Advancing 
Your Career
Concepts of Professional Nursing
Sixth Edition


Advancing 
Your Career
Concepts of Professional Nursing
Sixth Edition
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN

F. A. Davis Company
1915 Arch Street
Philadelphia, PA 19103
www.fadavis.com
Copyright © 2016 by F. A. Davis Company
Copyright © 2016 by F. A. Davis Company. All rights reserved. This book is protected by copyright. No part of 
it may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without written permission from the publisher.
Printed in the United States of America
Last digit indicates print number: 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Acquisitions Editor: Susan Rhymer
Director of Content Development: Darlene D. Pedersen
Content Project Manager: Echo K. Gerhart
Electronic Product Manager: Kate Crowley
Design and Illustration Manager: Carolyn O’Brien
As new scientific information becomes available through basic and clinical research, recommended treatments and
drug therapies undergo changes. The author(s) and publisher have done everything possible to make this book accurate,
up to date, and in accord with accepted standards at the time of publication. The author(s), editors, and publisher are
not responsible for errors or omissions or for consequences from application of the book, and make no warranty, 
expressed or implied, in regard to the contents of the book. Any practice described in this book should be applied by
the reader in accordance with professional standards of care used in regard to the unique circumstances that may apply
in each situation. The reader is advised always to check product information (package inserts) for changes and new 
information regarding dose and contraindications before administering any drug. Caution is especially urged when
using new or infrequently ordered drugs.
Kearney-Nunnery, Rose, author, editor.
Advancing your career : concepts of professional nursing / Rose Kearney-Nunnery. — Sixth edition.
p. ; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-8036-4203-4
I. Title. 
[DNLM: 1.  Nursing. 2.  Career Mobility.  WY 16.1]
RT82
610.7306’9–dc23
2015014170
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of specific clients, is
granted by F.A. Davis Company for users registered with the Copyright Clearance Center (CCC) Transactional 
Reporting Service, provided that the fee of $.25 per copy is paid directly to CCC, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA
01923. For those organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by CCC, a separate system of payment has
been arranged. The fee code for users of the Transactional Reporting Service is: 978-0-8036-4203-4/16 0 + $.25. 

F. A. Davis Company
1915 Arch Street
Philadelphia, PA 19103
www.fadavis.com
Copyright © 2016 by F. A. Davis Company
Copyright © 2016 by F. A. Davis Company. All rights reserved. This book is protected by copyright. No part of 
it may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without written permission from the publisher.
Printed in the United States of America
Last digit indicates print number: 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Acquisitions Editor: Susan Rhymer
Director of Content Development: Darlene D. Pedersen
Content Project Manager: Echo K. Gerhart
Electronic Product Manager: Kate Crowley
Design and Illustration Manager: Carolyn O’Brien
As new scientific information becomes available through basic and clinical research, recommended treatments and
drug therapies undergo changes. The author(s) and publisher have done everything possible to make this book accurate,
up to date, and in accord with accepted standards at the time of publication. The author(s), editors, and publisher are
not responsible for errors or omissions or for consequences from application of the book, and make no warranty, 
expressed or implied, in regard to the contents of the book. Any practice described in this book should be applied by
the reader in accordance with professional standards of care used in regard to the unique circumstances that may apply
in each situation. The reader is advised always to check product information (package inserts) for changes and new 
information regarding dose and contraindications before administering any drug. Caution is especially urged when
using new or infrequently ordered drugs.
Kearney-Nunnery, Rose, author, editor.
Advancing your career : concepts of professional nursing / Rose Kearney-Nunnery. — Sixth edition.
p. ; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-8036-4203-4
I. Title. 
[DNLM: 1.  Nursing. 2.  Career Mobility.  WY 16.1]
RT82
610.7306’9–dc23
2015014170
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of specific clients, is
granted by F.A. Davis Company for users registered with the Copyright Clearance Center (CCC) Transactional 
Reporting Service, provided that the fee of $.25 per copy is paid directly to CCC, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA
01923. For those organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by CCC, a separate system of payment has
been arranged. The fee code for users of the Transactional Reporting Service is: 978-0-8036-4203-4/16 0 + $.25. 

Preface
The nursing profession has undergone major changes in
the past decades, and the pace of change seems to acceler-
ate daily. We are redefining practice and basing this prac-
tice on evidence of efficacy. We have moved from a
position of defending nursing as a profession to our cur-
rent pivotal role in healthcare. Focusing on human beings
in their respective environments with unique healthcare
needs that are addressed through nursing care is vitally im-
portant with our rapidly expanding knowledge base and
the dynamic changes continually occurring in healthcare.
In essence, our quest in our nursing roles is to expand
knowledge, become involved within the profession and in
interdisciplinary healthcare, utilize evidence-based practice
and expanding technologies, and broaden the vision of
professional practice.
This book is directed to the RN student returning to
school. The intent is to provide you, the practicing RN,
with professional concepts to advance your practice. These
concepts build on your prior nursing education, and their
application will greatly enhance your professional practice
and growth. The aim is to engage you intellectually in an
ongoing professional dialogue and journey with your
peers, colleagues, and instructors; broaden your profes-
sional development; and build on your pre-existing knowl-
edge and experiences. You are challenged to delve further
into professional education and conceptual practice. The
book is written for the adult learner with the characteristics
of self-direction, prior experiences, applicability to prac-
tice, and motivation to meet the challenge to expand his
or her knowledge base.
The sixth edition has been updated and is divided into
three sections. As with the previous editions, each chapter
contains chapter objectives, key terms, key points, chapter
exercises to assist in meeting each of the chapter objec-
tives, references, online references, and bibliographical
sources. Interactive exercises have been updated and are
provided on an Intranet site to truly engage the adult
learner progressing through the content. The Intranet site
also houses a clinical scenario bank, glossary of terms, 
important Internet links, discussion sections, and online
lessons in presentation graphics with interactive chal-
lenges and Web links.
In Section I, the professional bases for nursing  practice
are introduced. This discussion is the start of Advancing
Your Practice. Chapter 1 focuses on the characteristics of
nursing as a profession and as a unique professional disci-
pline. A focus on the core competencies for all healthcare
professionals challenges both professional and interdisci-
plinary practice. As a first step in your educational pursuit,
you are challenged to review your learner characteristics
to enhance your educational experience. Next, you focus
on your concept of the profession via an analysis of your
personal perspectives of professional nursing as a philoso-
phy statement.
From a view of professional practice, Section I contin-
ues with a focus on theory as the basis for practice in 
Chapter 2. Dr. Jacqueline Fawcett addresses how unique
nursing knowledge has evolved and been applied to individ-
uals, families, and groups in Chapter 3. A discussion of
health, illness, and holism in Chapter 4 delves further into
models of health and illness with a focus on cultural and
literacy considerations. Section I concludes with a review
of the research process and the necessity for the application
of evidence-based practice in Chapter 5. Use of known and
evolving knowledge replaces tradition as healthcare focuses
on guidelines and documented evidence for efficacy of care.
Section II examines selected critical abilities in profes-
sional nursing practice. The first of these critical components
addresses communication skills, as vital to professional prac-
tice and in constant need of refinement. The content is pre-
sented by Dr. Lynne Ornes in Chapter 6, with a discussion
of communication models, essential ingredients of effective
communication, nonverbal communication forms, and spe-
cific communication techniques, including communication
skills for interdisciplinary and interprofessional practice.
Along with effective communication, critical thinking is 
essential to professional nursing practice. In Chapter 7, 
Dr. Genevieve M. Bartol discusses aspects of critical thinking
in nursing, along with further development of critical think-
ing and analysis skills. Effective communication and critical
thinking are required in collaborative practice situations.
Chapter 8 focuses on working with groups, including the
characteristics and roles of groups and group leaders and the
skills needed for collaboration, coordination, negotiation,
and dealing with conflict and difficult people. The next crit-
ical component for professional practice is the teaching and
learning process. Included in Chapter 9 is a discussion of
learning theories and learning readiness, along with infor-
mation on writing behavioral objectives, teaching skills and
methods, and evaluating outcomes, while the Intranet lesson
focuses on helping patients locate reliable Web sources.
Leadership and management skills are essential in pro-
fessional practice, especially in organizational settings.
Chapter 10 looks at organizational characteristics and pre -
sents the skills needed for effectively managing and leading
in organizational settings, including a discussion of se-
lected theories and delegation principles. Organizations
continue to redefine themselves, so effectively dealing with
change is critical. Chapter 11 includes theories on change
and innovation, along with the characteristics of change
agents for change in individuals, families, groups, and or-
ganizations. Section II concludes with Chapter 12, which
examines ethical principles and making ethical decisions
focusing on informed consent, advanced directives, the
persistive vegetative state, organ procurement and dona-
tion, genomics, and impaired practice. 
Section III starts with a focus on quality and safety in
Chapter 13 and the national initiatives that have driven
this process. Theoretical models for quality are discussed,
along with strategies for continuous quality improvement,
safety, and efficacy in the healthcare environment. In
Chapter 14, the focus is on population health. The progress
v

of the Healthy People initiatives in the United States is pre-
sented, along with the current focus on social determinants
of health. Special populations that are highlighted include
the aging population, minorities, and those living in rural
areas. In Chapter 15, we look at one of the core competen-
cies for healthcare professionals, the use of informatics.
Health information systems in the clinical setting are dis-
cussed, along with the implementation of the electronic
health record. Informatics competencies for nurses, infor-
matics nurses, and informatics specialists are described in
this evolving specialty in the discipline. 
Quality care includes a focus on healthcare economics
and policy, as presented in Chapter 16. Policy and the as-
sociated costs are changing  dramatically as we focus on safe,
effective, and equitable care for individuals and groups.
Stemming from a focus on healthcare policy are the political
advocacy skills needed by the politically active nurse in
Chapter 17. These skills include both understanding the
legislative process and promoting policy improvements for
the health of individuals and groups.
We conclude with a look at the reality of the healthcare
issues addressed throughout the book and the challenges to
be addressed by nursing professionals in the future. In
Chapter 18, Sister Rosemary Donley addresses healthcare
reform and the issues debated in both legislative and pro-
fessional areas that have major implications for the health-
care of the nation and global communities, with initiatives
for the profession. The final chapter discusses challenges
for your professional future in terms of expanding your 
vision and planning for the future. Topics include a look
at the practice environment and the call for change, greater
collaboration, and demonstration of competence. You will
be challenged to take the lead and demonstrate involve-
ment in the profession for improved care and healthcare
initiatives that meet the needs of the population, consid-
ering economics, quality initiatives, and demonstration of
effective outcomes. 
This book is intended to advance your professional
practice and continued professional development through
further education. Your personal characteristics of self-
motivation, a thirst for information, and commitment to
your patients and the profession will be enhanced as you
develop a more conceptual and visionary approach to
professional nursing practice.
—Rose Kearney-Nunnery
vi
●
Preface

Contributors
Genevieve M. Bartol, RN, EdD 
Independent Mental Health Care Professional
Greensboro, North Carolina
Chapter 7 Contributor
Sister Rosemary Donley, PhD, APRN, BC,
FAAN
Professor, Jacques Laval Endowed Chair for 
Justice for Vulnerable Populations
Duquesne University
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Chapter 18 Contributor
Francoise Dunefsky, MS, RN, NEA-BC
President and CEO, Gateway Community 
Industries, Inc. 
Port Ewen, New York
Chapter 13 Contributor
Jacqueline Fawcett, PhD, FAAN
University of Massachusetts at Boston
Boston, Massachusetts
Chapter 3 Contributor
William A. Himmelsbach, MPH, FACHE
Health Care CEO (Retired) 
Okatie, South Carolina
Chapter 16 Contributor
Lynne Ornes, PhD, MS, RN
University of South Carolina Beaufort
Bluffton, South Carolina
Chapter 6 contributor
vii


Reviewers
Pier A. Broadnax, PhD, RN
University of the District of Columbia
Washington, District of Columbia
Dawn M. Goodolf, PhD, RN
Moravian College 
Bethlehem, Pennsylvania
Sandy Halford, MSN, RN
East Tennessee State University
Johnson City, Tennessee
April D. Matthia, PhD, RN, CNE
University of North Carolina Wilmington
Wilmington, North Carolina
Beth Norton, DNP, RN, CNE
Northwest Florida State College
Niceville, Florida
Jeanne Tucker, RN, MSN, HSAD, CHES
Patty Hanks Shelton School of Nursing
Abilene, Texas
ix


Acknowledgments
Numerous people have been a large part of this continuing
process. Friends and colleagues have more than tolerated
my preoccupation with the profession. My respect is ex-
tended to all of my professional colleagues across the coun-
try for the opportunities they provided for reflection,
discussion, and debate. I extend particular thanks to all of
the contributors, past and present, who have shared their
expertise and insights. Joanne DaCunha merits particular
credit for the completion of this project and all prior edi-
tions through her encouragement, assistance, and belief in
the potential for our profession. And the ongoing efforts
of Echo K. Gerhart from F.A. Davis have been invaluable.
My ongoing appreciation continues for my late husband,
Jimmie E. Nunnery, for his support and encouragement
with prior editions, and much sage advice from his political
background that contributed to the chapter on politics.
As a final note, I cannot describe the endless encour-
agement from my professional colleagues, friends, and
students, all of whom added to this challenge for the nurs-
ing profession to focus on change in the future. And to
all who give to the consumers of nursing care, my endless
and enduring respect.
—Rose Kearney-Nunnery
xi


Contents
SECTION I
PROFESSIONAL BASES FOR PRACTICE
1. Your Professional Identity  2
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
2. Theory as the Basis for Practice  19
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
3. Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing
Knowledge  33
Jacqueline Fawcett, PhD, FAAN
4. Health, Illness, and Holism  58
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
5. Evidence-Based Practice  78
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
SECTION II
CRITICAL ABILITIES IN PROFESSIONAL
NURSING PRACTICE
6. Effective Communication  97
Lynne Ornes, PhD, RN
7. Critical Thinking  113
Genevieve M. Bartol, RN, EdD
8. Working with Groups  125
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
9. The Teaching-Learning Process  138
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
10. Managing and Leading in the 
Organization  157
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
11. Change and Innovation  182
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
12. Professional Ethics  201
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
SECTION III
QUALITY CARE FOR INDIVIDUALS,
FAMILIES, AND GROUPS
13. Quality and Safety in Healthcare  214
Francoise Dunefsky, MS, RN, NEA-BC
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
14. Population Health  236
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
15. Informatics and Documenting 
Outcomes  258
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
16. Economics and Healthcare Policy  276
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
William Himmelsbach, MPH, FACHE
17. The Politically Active Nurse: 
An Imperative  291
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
18. Healthcare Reform and Global 
Issues  304
Sister Rosemary Donley, PhD, APRN, BC, FAAN
19. Expanding the Vision  314
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
APPENDIX A
Professional Nursing Organizations  329
APPENDIX B
Nursing Interventions Classification (NIC) 
and Nursing Outcomes Classifications (NOC)
Systems  332
Index  341
xiii


S E C T I O N  I
Professional Bases
for Practice
INTRODUCTION
T
his section introduces the professional bases for  nursing practice to start the discussion
of Advancing Your Practice. Chapter 1, “Your Professional Identity,” focuses on the char-
acteristics of professional nursing as a profession and as a unique professional discipline.
A focus on the core competencies for all healthcare professionals challenges both professional
and interdisciplinary practice. As a first step in your educational pursuit, you are challenged
to review your learner characteristics to enhance your educational experience. Next, you focus
on your concept of the profession and an analysis of your personal perspectives of profes-
sional nursing as a philosophy statement.
From a view of professional practice, Section I continues with a focus on theory as the
basis for practice in Chapter 2, “Theory As the Basis for Practice.” And then we continue
with how unique nursing knowledge has evolved and been applied to the consumers of nurs-
ing in Chapter 3, “Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing Knowledge.” As you will learn in
Chapter 4, “Health, Illness, and Holism,” holistic practice delves further into models of
health and illness with a focus on cultural and literacy considerations. 
Section I concludes with Chapter 5, “Evidence-Based Practice,” which presents a review
of the research process and the necessity of the application of evidence-based practice in pro-
fessional nursing. Use of known and evolving knowledge replaces tradition as healthcare 
focuses on guidelines and documented evidence for efficacy of care.

Your Professional
Identity
2
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Relate the attributes of a profession to professional nursing practice.
2. Relate the core competencies for health professionals to professional nursing practice.
3. Describe the consumers of professional nursing practice.
4. Discuss responsibility and accountability in professional nursing practice.
5. Discuss the formal and informal educational expectations for professional nursing practice, including
essential curricular elements.
6. Consider personal learning attributes, including learning style, time management, and appropriate use
of resources.
7. Develop a personal philosophy of professional nursing.
Theory
Paradigm
Metaparadigm
Human Beings
Environment
Health
Nursing
Authority
Community Sanction
Code of Ethics
Professional Culture
Professional Development
Professional Organizations
Ethics
Educational Background
Core Competencies
Evidence-Based Practice and
Research
Quality of Practice
Communication
Leadership
Collaboration
Professional Practice 
Evaluation
Self-Regulation
Resource Utilization
Environmental Health
Roles
Learning
Knowledge
Skill
Ability
Learning Style
Resources
Philosophy
1
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
The past cannot be changed.
The future is yet in your power.
Mary Pickford, 1893–1979
Key Terms

As a registered nurse (RN) student pursuing an advanced
degree in nursing, you must reevaluate personal and 
collegial perspectives on what truly constitutes professional
practice. You are at a gateway for advancing your practice
and building a professional commitment. To advance in
your professional career, you must broaden and build on
your knowledge base. This involves Mezirow’s (1991,
2000) theory of adult development and education as trans-
formative learning. This theory proposes that the adult
learns in one of four ways: 
●By elaborating existing frames of reference
●By learning new frames of reference
●By transforming points of view 
●By transforming habits of mind (Mezirow, 2000, p. 19)
Building on your knowledge base and your personal
frame of reference, you will be adding and developing
new perspectives. This process promotes critical analysis
and will allow you as the adult learner to transform your
views in new ways, and create new ways of approaching
the world and professional practice. Learning occurs
through reflection and interpretation to understand per-
ceptions of the self and the world. This transformation
provides an ongoing process in both personal and pro-
fessional development.
From the professional standpoint, armed with techni-
cal skills and expertise in the practice setting, we chart a
course into the conceptual components that embody and
expand professional practice. As a start, consider the con-
cepts that characterize both a profession in general and
professional nursing practice specifically.
CHARACTERISTICS OF A
PROFESSION
Greenwood (1957) developed a classic work on profes-
sionalism in which he proposed five characteristics of a
profession:
●Systematic Theory and Knowledge Base
●Authority
●Community Sanction
●Code of Ethics
●Professional Culture
These attributes were then applied to the social work
discipline to defend its professional status, but they are
applicable to any profession, including professional
nursing practice.
Systematic Theory 
and Knowledge Base
Each profession is guided by systematic theory on which its
knowledge base is built. The skills of professional nurses
are not trial and error but are supported by a fund of knowl-
edge that has been organized into an internally consistent
system that is our theoretical basis for practice. This system
includes theoretical foundations unique to the profession as
well as those adapted from other scientific disciplines.
Kerlinger and Lee (2000) define a theory as “a set 
of interrelated constructs (concepts), definitions, and
propositions that present a systematic view of phenom-
ena by specifying relations among variables, with the 
purpose of explaining and predicting the phenomena”
(p. 11). This theory base is also referred to as the paradigm
used by professionals or the practitioners in a particular
scientific community.
Kuhn (1970) has provided us with the well- established
definition of a paradigm as “universally recognized scien-
tific achievements that, for a time, provide model problems
and solutions to a community of practitioners” (p. vii). The
paradigm consists of the beliefs and the belief system shared
by members of a particular scientific community. When
the paradigm is no longer useful in explaining, practicing,
and conducting research in that community, the paradigm
shifts and a new belief structure is promoted, adopted, and
used by its members.
The paradigm is merely the phenomenon of  concern
that guides nursing practice. In Chapter 3, Fawcett 
proposes that conceptual model and paradigm are inter-
changeable terms relative to the phenomena of nursing.
Various nursing paradigms or conceptual models are cur-
rently used in practice. The selection is based on the belief
structure of the particular nursing community—for ex-
ample, care of people who are chronically ill and need
major assistance with health needs versus the wellness ini-
tiatives applicable in occupational settings. The paradigm
is determined by the type of nursing, because it meets the
health needs of a particular group in a certain environ-
ment or setting.
The metaparadigm is the overall concern of  nursing
common to each nursing model, whether a  conceptual
model/paradigm or formal theory. Fawcett (1995, 2000,
2005) and Fawcett and DeSanto-Madeya (2013) have de-
scribed the following four requirements for a discipline’s
metaparadigm: identity, inclusiveness, neutrality, and in-
ternationality. First, the metaparadigm must provide an
identity for the profession that is distinctly different from
that of others. Second, the metaparadigm must address all
phenomena of interest to the profession in a manageable
and understandable manner. Third, the metaparadigm must
be neutral, so that all smaller practice paradigms can fit under
the umbrella metaparadigm. And, finally, the metapara-
digm must be “global in scope and substance” (Fawcett
and DeSanto-Madeya, 2013, p. 4) to represent the pro-
fession across national, social, cultural, and ethnic bound-
aries. With that in mind, the metaparadigm of professional
nursing incorporates four concepts:
●Human beings represent the individual, family, 
group, or community receiving care, each with 
unique characteristics.
●The environment comprises the physical, social, 
cultural, spiritual, and emotional climate or setting(s)
in which the person lives, works, plays, and interacts.
●Health is the focus for the particular type of nursing
and specific care provisions needed.
●Nursing is defined by its activities, goals, and services.
In any area of professional nursing practice, we can eval-
uate who the person is as the patient or recipient of nursing
care, where the person and the caregiver are seen and in-
fluenced by others, why the person needs professional nurs-
ing care, and how the professional nurse functions as a
CHAPTER 1 Your Professional Identity     ●
3

provider or manager of care. These concepts are present
whether the patient is the frail elder in an acute care setting,
the expanding family in a birthing center, or an employee
group in an occupational setting. Investigate these concepts
specific to your own practice setting for an initial view of
the systematic theory and knowledge base of your disci -
plinary paradigm. Look at how the “patient” is defined 
in the environmental context. And consider the health 
actions: Are they perceived as emerging, maintaining, 
enhancing, or perhaps palliative? Now, how do the nursing
actions address patients, in their environment, to meet the
concept of health? 
Authority
The next characteristic of a professional is authority, as
viewed by the patient. This authority occurs through 
education and experience, which give the professional
the knowledge and skills to make professional judgments.
The patient perceives the professional as having the
knowledge and expertise to assist the patient in meeting
some need. The professional is therefore viewed as an au-
thority in the area, and his or her judgments are trusted.
Authority is the basis for the competence the patient 
perceives and the patient-professional relationship.
In the nurse-patient relationship, the nurse is perceived
as the authority figure, whether providing a selected care
technique or filling an informational need. The compe-
tence and skill demonstrated justify the patient’s trust in
the professional nurse. Benner (1984) has described the
following five levels of competency in clinical nursing
practice: novice, advanced beginner, competent, profi-
cient, and expert (p. xvii). The higher the levels of com-
petence or expertise patients perceive in any profession,
the greater trust or authority they place in the practitioners
of that profession. Patients and their significant others who
see nurses as experts in providing needed healthcare view
the profession as having more authority in healthcare judg-
ments. On the basis of this perception of authority, society
grants the profession and its practitioners certain rights,
privileges, and responsibilities.
Community Sanction
Society grants each profession certain powers and obliga-
tions to practice the specific profession. Nursing’s Policy
Statement: The Essence of the Profession (American Nurses
Association [ANA], 2010a) attributes professional nurs-
ing’s authority to a social contract with the community.
The professional community is responsible for ensuring
safe and effective practice within the discipline. Profes-
sional and legal regulation of nursing practice as a com-
munity sanction occurs through statutes, rules and
regulations, definition of practice, and expectations for
practitioners. Powers for entry and continuity in the pro-
fession are granted through licensure and professional
practice parameters dictated in the state practice acts.
These laws define a specific practice and provide regulatory
powers at the state level for the board, licensing of profes-
sionals and protection of title (e.g., RN or APRN), general
practice standards, approvals for educational programs,
and disciplinary procedures.
Definition of practice and specific practice standards
are further specified within the professional community
through major nursing associations. The American
Nurses Association (ANA) has specified a variety of prac-
tice standards for the profession, both general and spe-
cific to certain practice areas. The ANA has prepared
several specialty standards documents jointly with the
particular specialty organization to reflect the expec -
tations for specialized professional practice. These stan-
dards, which signify the sanction by the community of
the nursing profession, are authoritative statements by
which nurses practicing within the role, population, and
specialty describe duties they are expected to competently
perform and may be used as evidence of the standard of
care governing the given context of nursing practice
(ANA, 2010b, p. 2).
The publication Nursing: Scope and Standards of 
Practice (ANA, 2010b), for example, prescribes stan-
dards of practice and standards of professional perfor -
mance. Standards of practice address safe and competent
practice in general or specialty practice and use of the
nursing process with the actions of assessment, diagno-
sis, outcome identification, planning, implementation,
and evaluation (ANA, 2010b). Standards of professional
performance are expected professional roles and behav-
iors, including ethics, education, evidence-based practice
and research, quality of practice, communication, lead-
ership, collaboration, professional practice evaluation,
resource utilization, and environmental health (ANA,
2010b).
Further standards of specialty practice are provided
through the certification process with specialized educa-
tion, testing, and ongoing learning requirements. Prac tice
standards and expectations have also been developed by
the applicable specialty organizations. Check the Web sites
listed in Appendix A for standards of practice expected in
selected specialty practice areas.
Another area in which the community grants a 
profession certain privileges on the basis of professional
knowledge and expertise is in the education process of
future clinicians and practitioners. Educational programs
are both approved at the individual state level, as by the
Board of Nursing, and accredited at the national level,
as by the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education
(CCNE). Development, implementation, and evaluation
of the organization, curriculum, faculty, students, grad-
uates, facilities, and program resources are important
considerations within the accreditation and reaccredita-
tion process. The job of establishing and evaluating these
standards falls to the professional accrediting groups.
Here again, the profession is granted the power by the
community and has the responsibility to provide the
community with practitioners who are appropriately 
educated for safe and effective practice.
4
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
ONLINE CONSULT 
American Nurses Association at 
http://www.nursingworld.org 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing 
http://www.aacn.nche.edu

Educational programs are also guided by professional
nursing standards. The American Association of Col-
leges of Nursing (AACN) has specified educational stan-
dards for nursing programs at the baccalaureate,
master’s, and doctoral levels. These essential curricular
elements serve as core elements for the educational 
programs and delineate expected outcomes for the nurs-
ing programs by educational level (AACN, 2011, p. 3).
Consider the differences in the essentials for baccalau-
reate and master’s nursing education listed in Box 1.1.
Further information on and description of these 
expected curricular elements can be found on the AACN
website at http://www.aacn.nche.edu/education-resources/
essential-series. 
Confidentiality of patient information is one of the
most important professional privileges. Professional nurs-
ing enjoys this privilege and conscientiously guards the
confidentiality of patient information. As discussed in 
relation to ethical codes, confidentiality is a major consid-
eration in professional nursing practice.
Code of Ethics
A professional abides by a certain code of ethics app -
licable to the practice area. Developed within the
 profession, the code addresses general ethical practice is-
sues as well as professional personal and practice values,
and colleague relationships. The ANA’s Code of Ethics for
Nurses is the ethical standard for professional nursing
practice. It embodies both formal and informal ethical
codes. The Code is non-negotiable in any setting . . . .
[and expresses] the values, virtues, and obligations that
shape, guide, and inform nursing as a profession” (ANA,
2015, p. vii). The interpretative statements promote un-
derstanding for appropriate application of the code of
ethics in professional practice. Adherence to this specific
code may be regulated in your state’s practice act. To view
the ANA Code of Ethics with Interpretative Statements,
go online to http://nursingworld.org/codeofethics. How-
ever, there are other ethical codes, including the Inter-
national Council of Nurses (ICN) Code of Ethics for
Nurses (2012), which presents four elements associated
with nurses: people, practice, the profession, and cowork-
ers. In addition, for each of the elements, the roles of
practitioners and managers, educators and researchers,
and national nursing associations are  illustrated. Achiev-
ing professional status requires  ethical standards for ex-
pected behaviors with patients, colleagues, and other
professionals.
Professional Culture
The fifth characteristic of a profession is a professional cul-
ture. Greenwood (1957) described professional  culture as
the formal and informal groups represented in the profes-
sion. Formal groups refer to the organi zational systems in
which the professionals practice, the educational institutions
CHAPTER 1 Your Professional Identity     ●
5
BOX 1.1
The AACN Essentials for Collegiate Nursing Programs 
1.1 The AACN Essentials for Collegiate Nursing Education
The Essentials of Baccalaureate Education for Professional Nursing Practice (AACN, 2008)
I. Liberal Education for Baccalaureate Generalist Nursing Practice
II. Basic Organizational and Systems Leadership for Quality Care and Patient Safety 
III. Scholarship for Evidence-based Practice
IV. Information Management and Application of Patient Care Technology 
V. Healthcare Policy, Finance, and Regulatory Environments 
VI. Interprofessional Communication and Collaboration for Improving Patient Health Outcomes 
VII. Clinical Prevention and Population Health 
VIII. Professionalism and Professional Values
IX. Baccalaureate Generalist Nursing Practice
The Essentials of Master’s Education in Nursing (AACN, 2011) 
I. Background for Practice from Sciences and Humanities 
II. Organizational and Systems Leadership 
III. Quality Improvement and Safety 
IV. Translating and Integrating Scholarship into Practice
V. Informatics and Healthcare Technologies
VI. Health Policy and Advocacy
VII. Interprofessional Collaboration for Improving Patient and Population Health Outcomes
VIII. Clinical Prevention and Population Health for Improving Health
IX. Master’s-Level Nursing Practice
Source: Reprinted with permission from the American Association of Colleges of Nursing, Essentials Series, © 2011, 2008
(http://www.aacn.nche.edu/education-resources/essential-series).
ONLINE CONSULT 
ANA Code of Ethics for Nurses with 
Interpretative Statements at 
http://www.nursingworld.org/codeofethics
ICN Code of Ethics for Nurses at 
http://www.icn.ch/icncode.pdf

that provide for basic and continued learning, and the 
professional associations. Informal groups are the collegial
settings that provide for collaboration, stimulation, and
sharing of mutual values. These informal groups exist within
each formal group, providing further professional, collegial
inclusiveness. These groups and the unique culture of 
nursing are reinforced in the Code of Ethics for Nurses.
Organizational systems in which professional nursing
is practiced are diverse and multidimensional. As you will
see in later chapters, hospital and home health agency set-
tings are complex parts of a larger system. Professional
nursing practice provides a unique culture with the values
and norms expected of its practitioners. Organizational
philosophies and mission statements provide information
on the expressed culture of these settings. Further expres-
sion of the professional culture is apparent in the behaviors
of professional nurses who practice in these settings.
Formal educational settings for professional nursing
practice occur in institutions of higher learning with liberal
and specialized learning requirements. In addition, values
and norms for continued learning and competency in
practice are transmitted as expectations for professional
practice. Beyond basic educational practice, professional
development is provided through continuing education
and specialty preparation and continual competency as a
professional.
Professional organizations or associations are a major
component of the culture of professional nursing practice,
but they vary in purpose or mission and membership. The
purpose of some professional organizations, such as the
ANA or the Canadian Nurses Association, is to represent
the profession on a national basis. Specialty groups, with
a more specific focus, promote education, skills, standards,
and perhaps certification opportunities for a particular seg-
ment of the profession—for example, the American Asso-
ciation of Critical-Care Nurses. Each organization has a
unique philosophy or mission directed at professional
nursing practice.
Professional organizations communicate values and
norms in official publications, position statements, and
specified practice standards. These organizations promote
professional parameters for clinical practice,  education, 
administration, and research. They provide educational
opportunities and foster expansion of the knowledge base
of individual professionals and the discipline in general.
Some organizations focus specifically on the science of 
the profession. Their purpose is to promote the scholarly
aspects of the profession and to build professional and
leadership skills through education, publications, and con-
ferences. A more global view of practice can be seen in
many professional organizations as they reach out to in-
fluence public policy. In addition, professional organiza-
tions often collaborate with each other on vital issues that
enhance the impact and the influence to the professional
and public communities.
Consider the organizations that represent profes-
sional nursing practice and education listed in Table 1.1.
The ANA and its state and territorial associations focus
mainly on the profession as an entity, with concern for
the health of society as well as the welfare of professional
nurses through standards, official position statements,
political action initiatives, and certification options for
specialty practice. Specific to an area of specialty prac-
tice, the American Association of Critical-Care Nurses,
with its worldwide membership, is the largest specialty
organization. Also more globally, the International
Council of Nurses (ICN) is composed of professional
associations from over 130 countries, including the
ANA. The American Association of Colleges of Nursing
focuses on collegiate education, serving member schools
with baccalaureate and higher-degree programs through
educational standards, programs, policies, research, 
accreditation, and legislative initiatives directed at high-
quality professional education. This organization has
published documents identifying educational essentials
important for the various nursing education programs.
The National League for Nursing (NLN) has individual
and agency membership for educational institutions 
and focuses on excellence in nursing education from
practical nursing to graduate education. The National
Council of State Boards of Nursing is composed of the
member regulatory boards for the 50 states, the District
of Columbia, and four U.S. territories as well as inter-
national regulatory bodies for nursing as associate mem-
bers. Sigma Theta Tau, the international honor society
for nursing, has a distinctly scientific focus. This organ-
ization promotes knowledge development through 
research, dissemination of scientific information, tech-
nology, education, interdisciplinary collaboration, and
adaptability for the improvement of the health of people
worldwide.
A comprehensive listing of professional organizations
and their Web site addresses is located in Appendix A and
on the Intranet site. In addition, useful links to additional
resources may be discovered within these sites. Just one
word of caution: Web site addresses change, as do physical
addresses. Try to update your Internet “favorites” listing
regularly with any changes and add new sites that you have
found useful.
PROFESSIONALISM IN
NURSING
We have viewed the profession of nursing according
to general attributes. However, consider the specific at-
tributes of the practice professionals specified as standards
for professional performance: ethics, education, evidence-
based practice and research, quality of practice, commu-
nication, leadership, collaboration, professional practice
evaluation, resource utilization, and environmental health
(ANA, 2010b). In subsequent chapters we will consider
specifics on legal and ethical issues, education, evidence-
based practice, quality of practice, communication, lead-
ership, and environ mental health. But, look further at the
following expectations of professional nurses that are
guideposts for your professional development.
Ethics
Adherence to a code of ethics is expected in any profession.
As discussed previously, the Code of Ethics for Nurses 
with Interpretative Statements (ANA, 2015) provides the
broad guidelines. It is the responsibility of the practicing
professional to know these guidelines and practice in 
6
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

CHAPTER 1 Your Professional Identity     ●
7
TABLE 1.1
Characteristics of Professional Organizations
Organization
Focus, Mission, and Membership
American Nurses Association
(ANA) and associated constituent
state associations and organizational
affiliate members
Founded 1897
http://www.nursing world.org
American Association of Colleges
of Nursing (AACN) 
Founded 1969
http://www.aacn.nche.edu
American Association of 
Critical-Care Nurses (AACN) 
Founded 1969
http://www.aacn.org
International Council of 
Nurses (ICN)
Founded 1899
http://www.icn.ch 
National Council of State Boards 
of Nursing (NCSBN)
Founded 1978 (previously a 
component of the ANA)
http://www.ncsbn.org
National League for Nursing (NLN)
and associated constituent leagues
Founded 1952
http://www.nln.org 
Sigma Theta Tau International
Honor Society of Nursing and
member chapters
Founded 1922
http://www.nursingsociety.org
Note: Reference citations in table are excerpts from online resources of the respective nursing organizations.
Focus: Professional nursing
Mission: “Nurses advancing our profession to improve health for all”
(ANA, 2014, p. 1).
Membership: Individual membership; professional nurses at the state level
obtain national membership.
Focus: Collegiate nursing education
Mission: The AACN “serves the public interest by setting standards, 
providing resources, and developing the leadership capacity of member
schools to advance nursing education, research, and practice” (AACN,
2014, p. 1).
Membership: Deans and directors of member schools with baccalaureate
and higher-degree nursing programs
Focus: Specialty care
Mission: “Patients and their families rely on nurses at the most vulnerable
times of their lives. Acute and critical care nurses rely on AACN for expert
knowledge and the influence to fulfill their promise to patients and their
families. AACN drives excellence because nothing less is acceptable”
(AACN, 2014, p. 1).
Membership: Individual membership
Focus: Nursing internationally
Mission: The ICN’s mission is “to represent nursing worldwide, advancing
the profession and influencing health policy” (ICN, 2013, p. 1).
Membership: National nurses’ associations representing nurses in more
than 130 countries
Focus: Nursing regulation and public protection
Mission: The NCSBN “provides education, service, and research through
collaborative leadership to promote evidence-based regulatory excellence
for patient safety and public protection” (NCSBN, 2014, p. 1).
Membership: All state boards of nursing in the 50 states, the District of 
Columbia, American Samoa, Guam, Northern Mariana Islands, and the 
Virgin Islands.
Focus: Nursing education and community health
Mission: The NLN “promotes excellence in nursing education to build a
strong and diverse nursing workforce” to advance the nation’s health
(NLN, 2013, p. 1).
Membership: Individuals, Schools of Nursing, Associate Agency membership
Focus: Nursing scholarship (international)
Mission: Sigma Theta Tau’s mission is “advancing world health and cele-
brating nursing excellence in scholarship, leadership, and service” (Sigma
Theta Tau, 2014, p. 1). 
Membership: Individuals are invited to membership in chartered chapters
with selection criteria as baccalaureate or higher-degree students, faculty
members, or community leaders.
accordance with the code. In 1993, Miller and associates re-
ported that most professional nurse respondents did not have
a copy of the ethical code, and many were unfamiliar with
the document (p. 293). This problem occurred with the
1985 Code of Ethics. The question then becomes, how many
nurses are aware of the 2001 revision and the current code
revised in 2015? To meet this criterion of professionalism,
nursing professionals need to demonstrate greater knowledge
and understanding of the official ethical code. Periodic 
review of the ethical provisions and their interpretative 

statements is an important responsibility for all professional
nurses. This is especially true when the roles of nurses or
patients change, but it is also important for nurses to 
appreciate fully their professional responsibilities, chal-
lenges, and talents when roles are stable.
Ethical considerations also involve personal and 
interpersonal actions, beyond those directly related to
the individual situation, as with autonomy and self-
 regulation. Autonomy means independent judgment and
self- governing within the scope of one’s practice, which
changes in response to people’s healthcare needs. As key
professionals in organizational settings, nurses make the
time and commitment to ensure that high-quality care
and standards are present and upheld. This involves 
critical analysis, communication, collaboration, and lead-
ership. Important concepts in this area are professional
responsibility and accountability. In the Code of Ethics for
Nurses, responsibility is defined as “an obligation to per-
form required professional activities at a level commen-
surate with one’s education and in compliance with
applicable laws and standards . . .” (ANA, 2015, p. 45)
whereas, accountability is being answerable to self and
others for one’s own choices, decisions and actions as
measured against a standard . . .” such as the Code (ANA,
2015, p. 41). Nurses are accountable to both themselves
and their patients for good clinical judgment and quality
care. However, as we will see in later chapters, accounta-
bility is also extended to the broader population as the
profession demonstrates involvement in social policy.
Educational Background
The educational background required for professional
practice is specified to ensure safe and effective practice.
In nursing, the basic education required for entry into
the profession varies, with differences among baccalau-
reate, associate degree, diploma education, and even
entry-level graduate programs. But within each type of
educational program, curricula and requirements are
guided by general standards, and, as stated in two of the
four key elements of the IOM (2011) Future of Nursing:
Advancing Health, Leading Change report, nurses should
practice to the full extent of their education and achieve
higher levels of education.
Although a school’s curriculum is developed by its fac-
ulty members, certain standards are required for an educa-
tional program. Nursing curricula must contain essential
content and hours as required by state boards of nursing,
higher education boards, professional associations, and 
national accrediting bodies. Consumers of nursing care can
be confused by the different educational routes leading to
the title of registered nurse. Numerous studies have re-
viewed the various health professions, their regulatory bod-
ies, educational program requirements, and workforce
needs with respect to the changing healthcare system. 
Consumer confusion and overlapping scopes of practice
are key issues that must be addressed. Ongoing clarification
of these areas among professionals and consumers of nurs-
ing will have a  beneficial effect on the view of nursing as a
profession and of individual nurses as true professionals.
However, some skills do cross professional boundaries and
are important considerations in collaborative practice.
A 2003 report from the Institute of Medicine follow-
ing a Health Professions Education Summit led to the
identification of five core competencies (Box 1.2) that are
required of all health professions to advance a vision for
the education of all health professionals “to deliver patient-
centered care as members of an interdisciplinary team, em-
phasizing evidence-based practice, quality improvement
approaches, and informatics” (Greiner & Knebel, 2003,
p. 45). To address these competencies in nursing educa-
tion programs, curricula must be constantly evaluated for
currency, content, and practice opportunities. For exam-
ple, most nurses will agree that providing patient-centered
care is a component of our nursing programs. However,
we need to assess carefully whether all programs foster 
interdisciplinary and evidence-based practice focused on
quality improvement and the use of informatics. 
Beyond the basic education, competent practice 
requires ongoing learning, continuing education, and
continued competency. These attributes are crucial to
safe, effective, and ethical professional practice. Ongoing
improvement and knowledge are the goals of continuing
education, which is required for relicensure in some
states and recertification in specialty areas. But continuing
education involves more than obtaining required credits,
in-service hours, and formal degrees. Remaining current
with ideas presented in the nursing and scientific literature
is an important component of continued competency as
a professional and to incorporate evidence-based informa-
tion into practice.
The Internet has made remaining current on issues of
concern to the profession more convenient. Yet, a word
of caution is in order: It is important to evaluate the source
of information and its validity. Consider whether the in-
formation is provided by an organization, an agency, or
an individual’s own Web site and personal perspective.
Identifying your own learning and developmental
needs is an expectation and a continual process for com-
petent professional practice. In essence, continuing edu-
cation for competency involves self-assessment, ongoing
learning, and self-evaluation. The focus is on discovery, as
in baccalaureate and graduate education. Ongoing learn-
ing means that your mind is challenged every day with
new ideas, building on a professional knowledge base and
skills. Opportunities for continuing education abound
through a variety of formal programs as well as through
professional journals and online resources. Many profes-
sional organizations have special online services for their
8
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
BOX 1.2
Core Competencies for Health 
Professionals
●Provide patient-centered care
●Work in interdisciplinary teams
●Employ evidence-based practice
●Apply quality improvement
●Utilize informatics
Source: Greiner, A. C., & Knebel, E. (eds.). (2003). Health professions
education: A bridge to quality. Washington, DC: Institute of 
Medicine (p. 48). Permission to reproduce material copyrighted 
by National Academies Press. 

members, such as reviews of current literature and care
products, bookstores, continuing education programs, 
e-mail lists, and online discussion forums. Publishers also
have online resources with special discounts, e-mail 
updates, associated Web sites, discussion groups, and 
interactive continuing education offerings. The ongoing
challenge is developing new knowledge, and it is the
responsi bility of the professional to maintain currency 
for the specific practice area and to document his or her
professional efforts and progress.
Evidence-Based Practice 
and Research
Nursing research is much more than leading or partici-
pating in a research study. We now look to the core
competency of evidence-based practice and research
to guide the way we practice. Greiner and Knebel
(2003) define evidence-based practice as the integration
of the best research with clinical expertise and the pa-
tient’s values for optimum care, as well as partici pation
in learning and research activities (pp. 45–46). As found
in the interpretative statements of the Code for Nurses,
“All nurses must participate in the advancement of the
profession through the knowledge development, evalu-
ation, dissemination, and application to practice” (ANA,
2015, p. 27).
Involvement in research—whether by using findings,
participating in an investigation, protecting human sub-
jects, or searching the literature for demonstrated innova-
tions in practice—is a characteristic of professionalism in
nursing. It adds to our knowledge base, enhances our prac-
tice, promotes improved outcomes for our patients and
fosters practice based on evidence of efficacy rather than
tradition or trial and error. Collaborating with others and
sharing new knowledge is critical in this process. We will
focus further on evidence-based practice and research in
Chapter 5.
Quality of Practice
The effectiveness of nursing care to address appropriate
and measurable patient outcomes is an expectation of the
professional nurse. In addition, recall that improvement
in the quality of practice is a core competency of all
health professionals. It is not just a matter of determining
whether a nursing intervention was appropriate and 
effectively addressed the healthcare need. Now, questions
are raised on further improvements that can be made
based on the evidence presented in the current case and
through documented evidence of practice effectiveness.
Quality improvement is the goal for making refinements
in practice that are based on efficacy and efficiency. 
Efficacy in meeting the patient outcomes is not sufficient
for professional practice. The activities must be acceptable
for the patient population in addressing our metapara-
digm concepts of human beings, health, environment,
and nursing. The patient is the focus, and efficiency is a
vital consideration to preserve resources, both personal
resources (such as energy of both the patient and the
nurse) and the material and physical healthcare resources
in the environment. So, the question becomes, how can
practice in the future be made safer and more effective?
This question can lead to innovative and changed prac-
tices for improved patient outcomes, considering human
needs, the environment, the concept of health, and care
techniques and technologies.
Communication
Effective communication has long been a focus and 
characteristic of professional nursing. In a subsequent
chapter, we will review this important content, as it is 
an area that needs constant reevaluation in different situ-
ations and with different individuals. And effective com-
munication skills are essential with patients as well as
nursing colleagues and other members of the healthcare
team. Consider communication as more than a verbal 
encounter with another individual, but rather an interac-
tion involving all the interpersonal and cultural facets.
Appropriate verbal messages must be communicated into
the plan of care, be documented appropriately, be shared
through a variety of channels and media, and lead to qual-
ity improvements for the care of patients. Dissent, debate,
conflict, and negotiation are natural outcomes and, again,
must focus on quality healthcare. And think further about
evolving technologies, as in the case of telehealth, with
patients and providers interacting at a distance. Effective
communication skills are in constant refinement for the
professional nurse who is on the front line managing and
leading the team for quality patient outcomes. We will
consider refinement of interpersonal and professional
communication skills in Chapter 6.
Leadership
Leadership is an expectation for the professional nurse,
both in the practice setting and in the profession. Nurses
must project a positive image and the vision and actions
needed for effective patient outcomes on a daily basis and
in an effective working environment. Managing care 
effectively and leading others in the process is more than
a job requirement but also a commitment to patients, 
colleagues, and the profession. And leadership extends 
beyond the care environment to involvement in the insti-
tution or agency, as with shared governance or committee
involvement, and in the profession at large.
Nurses also assume leadership positions in the com-
munity, through service activities using their unique
knowledge, skills, and abilities. Nurses are well equipped
and talented in this area because of their  orientation of
service to patients and society at large. Nurses frequently
lead health-promoting activities in their employment role,
their professional community, and among their families
and acquaintances. Consider how residents in a defined
community always seem to know who the nurses in the
area are and how frequently those nurses are approached
with questions or requests to become involved in projects
or serve on committees. Also consider how nurses reach
out to others with information on healthcare issues or
ideas to foster wellness in their communities. This vision
of the community also leads to involvement in healthcare
policy and changes needed for improved health status and
outcomes in the community.
CHAPTER 1 Your Professional Identity     ●
9

Collaboration
Each of the standards of professional performance 
requires collaboration in practice. The ANA Standard
of Performance on Collaboration includes the patient
and the patient’s significant others, and other healthcare
providers in the plan of care (ANA, 2010b). Professional
inter actions and behaviors should be ethical and patient-
 centered, based on the information and needs of the col-
leagues who influence patients and on the quality of
practice. These interactions require good communication
and leadership skills focused on effective practice and
quality outcomes. The healthcare team is focused on the
patient and promoting positive outcomes, which do not
occur in isolation by the efforts of one individual. This
professional performance standard requires that col-
leagues assist each other and include the patient in the
plan of care to promote long-term positive outcomes.
Trust, openness, knowledge, skills, various professional
abilities, and commitment are necessary parts of all in-
teractions toward this aim of safe and effective patient-
centered care.
Professional Practice Evaluation
The Scope and Standards of Practice (ANA, 2010b) specifies
practice competencies in this area as the application of cur-
rent “professional practice standards and guidelines, rele-
vant statutes, rules, and regulations” (p. 59). Professional
practice evaluation requires self-regulation by both the
professional and the profession that sets the standards. The
ANA’s Nursing’s Policy Statement: The Essence of the Profes-
sion (2010a) describes self-regulation as both personal 
accountability for the knowledge base for practice and 
participation in the peer review process (pp. 30–32). Pro-
fessional responsibility and accountability involve uphold-
ing quality standards as well as developing and critically
analyzing those standards and the outcomes. The regula-
tion of nursing practice includes both self-regulation be-
yond a limited job description and professional regulation
through the defined scope of practice, further education,
certification, and adherence to the code of ethics.
Professionals are responsible and answerable to patients
and their significant others for nursing care outcomes. And
performance feedback from patients as well as professional
colleagues should be included in a practice evaluation.
Nurses are actively involved in supervising, delegating, and
evaluating others. But reflection on professional perfor -
mance assists in practice improvement as an important
component of the peer review process, as part of an annual
performance evaluation. The peer review process is a time
for professional development for both the reviewer and the
person being evaluated. The process is a learning oppor-
tunity and much more than a checklist and narrative com-
ment provided on an annual basis.
Resource Utilization
Recall the concept of efficiency related to quality care. 
Innovative and changed practices for improved patient out-
comes must address human needs, the environment, the
concept of health, and care techniques and technologies.
Identification, procurement, and the judicious use of
healthcare resources are requirements of the  professional
role. The Scope and Standards of Prac tice (ANA, 2010b)
describes resource utilization as not only the appropriate
use of resources but also the assurance that nursing care
be “safe, effective, and financially responsible” (p. 60).
The focus continues to be on outcomes and the vital role
of the nurse in promoting successful outcomes. In the
healthcare  environment, the focus is on safety and obtain-
ing appropriate resources, supplies, and care provision.
How ever, understanding cost factors and patient concerns
and resources is essential. And think further than re-
sources in the healthcare environment, especially when
assisting the patient and family to prepare for care in the
home and community. Will they have sufficient resources
at home for safe healthcare practices? This includes the
knowledge for safety at home and the value for the treat-
ments needed, as well as the financial resources to obtain
needed medication or treatment. Think about the indi-
vidual with asthma and whether he or she will, in the long
term, have short-term rescue and controller medications,
the understanding for proper use and care, and the envi-
ronmental adjustments needed for successful manage-
ment of this chronic condition. The professional nurse is
concerned with safe and effective care beyond the treat-
ment facility with a focus on human beings, the environ-
ment, and health as part of effective nursing care for
positive outcomes.
Environmental Health
With nursing’s focus on the centrality of the environment
in individuals’ health and care, concerns over safety and
health risks require constant attention and vigilance.
Health professionals and consumers of healthcare were
alarmed by the release of reports from the Institute of
Medicine (IOM) of the National Academies on the high
incidence of medical errors. These reports started in 1998
and led to ongoing efforts for improving patient safety, in
both the hospital and community settings. The IOM is a
nonprofit organization designed to provide  science-based
advice as a public service. The 2001 report from the IOM,
Crossing the Quality Chasm, proposed ten rules for quality
healthcare in the 21st century (Box 1.3). The six overall
aims—that care should be safe, effective, patient-centered,
timely, efficient, and equitable—underlie these ten rules
(Corrigan et. al, 2001).
Patient safety and effectiveness of outcomes have 
become major national objectives and have directed 
additional attention to nursing, especially since the release
of the landmark IOM report in 2011 on the Future of
Nursing: Leading Change, Advancing Health. Research by
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)
continues to expand the knowledge base on how the qual-
ity of the healthcare workplace affects the quality of the
healthcare provided, especially in the areas of workload
and working conditions, effects of stress and fatigue, re-
duction of adverse events, and the organizational climate
and culture. Patient outcomes are viewed and investigated,
along with nursing-sensitive indicators and factors that
promote safe and effective practice.
Nurses play an essential role in their constant attention
to the environment and the factors that could place patients
10
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

at risk. These include product defects, risky or improper
medication practices, environmental artifacts like noise,
and any other potential hazards. Attention to the environ-
ment for care to be safe, effective, patient-centered, timely,
efficient, and equitable, and application of these ten rules,
are the means for promoting environmental health.
Fulfilling the characteristics described in standards of
professional performance is the challenge to you in your
educational pursuit and your daily practice in nursing.
Professionalism is an attribute in constant refinement. The
degree to which professionals demonstrate professionalism
in nursing is apparent in their professional practice and
how they define nursing. But, have you prepared all your
resources for this ongoing professional development?
RETURNING TO SCHOOL
This is a time to celebrate the talents you bring with you
to your continuing knowledge development. It is a time
for discovery, reflection, and professional development.
You have had many experiences in educational settings.
Unlike a child in school, the adult learner brings a wealth
of experiences to the learning environment. Experiences
of the adult learner may be varied, but they occurred in a
certain environment or context and have meaning to the
individual. To understand this meaning requires careful
examination of your situation. 
First, consider the reasons why you have returned to
school. You may think that the recognition for your work
or the pay differential on your career ladder is the reason.
These may be considerations, but you are embarking on a
journey of professional development that will further your
knowledge, skills, and abilities compared with a quick fix
to a limiting situation. You will be facing challenges of com-
peting roles and addressing priorities in time management.
Competing Roles
As an adult, you are already engaged in multiple roles.
Roles are organized behavioral patterns and expectations.
VandenBos (2013) defines a role as “a coherent set of be-
haviors expected of an individual in a specific position
within a group or social setting” (p. 503). Now consider the
multiple roles and positions in your unique circumstance.
You are probably employed as a registered nurse. 
The expectations for your work are written in the state
law for practice and in the job description at your place
of employment. There are also the less formal expec -
tations of your supervisors and colleagues at work. 
However, there are many role opportunities in profes-
sional nursing. The American Association of Colleges of
Nursing (AACN, 2008) has identified three primary
roles of the baccalaureate-prepared generalist nurse:
provider of care, designer/manager/coordinator of care,
and member of the profession. Clinical nurse leaders
(CNLs) also function as generalists in nursing practice
but are prepared at the master’s level in nursing. CNLs
practice in an advanced generalist role and are providers
and managers of care to individuals and cohorts of 
patients anywhere healthcare is delivered (AACN, 2014,
pp. 1–2). Advanced practice nurses (APRNs) are pre-
pared at the graduate level in nursing within one of 
four roles and function in a population foci specialty area
as a nurse practitioner, clinical nurse specialist, nurse
anesthetist, or nurse midwife. Nurses prepared at the
master’s or doctoral levels in nursing also function in 
role specialties or specialized advanced nursing positions
such as nursing education, administration, informatics,
research, public health, and policy analyst (ANA, 2010a).
The Scope and Standards of Practice (ANA, 2010c) 
describes the importance to the profession of these spe-
cialized advanced nursing positions for the continued ex-
pansion of those areas of nursing practice that intersect
with another body of knowledge but have a direct influ-
ence on nursing practice and support the care provided
to patients by other RNs (p. 18).
Your future practice will be in one of these multiple
roles of RN. However, your current situation has another
role: adult learner. And this new role of student will influ-
ence your current career and personal roles. For example,
how are your coworkers and supervisors reacting about
your return to school? Consider the apparent and hidden
behaviors, all of which have an impact on your progress.
Align yourself with positive influences and try not be
drawn into negativity.
Consider also your varied personal roles. You are also
a member of a family—whether it is an extended family
with intergenerational considerations, a single partnership,
a single-parent family, or even a social or religious group.
Your roles and responsibilities for caregiving occur by
virtue of your membership in this unique group. You 
may be a parent concerned about your child’s progress in
elementary school or your teenager’s involvement with a
particular social group in high school. You may be living
close to extended family members or be isolated by miles
or situations. These are all considerations of your unique
situation as an RN pursuing additional education.
You have now thought about both your family and
work-related roles and responsibilities. Now, what about
you? What are your deeply held wishes and desires—
personal, career-related, and family-inspired? This is
where competition and conflict can occur. Think about
CHAPTER 1 Your Professional Identity     ●
11
BOX 1.3
Rules for the 21st Century Health
System
●Care is based on continuous healing relationships.
●Care is customized according to patient needs and
values.
●The patient is the source of control.
●Knowledge is shared, and information ﬂows freely.
●Decision making is evidence-based.
●Safety is a system property.
●Transparency is necessary.
●Needs are anticipated.
●Waste is continuously decreased.
●Cooperation among clinicians is a priority.
Source: Corrigan, M.S., Donaldson, M.S., Kohn, L.Y., Maguire, S.K., 
& Pike, K.C. (2001). Crossing the quality chasm: A new health system
for the 21st century. Washington, DC: National Academy Press
(pp. 61–62). Permission to reproduce material copyrighted by 
National Academies Press.

the questions posed in Box 1.4 and add others that apply
to your personal situation. You made the right decision
to return to school. Now relax and prepare. Plan to
streamline your life (work, school, and family) and pre-
pare for dealing with your competing roles and responsi-
bilities. This situation is another form of multitasking—a
more complex one than encountered in daily practice.
You are advancing your career and professional practice
through additional learning and building on your knowl-
edge, skills, and abilities. 
Learning As Empowerment
Learning is the perception and assimilation of the informa-
tion presented to us in a variety of ways. Learning leads to
knowledge and encompasses the following characteristics:
●Perception of new information
●Reaction to the information
●Ability to recall or repeat the information 
●Understanding as rejection or acceptance of the 
information 
●Use of the information in a similar situation 
●Critical analysis of the information
●Incorporation of the information into the value 
system 
●Use of the information in various situations and 
combinations 
An increasing complexity emerges here as the learner
moves from receiving and recalling information through
understanding, application, analysis, and evaluation, to
the point of creating new applications. 
There are also three domains, or categories, of learning:
affective, cognitive, and psychomotor. The affective do-
main includes attitudes, feelings, and values—for example,
how you feel about returning to school. Your perception
and value of the positive effects on your life will influence
your progress. The cognitive domain involves knowledge
and thought processes within an individual’s intellectual
ability. This cognitive domain involves your understand-
ing of the information received about pathophysiology,
theory, and the other areas for knowledge acquisition. 
The psychomotor domain is probably the one you are
most comfortable with. This domain involves the process-
ing and demonstration of behaviors, as with the perfor -
mance of a skill like changing a dressing or starting an 
IV infusion.
Learning activities can be very different for the three
domains, but continued learning leads to empowerment.
Remember, to achieve a lasting change in observed be-
havior (psychomotor domain), the value of that change
(affective domain) and the intellectual capacity to under-
stand and process the information for behavioral changes
(cognitive domain) must first be present. What are some
of your individual learning needs?
Building Knowledge, Skills,
and Abilities
Your plan for professional practice should be tailored 
to your situation and learning needs, taking into account
your knowledge, skills, and abilities. Knowledge is the
accumulation of appropriate information through learn-
ing and experience. Skill is the ability to retrieve this
knowledge through mental and psychomotor activities
and apply it appropriately to a situation. Ability refers to
your competence and proficiency in the demonstration
of that knowledge and skill. Your personal plan needs to
address your knowledge, skills, and abilities for success in
your nursing program. Consider the particular factors in
your own situation.
First, look at your educational goals. Think about your
timeline for program completion and determine whether
adjustments may be needed to accommodate additional
time commitments. Given your personal timeline, con-
sider the factors that will promote your success. Consider
the time required for the program. If you are employed,
what adjustments to your schedule will need to be made?
Do you have to factor in travel for classes or library re-
search? Some nursing programs require a certain number
of courses arranged in a specific semester plan with classes,
labs or clinical, online activities, and library research. What
12
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
BOX 1.4
What Are Your Competing and Multiple Roles?
●Will your employer adjust your work schedule for you to attend class or use the library?
●How did your coworkers react (CNAs, LPNs, RN peers, supervisors, others) when they found out you were taking
this course?
●Have you taken the prerequisite courses, such as statistics, for the nursing program?
●What study materials do you have readily available?
●How are your computer skills?
●What expectations do your partner, family, or child(ren) have for your returning to school: high/low/none? Are
they supportive or unsupportive?
●What are your expectations? 
●What will you do to ensure you have the time needed for each of your roles?
●Do you have resources for childcare, if needed?
●If needed, did you apply for tuition assistance through your employer or at the college?
●Do you have any outstanding loans? Are they a worry?
●Do you have reliable transportation to get to work as well as to classes?
●Did taking this course seem like a good plan at the time but now you are having second thoughts? 
●Others?

is your computer access and how are your skills with pre -
sentation graphics and attaching files? Have you com-
pleted some of the prerequisite work? And what about
other courses required in the program—have you plotted
them into your timeline?
There may be areas in which you want to do some en-
hancement work. Consider your resources and materials
for review. Your program may offer review or tutorial re-
quirements to allow you to refresh certain content areas
or to learn about areas that were not known at the time of
your program, such as genetics and genomics competen-
cies. If review opportunities are available, take advantage
of them and take them seriously. Review and refreshment
opportunities can add to your supply of personal knowl-
edge, skills, and abilities.
Look further at your present job. Will the schedule
permit you to stay in that job, perhaps on a reduced sched-
ule, or will you need to find another job? How will your
peers at work react to you once you are really progressing
through the program? You may experience unanticipated
reactions, including hostility. 
Another consideration is unanticipated costs. You may
be evaluating the cost of tuition, books, and materials,
but what about additional travel to a clinical site, reduced
salary due to a reduced working schedule, and added costs
for childcare and perhaps prepared meals? Is your tuition
assistance available only after you have successfully com-
pleted a course? Are there delays that must be factored
into your plan? What other costs will be unique to your
situation? 
Now, consider your family and significant others.
What support systems are available, and what other ones
may be needed by you and your family members? You
need to differentiate educational commitments that are
required during a semester from family activities that can
become prominent during semester breaks. This may be
the opportunity to have a “family meeting” to discuss the
situation. Nurses often do not like to ask for help, but
perhaps family members can be enlisted to take on some
of the household chores. You may get to a point down
the road when your son or daughter scolds you, telling
you that you had better get your school work done before
you can play!
Your own health is also a consideration. Remember,
to effectively care for others, you must take good care of
yourself. All of this requires prioritization of needs, roles,
activities, and, especially, time management skills.
ADDRESSING TIME
MANAGEMENT
Now look at your time management skills. What do you
do well and what can be further developed? Identify your
“time wasters” and your “time enhancers.” Much reflec-
tion on your part will be involved in this activity—it is
not a one-size-fits-all situation. You are unique as is your
environment and the people around you. Someone once
asked me how I had the time to do a particular activity.
My first response was “I make the time.” Then I thought
about it and added, “I get up an hour earlier, and that
seems to work best.” It’s all about reflecting on the 
activity and planning ahead, as with a dressing change,
to set aside the time and have all the materials at hand.
Remember, no one has yet figured out how to add more
minutes to the day. So, within any given 24-hour period,
you must determine the most efficient use of time. Look
at the factors identified in Box 1.5. Depending on your
roles and unique situation, you will likely need to add
other factors for effective time management, whether at
work, at home, at school, in the library, or online. Be
honest and realistic, but do not get lost in the details. 
Your Learning Style
Learning styles and associated inventories have been dis-
cussed with varied research for over 50 years in an at-
tempt to improved teaching and learning outcomes. (See
Box 1.6.) The research and discussion continue as we
seek to understand better how individuals acquire mean-
ing and knowledge. Increasingly we are concerned with
the active involvement of the learner in the process. Your
learning style is simply the ways you best perceive,
think, organize, use, and retain knowledge. To under-
stand this concept, merely recall colleagues in the same
learning environment—those who take a lot notes, those
who just listen, and those who make notes or drawings
on what they interpret the message in the lecture to be.
Understanding differences in learning styles can help
teachers and learners make more informed decisions
CHAPTER 1 Your Professional Identity     ●
13
BOX 1.5
Factors to Consider for Efficient Time Management
Family
●Meals
●Homework
●Laundry
●Relationships
●Social obligations
Work
●Work schedule
●Hours and fatigue
●Coworkers and colleagues
●Practices to reﬁne
●Scope of practice
School/College
●Costs
●Transportation
●Learning needs 
●Course requirements
●Academic schedule and timeline
Personal
●Health and ﬁtness
●Hope and aspirations
●Spirituality
●Knowledge, skills, and abilities
●Individual needs

about which learning activities will be useful or produc-
tive to them as individuals and as members of learning
groups or communities.
Individuals with different learning styles vary in 
their preferences for how they absorb and assimilate 
information:
●visual learning (reading or watching) 
●auditory learning (listening or talking) 
●kinesthetic learning (doing or participating)
For example, some learners are highly visual in the way
they perceive information and derive meaning. For these
learners, a structured lecture with few visual aids is a less
desirable learning environment than one enhanced by vi-
sual aids. Others learn better through the written word,
by either reading or taking notes. Learners who are highly
auditory in their learning preference derive greater mean-
ing from just listening to the information. One of the ex-
ercises at the end of this chapter is the identification of
your particular learning style.
The learning environment for health professionals has
changed. The explosion of knowledge that con tinues on
a daily basis no longer allows for the  memorization of
discrete facts. Health professionals must understand the
underlying concepts, discover new information, reflect
on applications, and apply relevant knowledge to their
situation. Reflection and critical analysis are important
parts of this process. The learner is now active in the
process, no longer considering the teacher as the “sage
on the stage” but rather as the facilitator of learning. You,
as the learner, are the active one, seeing how information
fits with facts and perceptions. Recall that in Mezirow’s
(2000) view of transformative learning, adults learn by
elaborating existing frames of reference, learning new
frames of reference, transforming points of view, or
transforming habits of mind (p. 19). Building on your
knowledge base and your  personal frame of reference,
you will learn new perspectives. This process will further
allow you as the adult learner to transform your views,
and create new ways of approaching the world and nurs-
ing practice.
Learning occurs through reflection and interpre -
tation to understand perceptions of the self and the
world. But you also need to identify and organize your
resources.
GARNERING RESOURCES
Consider the resources that you will need to assist you as
a student. Perhaps the initial things that come to mind
are books, a stethoscope, a computer, and perhaps a car to
get to a class meeting or clinical site. Look beyond supplies
and reliable transportation. Resources are tools or means
of support. Consider those things and people that can help
you study, prepare assignments, succeed on examinations,
and thrive in your education. 
Studying
Once you understand your learning style, you can look to
the resources needed to capitalize on your assets. Remem-
ber, once you know your style, you will still be in a group
with individuals with varying styles, including the instruc-
tor. If you learn best through participation in discussions,
you may want to find a compatible study group. But a
word of caution: Study groups are not for everyone and
can be time wasters if the group is not focused, compati-
ble, and committed to ground rules of preparing on the
topic prior to the meeting. In addition, some individuals
are more solitary and need to think about something for a
while and work it out in their frame of reference before
being put on the spot in a discussion.
Your environment is another area you need to care-
fully consider, with regard to where you best think and
concentrate. Do you prefer a completely quiet environ-
ment or soft background music? Think about what helps
you to understand information and see relationships. 
Do you have a favorite place in the house, either a cozy
corner or a clean kitchen table after the children are in
bed? Maybe it is in a special chair with the cat in your
lap. Or perhaps it is at the library where additional 
resources are available without other distractions. Again,
you must determine your best environment to concen-
trate and be open to new  information.
Preparing Assignments
This is an area feared by many returning students, as they
face a blank piece of paper or computer screen. First, write
or type the expectation. It may help to see it isolated from
the distraction of other course expectations and grading
criteria. Make sure you have sufficient access to a reliable
computer for document preparation, sending and receiv-
ing e-mail, accessing the Internet, and preparing presen-
tation graphics. Competing with your spouse or children
for time online does not count! Locate the  dictionary tool
and make sure you have the spelling and grammar check-
ing tools activated to assist you in the composition process.
You will also need to become comfortable with the publi-
cation style required by your school or instructor. One
popular style is by the American Psychological Association
(2010), and you may be required to use this resource.
These basic tools and your development of skill in these
areas will facilitate your ease in making your case as you
address the requirements of an assignment, whether a case
study or a scholarly paper. 
Another valuable resource is a professional librarian,
especially one who can help you effectively search for
14
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
BOX 1.6
Myers-Briggs Inventory
The Myers-Briggs Inventory is used widely in education
and business applications. A classiﬁcation system of four
scales identiﬁes 16 personality types that can be further
classiﬁed for learning preferences:
●Introversion—Extroversion
●Sensing—Intuition
●Thinking—Feeling
●Judging—Perceptive
Source: Myers & Briggs Foundation. (2014). MBTI basics. Retrieved
from http://www.myersbriggs.org/my-mbti-personality-type/
mbti-basics/

materials, teach you how to access databases, and pro-
vide you with interlibrary loan materials. A librarian can
show you how to access the library remotely over the 
Internet to help with your time management and cut
down on travel to the library during certain hours. But
be sure use all your time management skills when
searching online to avoid getting distracted or lost in the
sea of information.
Sooner or later in your program of study you will have
a group assignment in which the group, not each individ-
ual, earns the grade. This type of activity can be accom-
plished in person or online and may be a wonderful team
experience—or a disaster with an uncooperative member.
Peer pressure is warranted; if that is not effective, consult
your instructor. Remember, teams are an important part
of collaborative practice and we need to continually refine
our skills in this area.
Taking Examinations
The thought of taking tests is one of the most threaten-
ing to the adult learner. Stress management techniques
such as deep breathing may help. Some of the most 
important considerations are adequate rest and being
confident in your preparation and understanding of
the content. Understanding the information is critical,
especially since test questions in nursing focus on critical
analysis and rarely involve the simple recall of isolated
facts. Beyond simple memorization of facts such as the
bones and muscles of the leg, more complexity is added
for application of this information to a patient situation.
And then grades are an issue, with the adult learner 
trying to do “the best” or else experience a personal sense
of failure. Remember, a grading scale is just that: a scale
that varies. There are certain acceptable numbers on
your bathroom scale, just as there should be acceptable
numbers or letters on a grading scale. There will be
times when you excel and others when you succeed 
but do not achieve an A—and that is acceptable. Give
yourself permission to be human and not always receive
the top grade in the course. Understanding, retention,
and application of knowledge are the more important
considerations.
Thriving
One of the most important actions you can take as you
pursue your nursing degree is to thrive on the acquisition
of your new knowledge, skills, and abilities. Lifelong learn-
ing is a component of professional nursing. From your
practice, armed with technical skills and experience in the
practice setting, we advance to critical analysis and clinical
judgment that embody professional practice. You have
taken the first step in your ongoing learning. Now, what
is your view of professional nursing?
YOUR PHILOSOPHY OF
NURSING
Virginia Henderson (1897–1996) was an outstanding
leader in nursing. Her classic definition of nursing 
embodied her view of the unique role of the professional
nurse as:
[a]ssisting the individual, sick or well, in the performance
of those activities contributing to health or its recovery 
(or to a peaceful death) that he would perform unaided if
he had the necessary strength, will, or knowledge. And to
do this in such a way as to help him gain independence as
rapidly as possible. (Henderson, 1966, p. 15)
This concrete definition was expanded and applied to
nursing practice, education, and research. Henderson’s
philosophy of nursing was one of caring, assisting, and
supporting the person. In her writings, she encouraged
every nurse to develop a personal concept of nursing—in
essence, a philosophy of nursing.
A philosophy of nursing presents a particular
 professional nurse’s belief system or worldview of nurs-
ing—the nurse’s personal definition of nursing. Recall that
the first component on the structural hierarchy of con-
temporary nursing knowledge was the metaparadigm,
followed by the influence of the belief system or philos-
ophy. Fawcett and DeSanto-Madeya (2013) describe the
function of a philosophy as communication of what the
members of a discipline believe to be true relative to the
phenomena of interest, how knowledge is developed, and
the values with regard to actions and practices (p. 8).
As discussed previously, the metaparadigm concept of
human beings relates to the people of concern for nursing.
Nurses in different settings define patients uniquely within
their practice—for example, as individuals versus families.
The nurse’s practice area and patient populations also in-
fluence the environment—for example, an intensive care
unit in an acute care setting or a rural healthcare clinic lo-
cated in a community school or modular building. The
concept of health also varies, being different for the pro-
fessional who provides care for trauma victims and the
nurse involved with health initiatives in an employee
group. Specific nursing roles, and the services provided,
influence the concept of nursing. In addition to the meta-
paradigm concepts in a personal philosophy of nursing,
certain other values and beliefs are generally apparent as
one’s beliefs about nursing are illustrated. 
Consider the following essential features of professional
nursing definitions identified in the ANA’s Nursing’s Policy
Statement: The Essence of the Profession (2010a):
●Provision of a caring relationship that facilitates health
and healing
●Attention to the range of human experiences and re-
sponses to health and illness within the physical and
social environments
●Integration of objective data with knowledge gained
from an appreciation of the patient or the group
●Application of scientific knowledge to the processes 
of diagnosis and treatment through the use of judg-
ment and critical thinking
●Advancement of professional nursing knowledge
through scholarly inquiry
●Influence on social and public policy to promote 
social justice
●Assurance of safe, quality, and evidence-based 
practice (p. 9)
CHAPTER 1 Your Professional Identity     ●
15

Along with these criteria are interwoven ethical principles,
standards of practice, and professional performance 
expectations. These are your values and beliefs.
At this point, you should critically analyze your be-
lief system and express your views of nursing. We all
have prior experiences that influence our thinking 
and actions. Try to place those aside and begin to craft
your philosophy of nursing. Using these definitions 
and criteria, develop your views into a personal philos-
ophy of nursing. Periodically reflect on your philosophy
to analyze how your professional practice is enhanced
in your ongoing quest for knowledge and expertise 
in your profession. This is your unique professional
identity.
16
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
K E Y  P O I N T S
●The following are characteristics of a profession: (1) systematic theory and knowledge base, (2) authority,
(3) community sanction, (4) an ethical code, and (5) a professional culture.
●Kerlinger and Lee (2000) define a theory as “a set of interrelated constructs (concepts), definitions, and
propositions that present a systematic view of phenomena by specifying relations among variables, with
the purpose of explaining and predicting the phenomena” (p. 11).
●A paradigm used by professionals in a scientific community consists of the beliefs and the belief system
shared by members of that particular community to explain phenomena, practice the profession, and
conduct research.
●The metaparadigm of nursing is the overall concern of nursing common to each nursing model, whether
a conceptual model/paradigm or formal theory, and it includes the concepts of human beings, environ-
ment, health, and nursing.
●The Code of Ethics for Nurses (ANA, 2015) is the ethical standard for professional nursing practice.
It identifies expected professional practice behaviors with patients, colleagues, and other professionals
within nine provisions with interpretative statements.
●Autonomy involves judgment and self-governing within one’s scope of practice. This self-governing re-
quires ongoing evaluation of both responsibility and accountability in professional practice. In the ANA’s
Code of Ethics for Nurses, responsibility is defined as “an obligation to perform required professional activities
at a level commensurate with one’s education and in compliance with applicable laws and standards . . .”
(ANA, 2015, p. 45) whereas, accountability is being answerable to self and others for one’s own choices,
decisions and actions as measured against a standard . . .” such as the Code (ANA, 2015, p. 41). 
●The ANA (2010b) Standards of Professional Performance are ethics, education, evidence-based practice
and research, quality of practice, communication, leadership, collaboration, professional practice evalua-
tion, resource utilization, and environmental health.
●The five competencies for health professionals are providing patient-centered care, working in interdisci-
plinary teams, employing evidence-based practice, applying quality improvement, and using informatics
(Greiner & Knebel, 2003).
●Roles are organized behavioral patterns and expectations.
●Learning is the perception and assimilation of the information presented to us in a variety 
of ways.
●Knowledge is the accumulation of the appropriate information through learning and experience. 
Skill is the ability to retrieve this knowledge through mental and psychomotor activities and apply 
it appropriately to the situation. Ability is your competence and proficiency in the demonstration 
of the knowledge and skill. 
●Learning style or preference is simply the ways you best perceive, think, organize, use, and retain 
knowledge.
●Resources are tools or means of support. 
●A personal philosophy of nursing presents the belief system or worldview of nursing for a particular pro-
fessional nurse. Incorporated into such a philosophy are definitions, values, and assumptions about the
metaparadigm concepts of human beings, environment, health, and nursing

REFERENCES
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2008). The 
essentials of baccalaureate education for professional nursing
practice. Washington, DC: Author.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2011). The es-
sentials of master’s education in nursing. Washington, DC:
Author.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2013). Compe-
tencies and curricular expectations for clinical nurse leader 
education and practice. Retrieved from http://www
.aacn.nche.edu/publications/white-papers/cnl 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2014). 
Mission. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/
about-aacn/mission-values 
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses. (2014). Mission. 
Retrieved from http://www.aacn.org/wd/memberships/
content/mission_vision_values_ethics.pcms?menu=aboutus
American Nurses Association. (2010a). Nursing’s policy state-
ment: The essence of the profession (2010 ed.). Silver Spring,
MD: Nursesbooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2010b). Nursing: Scope and 
standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursesbooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2014). About the ANA. Re-
trieved from http://nursingworld.org/FunctionalMenu
Categories/AboutANA
American Nurses Association. (2015). Code of ethics for 
nurses with interpretative statements. Silver Spring, MD:
Nursebooks.org.
Benner, P. (1984). From novice to expert: Excellence and power in
clinical nursing practice. Menlo Park, CA: Addison-Wesley.
Corrigan, M. S., Donaldson, M. S., Kohn, L. T., Maguire,
S. K., & Pike, K. C. (2001). Crossing the quality chasm: 
A new health system for the 21st century. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press. 
Fawcett, J. (1995). Analysis and evaluation of conceptual models
of nursing (3rd ed.). Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.
Fawcett, J. (2000). Analysis and evaluation of contemporary 
nursing knowledge: Nursing models and theories. 
Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.
Fawcett, J. (2005). Contemporary nursing knowledge: Analysis
and evaluation of nursing models and theories (2nd ed.).
Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.
Fawcett, J., & DeSanto-Madeya, S. (2013). Contemporary 
nursing knowledge: Analysis and evaluation of nursing models
and theories (3rd ed.). Philadelphia: F.A. Davis.
Greenwood, E. (1957). Attributes of a profession. Social Work,
2(3), 45–55.
Greiner, A. C., & Knebel, E. (Eds.). (2003). Health professions
education: A bridge to quality. Washington, DC: Institute of
Medicine.
Henderson, V. (1966). The nature of nursing: A definition 
and its implications for practice, education, and research. 
New York: Macmillan.
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2011). The future of nursing: 
Advancing health, leading change. Washington, DC: 
National Academies Press. Retrieved from http://www
.iom.edu/Reports/2010/The-Future-of-Nursing-Leading
-Change-Advancing-Health.aspx
International Council of Nurses (2012). The ICN code of ethics
for nurses. Retrieved from http://www.icn.ch/images/
stories/documents/about/icncode_english.pdf
International Council of Nurses. (2013). About ICN. Retrieved
from http://www.icn.ch/about-icn/icns-mission/
Kerlinger, F. N., & Lee, H. B. (2000). Foundations of behav-
ioral research (4th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth 
Thompson Learning.
Kuhn, T. S. (1970). The structure of scientific revolutions
(2nd ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mezirow, J. (1991). Transformative dimensions of adult learning.
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Mezirow, J. (2000). Learning to think like an adult: Core con-
cepts of transformation theory. In J. Mezirow and Associates,
Learning as transformation: Critical perspectives on a theory in
progress (pp. 3–33). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
CHAPTER 1 Your Professional Identity     ●
17
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Be prepared to participate in a discussion to be scheduled by your instructor on how you demonstrate the five
core competencies of health professionals.
2. Explain your views on professional responsibility and accountability.
3. Describe how you demonstrate and document your continued competency.
4. Reflect carefully and identify your reasons for continuing your nursing education.
5. Consider your responsibilities.
• Identify all your current roles. Which ones can be streamlined? 
• What resources can you classify as readily available, sometimes available, or in need of locating?
• What strategies can you identify for improved time management for your new role as a student?
6. Review the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter, and discuss it in the context of the contents
of the chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.

Miller, B. K., Adams, D., & Beck, L. (1993). A behavioral 
inventory for professionalism in nursing. Journal of 
Professional Nursing, 9, 290–295.
Myers & Briggs Foundation. (2014). MBTI basics. Retrieved
from http://www.myersbriggs.org/my-mbti-personality-type/
mbti-basics/
National Council of State Boards of Nursing. (2014). About
NCSBN: Mission and values. Retrieved from
https://www.ncsbn.org/182.htm 
National League for Nursing. (2013). Mission/goals/core 
values. Retrieved from http://www.nln.org/aboutnln/
ourmission.htm 
Sigma Theta Tau. (2014). STTI organizational fact sheet. 
Retrieved from http://www.nursingsociety.org/aboutus/
mission/Pages/factsheet.aspx 
VandenBos, G. R. (ed). (2013). APA dictionary of clinical 
psychology. Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY
American Nurses Association. (2009). Forensic nursing: 
Scope and standards of practice. Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2009). Nursing administration:
Scope and standards of practice. Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2009). Transplant nursing: 
Scope and standards of practice. Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursebooks.org. 
American Nurses Association. (2010). Gerontological 
Nursing: Scope and standards practice. Silver Spring, 
MD: Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2010). Nursing professional 
development: Scope and standards of practice. Silver Spring,
MD: Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2010). Position statement: 
The nurse’s role in ethics and human rights: Protecting and
promoting individual worth, dignity, and human rights in
practice settings. Retrieved from http://www.nursingworld
.org/ethicsrole 
American Nurses Association. (2011). School nursing: Scope 
and standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Spring, MD:
Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2012). Faith community nursing:
Scope and standards of practice. (2nd ed.). Silver Spring,
MD: Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2013). Addictions nursing: Scope
and standards of practice. Silver Spring, MD: Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2013). Corrections nursing: 
Scope and standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Spring, 
MD: Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2013). Holistic nursing: Scope
and standards of practice (2nd ed). Silver Spring, MD:
Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2013). Intellectual and develop-
mental disabilities nursing: Scope and standards of practice
(2nd ed.). Silver Spring, MD: Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2013). Neonatal nursing: Scope
and standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Spring, MD:
Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2013). Neuroscience nursing:
Scope and standards of practice. Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2013). Plastic surgery nursing:
Scope and standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Spring, 
MD: Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2013). Public health nursing:
Scope and standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Spring,
MD: Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2013). Radiology and imaging
nursing: Scope and standards of practice. Silver Spring,
MD: Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2013). Rheumatology nursing:
Scope and standards of practice. Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2014). Palliative nursing: 
Scope and standards of practice. Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2014). Psychiatric-mental health
nursing: Scope and standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver
Spring, MD: Nursebooks.org.
Kohn, L. T., Corrigan, M. S., & Donaldson, M. S. (1999). 
To err is human: Building a safer health system. Washington,
DC: National Academy Press.
O’Neil, E. H. (1998). Recreating health professional practice 
for a new century. San Francisco: Pew Health Professions
Commission.
Pew Health Professions Commission. (1995). Critical 
challenges: Revitalizing the health professions for the 
twenty-first century. San Francisco: USCF Center for 
the Health Professions.
ONLINE RESOURCES
American Association of Colleges of Nursing
http://www.aacn.nche.edu/
American Nurses Association
http://www.nursingworld.org
ANA Code of Ethics for Nurses
http://www.nursingworld.org/codeofethics
ICN Code of Ethics for Nurses
http://www.icn.ch/icncode.pdf
18
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

Theory as the
Basis for Practice
19
2
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
Theory
Model
Framework
Conceptual Model or Framework
Concept
Construct
Variable
Proposition
Theory Description and Evaluation
Hierarchy of Needs
Developmental Theories
General System Theory
Quantum Theory
“Theory and research are not solely 
the province of the academic, just as 
practice is not solely the field of the 
practitioner.”
(Glanz, Rimer, and Lewis 2002)
Key Terms
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Define key terms in theory development and utilization.
2. Discuss Maslow’s theory of motivation with the hierarchy of basic needs.
3. Describe the components of developmental theories and their application to individuals across the 
life span.
4. Describe the components and application of systems theory.
5. Discuss the impact of theory on practice.

One characteristic of a profession is that it is built on a
theoretical base. This base includes theoretical foundations
unique to the profession, as well as those borrowed or
adapted from other scientific disciplines. Chapter 1 dis-
cussed paradigms and the metaparadigm concepts of nurs-
ing. Recall that Kuhn (1970) described a paradigm as
“universally recognized scientific achievements that for a
time provide model problems and solutions to a commu-
nity of practitioners” (p. vii). When the paradigm is no
longer useful in explaining phenomena, practice, and re-
search in that particular scientific community, a paradigm
shift occurs, and a new structure evolves.
In 1957, Merton used a paradigm to analyze sociological
theory. He viewed the paradigm as a “field glass” to illumi-
nate and view concepts and interrelationships and to make
assumptions clear on the body of knowledge for analysis and
testing. Merton (1957) identified the purposes of a paradigm
as providing for the following:
1. Parsimonious arrangement of concepts and proposi-
tions showing interrelationships
2. A logical guide showing derivations and avoiding 
hidden assumptions and concepts
3. Culmination in theory development as a building
process
4. Systematic arrangement and cross-tabulation of 
concepts for analysis
5. Codiﬁcation of qualitative research methods 
(pp. 13–16)
From a cultural perspective, Leininger (2006) defined
worldview as “the way an individual or group looks out on
and understands their world about them as a value, stance,
picture, or perspective about life or the world” (p. 83). In
the professional culture of nursing, these are the values, at-
titudes, beliefs, and practices unique to the profession. Thus,
a scientific community has the tools to create and test a the-
ory for knowledge development and the use of this knowl-
edge in practice. The worldview furnishes the philosophical
assumptions that are considered “givens” by the theorist or
the scientific community. In nursing, this provides us with
the process: the metaparadigm concepts to various para-
digms, and the development of theories on which to base
research, practice, administration, and education.
TERMINOLOGY IN THEORY
AND DEVELOPMENT ANALYSIS
Professions such as nursing are based on unique theory.
Kerlinger and Lee (2000) defined a theory as “a set of in-
terrelated constructs (concepts), definitions, and proposi-
tions that present a systematic view of phenomena by
specifying relations among variables, with the purpose of
explaining and predicting the phenomena” (p. 11). This
definition provides us with the components and aims of a
theory, which must initially be described and then evalu-
ated for potential use in practice, education, and research
in a discipline. Some theorists, however, believe this defi-
nition is too narrow and excludes descriptive theories; de-
scriptive theories, which focus on factor naming, are
abundant in professional nursing and are often a first step
for further research and development.
Before moving to the components of a theory, we need
to address three similar terms frequently associated with the-
ory: model, framework, and conceptual model (or concep-
tual framework). A model is a graphic representation of
some phenomenon. It may be a mathematical model (such
as A + B = C) or a diagrammatic model that links words
with symbols and lines. A theoretical model provides a visual
description of a theory using limited narrative and display-
ing components and relationships symbolically. A frame-
work is another means of providing a structural view of the
concepts and relationships proposed in a theory. Again, use
of words and narrative is limited, but the structure of the
theory is presented as the framework and allows translation,
interpretation, and illumination of the narrative or text.
A conceptual model or framework is similar to a the-
ory in that it represents some phenomenon of interest and
contains concepts and propositions. However, with a con-
ceptual model or framework, the concepts and especially
the propositions are broader in scope, less defined, and
less specific to the phenomenon of concern. As Fawcett
and DeSanto-Madeya (2013) note, “the concepts of a
conceptual model are so abstract and general that they are
not directly observed in the real world, nor are they lim-
ited to any particular individual, group, situation, or
event” (p. 13).
A theory can evolve from a conceptual model or
framework as concepts are further defined, specified,
tested, and interrelated to represent some aspect of re-
ality. Fawcett (1995, 2000, 2005) and, subsequently, 
Fawcett and DeSanto-Madeya (2013) have described
the structural hierarchy of contemporary nursing knowl-
edge (Fig. 2.1) with its components, from the most 
abstract metaparadigm, influenced by different philoso-
phies, to conceptual models that further evolve into the-
ories and specific empirical indicators for testing. They
COMPONENTS
LEVEL OF ABSTRACTION
Metaparadigm
Philosophies1...n
Conceptual Models1...n
Empirical Indicators1...n
Most Concrete
Most Abstract
Theories1...n
Figure 2.1 The structural hierarchy of contemporary
nursing knowledge: Components and levels of abstraction.
(From Fawcett, J., and DeSanto-Madeya, S. (2013). Contempo-
rary nursing knowledge: Analysis and evaluation of nursing 
models and theories [3rd ed., p. 4]. Philadelphia: F. A. Davis,
with permission.)
20
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

CHAPTER 2 Theory as the Basis for Practice
●
21
further define the function of conceptual models “to
provide a framework to organize and visualize abstract
and general phenomena and relations between various
phenomena encompassed by the model” (Fawcett and
DeSanto-Madeya, 2013, p. 13). Then, the function of
a theory is “to narrow and more fully specify the phe-
nomena contained in a conceptual model” (Fawcett and
DeSanto-Madeya, 2013, p. 16). Concepts become less
abstract, and the population of interest is identified.
This increase in specificity is evident in the examples
proposed by Alligood (2014c), who, on the basis of 
Fawcett’s structural hierarchy of nursing knowledge,
correlated examples in theoretical structures by different
nursing theorists as follows:
●Metaparadigm: Person, environment, health, and
nursing
●Philosophies: Nightingale, Watson, Benner
●Conceptual Models: King, Levine, Neuman, Orem,
Rogers, Roy, Johnson
●Theories: Leininger, Newman, Parse, Pender, Meleis,
Husted and Husted, Boykin and Schoenhofer
●Middle-Range Theories: Mercer, Mishel, Wiener and
Dodd, Kolcaba, Swanson, Beck, Rutland and Moore
As more is known about the phenomenon, this knowledge
can be used in specific, meaningful patient applications.
As knowledge about some phenomena increases, a the-
ory is proposed to address the phenomena or reality within
the discipline. The components of a theory are the con-
structs (concepts), with their specific definitions, and the
propositions that describe or link those constructs (con-
cepts). At the simplest level, a concept is a view or idea
that we hold about something. It can be something highly
concrete, such as a pencil, or something highly abstract,
such as quality. The more concrete the concept, the easier
it is understood and consistently used. For instance, we
are comfortable envisioning a pencil and can easily de-
scribe it to others. This ability to describe something 
directly in the concrete world shares the “concept.” But
the concept of quality is more abstract, and ensuring that
all individual definitions are the same is difficult, often 
requiring indirect measures.
We strive to define a concept in operational terms—
that is, how we view a specific entity and how it can be
measured so that others know exactly what we mean. To
meet the criteria of a theory, we need to define the con-
cepts. Consider the concept of a pencil. We think of a
pencil as a writing implement. This is the theoretical or
conceptual definition of a pencil we read in a dictionary.
But what do we truly mean by pencil? It is a yellow-
painted, wooden-covered graphite instrument that we
use to make marks on a paper. Does it have an eraser?
Does a mechanical pencil fit into this definition? An op-
erational definition narrows the definition to precisely
what we view and how it can be measured for use in prac-
tice or research as a measurable, empirical indicator. In
addition, concepts are broadened to constructs, such as
with quality or identity, which can be multidimensional
and difficult—if not impossible—to break down into
component parts.
A construct is a more complex idea package of some
phenomenon that contains many factors but cannot be
truly isolated or confined to a more concrete concept. The
construct of identity, for example, contains many pieces,
such as personal perception, role expec tations, and status.
However, we must still provide an operational definition
of a construct by specifying certain elements it contains (as
indirect measures), such as self-image, ideal image, group
image, role expectations, and status. The same multidimen-
sionality occurs when we assess the quality of healthcare.
In research, we often see the term variables, referring
to some concept in the theory under study. A variable is
a concept that can change and that contains a set of values
that can be measured in a practice or research situation.
For example, a client’s cholesterol reading is a variable.
The concept of blood cholesterol has been operationally
defined within certain parameters, and the level of the
reading is the value for the variable.
Whether concepts, constructs, or a combination of the
two are included in a specific theory, they are the building
blocks of the theory. Definitions are provided to help us
understand the nature and characteristics of each block in
the construction. We then need to relate these building
blocks to each other. Describing and stating the relation-
ships between or among the constructs (or concepts) pro-
vides the propositions of a theory. Also called relational
statements, propositions show how the concepts are
linked in the theory and how they relate to one another
and to the total theoretical structure. They define how the
structure is held together. In nursing theory, propositions
refer to how the individual is characterized with specific
abilities, knowledge, values, and traits and how these 
factors interrelate with the characteristics of health, the en-
vironment, and nursing.
Research is a means of supporting the concepts and
relationships proposed in a theory. It provides support-
ive evidence and suggests further study and possible
gaps or revisions needed in the theoretical structure. We
can see this in the next chapters, which cover refine-
ment of nursing and other health models, such as the
health-belief model revision. Research can be qualita-
tive and inductive, for generating theory, or more quan-
titative, for deductively testing hypotheses as theoretical
propositions.
As stated previously, Kerlinger and Lee (2000) defined
the aims or purpose of theory as describing or explaining
some phenomena of interest. In nursing, theory is further
differentiated into levels that describe, explain, predict,
and control. Dickoff and James (1968) developed a classic
position paper proposing four levels of nursing theory
(Box 2.1). All levels may be present as a practice theory
BOX 2.1
Dickoff and James (1968): Four Levels
of Nursing Theory
1. Factor-isolating (naming) theories
2. Factor-relating (situation-depicting) theories
3. Situation-relating (predictive or promoting/
inhibiting theories)
4. Situation-producing (prescriptive) theories
Dickoff, J., & James, P. (1968). A theory of theories: A position paper.
Nursing Research, 17, 197–203.

evolves (factor-isolating and then factor-relating), is sub-
jected to further research, and is refined, becoming predic-
tive and prescriptive. In application, testing, and refinement,
a theory is a continuum as long as the content meets the 
intent of the discipline and metaparadigm.
In addition, theories are classified according to their
scope as grand, middle-range, or limited in scope or prac-
tice. This is the breadth of coverage of some phenomena.
General system theory is an example of a grand theory, or
one with a broad scope. This theory, discussed later in the
chapter, has been used in development, testing, and appli-
cation in many scientific disciplines.
Merton (1957) was the first theorist to suggest “theo-
ries of the middle range: theories intermediate to the
minor working hypotheses evolved in abundance during
the day-by-day routines of research, and the all inclusive
speculations comprising a master conceptual scheme from
which it is hoped to derive a very large number of empir-
ically observed uniformities of . . . behavior” (pp. 5–6). As
you will see in the next chapter, middle-range theories are
narrower in scope, with a limited view of a phenomenon,
and contain concepts and propositions that are measurable
and can be empirically tested. Some of our traditional
nursing theories meet the characteristics of a middle-range
theory, as described in Chapter 3. Other middle-range the-
ories include the developmental theories reviewed later in
this chapter. Although these theories address psychosocial,
cognitive, and moral development, they apply across dis-
ciplines as continual, incremental knowledge and skills de-
veloped by individuals. More limited nursing practice
theories are evolving as hypotheses derived from middle-
range theories are tested, clarified, and made specific to
certain practice areas or types of patients. Chapter 4 shows
examples of limited nursing practice models that are being
tested and refined into theoretical frameworks, including
Pender’s health promotion model. Even more narrow in
scope are practice theories, which focus on measurable
variables and propositions that are based on empirical re-
search and now may be refined further, perhaps to a spe-
cific population or group of individuals with a common
characteristic.
You can also enter “middle-range nursing theory” in
your Internet search engine to locate additional sources of
information from a variety of nursing programs.
THEORY DESCRIPTION 
AND EVALUATION
To understand theories for use and application in prac-
tice, we use certain criteria to describe and evaluate them.
Theory development is both an inductive and a deduc-
tive process. An inductive process is used to generate con-
cepts and make inferences by stating interrelationships
(propositions) within a framework to view phenomena.
From observations of phenomena, we can name concepts
and enumerate proposed relationships. Once the theory
is generated, it is applied, in whole or in part, for testing
as a deductive process. For nursing theory description
and evaluation, we consider the following three sets of
criteria proposed by nursing scholars Chinn and Kramer,
Barnum, and Fawcett.
Chinn and Kramer (2011) differentiate between  theory
description and critical reflection of empiric  theory. The
theory is described by answering questions in the following
areas: purpose, concepts, definitions, relationships and
structure, and assumptions. This process provides an un-
derstanding of the components and aims of the theory.
Once the theory has been described, five issues are addressed
in critical reflection:
●Clarity and consistency in presentation
●Simplicity and meaningfulness of relationships
●Generality or scope
●Accessibility as potential for use with empirically 
identifiable phenomena
●Significance as leading to the values in practice, educa-
tion, and research (Chinn & Kramer, 2011, p. 205).
This differentiation allows us to discriminate between un-
derstanding the theoretical structure and evaluating the
theory’s soundness and usefulness in practice, education,
or research. Alligood (2014c) refers to these five areas for
theory analysis as clarity, simplicity, generality, accessibility,
and importance (p. 9).
Barnum (1998) proposes two categories of theory: de-
scriptive theory and explanatory theory. Descriptive theory
is a factor-naming and factor-relating theory developed ini-
tially to characterize some phenomena. Explanatory theory
brings us to the situation-relating and situation-producing
levels of theory, looking at the “how,” the “why,” and the
interrelationships in the theory (Barnum, 1998). Theory
description is delineated as theory interpretation, with
questions addressing the following areas:
●Major elements of the theory and their definitions
●Relationships among the elements
●Differentiation between descriptive and explanatory
theory
●How the theory addresses, defines, and differentiates
nursing
●The focus on the patient, nurse, action, or relationship
●Unique language used and defined by the theorist
(Barnum, 1990, 1994, 1998)
For critical analysis, internal criticism and external crit-
icism are differentiated. Internal criticism is used to evalu-
ate how the theory components fit together: the clarity,
consistency, adequacy, logical development, and, some-
times, level of theory development (Barnum, 1998). Ex-
ternal criticism deals with real-world issues such as reality
convergence, usefulness, significance, and discrimination
from other healthcare disciplines (Barnum, 1998). This
process allows us to discriminate between understanding
the theoretical structure (internal criticism) and evaluating
the soundness and usefulness of the theory for application
in practice, education, or research (external criticism).
Fawcett and DeSanto-Madeya (2013) have proposed
criteria for theory analysis and evaluation that have under-
gone several revisions. They further differentiate between
22
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
ONLINE CONSULT 
Nursing Theories at 
http://nursingtheories.info/

CHAPTER 2 Theory as the Basis for Practice
●
23
analysis and evaluation of nursing conceptual models and
theories. Recall that conceptual models are more abstract
than theories. As described by Fawcett and DeSanto-
Madeya (2013) a theory is more concrete and more specific,
and is restricted to a more limited range of phenomena,
than a conceptual model, with the purpose of middle-range
theories to describe, explain, or predict concrete and specific
phenomena (p. 20).
Analysis refers to the description of the theory. Fawcett
and DeSanto-Madeya (2013) have described an analysis 
as “a nonjudgmental examination” of the nursing model,
while an evaluation requires judgments to be made about
the extent to which a nursing model satisfies certain criteria 
(p. 442). Theory analysis is followed by theory evaluation,
which requires thoughtful interpretation of the theory. 
Fawcett and DeSanto-Madeya (2013) have identified a series
of questions for analysis and evaluation of nursing theories
appropriate to their level of abstraction as compared with
conceptual models. In this revision, Fawcett and DeSanto-
Madeya (2013) have proposed steps in a framework for the
analysis and the evaluation of the theory, as follows:
Application of this framework for theory analysis and
evaluation will be evident in Chapter 3, which deals with
specific grand and middle-range nursing theories. Each of
these sets of criteria involves a careful identification of the
components and evaluation components for determina-
tion of applicability to nursing practice. 
THEORIES FROM OUTSIDE 
OF NURSING
Nursing and other healthcare disciplines have long used a
variety of theories to guide practice. Some are discipline-
specific, such as the nursing theories reviewed in Chapter 3.
For example, Fawcett and DeSanto-Madeya (2013) dif-
ferentiate between theories developed unique to nursing
(Newman, Orlando, Parse, Peplau, and Watson) and
models borrowed from other disciplines (stress, coping,
and self-efficacy) (p. 17). Early nursing theories were de-
scribed by Barnum (1990) as follows:
As an applied science, much of nursing’s theory is
“borrowed” from other disciplines. Every discipline has
similar boundary ambiguities, where the inquiry and
answers in one field overlap those in another. . . . 
Nursing’s uniqueness in this respect does not lie in
boundary overlap but in the number of boundary 
overlaps with which it must contend. A high number of
overlaps occur in the discipline of nursing because it
often attempts to deal holistically with a phenomenon
(man) that has previously been dealt with in compart-
mentalized ways by other disciplines. (p. 218)
But, nursing theory has come a long way since that time.
In her description of the development of nursing theory
from the Curriculum Era in the early 20th century,
through the Research and Graduate Education Eras in
the middle 20th century, and the Theory Era in the latter
part of the 20th century, into the 21st century and the
Era of Theory Utilization, Alligood (2014a)—described
the process resulting in theory is not just to know but to
use (p. 8) with the growth of the discipline (p. 9). As pro-
posed by Fawcett (2014), nurses must embrace nursing
knowledge in the form of explicit nursing conceptual
models and theories; indeed, “the use of discipline-
specific nursing knowlege to guide nursing practice is the
hallmark of professional nursing” (p. 427). Recall the
metaparadigm concepts. Borrowed theories may address
human beings, health, and the environment, but what of
nursing? With collaborative practice, however, these the-
ories provide a common ground and the opportunity for
the application and sharing of middle-range theories. They
also enable us to understand human nature, motivation,
and development. But, as noted by Chinn and Kramer
(2011), always consider specific factors that influence a
nursing situation (p. 40).
Several classic theories have been applied in nursing to
view the person, family, community, and group. We use
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs to view human beings and
basic human needs. Developmental theories have been ap-
plied across the human life span as we seek to understand
the complexity of human behavior. In looking at the per-
son or group, we have applied systems theory to understand
the interaction of human beings with their environment.
The following section briefly describes selected theories that
are applied in certain areas and have been used in the evo-
lution of nursing models more specific to our metaparadigm
concepts.
Maslow’s Theory of Human
Motivation and Hierarchy of 
Basic Needs
A theory widely used in many disciplines is Maslow’s the-
ory of human motivation. In his original 1954 book, 
Motivation and Personality, Maslow described how his work
emerged. The book begins by presenting Maslow’s philos-
ophy as an approach to science. Human values are
prevalent in the philosophy, and Maslow’s worldview is
described as holistic, functional, dynamic, and purposive.
In his 1970 revised edition, Maslow  reinforced his world-
views and described his theory as holistic-dynamic. He sup-
ported his original 16 propositions on motivation, on
which his theory was based (see Chapter 9, on motivation
in the teaching-learning process). This is a grand theory
that views the complexity of human behavior, especially in
relation to motivation of behavior. The theory of motiva-
tion is based on clinical and experimental data from psy-
chology, psychiatry, education, and philosophy. It does not
Theory Analysis
Theory Evaluation
Step 1: Model Origins
Step 1: Explication of origins
Step 2: Unique Focus 
Step 2: Comprehensiveness of content
Step 3: Content
Step 3: Logical congruence
Step 4: Generation of theory
Step 5: Legitimacy (social utility, 
congruence, and significance)
Step 6: Contributions to nursing knowledge 
and the discipline

address specific nursing concerns except as they relate to
human behavior with environmental influences.
Maslow’s theory includes a hierarchical structure for
human needs. This hierarchy of needs can be visualized
as a pyramid (Fig. 2.2). At the base of the pyramid are the
physiologic drives. Higher needs progress upward as safety,
love and belonging, esteem, and self-actualization needs.
Maslow (1954, 1970) described this as a “hierarchy of pre-
potency” to explain that the individual concentrates on
the physiologic drives. The physiologic drives are consid-
ered the most powerful, but as physiologic needs are sat-
isfied, the individual focuses on emerging higher needs.
This is the general structure for the hierarchy.
Individual differences are provided for in this theory.
Some individuals have altered placement of needs in the
hierarchy. Maslow (1970) described differences among in-
dividuals in placement of some of the higher needs such
as a reversal of esteem and love/belonging needs. In addi-
tion, individuals may have different levels of need satisfac-
tion. For example, one person might meet the physiologic
drives at a 75 percent level, whereas another person’s level
for satisfaction is 85 percent. Individual differences also
apply to the emergence of higher needs. Maslow (1970)
regarded this as a gradual process; one person’s safety needs
may begin to emerge when his or her physiologic needs
are being met at 25 percent, whereas another person may
not begin to satisfy his or her safety needs until 30 percent
of his or her physiologic needs are met. Levels of satisfac-
tion and emergence of higher needs therefore occur at dif-
ferent points in different people, as do pain thresholds in
different people.
Looking again at the theoretical hierarchy, we see at
the bottom level of the pyramid the physiologic drives, in-
cluding the need to maintain homeostasis and the needs of
satisfying hunger and thirst, sleep and rest, activity and ex-
ercise, sexual gratification and sensory pleasure, and maternal
responses (Maslow, 1970). Meeting the physiologic hunger
drive is very different from meeting one’s nutritional require-
ments or treating anxiety or depression with a chocolate bar.
When the individual is truly hungry or thirsty, not merely
satisfying an appetite for food or drink, all energies and
thoughts are directed to satisfying that drive for food or
water. Consider the physiologic need of an individual with
a chemical dependency. The person will focus all efforts on
attaining the drug or addictive substance at the required level
of satisfaction—while ignoring other needs, including the
physiologic need for food or the next level of safety needs.
When the physiologic drives and needs are relatively satisfied,
higher-level needs emerge.
Safety needs are the next level of the hierarchy. Safety,
both physical and emotional, must be achieved. Threats
to a person’s safety can become all-consuming. Think of
an isolated person in an inner-city apartment whose fear
for his safety motivates him to place bars on his windows
and multiple chains and dead-bolt locks on his door. This
person fears for his physical safety from a threat, real or
imagined, of bodily harm. This is the main concern, not
whether access is impeded in the case of a fire or accident.
He places all focus on the quest for freedom from per-
ceived danger.
Perceived safety can also be related to health, as with the
fear of the patient with chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
ease (COPD) to be near anyone who is coughing or sneez-
ing. This person’s safety need is to avoid a respiratory
infection that could lead to pneumonia or even diminished
oxygenation in an already compromised respiratory sys-
tem. Even if the other person in the room is experiencing
symptoms of a seasonal allergy, the individual with COPD
seeks immediate escape from that environment because of
the perceived danger of infection. Maslow (1954, 1970)
also viewed safety needs more broadly in the need for the
familiar and spiritual, religious, or philosophical meaning
in life. He describes the use of rituals and ceremonial be-
haviors in children and individuals with psychological dis-
orders as examples of focusing on safety needs.
Once the person satisfies safety needs, the focus turns
to the need for love and belonging. Inclusion and affection
are important needs, as contrasted with the isolated sex
24
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
SELF-
ACTUALIZATION
Meeting one's
full potential
ESTEEM
Feeling competent,
strong self-worth
LOVE and BELONGINGNESS
Feeling worthy of affection and
social support
SAFETY
Feeling free from danger and risk,
secure in one's own environment
PHYSIOLOGIC
Adequate oxygen, food, and water
Figure 2.2 Maslow’s hierarchy of human needs.

CHAPTER 2 Theory as the Basis for Practice
●
25
act, which is a physiologic drive. Maslow (1970) described
the normal person as having a hunger and striving for af-
fectionate relations and a place in a group, as opposed to the
maladjusted person (pp. 43–44). Love and affection are
manifested in many ways and are individually defined.
Satisfying the need for belonging and love brings us to
the next level, esteem needs. Esteem needs involve a sense
of dignity, worth, and usefulness in life. Maslow (1970) de-
scribed two sets of esteem needs: (1) the sense of self-worth,
including perceptions of strength, achievement, compe-
tence, and confidence, and (2) the esteem of others, includ-
ing perceptions of deserved respect, status, recognition,
importance, and dignity (p. 45). Satisfying the sense of self-
worth and respect allows the next, and highest, level of basic
needs to emerge.
The need for self-actualization, at the top of the pyramid,
is the desire for self-fulfillment. This is the sense of being
able to do all that a person can to answer the “why” of his or
her existence. Maslow (1970) defined self-actualization as
“the full use and exploitation of talents, capacities, potential-
ities, etc., such [that] people seem to be fulfilling themselves
and . . . developing to the full stature of which they are ca-
pable” (p. 150). Originally, Maslow (1954) proposed that
self-actualized people include both older people and college
students and children. But when he further examined the
concept of self-actualization, he separated psychological
health from self-actualization, which he limited to older 
people whose human potentialities have been realized and
actualized (Maslow, 1970).
Maslow then developed support for his theory of basic
needs and human actions using case studies and other re-
search. Through observation of people, he proposed specific
phenomena that are determined by basic gratification of
cognitive-affective, cognitive, character traits, interpersonal,
and miscellaneous needs. He cited characteristics of people
in relation to the hierarchy. For example, the following char-
acteristics of self-actualized people emerged from Maslow’s
(1970) research and analysis of historical figures, public 
people, selected college students, and children:
1. More eﬃcient and comfortable perceptions of reality
2. Acceptance of self, others, and nature
3. Spontaneity, simplicity, and naturalness in thoughts
and behaviors
4. Problem-centered rather than ego-centered
5. Desire for detachment, solitude, and privacy
6. Autonomy with independence of culture and 
environment
7. Continued freshness of appreciation
8. Mystic and oceanic feelings with limitless horizons
9. Genuine desire to help people
10. Deeper and more profound interpersonal 
relationships
11. Democratic character structure
12. Strong ethical sense that discriminates means/ends
and good/evil
13. Philosophical and unhostile sense of humor
14. Creativeness
15. Resistance to enculturation with an inner 
detachment (pp. 203–228).
Maslow created further hypotheses for testing. He de-
scribed cases that diverged from his theory, such as the
martyr who ignores survival needs for a principle. He
called for further research, hypothesizing that satisfying
basic needs earlier in life allows the individual to weather
deprivation easier in later life (Maslow, 1954, p. 99).
Maslow’s work continued until his death in 1970. His hi-
erarchy of needs has endured, and its applications have
been extended in healthcare, education, industry, and
marketing to understand people and their motivators.
Needs related to individual, environmental, and health
concerns are applicable to the nursing discipline. However,
this theory is still a grand theory and does not address the
specific domain of nursing.
Developmental Theories
A group of theories widely used in healthcare and educa-
tion are the developmental theories. Some of these 
middle-range theories address personality (Erikson), cog-
nitive (Piaget), and moral (Kohlberg) development using
a life-span perspective. This perspective is based on pro-
gression and complexity in motor, personal-social, cogni-
tive, or moral behavior. A brief review of each of the
theories demonstrates how the theorist moved from a phi-
losophy or worldview to identify concepts, propositions,
and a model or theory based on observations, existing 
research, or case study presen tations. Common to the 
developmental theories are predictable steps or stages
through which the individual progresses during the life
cycle. This is a building process. These theories are based
largely on research through observation or case studies.
Subsequent applications and research have been guided by
the use of these theories to explain more specific phenom-
ena or to test hypotheses.
Personality Development
Erikson’s (1963) eight ages of man represents a theory of
psychosocial personality development in which the indi-
vidual proceeds through critical periods in a step-by-step
or epigenetic process (Fig. 2.3). This theory has been and
continues to be used widely in healthcare and psychology.
In offering the theory, Erikson presented his philosophy
and case studies with Freudian and neo-Freudian applica-
tions. Each stage has positive and negative aspects that are
defined and described. The basic goal is for the individual
to develop a favorable ratio of the positive aspects for a
healthy ego. Erikson (1963) further described basic virtues
and essential strengths for each of his “ages” or stages of de-
velopment. These strengths and basic virtues define the
positive aspects of ego development required in each stage.
Proposi tions are developed for each of the stages. This the-
ory is supported mainly by case study, with suggestions and
encouragement of further hypotheses for research and test-
ing. Erikson’s theory has been used widely in nursing to
foster positive ego development and empowerment in in-
dividuals. Although this theory does not specifically address
ONLINE CONSULT 
Learn more about Maslow and his work at 
http://www.maslow.com

the domain of nursing, common concerns include human
beings, the environment, and psychosocial health.
Havighurst was another theorist who focused on per-
sonality development as developmental tasks and educa-
tion. His theory from the mid-20th century included
principles of cognitive and moral development in which
the individual proceeded through six stages, accomplishing
critical tasks. Havighurst (1972) described his philosophy,
including the origins of the concept, and proposed a
method for analyzing individual developmental tasks based
on his defining criteria as well as biological, psychological,
and cultural bases. He also provided educational implica-
tions for each of the developmental periods. Although de-
scriptions of the tasks represent some gender bias and
cultural limitations in our current global society, the bio-
logical and psychological bases are applicable. The tasks
represent major milestones in biological, psychological,
emotional, and cognitive functioning or development that
individuals must negotiate as they progress through life. As
with Erikson’s theory of personality development, concerns
about the human being, the environment, and health pro-
motion are apparent in Havighurst’s life-span perspective.
The age-specific tasks represent activities of daily living dur-
ing specific life stages, along with cognitive development.
Cognitive Development
Piaget’s theory of cognitive development focuses on the
development of the intellect. Piaget was truly an example
of a self-actualized person. He described himself as a 
naturalist and biologist by training, without formal train-
ing in psychology (Flavell, 1963, p. vii). Moving from the
publication of his first monograph on birds at the age
of 10, he detailed the development of the intellect in chil-
dren through observations. His techniques were some-
times criticized by the scientific community, but his theory
has since been accepted and used in practice and research
by many students and professionals. Piaget’s theory looks
at innate and environmental influences on the develop-
ment of the intellect. This theory has four major periods
of cognitive development: sensorimotor, preoperational
thought, concrete operations, and formal operations
(Table 2.1).
Within his theory, Piaget provided us with the con-
cepts of schema, object permanence, assimilation, and 
accommodation. Schema are patterns of thought or behav-
ior that evolve into more complexity as more information
is obtained through assimilation and accommodation. 
Object permanence, the knowledge that something still 
exists when it is out of sight, develops when the child is
between 9 and 10 months of age. Assimilation is the ac-
quisition and incorporation of new information into the
individual’s existing cognitive and behavioral structures.
Accommodation is the change in the individual’s cognitive
and behavioral patterns based on the new information ac-
quired. Piaget’s theory has been translated and applied
worldwide and across disciplines. His work continued
until his death in 1980, and further research and theory is
still evolving from his contributions.
Piaget’s work concentrated on cognitive development in
children, including views on moral development. As such,
it is more limited but has provided major insight into work-
ing with children. Applications are seen in health teaching,
especially in chronic or terminal illness situations. But with
these limitations on cognitive development for some envi-
ronmental influences, it can address only a portion of the
domain of concern to nursing.
Moral Development
Kohlberg’s theory of moral development was an  outgrowth
of Piaget’s work on moral development in children.
Kohlberg’s extensive work on moral development (Kohlberg,
1984; Kohlberg et al., 1987) is based on research with chil-
dren who were given scenarios to describe reactions and
make judgments. He initially studied boys 10 to 16 years 
old from Chicago, later adding research with children of 
both genders and different backgrounds. Kohlberg’s theory
(Table 2.2) consists of six stages grouped into three major
levels: preconventional, conventional, and postconventional
(Kohlberg, 1984).
Kohlberg’s theory confers major insight into moral 
development. He provided the theoretical structure, 
supportive research, and applications in educational prac-
tice. The individual progresses through the levels and
stages, not as a natural process, but through intellectual
stimulation with a central focus on moral justice. This re-
quires thinking about moral problems and issues. Further
research and practices have been based on this theory and
are ongoing. Consider the usefulness of this theory when
26
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
8.
7.
6.
5.
4.
3.
2.
1.
AGES
STRENGTHS & VIRTUES
DEVELOPMENTAL STAGE
Renunciation & Wisdom
Production & Care
Affiliation & Love
Devotion & Fidelity
Method & Competence
Direction & Purpose
Self-control & Will Power
Drive & Hope
Older Adulthood
Middle Adulthood
Young Adulthood
Adolescence
School Age
Preschool
Toddler
Infancy
 
Ego Integrity Vs. Despair
 
Generativity Vs. Stagnation
 
Intimacy Vs. Isolation
 
Identity Vs. Role Confusion
 
Industry Vs. Inferiority
 
Initiative Vs. Guilt
 Autonomy Vs. Shame & Doubt
Trust Vs. Mistrust
Figure 2.3 Erikson’s (1963) eight ages of man.
ONLINE CONSULT 
Learn more about psychosocial development 
and Erikson’s Eight Ages (or Stages) at 
http://www. childdevelopmentinfo.com/
development/erickson.shtml

CHAPTER 2 Theory as the Basis for Practice
●
27
you are working with a child or adolescent whose parent
was recently diagnosed with a terminal illness.
As with Piagetian theory, Kohlberg’s theory is limited
to a specific area of development. The focus is on human
beings, such as the child, with ramifications for adult life.
Environmental (e.g., social and cultural) factors provide
insight for social and psychological health. The limitation
to moral development addresses only a portion of the do-
main of concern to nursing.
Many developmental models are used and applied in
nursing. Examine the conceptual models and theories pre-
sented in Chapter 3 for their application of developmen-
tal concepts. Several nursing theories have a decidedly
developmental focus, whether as a main component, as
TABLE 2.1
Piaget’s Theory of Cognitive Development
Period of Cognitive
Development
Age
Stage Description
Sensorimotor Stages
Reflexive
Birth–1 month
Use of primitive reflexes, such as sucking and rooting
Primary circular reactions
1–4 months
Repeating an event for the result, such as thumb in mouth
Secondary circular reactions
4–10 months
Combining events for a result, such as kicking mobile 
over crib
Coordination of secondary 
10–12 months
Creating a behavior for some result, such as standing
schema
in crib to reach mobile
Tertiary circular reactions
12–18 months
Looking for similar results from varying behaviors, such as 
shaking crib and jumping to observe movements of mobile
Representational thought begins
18–24 months
Symbolic representation in thought such as hanging 
objects to create mobile
Preoperational
2–7 years
Making overgeneralizations, such as all cats are named 
Tiger; egocentric
Focuses only on one concrete attribute
Magical thought and symbolic play present
Concrete operations
7–11 years
Logical and reversible thought appears; conservation of 
matter and numbers
Formal operations
After 11 years
Theoretical and hypothetical thinking now possible; 
higher-order mathematics and reasoning
TABLE 2.2
Kohlberg’s Theory of Moral Development (Kohlberg, 1981; Kohlberg 
and Lickona, 1990)
Level
Stage
Stage Description
Level I: Preconventional 
1. Heteronomous morality
Egocentric and applies a fixed set of rules from 
morality
authorities, e.g., parents
2. Individualism, purpose, 
Sees that different individuals have different rules, 
and exchange
e.g., parents and teachers
Level II: Conventional 
3. Interpersonal expectations, 
Motives of other person now emerge when 
morality
relationships, and conformity
considering right and wrong; use of the Golden Rule
4. Social system and conscience
The good of society as a whole now emerges 
Level III: Postconventional 
5. Social contract and individual 
Believes in upholding laws and legal contracts 
morality
rights
6. Universal ethical principles
Principles of justice and human rights as an 
ethical system

in Watson’s theory, or with specific  concepts included,
defined, and built on, as in King’s model.
A life span, developmental, or life processes focus has
major relevance for nursing, because we view human be-
ings in the context of environment and effects on health
status. The interrelationships with health and nursing are
complex and must be specified for their applicability to
the domain of nursing.
Systems Theory
Perhaps the most widely used theory in multiple disci-
plines is systems theory. Systems have been in existence
for ages, but in the late 1930s, Bertalanffy introduced sys-
tems theory to represent an aspect of reality. Thus, gen-
eral system theory was incorporated in the paradigms of
many scientific communities. This is a grand theory that
is wide in scope, and that has generated numerous theo-
ries in many disciplines. Bertalanffy (1968) explained the
wide applicability in many scientific communities as the
various disciplines became concerned with “wholeness”—
that is, not just focusing on isolated parts, but dealing
with the interrelationships among them and between the
parts and the whole. A system generally contains the fol-
lowing basic components: input, output, boundary, en-
vironment, and feedback. Figure 2.4 illustrates a basic
view of a simple system.
The initial step in understanding and applying systems
theory is to view the grand theory. Bertalanffy (1968) de-
fined a system as a complex of interacting elements and
proposed that every living organism is essentially an open
system. The general system theory applies the following
principles to human and organizational systems:
1. Wholeness: This indicates that the whole is more than
merely the sum of its parts. To understand the whole,
one must understand the components and their inter-
actions with each other and the environment.
2. Hierarchical order: Some form of hierarchy exists in
the system’s components, structure, and functions.
3. Exchange of information and matter (openness): In an
open system, there is an exchange and ﬂow of infor-
mation and matter with the environment through
some boundary that surrounds the system. Inputs
come through the boundary from the environment,
are transformed through system processes (through-
puts), and are sent as outputs through the boundary
back into the environment. This exchange of informa-
tion and matter is goal-oriented, whether to maintain
the steady state or to fulﬁll the functions of the sys-
tem. An important component of this process is feed-
back from the environment.
4. Progressive differentiation: Diﬀerentiation within the
system leads to self-organization. Applying the laws 
of thermodynamics, entropy is a measure of order or
organization in the system in the process of seeking
equilibrium or some ﬁnal goal. In an open system, en-
tropy is decreased or negative, allowing for diﬀerentia-
tion and self-organization.
5. Equifinality: In open systems, the ﬁnal state can be
reached from diﬀerent initial conditions and in diﬀer-
ent ways. Initial conditions do not necessarily deter-
mine the ﬁnal state or outcome of the system.
6. Teleology: Behavior in the system is directed toward
some purpose or goal, as a human characteristic.
Environmental influences are a major consideration in
health care. Systems theory provides a useful framework
with which to visualize some phenomenon (the system),
focusing on the components, structure, and functions as
the internal environment (throughputs), and influenced
by (inputs and feedback) and influencing (outputs) the
environment. It is important to analyze the system care-
fully for all component parts, structures, and functions.
Recall that the basis for general system theory is that “the
whole is greater than the sum of the parts.” This brings us
to the need for a precise analysis of interrelationships
among components and between the parts and the entire
system. In addition, an open  system has permeable bound-
aries receiving input and feedback from the environment.
Problems occur when environmental factors are unknown,
unclear, or ignored. Consider the broad health-service sys-
tem. Since the Institute of Medicine began issuing a series
of reports in 1998, we have been greatly concerned about
safety in healthcare. Systems issues have been a major
focus, but moving from a culture of blaming individual
practitioners, the challenge became one of improving com-
ponents in the system, input, feedback, and outputs. In
addition, the broader healthcare environment and societal
influences are included and visualized as crossing the sys-
tem boundaries of an individual hospital setting.
In nursing, systems theory and various applications have
been used to explain organizations, nursing and healthcare
delivery, and groups of people. Several  nursing models are
based on systems theory. Johnson’s Behavioral Systems con-
ceptual model views the person as a behavioral system and
nursing as an external force. It exemplifies how a grand the-
ory (general system theory) from another scientific commu-
nity provided a basis for developing the conceptual model
of nursing (Johnson’s Behavioral Systems). Specificity to the
metaparadigm concepts and interrelationships unique to
nursing have provided the basis for the nursing conceptual
framework. Further delineation of concepts and proposi-
tions leads to more specific nursing theory. Neuman’s
28
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
Environment
Input
Output
Environment
Environment
System
Feedback
Figure 2.4 General systems model:
A simple, open system.

CHAPTER 2 Theory as the Basis for Practice
●
29
The language and concepts of quantum theory ex-
tend beyond the atom as we look at issues of holism, du-
ality, uncertainty, causality, and probabilities in daily
life and practice. Recognition and understanding of the
paradigm shift are essential for the health sciences as we
seek new knowledge and improvements in patient-care
outcomes.
THE IMPACT OF THEORY 
ON PRACTICE
Alligood (2014a) proposes that professional nursing
practice requires a systematic approach that is focused on
the patient, and the theoretical works provide the per-
spectives of the patient (pp. 9–10). We use theory every 
day in our personal and professional lives, from learning
the basic principles of asepsis in hygiene and standard
precautions, to understanding the complex communica-
tion channels of the organizational system in which we
practice.
Theory, practice, and research are interrelated and
interdependent. We need theory to guide practice pre-
dictably and effectively. We need research to support the
significance and usefulness of the theory, because the
dynamic nature of our metaparadigm concepts of
human beings, environment, health, and nursing makes
theories tentative and subject to refinement and revi-
sion. Professional practice provides the questions for
study based on problems and phenomena relevant to the
discipline. Again, recall that nursing is a profession and
a scientific community. We practice using principles
provided by our metaparadigm and theoretical bases.
This furnishes us with the tools for critical thinking,
provision of care, education, administration, research,
and interdisciplinary collaboration. We have a paradigm
that provides the models for problems and solutions in
our knowledge base and practice community in line
with Kuhn’s (1970) descriptions of a paradigm. Our
paradigms and theories are designed to address problems
and solutions in practice; otherwise we need to shift to
a new structure with different theories and paradigms
to explain our concerns for people, environments,
health, and nursing.
The theory on which we base practice must be com-
patible with and must correspond to the phenomena of
professional nursing practice. To ensure that the goals of
theory and practice are consistent, Alligood (2014b) has
recommended the following considerations for selecting a
framework for practice:
1. Evaluate your values and beliefs held true about 
nursing.
2. Establish your philosophy statement of beliefs on the
metaparadigm concepts.
3. Evaluate deﬁnitions of the metaparadigm concepts in
selected models.
4. Select two to three frameworks that are consistent
with your beliefs.
5. Look at the assumptions of the models.
6. Apply the models to your practice area to see if they
work in the practice setting.
Healthcare model, Roy’s Adaptation model, and King’s
conceptual framework and Theory of Goal Attainment are
examples of nursing conceptual models and theories based
on systems models. Other nursing models use various com-
ponents of general systems theory. Further applications of
systems theory are evident in subsequent sections on man-
agement and leadership in organizations and change.
THEORETICAL CHALLENGES
AND A PARADIGM SHIFT
Galbraith (1984) identified conventional wisdom as the
structure of ideas that is based on acceptability, and to
the people as their reality as they see and articulate it 
(p. 16). These ideas, which people generally consider as
“truths,” can be obstacles to new theories and to the de-
velopment of new knowledge. Conventional wisdom
may be that the current paradigm is on the brink of
change. We must be open to new theories with new
technology. Knowledge expansion can proceed at a
much greater rate, as we have now seen with quantum
physics or quantum mechanics.
For years, Newtonian physics provided the conven-
tional wisdom of the three laws of motion: (1) inertia (ob-
jects in motion tend to stay in motion, and objects at rest
tend to stay at rest unless there is interference from an
outside force), (2) net force (the force on an object is
mathematically equal to its mass times acceleration), and
(3) reciprocal actions (for every action there is an equal
and opposite reaction). 
Based on the work of Galileo and others, Newton’s the-
ories from the 17th century prevailed until the 20th century
with the addition of Einstein’s theory of relativity and the
discovery of quantum theory. As Nobel Laureate Robert
Laughlin (2005) points out, although applicable to the
macroscopic world, Newton’s laws are incorrect at the
atomic scale (p. 31). How we  formerly pictured an atom,
as a Newtonian-like solar system, is outdated and incorrect.
Researchers and theorists have moved from classical physics
to the era of the quantum.
We hear a good deal about the “quantum” nature of
our world and universe. But it is all evolving as we de-
velop new insight into the makeup of matter and how
particles behave. A quantum is merely an energy bundle
at the atomic and subatomic level—neutrons, protons,
and electrons. The measurement of the quantum requires
high-level mathematical computations looking at statis-
tical probabilities of matter and waves. Hence, the dis-
coveries from classic mechanics to quantum mechanics
have occurred in areas of physics, chemistry, computers,
and biology. This has provided the basis for certain trans-
formations in healthcare, such as the introduction of the
laser and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Biotech-
nology and advances in physical science will continue
with our quest for discovery and knowledge. Laughlin
(2005) notes, however, that we have experienced a para-
digm shift, moving from a reductionist view of science to
one of emergence, and that, “as in all other human activ-
ities, it is necessary in science to take stock now and then
and reevaluate what one deeply understands and what one
does not” (p. 13). 

K E Y  P O I N T S
●Kerlinger and Lee (2000) define a theory as “a set of interrelated constructs (concepts), definitions, and
propositions that present a systematic view of phenomena by specifying relations among variables, with
the purpose of explaining and predicting the phenomena” (p. 11).
●A model is a graphic representation of some phenomena. A theoretical model provides a visual descrip-
tion of the theory using limited narrative and displaying components and relationships symbolically. A
framework is another means of providing a structural view of the concepts and relationships proposed 
in a theory. 
●A concept is a view or idea we hold about something, ranging from something highly concrete to
something highly abstract. A construct is a more complex idea package of some phenomena. Defini-
tions of concepts and constructs are theoretical or conceptual. An operational definition states 
precisely what we view as phenomena and how they can be measured as variables in a practice 
or research situation.
●Propositions in a theory are the descriptions and relationships among the constructs (or concepts)
that propose how the concepts are linked and relate to each other and to the total theoretical 
structure.
●Dickoff and James (1968) developed a classic position paper proposing four levels of nursing theory: 
factor-isolating, factor-relating, situation-relating, and situation-producing theories.
●Theories are classified as grand, middle-range, or practice on the basis of their scope or breadth of 
coverage of phenomena.
●Theory description is a careful, nonjudgmental analysis of the component parts of a theory—its assump-
tions, concepts, definitions, propositions, context, and scope.
●Theory evaluation requires thoughtful interpretation relative to the clarity, significance, consistency, 
empirical support, and usefulness in explaining a phenomenon of concern.
●Maslow’s theory of human motivation proposes a hierarchical structure for basic human needs.
●Developmental theories are widely used in nursing and other healthcare disciplines and include Erikson’s
(1963) eight ages of psychosocial development, Piaget’s theory of cognitive development, and Kohlberg’s
theory of moral development.
●A system generally contains the following basic component parts: input, output, boundary, environ-
ment, and feedback. Bertalanffy’s (1968) general system theory is a grand theory applied to many 
disciplines.
●Quantum theory, based on quantum physics, uses statistical probabilities for the actions of atomic and
subatomic matter and waves and has provided some of the basis for advances in technology.
●Theory, practice, and research are interrelated and interdependent. When we are selecting a theory 
on which to base practice, the theory must be compatible with and correspond to the phenomena of
professional nursing practice.
30
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
be in a constant state of evaluation to ensure that the
model of practice is current and based on nursing science.
In the next chapter, conceptual models and theories
unique to nursing are discussed. These models guide
practice in our highly complex profession. Implementing
models for practice, whether unique to nursing or adapted,
is a necessary but arduous and time-consuming task. The
process is worth the effort to ensure quality care for re-
cipients, but it requires many of the skills addressed in
subsequent chapters.
7. Compare the frameworks, looking at patient focus,
nursing action, and outcomes.
8. Review the literature on applications of the selected
models to practice.
9. Select the best framework appropriate to your practice
and implement it. (p. 57)
But recall that conventional wisdom can be an obsta-
cle to the discovery of new knowledge. Practice  models
are subject to change as new information is discovered
and as patient needs change. The paradigm concepts must

CHAPTER 2 Theory as the Basis for Practice
●
31
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Consider the following statement by Barnum (1990) describing early nursing theories: “A high number of [bound-
ary] overlaps occur in the discipline of nursing because it often attempts to deal holistically with a phenomenon
(man) that has previously been dealt with in compartmentalized ways by other disciplines” (p. 218). What does
she mean by “holistically”? How do you think other disciplines may deal with the human being in a compartmen-
talized way?
2. Identify individuals who you think are self-actualized, and explain why.
3. Identify a theory used in your practice setting. Identify the concepts (constructs), how the component concepts
are defined, the propositions that link the concepts, and the aims of the theory.
4. Describe how theory is used in your practice setting, and propose how it could be used further.
5. Review the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter, and discuss it in the context of the contents
of the chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.
Fawcett, J. (2005). Contemporary nursing knowledge: Analysis
and evaluation of nursing models and theories (2nd ed.).
Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Fawcett, J. (2014). Nursing philosophies, models, and theories:
A focus on the future. In A. M. Tomey & M. R. Alligood
(Eds.), Nursing theory: Utilization and application (5th ed.,
pp. 425–441). St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
Fawcett, J., & DeSanto-Madeya, S. (2013). Contemporary
nursing knowledge: Analysis and evaluation of nursing models
and theories (3rd ed.). Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Flavell, J. H. (1963). The developmental psychology of Jean 
Piaget. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Galbraith, J. K. (1984). The affluent society. Boston, MA:
Houghton Mifflin.
Glanz, K., Rimer, B. K., & Lewis, F. M. (Eds.). (2002). Health
behavior and health education: Theory, research, and practice
(3rd ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Havighurst, R. J. (1972). Developmental tasks and education
(3rd ed.). New York: David McKay.
Kerlinger, F. N., & Lee, H. B. (2000). Foundations of 
behavioral research (4th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth 
Thompson Learning.
Kohlberg, L. (1984). Essays in moral development: Vol. II. The
psychology of moral development. San Francisco, CA: 
Harper & Row.
Kohlberg, L., DeVries, R., Fein, G., Hart, D., Mayer, R., Noam,
G., Snarey, J., & Wertsch, J. (1987). Child psychology 
and childhood education: A cognitive-developmental view. 
New York: Longman.
Kohlberg, L., & Lickona, T. (1990). Moral discussion and the
class meeting. In R. DeVries & L. Kohlberg (Eds.), Con-
structivist early education: Overview and comparison with
other programs. Washington, DC: National Association for
the Education of Young Children.
Kuhn, T. S. (1970). The structure of scientific revolutions
(2nd ed.). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
REFERENCES
Alligood, M. R. (2014a). The nature of knowledge needed 
for nursing practice. In M. R. Alligood, Nursing theory: 
Utilization and application (5th ed., pp. 1–12). St. Louis,
MO: Elsevier Mosby.
Alligood, M. R. (2014b). Philosophies, models, and theories:
Critical thinking structures. In M. R. Alligood (Ed.), 
Nursing theory: Utilization and application (5th ed., 
pp. 40–62). St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Mosby.
Alligood, M. R. (2014c). Introduction to nursing theory: Its
history, significance, and analysis. In M. R. Alligood (Ed.),
Nursing theorists and their work (8th ed., pp. 2–13). 
St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Mosby. 
Barnum, B. J. S. (1990). Nursing theory: Analysis, application,
evaluation (3rd ed.). Glenview, IL: Scott Foresman/Little,
Brown Higher Education.
Barnum, B. J. S. (1994). Nursing theory: Analysis, appli cation,
evaluation (4th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: J. B. Lippincott.
Barnum, B. S. (1998). Nursing theory: Analysis, application, 
evaluation (5th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams 
& Wilkins.
Bertalanffy, L. V. (1968). General system theory: Foundations, 
development, applications. New York: George Braziller.
Chinn, P. L., & Kramer, M. K. (2011). Integrated knowledge
development in nursing (8th ed.). St. Louis, MO: Elsevier 
Mosby.
Dickoff, J., & James, P. (1968). A theory of theories: A  position
paper. Nursing Research, 17, 197–203.
Erikson, E. H. (1963). Childhood and society (2nd ed.).
New York: W. W. Norton.
Fawcett, J. (1995). Analysis and evaluation of conceptual models
of nursing (3rd ed.). Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Fawcett, J. (2000). Analysis and evaluation of contemporary nurs-
ing knowledge: Nursing models and theories. Philadelphia,
PA: F. A. Davis.

Hardy, M. E. (1974). Theories: Components, development,
evaluation. Nursing Research, 23, 100–107.
Power, F. C., Higgins, A., & Kohlberg, L. (1989). Lawrence
Kohlberg’s approach to moral education. New York: 
Columbia University.
Singer, D. G., & Revenson, T. A. (1998). A Piaget primer: 
How a child thinks (Rev. ed.). Madison, CT: International
Universities Press.
ONLINE RESOURCES
Books by A. H. Maslow 
http://www.maslow.com
Jean Piaget Society 
http://www.piaget.org 
Nursing Theories 
http://www.nurses.info/nursing_theory.htm
Laughlin, R. B. (2005). A different universe: Reinventing physics
from the bottom down. New York: Basic Books.
Leininger, M. M. (2006). The culture care theory. In 
M. Leininger & M. R. McFarland (Eds.), Culture care 
diversity and universality: A worldwide nursing theory
(2nd ed., pp. 1–41). Boston, MA: Jones and Bartlett.
Maslow, A. H. (1954). Motivation and personality.
New York: Harper & Brothers.
Maslow, A. H. (1970). Motivation and personality (2nd ed.).
New York: Harper & Row.
Merton, R. K. (1957). Social theory and social structure
(Rev. ed.). Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Fawcett, J. (2011). Thoughts about nursing science and 
nursing sciencing on the event of the 25th anniversary of
Nursing Science Quarterly. Nursing Science Quarterly, 25,
111–113.
32
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

Evolution and Use of
Formal Nursing
Knowledge
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Describe the meaning of formal nursing knowledge as the basis for professional nursing practice.
2. Identify the definitions and different functions of conceptual models and theories.
3. Discuss the advantages of using explicit conceptual models of nursing and nursing theories to guide
professional nursing practice.
4. Apply a conceptual model of nursing or nursing theory to a particular practice situation.
Formal Nursing Knowledge
Nursing Knowledge
Conceptual Models of Nursing
Johnson’s Behavioral System Model
King’s Conceptual System
Levine’s Conservation Model
Neuman’s Systems Model
Orem’s Self-Care Framework
Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human
Beings
Roy’s Adaptation Model
Synergy Model
Grand Theories of Nursing
Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care
Diversity and Universality
Newman’s Theory of Health as
Expanding Consciousness
Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming
Middle-Range Nursing Theories
Peplau’s Theory of Interpersonal
Relations
Watson’s Theory of Human Caring 
Orlando’s Theory of the
Deliberative Nursing Process
Transitions Theory
Situation-Specific Nursing Theories
33
3
●Jacqueline Fawcett
The survival of the profession and discipline of
nursing depends on nurses’ understanding,
acceptance, further development, and use of
nursing discipline-specific knowledge, including
nursing conceptual models and theories.
Key Terms

34
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
This chapter presents a discussion of the evolution of nurs-
ing knowledge—as it has been formalized—in conceptual
models of nursing and nursing theories as well as a discus-
sion of how that knowledge has influenced professional
nursing practice.
FORMAL NURSING
KNOWLEDGE 
Conceptual models of nursing and nursing theories rep-
resent formal nursing knowledge. That knowledge was
organized by several nurse scholars who devoted a great
deal of time to observing people’s experiences of wellness
and illness, thinking about what is important to nurses
and the profession of nursing in those experiences, and
then testing their thoughts by conducting nursing re-
search. Nursing knowledge continues to evolve as nurse
researchers and practicing nurses use conceptual models
and theories to guide their research and practice and then
report the results at conferences and in publications. Con-
sequently, all nurses can contribute to the evolution of
nursing knowledge.
Nursing Defined
Nightingale’s (1859) book, Notes on Nursing: What It 
Is, and What It Is Not, contains the first ideas that can be
considered formal nursing knowledge. According to
Nightingale, nursing ought to signify the proper use of
fresh air, light, warmth, cleanliness, quiet, and the proper
selection and administration of diet—all at the least ex-
pense of vital power to the patient; that is, she maintained
that the purpose of nursing was to put the patient in the
best condition for nature to act on him or her. 
More than 100 years later, Henderson continued the
evolution of formal nursing knowledge when she pub-
lished a definition of nursing. “The unique function of the
nurse,” Henderson (1966) maintained, “is to assist the in-
dividual, sick or well, to perform those activities contribut-
ing to health or its recovery (or to peaceful death) that he
[or she] would perform unaided if he [or she] had the nec-
essary strength, will, or knowledge. And to do so in such
a way as to help him [or her] gain independence as rapidly
as possible” (p. 15). Although the intervening years were
filled with many ideas about nursing, most of those ideas
were, unfortunately, not presented as formal conceptual
models and theories.
CONCEPTUAL MODELS
For our purposes, the terms conceptual model, conceptual
framework, conceptual system, and paradigm have the same
definition and functions and may be used interchangeably.
Definition
A conceptual model is defined as a set of relatively abstract
and general concepts that address the phenomena of central
interest to a discipline, the statements that broadly describe
those concepts, and the statements that assert relatively ab-
stract and general relations between two or more of the
concepts (Fawcett & DeSanto-Madeya, 2013).
Each conceptual model presents a particular perspec-
tive about the phenomena of interest to a particular disci-
pline, such as nursing. Conceptual models of nursing
present diverse perspectives of human beings—including
individuals, families and other groups, and communities—
who are participants in nursing; the environment of the
nursing participant and the environment in which nursing
practice occurs; the health condition of the nursing par-
ticipant; and the definition and goals of nursing as well as
the practice methodology—typically referred to as the
nursing process—used to assess, label, plan, intervene, and
evaluate.
Functions
One function of any conceptual model is to provide a dis-
tinctive frame of reference, or “a horizon of expectations”
(Popper, 1965, p. 47). Another function of each concep-
tual model is to identify a particular “philosophical 
and pragmatic orientation to the service nurses provide 
patients—a service which only nurses can provide—a ser -
vice which provides a dimension to total care different
from that provided by any other health professional”
(Johnson, 1987, p. 195). Conceptual models of nursing
provide explicit orientations not only for nurses but also
for the general public. Johnson (1987) explained, “Con-
ceptual models specify for nurses and society the mission
and boundaries of the profession. They clarify the realm
of nursing responsibility and accountability, and they
allow the practitioner and/or the profession to document
services and outcomes” (pp. 196–197).
Conceptual Models of Nursing
Currently, the works of several nurse scholars are recog-
nized as broad conceptual models of nursing that can be
used in many different practice situations. Among the best
known of those conceptual models are Johnson’s (1990)
Behavioral System Model, King’s (2006) Conceptual 
System, Levine’s (1991) Conservation Model, Neuman’s 
Systems Model (Neuman & Fawcett, 2011), Orem’s
(2001) Self-Care Framework, Rogers’ (1990) Science of
Unitary Human Beings, and Roy’s (2009) Adaptation
Model. An overview of each of these nursing models is
presented in the following section, along with the impli-
cations of each one for professional nursing practice.
Dorothy Johnson’s Behavioral 
System Model
Johnson’s Behavioral System Model focuses on the per-
son as a behavioral system, made up of all the patterned,
repetitive, and purposeful elements of behavior that char-
acterize life. Seven subsystems carry out specialized tasks
or functions needed to maintain the integrity of the whole
behavioral system and to manage its relationship to the
environment. The subsystems and their functions are as
follows:
1. Attachment or aﬃliative: The security—in terms of 
social inclusion, intimacy, and formation and mainte-
nance of social bonds—that the individual needs for
survival.

CHAPTER 3 Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing Knowledge     ●
35
2. Dependency: The succoring behavior that calls for a re-
sponse of nurturance as well as approval, attention or
recognition, and physical assistance.
3. Ingestive: Appetite satisfaction—when, how, what, how
much, and under what conditions the individual eats—
all of which are governed by social and psychological
considerations as well as biological requirements for
food and ﬂuids.
4. Eliminative: Elimination—when, how, and under
what conditions the individual eliminates wastes.
5. Sexual: Procreation and gratiﬁcation, with regard to
behaviors dependent on the individual’s biological sex
and gender role identity, including but not limited to
courting and mating.
6. Aggressive: Protection and preservation of self and 
society.
7. Achievement: Mastery or control of some aspect of self
or environment, with regard to intellectual, physical,
creative, mechanical, social, and caretaking (of 
children, partner, home) skills.
The structure of each subsystem involves four elements:
1. Drive or goal: The motivation for behavior.
2. Set: The individual’s predisposition to act in certain
ways to fulﬁll the function of the subsystem.
3. Choice: The individual’s total behavioral repertoire for
fulﬁlling subsystem functions, which encompasses the
scope of action alternatives from which the person can
choose.
4. Action: The individual’s actual behavior in a situation.
Action is the only structural element that can be ob-
served directly; all other elements must be inferred
from the individual’s actual behavior and from the
consequences of that behavior.
The three functional requirements listed below are needed
by each subsystem to fulfill its functions:
1. Protection from noxious inﬂuences with which the 
system cannot cope
2. Nurturance through the input of appropriate supplies
from the environment
3. Stimulation to enhance growth and prevent 
stagnation
Implications for Nursing Practice
Nursing practice is directed toward the restoration, main-
tenance, or attainment of behavioral system balance and
dynamic stability at the highest possible level for the indi-
vidual. Johnson’s practice methodology, which is called
the Nursing Diagnostic and Treatment Process, encom-
passes the four steps listed in Box 3.1. Each step is dis-
cussed in detail below.
Determination of the Existence of a Problem
The nurse obtains the following:
●Past and present family and individual behavioral sys-
tem histories through interviews, structured and un-
structured observations, and objective methodologies
●Data about the nature of behavioral system function-
ing in terms of the efficiency and effectiveness with
which the patient’s goals are obtained
●Information to determine the degree to which the 
behavior is purposeful, orderly, and predictable
●Information on the condition of the subsystem struc-
tural components to draw inferences about (1) drive
strength, direction, and value; (2) the solidity and
specificity of the set; (3) the range of behavior patterns
available to the patient; and (4) the usual behavior in a
given situation
The patient’s behavior is compared with the following in-
dices for behavioral system balance and stability, as well as
the reorganization and integration of the subsystems:
●The behavior achieves the consequences sought.
●The behavior reveals the patient’s effective use of
motor, expressive, or social skills.
●The behavior is purposeful—actions are goal directed,
reveal a plan, cease at an identifiable point, and are
economical in sequence.
●The behavior is orderly—actions are methodical and
systematic, build sequentially toward a goal, and form
a recognizable pattern.
●The behavior is predictable—actions are repetitive
under particular circumstances.
●The amount of energy expended to achieve desired
goals is acceptable.
●The behavior reflects appropriate choices—actions are
compatible with survival imperatives and the social 
situation.
●The behavior satisfies the patient sufficiently.
Diagnostic Classification of a Problem
A problem might occur in two areas: 
●Internal subsystem problems: Functional requirements
are not met, inconsistency or disharmony among the
structural components of subsystems is evident, and/or
the behavior is inappropriate in the ambient culture.
●Intersystem problems: The entire behavioral system is
dominated by one or two subsystems, or a conflict ex-
ists between two or more subsystems.
Management of Nursing Problems
The general goals of action are to restore, maintain, or 
attain the patient’s behavioral system balance and stability
and to help the patient achieve an optimum level of 
balance and functioning when this goal is possible and 
desired. The nurse determines what nursing is to accom-
plish on behalf of the behavioral system by determining
who makes the judgment regarding the acceptable level of
behavioral system balance and stability. Nursing actions
may occur in three areas:
●Temporary external regulatory or control mechanisms, 
by setting limits for behavior by either permissive or
inhibitory means, inhibiting ineffective behavioral 
BOX 3.1
Johnson’s Behavioral System Model:
Diagnostic and Treatment Process
●Determination of the Existence of a Problem
●Diagnostic Classiﬁcation of a Problem
●Management of Nursing Problems
●Evaluation of Behavioral System Balance and 
Stability

responses, helping the patient acquire new responses,
and reinforcing appropriate behaviors
●Repair of damaged structural components, by reducing
drive strength by changing attitudes, redirecting goals
by changing attitudes, altering the set by instruction or
counseling, and adding choices by teaching new skills
●Fulfillment of functional requirements of subsystems, by
protecting the patient from overwhelming noxious in-
fluences, supplying adequate nurturance, and provid-
ing stimulation to enhance growth and inhibit
stagnation
The nurse negotiates the treatment modality with the 
patient by establishing a contract with the patient and
helping him or her to understand the meaning of the nurs-
ing diagnosis and the proposed treatment.
Evaluation of Behavioral System Balance 
and Stability
The nurse compares the patient’s behavior after treatment
with indices of behavioral system balance and stability.
Imogene King’s Conceptual System
King’s Conceptual System focuses on the continuing abil-
ity of individuals to meet their basic needs so that they may
function in their socially defined roles. This conceptual
model also concentrates on individuals’ interactions within
three open, dynamic, interacting systems—the personal
system, the interpersonal system, and the social system.
Personal Systems
Personal systems are individuals who are regarded as 
rational, sentient, social beings. Concepts related to the
personal system are as follows:
●Perception: A process of organizing, interpreting, and
transforming information from sense data and mem-
ory that gives meaning to one’s experience, represents
one’s image of reality, and influences one’s behavior
●Self: A composite of thoughts and feelings that consti-
tute a person’s awareness of individual existence, of
who and what he or she is
●Growth and development: Cellular, molecular, and be-
havioral changes in human beings that are a function
of genetic endowment, meaningful and satisfying expe-
riences, and an environment conducive to helping 
individuals move toward maturity
●Body image: A person’s perceptions of his or her body
●Time: The duration between the occurrence of one
event and the occurrence of another event
●Personal space: The physical area, or territory, that ex-
ists in all directions as perceived by each individual
●Learning: Gaining knowledge
Interpersonal Systems
Interpersonal systems are defined as two or more individ-
uals interacting in a given situation. The concepts associ-
ated with this system are as follows:
●Interaction: The act of two or more persons in mutual
presence; a sequence of verbal and nonverbal behaviors
that are goal directed
●Communication: The vehicle by which human rela-
tions are developed and maintained; encompasses 
intrapersonal, interpersonal, verbal, and nonverbal
communications
●Transaction: A process of interaction in which human
beings communicate with the environment to achieve
goals that are valued
●Role: A set of behaviors expected of a person occupying
a position in a social system
●Stress: A dynamic state whereby a human being inter-
acts with the environment to maintain balance for
growth, development, and performance, which in-
volves an exchange of energy and information between
the person and the environment for regulation and
control of stressors
●Coping: A way of dealing with stress
Social Systems
Social systems are organized boundary systems of social
roles, behaviors, and practices developed to maintain val-
ues, and the mechanisms to regulate these practices and
rules. The concepts related to social systems are as follows:
●Organization: Composed of human beings with pre-
scribed roles and positions who use resources to ac-
complish personal and organizational goals
●Authority: A transactional process characterized by 
active, reciprocal relations in which members’ values,
backgrounds, and perceptions play a role in defining,
validating, and accepting the authority of individuals
within an organization
●Power: The process whereby one or more persons 
influence other persons in a situation
●Status: The position of an individual in a group or a
group in relation to other groups in an organization
●Decision making: A dynamic and systematic process by
which a goal-directed choice of perceived alternatives is
made and acted on by individuals or groups to answer
a question and attain a goal
●Control: Being in charge
Implications for Nursing Practice
Nursing practice is directed toward helping individuals
maintain their health so that they can function in their
roles. King’s practice methodology, which is the essence of
her Theory of Goal Attainment, is called the Interaction-
Transaction Process. The process encompasses the 10 steps
listed in Box 3.2. Each step is discussed in detail below.
36
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
BOX 3.2
King’s Conceptual System Practice
Methodology: Interaction-
Transaction Process
●Perception
●Judgment
●Action
●Reaction
●Disturbance
●Mutual Goal Setting
●Exploration of Means to Achieve Goals
●Agreement on Means to Achieve Goals
●Transaction
●Attainment of Goals

CHAPTER 3 Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing Knowledge     ●
37
Perception
Perception is the first step in the assessment phase of the
interaction-transaction process. The nurse and the patient
meet in some nursing situation and perceive each other.
The accuracy of the perception depends on verifying the
nurse’s inferences with the patient. The nurse can use the
Goal-Oriented Nursing Record (GONR) to record both
sets of perceptions.
Judgment
Judgment is the second step in the assessment phase of the
interaction-transaction process. The nurse and the patient
make mental judgments about the other, which the nurse
can record on the GONR.
Action
Action is the third step in the assessment phase of the 
interaction-transaction process. Action is a sequence of be-
haviors of interacting persons, including recognition of the
situation, activities related to the situation, and motivation
to exert some control over the events to achieve goals. The
nurse and the patient take some mental action, which the
nurse can record on the GONR.
Reaction
Reaction is the fourth step in the assessment phase of the
interaction-transaction process. The nurse and the patient
mentally react to each one’s perceptions of the other. The
nurse can use the GONR to record these mental reactions.
Disturbance
Disturbance is the diagnosis phase of the interaction-
transaction process. The nurse and the patient communi-
cate and interact, and the nurse identifies the patient’s con-
cerns, problems, and disturbances in health. The nurse
then conducts a nursing history to determine the patient’s
activities of daily living, using the Criterion-Referenced
Measure of Goal Attainment Tool (CRMGAT); roles; 
environmental stressors; perceptions; and values, learning
needs, and goals. The nurse records these data from the
nursing history on the GONR.
The nurse also records the medical history and physical
examination data, results of laboratory tests and x-ray ex-
amination, information gathered from other health pro-
fessionals and the patient’s family members, and any
diagnoses on the GONR.
Mutual Goal Setting
Mutual goal setting is the first step in the planning phase
of the interaction-transaction process. The nurse and 
the patient interact purposefully to set mutually agreed-
on goals. If the patient cannot verbally participate in
goal setting, the nurse interacts with family members 
instead.
Mutual goal setting is based on the nurse’s assessment
of the patient’s concerns, problems, and disturbances in
health; the nurse’s and patient’s perceptions of the inter-
ference; and the nurse’s sharing of information with the
patient and his or her family to help the patient attain the
goals identified. Mutual goal setting includes considera-
tion of the ethical aspects of the situation, including the
following:
●Helping the patient and family to sort out the values
inherent in the situation and encouraging them to
think through their own value system and the conse-
quences of action they decide to take in the situation
●Helping the patient and family to make decisions that
take their value system into consideration by providing
information that contributes to their decision, by em-
phasizing their reality as they have expressed it, and by
not making decisions for them
●Becoming skillful in identifying options in every nurs-
ing situation and exploring those options with the 
patient and family
●Identifying those elements in the situation that can be
changed and controlled and those that cannot, and
concentrating energy and efforts on control and change
●Being especially sensitive to the ethical issues that may
arise when considering the right to life, the right to
die, and the right to information required for informed
choice
The nurse records the mutually set goals on the GONR.
Exploration of Means to Achieve Goals
Exploration is the second step in the planning phase of the
interaction-transaction process. The nurse and the patient
interact purposefully to explore the means to achieve the
mutually set goals.
Agreement on Means to Achieve Goals
Agreement is the third step in the planning phase of the
interaction-transaction process. The nurse and the patient
interact purposefully to agree on the means to achieve the
mutually set goals. The nurse records the nursing orders
with regard to the means to achieve goals on the GONR.
Transaction
Transaction is the implementation phase of the interaction-
transaction process. Transaction refers to what is valued
in the interaction. The nurse and the patient carry out
the measures agreed on to achieve the mutually set goals.
The nurse can use the GONR flow sheet and progress
notes to record the implementation of measures used to
achieve goals.
Attainment of Goals
Attainment of goals is the evaluation phase of the 
interaction-transaction process. The nurse and the patient
identify the outcome of the interaction-transaction
process. The outcome is expressed in terms of the patient’s
state of health or ability to function in social roles. The
nurse and the patient make a decision with regard to
whether the goal was attained and, if necessary, deter-
mine why the goal was not attained. The nurse can use
the CRMGAT to record the outcome and the GONR
to record the discharge summary.
Myra Levine’s Conservation Model
Levine’s Conservation Model focuses on conservation of
the person’s wholeness. Adaptation is the process by which
people maintain their wholeness or integrity as they re-
spond to environmental challenges and become congruent
with the environment. There are three sources of environ-
mental challenges:
1. Perceptual environment: That part of the environ-
ment to which individuals respond with their sense
organs
2. Operational environment: Those aspects of the environ-
ment that are not directly perceived, such as radiation,
odorless and colorless pollutants, and microorganisms

3. Conceptual environment: The environment of lan-
guage, ideas, symbols, concepts, and invention
Individuals respond to the environment by means of four
integrated processes that constitute the organismic response:
1. Flight-or-ﬂight mechanism
2. Inﬂammatory-immune response
3. Stress response
4. Perceptual awareness, which includes the basic orient-
ing, haptic, auditory, visual, and taste-smell systems
Implications for Nursing Practice
Nursing practice is directed toward promoting wholeness
for all people, well or sick. Patients are partners or partic-
ipants in nursing care and are temporarily dependent on
the nurse. The nurse’s goal is to end the dependence as
quickly as possible. Levine’s practice methodology is Nursing
Process as Conservation, which is defined as “keeping to-
gether.” The three steps of the process are listed in Box 3.3.
Each step is discussed in detail below.
Trophicognosis
Trophicognosis is the formulation of a nursing care judg-
ment arrived at by the scientific method. The nurse ob-
serves and collects data that will influence nursing practice,
using appropriate assessment to establish an objective and
scientific rationale for nursing practice. The nurse under-
stands the basis for the prescribed medical regimen, in-
cluding the medical diagnosis, the medical history, and the
laboratory and x-ray examination reports, with specific 
reference to areas influencing the nursing care plan.
Assessment skills are directed at four conservation 
principles:
1. Conservation of energy determines the ability to per-
form necessary activities without producing excessive
fatigue. Relevant observations include vital signs, the
patient’s general condition, the patient’s behavior, the
patient’s tolerance of nursing activities required by his
or her condition, and allowable activity for the patient
based on his or her energy resources.
2. Conservation of structural integrity determines physical
functioning. Relevant observations include status of
any pathophysiological processes, status of healing
processes, and eﬀects of surgical procedures.
3. Conservation of personal integrity determines moral
and ethical values and life experiences. Relevant ob-
servations include the patient’s life story, interest in
participating in decision making, and identifying
sense of self.
4. Conservation of social integrity takes the patient’s family
members, friends, and conceptual environment into 
account. Relevant observations include identiﬁcation of
the patient’s signiﬁcant others, participation in work-
place and/or school activities, religion, and cultural and 
ethnic history.
The basis for implementation of the nursing care plan
includes principles of nursing science and adaptation of
nursing techniques to the unique cluster of needs demon-
strated in the individual patient. The nurse identifies the
provocative facts—that is, the data that provoke attention
on the basis of knowledge of the situation—to provide the
basis for a hypothesis, or trophicognosis. Observations are
then recorded and transmitted.
Intervention/Action
Intervention/action is a test of the hypothesis. The nurs-
ing care plan is implemented and evaluated within the
structure of administrative policy, availability of equip-
ment, and established standards of nursing. The general
types of nursing intervention required are therapeutic
nursing intervention, which influences adaptation favor-
ably, or toward renewed social well-being, and support-
ive nursing interventions, which cannot alter the course
of the adaptation and can only maintain the status 
quo or fail to halt a downward course. Nursing inter-
ventions are structured according to the four conserva-
tion principles:
●Conservation of energy through an adequate deposit of
energy resource and regulation of the expenditure of
energy
●Conservation of structural integrity through mainte-
nance or restoration of the structure of the body
●Conservation of personal integrity through maintenance
or restoration of the patient’s sense of identity, self-
worth, and acknowledgment of uniqueness
●Conservation of social integrity through acknowledging
the patient as a social being
Evaluation of Intervention/Action
The nurse’s evaluation of the effects of the intervention/
action is used to revise the trophicognosis as necessary. An
indicator of the success of nursing interventions is the 
patient’s organismic response.
Betty Neuman’s Systems Model
Neuman’s Systems Model focuses on the wellness of the
patient system in relation to environmental stress and re-
actions to stress. The patient system, which can be an in-
dividual, a family or other group, or a community, is a
composite of five interrelated variables:
1. Physiological: Bodily structure and function
2. Psychological: Mental processes and relationships
3. Sociocultural: Social and cultural functions
4. Developmental: Developmental processes of life
5. Spiritual: Aspects of spirituality on a continuum from
complete unawareness or denial to a consciously 
developed, high level of spiritual understanding
The patient system is depicted as a central core, which is a
basic structure of survival factors common to the species,
surrounded by three types of metaphorical concentric rings:
1. Flexible line of defense: The outermost ring is a protec-
tive buﬀer for the patient’s normal or stable state that
38
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
BOX 3.3
Levine’s Conservation Model Practice
Methodology: Nursing Process 
as Conservation
●Trophicognosis
●Intervention/Action
●Evaluation of Intervention/Action

CHAPTER 3 Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing Knowledge     ●
39
prevents invasion of stressors and keeps the patient sys-
tem free from stressor reactions or symptomatology.
2. Normal line of defense: This lies between the ﬂexible line
of defense and the lines of resistance and represents 
the patient system’s normal or usual wellness state.
3. Lines of resistance: The innermost concentric rings are
involuntarily activated when a stressor invades the
normal line of defense. They attempt to stabilize the
patient system and foster a return to the normal line
of defense. If these rings are eﬀective, the system can
reconstitute; if they are ineﬀective, death may ensue.
The environment encompasses all internal and external
factors or influences surrounding the patient system. The
internal environment is all forces or interactive influences
internal to or contained solely within the boundaries of
the defined patient system; this is the source of intraper-
sonal stressors. The external environment is all forces or 
interaction influences external to or existing outside the
defined patient system; this is the source of interpersonal
and extrapersonal stressors. The created environment is sub-
consciously developed by the patient as a symbolic expres-
sion of system wholeness and supersedes and encompasses
the internal and external environments; it functions as a
subjective safety mechanism that may block the true reality
of the environment and the health experience.
Implications for Nursing Practice
Nursing practice is directed toward facilitating optimal
wellness through retention, attainment, or maintenance
of client system stability. The nurse uses the Neuman Sys-
tems Model Assessment and Intervention Tool, the 
Systems Model Nursing Diagnosis Taxonomy, and any
other relevant clinical tools to guide collection of data and
facilitate documentation of nursing diagnoses, nursing
goals, and nursing outcomes. The three steps of Neuman’s
practice methodology, which is called the Nursing Process
Format, are listed in Box 3.4. Each step is discussed in
detail here.
Nursing Diagnosis
The nurse establishes the database, which involves simul-
taneous consideration of the dynamic interactions of phys-
iological, psychological, sociocultural, developmental, and
spiritual variables. The nurse identifies the patient/patient
system’s perceptions and his or her own perceptions, in-
cluding basic structure factors and energy resources; flexible
and normal lines of defense, lines of resistance, degree of
potential or actual reaction, and potential for reconstitution
following a reaction; and the internal and external environ-
mental stressors that threaten the stability of the patient/
patient system. The nurse then compares his or her own
perceptions with the patient/patient system’s perceptions.
A comprehensive nursing diagnosis is presented that en-
compasses the patient/patient system’s general condition
or circumstances, including identification of actual or 
potential variances from wellness and available resources.
Nursing Goals
The nurse prioritizes goals by considering the patient/
patient system’s wellness level, the meaning of the experi-
ence to the patient/patient system, system stability needs,
and total available resources. Outcome goals and interven-
tions are proposed that will facilitate the highest possible
level of patient/patient system stability or wellness, main-
tain the normal line of defense, and retain the flexible line
of defense. Desired prescriptive change or outcome goals
are developed to correct variances from wellness with the
patient/patient system, taking patient/patient system needs
and resources into account. Specific preventions, presented
as intervention modalities, are negotiated with the patient/
patient system.
Nursing Outcomes
The nurse implements nursing interventions through the
use of one or more of the three “prevention as interven-
tion” modalities:
1. Primary prevention: Nursing actions to retain system 
stability are implemented through such measures as pre-
venting stressor invasion, providing resources to retain
or strengthen existing patient/patient system strengths,
and supporting positive coping and functioning.
2. Secondary prevention: Nursing actions to attain system
stability are implemented through such measures as
protecting the patient/patient system’s basic structure,
mobilizing and optimizing the patient/patient system’s
internal and external resources to attain stability and
energy conservation, and facilitating purposeful 
manipulation of stressors and reactions to stressors.
3. Tertiary prevention: Nursing actions to maintain system
stability are implemented through such measures as 
attaining and maintaining the highest possible level of
patient/patient system wellness and stability during re-
constitution; educating, reeducating, and/or reorienting
the patient/patient system as needed; and supporting
the patient/patient system toward appropriate goals.
The nurse evaluates the outcome goals by confirming
(with the patient/patient system) their attainment and 
reformulating goals as necessary. The nurse and patient/
patient system set intermediate and long-range goals for
subsequent nursing action.
Dorothea Orem’s Self-Care Framework
Orem’s Self-Care Framework focuses on patients’ delib-
erate actions to meet their own and dependent others’
therapeutic self-care demands. The model also focuses on
nurses’ deliberate actions to implement nursing systems
designed to assist individuals and multiperson units who
have limitations in their abilities to provide continuing
and therapeutic self-care or care of dependent others. The
concepts of Orem’s conceptual model are as follows:
Self-Care
Self-care is behavior directed by individuals to themselves
or their environments to regulate factors that affect their
own development and functioning in the interests of life,
health, or well-being.
BOX 3.4
Neuman’s Systems Model Practice
Methodology: Nursing Process Format
●Nursing Diagnosis
●Nursing Goals
●Nursing Outcomes

Self-Care Agency
A self-care agency is the complex capability of maturing
and mature individuals to determine the presence and
characteristics of specific requirements for regulating their
own functioning and development, make judgments and
decisions about what to do, and perform care measures to
meet specific self-care requisites.
Power Components
A person’s ability to perform self-care is influenced by 
10 power components:
1. Ability to maintain attention and exercise requisite
vigilance with respect to self as self-care agent and in-
ternal and external conditions and factors signiﬁcant
for self-care
2. Controlled use of available physical energy that is suf-
ﬁcient for the initiation and continuation of self-care
operations
3. Ability to control the position of the body and its
parts in the execution of the movements required for
the initiation and completion of self-care operations
4. Ability to reason within a self-care frame of reference
5. Motivation (i.e., goal orientations for self-care that
are in accord with its characteristics and its meaning
for life, health, and well-being)
6. Ability to make decisions about self-care and to op-
erationalize these decisions
7. Ability to acquire technical knowledge about self-
care from authoritative sources, to retain it, and to
operationalize it
8. A repertoire of cognitive, perceptual, manipulative,
communication, and interpersonal skills adapted to
the performance of self-care operations
9. Ability to order discrete self-care actions or action
systems into relationships with prior and subsequent
actions toward the ﬁnal achievement of regulatory
goals of self-care
10. Ability to consistently perform self-care operations,
integrating them with relevant aspects of personal,
family, and community living
Basic Conditioning Factors
The person’s ability to perform self-care also is influenced
by 10 internal and external factors called basic condition-
ing factors:
1. Age
2. Gender
3. Developmental state
4. Health state
5. Sociocultural orientation
6. Healthcare system factors, such as medical diagnostic
and treatment modalities
7. Family system factors
8. Patterns of living, including regular activities
9. Environmental factors
10. Resource availability and adequacy
Therapeutic Self-Care Demand
Therapeutic self-care demand is the action demand on 
individuals to meet three types of self-care requisites:
1. Universal self-care requisites: Actions that need to be
performed to maintain life processes, the integrity of
human structure and function, and general 
well-being
2. Developmental self-care requisites: Actions that need to
be performed in relation to human developmental
processes, conditions, and events and in relation to
events that may adversely aﬀect development
3. Health deviation self-care requisites: Actions that need
to be performed in relation to genetic and constitu-
tional defects, human structural and functional devia-
tions and their eﬀects, and medical diagnostic and
treatment measures prescribed or performed by
physicians
Self-Care Deficit
The self-care deficit is the relationship of inadequacy be-
tween self-care agency and the therapeutic self-care de-
mand. A self-care deficit occurs when the therapeutic
self-care demand exceeds self-care agency. 
Nursing Agency
Nursing agency is a complex property or attribute that en-
ables nurses to know and help others to know their ther-
apeutic self-care demands, to meet their therapeutic
self-care demands, and to regulate the exercise or develop-
ment of their self-care agency. A nursing system is a series
of coordinated deliberate practical actions performed by
nurses and patients directed toward meeting the patient’s
therapeutic self-care demand and protecting and regulat-
ing the exercise or development of the patient’s self-care
agency.
Implications for Nursing Practice
Nursing practice is directed toward helping people meet
their own and their dependent others’ therapeutic self-care
demands. Orem’s practice methodology, which is called
Professional-Technological Operations of Nursing Prac-
tice, involves the seven steps listed in Box 3.5. A detailed
discussion of the operations is given below.
Case Management Operations
The nurse uses a case management approach to direct
each of the nursing diagnostic, prescriptive, regulatory,
and control operations. The nurse also maintains an
overview of the interrelationships between the social, in-
terpersonal, and professional-technological systems of
nursing. Finally, the nurse uses the nursing history and
other appropriate tools for collection of information,
40
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
BOX 3.5
Orem’s Practice Methodology: 
Professional-Technological Operations
of Nursing Practice
●Case Management Operations
●Diagnostic Operations
●Prescriptive Operations
●Regulatory Operations: Design of Nursing Systems
for Performance of Regulatory Operations
●Regulatory Operations: Planning for Regulatory
Operations
●Regulatory Operations: Production of Regulatory
Care
●Control Operations

CHAPTER 3 Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing Knowledge     ●
41
documentation of information, and measurement of the
quality of nursing.
Diagnostic Operations
The nurse identifies the unit of service for nursing prac-
tice as an individual, an individual member of a multiper-
son unit, or a multiperson unit. The nurse determines why
the individual needs nursing and collects demographic
data about the patient and information about the nature
and boundaries of the patient’s healthcare situation and
nursing’s jurisdiction within those boundaries.
Prescriptive Operations
In collaboration with the patient or family, the nurse
identifies all care measures needed to meet the entire
therapeutic self-care demand. In addition, the nurse spec-
ifies the roles to be played by the nurse(s), patient, and
dependent-care agent(s) in meeting the therapeutic 
self-care demand and in regulating the patient’s exercise
or development or self-care agency or dependent-care
agency.
Regulatory Operations: Design of Nursing Systems
for Performance of Regulatory Operations
The nurse designs a nursing system, a series of coordinated
deliberate practical actions performed by the nurse and the
patient. The actions are directed toward meeting the pa-
tient’s therapeutic self-care demand and protecting and
regulating the exercise or development of the patient’s self-
care agency or dependent-care agency. The selection of the
appropriate nursing system depends on who can or should
perform self-care actions:
●The wholly compensatory nursing system is selected when
the patient cannot or should not perform any self-care
actions, and thus the nurse must perform them.
●The partly compensatory nursing system is selected when
the patient can perform some, but not all, self-care 
actions.
●The supportive-educative nursing system is selected
when the patient can and should perform all self-care
actions.
Each nursing system is implemented using one or more of
the following methods of helping:
●Acting for or doing for the patient
●Providing a developmental environment
●Supporting the patient psychologically
●Guiding the patient
●Teaching the patient
Regulatory Operations: Planning for 
Regulatory Operations
The nurse specifies what is needed to produce the nursing
system(s) selected for the patient, including the following
elements:
●The time during which the nursing system will be 
produced
●The place where the nursing system will be produced
●The environmental conditions necessary for the pro-
duction of the nursing system, as well as the equip-
ment and supplies required
●The number and qualifications of nurses and other
healthcare providers necessary to produce the nursing
system and to evaluate its effects
●The organization and timing of tasks to be performed
●The designation of who (nurse or patient) is to 
perform the tasks
Regulatory Operations: Production of 
Regulatory Care
Nursing systems are produced by means of the actions
of nurses and patients during nurse-patient encounters;
the nurse produces and manages the designated nursing
system(s) and method(s) of helping for as long as the pa-
tient’s self-care deficit or dependent-care deficit exists.
●The nurse performs and regulates the self-care or 
dependent-care tasks for patients or assists patients
with their performance of self-care or dependent-
care tasks.
●The nurse coordinates self-care or dependent-care task
performance so that a unified system of care is pro-
duced and coordinated with other components of
healthcare.
●The nurse helps patients, their families, and others
bring about systems of daily living for patients that
support the accomplishment of self-care or dependent
care and are, at the same time, satisfying in relation to
patients’ interests, talents, and goals.
●The nurse guides, directs, and supports patients 
in their exercise of, or in the withholding of the 
exercise of, their self-care agency or dependent-
care agency.
●The nurse stimulates patients’ interests in self-care or
dependent care by raising questions and promoting
discussions of care problems and issues when condi-
tions permit.
●The nurse is available to patients at times when ques-
tions are likely to arise.
●The nurse supports and guides patients in learning ac-
tivities and provides cues for learning as well as in-
structional sessions.
●The nurse supports and guides patients as they experi-
ence illness or disability and the effects of medical care
measures and as they experience the need to engage in
new measures of self-care or change their ways of
meeting ongoing self-care requisites.
Control Operations
The nurse performs control operations concurrently 
or separately from the production of regulatory care.
The nurse makes observations and evaluates the nursing
system to determine whether the following goals are
being met:
●The nursing system that was designed is actually 
produced.
●There is a fit between the current prescription 
for nursing and the nursing system that is being 
produced.
●Regulation of the patient’s functioning is 
being achieved through performance of care 
measures to meet the patient’s therapeutic self-
care demand.
●Exercise of the patient’s self-care agency or dependent-
care agency is being properly regulated.
●Developmental change is in process and is adequate.
●The patient is adjusting to any decline in 
powers to engage in self-care or dependent care.

Martha Rogers’ Science of Unitary
Human Beings
Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human Beings focuses on
unitary, irreducible human beings and their environments.
The four basic concepts are as follows:
1. Energy fields are irreducible, indivisible, pandimen-
sional unitary human beings and environments that
are identified by pattern and manifesting character-
istics that are specific to the whole and that cannot
be predicted from knowledge of the parts. Human
and environmental energy fields are integral with
each other.
2. Openness is a characteristic of human and environ-
mental energy ﬁelds; energy ﬁelds are continuously
and completely open.
3. Pattern refers to the distinguishing characteristic of an
energy ﬁeld. Pattern is perceived as a single wave that
gives identity to the ﬁeld. Each human ﬁeld pattern is
unique and is integral with its own unique environ-
mental ﬁeld pattern. Pattern is an abstraction that
cannot be seen; what is seen or experienced are mani-
festations of ﬁeld patterns. Manifestations of pattern
include perceptions, expressions, and experiences. 
4. Pandimensionality is a nonlinear domain without 
spatial or temporal attributes.
The three principles of homeodynamics, which describe
the nature of human and environmental energy fields, are
as follows:
1. Resonancy asserts that human and environmental ﬁelds
are identiﬁed by wave patterns that manifest continu-
ous change from lower to higher frequencies.
2. Helicy asserts that human and environmental ﬁeld pat-
terns are continuous, innovative, and unpredictable
and are characterized by increasing diversity.
3. Integrality emphasizes the continuous mutual human
ﬁeld and environmental ﬁeld process.
Implications for Nursing Practice
Nursing practice is directed toward promoting the health
and well-being of all persons, wherever they are. The three
steps of Rogers’ practice methodology, which is called the
Health Patterning Practice Method, are listed in Box 3.6.
Each step is discussed in detail below.
Pattern Manifestation Knowing and Appreciation—
Assessment
●Assessment refers to the continuous process of appre-
hending and identifying manifestations of the human
energy field and environmental energy field patterns
that relate to current health events, including percep-
tions, expressions, and experiences.
●The nurse uses one or more research instruments or
clinical tools based on the Science of Unitary Human
Beings to guide application and documentation of the
practice methodology.
●The nurse acts with pandimensional authenticity—
that is, with a demeanor of genuineness, trustworthi-
ness, and knowledgeable caring.
●The nurse focuses on the patient as a unified whole, a
unitary human being.
Voluntary Mutual Patterning
●Voluntary mutual patterning is the continuous process
whereby the nurse, with the patient, patterns the envi-
ronmental energy field to promote harmony related to
the health events.
●The nurse facilitates the patient’s actualization of 
potentials for health and well-being. The nurse 
has no investment in the patient’s changing in a 
particular way.
●The nurse does not attempt to change anyone to 
conform to arbitrary health ideals. Rather, the nurse
enhances the patient’s efforts to actualize health 
potentials from the patient’s point of view.
Pattern Manifestation Knowing and Appreciation—
Evaluation
●The nurse evaluates voluntary mutual patterning by
means of pattern manifestation knowing.
●Additional pattern information is monitored and col-
lected as it unfolds during voluntary mutual patterning.
●The nurse considers the pattern information within
the context of continually emerging health patterning
goals affirmed by the patient.
Callista Roy’s Adaptation Model
Roy’s Adaptation Model focuses on the responses of the
human adaptive system, which can be an individual or a
group, to a constantly changing environment. Adaptation
is the central feature of the model. Problems in adaptation
arise when the adaptive system is unable to cope with or
respond to constantly changing stimuli from the internal
and external environments in a manner that maintains the
integrity of the system. 
Environmental stimuli are categorized as follows:
●Focal: The stimuli most immediately confronting the
person.
●Contextual: The contributing factors in the situation.
●Residual: Other unknown factors that may influence
the situation. When the factors making up residual
stimuli become known, they are considered focal or
contextual stimuli.
Adaptation occurs through innate or acquired coping
mechanisms used to respond to changing environmental
stimuli:
●The regulator coping subsystem ( for individuals) receives
input from the external environment and from
changes in the individual’s internal state and processes
the changes through neural-chemical-endocrine chan-
nels to produce responses.
42
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
BOX 3.6
Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human 
Beings Practice Methodology: The
Health Patterning Practice Method
●Pattern Manifestation Knowing and Appreciation—
Assessment
●Voluntary Mutual Patterning
●Pattern Manifestation Knowing and Appreciation—
Evaluation

CHAPTER 3 Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing Knowledge     ●
43
●The cognator coping subsystem (for individuals) also re-
ceives input from external and internal stimuli that in-
volve psychological, social, physical, and physiological
factors, including regulator subsystem outputs. These
stimuli are then processed through cognitive/emotive
pathways, including perceptual/information process-
ing, learning, judgment, and emotion.
●The stabilizer subsystem control process (for groups) in-
volves the established structures, values, and daily activ-
ities used by a group to accomplish its primary purpose
and contribute to common purposes of society.
●The innovator subsystem control process (for humans in
groups) involves the structures and processes necessary
for change and growth in human social systems.
Responses take place in four modes of adaptation for 
individuals and groups:
1. Physiological/physical mode
• Physiological mode (for individuals) is concerned with
basic needs requisite to maintaining the physical and
physiologic integrity of the individual human system.
It encompasses oxygenation; nutrition; elimination;
activity and rest; protection; senses; fluid, electrolyte,
and acid-base balance; neurologic function; and 
endocrine function. The basic underlying need is
physiologic integrity.
• Physical mode (for groups) pertains to the manner in
which the collective human adaptive system mani-
fests adaptation relative to basic operating resources,
including participants, physical facilities, and fiscal
resources. The basic underlying need is resource ade-
quacy, or wholeness achieved by adapting to change
in physical resource needs.
2. Self-concept/group identity mode
• Self-concept mode (for individuals) addresses the
composite of beliefs and feelings that a person holds
about himself or herself at a given time. The basic
underlying need is psychic and spiritual integrity,
the need to know who one is so that one can be or
exist with a sense of unity, meaning, and purposeful-
ness in the universe. The physical self refers to the 
individual’s appraisal of his or her own physical
being, including physical attributes, functioning, sex-
uality, health and illness states, and appearance. It in-
cludes the components of body sensation and body
image. The personal self refers to the individual’s ap-
praisal of his or her own characteristics, expectations,
values, and worth, including self-consistency, self-
ideal, and the moral-ethical-spiritual self.
• Group identity mode (for groups) addresses shared 
relations, goals, and values, which create a social 
milieu and culture, a group self-image, and co-
responsibility for goal achievement. Identity in-
tegrity is the underlying need, which implies the
honesty, soundness, and completeness of the group
members’ identification with the group and involves
the process of sharing identity and goals. This mode
encompasses interpersonal relationships, group self-
image, social milieu, and group culture.
3. Role function mode (for individuals and groups) focuses
on the roles that the individual occupies in society.
The basic underlying need is social integrity—the
need to know who one is in relation to others so that
one can act. For the group, this mode focuses on the
action components associated with group infrastruc-
ture that are designed to contribute to the accomplish-
ment of the group’s mission or the tasks or functions
associated with the group. The basic underlying need
is role clarity—the need to understand and commit to
fulﬁll expected tasks—so that the group can achieve
common goals.
4. Interdependence mode (for individuals and groups) 
focuses on the basic underlying need of relational in-
tegrity, deﬁned as the feeling of security in nurturing
relationships. For the individual, the mode focuses on
interactions related to the giving and receiving of love,
respect, and value and encompasses aﬀectional ade-
quacy, developmental adequacy, resource adequacy,
signiﬁcant others, and support systems. For the group,
it pertains to the social context in which the group 
operates, including both private and public contacts
within the group and with those outside the group,
and encompasses aﬀectional adequacy, developmental
adequacy, resource adequacy, context, infrastructure,
and resources.
The four modes are interrelated. Responses in any one
mode may have an effect on or act as a stimulus in one or
all of the other modes. Responses in each mode are judged
as either adaptive or ineffective. A judgment of “adaptive
responses” indicates promotion of the goals of the human
adaptive system, including survival, growth, reproduction,
mastery, and person-environment transformation. A judg-
ment of “ineffective responses” does not contribute to the
goals of the human adaptive system.
Adaptation level is determined by the total effect of
focal, contextual, and residual stimuli on the modes of
adaptation. The three levels of adaptation are as follows: 
1. Integrated life process: Level of adaptation at which the
structures and functions of a life process are working
as a whole to meet human needs
2. Compensatory life process: Level of adaptation at which
the cognator and regulator [or stabilizer and innova-
tor] have been activated by a challenge to the inte-
grated life processes
3. Compromised life process: Level of adaptation resulting
from inadequate integrated and compensatory life
processes; an adaptation problem 
Implications for Nursing Practice
Nursing practice is directed toward promoting adaptation
in each of the four response modes, thereby contributing
to the person’s health, quality of life, and dying with dig-
nity. Roy’s practice methodology is the Adaptation Model
Nursing Process, which encompasses the six steps listed in
Box 3.7. Each step is discussed in detail below.
Assessment of Behavior
The nurse systematically gathers data about the behavior
of the human adaptive system and judges the current state
of adaptation in each adaptive mode. The nurse uses one
or more of Roy’s Adaptation Model–based research instru-
ments or clinical tools to guide application and documen-
tation of the practice methodology.

Assessment of Stimuli
The nurse recognizes that stimuli must be amenable to in-
dependent nurse functions. Consequently, factors such as
medical diagnoses and medical treatments are not consid-
ered stimuli because those factors cannot be independently
managed by nurses. The nurse identifies the internal and
external focal and contextual stimuli that are influencing
the behaviors of particular interest, in the order of priority
established at the end of the Assessment of Behavior com-
ponent of Roy’s Adaptation Model Nursing Process.
Nursing Diagnosis
The nurse uses a process of judgment to make a statement
conveying the adaptation status of the human adaptive sys-
tem of interest. The nursing diagnosis is a statement that
identifies the behaviors of interest together with the most
relevant influencing stimuli. The nurse uses one of the fol-
lowing three approaches to state the nursing diagnosis:
1. The nurse states the behaviors within each adaptive
mode and with their most relevant inﬂuencing 
stimuli.
2. The nurse uses a summary label for behaviors in each
adaptive mode with relevant stimuli.
3. The nurse uses a label that summarizes a behavioral
pattern across adaptive modes that is aﬀected by the
same stimuli.
The nurse may link Roy’s Adaptation Model–based nurs-
ing diagnosis with a relevant diagnosis from the taxonomy
of the North American Nursing Diagnosis Association
(NANDA).
Goal Setting
The nurse articulates a clear goal statement, identifying
the specific short-term and long-term behavioral outcomes
in response to nursing provided to the human adaptive
system. The goal statement designates each behavior of in-
terest, the way in which the behavior will change, and the
time frame for attainment of the goal. Goals may be stated
for ineffective behaviors that are to be changed to adaptive
behaviors and also for adaptive behaviors that should be
maintained or enhanced.
Intervention
Nursing intervention is the management of stimuli. The
nurse selects and implements nursing approaches that have
a high probability of changing stimuli or strengthening
adaptive processes. The nurse may alter, increase, decrease,
remove, or maintain stimuli.
Evaluation
The nurse judges the effectiveness of nursing interventions
in relation to the behaviors of the human adaptive system.
The nurse systematically reassesses observable and nonob-
servable behaviors for each aspect of the four adaptive modes.
Other Nursing Conceptual Models
Most conceptual models are applicable to many, if not
all, nursing specialities. However, some nurses prefer 
to use conceptual models that were developed for a par-
ticular area of nursing specialty practice. For example,
the Synergy Model (Hardin & Kaplow, 2005) was de-
veloped by members of the American Association of
Critical-Care Nurses to guide practice with hospitalized
critically ill patients. Noteworthy is that this conceptual
model is now used in several other clinical settings 
with several other patient populations. Practice guided
by the Synergy Model focuses attention on the match
between eight characteristics of patients and eight com-
petencies of nurses. According to the model, when nurse
competencies are a good match with patient character-
istics, the likelihood of attaining optimal outcomes is
increased. Each patient characteristic and each nurse
competency may be rated on a scale of 1 to 5, with 1 =
lowest level and 5 = highest level (http://www.aacn.
org/wd/certifications/content/synmodel.pcms?menu=
certification). (http://www.aacn.org/wd/certifications
/content/synmodel.pcms?pid=1&&menu=).
The eight patient characteristics are as follows:
1. Resiliency
2. Vulnerability
3. Stability
4. Complexity
5. Resource availability
6. Participation in care
7. Participation in decision making
8. Predictability
The eight nurse competencies are as follows: 
1. Clinical judgment
2. Advocacy
3. Caring practices
4. Collaboration
5. Systems thinking
6. Response to diversity
7. Clinical inquiry
8. Facilitation of learning
Three categories of outcomes are relevant: those experi-
enced by patients and families, those that occur as the 
result of nursing care, and those that occur within the
healthcare system. 
1. Patient and family outcomes: Functional and behav-
ioral changes, trust, satisfaction, comfort, and quality
of life. 
2. Nursing care outcomes: Physiological changes, presence
or absence of complications, and extent to which care
or treatment objectives were attained. 
3. System outcomes: Readmission rate, length of stay, and
cost utilization per case.
44
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
BOX 3.7
Roy’s Adaptation Model Practice
Methodology: The Nursing Process
●Assessment of Behavior
●Assessment of Stimuli
●Nursing Diagnosis
●Goal Setting
●Intervention
●Evaluation
ONLINE CONSULT
North American Nursing Diagnosis Association
(NANDA) at 
http://www.nanda.org

CHAPTER 3 Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing Knowledge     ●
45
NURSING THEORIES
For our purposes, the terms theory, theoretical framework,
theoretical model, and theoretical rationale have the same
definition and may be used interchangeably.
Definition
A nursing theory is defined as one or more relatively con-
crete and specific concepts that are derived from a concep-
tual model, the statements that describe those concepts, and
the statements that assert relatively concrete and specific 
relations between two or more concepts (Fawcett & DeSanto-
Madeya, 2013). Each theory presents a unique perspective
about a particular phenomenon, such as a nursing partici-
pant, the environment, health, or a step of the nursing
process or practice methodology.
Function
The function of a nursing theory is to provide considerable
specificity in the description, explanation, or prediction of
some phenomenon.
Nursing Grand Theories
Theories vary in scope—that is, they vary in the relative
level of concreteness and specificity of their concepts and
statements. Theories that are broadest in scope are called
grand theories. These theories are made up of rather ab-
stract and general concepts and statements that cannot be
generated or tested empirically. Indeed, grand theories are
developed through thoughtful and insightful appraisal of
existing ideas or creative intellectual leaps beyond existing
knowledge. Examples of grand theories of nursing are
Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and Univer-
sality (Leininger & McFarland, 2006), Newman’s (1994)
Theory of Health as Expanding Consciousness, and
Parse’s (1998) Theory of Humanbecoming. Some nurses
prefer to use a nursing grand theory rather than a concep-
tual model to guide their practice. An overview of each
grand theory, along with implications for practice, is pre-
sented below. The less abstract nature of grand theories
compared with conceptual models is illustrated by Parse’s
(1998) theory, which was derived in part from Rogers’
(1970, 1990) conceptual model. Rogers’ conceptual
model is a frame of reference for all of nursing, whereas
Parse’s theory limits the domain of interest to the unitary
human’s experience of becoming.
Madeleine Leininger’s Theory of Culture
Care Diversity and Universality
Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and Uni-
versality focuses on the discovery of human care diversities
and universalities and ways to provide culturally congruent
care to people. The concepts of this grand theory are as
follows:
●Care: Abstract and concrete phenomena related to as-
sisting, supporting, or enabling experiences or behaviors
toward or for others with evident or anticipated needs
to ameliorate or improve a human condition or lifeway
●Caring: The actions and activities directed toward as-
sisting, supporting, or enabling another individual or
group with evident or anticipated needs to amelio-
rate or improve a human condition or lifeway or to
face death
●Culture: The learned, shared, and transmitted values,
beliefs, norms, and lifeways of a particular group that
guide thinking, decisions, and actions in patterned
ways; encompasses several cultural and social structure
dimensions: technological factors, religious and philo-
sophical factors, kinship and social factors, political
and legal factors, economic factors, educational and
cultural values, and lifeways
●Language: Word usages, symbols, and meanings 
about care
●Ethnohistory: Past facts, events, instances, and experi-
ences of individuals, groups, cultures, and institutions
that are primarily people centered (ethno) and that de-
scribe, explain, and interpret human lifeways within
particular cultural contexts and over short or long peri-
ods of time
●Environmental context: The totality of an event, situa-
tion, or particular experience that gives meaning to
human expressions, interpretations, and social interac-
tions in particular physical, ecological, sociopolitical,
and/or cultural settings
●Health: A state of well-being that is culturally defined,
valued, and practiced and that reflects the ability of in-
dividuals (or groups) to perform their daily role activi-
ties in culturally expressed, beneficial, and patterned
lifeways
●Worldview: The way people tend to look out on the
world or their universe to form a picture of or a value
stance about their life or the world around them
●Cultural care: The subjectively and objectively trans-
mitted values, beliefs, and patterned lifeways that as-
sist, support, or enable another individual or group to
maintain their well-being and health, to improve their
human condition and lifeway, and to deal with illness,
handicaps, or death; the two dimensions of cultural
care are:
1. Cultural care diversity: The variabilities and/or diﬀer-
ences in meanings, patterns, values, lifeways, or sym-
bols of care within or between collectivities that are
related to assistive, supportive, or enabling human
care expressions
2. Cultural care universality: The common, similar, or
dominant uniform care meanings, patterns, values,
lifeways, or symbols that are manifest among many
cultures and reﬂect assistive, supportive, facilitative,
or enabling ways to help people
●Care systems: The values, norms, and structural features
of an organization designed for serving people’s health
needs, concerns, or conditions; the two types of care
systems are as follows:
1. Generic lay care systems: Traditional or local indige-
nous healthcare or cure practices that have special
meanings and uses to heal or assist people, which
are generally offered in familiar home or commu-
nity environmental contexts with their local 
practitioners
2. Professional healthcare systems: Professional care or
cure services oﬀered by diverse health personnel who

have been prepared through formal professional pro-
grams of study in special educational institutions
●Cultural-congruent nursing care: Cognitively based as-
sistive, supportive, facilitative, or enabling acts or deci-
sions that are tailor-made to fit with individual, group,
or institutional cultural values, beliefs, and lifeways in
order to provide or support meaningful, beneficial,
and satisfying healthcare or well-being services; the
three modes of cultural-congruent nursing care are as
follows:
1. Cultural care preservation or maintenance: Assistive,
supportive, facilitative, or enabling professional ac-
tions and decisions that help people of a particular
culture retain and/or preserve relevant care values so
that they can maintain their well-being, recover
from illness, or face handicaps and/or death
2. Cultural care accommodation or negotiation: Assistive,
supportive, facilitative, or enabling creative profes-
sional actions and decisions that help people of a
designated culture adapt to, or negotiate with, others
for a beneﬁcial or satisfying health outcome with
professional care providers
3. Cultural care repatterning or restructuring: Assistive,
supportive, facilitative, or enabling professional 
actions and decisions that help patients reorder,
change, or greatly modify their lifeways for a new, 
diﬀerent, and beneﬁcial healthcare pattern while re-
specting the patients’ cultural values and beliefs and
still providing a beneﬁcial or healthier lifeway than be-
fore the changes were coestablished with the patients.
Implications for Nursing Practice
Nursing practice is directed toward improving and pro-
viding culturally congruent care to people. The compo-
nents of the practice methodology for the Theory of
Culture Care Diversity and Universality are shown in 
Box 3.8. Each component is discussed in detail here.
Goals of Nursing Practice
The goals of nursing practice are to provide culturally con-
gruent care that will be beneficial to, fit with, and be useful
to the patient, family, or culture group healthy lifeways,
and to offer a different kind of nursing care service to peo-
ple of diverse or similar cultures.
Patients
●Individuals
●Families
●Subcultures
●Groups
●Communities
●Institutions
Culturalogical Assessment
The nurse maintains a holistic or total view of the patient’s
world by using the Sunrise Enabler to guide assessment of
cultural beliefs, values, and lifeways, which are identified
by assessing the seven cultural and social structure dimen-
sions that make up the patient’s worldview: technological; 
religious and philosophical; kinship and social; cultural values,
beliefs, and lifeways; political and legal;, economic; and 
educational factors. In most cases, more than one session
with the patient is required to cover all components of the
Sunrise Enabler. The first session in a hospital or clinic lasts
approximately 20 minutes; subsequent sessions may be
longer. The nurse begins by clarifying and explaining the
focus of the assessment to the patient, which is the patient’s
internal (emic) world, not the nurse’s outsider (etic) world.
The nurse knows his or her own culture and subculture
and particular variabilities, strengths, and assets. The nurse
must also discover and remain aware of his or her own cul-
tural beliefs, values, lifeways, biases, attitudes, and preju-
dices to avoid cultural blindness. The nurse must be aware
that the patient may belong to a subculture or special
group that maintains its own values and beliefs that differ
from the values and beliefs of the dominant culture. The
nurse gives attention to patient gender differences, com-
munication modes, special language terms, interpersonal
relationships, and use of space and foods.
The nurse shows a genuine interest in the patient and
learns from and maintains respect for the patient. The
nurse asks open-ended questions and maintains the role
of an active listener, learner, and reflector. The nurse
shares professional knowledge only if the patient asks
about such knowledge.
The nurse begins the assessment with questions such
as the following:
●“What would you like to share with me today about
your experiences or beliefs to help you keep well?” or
“Please tell me what is important to you and about
your lifestyle.”
●“Are there some special ideas or ways you would like
nurses to care for you?”
●“From whom do you usually receive care?”
●“What aspects of your care do you want to change?”
Nursing Judgments, Decisions, and Actions
Nursing practice requires the co-participation of nurses and
patients working together to identify, plan, implement, and
evaluate the appropriate mode(s) of cultural-congruent
nursing care. Nursing decisions and actions encompass the
following:
●Assisting
●Supporting
●Facilitating
●Enabling
Together, the nurse and the patient select one or more
modes of cultural-congruent nursing care:
●Cultural care preservation or maintenance
●Cultural care accommodation or negotiation
●Cultural care repatterning or restructuring
Clinical Protocols
Specific nursing practices or clinical protocols are derived
from the findings of research guided by the Theory of
46
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
BOX 3.8
Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care 
Diversity and Universality Practice
Methodology
●Goals of Nursing Practice
●Patients
●Culturalogical Assessment
●Nursing Judgments, Decisions, and Actions
●Clinical Protocols

CHAPTER 3 Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing Knowledge     ●
47
Culture Care Diversity and Universality. The research
findings are used to develop protocols for cultural-
congruent care that blends with the particular cultural
values, beliefs, and lifeways of the patient and is assessed
to be beneficial, satisfying, and meaningful to the patient.
Margaret Newman’s Theory of Health as
Expanding Consciousness
Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding Conscious-
ness emphasizes the idea that every person in every situa-
tion, no matter how disordered and hopeless the situation
may seem, is part of the universal process of expanding
consciousness. The concepts of the theory are conscious-
ness and pattern.
Consciousness
Consciousness is the informational capacity of human 
beings—that is, the ability of humans to interact with their
environments. Consciousness encompasses interconnected
cognitive and affective awareness; physiochemical main-
tenance, including the nervous and endocrine systems;
growth processes; the immune system; and the genetic
code. Consciousness can be seen in the quantity and qual-
ity of the interaction between human beings and their en-
vironments. The process of life moves toward higher levels
of consciousness. Sometimes this process is smooth, pleas-
ant, and harmonious; other times it is difficult and dishar-
monious, as in disease.
Pattern
Pattern is information that depicts the whole; it is relat-
edness. People are identified by their pattern. The evolu-
tion of expanding consciousness is seen in the pattern of
movement-space-time. Pattern is manifested as exchang-
ing, communicating, relating, valuing, choosing, moving,
perceiving, feeling, and knowing. Pattern encompasses
three dimensions:
1. Movement-space-time: Movement is an essential
property of matter, a means of communicating, 
the means whereby one perceives reality and be-
comes aware of self, and the natural condition 
of life. Space encompasses personal space, inner
space, and life space as dimensions of space 
relevant to the individual; and territoriality, shared
space, and distancing as dimensions relevant to 
the family. Time can be both subjective (the
amount of time perceived to be passing) and 
objective (clock time).
2. Rhythm: Basic to movement, rhythm is an integrating
experience.
3. Diversity: Seen in the parts
Implications for Nursing Practice
Nursing practice is directed toward facilitating pattern
recognition by connecting with the patient in an authentic
way and assisting him or her to discover new rules for a
higher level of organization or consciousness. The com-
ponents of Newman’s research/practice methodology,
which is called the Research as Praxis Protocol, are listed
in Box 3.9. Each component is discussed in detail here.
Phenomenon of Interest
The phenomenon of interest is the process of expanding
consciousness.
The Interview
The meeting of the nurse and the study participant/
patient occurs when there is a mutual attraction through
congruent patterns—that is, an interpenetration of the 
two fields. The nurse and the study participant/patient
enter into a partnership with the mutual goal of partici-
pating in an authentic relationship, trusting that in the
process of its unfolding, both will emerge at a higher level
of consciousness.
First, the nurse explains the study. The study participant/
patient agrees to continue with the study and agrees to 
have the interview recorded. The initial interview lasts 
45 to 60 minutes. The nurse begins with a simple, open-
ended statement, such as, “Tell me about the most mean-
ingful people and events in your life.” This question may
be modified to fit the focus of the study. The nurse con-
tinues the interview in a nondirectional manner, although
direct questions may be used occasionally. Examples of ad-
ditional questions are, “Tell me what it has been like living
with [a particular medical diagnosis, clinical condition, or
life circumstance],” “What is meaningful to you?” and
“What do you think about what we have been talking
about?” The nurse may prompt the study participant/
patient to bring to mind something from childhood that
stands out in memory, if he or she needs help in thinking
of something considered important.
The nurse acts as an active listener and clarifies and re-
flects as necessary. The nurse is fully present in the mo-
ment, is sensitive to intuitive hunches about what to say
or ask, and waits for insight into the meaning of the pat-
tern. The nurse is free to disclose aspects of himself or her-
self that are deemed appropriate.
Transcription
The nurse listens carefully to and transcribes the audio
recording of the interview soon after the interview is com-
pleted. The nurse is sensitive to the relevance of the data
and may omit comments made by the study participant/
patient that do not directly relate to his or her life pattern,
with a reference to the time during the interview that such
comments occurred, in case those comments seem impor-
tant later.
Development of the Narrative: Pattern Recognition
The nurse selects the statements deemed most important to
the study participant/patient and rearranges the key segments
BOX 3.9
Newman’s Health as Expanding 
Consciousness Practice Methodology:
Research as Praxis Protocol
●Phenomenon of Interest
●The Interview
●Transcription
●Development of the Narrative: Pattern Recognition
●Diagram: Pattern Recognition
●Follow-up: Pattern Recognition
●Application of the Theory of Health as Expanding
Consciousness

of the data in chronological order to highlight the most sig-
nificant events and persons. Natural breaks where a pattern
shift occurs are noted and form the basis of the sequential
patterns. The nurse will recognize the pattern of the whole,
made up of segments of the study participant/patient’s 
relationships over time.
Diagram: Pattern Recognition
The nurse then transmutes the narrative into a simple 
diagram of the sequential pattern configurations.
Follow-up: Pattern Recognition
The nurse conducts a second interview with the study 
participant/patient to share the diagram or other visual
portrayal of the pattern. The nurse does not interpret the 
diagram but rather uses it simply to illustrate the study
participant/patient’s story in graphic form, which tends to
accentuate the contrasts and repetitions in relationships
over time.
The mutual viewing of the graphic form is an oppor-
tunity for the study participant/patient to confirm and
clarify or revise the story being portrayed. It is also an
opportunity for the nurse to clarify any aspect of the
story about which he or she has any doubt.
The nature of the pattern of person-environment in-
teraction will begin to emerge in terms of energy flow—
for example, blocked, diffuse, disorganized, repetitive, or
whatever descriptors and metaphors come to mind to 
describe the pattern. The study participant/patient may 
express signs that pattern recognition is occurring (or has
already occurred in the interval following the first inter-
view) as the nurse and study participant/patient reflect 
together on the study participant/patient’s life pattern.
If no signs of pattern recognition occur, the nurse and
study participant/patient may want to proceed with addi-
tional reflections in subsequent interviews until no further
insight is reached. Sometimes, no signs of pattern recog-
nition emerge, and if so, that characterizes the pattern for
that person. It is not to be forced.
Application of the Theory of Health as Expanding
Consciousness
After the interviews are completed, the nurse undertakes
more intense analysis of the data in light of the Theory of
Health as Expanding Consciousness. The nurse evaluates
the nature of the sequential patterns of interaction in terms
of quality and complexity and interprets the patterns ac-
cording to the study participant/patient’s position on
Young’s spectrum of consciousness. The sequential patterns
represent presentational construing or relationships. Any
similarities of pattern among a group of study participants/
patients having a similar experience may be designated by
themes and stated in propositional form.
Rosemarie Parse’s Theory 
of Humanbecoming
Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming focuses on human
experiences of participation with the universe in the 
co-creation of health. The concepts of the theory are as
follows:
●Humanbecoming: A unitary construct referring to the
human being’s living health
●Meaning: The linguistic and imagined content of
something and the interpretation that one gives to
something
• Imaging: Reflective-prereflective coming to know the
explicit-tacit-all-at-once
• Valuing: Confirming-not confirming cherished 
beliefs in light of a personal worldview
• Languaging: Signifying valued images through 
speaking-being silent and moving-being still
●Rhythmicity: The cadent, paradoxical patterning of the
human-universe mutual process
• Revealing-concealing: Disclosing-not disclosing all-
at-once
• Enabling-limiting: Living the opportunities-
restrictions present in all choosings all-at-once
• Connecting-separating: Being with and apart from
others, ideas, objects, and situations all at once
●Transcendence: Reaching beyond with possibles—
the hopes and dreams envisioned in multidimen-
sional experiences and powering the originating of
transforming
• Powering: The pushing-resisting process of affirming-
not affirming being in light of nonbeing
• Originating: Inventing new ways of conforming-
nonconforming in the certainty/uncertainty of living
• Transforming: Shifting the view of the familiar-
unfamiliar, the changing of change in co-constituting
anew in a deliberate way
The three major principles of the theory of humanbecoming
are as follows:
1. Structuring meaning is the imaging and valuing of lan-
guaging and means that humans construct what is real
for them from choices made at many realms of the
universe. 
2. Configuring rhythmical patterns of relating is the 
revealing-concealing and enabling-limiting of 
connecting-separating and means that humans live
in rhythm with the universe co-constituting patterns 
of relating. 
3. Co-transcending with possibles is the powering and
originating of transforming and means that humans
forge unique paths with shifting perspectives as a dif-
ferent light is cast on the familiar. 
Implications for Nursing Practice
Nursing practice is directed toward respecting quality of
life as perceived by the person and the family. Part I of
Parse’s Practice Methodology is summarized in Box 3.10.
Each aspect of Part II of Parse’s Practice Methodology is
outlined below.
Part II of Parse’s Practice Methodology
Contexts for Nursing
●Nurse-person situations
●Nurse-group situations
●Participants: Children, adults
●Locations: Homes, shelters, healthcare centers, parish
halls, all departments of hospitals and clinics, rehabili-
tation centers, offices, other milieus where nurses in-
teract with people
48
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

CHAPTER 3 Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing Knowledge     ●
49
Goal of the Discipline of Nursing
The goal of nursing is to enhance the quality of life from
the person’s, family’s, and community’s perspectives.
Goal of the Humanbecoming Nurse
The goal of the humanbecoming nurse is to be truly pres-
ent with people as they enhance the quality of their lives.
True Presence
True presence refers to a special way of “being with” in
which the nurse is attentive to moment-to-moment
changes in meaning as he or she bears witness to the per-
son’s or group’s own living of value priorities.
●Coming-to-be-present: True presence begins in the 
coming-to-be-present moments of preparation and 
attention—an all-at-once gentling down and lifting
up. True presence begins in the coming-to-be-present
moments of preparation and attention. Preparation in-
volves an emptying to be available to bear witness to
the other or others and being flexible, not fixed but
gracefully present from one’s center, as well as dwelling
with the universe at the moment, considering the at-
tentive presence about to be. Attention involves focus-
ing on the moment at hand for immersion.
●Face-to-face discussions: The nurse and the person en-
gage in dialogue, and the nurse tries to understand the
person’s perspective by initiating discussions. Conversa-
tion may be through discussion in general or through
interpretations of stories, films, drawings, photographs,
music, metaphors, poetry, rhythmical movements, and
other expressions. The nurse really listens to the person,
without interrupting. The nurse may seek clarification
of the person’s comments. The nurse tries to under-
stand the person’s perspective by initiating discussions
using questions such as: How are you doing? How are
things going? How was your day (or night)? What is
life like for you? What is most important to you at this
time? What do you need most right now? The nurse
may seek clarification through such statements as: Tell
me more about that. What does . . . mean for you?
What is it like for you to live with . . . ? What do you
see yourself doing? What can you do to get help? What
might help you to go on? What do you hope happens?
●Silent immersion: Silent immersion is a process of the
quiet that does not refrain from sending and receiving
messages, a chosen way of becoming in the human-
universe process lived in the rhythm of speaking-being
silent, moving-being still as valued images incarnate mean-
ing. Silent immersion is true presence without words.
●Lingering presence: Lingering presence refers to recall-
ing a moment after an immediate engagement—a 
reflective-prereflective “abiding with” attended to
through glimpses of the other person, idea, object, or
situation.
Ways of Changing Health Patterns in True Presence
●Creative imagining: Picturing—by seeing, hearing, and
feeling—what a situation might be like if lived in a dif-
ferent way
●Affirming personal becoming: Uncovering preferred per-
sonal health patterns by critically thinking about how
or who one is
●Glimpsing the paradoxical: Changing one’s view of a
situation by recognizing incongruities in that situation
Middle-Range Theories
Middle-range theories are narrower in scope than grand
theories, encompassing a smaller number of concepts and
a limited aspect of the real world. Middle-range theories
are, therefore, made up of concepts that are empirically
measurable and statements that are empirically testable.
Indeed, the product of any nursing study can be consid-
ered a middle-range theory that constitutes the evidence
for nursing practice (Fawcett & Garity, 2009). Middle-
range theories may describe a concept, explain the relation
between two or more concepts, or predict the effects of
one or more concepts that are interventions on one or
more other concepts that are outcomes.
Examples of widely used middle-range nursing theo-
ries are Peplau’s (1952, 1992) Theory of Interpersonal
Relations, Watson’s (2006) Theory of Human Caring,
and Orlando’s (1961) Theory of the Deliberative Nurs-
ing Process. Peplau’s middle-range descriptive nursing
theory focuses on the phases of the interpersonal process
that occur when an ill person and a nurse come together
to resolve a health difficulty. Watson’s middle-range ex-
planatory nursing theory focuses on the human compo-
nent of caring and the moment-to-moment encounters
between the one who is caring and the one who is being
cared for, especially the caring activities performed by
nurses as they interact with others. Her theory asserts a
relation between clinical caritas processes (nursing inter-
ventions) and a transpersonal caring relationship between
BOX 3.10
Parse’s Practice Methodology: Part I
Theory of Humanbecoming
1. Structuring meaning 
2. Conﬁguring rhythmical 
patterns of relating
3. Co-transcending with 
possibles
Practice Methodology 
Dimension
Illuminating meaning: Explicat-
ing what was, is, and will be
Synchronizing rhythms: Dwelling
with the pitch, yaw, and roll of
the human universe process
Mobilizing transcendence: 
Moving beyond the meaning
moment with what is not-yet
Practice Methodology Principle
Process (Empirical Activity)
Explicating: Making clear what
is appearing now through 
languaging
Dwelling with: Immersing with
the ﬂow of connecting-separating
Moving beyond: Propelling with
envisioned possibles of 
transforming

nurse and patient. Orlando’s middle-range predictive
nursing theory focuses on an interpersonal process be-
tween people. Her theory asserts that the outcome of use
of the deliberative nursing process is identification of the
patient’s immediate need for help.
More than 80 middle-range theories have been directly
derived from the seven nursing conceptual models discussed
50
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
TABLE 3.1
Explicit Middle-Range Theories Derived from Selected Conceptual Models
of Nursing
Conceptual Model
Middle-Range Theory
Johnson’s Behavioral System Model
King’s Conceptual System
Levine’s Conservation Model
Neuman’s Systems Model
Theory of a Restorative Subsystem
Theory of Sustenal Imperatives
Theory of Asynchronous Development
Theory of Basic Empathy, Self-Awareness, and Learning Styles 
Theory of Decision Making
Theory of Departmental Power [retitled Theory of Group Power]
Theory of Families, Children, and Chronic Illness
Theory of Family Health [retitled Family Health Theory]
Theory of Goal Attainment 
Theory of Health and Social Support
Theory of Social Support and Health of Older Adults
Theory of Intrapersonal Perceptual Awareness 
Theory of Health Perception
Theory of Interaction Enhancement
Theory of Nursing Administration
Theory of Nursing Empathy
Theory of Organizational Health 
Theory of Personal System Empathy
Theory of Transaction Process
Theory of Integration
Theory of Quality of Life of Stroke Survivors
Theory of Patient Satisfaction with Nursing Care
Theory of Social and Interpersonal Influences on Health
Theory of Health Promotion for Preterm Infants
Theory of Redundancy
Theory of Therapeutic Intention
Codependency-Overeating Model
Theory of Adolescent Vulnerability
Theory of Caregiver Role Strain
Theory of Infant Exposure to Environmental Tobacco Smoke
Theory of Maternal Student Role Stress 
Theory of Moderation of Stress Levels in Women in Multiple Roles 
Theory of Optimal Patient System Stability
Theory of Prevention as Intervention
earlier in this chapter (Table 3.1). Many other middle-range
nursing theories and middle-range theories from other dis-
ciplines are used by nurses (see, for example, Alligood &
Tomey, 2010; Peterson & Bredow, 2004; Smith & Liehr,
2014; Ziegler, 2005) but are not explicitly derived from any
nursing conceptual model or a conceptual model from any
other discipline.

CHAPTER 3 Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing Knowledge     ●
51
Continued
TABLE 3.1
Explicit Middle-Range Theories Derived from Selected Conceptual Models
of Nursing—cont’d
Conceptual Model
Middle-Range Theory
Orem’s Self-Care Framework
Rogers’ Science of Unitary 
Human Beings
Roy’s Adaptation Model
Theory of Well-Being
Theory of Well-Being for Fatigue in Diabetics
A Theory of Palliative Care Nursing Self-Competence
Theory of Dependent Care
Theory of Diabetes Self-Care Management
Theory of Taking Care of Oneself in a High-Risk Environment
Theory of Testicular Self-Examination
White’s Theory of Spirituality and Spiritual Self-Care
Theory of Aging
Theory of Aging as Emerging Brilliance
Theory of the Art of Professional Nursing 
Theory of Creativity, Actualization, and Empathy
Theory of Energetic Patterning
Theory of Diversity of Human Field Pattern
Theory of Enfolding Health as Wholeness and Harmony
Theory of Enlightenment 
Theory of Healthiness
Theory of Human Field Motion 
Theory of Intentionality
Theory of Kaleidoscoping in Life’s Turbulence 
Theory of Participation
Theory of Pattern
Theory of Perceived Dissonance
Theory of Power as Knowing Participation in Change
Theory of Self-Transcendence
Theory of Sentience Evolution 
Theories of Spirituality
Parrett and Biley Negotiating Uncertainty Theory
Theory of Adaptation during Childbearing
Theory of Adaptation to Chronic Pain
Theory of Adapting to Diabetes
Theory of Adapting to Chronic Health Conditions
Theory of the Adapting Family
Theory of Adapting to Life Events
Theory of Adapting to Loss
Theory of Caregiver Stress
Theory of Chronic Pain
Theory of Coping
Theory of Holistic Clinical Education
Theory of Psychosocial Adaptation to Termination of Pregnancy for Fetal
Anomaly
Theory of Sexuality Adaptation

52
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
TABLE 3.1
Explicit Middle-Range Theories Derived from Selected Conceptual Models
of Nursing—cont’d
Conceptual Model
Middle-Range Theory
Source: Adapted from Fawcett, J., (2009). Evaluating research for evidence-based nursing practice.
Philadelphia: F. A. Davis. Adapted from Fawcett, J., & Garity, J. (2009). Evaluating research for 
evidence-based nursing practice. Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Theory of Successful Aging
Theory of Urine Control
Theory of the Physiological Mode
Theory of Self-Concept Mode
Theory of Role Function Mode
Theory of Interdependence Mode
Nursing Model of Cognitive Processing
Theory of Facilitated Sensemaking
Transitions Theory has become more widely known
during the past few years (Meleis, 2010). This middle-range
theory focuses people’s experiences during developmental,
wellness-illness, situational, and organizations transitions. 
Situation-Specific Theories
Situation-specific theories are even more specific and 
concrete than middle-range theories. As Meleis (2012) ex-
plained, situation-specific theories “are closer [than con-
ceptual models, grand theories, and middle-range theories]
to the clinical realities of caring for patients, as well as re-
flective of variations in the contexts and situations of pop-
ulations” (p. 419). More specifically, situation-specific
theories focus on a particular population of people who
are experiencing a specific health condition. 
Situation-Specific Nursing Theories
Development of situation-specific nursing theories may
be guided by a conceptual model of nursing. For example,
the situation-specific theory of Men’s Healing from Child-
hood Maltreatment was constructed by viewing findings
of a study of men’s perceptions of their experiences of
abuse and neglect during childhood within the context 
of Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human Beings (Willis, 
DeSanto-Madeya, & Fawcett, 2015). 
Development of nursing situation-specific theories also
may be guided by a middle-range theory. For example, Im
(2014) used Transitions Theory (Meleis, 2010) to guide
development of her situation-specific theories of Cau-
casian Cancer Patients’ Pain Experience, Asian American
Cancer Patients’ Pain Experience, and Asian Immigrant
Women’s Menopausal Symptom Experience in the
United States. Hanna (2012) used Transitions Theory to
guide development of her situation-specific theory of
Emerging Adults’ Experience of Type 1 Diabetes.
ADVANTAGES OF USING
FORMAL NURSING
KNOWLEDGE
Recognition of nursing as a profession bestows a certain sta-
tus on nurses. The status conferred by being a member of a
profession, rather than having an occupation or a trade, car-
ries with it the responsibility to use formal nursing knowl-
edge. Anderson (1995) explained that, as members of a
profession, nurses “must ensure that we have a solid scholarly
and scientific foundation upon which to base our practice”
(p. 247). Conceptual models of nursing and nursing theories
are that foundation; they provide explicit frames of reference
for professional nursing practice by delineating the scope of
nursing practice. Furthermore, conceptual models of nursing
and nursing theories (1) specify innovative goals for nursing
practice, (2) introduce ideas that are designed to improve
practice (Lindsay, 1990), and (3) enhance the quality of peo-
ple’s lives by facilitating the identification of relevant infor-
mation, reducing the fragmentation of healthcare, and
improving the coordination of all aspects of healthcare
(Chalmers, as cited in Chalmers et al., 1990).
More specifically, the use of formal nursing knowledge
to guide nursing practice “represents nursing’s unique con-
tribution to the health-care system” (Parse, 1995, p. 128).
It is the hallmark of professional nursing practice. As
Chalmers pointed out, “Nursing models [and theories]
have provided what many would argue is a much needed
alternative knowledge base from which nurses can practice
in an informed way. An alternative, that is, to the medical
model which for so many years has dominated many as-
pects of health care” (Chalmers et al., 1990, p. 34).
Formal nursing knowledge also provides an alternative
to the institutional model of practice, in which “the most
salient values [are] efficiency, standardized care, rules, and
regulations” (Rogers, 1989, p. 113). The institutional model,
moreover, typically upholds, reinforces, and supports the

CHAPTER 3 Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing Knowledge     ●
53
medical model (Grossman & Hooton, 1993). Thus, the use
of conceptual models of nursing and nursing theories moves
the practice of nursing away from that driven by a medical
or institutional model and, therefore, fosters autonomy from
medicine and a coherent purpose of practice (Bélanger,
1991; Bridges, 1991; Ingram, 1991; Parse, 1995).
The major practical advantage of using a conceptual
model of nursing is the identification of a comprehensive
nursing process format or practice methodology that en-
compasses particular parameters for assessment, labels for
problems, a strategy for planning nursing interventions, 
a typology of nursing interventions, and criteria for eval-
uation of the outcomes of nursing practice. The major
practical advantage a nursing theory provides is greater
specificity in one or more phases of the nursing process.
Middle-range theories may be linked with conceptual
models or grand theories, with the proviso that logical con-
gruence is evident. For example, Orlando’s (1961) Theory
of the Deliberative Nursing Process tells the nurse exactly
how to identify the patient’s immediate need for help. 
Orlando’s theory can be used very effectively in combina-
tion with Roy’s (2009) Adaptation Model and other con-
ceptual models of nursing.
It should be obvious by now that formal nursing
knowledge identifies the distinctive nursing territory
within the vast arena of multidisciplinary healthcare (Feeg,
1989). In addition, the use of formal nursing knowledge
“help[s] nurses better communicate what they do” (Neff,
1991, p. 534) and why they do it. The importance of com-
municating what nursing is and what nurses do was un-
derscored by Feeg (1989), who identified three reasons for
implementing conceptual model-based or theory-based
nursing practice that are as relevant today as they were in
the 1980s. The three reasons are as follows:
1. In this time of information saturation and rapid change,
we know it is not valuable to focus on every detail and,
therefore, we need [conceptual models and theories] to
help guide our judgments in new situations.
2. In this time of technologic overdrive, we need a 
holistic orientation to remind us of our caring 
perspective.
3. In this time of professional territoriality, it has become
even more important to understand our identity in
nursing and operationalize our practice from a [formal
nursing] knowledge base. (p. 450)
The number of nurses throughout the world who recog-
nize the advantages of using formal nursing knowledge
is rapidly increasing, which is very important as the
healthcare reforms that are occurring in many countries
emphasize the expanded role of nursing in providing 
primary and specialized care. Use of formal nursing
knowledge enables nurses to engage in “thinking nurs-
ing” (Allison & Renpenning, 1999), rather than just
doing tasks and carrying out physicians’ orders (Le Storti
et al., 1999). Nurses are able to think nursing and talk
nursing because the conceptual models and theories that
constitute formal nursing knowledge provide a distinc-
tive nursing language. The lack of a nursing language in
the past—and in the present when conceptual models of
nursing and nursing theories are not used—“has been a
handicap in nurses’ communications about nursing to
the public as well as to persons with whom they work in
the health field” (Orem, 1997, p. 29). Thus, the content
of each conceptual model of nursing and nursing theory,
which is stated in a distinctive vocabulary, should not be
considered jargon. Rather, the terminology used by the
author of each conceptual model or theory should be rec-
ognized as the result of considerable thought about how
to convey the meaning of that particular perspective to
others (Biley, 1990). “The attention to language,” Watson
(1997) maintained, “is especially critical to an evolving
[profession], in that during this postmodern era, one’s
survival depends on having language; writers in this area
remind us ’if you do not have your own language you
don’t exist’” (p. 50). Elaborating, Akinsanya (1989) 
explained, “Every science has its own peculiar terms, con-
cepts, and principles which are essential for the develop-
ment of its knowledge base. In nursing, as in other
sciences, an understanding of these is a prerequisite to a
critical examination of their contribution to the develop-
ment of knowledge and its application to practice” (p. ii).
Indeed, the differences in the vocabularies of the various
conceptual models and theories are the same as the dif-
ferences in the vocabularies of diverse medical specialties,
such as obstetrics, gynecology, cardiology, neurology,
psychiatry, and geriatrics.
Thinking nursing within the context of formal nurs-
ing knowledge helps nurses to “clarify their thinking on
their role, especially at a time when the roles of many
health professionals are becoming blurred” (Nightingale,
1993, p. 2). 
Risks and Rewards of Using Formal 
Nursing Knowledge
Johnson (1990) noted that although individual nurses and
nursing departments take risks when the decision is made
to implement conceptual model- or theory-based nursing
practice, the rewards far outweigh the risks. She stated:
To openly use a nursing model [or theory] is risk-
taking behavior for the individual nurse. For a nurs-
ing department to adopt one of these models [or theo-
ries] for unit or institution use is risk-taking behavior
of an even higher order. The reward for such risk-
taking for the individual practitioner lies in the great
satisfaction gained from being able to specify explicit
concrete nursing goals in the care of patients and from
documenting the actual achievement of the desired
outcomes. The reward for the nursing department is
having a rational, cohesive, and comprehensive basis
for the development of standards of nursing practice,
for the evaluation of practitioners, and for the docu-
mentation of the contribution of nursing to patient
welfare. (Johnson, 1990, p. 32)
Accumulating anecdotal and empirical evidence indi-
cates that additional rewards of using formal nursing
knowledge to guide nursing practice include reduced staff
nurse turnover, more rapid movement from novice to ex-
pert nurse, greater patient and family satisfaction with
nursing, increased nurse job satisfaction, and considerable
cost savings (Fawcett & DeSanto-Madeya, 2013). Fur-
thermore, as the use of formal nursing knowledge grows,
both nurses and participants in nursing are empowered. 

SELECTING A CONCEPTUAL
MODEL OR NURSING GRAND
THEORY FOR PROFESSIONAL
NURSING PRACTICE
Although formal nursing knowledge is made up of many
conceptual models and theories, using more than one con-
ceptual model or grand theory at the same time will create
much confusion. Therefore, each nurse should select just
one as a guide for professional practice. The following six
steps can help you select an appropriate conceptual model
of nursing or nursing grand theory:
1. Identify your own beliefs and values related to the
phenomena of interest to all nurses. State your beliefs
about the participants in nursing, the relevant envi-
ronment, health, and the goals of professional nursing
practice.
2. Identify the patient population with which you would
like to work. The population may be based on a spe-
ciﬁc medical diagnosis, such as cancer or renal failure;
an age group, such as children or the older adults; a
type of illness, such as an acute crisis or chronic ill-
ness; or a particular symptom, such as chest pain or an
elevated temperature.
3. Systematically analyze and evaluate the content of sev-
eral conceptual models of nursing and nursing grand
theories. Review the summaries of the conceptual
models and grand theories presented in the chapter as
well as the primary-source material for each concep-
tual model and grand theory. This review will provide
a ﬁrm foundation for your selection of the conceptual
model or grand theory.
4. Compare your own beliefs and values with the philo-
sophical claims undergirding the selected conceptual
model or grand theory.
5. Identify the conceptual models and nursing grand
theories that are appropriate guides for nursing 
with the patient population in which you are 
interested.
6. Choose the conceptual model or grand theory that
most closely matches your beliefs and values and 
the patient population with which you want to
work. Then use the model or theory to guide your
practice with several nursing participants so that 
you can determine its utility. If you find that the
conceptual model or grand theory you have chosen
is not useful, select another model or theory and test
its utility.
USING CONCEPTUAL MODELS
OR GRAND THEORIES TO
GUIDE PROFESSIONAL
NURSING PRACTICE
Research findings indicate that nurses feel vulnerable and 
experience a great deal of stress when they attempt to
achieve professional aspirations within a rapidly changing,
medically dominated, bureaucratic healthcare delivery sys-
tem (Graham, 1994). As a structure for critical thinking
within a distinctively nursing context, formal nursing knowl-
edge provides the intellectual skills and points to the practical
skills that nurses need to survive at a time when cost con-
tainment through reduction of professional nursing staff is
the modus operandi of managed care and the administrators
of healthcare delivery systems, including hospitals, home
healthcare agencies, and health maintenance organizations.
As a novice user of a conceptual model of nursing or
nursing grand theory, you should not become discouraged
if your initial experiences with the model or theory seem
forced or awkward. Adopting an explicit nursing model
or theory does require using a new vocabulary and a new
way of thinking about nursing situations. Repeatedly using
the conceptual model or grand theory should, however,
lead to more systematic and organized applications. Bron-
catello’s (1980) words, written more than 30 years ago,
continue to provide the encouragement needed to start
using a conceptual model of nursing or nursing theory to
guide professional nursing practice:
The nurse’s consistent use of any model [or theory] for the
interpretation of observable [patient] data is most defi-
nitely not an easy task. Much like the development of
any habitual behavior, it initially requires thought, dis-
cipline, and the gradual evolvement of a mind-set of
what is important to observe within the guidelines of the
model [or theory]. As is true of most habits, however, it
makes decision making less complicated. (p. 23)
Using formal nursing knowledge allows the nursing pro-
fession to be clear about its mission in the constantly chang-
ing healthcare arena. Now, perhaps more than ever before,
it is crucial that nurses explicate what they know and why
they do what they do. In other words, it is crucial that all
nurses communicate distinctive nursing knowledge and ex-
plain how that knowledge governs the actions performed
on behalf of or in conjunction with people who require
nursing. Thus, it is incumbent on all nurses to use formal
nursing knowledge. Only if they do so can nurses continue
to claim a place on the multidisciplinary healthcare team.
54
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
K E Y  P O I N T S
●Conceptual models of nursing present diverse perspectives of the participant in nursing, who can be an
individual, a family, or a community; the environment of the nursing participant and the environment in
which professional nursing practice occurs; the participant’s health state; and the definition and goals of
nursing as well as nursing actions or interventions.

CHAPTER 3 Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing Knowledge     ●
55
K E Y  P O I N T S — cont’d
●The most practical function of a conceptual model is its delineation of goals for nursing practice and a
practice methodology (that is, a nursing process) that encompasses parameters for assessment, labels for
problems, a strategy for planning nursing interventions, a typology of nursing interventions, and criteria for
evaluation of the outcomes of nursing practice. A conceptual model of nursing provides a structure for
documentation of all aspects of the nursing process, from patient assessment to evaluation of outcomes. A
conceptual model also helps identify standards of nursing practice and criteria for quality assurance reviews.
Nursing grand theories can be used in place of conceptual models and, therefore, have the same functions.
●The function of nursing middle-range theories and situation-specific theories is to provide considerable
specificity in the description, explanation, or prediction of some phenomenon. Theories are more con-
crete and specific than conceptual models. A conceptual model is an abstract and general system of con-
cepts and statements, whereas a theory deals with one or more relatively concrete and specific concepts
and statements. In addition, conceptual models are general guides that must be specified further by 
relevant and logically congruent theories before action can occur.
●Conceptual models of nursing and nursing grand theories, middle-range theories, and situation-specific
theories move the professional practice of nursing away from that driven by a medical or institutional
model and, therefore, foster autonomy from medicine and a coherent purpose for professional nursing
practice.
●Six steps are used to select a conceptual model or nursing grand theory to guide professional nursing
practice: (1) state your philosophy of nursing, in the form of beliefs and values about human beings who
are nursing participants, the environment, health (including wellness and illness), and nursing goals; 
(2) identify the particular patient population with which you wish to practice; (3) thoroughly analyze and
evaluate several conceptual models of nursing and nursing grand theories; (4) compare the philosophical
claims on which each conceptual model and nursing grand theory is based with your own philosophy of
nursing; (5) determine which conceptual models or nursing grand theories are appropriate for use with
the patient population you are interested in; and (6) select the one conceptual model or nursing grand
theory that most closely matches your philosophy of nursing and the patient population of interest.
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. List two ways in which a conceptual model differs from a grand theory, a middle-range theory, and a situation-
specific theory.
2. Many people select nursing as a career because they enjoy “taking care of” other people. Orem’s conceptual
model of nursing focuses on individuals with limited abilities to provide continuing self-care or care of dependent
others. Describe the difference between “taking care of people” as a general term and professional nursing prac-
tice directed toward helping people meet their own and their dependent others’ therapeutic self-care demands.
3. Describe the focus of Neuman’s systems model in relation to chronically ill patients and their families as they 
struggle to respond to stressors associated with periodic changes in the patients’ health status. For example, what
level(s) of prevention interventions are needed as chronically ill patients’ health status changes?
4. Some nurses at a nursing home describe a particular resident as a “difficult patient.” How does use of Orlando’s
theory of the deliberative nursing practice influence the way you think about and interact with patients who are
regarded as “difficult”? 
5. Explain how Roy’s adaptation model provides guidelines for patient-centered and family-centered nursing care.
6. Patient-centered care requires that nurses understand and acknowledge culturally diverse patients’ health-related
beliefs, values, and lifeways. What types of health-related beliefs, values, and lifeways can be identified by applying
the practice methodology of Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and Universality?
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.

REFERENCES
Portions of this chapter were adapted from Fawcett, J., &
DeSanto-Madeya, S. (2013). Contemporary nursing
knowledge: Analysis and evaluation of nursing models and
theories (3rd ed.). Philadelphia: F. A. Davis; and Fawcett, J.
(2013). Appendix N-1: Conceptual models and theories 
of nursing. In D. Venes (Ed.), Taber’s cyclopedic medical
dictionary (22nd ed., pp. 2629–2660). Philadelphia: 
F. A. Davis, with permission.
Akinsanya, J. A. (1989). Introduction. Recent Advances in Nursing,
24, i–ii.
Alligood, M. R., & Tomey, A. M. (2010). Nursing theorists and
their work (7th ed.). St. Louis, MO: Mosby Elsevier.
Allison, S. E., & Renpenning, K. (1999). Nursing administration
in the 21st century. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Anderson, C. A. (1995). Scholarship: How important is it?
Nursing Outlook, 43, 247–248.
Bélanger, P. (1991). Nursing models: A major step towards
professional autonomy. AARN Newsletter, 48(8), 13.
Biley, F. (1990). Wordly wise. Nursing (London), 4(24), 37.
Bridges, J. (1991). Working with doctors: Distinct from medicine.
Nursing Times, 87(27), 42–43.
Broncatello, K. F. (1980). Auger in action: Application of the
model. Advances in Nursing Science, 2(2), 13–23.
Chalmers, H., Kershaw, B., Melia, K., & Kendrich, M. (1990).
Nursing models: Enhancing or inhibiting practice? Nursing
Standard, 5(11), 34–40.
Fawcett, J., & DeSanto-Madeya, S. (2013). Contemporary nurs-
ing knowledge: Analysis and evaluation of nursing models and
theories (3rd ed.). Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Fawcett, J., & Garity, J. (2009). Evaluating research for evidence-
based nursing practice. Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis. 
Feeg, V. (1989). From the editor: Is theory application merely
an intellectual exercise? Pediatric Nursing, 15, 450.
Graham, I. (1994). How do registered nurses think and experi-
ence nursing? A phenomenological investigation. Journal of
Clinical Nursing, 3, 235–242.
Grossman, M., & Hooton, M. (1993). The significance of the
relationship between a discipline and its practice. Journal of
Advanced Nursing, 18, 866–872.
Hanna, K. M. (2012). A framework for the youth with type 1
diabetes during the emerging adulthood transition. Nursing
Outlook, 60, 401–410.
Hardin, S. R., & Kaplow, R. (2005). Synergy for clinical excel-
lence: The AACN synergy model for patient care. Boston, MA:
Jones and Bartlett.
Henderson, V. (1966). The nature of nursing. A definition and its
implications for practice, research, and education. New York,
NY: Macmillan.
Im, E.-O. (2014). Theory of transitions. In M. J. Smith & 
P. R. Liehr (Eds.), Middle-range theory for nursing (3rd ed.,
pp. 253–276. New York, NY: Springer.
Ingram, R. (1991). Why does nursing need theory? Journal of
Advanced Nursing, 16, 350–353.
Johnson, D. E. (1987). Evaluating conceptual models for use in
critical care nursing practice [Guest editorial]. Dimensions of
Critical Care Nursing, 6, 195–197.
Johnson, D. E. (1990). The behavioral system model for nurs-
ing. In M. E. Parker (Ed.), Nursing theories in practice (pp.
23–32). New York, NY: National League for Nursing.
King, I. M. (2006). Part One: Imogene M. King’s theory of goal
attainment. In M. E. Parker, Nursing theories and nursing 
practice (2nd ed., pp. 235–243). Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Leininger, M. M., & McFarland, M. R. (2006). Culture care 
diversity and universality: A worldwide nursing theory
(2nd ed.). Boston, MA: Jones and Bartlett.
Le Storti, L. J., Cullen, P. A., Hanzlik, E. M., Michiels, J. M., Piano,
L. A., Ryan, P. L., & Johnson, W. (1999). Creative 
thinking in nursing education: Preparing for tomorrow’s
challenges. Nursing Outlook, 47, 62–66.
Levine, M. E. (1991). The conservation principles: A model for
health. In K. M. Schaefer & J. B. Pond (Eds.), Levine’s con-
servation model: A framework for nursing practice (pp. 1–11).
Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Lindsay, B. (1990). The gap between theory and practice. 
Nursing Standard, 5(4), 34–35.
Meleis, A. I. (2010). Transitions theory: Middle-range and 
situation-specific theories in nursing research and practice.
New York, NY: Springer.
Meleis, A. I. (2012). Theoretical nursing: Development and
progress (5th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer
Health/Lippincott Williams and Wilkins.
Neff, M. (1991). President’s message: The future of our profes-
sion from the eyes of today. American Nephrology Nurses 
Association Journal, 18, 534.
Neuman, B., & Fawcett, J. (2011). The Neuman systems model
(5th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Newman, M. A. (1994). Health as expanding consciousness
(2nd ed.). New York, NY: National League for Nursing Press.
Nightingale, F. (1859). Notes on nursing: What it is, and what it
is not. London: Harrison and Sons. [Commemorative 
edition printed 1992, Philadelphia, PA: J. B. Lippincott]
Nightingale, K. (1993). Editorial. British Journal of Theatre
Nursing, 3(5), 2.
Orem, D. E. (1997). Views of human beings specific to 
nursing. Nursing Science Quarterly, 10, 26–31.
Orem, D. E. (2001). Nursing: Concepts of practice (6th ed.). 
St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
Orlando, I. J. (1961). The dynamic nurse-patient relationship:
Function, process and principles. New York: G. P. Putnam’s
Sons. [Reprinted 1990, New York: National League for
Nursing]
Parse, R. R. (1995). Commentary. Parse’s theory of humanbe-
coming: An alternative guide to nursing practice for pedi-
atric oncology nurses. Journal of Pediatric Oncology Nursing,
12, 128.
Parse, R. R. (1998). The humanbecoming school of thought: A
perspective for nurses and other health professionals. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Peplau, H. E. (1952). Interpersonal relations in nursing. 
New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons. [Reprinted 1991, 
New York, NY: Springer]
Peplau, H. E. (1992). Interpersonal relations: A theoretical
framework for application in nursing practice. Nursing 
Science Quarterly, 5, 13–18.
Peterson, S. J., & Bredow, T. S. (2004). Middle-range theories:
Application to nursing research. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.
Popper, K. R. (1965). Conjectures and refutations: The growth of
scientific knowledge. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Rogers, M. E. (1970). An introduction to the theoretical basis of
nursing. Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Rogers, M. E. (1989). Creating a climate for the implementa-
tion of a nursing conceptual framework. Journal of 
Continuing Education in Nursing, 20, 112–116.
Rogers, M. E. (1990). Nursing: Science of unitary, irreducible,
human beings: Update 1990. In E. A. M. Barrett (Ed.), 
56
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

CHAPTER 3 Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing Knowledge     ●
57
Visions of Rogers’ science-based nursing (pp. 5–11). 
New York, NY: National League for Nursing.
Roy, C. (2009). The Roy adaptation model (3rd ed.). Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
Smith, M. J., & Liehr, P. R. (Eds.). (2014). Middle range theory
for nursing (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Springer.
Watson, J. (1997). The theory of human caring: Retrospective
and prospective. Nursing Science Quarterly, 10, 49–52.
Watson, J. (2006). Part One: Jean Watson’s theory of human
caring. In M. E. Parker, Nursing theories and nursing practice
(2nd ed., pp. 295–302). Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Willis, D. G., DeSanto-Madeya, S., & Fawcett, J. (2015).
Moving beyond dwelling in suffering: A situation-specific
theory of men’s healing from childhood maltreatment.
Nursing Science Quarterly, 28, 57–63. 
Ziegler, S. M. (Ed.). (2005). Theory-directed nursing practice
(2nd ed.). New York, NY: Springer.

Health, Illness, 
and Holism
58
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Differentiate among the various health and illness models for applicability to professional nursing
practice.
2. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the various models.
3. Apply a health belief or health promotion model to a given nursing care situation.
4. Examine the application of holism in professional practice.
5. Select a model for cultural competence and apply it to a patient population from a culture other 
than yours.
Health
Health Promotion
Health Protection
Preventive Services
Primary Prevention
Secondary Prevention
Tertiary Prevention
High-level Wellness
Health Belief Model
Health Promotion Model
Chronic Illness Trajectory
Framework
Functional Health Patterns
Holistic Nursing
Cultural Competence
4
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
“I can enter your world, as one who invites 
your growth or as a strangler of your 
possibilities, a prophet of stasis.”
Sidney M. Jourard (1971)
Key Terms

Health is a condition we seek, promote, and hope to
maintain. Health is more than the absence of illness or 
infirmity. A multidimensional construct of health is de-
termined by the individual’s worldview and philosophical
assumptions. Consider the four metaparadigm concepts
of nursing and the fact that health is specified in the 
nursing theory that guides our practice. Health as a part
of the metaparadigm is interrelated with the concepts of
human beings, environment, and nursing. Considering
your particular view of the world and your concept of
health, we can now approach ways of promoting health
using a sample of different models. However, consider that
your patient population may have a different worldview.
The selection of model is, again, determined by one’s
worldview and theoretical guide.
In Chapter 3, health is illustrated within individual
theoretical structures. For example, compare the defini-
tions of health provided by King, Roy, and Leininger.
King (1981) defines health as “dynamic life experiences
of a human being, which implies continuous adjustment
to stressors in the internal and external environment
through optimum use of one’s resources to achieve max-
imum potential for daily living” (p. 5). Here we have the
focus on human beings. Roy defines health as a state and
process of being and becoming integrated and whole
with a focus on the mutuality between human beings and
the environmental (Andrews & Roy, 1991, p. 21).
Leininger (2002b) defines health as “a state of well-being
or restorative state that is culturally constituted, defined,
valued, and practiced by individuals or groups that 
enables them to function in their daily lives” (p. 84).
Care, rather than health, is considered the central con-
cept. It refers to the secondary concepts of nursing—
health, curing, and well-being, and especially culture care
(Leininger & McFarland, 2006, p. 3).
In other nursing theories and models, the concept of
health may not be well defined but is interpreted, as in
Rogers’s theory, as a “value term defined by the culture
or individual” (Gunther, 2010, p. 246). Or, in Parse’s
(1981) theory, health is a process of becoming (p. 159).
Still, health or well-being is represented in each frame-
work on which practice is based. Before delving into the
theories of health and illness—in the context of health
promotion and illness prevention—and cultural percep-
tions of health, it is first important to understand the dif-
ferent levels and types of health promotion and illness
prevention activities.
LEVELS OF PREVENTION
When considering health promotion activities, we fre-
quently refer to illness and disability prevention. Over
twenty years ago, national health promotion and disease
prevention activities were developed under the auspices
of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
(USDHHS) and published as Healthy People 2000. 
Interestingly, the publication distinguished between
health promotion and health protection strategies, with
an individual versus a community focus:
Health promotion strategies are those related to individ-
ual lifestyle—personal choices made in a social context—
that can have a powerful influence over one’s health
prospects. These include physical activity and fitness, 
nutrition, tobacco, alcohol and other drugs, family plan-
ning, mental health and mental disorders and violent
and abusive behavior. . . . Health protection strategies
are those related to environmental or regulatory measures
that confer protection on large population groups. These
strategies address issues such as unintentional injuries, 
occupational safety and health, environmental health,
food and drug safety, and oral health. Preventive 
services include counseling, screening, immunization, 
or chemoprophylactic interventions for individuals in
clinical settings. (USDHHS, PHS, 1992, pp. 6–7)
These preventive activities and services address the
three levels of prevention: primary, secondary, and terti-
ary. Health promotion activities are both protective and
preventive, but they require consumers actively involved
in all levels of prevention. And this focus on health pro-
motion and health protection strategies became an im-
portant component of Healthy People 2020 (USDHHS,
2010) with the national goals for high quality and years
of healthy life, health equity, healthy environments, and
healthy development and behaviors across the lifespan.
See Chapter 14 for more on population health.
Primary Prevention
Primary prevention refers to healthy actions taken to
avoid illness or disease. Examples are healthy nutrition,
smoking cessation, exercise programs, parenting classes,
community awareness programs, and mental health 
programs and activities. The individual lifestyle health
promotion strategies recommended in Healthy People are
becoming more popular and prevalent as people take 
responsibility for their own health. Health columns appear
frequently in publications. We have also seen a growing
number of health food and holistic health stores, “healthy”
fast food options, Web sites, and educational programs for
the general public. But consumers can still have difficulty
acquiring sufficient information on a selected topic before
they become frustrated.
Secondary Prevention
Secondary prevention involves screening for early detec-
tion and treatment of health problems. With secondary
prevention, the individual is seeking healthcare not for a
specific problem but, rather, for early detection of a po-
tential problem to mobilize resources and reduce its inten-
sity or severity if the problem is identified. Secondary
prevention usually involves use of some procedure or
measurement tool in addition to the health history and
physical assessment. Examples of secondary prevention are
screening procedures used by healthcare consumers or
healthcare professionals for physiological, developmental,
CHAPTER 4 Health, Illness, and Holism     ●
59
ONLINE CONSULT 
Nursing Theories at 
http://www.nurses.info/nursing_theory.htm

or environmental problems. Physiological procedures 
include screening for hypertension or specific forms of
cancer. Mental health screening procedures range from
simple tests for orientation to more elaborate instruments
such as mental status questionnaires for aging patients.
In young children, examples of secondary prevention 
activities are use of growth charts to assess growth along
established percentiles and developmental screening 
tests to detect problems in the areas of personal-social
skills, motor activities, and language. Note the difference 
between using parenting classes as primary prevention
for developmental stimulation and screening for devel-
opmental problems as secondary prevention. Environ-
mental screening procedures include testing air and water
quality and home safety assessments. If a problem is de-
tected, a referral is made for a differential diagnosis and
institution of early treatment.
Tertiary Prevention
Tertiary prevention occurs during the rehabilitative
phase of an illness to prevent complications or further
disability. The individual has already entered the health-
care system and is recovering from or learning to cope
with a health deficit. Tertiary prevention builds on this
care to prevent further deficits. Examples of tertiary pre-
vention are counseling and teaching after recovery from
a cardiovascular event, an accident or injury, an abusive
situation, or any other physical, psychosocial, mental, or
environmental disruption from usual health and func-
tioning. Support from self-help groups is a large compo-
nent of tertiary prevention. An example of tertiary
prevention is family counseling after identification of a
child in an abusive situation.
Professional nursing practice involves not only health
promotion but also all three levels of preventive activities.
Because the health of individuals, families, communities,
and groups is a major concern in nursing, professional skill
and expertise in the area of prevention activities are pre-
sumed in practice, education, research, and administrative
functions.
THEORIES OF HEALTH 
AND ILLNESS
Aside from the conceptual or theoretical frameworks, dif-
ferent nursing models are available to guide assessment of
health factors and promote and preserve health. Interest-
ingly, Benner and Wrubel (1989) described five theories
of health as (1) an ideal, (2) the ability to fulfill social
roles, (3) a commodity, (4) a human potential, and (5) a
sense of coherence. Health is more than an ideal. We
strive for the person, family, community, or group to
reach a positive state of well-being. Defining health as the
ability to perform one’s role is limiting and fails to meet
our holistic concern for human beings. As Benner and
Wrubel (1989) observe, “this view focuses on doing
rather than being and ignores the person’s sense of fulfill-
ment and well-being” (p. 151). Health as a commodity
implies that it can be bought, sold, traded, and withheld.
This view fails to meet the intent of a caring professional
practice discipline. Health as a commodity is described as
a “medicalized view,” promising instant cures without per-
sonal involvement (Benner & Wrubel, 1989, pp. 151–153).
Health defined as a human potential is consistent with
the beliefs of nursing and many other healthcare disci-
plines and is the basis of the first three health models pre-
sented here. Health as a human potential includes
physical, mental, and spiritual health. Benner and Wrubel
(1989) describe the limitation of this model in health pro-
motion activities in that, although all people have the po-
tential for health, they are continually pursuing increasing
levels of health but not attaining health as a state or con-
dition (pp. 156–157). This definition depends on whether
health is viewed as a defined goal or a dynamic state that
we continue to strive toward. Dunn’s (1973) high-level
wellness model, the health belief model, and Pender’s
(1996) health promotion model are consistent with health
viewed as human potential.
The fifth view of health takes a phenomenological 
approach. Phenomenology is the lived experience of the
individual, from his or her unique perspective. This view
focuses on one’s lived experience rather than on an opin-
ion derived from another person’s observations of the 
experience. Benner and Wrubel’s (1989) approach to
health as a mind-body-spirit integration in a state of 
becoming is an example of health as a sense of coherence.
A focus on the person’s belonging to a sociocultural
group makes this integration unique. Benner and Wrubel
define the term well-being as a better indication of health
with challenges and involvement in the following defi-
nition: “Well-being is defined as congruence between
one’s possibilities and one’s actual practices and lived
meanings and is based on caring and feeling cared for”
(Benner & Wrubel, 1989, p. 160).
In this view, a model must be based on a qualitative
approach to address individuals’ well-being, because it 
depends on the lived experience of those persons in their
context. As Benner and Wrubel (1989) state, “health as
well-being comes when one engages in sound self-care,
cares, and feels cared for—when one trusts the self, the
body, and others. Breakdown occurs when that trust is
broken. Well-being can be restored” (p. 165). Newman’s
(2008) theory of health as the expansion of consciousness
(p. 5) is applicable to this view. The chronic illness trajec-
tory framework is also consistent with the view of health
as coherence, as are holistic health practices focused on the
interrelatedness of mind, body, and spirit.
Model of High-Level Wellness
Dunn developed his model of high-level wellness starting
with the 1947 definition of health from the World Health
Organization that emphasized physical, mental, and social
well-being. He stressed that well-being includes the posi-
tive, dynamic, and unique integration of mind, body, and
spirit of the individual within his or her environment, in-
cluding work, family, community, and society. Dunn
(1973) defined high-level wellness for an individual as “an
integrated method of functioning which is oriented to-
ward maximizing the potential of which the individual is
capable [and] requires that the individual maintain a con-
tinuum of balance and purposeful direction within the 
environment where he is functioning” (pp. 4–5).
60
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

Dunn regarded high-level wellness as an ongoing chal-
lenge to the highest level possible—the individual’s max-
imum potential. Meeting basic needs and striving for
higher needs were components of his view of individual
health and well-being. Dunn (1973) viewed high-level
wellness as “an open-ended and ever-expanding tomorrow
with its challenge to live at full potential” (p. 223). He also
considered high-level wellness, with similar components,
for the family, community, environment, and society.
Dunn’s beliefs about high-level wellness evolved into a
health grid (Fig. 4.1) that demonstrates a person or group
at some point along a health continuum or horizontal axis,
from death at the left side to peak wellness at the right. The
person or group was further influenced by the environment
(the vertical axis), from a very favorable environment at the
top to a very unfavorable environment at the bottom. This
grid illustrates the person or group in context, within one
of the four quadrants ranging from poor health to pro-
tected poor health, high-level wellness, and emergent 
high-level wellness. The high-level wellness model provides
an explanation of the person-environment relationship in
health but gives no direction as to movement among quad-
rants, and it also compartmentalizes wellness.
The model could be used effectively to address health
equity for the patient who is currently in an unfavorable
environment (poorly accepted health services related to a
language barrier) to a favorable envi ronment where we
strive to promote more culturally relevant, understandable,
and acceptable services and healthcare.
Health Belief Model
The health belief model is a tool for looking at both health
promotion and actions directed at maintaining or restor-
ing health. Originally, the model was based on the follow-
ing hypothesis:
Persons will not seek preventative care or health screen-
ing unless they possess minimal levels of relevant health
motivation and knowledge, view themselves as poten-
tially vulnerable and the condition as threatening, are
convinced of the efficacy of intervention, and see few dif-
ficulties in undertaking the recommended action (Becker 
et al., 1977, p. 29).
The health belief model was designed as an organiz-
ing framework to advance health promotion activities
CHAPTER 4 Health, Illness, and Holism     ●
61
VERY FAVORABLE ENVIRONMENT
ENVIRONMENTAL
VERY UNFAVORABLE ENVIRONMENT
PROTECTED POOR HEALTH
(in favorable environment,
i.e., through social and
cultural institutions)
POOR HEALTH
(in unfavorable
environment)
HIGH-LEVEL WELLNESS
(in favorable environment)
EMERGENT
HIGH-LEVEL WELLNESS
(in favorable environment)
PEAK
WELLNESS
DEATH
AXIS
HEALTH
AXIS
Figure 4.1 Dunn’s high-level wellness.  (From U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Public
Health Service, National Office of Vital Statistics.)

by targeting interventions on certain individual vari-
ables. The three major concepts in the model were in-
dividual perceptions, modifying factors, and likelihood
of action. Individual perceptions involve how the person
considers the risk of susceptibility or the severity of the
illness—in other words, how likely he or she believes it
is that the disease or condition could happen to him or
her. Modifying factors are a set of demographic, so-
ciopsychological cues to action from family, friends,
professionals, or the media relative to the perceived
threat of the disease. Sociopsychological variables in-
clude personality, interpersonal influences, and socio -
economic status. The modifying factors, along with
individual perceptions, lead to the likelihood of action
in the direction of health. The concept of motivation is
central to this model (Becker et al., 1977, p. 31).
An extensive review of research on variables in the
health belief model led to a subsequent revision. The
model was expanded from a diagram of health belief con-
cepts and their interrelationships to a full explanation of
and prediction about health-related behaviors. The three
major concepts were (1) readiness to undertake recom-
mended compliance behavior, (2) modifying and en-
abling factors, and (3) compliant behaviors. On the basis
of research, readiness to undertake recommended com-
pliance behavior broadened individual perceptions from
perception of susceptibility and severity to perceptions
of motivations, values for threat reduction, and subjec-
tive risk/benefit considerations that the compliant behav-
iors would be safe and effective. Modifying factors were
expanded to more inclusive modifying and enabling fac-
tors on the basis of research findings. A reciprocal rela-
tionship between readiness and modifying/enabling
factors also became more apparent in the revised model.
The outcome in the revised model was the likelihood of
compliant behaviors with preventive recommendations
or prescribed regimens.
The original version of the health belief model focused
on health promotion or preventive behaviors. Since its in-
ception, the model has been widely used in research and
practice. In addition to use in understanding utilization
of healthcare services and health promotion behaviors, the
model has guided research in patient compliance to
healthcare. An extensive body of research on patient com-
pliance for the revised model demonstrated applicability
in a wide range of healthcare situations. Insights for use
of the model in practice and education were offered. Con-
cerning patient education, Becker and associates (1977)
recommended that healthcare providers understand the
following principles:
1. Behavior is motivated.
2. Certain beliefs seem central to a person’s decision to act.
3. Not all persons possess these beliefs and motives to
equal degrees.
4. Intellectual information, although necessary, is often
not suﬃcient to stimulate needed beliefs.
5. Health providers need to view the importance of 
patient education and accept substantial responsibility
in this activity. (p. 42)
These principles are consistent with the discipline of
professional nursing practice and are routinely incorporated
into plans for care and health teaching. Consideration of
the belief systems of the individual, family, or group is 
essential in assessing a patient and choosing interventions.
The extent of detail and inclusion of this information is 
the challenge to the nurse, whose health-teaching role is an
integral component of professional practice.
As a part of the health history, readiness, as a motiva-
tion in health behaviors, is easily included in the inter-
view. The patient’s “subjective estimates” of the potential
to reduce the threat and care options are less commonly
included in the assessment, depending on the profes-
sional’s impressions of time restraints and knowledge of
the patient or even on cultural or interpersonal differences
between the professional and the patient. In a nursing
health assessment, we frequently acquire demographic 
information and some structural information that pro-
vides insight into modifying and enabling factors. The
challenge is to acquire the additional structural informa-
tion, such as cost and accessibility, and to seek informa-
tion from the patient about quality, satisfaction, and
social pressures for additional knowledge of attitudinal,
interaction, and enabling factors. This information can
be used to increase compliant behaviors.
Nevertheless, the model has limitations. First, the lan-
guage is directed to physician-patient relationships, quite
possibly a product of the roles and functions of other
healthcare providers in 1977. More recently, the health
belief model has been used in further research consistent
with views of nursing. Ongoing research and applications
of health behavior have been demonstrated at the level
of the individual, dyad, group, organization, and com-
munity (Glanz, Rimer, & Lewis, 2002). Second, as 
Pender (1987, 1996; Pender, Murdaugh, & Parsons,
2002, 2011) indicates, the health belief model is directed
at preventive services or health protection behaviors in
the context of a provider-consumer relationship rather
than individual health promotion behaviors. To be em-
powered consumers in today’s healthcare system, indi-
viduals must take personal responsibility for their own
health long before they seek care from a health profes-
sional. This concept is now beginning to be addressed in
the health belief model, especially in applications related
to health education.
Health Promotion Model
Pender’s health promotion model, an outgrowth of the
health belief model, is based on research and  information
on health and health-protecting behaviors. It is primarily
a nursing model and has been revised with evolving
knowledge. In the health promotion model, health pro-
motion is motivated by the desire to increase the level of
wellness and actualization of an individual or an aggregate
group (Pender, 1996, p. 7). Pender describes the health
promotion model as a “competence- or approach-oriented
model with applicability across the life span for motivating
overall healthy lifestyles” (Pender et al., 2006, p. 48). A
further holistic focus is apparent in the revisions of the
health promotion model; to include considerations of the
family, the community, the nation, and the world (Pender
et al., 2011, p. 31). Health is defined as “the realization
of human potential through goal-directed behavior, 
62
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

competent self-care, and satisfying relationships with 
others, while adapting to maintain structural integrity 
and harmony with the social and physical environments”
(Pender et al., 2011, p. 22). She points out that unlike the
health belief model “the health promotion model does not
include ‚’fear’ or ’threat’ as a source of motivation for the
health behavior” (Pender et al., 2011, p. 44).
Structurally, the model had been designed as a
schematic representation similar to the original health be-
lief model. After extensive research, however, the model
was revised, and significant variables were reorganized
(Fig. 4.2). The knowledge obtained through research led
to the later addition of three new variables in the health
promotion model: activity-related affect, commitment to
a plan of action, and immediate competing demands and
preferences.
The revised health promotion model contains two prin-
cipal components that interact for participation in health-
promoting behaviors: (1) individual char acteristics and
experiences and (2) behavior-specific cognitions and affect.
Individual characteristics and experiences are similar to the
individual perceptions in the health belief model, in that
they involve looking at health through past experiences
(prior related behavior) and personal factors. Pender points
out that “research indicates that often the best predictor of
behavior is the frequency of the same or a similar behavior
in the past” (Pender et al., 2011, p. 45). Personal factors
include biologic variables (age, gender, body mass, etc.),
psychological variables (such as self-esteem, self-motivation,
perceived health status), and sociocultural variables (race,
ethnicity, acculturation, education, socioeconomic  status)
(Pender et al., 2011, p. 46).
CHAPTER 4 Health, Illness, and Holism     ●
63
INDIVIDUAL
CHARACTERISTICS
AND EXPERIENCES
Prior
related
behavior
Perceived
benefits
of action
Immediate competing
demands
(low control)
and preferences
(high control)
Health-
promoting
behavior
Commitment
to a
plan of action
Perceived
barriers
to action
Perceived
self-efficacy
Activity-related
affect
Interpersonal
influences
(family, peers,
providers); norms,
support, models
Situational
influences:
Options
Demand characteristics
Aesthetics
Personal
factors:
Biological
Psychological
Sociocultural
BEHAVIOR-SPECIFIC
COGNITIONS
AND AFFECT
BEHAVIORAL
OUTCOME
Figure 4.2 Pender’s health belief model.  (Pender, N. J., Murdaugh, C. L., and Parsons, M. A. [2011]. Health
promotion in nursing practice [6th ed.]. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education, Inc., p. 45. Reprinted by 
permission of Pearson Education, Inc.)

On the basis of research evidence, these biological, psy-
chological, and sociocultural personal factors were in-
cluded in the model as further predictors of individual
health perceptions and behaviors. For example, consider
the health-seeking behaviors demonstrated by patients of
different socioeconomic groups, family backgrounds, and
experiences in the healthcare system. A later section of this
chapter addresses cultural differences in health beliefs that
also influence health-seeking behaviors.
The behavior-specific cognitions and affect are similar
to the health belief model’s modifying or enabling factors
but relate more to the nomenclature of nursing. As Pender
has indicated, this category of variables is of “major 
motivational significance” and provides the critical “core,”
because they are subject to modification based on interven-
tions (Pender et al., 2011, p. 46). These behavior-specific
cognitions and affects include perceived benefits, perceived
barriers, perceived self-efficacy, activity-related affect (sub-
jective feelings), interpersonal influences, and situational
influences. Interpersonal and situational influences are
identified as having both direct and indirect effects on
health promotion behaviors. Consider the older adult walk-
ing through a shopping mall and noticing a free hyperten-
sion screening clinic. Indirect situational influences to
obtain a screening test may include the perceived cama-
raderie of people in the clinic compared with a tedious wait
for an office appointment. The direct influence is the avail-
ability of the screening during this older adult’s routine 
exercise program at the mall.
The variables of perceived benefits, perceived barriers,
self-efficacy, interpersonal influences, and situational in-
fluences have been supported in research studies as predic-
tors of health promotion behaviors (Pender, 1996; Pender
et al., 2002, 2006, 2011). Activity-related affect, a variable
added in the revised health promotion model, addresses
the individual’s subjective feelings related to the health
promotion behavior. Although research studies have sup-
ported constructs in the model, Pender et al. (2011) have
observed that inadequate testing of the entire model is pos-
sibly related to the complexity and the large number of
concepts (p. 50).
Behavioral outcome, the third component of the
model, includes actions toward the healthy behavior.
These actions lead to the attainment of a positive health
outcome. Two variables (immediate competing demands
and preferences, and commitment to a plan of action)
were added to the revised health promotion model to 
explain further the behavioral outcome of the health-
promoting behavior. Pender describes the commitment
to the plan of action with two distinct cognitive
processes: “[a] commitment to carry out a specific action
at a given time and place and with specified persons 
or alone, irrespective of competing preferences . . . and
(2) identification of definitive strategies for eliciting, car-
rying out, and reinforcing the behavior” (Pender et al.,
2011, p. 49).
The health-promoting behavior can be affected by the
immediate competing demands and preferences the indi-
vidual perceives. These are viewed as alternate behaviors.
Competing demands are behaviors over which the person
has little control because of environmental factors, like fam-
ily commitments. Competing preferences are behaviors
with powerful reinforcing properties—such as a sudden
urge for a particular food—over which the person has 
a high level of control (Pender et al., 2011, p. 50). This
component is greatly influenced by nursing interventions
related to values clarification, encouragement, and rein-
forcement of healthy behaviors.
In the earlier version of the health promotion model,
Pender (1987) described the model as a flexible organizing
framework, subject to revision after further testing. This
was followed by the identification of theoretical basis from
both the Expectancy-Value Theory and the Social Cogni-
tive Theory with the specification of first seven assump-
tions (Pender, 1996) and then 15 theoretical propositions
(Pender et. al., 2002). Research has been ongoing for test-
ing of the model. With the empirical support of variables,
the revised model has greater potential to predict and in-
tervene for health promotion activities. Health promotion
settings are the social environment in which we live, work,
and play, such as family, school, workplace, healthcare
agencies, and the community at large. Ongoing research
studies have focused on a variety of populations to target
health promotion activities.
Comparison of the Two Models
Table 4.1 compares the health belief model and the health
promotion model. Both models propose that the health
professional must understand how the person perceives the
world and that the person makes personal decisions
through identified readiness or individual characteristics
and experiences. The modifying factors or behavior-specific
cognitions and affect are the social, situational, and envi-
ronmental influences related to the person’s conception of
healthy behavior. Both models include demographic vari-
ables, because research supports the importance of differ-
ences. For example, the choice between surgery and
irradiation is very different for a 28-year-old patient and
an 88-year-old patient, in terms not only of physiological
differences but also of past experiences. Attention to these
differences turns the focus of healthcare consumers to their
specific outcomes and increases chances of success in the
health promotion activity.
Chronic Illness Model
Although the health belief model has been used in research
and practice settings with patients who have chronic ill-
nesses, Corbin and Strauss’s chronic illness model is spe-
cific to chronicity. Despite its focus on chronic illness, it
is still a health promotion model. As Corbin and Strauss
(1992a) have stated:
The focus of care in chronicity is not on cure but first of
all on the prevention of chronic conditions, then on find-
ing ways to help the ill manage and live with their illness
should these occur. Interventions are aimed at fostering
the prevention of, living with, and shaping the course of
chronic illnesses, especially those requiring technologically
complex management, while promoting and maintain-
ing quality of life. (p. 20)
The chronic illness trajectory framework (Corbin &
Strauss, 1992a) was developed as a substantive theory for
64
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

application to individuals with a broad range of chronic
conditions. Benner and Wrubel’s (1989) concept of
health as coherence applies to this model. Corbin and
Strauss (1992a) describe the development of the frame-
work as based on 30 years of qualitative, grounded theory
research. The original framework was developed with the
following concepts: key problems, basic strategies, orga-
nizational or family arrangements, and consequences
(Strauss & Glaser, 1975; Strauss et al., 1984). It evolved
into a nursing theory through its use and research base,
but the developers maintain that it potentially applies to
all healthcare disciplines. The framework was based on
the following assumptions:
1. The course of chronic conditions varies and changes
over time.
2. The course of a chronic condition can be shaped and
managed.
3. The technology involved is complex and can poten-
tially create side eﬀects.
4. The illness and technology pose potential conse-
quences for the individual’s physical well-being, 
biographical fulﬁllment (identify over time), and 
performance of daily activities.
5. Biographical needs and performance of daily activities
can aﬀect illness management choices and the course
of the illness.
6. The course of illness is not inevitably downward.
7. Chronic illnesses do not necessarily end in death.
(Corbin & Strauss, 1992a, p. 10; 1992b, p. 97)
Corbin and Strauss (1992a) described the framework
as a conceptual model organized under the central concept
of trajectory. This central concept was proposed to indicate
the management of the evolving course of the chronic con-
dition, as “shaped” by the person, family members, and
healthcare providers. Corbin (1998) subsequently updated
the model with “a greater emphasis on health promotion
and illness prevention,” along with simplified language,
greater emphasis on the role of nurses, and global health
considerations (p. 33). Refer to Table 4.2. The revision
provided nine, rather than eight, phases for a trajectory
with a focus on quality of life. In the acute phase, the illness
is treated with a goal of returning to normal activities.
However, in a life-threatening situation, the goal of man-
agement is to remove the threat, with everyday activities
suspended until the crisis has past, but the downward phase
is focused on adaptation to disability (Corbin, 1998, p. 36).
However, if the patient returns to the stable phase, normal
activities of daily living will take place in the home and
community environment. Corbin (1998) describes the im-
plementation of the model as the problem-solving ap-
proach, similar to the steps of the nursing process, as data
gathering, problem prioritizing and goal setting, developing
the plan of action, implementing the plan, and following
up with any needed changes in the plan.
This model focuses on the person to illustrate the man-
agement of an evolving course of a chronic condition and
the individual experiences that are influenced by that 
individual, the family, and healthcare providers. The ulti-
mate goals are health promotion and disability prevention,
but with the recognition of the incidence of increasing
chronic illness. It takes us a step farther than the health
belief model because this model is more grounded in the
individual’s unique, personal history and patterns of life.
Individuals with various chronic illnesses have been stud-
ied in many countries around the world using grounded
theory and the Chronic Illness Trajectory Framework. The
framework has also been used in research on dementia in
family members and considerations on placement that was
funded by the National Institute of Nursing Research
CHAPTER 4 Health, Illness, and Holism     ●
65
TABLE 4.1
Comparing the Health Belief Model and the Health Promotion Model
Model
Individual Characteristics
Mediating Factors
Outcomes
Health Belief 
Model 
(Becker et al., 
1977)
Pender’s 
Health 
Promotion 
Model 
(Pender, 
Murdaugh, 
& Parsons, 
2011)
Readiness for recommended behavior: 
Motivations, including general health 
concerns, willingness and compliance 
behaviors, positive health attitudes 
Value of illness threat reduction, including
subjective estimates and past experiences
Probability that compliant behavior will 
reduce threat (subjectively)
Individual characteristics and experiences:
Prior related behavior
Personal factors
Biological
Psychological
Sociocultural
Modifying/enabling 
factors:
Demographic
Structural
Attitudes
Interaction
Enabling
Behavior-specific 
cognitions and affect:
Perceived benefits
Perceived barriers
Perceived self-efficacy
Activity-related affect
Interpersonal 
influences
Situational influences
Compliant behaviors:
Likelihood of compli-
ance with preventive
health recommenda-
tions and prescribed
regimens
Behavioral outcomes:
Commitment to a plan
of action
Immediate competing
demands and 
preferences
Health promoting 
behaviors

(NINR). This model has also been used to study adher-
ence to treatment over time in patients with congestive
heart failure (Granger, Moser, Harrell, Sandelowski, &
Ekman, 2007). Additional chronic illness models have
evolved (Curry, Walker, Moore, & Hogstel, 2010;
McEvoy & Barnes, 2007; Weinert, Cudney, & Spring,
2008) as we focus on the growing population of patients
with chronic illnesses. The model has also been adapted
for application to cancer survivorship patients (Klimmek
& Wenzel, 2012). The use of grounded theory as an in-
ductive approach to understanding the individual’s expe-
rience with chronic illness and all the associated contextual
factors is predominant in these research studies. For ex-
ample, the chronic illness experience is distinctively dif-
ferent for an elderly, frail Anglo-American woman living
alone in an urban high-rise apartment than for the African
American elder with a physical disability living with her
grandson in a rural farm area or for the Asian American
elder in a multigenerational environment. The difference
involves more than the issue of compliance; it focuses on
quality. This model is extremely relevant to nursing care
as we experience the rising numbers of chronic illnesses
managed in contemporary practice and the growing pop-
ulation of aging adults who are living longer while dealing
with a chronic illness. In addition, the importance of cultural
relevance, the beliefs and values of individuals, families,
communities, and groups, and environmental factors are
major considerations in holistic healthcare.
All of these models require a thoughtful and thorough
nursing assessment. Valid data are needed for their ap-
plication. As part of the nursing assessment, the applica-
tion of Gordon’s (2008) functional health patterns could
assist in this application (Box 4.1). Nursing assessment 
of each of these areas provides valuable data for applica-
tion of a health or illness model to address health and 
illness focused on human potential or a sense of coher-
ence and holism. In addition, this assessment data and
identification of functional health patterns provide the
basis of the nursing process and identification of nursing
diagnoses.
Holism
Holism is a term frequently used in nursing and other
health professions as we focus on human beings in their
environment. As simply stated by Antigoni and Dimitrios
(2009), holistic nursing is “healing the whole person” 
66
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
TABLE 4.2
The Chronic Illness Trajectory Framework (Corbin, 1998) 
Trajectory phases
Pretrajectory
    
Trajectory onset
    
Stable
    
Unstable
    
Acute
    
Crisis
    
Comeback
    
Downward
    
Dying 
Trajectory, defined
The illness/condition course and actions taken to shape or control the course
(Corbin, 1998, p. 35)
Trajectory, overall goal
“To keep populations free of chronic conditions, and when chronic 
conditions strike, to assist those affected to control symptoms, prevent 
complications, and maintain stability . . . [for] quality and quantity to life” (Corbin,
1998, p. 37)
Management strategies
Technology used, resources, past experience, motivation, setting of care,
lifestyle/beliefs, interactions/relationships, service providers, chronic condition 
and physiological involvement, symptoms, political and economic trends
Approach to care
Holistic, individualized, flexible with consideration of the cultural setting and
changes in trajectory phases, and applicable to the care setting
BOX 4.1
Functional Health Patterns
Gordon (2008) has identiﬁed 11 functional health
patterns for inclusion in the nursing assessment and
diagnosis process:
●Health perception and health management
●Nutrition and metabolic
●Elimination
●Activity and exercise
●Sleep and rest
●Cognitive and perceptual
●Self-perception and self-concept
●Role and relationship
●Sexuality and reproductive
●Coping and stress tolerance
●Values and beliefs

(p. 150). In her review of the philosophy and theory of
holism, Erickson (2007) points out that although the
concept of holism has been present for many centuries,
the word holism is a product of the 20th century applica-
tion in nursing in the 1970s when “central to each holistic
nurse’s philosophy were the beliefs that the whole is
greater than the sum of the parts, the patient’s world view
guides practitioners in understanding the whole, and the
nurse is instrumental in helping people to heal and
grow”(p. 145). Recall that “wholeness” is one of the prin-
ciples in systems theory and also included in many nurs-
ing models. More recently, Zborowsky and Kreitzer
(2009) applied systems theory to their model designed at
three overlapping circles for people, process, and place,
with the common center that was created and entitled the
optimum healing environment (OHE). In fact, they pro-
pose that the OHE is “created when people, place, and
care processes converge at a particular time and within a
particular culture” (Zborowsky & Kreitzer, 2009, p. 187).
And, as Ray (2010) points out, “the holistic science of
nursing has provided nursing with understanding of the
complexity of human relationships and the complexity of
the meaning of the integral relationship of the human and
environment” (p. 138). 
The American Holistic Nurses Association (AHNA)
and the American Nurses Association (ANA) (2013) have
identified the Holistic Nursing: Scope and Standards of
Practice guided by principles for the concepts of person,
health/healing, practice, nursing roles, self-reflection, and
self-care. As with the general Scope and Standards of 
Practice (ANA, 2010), holistic nursing is described with
six standards of practice in line with the steps of the 
nursing process and standards of professional perform-
ance focused on quality, education, practice evaluation,
collegiality, collaboration, ethics, research, resource uti-
lization, and leadership. Holistic nursing is described as
“focus[ing] on protecting, promoting, and optimizing
health and wellness; assisting healing; preventing illness
and injury; alleviating suffering; supporting people to find
peace, comfort, harmony, and balance through the diag-
nosis and treatment of human response; and advocacy in
the care of individuals, families, communities, popula-
tions, and the planet” (AHNA & ANA, 2013, p. 1). The
focus is on the whole person in their unique context. An-
drews (2008b) describes the holistic paradigm as seeking
“to maintain a sense of balance or harmony between 
humans and the larger universe [with] explanations for
health and disease based not so much on external agents
as on imbalance or disharmony among the human, 
geophysical, and metaphysical forces of the universe” 
(p. 69). As illustrated in Chapter 3, several nursing mod-
els are consistent with this model of practice. The patient
is the focus, with the goal of returning to a state of har-
mony or balance, and care may include both conventional
treatment as well a traditional and complementary and
alternative therapies (CAM).
While holistic nursing practice is a specialty practice
with its unique scope and standards identified by the pro-
fession, components of holism are evident in all nursing
practice areas. The American Association of Colleges of
Nursing (AACN, 2006, 2008b) in its Essentials documents
for both baccalaureate and graduate education, includes
the expectation for holistic practice. At the undergraduate
level, the first assumption is that “the baccalaureate gen-
eralist graduate is prepared to practice from a holistic, car-
ing framework” (AACN, 2008b, p. 8), and the direct
practice of the advanced practice nurse is characterized by
the use of a holistic perspective (AACN, 2006, p. 18).
As stated in the Holistic Nursing: Scope and Standards
of Practice (AHNA & ANA, 2013), “holistic nursing is a
world view—a way of ’being’ in the world and not just a
modality—holistic nurses can practice in any setting, 
anywhere, and with individuals throughout the life span”
(p. 22). The holistic caring process is aligned with the steps
of the nursing process but, as with any specialty practice,
requires specialty knowledge, skills, and abilities. In addi-
tion, as in the ANA (2010) Nursing: Scope and Standards
of Practice, holistic practice competencies are delineated
for the RN and the nurse with graduate-level preparation.
All professional nursing practice requires a holistic per-
spective. As stated in the ANA (2010) Nursing: Scope and
Standards of Practice, “the nursing needs of human beings
are identified from a holistic perspective and are met
within the context of a culturally sensitive, caring inter-
personal environment” (p. 18). This holistic perspective
includes the physical, emotional, social, and spiritual needs
of the individual and the family. And the spiritual dimen-
sion includes feelings, thoughts, experiences, and behaviors
in a search for meaning, not necessarily synonymous with
religion (AHNA & ANA, 2013, p. 91). The need for ho-
listic nursing practice is important for the patient, family,
and nurse whether the situation involves routine, emer-
gency, or palliative care, the care is applicable to individual
preferences and culture. 
CULTURAL INFLUENCE ON
HEALTH PERCEPTIONS
Over the past 30 years, national initiatives in Healthy Peo-
ple 2000, 2010, and 2020, have targeted selected groups
of at-risk populations requiring special health promotion
strategies. These reports illustrated significant health
problems in some minority groups, but more impor-
tantly, they emphasized individuals within subgroups. As
originally reported in Healthy People 2000, individual dif-
ferences, beyond racial group, socioeconomic status, and
educational level, affect health status and access to health-
care. These reports pointed out that “our healthcare pro-
grams are characterized by unacceptable disparities linked
to membership in certain racial and ethnic groups” 
(USDHHS, PHS, 1992, p. 31). Since that time, studies
and outreach efforts have investigated racial, cultural, 
environmental, social, and linguistic issues. As an exam-
ple, the Commonwealth Foundation conducted a field
study, reporting that “minorities have  difficulty getting
appropriate, timely, high-quality care because of lan-
guage barriers and that they may have different perspec-
tives on health, medical care, and expectations about
diagnosis and treatment” (Betancourt et al., 2002, p. 3).
Further research into managed care, education, and gov-
ernment illustrated “a clear link between cultural com-
petence, improving quality, and eliminating racial and
ethnic disparities in health care” (Betancourt et al., 2005,
p. 1). Pender et al. (2011) describe designing culturally
CHAPTER 4 Health, Illness, and Holism     ●
67

competent health promotion programs and identify 
specific demographic, cultural, and health system factors
to assess in vulnerable populations (p. 293). The issue
then goes beyond access to the need for the provision 
of acceptable healthcare to address the issue of health 
equity.
These reports began to highlight the need for a con-
certed effort to understand and embrace diversity in our
daily personal and professional lives. But much is implied
within the construct of “diversity.” When people speak of
ethnicity and race, they generally refer to a group, tribe,
or nation of people united by some common characteris-
tics, whether biological, environmental, or social. In the
United States, we tend to classify people into five ethnic
groups: African Americans, Asian Americans and Pacific
Islanders, Hispanic Americans, Native Americans, and
white Americans. But this tendency does little to help us
understand the health beliefs, practices, needs, or diversity
represented within each of these population classifications.
It may, in fact, encourage us to impose stereotypical judg-
ments on persons within these groups.
This point leads us to the concept of culture as a way
of life and the increasing focus on cultural competence.
Purnell (2013) describes competence in healthcare as
“having the knowledge, skills, and abilities to deliver care
congruent with the patient’s cultural beliefs and practices”
(p. 7). Purnell (2013) further states that increasing one’s
consciousness of cultural diversity improves the possibil-
ities for healthcare practitioners to provide culturally
competent care (p. 7). 
Our cultural inheritance has a powerful influence on
our health beliefs, both conscious and unconscious. We
bring into our personal and professional lives the influ-
ences from our ancestors, family, peers, and colleagues.
We are affected by history, genetics, social customs, reli-
gion, language, politics, law, economics, education, and
many other factors. We mutually influence and are in-
fluenced by others because of these endowments. When
we talk about cultural diversity, we mean more than an
inherited background. “Culture” implies social, familial,
religious, national, and professional characteristics that
affect the way we think and act; it is a combination of
all these things.
Research demonstrating individual differences and per-
ceptions provided valuable data for the revision of the
health belief model. Educational, ethnic, and social class
differences were identified for careful assessment of patient
beliefs and perceptions (Becker et al., 1977). These data
are significant whether one is dealing with individual 
patients or families with a specific healthcare deficit or a
larger population group with informational needs for
health promotion activities. 
But it is important to consider the characteristics of
both the patient and the health professional. The values for
cultural diversity and culturally sensitive care are clearly il-
lustrated in position statements of our nursing organiza-
tions. In addition, AACN (2008a, 2009) has identified
core cultural competences for nurses prepared at both the
baccalaureate and graduate levels (see Table 4.3). As An-
drews (2008b) indicates, however, healthcare professionals
“must have positive experiences with members of other 
cultures and learn to value genuinely the contributions all
cultures make to our multicultural society” (p. 9).
One’s health beliefs are the result of cultural in -
heritance, education, reasoned opinions, and, often, un-
founded impressions. The proportion of each of these
factors is individually determined. Andrews (2008a) de-
scribes three worldviews for cultural influence on health-
care: (1) magico-religious, (2) scientific, and (3) holistic.
The three different views show us how individuals differ
in their beliefs in the supernatural, the scientific commu-
nity, or the holistic mind-body-spirit interrelationship.
It is worth noting that the traditional healthcare system
operates from the scientific worldview, which diverges
from that of many cultures and their subgroups. 
The magico-religious view of health and healing focuses
on the supernatural. It can include ancient rites and rituals,
reliance on prayer and the will of a supreme being, pil-
grimages, spiritual healing, and the like. The scientific view
is the dominant one for the healthcare system, with 
reliance on allopathic medicine, biomedical treatments,
and a focus on a cure for illness and disease. As noted by
Spector (2013), the allopathic  philosophy is predicated on
a dualistic view of body and mind and adherence to sci-
entific and technological norms of the system for acute
care, chronic care, rehabilitation, psychiatric/mental
health, and community/public health—and is a culture
onto itself (pp. 108–109). The holistic paradigm sees health
as a balance of the physical, mental, and spiritual whole
and includes both alternative and complementary thera-
pies (e.g., aromatherapy or massage) and ethnocultural
practices (e.g., herbs or voodoo) used to treat the person
rather than the disease (Spector, 2013). The holistic aim
is for a sense of harmony and treatment to correct an im-
balance. Significant differences can exist in health beliefs
and roles between the patient with a healthcare need and
the healthcare provider, considered the “expert.”
In our healthcare system, we generally view the roles
of healthcare providers and those of consumers in tradi-
tional ways. We consider the disease or illness, including
all the pathophysiology and treatment modalities. We are
aware of healthcare and health promotion services in both
the hospital and community setting. We usually present
them through our words and behaviors as norms to which
patients must adhere. Otherwise, they are termed “bad 
patients,” “noncompliant,” or even “problem cases.” For
example, the healthcare community carefully conducts,
evaluates, and uses research to identify biological, chemi-
cal, structural, and physical factors to treat, manage, or
cure a disease. Faced with patients whose belief system 
68
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
ONLINE CONSULT 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality at 
http://www.ahrq.gov
The Commonwealth Fund at 
http://www.cmwf.org
Healthy People at
http://www.healthypeople.gov
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services at
http://www.hhs.gov

includes the “hot/cold” theory of disease causation and
treatment—which holds that imbalance of the four body
humors of yellow and black bile, phlegm, and blood re-
sulting in a “hot” infectious condition must be treated
with appropriate foods or herbs—we may ignore or 
patronize the patient. Many scientific minds reject this
theory, creating conflict and failure to provide healthcare.
As Benner and Wrubel (1989) observe, “changes in
lifestyles and health habits work best when they are inte-
grated into the person’s own cultural patterns and tradi-
tions [for] it is hard to sustain new patterns if they go
against the grain of one’s normal social patterns” (p. 155). 
Models of Cultural Care and
Competence in Practice
The movement for culturally competent care is an imper-
ative for practice in the health professions. Although many
models have been designed to assist practitioners, the fol-
lowing selected models are useful in nursing practice. To
explore additional models of culturally competent care, see
the Bibliography at the end of this chapter.
Culture Care Diversity and Universality
Madeleine Leininger proposed a transcultural nursing the-
ory with the central focus on care, especially the concept
of culture care. Leininger’s (1970) early definition of 
culture referred to a way of “life belonging” to a designated
group, through accumulated traditions, customs, and the
ways the group solves problems that are learned and trans-
mitted systematically, largely through socialization prac-
tices that are reinforced through social and cultural
institutions (pp. 48–49). Within her culture care theory,
Leininger (2002c) defined culture as “patterned lifeways,
values, beliefs, norms, symbols, and practices of individu-
als, groups, or institutions that are learned, shared, and
usually transmitted intergenerationally over time” (p. 83).
Taking this one step further as a health belief, Leininger
(2002c) defined cultural care as “the synthesized and cul-
turally constituted assistive, supportive, and facilitative 
caring acts toward self or others focused on evident or an-
ticipated needs for the patient’s health or well-being or to
face disabilities, death or other human conditions” (p. 83).
To this end, she states that “the purpose of theory of 
Culture Care was to discover, document, know and ex-
plain the interdependence of care and culture phenomena
with differences and similarities between and among 
cultures” (Leininger & McFarland, 2006, p. 4).
On the basis of in-depth qualitative research,
Leininger has identified dominant cultural values and
culture care meanings and action modes for many differ-
ent American subculture groups, showing differences
with the Anglo-American healthcare value structure. She
defines subcultures as “small or large groups living in a
dominant culture that retain certain values and beliefs
that are different from the dominant culture” (Leininger,
2002a, p. 122). The Anglo-American cultural values 
include individualism, independence and freedom, com-
petition and achievement, materialism, technology, in-
stant time and actions, youth and beauty, equal rights
CHAPTER 4 Health, Illness, and Holism     ●
69
TABLE 4.3
AACN’s (2008a, 2009) Identification of Cultural Care Competencies 
for Nurses by Educational Preparation
Baccalaureate Prepared Nurses
Master’s and Doctorally Prepared Nurses
Apply knowledge of social and cultural 
factors that affect nursing and healthcare 
across multiple contexts.
Use relevant data sources and best 
evidence in providing culturally 
competent care.
Promote achievement of safe and 
quality outcomes of care for diverse 
populations.
Advocate for social justice, including 
commitment to the health of vulnerable 
populations and the elimination of 
health disparities.
Participate in continuous cultural 
competence development.
Sources: American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2008). Cultural competency in baccalaureate nursing education. Retrieved
from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/education/pdf/competency.pdf; American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2009). Estab-
lishing a culturally competent master’s and doctorally prepared nursing workforce. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/
Education/pdf/CulturalComp.pdf
Prioritize the social and cultural factors that affect health in 
designing and delivering care across multiple contexts.
Construct socially and empirically derived cultural knowledge of 
people and populations to guide practice and research.
Assume leadership in developing, implementing, and evaluating 
culturally competent nursing and other healthcare services.
Transform systems to address social justice and health disparities.
Provide leadership to educators and members of the healthcare or 
research team in learning, applying, and evaluating continuous cultural
competence development.
Conduct culturally competent scholarship that can be utilized in 
practice.

(gender), leisure time, scientific facts and numbers, and
a sense of generosity in time of crisis; action modes in-
clude stress alleviation, personalized acts, self-reliance,
and health instruction. These characteristics are consis-
tent with the prevailing culture of the practitioners and
organizations that make up the healthcare system. In her
book Culture Care Diversity and Universality: A Theory
of Nursing, Leininger lists information on a sample of
some American subgroups (Leininger, 1991a, p. 355).
She has identified further special groups as subgroups,
such as the homeless, drug users, homosexual individuals,
the deaf, those infected with HIV, and nurses. Valencia-
Go (2006) supports the identification of these subgroups
as emerging populations in healthcare to include ethnic
minorities, the homeless, and those afflicted with 
AIDS (p. 24).
Difficulties arise when significant values are un-
known, in conflict, or poorly understood. The patient’s
cultural values can be quite different from those of the
healthcare provider. As Leininger (1991a) details in her
book, of the 15 sample subgroups presented, 10 share
none of the dominant characteristics of healthcare sys-
tems and Anglo-American patients, and few character-
istics are shared by the remaining subgroups. In
addition, consider the importance of religious or domi-
nant spiritual influence in all but three of the cultural
subgroups she described. Knowledge of the dominant
values can assist in providing health promotion or health
maintenance information, activities, and programs. 
An example can be seen with the increasing importance
of the use of faith communities in health promotion 
activities. Leininger (1994) stresses that nurses as pri-
mary, secondary, and tertiary care providers, through
their close and continuous contact with culturally di-
verse patients, must move from unicultural personal and
professional knowledge to provide meaningful culturally
based nursing care (p. 255). Time, openness, and 
a growing understanding are critical components of 
a clinician’s development of higher levels of cultural
competence.
The Giger and Davidhizar
Transcultural Assessment Model
Another nursing model directed at the importance of
culture and care focuses on the assessment process. Giger
and Davidhizar have identified a variety of cultural be-
havior patterns relevant to health assessment that have
an influence on the delivery of care. They define culture
as “a patterned behavioral response that develops over
time as a result of imprinting the mind through social
and religious structures and intellectual and artistic
manifestations” (Giger & Davidhizar, 2008, p. 2). Their
assessment model has been used in a variety of research
and clinical practice settings and includes the concepts
listed in Box 4.2. Cultures of origin, subcultures, and
acculturalization are important considerations in this 
assessment model.
Notice that in this assessment model, the focus is on
the culturally unique individual. The initial area for assess-
ment is on individual characteristics, including the indi-
vidual’s definition of culture. The next assessment areas
include specifics on communication patterns and use of
space, which reveal cultural differences but also have a 
profound influence on interactions and acceptability of 
information sharing. Social organization is designed to ob-
tain information on current health status as well as family,
work, social, political and religious affiliations, practices,
and  preferences. Assessment of time consideration also
looks at cultural patterns, practices, and preferences. En-
vironmental control focuses on the individual’s perception
of locus of control (internal versus external as with the
magico-religious paradigm), values and supernatural in-
fluences, and their description of their environment and
their concept of health. The area of biological variations
includes a complete physical examination with particular
attention to cultural/sociocultural, physical, metabolic,
and genetic variations. The nursing assessment focuses 
on clinical judgment of the individual and summarizes 
the assessment data for incorporation into the plan of care.
Although identified in their assessment model as nursing
assessment, applications have been extended to other
health professions. As reported by Giger and Davidhizar
(2008), application of the model in diverse settings is pro-
ducing a means for clinical understanding and application
of culturally competent care across disciplines (p. 16).
Spector’s Health Traditions
Model
Spector (2013) views a person as a unique cultural being,
having personal health traditions and being affected by
cultural phenomena. Her model for the individual is an
oval with the outer band containing the concepts of com-
munication, space, time, biological variations, environ-
mental control and social organization, and with the
middle band containing the concepts of culture, religion,
and ethnicity. At the center of the model is the person as
a unique being with personal health traditions. Using the
concept of holistic health, health traditions are explored
as a model for these unique individuals, as what people
do in order to maintain, protect, and restore health from
the perspective of their traditions (Spector, 2013, p. 92).
This Health Traditions model is designed as a matrix with
health maintenance, protection, and restoration on the
vertical axis, which interrelate with three holistic concepts
(physical, mental, and spiritual) on the horizontal axis.
70
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
BOX 4.2
Patterns for Assessment in the Giger 
& Davidhizar (2008) Transcultural 
Assessment Model
Culturally unique individual factors
●Communication 
●Space
●Social orientation
●Time
●Environmental control
●Biologic variations
●Nursing assessment
Source: J. N. Giger & R. E. Davidhizar (2008). Transcultural Nursing: 
Assessment and Intervention (5th ed.). Philadelphia: Mosby.

Health maintenance concepts involve basic physical,
mental, and spiritual needs. Health protection includes
special foods, activities, customs, and religious practices
or rituals. Restoration activities include holistic remedies
for the body, mind, and spirit. Culture, heritage, and
health traditions are important foci for this view of cul-
ture and the development of cultural awareness. Spector
(2013) provides a heritage assessment tool to understand
a person’s traditional health and illness beliefs and prac-
tices, and to determine appropriate community care 
resources (pp. 376–378).
The Purnell Model for 
Cultural Competence
Purnell (2013) describes the need for self-awareness in
cultural competence as a deliberative and emotional
process of getting to know yourself (personality, values,
beliefs, standards, ethics, etc.) and the impact of these
factors when interacting with others different from
yourself (p. 45). The Purnell model is an organizing
framework, designed as a wheel with four rims repre-
senting the society, community, family, and the person,
and spokes as 12 wedges representing interconnected
cultural constructs or domains, to the unknown dark
core at the center (Fig. 4.3). Purnell provides assessment
questions for each of the 12 domains of culture, address-
ing the concepts under the various and interrelated do-
mains. Purnell (2013) further describes the jagged line
at the bottom of the model under the wheel representing
“the concept of cultural consciousness,” from left to
right, as the unconsciously incompetent to the uncon-
sciously competent practitioner (pp. 16–17). The devel-
opment of cultural competence is implicit, as noted in
one of 20 assumptions upon which the model is based:
“to be effective, health care must reflect the unique un-
derstanding of the values, beliefs, attitudes, lifeways, and
worldview of diverse populations and individual accul-
turation patterns” (Purnell, 2013, p. 15).
Purnell’s model emphasizes human beings, health, and
the environment; however, the model is not restricted to
nursing and is applicable across disciplines. Information
provided in the model is designed to understand holisti-
cally human beings with health issues within the various
broad constructs. 
What each of the models seems to have in common is
a directive to actively seek to understand the uniqueness
of human beings in their context, as cultural competence.
And in doing this, care for individuals, families, and
groups will result in more positive outcomes. They also
point to the fact, however, that individuals within a se-
lected culture are very different. As we seek to understand
different cultures and heritages, we must still focus on
human beings. Consider the results of a research study to
validate an instrument used with hospitalized patients on
advance directives. The researchers found that the instru-
ment was valid, in both the English and Spanish versions.
But differences were also found in the preferences, in that
the Hispanic adult participants had less knowledge of ad-
vance directives and a higher preference for life-support
interventions. Froman and Owen (2003) were able to sup-
port the validity of the instrument but did recommend
further study to address the “great diversity among 
Hispanic regions and culture” (p. 36). 
Further, consider the following variables for culturally
competent care:
●Time with patients to become accepted and gain an
understanding of their belief system
●Differences in belief systems among generations and
geographic origin
●Past experiences and current situation
●Religious influences
●Familial influences
●Understanding of advance directives
●Acceptance of the healthcare services, systems, and
practitioners
●Linguistic issues
Other individual values may not be initially apparent or
may grow more dominant. Complementary and alterna-
tive medicine (CAM) and healthcare practices, such as
acupuncture, imagery, and herbal medicines, are being
used as people become dissatisfied with the biomedical
view and move to holistic care. These practices may differ
from an individual’s inherited cultural background but
may be adopted or become more dominant. In addition,
they may be used along with (complementary) or instead
of (alternative) conventional medicine, and their use may
or may not be reported by the patient to the healthcare
provider. Spector (2013) reports the rapidly growing use
of homeopathic healthcare choices as alternative or com-
plementary (e.g., aromatherapy, biofeedback, hypnother-
apy, massage) and ethnocultural or traditional (e.g.,
herbs and holistic healing practices and rituals). And the
research and body of knowledge on many of these prac-
tices is growing. A review of current literature reveals 
a wide range of research studies reporting on the use 
of CAM in a variety of patient populations, from chil-
dren, to normal childbearing families, to patients with
medical diagnoses including breast and prostate cancer.
The increase in use and acceptance of CAM points to the
need for a comprehensive cultural assessment with 
the patient and may require of the clinician great open-
ness, sensitivity, and time. 
THE NURSE’S ROLE
Nurses have a primary responsibility in health promotion,
health maintenance, and prevention activities; in fact,
such activities represent the essence of professional nurs-
ing practice. The focus of nursing is on the health of the
CHAPTER 4 Health, Illness, and Holism     ●
71
ONLINE CONSULT 
Office of Minority Health & Health Disparities
(OMHD) at
http://www.cdc.gov/diversity/faqs/diversity.htm
National Center for Complementary and 
Alternative Medicine at
http://nccam.nih.gov
Transcultural Nursing at
http://www.culturediversity.org/ index.html

72
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
Community
Person
Person
Person
Person
Person
Person
Person
Person
Person
Person
Person
Family
Family
Family
Family
Family
Family
Family
Family
Family
Family
Family
Family
Global Society
Global Society
Global Society
Global Society
Community
Community
Community
Person
Unconsciously
incompetent
Consciously
incompetent
Consciously
competent
Unconsciously
competent
Overview/heritage
Origins
Residence
Topography
Economics
Politics
Education
Occupation
Nutrition
Meaning of food
Common foods
Rituals
Deficiencies
Limitations
Health promotion
Communication
Dominant language
Dialects
Contextual use
Volume/tone
Spatial distancing
Eye contact
Facial expressions
Greetings
Temporality
Time
Names
Touch
Pregnancy
Fertility practices
Views toward pregnancy
Pregnancy beliefs
Birthing
Postpartum
Family roles and
organization
Head of household
Gender roles
Goals & priorities
Developmental tasks
Roles of aged
Extended family
Social status
Alternative
lifestyles
Death rituals
Death rituals
Bereavement
Workforce issues
Acculturation
Autonomy
Language barriers
Spirituality
Religious
practices
Use of prayer
Meaning of life
Individual strength
Spirituality & health
Health-care
practitioners
Perceptions of practitioners
Folk practitioners
Gender & health care
High-risk
behaviors
Tobacco
Alcohol
Recreational drugs
Physical activity
Safety
Health-care practices
Focus on health care
Traditional practices
Magicoreligious religious
beliefs 
Responsibilty for health
Transplantation
Rehablilitation/
chronicity
Self-medication
Pain/sick role
Mental health
Barriers
Biocultural
ecology
Biological variations
Skin color
Heredity
Genetics
Ecology
Drug metabolism
Primary characteristics of culture: age, generation, nationality, race, color, gender, religion
Secondary characteristics of culture: educational status, socioeconomic status, occupation, military status, 
political beliefs, urban versus rural residence, enclave identity, marital status, parental status, physical character-
istics, sexual orientation, gender issues, and reason for migration (sojourner, immigrant, undocumented status)
Unconsciously incompetent: not being aware that one is lacking knowledge about another culture
Consciously incompetent: being aware that one is lacking knowledge about another culture
Consciously competent: learning about the client’s culture, verifying generalizations about the client’s culture, 
and providing culturally specific interventions
Unconsciously competent: automatically providing culturally congruent care to clients of diverse cultures
The Purnell Model for Cultural Competence
Figure 4.3 The Purnell Model for Cultural Competence.  Source: Purnell, L. (2013). Transcultural health
care: A culturally competent approach (4th ed.). Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.

individual, family, community, and societal group.
Health promotion roles are guided within the theoretical
framework on which nursing practice is based, including
how you, as the professional, view the human beings, the
concept of health, the environment, and the practice of
nursing as well as your accord with a model’s definitions
and relationships. This is the purpose of the middle-range
theories discussed in Chapter 3, from which you can move
to a practice model that is applicable to your specific func-
tion or practice setting. Before you decide on the best
framework to guide your own professional practice, con-
sider the following two examples.
Example 1
Suppose your practice is guided by King’s Theory of Goal
Attainment. In this theory, nursing is defined as “a process
of human interactions between nurse and patient whereby
each perceives the other and the situation, and through
communications, they set goals, explore the means to
achieve them, agree to the means, [and] their actions in-
dicate movement toward goal achievement” (King, 1987,
p. 113). Health promotion, health maintenance, and pre-
vention activities are all implied in this definition of health
as adjustment to stressors in the system environments and
use of resources. Health is viewed as a potential and the
goal of the process.
Specific assessment and intervention activities must 
address the theory’s theoretical concepts and propositions.
Selected health and illness models can be used to guide
practice. Personal perceptions of the patient are important
components of the Health Belief Model, Pender’s Health
Promotion Model, and the Chronic Illness Trajectory
Framework. If your practice setting is a clinic with a large
population that needs health promotion strategies address-
ing individual lifestyles and the preventive services identi-
fied in Healthy People 2020, you may find the health belief
model or Pender’s Health Promotion Model quite useful
with your patients. These same models can address health
maintenance as secondary and tertiary prevention. On the
other hand, if your practice setting is a hospice or you work
primarily with patients with cancer and their families, you
may find the chronic illness trajectory framework more use-
ful for guiding your practice and use of the nursing process.
Example 2
If your practice is guided by Leininger’s Culture Care
Diversity and Universality model, three modes of cul-
tural care guide your nursing judgment, decisions, and
actions: preservation and maintenance, accommodation
and negotiation, and repatterning or restructuring
(Leininger, 1991b, 2002c; Leininger & McFarland,
2006). In Leininger’s concept of culturally congruent
nursing care, these modes all focus on health promotion,
health maintenance, and prevention activities within the
context of the individual cultural belief system. Leininger
defines culturally congruent nursing care as the specific
use of “culturally based care, knowledge, acts and deci-
sions in sensitive and knowledgeable ways to appropri-
ately and meaningfully fit the cultural values, beliefs, and
lifeways of human beings for their health and wellbeing,
or to prevent illness, disabilities, or death” (Leininger 
& McFarland, 2006, p. 15). The practice models and as-
sessment tools you select must be culturally sensitive and
must include individual focus on each of the assessment
factors in the Sunrise Enabler, which is used to depict
the dimensions of her theory visually (Leininger, 1991b,
2002c; Leininger & McFarland, 2006).
Selecting a health model involves a deliberate and re-
flective process that takes into account your views, the the-
ory that guides your professional practice, and the unique
characteristics of the people and envi ronment in which
you work. You may practice under several similar models,
depending on a changeable environment or consumer
group interactions.
CHAPTER 4 Health, Illness, and Holism     ●
73
K E Y  P O I N T S
●Health promotion and health protection strategies relate to individual lifestyle and environmental
influences on health status and health prospects. Preventive activities and services address three areas of
prevention. Primary prevention consists of healthy actions taken to avoid illness or disease. Secondary
prevention involves screening for early detection and treatment of health problems. Tertiary prevention
during the rehabilitative phase of an illness prevents complications and further disability.
●Health is more than the absence of illness, disease, or infirmity. A concept of health is determined by
one’s worldview and philosophical assumptions.
●Benner and Wrubel (1989) describe five theories of health as (1) an ideal, (2) the ability to fulfill social
roles, (3) a commodity, (4) a human potential, and (5) a sense of coherence.
●Dunn’s (1973) high-level wellness emphasizes well-being, including the positive, dynamic, and unique
integration of the mind, body, and spirit of the individual functioning within the environment and at the
maximum potential.
●The health belief model (Becker et al., 1977) was designed as an organizing framework to advance
health promotion activities by targeting interventions to certain individual variables. Three major
concepts explain and predict health-related behaviors: (1) readiness to undertake recommended
compliance behavior, (2) modifying and enabling factors, and (3) compliant behaviors.
Continued

74
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
K E Y  P O I N T S—cont’d
●Pender’s health promotion model is a schematic representation with three components for health-
promoting behaviors. Individual characteristics and experiences include prior related behavior and
personal factors (biologic, psychological, and sociocultural factors). Behavior-specific cognitions and affect
include perceived benefits, perceived barriers, perceived self-efficacy, activity-related affect interpersonal
influences, and situational influences. The behavioral outcome is attainment of a positive health outcome
through commitment to the plan of action and competing demands and preferences.
●The chronic illness trajectory framework (Corbin & Strauss, 1992a) is a conceptual model organized
under the main concept of trajectory for managing an evolving course of a chronic condition.
●Gordon’s (2008) 11 functional health patterns can be used as a valuable tool in the nursing assessment
and diagnosis process and in the application of models to address health and illness focused on human
potential or a sense of coherence.
●Holistic nursing is described as “focus[ing] on protecting, promoting, and optimizing health and
wellness; assisting healing; preventing illness and injury; alleviating suffering; supporting people to find
peace, comfort, harmony, and balance through the diagnosis and treatment of human response; 
and advocacy in the care of individuals, families, communities, populations, and the planet” (AHNA 
& ANA, 2013, p. 1).
●Culture involves a combination of social, familial, religious, national, and professional characteristics
that affect the way we think, act, and interact with others. Differences among groups and subgroups
produce diversity that can lead from uniculturalism to appreciation of a multicultural environment and
healthcare behaviors.
●Leininger defines culturally congruent nursing care as “culturally based care, knowledge, acts and
decisions in sensitive and knowledgeable ways to appropriately and meaningfully fit the cultural values,
beliefs, and lifeways of human beings for their health and wellbeing, or to prevent illness, disabilities, or
death” (Leininger & McFarland, 2006, p. 15). 
●The Giger and Davidhizar Transcultural Assessment Model (2008), directed at the importance of 
culture and care focuses on the assessment process and patterns of culturally unique individual factors,
communication, space, social orientation, time, environmental control, biological variations, and nursing
assessment. 
●Using the same concepts of communication, space, time, biological variations, and social orientation,
Spector (2013) views a person as a unique cultural being with personal health traditions and considers
how he or she is affected by cultural phenomena.
●The Purnell Model for Cultural Competence (2013) is an organizing framework, designed as a wheel
with four rims representing the society, community, family, and the person, and spokes as 12 wedges
representing cultural constructs, to the unknown dark core at the center. 
●Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) and healthcare practices are being tried as people
become dissatisfied with the biomedical view and move to holistic care. 
●Nursing focuses on the health of the individual, family, community, and societal group. Health promotion
roles are guided by the theoretical framework on which practice is based.
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Select a definition provided for health from the nursing theories presented in Chapter 3. Discuss which of the
five models of health they fit into, and suggest health promotion models for each.
2. Use Pender’s health promotion model to plan a health promotion campaign for one of the following situations:
• Immunization program in an urban apartment complex with a high density of families with young children
• Home safety program at a senior citizens’ center
• Wellness program for employees in a manufacturing company

CHAPTER 4 Health, Illness, and Holism     ●
75
3. Recall a patient with a chronic illness for whom you have provided nursing care in the past. Retrospectively apply
the chronic illness trajectory framework to the patient experiences that you were able to observe.
4. Think of an example from your experience of a patient from a different culture with different perceptions of
health, illness, or treatment from your own. How did you or could you alter your approach to the patient?
5. Review the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter, and discuss it in the context of the
contents of the chapter.
Interactive Exercises 
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.
REFERENCES
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2006).
The essentials of doctoral education for advanced nursing 
practice. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/
DNP/pdf/Essentials.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2008a).
Cultural competency in baccalaureate nursing education. Re-
trieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/ leading-initiatives/
education-resources/competency.pdf 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2008b).
The essentials of baccalaureate education for professional nurs-
ing practice. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/
Education/pdf/BaccEssentials08.pdf 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2009).
Establishing a culturally competent master’s and doctorally pre-
pared nursing workforce. Retrieved, from http://www.aacn
.nche.edu/education-resources/CulturalComp.pdf 
American Holistic Nurses Association (AHNA) & American
Nurses Association (ANA). (2013). Holistic nursing: Scope
and standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Springs, MD:
Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2010). Nursing: Scope
and standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Springs, MD:
Nursebooks.org.
Andrews, H., & Roy, C. (1991). Essentials of the Roy Adaptation
Model. Norwalk, CT: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Andrews, M. M. (2008a). The influence of cultural and health
belief systems on health care practices. In M. M. Andrews &
J. S. Boyle, Transcultural Concepts in Nursing Care (5th ed.,
pp. 66–81). Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.
Andrews, M. M. (2008b). Theoretical foundations of transcul-
tural nursing. In M. M. Andrews & J. S. Boyle, Transcultural
Concepts in Nursing Care (5th ed., pp. 3–14). Philadelphia,
PA: Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Antigoni, F., & Dimitrios, T. (2009). Nurses’ attitudes 
towards complementary therapies. Health Science Journal, 
3, 149–157.
Becker, M. H., Haefner, D. P., Kasl, S. V., Kirscht, J. P.,
Maiman, L. A., & Rosenstock, I. M. (1977). Selected
psychosocial models and correlates of individual health-
related behaviors. Medical Care, 15(5, Supplement), 
27–46.
Benner, P., & Wrubel, J. (1989). The primacy of caring: 
Stress and coping in health and illness. Menlo Park, CA:
Addison-Wesley.
Betancourt, J. R., Green, A. R., & Carrillo, J. E. (2002). 
Cultural competence in health care: Emerging frameworks 
and practical approaches (Publication No. 576). New York:
The Commonwealth Fund.
Betancourt, J. R., Green, A. R., Carrillo, J. E., & Park, E. R.
(2005). Cultural competence and health care disparities:
Key perspectives and trends. (Publication No. 821). 
New York: The Commonwealth Fund.
Bucher, D. (2008). Cultural competence: scholarly nature of
clinical practice of nursing. Clinical Scholars Review, 1(2),
110–113.
Corbin, J. M. (1998). The Corbin and Strauss chronic illness
trajectory model: An update. Scholarly Inquiry for Nursing
Practice: An International Journal, 12, 33–41.
Corbin, J. M., & Strauss, A. (1992a). A nursing model for
chronic illness management based upon the trajectory 
framework. In P. Woog (Ed.), The chronic illness trajectory
framework: The Corbin and Strauss nursing model (pp. 9–28).
New York: Springer.
Corbin, J. M., & Strauss, A. (1992b). Commentary. In
P. Woog (Ed.), The chronic illness trajectory framework: The
Corbin and Strauss nursing model (pp. 97–102). New York:
Springer.
Curry, L. C., Walker, C., Moore, P., & Hogstel, M. (2010). 
Validating a model of chronic illness and family caregiving.
Journal of Theory Construction & Testing, 14(1), 10–16.
Dunn, H. L. (1973). High-level wellness. Arlington, VA:
Beatty.
Erickson, H. L. (2007). Philosophy and theory of holism. 
Nursing Clinics of North America, 42, 139–163.
Froman, R. D., & Owen, S. V. (2003). Validation of the 
Spanish life support preference questionnaire (LSPQ). 
Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 35(1), 33–36.
Giger, J. N., & Davidhizar, R. E. (2008). Transcultural  nursing:
Assessment and intervention (5th ed.). St. Louis, MO: Mosby
Elsevier.
Glanz, K., Rimer, B. K., & Lewis, F. M. (Eds.) (2002). Health
behavior and health education: Theory, research, and practice
(3rd. ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Gordon, M. (2008). Assess notes: Assessment and diagnostic rea-
soning. Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Granger, B. B., Moser, D., Harrell, J., Sandelowski, M., &
Ekman, I. (2007). Progress in cardiovascular nursing, 22(3),
152–158.
Gunther, M. E. (2010). Martha E. Rogers: Unitary human 
beings. In M. R. Alligood & A. M. Tomey (Eds.), Nursing
theorists and their work (7th ed., pp. 242–264). St. Louis,
MO: Mosby/Elsevier.
Jourard, S. M. (1971). The transparent self. New York: Litton
Educational.

King, I. M. (1981). A theory for nursing: Systems, concepts,
process. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
King, I. M. (1987). King’s theory of goal attainment. In R. R.
Parse (Ed.), Nursing science: Major paradigms, theories, and
critiques (pp. 107–113). Philadelphia, PA: W. B. Saunders.
Klimmek, R., & Wenzel, J. (2012). Adaptation of the 
Illness Trajectory Framework to describe the work of
transitional cancer survivorship. Oncology Nursing 
Forum, 39, E499–510.
Leininger, M. (1970). Nursing and anthropology: Two worlds to
blend. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Leininger, M. (2002a). Culture care assessments for congruent
competency practices. In M. Leininger & M. R. McFarland,
Transcultural nursing: Concepts, theories, research, and practice
(3rd ed., pp. 117–143). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Leininger, M. (2002b). Cultures and tribes of nursing, 
hospitals, and the medical culture. In M. Leininger & 
M. R. McFarland, Transcultural nursing: Concepts, 
theories, research, and practice (3rd ed., pp. 181–204). 
New York: McGraw- Hill.
Leininger, M. (2002c). The theory of culture care and 
ethnonursing research method. In M. Leininger & 
M. R. McFarland, Transcultural nursing: Concepts, 
theories, research, and practice (3rd ed., pp. 71–98). 
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Leininger, M. M. (1991a). Selected culture care findings of 
diverse cultures using culture care theory and ethnometh-
ods. In M. M. Leininger (Ed.), Culture care diversity and
universality: A theory of nursing (Pub. No. 15–2402, 
pp. 345–371). New York: National League for Nursing.
Leininger, M. M. (1991b). The theory of culture care 
diversity and universality. In M. M. Leininger (Ed.), 
Culture care diversity and universality: A theory of nursing
(Pub. No. 15–2402, pp. 5–68). New York: National
League for Nursing.
Leininger, M. M. (1994). Transcultural nursing education: 
A worldwide imperative. Nursing and Health Care, 15,
254–257.
Leininger, M. M., & McFarland, M. R. (2006). Culture 
care diversity and universality: A worldwide nursing theory
(2nd ed.). Boston, MA: Jones and Bartlett.
McEvoy, P., & Barnes, P. (2007). Using the chronic care
model to tackle depression among older adults who have
long-term physical conditions. Journal of Psychiatric and
Mental Health Nursing, 14, 233–238.
Newman, M. A. (2008). Transforming presence: The difference
that nursing makes. Philadelphia, PA: F.A. Davis.
Parse, R. R. (1981). Man-living-health: A theory of nursing. 
New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Pender, N. J. (1987). Health promotion in nursing practice
(2nd ed.). Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange.
Pender, N. J. (1996). Health promotion in nursing practice
(3rd ed.). Stamford, CT: Appleton & Lange.
Pender, N. J., Murdaugh, C. L., and Parsons, M. A. (2002).
Health promotion in nursing practice (4th ed.). Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Pender, N. J., Murdaugh, C. L., and Parsons, M. A. (2006).
Health promotion in nursing practice (5th ed.). Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Pender, N. J., Murdaugh, C. L., and Parsons, M. A. (2011).
Health promotion in nursing practice (6th ed.). Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Purnell, L. (2013). Transcultural health care: A culturally 
competent approach (4th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: F.A. Davis. 
Ray, M. A. (2010). Transcultural caring dynamics in nursing and
health care. Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Spector, R. E. (2013). Cultural diversity in health and  illness
(8th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
Strauss, A. L., Corbin, J., Fagerhaugh, S., Glaser, B. G.,
Maines, D., Suczek, B., & Wiener, C. L. (1984). Chronic
illness and the quality of life (2nd ed.). St. Louis, MO: C. V.
Mosby.
Strauss, A. L., & Glaser, B. G. (1975). Chronic illness and the
quality of life. St. Louis, MO: C. V. Mosby.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2010). Healthy People 2020. Retrieved from http://www
.healthypeople.gov/2020/about/default.aspx
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public
Health Service (USDHHS, PHS). (1992). Healthy People
2000: Summary Report. Boston, MA: Jones & Bartlett.
Valencia-Go, G. (2006). Emerging populations and health. In
C. L. Edlman & C. L. Mandle (Eds.), Health promotion
throughout the lifespan (6th ed., pp. 23–49). St. Louis, MO:
Mosby. 
Weinert, C., Cudney, S., & Spring, A. (2008). Evolution of
a conceptual model for adaptation to chronic illness. 
Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 40, 364–372.
Zborowsky, T, & Kreitzer, M. J. (2009). People, place, and
process: The role of place in creating optimal healing 
environments. Creative Nursing, 15, 186–190. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Burton, C. R. (2000). Rethinking stroke rehabilitation: The
Corbin and Strauss chronic illness trajectory framework.
Journal of Advanced Nursing, 32, 595–602.
Campinha-Bacote, J. (2003). The process of cultural competence
in the delivery of healthcare services: A culturally competent
model of care (4th. ed.). Cincinnati, OH: Transcultural
C.A.R.E. Associates. 
Erickson, H. L., Erickson, M. E., Campbell, J. A., Brekke, M. E.,
Sandor, M. K. (2012). Validation of holistic nursing com-
petencies: Role-delineation study, 2012. Journal of Holistic
Nursing, 31, 291–302. 
Fontaine, K. L. (2011). Complementary and alternative therapies
for nursing practice (3rd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall.
Halcomb, E., & Davidson, P. (2005). Using the illness
 trajectory framework to describe recovery from traumatic
injury. Contemporary Nurse: A Journal for the Australian
Nursing Profession, 19(1–2), 232–241.
Lubkin, I. M., & Larsen, P. D. (1998). Chronic illness: Impact
and interventions (4th ed.). Sudbury, MA: Jones and
Bartlett. 
Purnell, L. (2005). The Purnell model for cultural competence.
Journal of Multicultural Nursing & Health, 11(2), 7–15.
ONLINE RESOURCES
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
http://www.ahrq.gov
The Commonwealth Fund at
http://www.cmwf.org
76
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

Healthy People
http://www.healthypeople.gov
Office of Minority Health & Health Disparities
http://www.cdc.gov/minorityhealth/OMHHE.html
National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine
http://nccam.nih.gov
National Center for Cultural Competence
http://nccc.georgetown.edu/index.html
Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion
http://odphp.osophs.dhhs.gov
Transcultural C.A.R.E. Associates
http://www.transculturalcare.net
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services
http://www.hhs.gov
CHAPTER 4 Health, Illness, and Holism     ●
77

Evidence-Based Practice
78
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Explain the importance of evidence-based practice for the profession of nursing.
2. Define basic terminology used in research for application of findings in practice.
3. Describe legal and ethical considerations applicable to research with human subjects.
4. Describe different ways to participate in nursing research.
5. Analyze barriers to evidence-based practice.
6. Prepare a basic critique of a published research study.
7. Plan for the inclusion of consistent evidence-based care in the practice setting.
Evidence-Based Practice
Research
Ethical Codes
Basic Human Rights
Minimal Risk
Empirical Research
Qualitative Research
Knowledge Transformation
Translational Research
Critique
Research Problem
Literature Review
Hypotheses
Research Design
Operational Definition
Variables
Sampling
Data Collection Procedures
Instruments
Descriptive Statistics 
Inferential Statistics
5
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
“We may search for information, but once gained 
how does it become wisdom?”
Rose Kearney-Nunnery
Key Terms

Theory guides practice, but current knowledge and practice
must be based on evidence of efficacy rather than intuition,
tradition, or past practice. Out of a national concern for
safety initiatives in 1999 and a focus on systems issues in
2001, the national call came for changes in the education
and competencies of health professionals in all disciplines in
2003. The result was the identification of the five core com-
petencies for health professionals identified in Chapter 1.
The importance of employing evidence-based practice (EBP)
was described as follows:
The committee feels that it is critical for interdisciplinary
health teams and each of the disciplines to be able to tap
this evidence base effectively at the point of patient care,
determining whether an intervention, such as a preven-
tive service, diagnostic test, or therapy, can be expected to
produce better outcomes than alternatives—including
the alternative of doing nothing. (Greiner & Knebel,
2003, p. 56)
Sigma Theta Tau (2005), the International Honor 
Society of Nursing, defines the use of evidence-based prac-
tice as “an integration of the best evidence available, nursing
expertise, and the values and preferences of the individuals,
families, and communities who are selected” (p. 1). This
does not sound unique to our view of nursing and quality
healthcare. The question becomes Are we consistently using
the best evidence available to guide care to patients? And
the next questions are: Do we have the best evidence avail-
able? Where is the information? And, are we applying 
appropriate knowledge in clinical situations? 
An actual paradigm shift has occurred with the
call for evidence-based practice. Traditional practices are
not appropriate unless supported by current evidence of
efficacy and appropriateness for the patient. As will be
discussed in subsequent chapters, Magnet Recognition
also supports the use of evidence-based practice for en-
hanced outcomes for both patients and nurses (Ameri can
Nurses Credentialing Center [ANCC], 2014):
A robust quality program with clinical decisions based on
solid evidence translates into better patient outcomes. (p. 1)
Research supports our knowledge base and answers ques-
tions of clinical concern. It provides sound information
on which to base practice, as evidence-based nursing prac-
tice. Porter-O’Grady (2006) describes  evidence-based
practice as requiring “a degree of flexibility and fluidity
based on firm scientific and clinical evidence validating
appropriate and sustainable clinical practice” (p. 3). Evi-
dence can come from a number of sources, but we need
both seekers and users of the information in practice to 
develop and enhance knowledge. Clinicians in the practice
setting have the questions. These questions must be re-
fined and studied so that nurse researchers can find solu-
tions to healthcare practice problems. And we need further
validation from the consumer as to the appropriateness of
the intervention. This is truly evidence-based practice.
THE EVOLUTION OF
NURSING RESEARCH
Research has been defined as a “systematic, controlled,
empirical, amoral, public, and critical investigation of
natural phenomena guided by theory and hypotheses
about the presumed relations among such phenomena”
(Kerlinger & Lee, 2000, p. 14). Given this definition,
research is still viewed by some as an academic exercise.
But it is much more in nursing. The purposes of research
are to describe, explain, predict, and control phenomena
and to provide information for future use in practice 
or for expansion of the knowledge base. Specific to the
discipline, the National Institute of Nursing Research
(NINR, 2012) defines nursing research as the develop-
ment of knowledge to (1) build the scientific foundation
for clinical practice, (2) prevent disease and disability,
(3) manage and eliminate symptoms caused by illness,
and (4) enhance end-of-life and palliative care (p. 1).
Nursing research began with Florence Nightingale and
her identification of environmental influences on health
and illness. In her classic Notes on Nursing: What It Is, 
and What It Is Not (1859), Nightingale identified factors
that influence health and wellness, supporting them with
observational accounts, statistics, and deductive reasoning.
Following her landmark efforts, non-nurse researchers per-
formed limited research on nurses and nursing education.
Then, in the mid-20th century, graduate nursing programs
began to proliferate, as did nurses’ involvement in research
studies, often on nurses and delivery of nursing services.
The introduction of the journal Nursing Research in 1952
provided a specific channel for disseminating research find-
ings to other nurses.
During the second half of the 20th century, the
 number of graduate and baccalaureate nursing programs
grew. Content on research became prevalent in baccalau-
reate nursing curricula during the 1970s and early 1980s.
Graduate student enrollments increased with the growth
in doctoral programs in the 1980s. Research findings were
used to develop and refine  conceptual and theoretical
models. More nurses were now doing research, and 
the American Nurses Association (ANA) Cabinet on
Nursing Research identified research expectations by level
of education in 1981. The primary focus of research
changed during this time from educational programs and
methods to the focus of nursing: people as patients, con-
sumers, and members of society. Support has grown for 
research as we see the needs to investigate the domain of
nursing, test theories and interventions, and demonstrate
efficacy and efficiency of nursing actions and patient out-
comes. And now, with our emphasis on evidence-based
practice, we need more than isolated studies. We depend
on an evolving body of knowledge of efficacy for positive
patient outcomes.
Nursing research was supported in a position statement
of the American Association of Colleges of Nursing
(AACN) that has gone through revisions as our body of
knowledge has developed—as have our professionals with
additional knowledge and education with the develop-
ment of the generalist nurse prepared at master’s level and
the nurse with a practice doctorate. AACN has identified
research expectations and competencies of graduates from
baccalaureate through postdoctoral programs, moving
from evaluation and utilization of research to generating
new knowledge with advanced preparation (AACN,
2006a, p. 5). This progression has implications for the
baccalaureate- prepared nurse in the identification of 
CHAPTER 5 Evidence-Based Practice     ●
79

research problems, the support of ongoing research, the
use of applicable findings in practice, and the expansion
of the knowledge base following preparation at the grad-
uate level. For example, at the baccalaureate level, AACN
(2008) describes the scholarship needed for  evidence-based
practice as “grounded in the translation of current evi-
dence into one’s practice” (p. 4). Nursing programs are re-
quired to have content and practice in place in the
baccalaureate curriculum with demonstration of these out-
comes in students and graduates. And baccalaureate grad-
uates are expected to demonstrate further evolution and
skill in professional practice. In comparison, for the prac-
tice doctorate, AACN (2006b) illustrates additional skill
where “the scholarship of application expands the realm
of knowledge beyond mere discovery and . . . through its
position where the sciences, human caring, and human
needs meet and new understandings emerge” (p. 11).
The Growing Significance 
of Nursing Research
The establishment of the National Center for Nursing Re-
search (NCNR) as part of the National Institutes of
Health (NIH) in April 1986, under the Health Research
Extension Act of 1985 (PL99–158), demonstrated the im-
portance of research for and by the profession. In 1993,
the National Institute of Nursing Research (NINR) was
established, a change from the former divisional and center
status, with fiscal year appropriations from Congress grow-
ing, thus further demonstrating the importance of gener-
ating knowledge in nursing. An important component of
the mission of the NINR is to “promote and improve the
health of individuals, families, communities, and popula-
tions [through] . . . clinical and basic research and research
training on health and illness across the lifespan to build
the scientific foundation for clinical practice, prevent dis-
ease and disability, manage and eliminate symptoms
caused by illness, and improve palliative and end-of-life
care” (NINR, 2013, p. 1). Extramural research programs
for the NINR concern promoting health and preventing
disease, improving quality of life, and addressing health
disparities, end-of-life issues, and quality care. Research
proposals are highly competitive at NINR, as with other
areas of NIH. Research proposals are reviewed by a panel
of experts and scored according to the consistency with
the mission of NINR and the merit of the research  project.
During the initial phase of NINR initiatives, research 
priorities were specified for investigations. In 2004, the
NINR issued research opportunities to focus on chronic
illnesses or conditions, behavioral changes and interven-
tions, and response to compelling health concerns. Impor-
tant information is evolving with results presented to
Congress and other audiences. Reports on these projects
are available and are making a difference, as are the con-
tinued federal appropriations that are committed to the
NINR. Scientific topics continue to be identified as areas
of research emphasis and ongoing interests.
A vital issue is the need for reliable and valid research
on questions of clinical concern for decision making and
change in practice. In nursing, research must be directed
at interventions over which nursing has control so that
the knowledge developed can lead to needed change. This
direction at nursing practice issues is also relevant in collab-
orative projects that address multiple disciplines. This focus
on practice is the essence of evidence-based practice.
For some time, Sigma Theta Tau has recognized the
importance of generating and using research. The pur-
poses of this honor society include encouraging scholarly
and creative work. This purpose is applicable to both the
conduct and utilization of research for evidence-based
practice. Scholarship involves discovery, integration, 
application, and teaching. Utilizing and communicating
research in nursing practice projects and conferences
have been foci of Sigma Theta Tau International. The
organization also supports research investigations that
generate nursing knowledge through competitive extra-
mural grants for researchers, as does the American Nurses
Foundation. Nurses have a major responsibility to iden-
tify research problems, support ongoing research, and use
applicable findings in practice, along with continuing to
learn in this area of scholarly nursing practice.
LEGAL AND ETHICAL
CONSIDERATIONS IN
RESEARCH
An essential responsibility in professional nursing practice
is protecting the rights of research subjects. The rights of
people in research have been of great concern to ethicists,
legislators, and professionals, leading to ethical codes and
guidelines for the protection of research subjects. History
has provided much of the impetus for our professional
codes and federal regu lations. During World War II, ex-
periments noted for the unethical treatment of subjects
included the Nazi medical experiments and the Japanese
concentration camp experiments on human subjects. 
As a result, international ethical codes evolved. In 1949,
the Nuremberg Code set standards for involving human
subjects in research, with guidelines for consent, protec-
tions, risks and benefits, and qualifications of researchers.
For example, true informed and voluntary consent 
became an essential requirement. The Declaration of
Helsinki (1990), formalized in 1964 and revised in 1975
and 1989, provided guidelines on therapeutic and non-
therapeutic research, along with the requirements for 
80
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
ONLINE CONSULT 
American Nurses Foundation: Nursing Grant 
Scholars at 
http://anfonline.org/Doc-Vault/Programs/
NursingResearchGrant
Federal Opportunities for Research Funding at 
http://www.grants.gov
National Institute of Nursing Research at 
http://ninr.nih.gov
Sigma Theta Tau International: Research Grant 
Opportunities at 
http://www.nursingsociety.org/Research/Pages/
default.aspx

disclosing the risks and potential benefits of the research
and obtaining written consent for participation from 
research subjects.
Safety, Health, and Welfare
In the United States, the Tuskegee syphilis study, the
Jewish Chronic Disease Hospital study, and the Willow-
brook hepatitis study are further examples of unethical
treatment of research subjects (Box 5.1). In the quest
for knowledge, researchers failed to consider the basic
human rights of their subjects, especially the right of 
informed consent and considerations for vulnerable
populations. Federal regulations evolved from the 
original guidelines of the former Department of Health,
Education, and Welfare, culminating in the National
Research Act in 1974. This law specified the composi-
tion and authority of institutional review boards (IRBs).
IRBs are now mandated as oversight bodies to ensure
protection of research subjects, especially for research
projects seeking federal funding.
The Belmont Report was the outcome of a National
Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of 
Biomedical and Behavioral Research assembled by the 
National Research Act. This commission was charged 
with identifying principles and developing guidelines. The
report specified boundaries between practice and research.
Basic ethical principles were reinforced, highlighting 
respect for persons and defining the principles of benefi-
cence (doing no harm, with maximum benefits and mini-
mal risks) and justice (fairness relative to one’s share, need,
effort, contribution, and merit). Specific applications 
that resulted from the Belmont Report (1979) were 
(1) guidelines on informed consent, including provision
of information and ensuring comprehension and volun-
tariness, (2) assessment of risks and benefits, and (3) se-
lection of subjects. The Belmont Report provided the basis
for federal laws.
All activities involving humans as subjects must pro-
vide for the safety, health, and welfare of every individual.
Subjects do not abdicate rights with their participation in
a research study. Four basic human rights must be en-
sured for research subjects. These principles speak to eth-
ical considerations and human rights:
1. Beneﬁcence (“Do no harm”)
2. Full disclosure
3. Self-determination
4. Privacy and conﬁdentiality
The “do no harm” concept includes careful consideration
of the risk-benefit ratio with any research project. One
must keep in mind that minimal risk requires that 
“the probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort 
anticipated in the research are not greater in and of them-
selves than those ordinarily encountered in daily life or
during the performance of routine physical or psycholog-
ical examinations or tests” (Protection of Human Subjects,
45 CFR 46, §46.102 [i], 2009). Full disclosure of infor-
mation and self-determination by potential subjects are
necessary conditions for informed consent. In addition,
subjects’ rights to privacy and confidentiality must be en-
sured throughout the process. As protections for these four
rights, the guidelines must be considered by researchers
and their respective IRBs (Box 5.2).
The issue of privacy of personal health information
(PHI) was the focus of the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996. PHI is “individually
identifiable health information transmitted by electronic
CHAPTER 5 Evidence-Based Practice     ●
81
BOX 5.1
Examples of Unethical Use of 
Vulnerable Populations in Research 
1932–1972  Tuskegee, Alabama
Longitudinal clinical study by the Public Health 
Service of untreated syphilis in sharecroppers, mostly
African Americans, who did not receive full disclosure,
did not give informed consent, and received deceptive
and ineﬀective treatments.
1963  Brooklyn, New York
In a short-term study, debilitated patients at the Jewish
Chronic Disease Hospital, who did not have cancer,
were injected with live cancer cells to study their re-
sponse. This study also had partial federal funding with
subjects who were indigent and did not receive full
disclosure or informed consent.
1963–1966  Staten Island, New York
At Willowbrook State School, a school for the mentally
retarded (intellectually disabled), healthy children were
intentionally injected with the hepatitis virus to study
the disease and treatment process. Parents did not re-
ceive full disclosure, and needless to say, subjects were
harmed.
BOX 5.2
General Principles/Ethical Guidelines
for Research on Human Subjects
●Risks to the subjects are minimized.
●Risks are reasonable in relation to anticipated bene-
ﬁts to subjects.
●Selection of subjects is equitable.
●Informed consent is sought from each pros pective
subject or the legally authorized  representative.
●Informed consent is appropriately documented.
●The research plan makes adequate provision for
monitoring the data collected to ensure the safety 
of subjects.
●Adequate provisions exist to protect the privacy of
subjects and maintain the conﬁdentiality of data.
●Additional safeguards are in place to protect the rights
and welfare for subjects who are vulnerable—e.g.,
children, prisoners, pregnant women, mentally 
disabled persons, or economically or educationally 
disadvantaged persons—because these subjects are
vulnerable to coercion or undue inﬂuence.
Source: Title 45 Code of Federal Regulations Part 46 (45 CFR 46),
§46.111 at http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/humansubjects/guidance/
45cfr46.html

media, maintained in electronic mediator transmitted or
maintained in any other form or medium” (USDHHS,
2004, p. 6). The Act’s Privacy Rule  establishes:
[M]inimum federal standards for protecting the privacy
of individually identifiable health information. The Rule
confers certain rights on individuals, including rights to
access and amend their health information and to obtain
a record of when and why their PHI has been shared
with others for certain purposes. (USDHHS, 2004, p. 6)
For researchers, informed consent is a necessary process.
HIPAA’s privacy provisions require further language in the
consent process, with required elements for access to and
use of PHI. A privacy authorization may be incorporated
into the consent form or maintained as a separate docu-
ment. De-identifying PHI before revealing it to others re-
quires the removal of specific data identifiers that could link
the individual to his or her PHI. The privacy rules do allow,
however, for the use of selected categories of PHI, as a “lim-
ited data set” that may be used or disclosed for purposes of
research, public health, or healthcare operations without ob-
taining either an individual’s authorization or a waiver for
its use and disclosure, with the removal of 16 data identifiers
and a data use agreement (USDHHS, 2004, p. 19). 
As with other areas of nursing practice, legal and ethical
considerations are deliberated with any research activity.
These issues occur in the planning, implementation, analysis,
and reporting stages for a research endeavor. In the proposal
or planning stage of any research study, the researcher must
consider the rights of the subjects and the ethical nature of
the study. When a researcher defines the problem and pur-
pose of the research, the significance of the problem for the
body of knowledge and the ethical issues associated with the
proposed investigation are vital considerations.
The Institutional Review 
Board (IRB)
Once the basic research plan is developed, an IRB must
review and approve the start of the study. Strict federal
guidelines for review by an IRB must be adhered to, espe-
cially in agencies seeking funding for research. Human
subjects’ rights of full disclosure, self-determination 
(informed consent), privacy and confidentiality, and safety
must be ensured. The research proposal, with statements
of the problem and purpose or significance, literature sup-
port, theory and definitions, specific research questions or
hypotheses, design, sampling plans, and data collection
and analysis methods must be approved by the IRB for
use with human subjects. The researcher submits a pro-
posal to an IRB for approval to proceed to the next steps
of subject selection and data collection. During this stage
of implementing the research project, the investigator
must adhere to the procedures specified for data collection
and analysis. The IRB performs evaluations throughout
the project to ensure that subjects are not placed at risk
and that the integrity and confidentiality of the data are
maintained during collection, analysis, and dissemination
of the findings.
ANA Guidelines
In addition to basic ethical principles and federal, state,
local, and institutional regulations, in 1985 the ANA
specified human rights guidelines for nurses in research.
Ten years later, and with the consideration of societal
and professional practice changes that had occurred,
new guidelines based on nine principles were published
(Silva, 1995, p. 2). These principles addressed benefi-
cence, full disclosure, self-determination, privacy and
confidentiality, and the skills of the researcher.
Each of the nine principles charged the investigator
with specific responsibilities. Explanatory commentary
and specific research guidelines were presented for each of
the nine principles. For example, with the protection of
subjects against harm, vulnerable groups were discussed,
such as pregnant women, children, persons with HIV or
AIDS, and the elderly. All of the principles required that
professionals in a practice setting be aware of any ongoing
research and its associated risks to both subjects and 
participants. And nurses have both the right and the re-
sponsibility to participate in research. Participation of
nurses should be evident; for example, they should func-
tion as members of research teams and IRBs. Nurses also
can actively participate by giving support and assistance
to others involved in research for the advancement of
knowledge and enhancement of professional practice
within the discipline and among the various healthcare
disciplines. The process of research with human subjects
must be diligent and must benefit subjects and participants
82
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
ONLINE CONSULT 
National Institutes of Health: Regulations and 
Ethical Guidelines, including the Belmont Report
(http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/humansubjects/
guidance/belmont.html), the Declaration of 
Helsinki (http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/archive/irb/
irb_appendices.htm#j6), and the Nuremberg 
Code at 
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/archive/irb/irb_
appendices.htm#j5
Compensating for Research Injuries: The Ethical
and Legal Implications of Programs to Redress 
Injured Subjects, Volume 1, a report by the 
President’s Commission for the Study of 
Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical 
and Behavioral Research, Washington, DC, 
June 1982, at 
http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/radiation/dir/
mstreet/commeet/meet16/brief16/tab_b/
br16b1a.txt
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses.
(2013). Ethical foundations for critical care nursing
research at 
http://www.aacn.org/wd/practice/docs/
research/ethical-foundations-critical-care-
nursing-research.pdf
ONLINE CONSULT 
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services:
Health Information Privacy at 
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/hipaa/

through the acquisition and use of new knowledge. Con-
sult the government and your institutional Web sites for
information on protections for human subjects in 
research.
PROCESSES OF NURSING
RESEARCH
The actual research process is generally thought of as the
scientific method. This can be misleading, however,
when one considers the different types of research. To
understand the basics of nursing research, first think
about the scientific method as a systematic process for
answering a question or testing a hypothesis. One prob-
lem emerges: this is done more easily in a controlled 
laboratory setting, with variables such as chemicals, than
in a natural setting in which the variables involve people,
well or ill, who need nursing interventions. With this in
mind, it is easier to begin with empirical research using
quantitative methods.
The Empirical Method
First, consider the steps of research. Empirical research is
based on the strict rules of the scientific method and on the
philosophical perspective of positivism. With this perspec-
tive, the focus is on an observable, measurable, and pre-
dictable world. It is guided by a controlled set of steps that
one goes through to make an observation or test a hypoth-
esis. It is a deductive and linear method consisting of the
following steps:
1. Identiﬁcation of the problem
2. Statement of the purpose
3. Review of the literature
4. Description of the theoretical framework
5. Deﬁnition of terms
6. Statement of the hypothesis(es)
7. Selection of the research design, population, and
sample
8. IRB approval
9. Data collection
10. Data analysis and interpretation
11. Presentation of ﬁndings and recommendations
Using this empirical approach, the researcher may 
return to a prior step in the planning stage—for example,
to refine the problem after a review of the literature—but
will still go through all successive steps in a systematic and
controlled manner to maintain the integrity of the process.
Once the plans for the study are finalized, strict research
protocols are adhered to with quantitative methods to 
reduce threats to the validity of the study. Although some
of the steps may be combined, nurse researchers using
quantitative methods engage in the same process to de-
scribe, explain, predict, and control phenomena of con-
cern to nursing. The following is a review of the empirical
research process.
In the initial step of problem identification, the re-
searchers specify what they are interested in studying. This
is the “what” that will be done as the study progresses. For
example, a specific nursing intervention is compared with
a traditional nursing intervention for a selected group of
patients. Next, researchers specify the reason they are in-
terested in this problem, or the purpose of the research. 
At this time, the significance of the problem for the body
of knowledge and ethical issues associated with the 
proposed investigation are considerations. This is “why”
the researchers want to investigate the new intervention—
for example, to effectively improve the health awareness
or healthy behaviors of the patient group.
The researchers next search the literature to discover
what is known on the topics: the interventions, the patient
group, cultural factors, useful theoretical bases (e.g., self-
care), and what problems have been studied in the area.
This provides context and the current information known
on the topic. This is a time-intensive process that requires
absorbing a great deal of information for the planning
stage of the project. Researchers perform literature
searches, followed by careful critique and assimilation of
the information. Next, researchers specify the theoretical
framework, or philosophical orientation that will guide 
the research. For example, the study may be guided by 
one of the middle-range or practice theories discussed in
Chapter 3. Definitions of terms and variables specific to the
study emerge from the theoretical framework, as do specific
research questions that will be addressed or the hypotheses
(predictions) the study will test.
So far we have the basic idea for the investigation, but
the researchers must select a design or plan for the study
that is appropriate for the problem in light of the theo-
retical framework. For example, when studying the effi-
cacy of an intervention with two groups of patients, the
researcher may use an experimental control group design.
However, true experiments require manipulation of 
the independent variable, control of other variables, and
random assignment to study groups. Often we see quasi-
experimental designs in nursing—for example, the use of
a nonequivalent control group—because of the nature of
the intervention.
Once the appropriate design has been selected, the 
researchers must define the population—those individ-
uals or groups to whom the findings will be applicable
or generalizable. Researchers know that not all of the
people to whom the research applies can be studied, 
so they must study a select group of the population; this
is known as a sample. The researchers’ decision about
the type and the size of the sample is based on the 
research design, theoretical framework, research pur-
pose, and research problem. It all relates back in a linear
CHAPTER 5 Evidence-Based Practice     ●
83
ONLINE CONSULT 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) at 
http://www.ahrq.gov/
National Institutes of Health at 
http://www.nih.gov/ 
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services at 
http://www.hhs.gov
Office for Human Research Protections 
(OHRP) at 
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/

manner, but the goals in sampling are to limit bias and
statistical error and for the sample to be representative
of the population.
The researchers now have the basic plan for their in-
vestigations, but no one has been studied yet. The rights
of human subjects must be considered and protected. At
this point the researcher submits a proposal to an IRB for
approval or exemption to proceed to the next step of data
collection. Once IRB approval has been secured, the re-
searcher is ready to begin collecting data.
Plans for data collection and analysis have already been
made in the research proposal and are strictly adhered to.
Researchers must follow the proposed design when data
are collected; for example, they cannot decide to replace
interviews that were planned with a questionnaire. Data
must be collected in an orderly and systematic manner and
must be recorded before analysis and decision making
begin.
Measurement issues are of prime concern. The type of
data collected and the measurement instruments are,
again, determined before the study is started, on the basis
of the research problem, literature review, theoretical basis,
research questions or hypotheses, research design, and
sampling method. Issues of reliability (consistency of
measurement) and validity (proper measurement of the
variable of interest) are considered by the researcher from
prior methodological studies, use in similar research, or a
pilot study as a small-scale version or a formal trial de-
signed to resolve any methodological issues. Measurements
may be self-reported, in writing, by the subjects in the
sample (via tests, questionnaires, diaries, etc.) or may re-
quire recording or note taking by researchers in personal
or telephone interviews.
Measurements can also be observations of behavior
(ability to perform a skill, such as a dressing change), re-
sponses by subjects on a scale (such as a Likert scale or a
scale for pain perception from 0 to 10), physiological
measures (such as blood pressure, electrocardiogram, elec-
troencephalogram, or oxygen saturation), review of
records, or other types of methods. Research protocols are
strictly adhered to: the identical detailed process is used
with each research subject. Scripts are used to read instruc-
tions to subjects to ensure that each subject has been given
the same information for the data collection process.
Once all subjects have been investigated and all data
collected, the researcher moves into the analysis stage. The
analysis provides information to answer the research ques-
tions or support or refute the hypotheses. The analysis
stage seems to be the most threatening to the research
novice. Keep in mind that the research depends on a good
analysis of the data so that reliable, valid information is
made available on the topic. The most important decisions
for this stage were made before the study was started, with
the selection of the correct statistical tests. In addition,
computers or statisticians can easily perform calculations.
Try to see this stage as one of discovery and understanding
how the data provide answers to the research questions or
hypotheses. The findings are reported objectively for each
research question or hypothesis. 
The results of the descriptive statistics (such as
 frequencies, means, standard deviations, correlations) are
reported to characterize the sample. Appropriate inferen-
tial statistics are used to generalize to the population (such
as t-test, analysis of variance, correlations, and multivariate
analysis), according to the type of measurement scale, the
sample size, and the assumption of a normal distribution.
From the point of reporting the statistics, the researcher
then interprets the meaning and implications relative to
the stated research questions or hypotheses. Recommen-
dations for use of the findings and further research are then
presented in the research report.
Presenting the findings and recommendations to oth-
ers is the final responsibility of the researcher as part of
the particular study. The findings can be disseminated
locally, regionally, nationally, and/or globally through
presentations or publications. It is vital that the infor-
mation be shared with others. If the findings are impor-
tant and point to a need for change, practicing nurses
have the opportunity and responsibility to implement
the information as appropriate to their practice settings.
Additional research may also be needed. If the findings
were not significant or were indifferent, then further re-
search is needed, perhaps involving further specification
of the problem, better measurement instruments, or a
different environment or sample. If the research findings
were negative, the new intervention was less effective
than current ones. Still more research may be needed 
if there were problems with reliability and validity. For
example, if a safety issue emerged during the research, a
subject would have been withdrawn from the study or
the study halted. Still, it is necessary for others to know
about this in order to make use of the information or
avoid problem areas.
Qualitative Research
The research process using qualitative research methods
is somewhat different. Qualitative research is used 
to generate theory to explore, describe, and illuminate
phenomena. The basis of qualitative research focuses 
on the meaning and interpretation of experiences to 
understand some phenomena. Types of research classi-
fied as qualitative include ethnography, field studies,
grounded theory, historical research, analytic induction,
and phenomenology.
Major data collection methods are naturalistic
 observation (hence the term field studies) and on-site in-
terviewing. Some researchers describe the data that emerge
from this research as “information rich,” because the re-
searcher begins a study with a need to understand from
the perspective of people in the environment. The re-
searcher is not limiting the data collection to a few vari-
ables. Rather, he or she is trying to have the people in their
environment describe the phenomena; the researcher then
classifies concepts, identifies themes, and generates theory.
This is why some also see qualitative research as a “human-
istic” form of research that investigates people and their
unique experiences.
In qualitative research, the linear steps of the process
are not the procedure. The researcher must still complete
the initial process of developing the project, with identi-
fication of a problem or a little-understood area or phe-
nomena, and the statement of purpose as an inquiry for
“discovery” of the phenomena. The review of the litera-
ture looks at what is known, which is often tangential,
because little may be known before the research uncovers
84
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

the phenomena. The theory will evolve from this re-
search, rather than be driven by it, as are the terminology
and future study hypotheses that use quantitative methods
for theory testing. The process of IRB approval is still re-
quired prior to data collection, for the protection of
human subjects.
Qualitative methods have different inquiry forms and
processes. Data collection and analysis are driven by the par-
ticular qualitative method, as with an ethnography to de-
scribe the phenomena from the perspective of the subjects.
Reliability and validity issues can be difficult with this
form of research, and investigators frequently use triangu-
lation of data to provide valid results. Triangulation in-
volves the use of multiple data sources, complementary
investigations, or theoretical perspectives to improve the
data’s validity. Dissemina tion of the findings through 
presentations and publi cation is the final step in the process,
along with identification of future areas for inquiry.
Choice of Research Method
Whether quantitative or qualitative research methods are
selected depends on the phenomena of interest and the
purpose of the research. For example, one researcher may
use qualitative methods to investigate the health beliefs of
a particular cultural group, while another researcher would
use quantitative methods to test a new intervention de-
signed to enhance the functional independence of older
adults with a limitation in mobility. Comparisons of 
qualitative research to the empirical research process are 
illustrated in Table 5.1. Regardless of the methods selected
to address the need for information on the problem, the
CHAPTER 5 Evidence-Based Practice     ●
85
TABLE 5.1
Empirical and Qualitative Research Methods
Empirical Research
Qualitative Research
Identification of the 
problem
Statement of the 
purpose
Review of the literature
Description of the 
theoretical framework
Definition of terms
Statement of the 
hypothesis(es)
Selection of the research 
design, population, and 
sample
Approval of institutional 
review board 
Data collection 
Data analysis and 
interpretation
Presentation of findings 
and recommendations
Identify little understood area or 
phenomena.
Specify the inquiry for discovery of the
phenomena.
Using tangential subjects, demonstrate
why little is known about the phenomena.
Theory will evolve from the research.
Terminology will emerge from the 
findings.
Develop broad questions to be asked that
will lead to others during the research as
discovery. 
Select a qualitative method and a group
to seek their descriptions of their human
experience. Propose methods to access
the group.
Submit and obtain approval of research
proposal.
Gain entry to the group, propose broad
questions, receive information, and seek
meaning. Further questions emerge as 
the study progresses and are pursued in
search of meaning and understanding. For
example, use grounded theory to see the
data falling into differing categories.
Create meaning and themes from infor-
mation in transcripts and documents that
evolve into different areas and emerge
into a theoretical framework.
Propose a theoretical framework to pur-
sue further investigation of the categories
of meaning discovered, thus adding to our
theoretical bases described in Chapter 3.
Narrowly specify what is to be studied.
Specify the reason the problem is of 
interest.
Discover what is already known about
the problem.
Select and apply a theory or model.
Define terms and variables to be studied,
consistent with the theoretical model.
Specify questions or hypotheses to be
tested, consistent with the theoretical
model.
Select specific design and study instru-
ments. Specify population of interest.
Identify group and number of research
subjects (sample).
Submit and obtain approval of research
proposal.
Strictly adhere to research protocol, con-
trols, and steps specified with the study’s
measurement instruments; for example,
the experimental group of subjects has
one intervention while the control group
received the usual treatment or interven-
tion. Systematically record data.
Apply the statistical tests on the study
variables specified in the research pro-
posal and draw conclusions from these
tests.
Report the statistics on the questions or
hypotheses as findings. Draw conclu-
sions based on the findings and propose
applications and further investigation.

research must respect the individual or group in the quest
for knowledge.
THE ROAD TO EVIDENCE-
BASED PRACTICE
We have a responsibility to base nursing practice on 
current knowledge. This responsibility highlights an 
accountability issue for the profession and focuses the
direction of nursing research on issues for improved 
patient outcomes and effective care in a time when re-
sources are stretched beyond limits. We have evolved
from the landmark work for research-based nursing
practice that began in the 1970s. Between 1971 and
1975, the federally funded Western Interstate Commis-
sion for Higher Education (WICHE) project focused on
both the conduct of research projects and the utilization
of research findings, to support collaborative research
endeavors followed by a focus on using research findings
in practice (Lindeman & Krueger, 1977). Between 1975
and 1981, a second federally funded project, Conduct
and Utilization of Research in Nursing (CURN), 
focused on use in the hospital setting of the knowledge
from research already available. Finding the information
and the applicability to the practice  setting were the
skills of concern. This led to the  development of guide-
lines and specific protocols for research-based nursing
interventions and educational media to help nurses base
their practice and inter ventions with patients on re-
search evidence. Since the 1970s, many professional
journals are now dedicated to publishing research find-
ings, and other journals include special columns or re-
search features. Professional conferences, both general
and specialty, provide research presentations as special
and concurrent offerings. A focus on research and 
evidence-based practice has also emerged in certification
examinations.
In 1981, the ANA Cabinet for Nursing Research 
developed guidelines for involvement in research based on
level of nursing education, as mentioned earlier in the
chapter. Subsequently, professional nursing organizations
have delineated expectations for nurses’ involvement in 
research according to level of educational preparation. In
these guidelines, the graduate with doctoral or postdoc-
toral preparation is seen as providing leadership on inves-
tigating phenomena, applying theory, and developing
methods to generate knowledge for the discipline. With
an expertise in specialty practice, the nurse with graduate
preparation in nursing is the facilitator for using research
findings and conducting investigations. Baccalaureate
nursing graduates are research consumers and are respon-
sible for identifying researchable problems and findings
from prior research on which to base practice. 
Nevertheless, there have been problems with dissem-
inating findings and applying them in practice. National
practice guidelines have been available since the 1990s,
but studies have shown they have not been incorporated
consistently in practice. However, improvements are
apparent with our current focus on evidence-based
practice.
Evidence-based practice is fundamental to contem-
porary nursing, providing a firm foundation for nursing
interventions and quality improvement in healthcare.
EBP has been identified as one of the core competencies
for health professionals in all disciplines.
To address this core competency, the Academic Center
for Evidence-Based Practice (ACE) led the way with a
project to establish a national consensus on essential com-
petences for EBP for use in education and practice
(Stevens, 2005, p. 1). Competencies by educational level
(undergraduate, 20; masters, 32; and docoral, 31) were
identified based on the five stages of the ACE Star Model
of knowledge transformation (Fig. 5.1). In 2008, 10 ad-
ditional competencies were identified to address Associate
Degree Nursing preparation and the need for evidence-
based practice at the different educational levels (Stevens,
2009). Knowledge transformation is defined as “the con-
version of research findings from primary research results,
through a series of stages and forms, to impact on health
outcomes by way of EB care” (Stevens, 2009, p. 28). As
new knowledge is transformed through the five stages—
discovery, evidence summary, translation, integration, and
evaluation—the outcome is quality improvement of care
(Stevens, 2009, pp. 28–30). Discovery is primary research,
whereas the evidence summary is the available body of
knowledge. As noted by Stevens (2009), the rigorous evi-
dence summary step has moved professional practice from
the old paradigm of research utilization to evidence-based
care (p. 29).
When systematic reviews of research are available,
more is known about the body of knowledge and the 
evidence is stronger for clinical application, based on the
unique needs of the patient population. The Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) has provided
guidance in this area for comparative effectiveness reviews
across the health professions. The AHRQ (2014) Effec-
tive Health Care Program funds individual researchers,
research centers, and academic organizations to produce
effectiveness and comparative effectiveness research to 
improve the quality, safety, efficiency, and effectiveness
of healthcare through three primary products: research 
86
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
ACE Star Model fo Knowledge Transformation
Discovery
Evaluation
Integration
Summary
Translation
1
3
4
2
5
Figure 5.1 ACE Star Model of Knowledge Transforma-
tion.  Source: Copyrighted material (Stevens, 2012). Repro-
duced with expressed permission. Stevens, K. R. (2012). ACE
Star Model of EBP: Knowledge Transformation. Academic
Center for Evidence-Based Practice. The University of Texas
Health Science Center San Antonio.

reviews (comparative effectiveness reviews and technical
briefs), original research reports, and research sum-
maries (p. 1).
Evaluating the effectiveness has led to the development
of rating scales by some organizations to assist practition-
ers. In 2009, the American Association of Critical-Care
Nurses revised their rating scales for their practice alerts
for nurses to support their practice (Armola et al., 2009,
pp. 407–408). Since that time, the American Association
of Critical-Care Nurses has added additional evidence-
based research resources to their Web site for practicing
nurses, including a toolkit and practice protocols. How-
ever, individual changes in practice do not guide a practice
across a profession or professions, hence the focus on dis-
semination and utilization of current information. This
new research utilization effort is called translational re-
search (or translation science) and is the drive to get the
best evidence into practice. Titler (2010) has differentiated
between translational research and evidence-based practice
(EBP) as follows: “EBP is the process of integrating evi-
dence into healthcare delivery, whereas translation science
is the study of how to promote adoption of evidence in
healthcare” (p. 36). However, the stages of translational
research are described by Grady (2010) as “work in two
directions: to continuously develop and reevaluate an in-
tervention across diverse settings and populations and to
proactively integrate data from real-world settings into the
inception, design, and development of new basic and ap-
plied research studies (pp. 164–165).
All of this points to the need for the nurse, both
within the discipline and with interdisciplinary colleagues,
to seek out the best available information for care of the pa-
tient. Fawcett and Garity (2009) identify three valuable
questions about information for evidence-based nursing
practice:
●Where is the information?
●What is the information?
●How good is the information? (p. 20)
In the ACE Star Model, Stevens (2009) describes the
process with evidence summary as the synthesis of the
primary research and the body of knowledge leading to
translation into practice guidelines and then integrated
in practice and evaluation of outcomes (pp. 28–30).
Proficiency in critiquing or evaluating research or the
evidence summaries is central to the ability to translate
and integrate the evidence in professional practice.
When the body of knowledge is evolving and when 
evidence summaries and systematic reviews are not yet
available, individual research studies may provide insight
to improvements in care. However, a word of caution is
in order: A single study provides information but not com-
pelling evidence unless supported by a body of reseach.
But to evaluate the study, a thoughtful critique of the 
research is required.
SKILLS FOR A THOUGHTFUL
CRITIQUE
Consider both the objective process of critiquing a re-
search study and the subjective process of evaluating its
application to practice. An objective analysis looks at the
content available to the reader. This analysis is required
to have the information for making a judgment as to
whether the information is applicable to your practice
area and setting.
Objective Evaluation
A research critique is an objective analysis of a  published
research report. The reader must critically consider all
components of the report—problem,  purpose, supporting
literature, theoretical framework, definitions, study ques-
tions or hypotheses, design,  population and sample, data
collection methods and procedures, analysis, and interpre-
tation of findings (Box 5.3). Evidence summaries will have
done this across studies for an understanding of the knowl-
edge on a specific area. As practice for understanding the
process and terminology, consider an individual research
report you have found in the literature. The ultimate goal
of a research critique is to evaluate applicability of appro-
priate scientific findings to one’s own professional practice
and knowledge base.
A thoughtful critique is based on critical thinking skills
used to address the steps of the research process. When
publishing research reports, researchers must provide the
essential information gained from the study within the
given space. This can create a challenge for the reader at-
tempting to glean the vital information for a critique. A
published research report is frequently organized into the
following sections: abstract, introduction, review of liter-
ature, theoretical framework, methods, results, discussion,
and references. 
Preliminary information provides valuable informa-
tion for the reader. First, the title of the study should
clearly reflect the problem area and attract the reader’s in-
terest. Information provided about the researcher includes
CHAPTER 5 Evidence-Based Practice     ●
87
ONLINE CONSULT 
Academic Center for Evidence-Based Practice at 
http://www.acestar.uthscsa.edu
BOX 5.3
Areas to Address in a Thoughtful 
Critique*
Areas to address while doing a thoughtful critique of a
research study as a component of evidenced-based
practice include:
●Title and abstract
●Introduction, problem, and purpose
●Literature review
●Theoretical framework
●Research questions or hypotheses
●Methods: design, ethics, sampling, data collection
●Results and analysis
●Discussion and recommendations
And now, are the ﬁndings applicable to use in your
practice?
*Further information on the areas to address in a research critique is
provided on the Intranet site.

background and qualifications in the practice area and for
conducting the research study. The abstract briefly 
reviews the problem, purpose, methodology, findings, and
conclusions, summarizing the content and also capturing
the reader’s attention.
Next comes the introduction to the research report. The
opening paragraphs outline the background of the problem,
including its purpose and significance to nursing and 
the care of patients. The research problem is the central
question that the research has been designed to answer. It
is the “what” that is being done in the study to describe, ex-
plain, predict, or control some phenomenon of concern to
nursing. The research problem contains the major variables
and the popu lation of concern to the researcher. The author
may also identify specific research aims in this introductory
section.
Next, a literature review pertinent to the research
problem is provided. The literature review is a report and
comparison of all pertinent prior investigations on the
topic, variables of interest, theoretical models, and meth-
ods used. Unlike the library research done for a paper, a
research literature review concentrates on primary refer-
ences. A primary source is the actual report of an investi-
gation or development of an instrument or theory written
by the researcher or theorist. Using the primary source
eliminates the chance of error in interpretation that could
occur through analyses by others or loss of the context of
the original work.
The literature review should provide a critical appraisal
and synthesis of what is already known on the topic. Thus,
the literature review supports the study and how the 
investigation proposes to contribute to the existing body
of nursing knowledge. A review of literature may be con-
ducted electronically with the availability of online data-
bases, resources, and articles. Caution is recommended 
on the use of research reports found in chat rooms, on per-
sonal Web pages, or other sources that have not been sub-
jected to a thoughtful peer review process before being
accepted for publication.
The theoretical framework may be described in a sep-
arate section or may be included with the literature re-
view. As discussed in Chapters 2 and 3, a theoretical
framework or model is the way the researcher views
the concepts and their interrelationships; it may be de-
scribed in words or displayed symbolically. This under-
lying view drives the research in describing, explaining,
predicting, or controlling the phenomena, as in the case
of empirical research studies.
At this point, the researcher may present specific ques-
tions to address in the study or hypotheses to be tested.
Specific research questions must flow from, and relate back
to, the main research problem or purpose. Hypotheses
are predictions about the variables that the investigation
is testing with a subject group. Hypotheses may be null
(statistical), predicting no relationship; conversely, the re-
searcher may state research (alternative) hypotheses that
do predict a difference and, in some cases, the direction of
the difference (increase, decrease, greater, less). Both null
and research hypotheses can be either simple (stating a pre-
diction between two variables) or complex (stating a dif-
ference between more than two variables). Hypothesis
testing uses inferential statistics, inferring from the sample
to make generalizations about the population. Both research
questions and hypotheses must be consistent with the
framework that provides the theoretical guidance for the in-
vestigation. The variables to be investigated should be read-
ily apparent in the stated research questions or hypotheses.
The next major section in a published research report
describes the methodology. This section contains infor-
mation on the research design, research subjects (including
ethical considerations and sampling), and data collection
and procedures used. The research design is the overall
blueprint for the study. The design specifies the setting
for the study, the subjects (sample group), the experimen-
tal or nonexperimental treatment or grouping methods,
the data collection methods, and procedures or protocol.
The research design is selected to address the variables of
concern to answer the research questions or test the 
hypotheses. Study designs may be experimental or non-
experimental. Qualitative research studies are also useful
in aiding the understanding of a phenomenon that is 
relevant to your practice area.
Experimental designs are classified as true experi-
ments, quasi-experiments, and pre-experiments, with
varying degrees of control, manipulation, and random-
ization. Nonexperimental study designs may be used to
answer the research questions with less human subject
involvement or intervention; such designs are ex post
facto, correlational, survey, case study, needs assessment,
secondary analysis, and evaluation studies. Additional de-
signs you may see in the literature are methodo logical
(studies on research tools or instruments) and meta-
analysis, which uses many previous studies to determine
the overall effect. The design must “fit” the research
problem, purpose, and theoretical framework. You may
refer to a nursing research text for more information on
these various designs.
The researcher provides definitions for all major vari-
ables included in the study. Both theoretical and opera-
tional definitions may be provided in the introduction or
the review of the literature. Theoretical, or in some cases
conceptual, definitions are the general description of a
term—that is, the term as defined in a specific theoretical
framework or the dictionary. Researchers must provide
operational definitions of the major variables of interest,
especially when quantitative research methods are used.
An operational definition is the description specific to
the use of the variable in the study. It is precisely what the
researchers are looking at and how they are measuring it.
For example, consider the term stethoscope. Every nurse
knows it is an acoustical instrument used to measure heart
rate apically or blood pressure peripherally. But the type
of stethoscope must be specified in the operational defini-
tion, for example, bell-diaphragm combination, electronic,
or pediatric. The specification ensures controls in quanti-
tative methods, describing exactly what the researcher used
and enabling others to reproduce the study results given a
similar set of circumstances or apply the findings to a spe-
cific practice setting.
Generally, the researcher provides operational defini-
tions of the study variables in the section on methodol-
ogy. Variables are concepts and constructs defined and
manipulated, controlled, or measured in a research study.
Independent variables are variables manipulated by the
88
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

researcher, such as the cause, treatment, or difference be-
tween the groups (for example, the type of dressing used).
Dependent variables are the outcome variables that the
researcher is measuring and analyzing. The researcher
wishes to see whether or not the change in the indepen -
dent variable (type of dressing) caused a difference in the
dependent variable (healing time or bacterial colony
count). Uncontrolled or confounding variables (such as
nutritional status) must also be considered because they
can have extraneous and unwanted effects on the depen -
dent variable (healing time). The researcher often attempts
to control the extraneous effects by selecting a population
or study procedures that meet specific criteria, to reduce
the chance of occurrence of the unwanted influences. In
the methods section, special attention is given to the de-
scriptions of the subjects. Ultimately, this allows the read-
ers to determine the applicability of results to practice
with their specific patient group. Ethical considerations
specific to the sample should also be described.
Sampling is the use of a subset (sample) of the popula-
tion as a feasible group to study, ultimately generalizing the
findings to the population. The population is the total
group to which the researcher wishes the results of the re-
search to be generalized. For example, not all cardiac 
patients in a rehabilitation program can be interviewed in
person. Yet the researcher would like the study results to
be applicable to all patients similar to the subjects inter-
viewed in the study, so that the information will add to the
body of nursing knowledge. Samples may be selected 
by probability (based on  statistical chance of selection) or
they may be nonprobability samples. Types of probability 
samples are random, systematic, stratified, and cluster.
Nonprobability samples include convenience, purposive,
snowball, quota, and expert samples. Each type of sample
has advantages and disadvantages that must be considered.
At this point, look for the sample size. Smaller sample sizes
are associated with qualitative methods. On the other hand,
minimum sample sizes are necessary with some statistical
procedures in quantitative methods and analysis.
Specific research methods are described as data col-
lection procedures. Data are the measures or responses
obtained from the subjects in the study. Analyzed data
become information. Research methods may be quanti-
tative or qualitative. Quantitative methods focus on nu-
merical data that can be obtained from subjects using any
one or a combination of measurement instruments.
Qualitative methods focus on information gathered from
individuals and groups, often in their natural environ-
ment, to explore their unique qualities in depth and gen-
erate theory on a little-known topic or construct. The
different research methods can use similar or different
instruments to obtain or measure data.
Instruments are the measurement tools for collecting
data. They include paper-and-pencil instruments (such
as questionnaires, diaries, or scales), biophysiological in-
struments (such as a stethoscope, sphygmomanometer,
pulse oximeter, electrocardiograph, or electroencephalo-
graph), interview guides, videotapes and audiotapes, and
others, depending on the specific investigation and vari-
ables. Important considerations for use of any instru-
ment, including an observer as data collector, are the
reliability and validity of the measurement. Researchers
report the reliability and validity tests before they discuss
the findings of their study.
Instrument reliability describes whether the instrument
provides consistent measurement. The reliable instrument
measures the variable consistently over time. The need for
instrument reliability is apparent in examples of a calibrated
scale that dependably provides a reading of the patient’s
weight or the test that consistently estimates the patient’s
stress level. The types of instrument reliability that are re-
ported in studies are test-retest (stability of the measure
over time), internal consistency or alpha (statistical measure
on items or parts of a test), equivalent forms of tests, and
interrater (equivalence among data collectors).
Instrument validity considers whether the instrument
measures what it is intended to measure, such as body 
surface area and not weight. Types of instrument validity
include content, construct, and criterion-related. A panel
of experts may assess the content validity of an instrument,
ensuring that it adequately addresses the variable or area of
interest. Construct validity is described with prior research
on the instrument and may be reported as findings from a
factor analysis or other statistical test. Criterion-related 
validity is important when the variable cannot be measured
directly, such as family and visitor contacts, cards and gifts,
and discussions (as another  criterion) to discover social sup-
port for a study on the psychosocial stress of the hospital-
ized patient.
Once the data collection methods have been described,
the researcher describes methods used to analyze the data
and reports the results in the findings or results section.
Methods for analysis of the data are based on the specified
research methods and the type of data involved. For nu-
merical data, statistics are used in the analysis of quantita-
tive research methods. Des criptive statistics are used to
summarize and describe data through graphic displays of
the information (percentages and frequency counts), mea -
sures of central tendency (means, medians, modes), and
measures of dispersion (ranges, variances, and standard de-
viations). Inferential statistics are used to test hypotheses,
make predictions, and infer from the sample (statistic) to
the population (parameter). Depending on the variables,
data, and sample size and distribution, inferential statistics
used include nonparametric tests (chi square, Spearman
rho, median test) and parametric tests (t-test, analysis of
variance [ANOVA], Pearson r correlation coefficient). The
results are reported for each research question or hypoth-
esis in an objective manner.
Finally, the researcher presents his or her interpretation
of the results in a discussion section. Conclusions should
be consistent with the theoretical framework used to guide
the study. The discussion also includes the researcher’s
identification of limitations and recommendations for
using the findings in practice, teaching, administration,
and further research.
Guidelines to assist with a thoughtful critique of a re-
search study are available on the Intranet site.
Subjective Evaluation: Incorporating
Evidence-Based Practice
At this point, the reader must determine the applicability
of the results to the individual practice area. A research 
CHAPTER 5 Evidence-Based Practice     ●
89

critique is an objective assessment of the information 
presented in the report against some criterion, such as the
critique questions. The subjective evaluation for use of 
the findings in one’s own practice area is made after the
objective critique of the value of the study’s process and
results. If the critique is positive, you must decide whether
the results are applicable in your practice area. If so, con-
sider what other information is known on the topic. Re-
member, it is a professional responsibility to implement
information found to be beneficial to patients, rather than
to continue to practice on the basis of tradition.
Reading professional journals and keeping abreast of
current knowledge are essential in contemporary nursing
practice. Acquiring critique skills is integral for good clinical
decisions. Access to quality journals and the depth of read-
ing must also be considered. Look carefully at the profes-
sional journals to which you subscribe and the journals that
are available at your work site or online. Do they contain
research reports? If so, are you reading research studies and
systematic reviews as well as the narrative and practice 
articles? Consider different levels of reading, from skimming
the information to a careful analysis of the content or a 
comparison with other literature to synthesize the informa-
tion known on the topic. At what level are you reading? 
Critiquing a research article is at the level of analytic reading
rather than merely looking for articles of interest to your
practice area. Make time, on a consistent basis, to look for
and evaluate research in the professional literature.
As a valuable resource for the implementation of 
evidence-based practice, alternative sources beyond tradi-
tional research articles are available to assist the clinician.
These sources provide an integration of findings, as trans-
lational science on a specific research topic through sources
such as published meta-analyses, systematic reviews, prac-
tice guidelines, online reviews, and Internet searches. As
noted by Stevens (2009), systematic reviews have been
greatly advanced and produce new knowledge. Since they
combine findings from all studies, identify bias and limit
chance effects, and increase reliability and replication of the
results (p. 28).
As mentioned previously, national clinical guidelines
have been available since the 1990s. The National Guide-
line Clearinghouse provides archives of current practice
guidelines that have been reviewed, revised, or deleted
within the past five years, organized by health conditions
and national organizations. The AHRQ also provides useful
information for clinicians on current research and quality
measures for application in evidence-based practice. The
Cochrane Collaboration also provides evidence-based
practice information from leading international and inter-
disciplinary sources.
Once you have obtained the information from the pro-
fessional literature or resources, the issue is implementation
and sharing. Are you sharing the information with col-
leagues? This can be done informally among your col-
leagues or formally presented at a unit conference. Having
access to “user-friendly” databases or a library is essential
for acquiring information on a clinical issue. Investigate
what is available in your environment. Attending “brown
bag lunches” and participating in a journal club focused on
research studies are ways of making this activity more en-
joyable and rewarding.
Obtaining new information is the intended aim of at-
tending a clinical conference, regardless of whether you need
continuing education units for relicensure or recertification.
Quality of programs and significance of the topics to your
practice area must be considered for evidence-based practice.
Selecting EBP concurrent sessions is a good way to hear 
current research information. Attendance at an interdisci-
plinary grand rounds in an institution committed to research
is also a valuable experience. Research questions specific to
nursing or interdisciplinary collaboration may become avail-
able. Your work setting may have a nursing or interdisci -
plinary research committee. Participating on a research
committee can be a challenging and rewarding experience.
Nurses can collaborate on different stages of the research
process. In addition, the practice problems specific to your
setting can emerge, be developed, and be investigated when
professionals start the discussion and raise the issues. It can
be an extremely stimulating and enjoyable experience.
ELIMINATING BARRIERS TO
EVIDENCE-BASED NURSING
PRACTICE
Barriers to evidence-based nursing practice should be di-
minished or removed. Such barriers are a real and perceived
lack of educational preparation, administrative support, re-
sources, and time. In this time of diminishing resources, the
use of the most reliable and accurate information is crucial.
Trial-and-error strategies as the basis for a patient interven-
tion waste valuable resources and are unconscionable if there
is contrary evidence. We need an increasing sense of pro-
fessional commitment to practice based on evidence of 
effective outcomes for our patients.
Negative attitudes toward research or researchers must
be replaced with greater collaboration among clinicians, re-
searchers, administrators, and educators. And this needs to
take place among professionals within the discipline and
among disciplines. Inclusion of the patient is also a con-
sideration. The patient or significant others may have spent
a great deal of time searching for information as “solutions”
to the current healthcare problem. Some of the information
gleaned from Internet searches or discussions with others
may have merit, while other information may be inappro-
priate or inaccurate. The important consideration is in-
volvement of colleagues and patients in the quest for
evidence-based practice.
Clinicians have firsthand awareness of problem areas
but must be assisted in accessing the current knowledge
base, looking at problems in the domain of nursing that
address the need for improved patient outcomes, having
90
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
ONLINE CONSULT 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) at http://www.ahrq.gov/ 
The Cochrane Collaboration at 
http://www.cochrane.org/
National Guideline Clearinghouse at 
http://www.guideline.gov/ 

the professional commitment to go the extra mile and take
time to get involved with research activities, basing their
nursing interventions on the current evidence of efficacy,
and receiving some form of recognition for their efforts.
In addition, these clinicians can be a rich source for iden-
tification of areas for change.
The support and encouragement of the chief nurse 
administrator or executive are a must to ensure that the
organizational climate, resources, and philosophy of prac-
tice are present in the practice setting. Moving to evidence-
based practice will not be an easy transition without a
dynamic person spearheading the process. Clinicians must
keep an open mind and make a professional commitment
to identify problems and search the current knowledge
base for information. Researchers must collaborate with
clinicians to address nursing questions and avoid speaking
or talking in “researchese,” thus providing clear practice
implications in publications and presentations. Educators
must also assist in the development of critique and EBP
skills.
Commitment must be made to the ongoing nature of
building knowledge and basing practice on evidence of 
efficacy. Our knowledge base has been evolving since the
time of Nightingale and before. It will continue to evolve
because of the nature of the information and our focus on
people in a dynamic environment. The profession needs
more extensive research that is generalizable to and sup-
portive of nursing as a major player in healthcare issues.
We need more replications to add reliability and validity
to instruments and information for translational research.
And the need for interprofessional research is critical when
scopes of practice are close or overlap to better address 
improved patient outcomes. Constant updating and modi-
fication of any protocol is needed as more information 
becomes available. Gaining critique skills and learning the
language of EBP are components of this process.
CHAPTER 5 Evidence-Based Practice     ●
91
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
Brown (2014) has identified the following considerations for evaluating the clinical significance of a clinical
guideline:
●Importance of expected health benefits
●Likelihood of health benefits
●Side effects and risks
●Practicality and acceptability to patients (p. 325)
Suppose you have selected an AHRQ EBP guideline with the systematic review of the literature and 
suggested guidelines and tools for implementation that are appropriate for your setting. 
Question: How will you use this information and include an evaluation process to promote quality 
improvement?
Source: Brown, S. J. (2014). Evidence-based nursing: The research practice connection (3rd ed.). Boston, MA: Jones and Bartlett. 
K E Y  P O I N T S
●Evidence-based practice, a core competency for health professionals, is defined as the use of clinical 
expertise and interventions that are based on evidence of efficacy for patient outcomes and the 
preferences of the patients served.
●Research is a process for generating scientific knowledge and utilizing the knowledge on which to base
practice. Using evidence of efficacy for practice is a vital professional attribute and a responsibility.
●Nursing research began with Florence Nightingale and has become vital to both professionals and con-
sumers in investigating the domain of nursing, testing theories and interventions, and demonstrating the
efficacy and efficiency of nursing actions.
●Ethical considerations in research must include the four basic human rights:
●Beneficence (“Do no harm”)
●Full disclosure
●Self-determination
●Privacy and confidentiality
Continued

92
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
K E Y  P O I N T S—cont’d
●A professional nurse should be an active consumer of nursing research, promoting use of current and
valid scientific knowledge and identifying the questions to be addressed in further research. Professional
accountability demands that one read the literature, attend educational sessions, use critique skills, 
participate in investigations, and apply and promote evidence-based interventions.
●Empirical research is based on the strict rules of the scientific method, with the following steps:
●Identification of the problem
●Statement of the purpose
●Review of the literature
●Description of the theoretical framework
●Definition of terms
●Statement of hypothesis(es)
●Selection of the research design, population, and sample
●Approval by the IRB
●Collection of data
●Analysis and interpretation of data
●Presentation of findings and recommendations
●Knowledge transformation is defined as “the conversion of research findings from primary research 
results, through a series of stages and forms, to impact on health outcomes by way of EB care” 
(Stevens, 2009, p. 28). 
●Grady (2010) describes translational research “to continuously develop and reevaluate an intervention
across diverse settings and populations and to proactively integrate data from real-world settings into 
the inception, design, and development of new basic and applied research studies” (pp. 164–165).
●A critique is an objective analysis of a research report. The reader must critically consider all components
of the report. 
●A research problem is the main issue or central question that the researcher addresses in the investiga-
tion. Specific research questions or hypotheses flow from the main research problem.
●The literature review is a report and comparison of all pertinent prior investigations on the topic, 
variables of interest, theoretical models, and methods used. 
●Variables are concepts and constructs defined and manipulated, controlled, or measured in a research
study. Independent variables are manipulated by the researcher.
●Hypotheses are predictions about the variables that the researcher is testing with a subject group. 
●The research design is the overall blueprint and methods for the study.
●Research methods may be quantitative or qualitative. Quantitative methods focus on numerical data
that can be obtained from subjects through any one or a combination of measurement instruments.
Qualitative methods focus on information gathered from individuals and groups, often in their natural
environment, to explore in depth their unique qualities and generate theory on a little-known topic 
or construct.
●Sampling is the use of a subset (sample) of the population as a feasible group to study and ultimately 
generalize findings to the population.
●Instruments are the measurement tools for collecting data. Important considerations for use of any 
instrument are the reliability and validity of the measurement.
●Statistics are used in analyzing quantitative research methods. Descriptive statistics are used to summarize
and describe data. Inferential statistics are used to test hypotheses, make predictions, and infer from the
sample to the population.

CHAPTER 5 Evidence-Based Practice     ●
93
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Describe activities present in your practice setting that demonstrate the use of evidence-based practice.
2. Develop a plan to encourage or promote evidence-based practice in your nursing practice environment. Select
a clinical protocol or problem. Use the following six phases of the research utilization process to organize your
plan: (1) identification of clinical problems and access to research bases, (2) evaluation of the knowledge and
the potential for application in the organization, along with policy and cost determinants, (3) planning for imple-
mentation and evaluation of the innovation, (4) clinical trial and evaluation, (5) decisions to adopt, modify, or
reject innovations on the basis of evaluation, and (6) if the innovations are adopted, planning for their extension
to other units (Horsley et al., 1978). Describe who will be involved in the process and how the new practice or
protocol will be implemented. Finally, identify evaluation criteria.
3. Identify practice issues that can be developed into a nursing research problem for investigation.
4. Find the requirements for the IRB at your college or institution. Be prepared to participate in a discussion of the
requirements for the preparation of a research proposal for consideration by the IRB.
5. Look further at PHI and current privacy issues. Be prepared to participate in a discussion as scheduled by your 
instructor.
6. Review the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter and discuss it in the context of the contents
of the chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.
REFERENCES
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). (2014).
What is the Effective Health Care Program? Retrieved from
http://www.effectivehealthcare.ahrq.gov/index.cfm/
what-is-the-effective-health-care-program1/ 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2006a).
Essentials of doctoral education for advanced nursing practice.
Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/DNP/pdf/
Essentials.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN).
(2006b). Position statement on nursing research. Retrieved
from http://www.aacn.browsermedia.com/publications/
position/nursing-research 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2008).
The essentials of baccalaureate education for professional nurs-
ing practice. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/
Education/pdf/BaccEssentials08.pdf
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses. (2010). Practice
alert: Family presence during resuscitative and invasive proce-
dures. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.org/wd/practice/
content/family-presence-practice-alert.pcms?menu=practice
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses. (2013). Ethical
foundations for critical care nursing research. Retrieved 
from http://www.aacn.org/wd/practice/docs/research/
ethical-foundations-critical-care-nursing-research.pdf
American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC). (2014). Practice
standards. Retrieved from http://www.nursecredentialing
.org/Pathway/AboutPathway/PathwayPracticeStandards
Belmont Report. (1979). Ethical principles and guidelines for
the protection of human subjects of research, 79 Fed. Reg.
12065.
Brown, S. J. (2014). Evidence-based nursing: The research 
practice connection (3rd ed.). Boston, MA: Jones and Bartlett.
Declaration of Helsinki. (1990). Recommendations guiding
physicians in biomedical research involving human subjects.
Bulletin of Pan American Health Organization, 24(4), 
606–609.
Fawcett, J., & Garity, J. (2009). Evaluating research for evidence-
based nursing practice. Philadelphia, PA: F.A. Davis.
Greiner, A. C., & Knebel, E. (Eds.). (2003). Health professions
education: A bridge to quality. Washington, DC: Institute 
of Medicine.
Grady, P. A. (2010). Translational research and nursing science.
Nursing Outlook, 58, 164–166.
Horsley, J. A., Crane, J., & Bingle, J. D. (1978). Research 
utilization as an organizational process. Journal of Nursing
Administration, 8(7), 4–6.
Kerlinger, F. N., & Lee, H. B. (2000). Foundations of
 behavioral research (4th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth
Thompson Learning.
Lindeman, C. A., & Krueger, J. C. (1977). Increasing the qual-
ity, quantity, and use of nursing research. Nursing Outlook,
25, 450–454.
National Institute of Nursing Research (NINR). (2012). 
FAQ: General information. What is nursing research? 
Retrieved from http://www.ninr.nih.gov/site-structure/
faq#.Uu6k1WeYbmQ

National Institute of Nursing Research (NINR). (2013). Mission
and strategic plan. Retrieved from http://www.ninr.nih.gov/
aboutninr/ninr-mission-and-strategic-plan#.Uu2wi2eYbmI 
Nightingale, F. (1859). Notes on nursing: What it is, and what 
it is not. London, UK: Harrison and Sons. (Commemorative 
edition printed 1992, Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott.)
Porter-O’Grady, T. (2006). A new age for practice: Creating
the framework for evidence. In K. Mallock & T. Porter-
O’Grady (Eds.), Introduction to evidence-based practice
(pp. 1–29). Boston, MA: Jones and Bartlett.
Protection of Human Subjects, 45 CFR 46 (2009). Title
45 Code of Federal Regulations Part 46 (45 CFR 46),
§46.102, 110. Retrieved from http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/
humansubjects/guidance/45cfr46.html 
Sigma Theta Tau. (2005). Evidence-based nursing position 
statement. Retrieved from http://www.nursingsociety.org/
aboutus/PositionPapers/Pages/EBN_positionpaper.aspx
Silva, M. (1995). Ethical guidelines in the conduct, dissemination,
and implementation of nursing research. Washington, DC:
American Nurses Association.
Stevens, K. R. (2005). Essential competencies for evidence-based
practice in nursing. San Antonio, TX: Academic Center for
Evidence-Based Practice.
Stevens, K. R. (2009). Essential competencies for evidence-based
practice in nursing (2nd ed.). San Antonio, TX: Academic
Center for Evidence-Based Practice.
Titler, M. G., (2010). Translation science and context. Research
and Theory for Nursing Practice: An International Journal,
24, 35–55.
U.S. President’s Commission for the Study of Ethical Problems
in Medicine and Behavioral Research. (1982). Compensating
for research injuries: The ethical and legal implications of 
programs to redress injured subjects (Vol. 1). Retrieved from
http://www2.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/radiation/dir/mstreet/
commeet/meet16/brief16/tab_b/br16b1a.txt
United States Department of Health & Human Services 
(USDHHS). (2004). Protecting personal health infor mation
in research: Understanding the HIPAA privacy rule
(NIH Pub. No. 03–5388). Retrieved from http://
privacyruleandresearch.nih.gov/pr_02.asp
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Academic Center for Evidence-Based Practice, UTHSCSA
(2012). Welcome to ACE. Retrieved from http://
www.acestar.uthscsa.edu/
American Nurses Association. (1997). Position statement: Educa-
tion for participation in nursing research (retired). Retrieved
from members only archive, http://nursingworld.org/
MainMenuCategories/HealthcareandPolicyIssues/
ANAPositionStatements/Archives/rseducat14484.aspx 
American Nurses Association. (1985). Human rights guidelines
for nurses in clinical and other research (Pub. No. D-46 3M
9/87R). Kansas City, MO: American Nurses Association.
American Nurses Association Commission on Nursing Research.
(1981). Guidelines for the investigative function of nurses.
Kansas City, MO: American Nurses Association.
Crane, J. (1985). Research utilization: Theoretical perspectives.
Western Journal of Nursing Research, 7, 261–268.
Munhall, P. (2011). Nursing research: A qualitative  perspective
(5th ed.). Boston, MA: Jones and Bartlett. 
Munhall, P. L., & Chenail, R. (2008). Qualitative research 
proposals and reports: A guide (3rd ed.). Boston: Jones and
Bartlett.
Long, L. E., Burkett, K., & McGee, S. (2010). Promotion of
safe outcomes: Incorporating evidence into policies and 
procedures. Nursing Clinics of North America, 44, 57–70.
Peterson, S. J., & Bredow, T. S. (2012). Middle range  theories:
Application to nursing research (3rd ed.). Philadelphia, PA: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Walsh, N. (2010). Dissemination of evidence into practice:
Opportunities and threats. Primary Health Care, 20(3), 
26–30.
ONLINE RESOURCES
Academic Center for Evidence-Based Practice (ACE)
http://www.acestar.uthscsa.edu
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)
http://www.ahrq.gov/ 
The Cochrane Collaboration
http://www.cochrane.org/ 
Federal Guidelines for the Protection of Human Subjects
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/humansubjects/guidance/
45cfr46.html 
Federal Opportunities for Research Funding
http://www.grants.gov 
National Institute of Nursing Research
http://ninr.nih.gov
National Institutes of Health
http://www.nih.gov/ 
Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP)
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/ 
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services: Health
Information Privacy
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/hipaa/
Sigma Theta Tau International: Research Grant Opportunities
http://www.nursingsociety.org/Research/Grants/Pages/
grantsbydate.aspx
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services
http://www.hhs.gov
94
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

S E C T I O N  II
Critical Abilities in
Professional Nursing
Practice
S
ix critical abilities in professional nursing are reviewed in this section. The first critical
component addresses communication skills, which are vital to professional practice and
are in constant need of refinement. The content is presented by Lynne Ornes in Chapter 6,
“Effective Communication,” with a discussion of communication models, essential ingredients
of effective communication, nonverbal communication forms, and specific communication
techniques, including communication skills for interdisciplinary practice.
Along with effective communication, critical thinking is essential to professional nursing
practice. In Chapter 7, “Critical Thinking,” Genevieve M. Bartol discusses aspects of critical
thinking in nursing, along with further development of critical thinking and analysis skills. 
Effective communication and critical thinking are required in collaborative practice situations.
Chapter 8 focuses on working with groups, including the characteristics and roles of groups
and group leaders and the skills needed for collaboration, coordination, negotiation, and
dealing with conflict and difficult people.
The next critical component for professional practice is the teaching and learning process.
Chapter 9 presents a discussion of learning theories and learning readiness, along with infor-
mation on writing behavioral objectives, teaching skills and methods, and preparing outcome
evaluations. The Intranet lesson focuses on helping patients locate reliable Web sources.
Leadership and management skills are essential in professional practice, especially in or-
ganizational settings. Chapter 10 looks at organizational characteristics and the skills needed
for effectively managing and leading in organizational settings, including a discussion of 

96
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
selected theories and delegation principles. Organizations continue to redefine themselves,
and effectively dealing with change is critical. Chapter 11 includes theories on change and
innovation, along with the characteristics of agents for change in individuals, families, groups,
and organizations.
Section II concludes with Chapter 12, on professional ethics, by focusing on informed
consent, advanced directives, the persistive vegetative state, organ procurement and donation,
genomics, and impaired practice.

Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Describe and understand the various communication models.
2. Explain the various forms of communication, such as verbal and nonverbal communication.
3. Evaluate the use of therapeutic communication in the healthcare setting.
4. Differentiate between ways the nurse receives information from the patient.
5. Discuss the various types of barriers to communication.
6. Identify past life experiences that influence communication skills.
7. Describe how structured communication tools can be used to reduce errors in the healthcare system.
8. Evaluate his or her current communication skills with patients and colleagues and propose refinements
as a part of advancing his or her career in nursing.
Communication
Communication Models
Source
Encoder
Message
Channel
Decoder
Environment
Receiver
Relationships
Transactions
Contexts
Metacommunication
Verbal Communication
Nonverbal Communication
Proxemics
Cultural Variations
Kinesics
Facial Expressions
Physical Appearance
Therapeutic Communication
Active Listening
Collaboration
SBAR
97
“A wise old owl sat on an oak; the more he saw
the less he spoke; the less he spoke the more he
heard; why aren’t we like that wise old bird?” 
Charles M. Shulz 
Key Terms
Effective
Communication
●Lynne Ornes
6

Communication is a comprehensive and complex process.
The word communication is similar to words like love, health,
and freedom; intuitively, each of us thinks that we know
what it means, but in reality people base their definitions on
their own life experiences, cultures, and surroundings. For
the nurse, communication is an essential element not only
in the relationship with the patient but also in working 
effectively with the interdisciplinary health team. The process
of interactions between humans can be verbal or nonverbal,
written or unwritten, planned or spontaneous. It is therefore
essential for communication to be defined within the context
of nursing. Communication consists of “all the cognitive, 
affective, and behavioral responses used to convey a message
to another person” (Watson, 1979, p. 33). Within this con-
text there is no such thing as “no communication” between
individuals. All behavior, whether verbal or nonverbal, has
both a meaning and a message value.
Effective communication within the nurse-patient rela-
tionship is not necessarily a natural process; it is a learned
skill. Clear and appropriate communication is essential for
providing effective nursing care and presents a unique chal-
lenge to nurses today. Society is composed of many different
cultures using many different languages. “U.S. census data
show that between 1990 and 2000, the percentage of 
Americans (older than age five) speaking a language other
than English at home rose from 13.8 percent to 17.8 percent”
(Ku & Flores, 2005, p. 435). For example, in the aftermath
of the September 2001 terrorist attack in New York, one of
the biggest challenges faced by the Red Cross workers was
communicating with individuals who spoke so many dif-
ferent languages. When a nurse is giving care to a patient,
the nurse’s message must be understandable to the patient
and vice versa. Nurses must be aware not only of what they
are saying in their words but also of what their body lan-
guage is saying to their patients and to other members of
the interdisciplinary health team.
The 21st century poses an additional challenge to nurses
in communicating via technology. Nurses use many differ-
ent types of communication in their care of patients—in
person, the written word, telephone, fax, and e-mail. Find-
ing effective ways to overcome communication barriers, 
discussed later in this chapter, gives nurses the opportunity
to bridge culture gaps within their community and provide
care to a larger number of individuals. This chapter will
cover various techniques of communication and offer tools
to assist you in your professional relationships with others.
COMMUNICATION MODELS
An overview of basic communication models is presented
first to help you understand the complex process of com-
munication in the healthcare setting. Later, various com-
munication models that are useful in health communication
are described.
Basic Components
Whether or not sources of communication are effective de-
pends on a combination of factors (Berlo, 1960). All types
of communication require the following components:
●Source: The individual who decides what message is to
be sent
●Encoder: The person who interprets the message
●Message: The content
●Channel: The medium or way chosen to convey the
message
●Receiver: The one who receives the message
●Decoder: The one who interprets the message sent
Additional factors have been added to the basic com-
ponents, including the following:
●Feedback: The message the receiver returns to the
source
●Interpersonal variables: Factors that influence 
communication
●Environment: The setting for source-receiver 
interaction
In intrapersonal communication, the source and the
encoder are the same person. The message is then com-
municated by either verbal or nonverbal language. The
message may be sent to any or all of a person’s five senses.
The receiver is also the decoder. According to Berlo
(1960), in effective communication, the receiver is the
most important component in the communication
process. If the source does not reach the receiver with the
intended message, the source might just as well have
talked to himself or herself. Feedback is confirmation that
the message was received by the receiver and been under-
stood. Examples of interpersonal variables are culture,
gender, and age. The environment refers to the setting in
which the communication takes place. Is it private? Are
there distractions, such as music or talking from others,
which is interfering?
In written communication, the reader receiver is most
important. In spoken communication, the listener receiver
is most important. When the source chooses a “code” for
a message, he or she must choose one that is familiar to
the receiver. An example of poor communication in the
healthcare setting is when a nurse gives information to a
patient using a code that consists of the jargon or terms
known only within the profession. The patient can receive
the information but does not have the knowledge to 
decode the message.
Human communication is a two-person process in 
which both individuals influence and are influenced 
by each other.
Source-Message-Channel-Receiver
Model
David Berlo (1960), a professor at Michigan State Uni-
versity, developed the source-message-channel-receiver
(SMCR) model of the communication process (Fig. 6.1).
This paradigm emphasizes the importance of a thorough
understanding of human behavior as a prerequisite to
communication analysis. The SMCR model represents a
communication process that occurs as a source formulates
messages based on the source’s communication skills, 
attitudes, knowledge, and sociocultural system. These
messages, which have unique elements, structure, content,
treatment, and codes, are then transmitted along channels.
Channels are the various senses, such as seeing, hearing,
touching, smelling, and tasting. The receiver interprets
98
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

messages on the basis of his or her own communication
skills, attitudes, knowledge, and sociocultural system.
The strength of the SMCR model is that it demon-
strates the complex process of communication and shows
that communication is not a static event. It incorporates
the sociocultural context of both sender and receiver as 
a critical component in the communication process. 
However, the model lacks the important component of
feedback (Berlo, 1960). The next model includes this 
factor in its concepts.
Health Communication Model
Northouse and Northouse (1998) constructed the health
communication model (HCM) (Fig. 6.2), which specif-
ically applies to transactions between participants in
healthcare about health-related issues. The primary
focus of the HCM is on the communication that occurs
within the various kinds of relationships in healthcare
settings. This model also takes a broader systems view
of communication and emphasizes the way in which a
series of factors can affect the interactions in the health-
care setting. Three major factors illustrate the health
communication process: relationships, transactions, and
contexts.
Relationships
From a systems perspective, the HCM illustrates four
major types of relationships that exist in the healthcare
setting:
●Professional-professional
●Professional-client/patient
●Professional–significant other
●Client/patient–significant other
When an individual is involved in health communi-
cation, he or she is involved in one of these types of rela-
tionships. In this model, the term health professional refers
to any individual who has the education, training, and
CHAPTER 6 Effective Communication     ●
99
Figure 6.1 Source-message-channel-receiver (SMCR) model of communication.  (From Berlo, D. K.
[1960]. The process of communication: An introduction to the theory and practice [p. 7]. New York: Holt, Rinehart 
& Winston, with permission.)
Health
Professional
Communication Variables
Health
Transactions
Lifespan
Communication Variables
Health Care
Contexts
Client
Health
Professional
Significant
Others
Figure 6.2 Health communication
model.  (From Northouse, P. G., &
Northouse, L. L. [1998]. Health
communication strategies for the health
professional (3rd ed.) [p. 16]. Norwalk,
CT: Appleton & Lange, with 
permission.)

experience to provide health services to others. Health
professionals include a wide range of individuals such as
nurses, health administrators, social workers, physicians,
and occupational and physical therapists (Northouse &
Northouse, 1998). Each of these professionals brings
unique characteristics and beliefs to healthcare settings
that affect the way he or she interacts with the patient
and with the other members of the interdisciplinary
healthcare team.
Patients are the people who are the focus of the health-
care services being provided. The term patient also encom-
passes the characteristics, values, and beliefs that these
individuals bring to the healthcare setting. Just as the per-
sonal characteristics of the nurse and other professionals
influence their interactions, the characteristics of patients
influence their interactions with others. Within the social
network of the patient, the patient’s significant others in-
clude family members and friends who have been found
to be essential in supporting patients as they maneuver
through the healthcare system. Significant others are all of
the people who are significant in patients’ lives but are not
health professionals.
The patient’s self-esteem, emotional stability, and sense of
identity will define how the patient relates to the health-
care professionals as well as those significant individuals
in his or her life.
Northouse and Northouse (1998) realized that, too
often, health professionals overlook the important role
played by family members and other significant individu-
als in enhancing the health of the person. Their model 
includes this aspect because as patients live longer with
chronic health problems, significant others assume an even
more central role as patient advocates and are more in-
volved in the direct care of the patient. This concept is also
true when the nurse is visiting the patient in the home.
The dynamics within the family and the support of the
significant others around the patient can help the patient
realize the full potential of a healthy lifestyle.
Transactions
Transactions, the second major factor in the HCM, are
the health-related interactions between the nurse or other
health professional, the patient, and the patient’s signifi-
cant others. These transactions about health can include
both verbal and nonverbal communication behaviors,
which are equally important and are most effective when
they are compatible with each other. Northouse and 
Northouse (1998) represent these health transactions with
a circle from which an unending spiral emerges, signifying
that communication is not static but is an interactive
process that occurs at various points in a person’s life. This
continuous feedback allows the message to be changed in
accordance with the situation.
Contexts
Contexts, the third major factor in the model, is defined
as the settings where the health communication takes
place and includes the properties of these settings. At one
level, context can refer to the healthcare setting, such as a
hospital room or the patient’s home. For example, if the
professional is communicating with the patient in an am-
bulatory clinic, there may be many distractions and in-
fringements of privacy. Each particular healthcare setting
affects the dynamics of the transactions that take place.
At another level, however, healthcare contexts can refer
to the number of participants within the particular
healthcare setting. Communication can take place in a
one-to-one situation or in small groups. The number of
participants present influences the overall interactions in
the setting.
The health communication model is based on the as-
sumption that communication is ongoing and dynamic.
It is transactional, in that each participant affects the other
participants, and it has both a content and relationship
dimension that are inextricably bound together in the in-
teractions. It is a model that incorporates the thoughts,
feelings, attitudes, and current roles of the participants
and demonstrates that all of these things can affect the 
accuracy of the communication.
FORMS OF COMMUNICATION
In order to share information, people express messages in
a complex composite of both verbal (spoken or written)
and nonverbal behaviors. Individuals express themselves
through language, gestures, voice inflection, facial expres-
sions, and use of space. Within the nurse-patient relation-
ship, information exchanged between two individuals
must be interpreted not only by the nurse but also by the
patient. The healthcare provider should be aware of styles
of communication and should have observational skills
that enhance the encounter.
Metacommunication
Metacommunication is a broad term used to “describe all
of the factors that influence how the message is perceived”
(Arnold & Boggs, 2011, p. 163) and has long been recog-
nized as being of enormous value in the nurse-patient ther-
apeutic relationship. Metacommunication includes all of
the things taken into account when the receiver is inter-
preting a message, such as the role of the communicator,
the nonverbal messages sent, and the context in which the
communication is taking place. These messages may be
hidden within verbal messages or conveyed by nonverbal
expressions or gestures. An example is the “play fighting”
observed in children and animals. Bateson noted that for
an organism to “play” at fighting, it must be able to both
appear that it is fighting and simultaneously appear not to
be actually fighting but merely simulating the act of fight-
ing (Mitchell, 1991).
In the nurse-patient relationship, metacommunication
conveys messages about how to interpret both verbal and
nonverbal communication clues. For example, a nurse can
convey a message of caring by saying to the patient,
“That’s important. Let’s talk about it.” If the nurse sits in
a chair and uses nonverbal cues such as maintaining eye
contact, smiling, having a relaxed posture, and listening
intently, the verbal and nonverbal messages are congruent.
If the same verbal message is delivered while the nurse
fidgets and looks at the clock, the nurse may provide a
100
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

nonverbal message that he or she does not have time or is
not willing to listen. Metacommunication is the message
conveyed when both verbal and nonverbal communica-
tion are perceived together.
Nurses must make sure that their verbal and nonverbal
messages to the patient are consistent and congruent in
order to be sure that the patient interprets the messages
clearly. Suppose you walk into a room and ask a patient
whether he is in pain and he answers no, but you observe
that he is thrashing in bed, clutching his incision, and has
deep grimaces on his face. How would you interpret this
behavior? A nurse who is skilled in communication would
realize that the verbal answer and the nonverbal cues are
inconsistent and would clarify the situation. If the nurse
points out the incongruent form of communication that
he or she observed, the patient may admit that he is in
pain (Arnold & Boggs, 2011).
Metacommunication is the message conveyed when 
both verbal and nonverbal communication are perceived
together.
Verbal Communication
Verbal communication takes place when people use words
to share experiences with others. Without the use of spo-
ken language, individuals are severely limited in their
means of sharing with others what they are feeling. The
choice of words that a person uses is based on language,
educational background, age, race, and socioeconomic
background, as well as on the situation in which the com-
munication takes place.
According to the individual’s background and experi-
ence, interpretation of words may also vary. One cannot
assume that words have the same meaning to everyone
who hears them. “Language is useful only to the extent
that it actually reflects the experience it is designed to por-
tray” (Arnold & Boggs, 2011, p. 164). If a person speaks
a different native language, consider the difficulty that per-
son will have expressing his or her thoughts in English.
This could also apply to a small child or an Alzheimer’s
patient.
Keep in mind that the intended meaning of the mes-
sage may be represented in the emphasis placed on a par-
ticular word. The pitch and tone of a word can suggest
mood and can either support or contradict the content of
the verbal message. When the patient is explaining some-
thing to the nurse, the nurse must consider that certain
phrases and words may have entirely different meanings
for the patient and the nurse.
Potter and Perry (2013) state that the six most impor-
tant aspects of verbal communication are (1) vocabulary,
(2) denotative and connotative meanings, (3) intonation,
(4) pacing, (5) clarity and brevity, and (6) timing and 
relevance.
Vocabulary
Vocabulary consists of the words or phrases that a person
chooses and uses to communicate a message. Communi-
cation is unsuccessful if the receiver cannot translate or
understand the sender’s words and phrases. Nurses work
with individuals of various ages, developmental stages,
cultures, and educational backgrounds, as well as individ-
uals who have physical problems that distort their com-
munication skills.
Nurses must be very aware of their use of nursing or
medical jargon. Consider the nurse who is instructing a
patient before an operation. If the nurse says, “You are to
be NPO after midnight and you are to void prior to the
pre-op injection,” what will the patient be able to deci-
pher from this instruction? At the same time, the nurse
must not “talk down” to or patronize the patient. The
nurse must respect the patient and understand the best
way to provide the information in a manner that can be
understood readily.
Meaning
A single word may have several different meanings. The
denotative meaning is the meaning that is shared by indi-
viduals who use a common language. The word football
may be understood by all individuals who speak English
but denotes a different meaning to individuals of different
countries. The word code denotes a cardiac arrest to mem-
bers of the healthcare profession but has different mean-
ings outside the health community. The connotative
meaning is the interpretation or the way one’s feelings,
thoughts, experiences, or ideas about a word influence the
meaning of the word. When a family is told that their
loved one is in “serious condition,” they may interpret that
phrase to mean that their loved one is near death. To the
nurse, however, the term may merely describe the nature
of the illness. Nurses should be extremely cautious to use
words and phrases that will not be misinterpreted, espe-
cially when explaining a patient’s condition.
When a nurse is giving instructions to a patient, the
nurse must use terms and phrases that the patient un-
derstands. The best way to ensure that the patient has
understood the instructions is have the patient repeat the
instructions to the nurse. At that time, any questions
can be answered, and the nurse can be assured that the
patient has the correct information.
Intonation
Intonation is the cadence and tone of the spoken word.
The intonation of words in a message can readily change
the meaning. Take the phrase “He is.” If spoken one way
it can be a sentence, but with a different tone it can be a
question. Emphasizing the “he” or the “is” also changes
the meaning of the phrase. Tone of voice can dramatically
affect a message’s meaning, and emotions directly influ-
ence tone of voice. Emotions such as anger, enthusiasm,
and concern may be gleaned from the tone of voice that
one uses. Nurses must be aware of this fact to avoid send-
ing an unintended message. The nurse must also realize
that the patient’s intonation may reflect the patient’s emo-
tional state, even if the patient’s words do not.
Pacing
Pacing is the speed and rate of the spoken word. Commu-
nication is more successful when words are spoken at an
appropriate speed or pace. Talking too rapidly or too
CHAPTER 6 Effective Communication     ●
101

slowly may express an inadvertent message. When com-
municating important information to a patient, the nurse
must speak slowly and clearly and must pause at appro-
priate points to give emphasis. This approach allows the
patient time to absorb the message and to understand it
more clearly. Pacing is optimum if the nurse thinks out
the message before delivering it.
The nurse should also be aware of the pace of the pa-
tient’s spoken word. The speech may be slow and slurred
if the patient has some type of neurologic problem or is
under the influence of drugs or alcohol. The patient who
is scared and nervous may speak very rapidly. Cultural
variables may also influence the pace of the words; a per-
son from the southern part of the United States may speak
more slowly than someone from the Northeast. It is im-
portant for the nurse to be aware of these differences and
be able to interpret the meanings of a person’s pace of
speaking.
Clarity, Timing, and Relevance
The nurse should use words and phrases that express an
idea simply and directly. Using examples tends to make a
message clearer. Timing and relevance are likewise critical
in communication. The patient must be ready to hear
what the nurse has to say. If a patient is distracted by pain,
the nurse must realize that it is not the right time to give
detailed instructions. Often the best time to communicate
is when the patient has expressed interest in a particular
topic. Choosing this timing tends to make the patient
more attentive.
Nurses should also demonstrate credibility, which is
defined as a sense of trustworthiness, sincerity, reliability,
and integrity. The nurse must be dependable and believ-
able. If the patient asks the nurse a question that the nurse
does not know the answer to, it is much better for the
nurse to say, “I do not know the answer to that but I will
find out for you” than to give erroneous information.
When a nurse establishes credibility in a nurse-patient 
relationship, the communication is more reliable and can
have more substantial meaning for both the patient and
the nurse.
Nonverbal Communication
Nonverbal communication is communication without
words; it includes messages that are created through body
motions, facial expressions, the use of space and sounds,
and the use of touch. Birdwhistell (1970) studied the area
of body movement and suggested that 65 to 70 percent of
the social meaning of an interaction is transmitted by non-
verbal communication. Although nonverbal communica-
tion does not include language, it can be either vocal or
nonvocal. For example, if a patient is moaning in pain, she
is giving a nonverbal cue that the nurse should ask more
questions about her condition.
Nonverbal communication can be intentional or un-
intentional. If a nurse is giving important information to
a patient, the nurse should intentionally have a serious 
facial expression. A patient who is giving the nurse infor-
mation in an apparently relaxed and gleeful manner but
whose face shows expressions of fear and uncertainty
demonstrates unintentional nonverbal communication. A
prime example of nonverbal communication is Holly
Hunter’s role in the 1993 movie The Piano. For the entire
length of the movie, she does not speak one word, yet 
her nonverbal communication in the role is so effective
that it earned her an Oscar for the best actress perfor -
mance. Monitoring subtle nonverbal communication
clues accounts for the vast majority of communication be-
tween individuals.
Most Americans are only dimly aware of their use of
nonverbal language, although they use it every day. We
are constantly communicating our real feelings in nonver-
bal ways (Hall, 1959). Arnold and Boggs (2011) categorize
four areas in which nonverbal behaviors are used: (1) prox-
emics; (2) cultural variations; (3) kinesics, which includes
body language and facial expression; and (4) appearance.
Proxemics
Proxemics refers to how individuals use and interpret
space in the communication process. Some areas of prox-
emics address questions of territoriality, personal space,
and distance relevant to the healthcare setting. Each cul-
ture has expectations for appropriate distance, depending
on the context of communication. Personal space, or one’s
own territory, is important because it gives one a sense of
identity, security, and control. A person may feel threat-
ened or simply irritated when his or her personal space is
invaded.
When people enter the healthcare setting, they are 
required to give up much of their privacy and personal
space. They are required to give personal and intimate in-
formation to strangers and may undergo procedures that
further compromise their sense of privacy and personal
space. Although nurses and other health professionals
may not be able to eliminate these problems of personal
space, the healthcare professional should respect the 
patient’s territory, belongings, and right to privacy. The
patient should be given as much control over the situation
as possible. For example, the patient should be allowed
to decide whether the door to the room is left open or
closed and where personal items are placed. The patient’s
body should be exposed as little as possible to minimize
the discomfort involved with procedures that invade his
or her privacy.
Cultural Variations
Cultural variations are learned subconsciously through
the observations of behavior of significant individuals 
in the patient’s culture. Communication patterns vary
in different cultures, even for such conventional social
behaviors as smiling, a handshake, and direct eye con-
tact. For many Hispanic individuals, smiling and shak-
ing hands are considered an integral part of sincere
interaction and trust, whereas an Asian individual might
perceive this behavior to be inappropriate (Galanti,
2014).
Sometimes a nonverbal gesture—a body movement
usually with the hand—is totally acceptable in one culture
and truly offensive in another one. For example, a nurse
may mean to signal to a Brazilian patient that things went
well by making an “OK” circle with the thumb and index
102
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

finger; in Brazil, however, this movement is considered an
obscene gesture (Arnold & Boggs, 2011).
Cultural taboos can inhibit nonverbal behaviors. Dif-
ferent cultures have different rules about eye contact. In
many Western cultures, looking directly into another
person’s eyes is interpreted as being interested and atten-
tive. The use of eye contact is one of the most culturally
variable nonverbal behaviors, however. Although most
nurses have been taught to look directly at the patient
when speaking, individuals from other cultures may at-
tribute other culturally based meanings to this behavior.
Asian, Native American, Middle Eastern, and Hmong
patients may consider eye contact impolite or antagonis-
tic, and they may divert their own eyes when talking to
a nurse or physician. In some cultures, showing respect
to the nurse dictates that the patient should cast the eyes
downward. Navajo patients believe that making direct
eye contact is disrespectful and harmful to the spirits of
both parties (Galanti, 2014).
In some cultures, touching—coming into physical
contact with another person—is one of the most powerful
means of nonverbal communication, but the nurse must
give careful consideration to issues surrounding touch.
Touch can take a variety of forms and can convey a range
of meanings, but it is a powerful tool in healthcare when
it communicates caring and respect. Touch can ease a 
patient’s sense of isolation and can make procedures seem
less invasive. Care must be taken, however, to understand
individual cultural customs about touching, which can
vary dramatically. For example, the cultures of Muslim
and Orthodox Jewish men dictate that they do not touch
women outside their families. Such men may be very un-
comfortable even shaking the hand of a female healthcare
provider (Arnold & Boggs, 2011).
Unfortunately, there is no precise formula to deter-
mine when or when not to touch a patient, and no uni-
versal meaning can be given to a touch. In order for
patients to perceive touch positively in a therapeutic rela-
tionship, Northouse and Northouse (1998) suggest that
nurses use the following guidelines:
●Use a form of touch that is appropriate to the particu-
lar situation. There are many types of touch that can
be used in various ways. The nurse should use touch
that is fitting to the situation. For example, if a woman
has just been told distressing information (e.g., that
her child is diagnosed with leukemia), she may re-
spond positively to the nurse’s hand being placed on
her arm. However, this type of touch may not be ther-
apeutic or well received by a male adolescent who has
just been told that he has diabetes and who is in the
process of venting anger. It is better to let him get the
anger out than to try to console him.
●Do not use a touch gesture that imposes more intimacy
on a patient than he or she desires. To some people,
certain gestures may imply a level of intimacy or degree
of closeness. When the touch suggests a degree of 
closeness that is not equally shared or agreed on by
both parties, distress may occur. The patient may be 
offended if his or her personal space is violated.
●Observe the patient’s response to the touch. Assess-
ment of a touch is especially important in the initial
meeting with a patient, when the nurse does not know
how the patient will respond. The nurse should ob-
serve the patient’s nonverbal behaviors. For example, 
if the patient pulls away or displays a tense facial ex-
pression, he or she may be having a negative reaction
or response to the touch. On the other hand, if a 
patient appears relaxed and more comforted after the
touch, it is likely that he or she is receiving the touch
positively.
●In healthcare situations in which both the nurse and
the patient are comfortable with touch and the use of
touch is assessed for therapeutic effect, touch can be a
very valuable mode of human communication.
Kinesics
Kinesics, commonly referred to as body language, is an
important component of nonverbal communication
(Arnold & Boggs, 2011). Kinesics is also defined as in-
volving the conscious or subconscious body positioning
and actions of the individual giving the message. Some
dimensions of kinesics are posturing and gait, gestures,
and facial expressions. Body stance can convey a message
about the nurse or the patient. If the patient is in a
slumped, head-down position, the nurse may assess that
the patient may have low self-esteem, whereas an erect
posture and decisive movements may suggest confidence
and self-control. Rapid, diffuse, or agitated body move-
ments may indicate anxiety.
Facial Expressions
Facial expressions, the various movements in the face, pro-
vide emotional undertone and feeling whether or not they
are accompanied by verbal communication. Throughout
life, individuals respond to the expressive qualities of an-
other face, often without realizing it. Mehrabian (1981),
in studying the impact of words, vocalization, and facial
expressions, noted that the power of the facial expression
supporting the verbal content far outweighs the impact of
the actual words.
Facial expression is important in conveying a message;
it either reinforces or changes the verbal message that the
listener hears. When the verbal message is inconsistent or
different from the individual’s facial expression, the non-
verbal expressions assume more prominence and meaning
and are generally perceived as more trustworthy and mean-
ingful than the spoken word (Mehrabian, 1981).
The face is the most expressive part of the body,
adding obvious and subtle cues to the real focus of the
message. Common facial expressions are surprise, sadness,
anger, happiness and joy, disgust and contempt, and fear
(Arnold & Boggs, 2011). A patient’s facial expression
should be part of the nursing assessment. For example, if
a patient frowns after receiving information, he or she
may be experiencing confusion or anger. The nurse can
intervene by saying, “I see that you are frowning. Is some-
thing wrong?” The question would encourage the patient
to clarify his or her response.
In the healthcare profession, it is very important for
the nurse’s facial expression to be congruent with the 
verbal message given to the patient. When a nurse walks
into a patient’s hospital room, the patient will “search” the
CHAPTER 6 Effective Communication     ●
103

nurse’s face for clues before the nurse can even speak. For
example, if the patient asks the nurse, “Do I have cancer?”
the slightest change in the nurse’s facial features can reveal
the nurse’s answer. Although it is difficult to control all
facial expressions, the nurse should try to avoid showing
overt shock, revulsion, dismay, and other distressing reac-
tions in the patient’s presence. If the nurse comes into a
patient’s room with an expression of anger, stress, or dis-
gust, the patient and his family may perceive the nurse to
be uncaring.
Appearance
The nurse’s physical appearance, including dress, groom-
ing, posture, gestures, and ease of movements, makes an
important impact on the patient and conveys the nurse’s
attitudes about himself or herself and others. Studies have
shown that spoken words account for only 7 percent of
the message. Tattoos and body art, although very popular
these days, can be frightening and offensive to some 
patients (Cardillo, 2009; Rizk & Bofinger, 2008).
The business world has been aware of the “dress 
for success” rule and has noted the role clothes play in
projecting the image of the serious professional. Nursing
is no different; the patient reacts to the way a nurse is
dressed. In the past, nurses wore white uniforms and caps
in designs that represented their various schools of nurs-
ing. In today’s healthcare environment there is no stan-
dard uniform for the professional nurse—a fact that does
tend to confuse the layperson. What nurses wear is usu-
ally determined by the area of the hospital in which they
work or the role they have in the community. Mangum,
Garrison, Lind, Thackeray, and Wyatt (1991) surveyed
patients, nurses, and administrators to determine
whether or not different styles of nursing uniforms are
associated with the professional image of nursing. In
their summary, they noted that the nurse is judged 
primarily by what is worn and presented at the bedside.
The nurse should make a conscious effort to dress in a
professional way.
Therapeutic Communication
Therapeutic communication, a term coined by Ruesch
(1961), is defined as a purposeful form of communication
between the health professional and the patient that allows
them to reach health-related goals through participation
in a focused relationship. “Therapeutic communication
differs from ordinary communication in that the intention
of one or more of the participants is clearly directed at
bringing about a change in the system and manner 
of communication” (Ruesch, 1961, p. 460). This type 
of communication differs from a social communication
because there is a specific purpose or planned direction to
the communication. The nurse uses therapeutic commu-
nication to promote a psychological setting that allows
positive change, growth, and healing for the patient. As
the professional caregiver, the nurse comes to know the
patient as an individual who has unique health needs, 
responses, and patterns of living. With this knowledge, the
nurse uses a goal-directed approach when communicating
with the patient.
Therapeutic communication can take place in a vari-
ety of clinical settings, ranging from the acute care system
to nursing homes. As healthcare delivery moves to a com-
munity focus, therapeutic communication can take place
in nontraditional healthcare settings such as patients’
homes, schools, and ambulatory care settings. Therapeu-
tic conversations in healthcare settings are designed to
help patients maintain healthy habits, learn about their
illness, and learn ways of coping. The communication is
goal oriented and patient centered, has rules and bound-
aries, and uses individualized strategies (Arnold & Boggs,
2011).
Therapeutic Communication Techniques
A number of techniques are used in therapeutic commu-
nication (Box 6.1). Nurses should familiarize themselves
with and make it a habit to use these techniques both in
and outside of therapeutic situations.
Active Listening
Effective therapeutic communication between the nurse
and patient begins with active listening (Bush, 2001). 
Listening actively means that the listener is communicat-
ing interest and attention to the patient. The goal of active
listening is to comprehend and understand fully what the
other person is trying to communicate.
Two important techniques used by the nurse in active
listening are restatement and reflection (Craven &
Hirnle, 2009). Restatement takes place when the nurse
listens carefully to the patient and then restates some or
all of the content back to the patient to ensure that the
nurse has the correct understanding of what the patient
has said. When the content is restated, the patient has
the opportunity to hear what he or she has said and
therefore gains an understanding of how the nurse has
perceived what he or she has communicated. The nurse
listens to the patient for both content and emotions 
expressed through nonverbal facial expression, body 
posture, and emotional status.
Reflection is the process of identifying the main emo-
tional themes in the conversation and directing them back
to the patient (Box 6.2). The nurse listens for the under-
lying feeling that the patient is conveying and then shares
this with the patient in a nonjudgmental, open manner.
This process allows the patient to explore his or her own
ideas and gives the patient a clearer understanding of the
feelings being experienced.
104
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
BOX 6.1
Therapeutic Communication 
Techniques
●Active listening
●Restatement
●Reﬂection
●Asking appropriate questions
●Focusing
●Encouraging elaboration
●Looking at alternatives
●Use of silence

Questions
Questions are an important part of all phases of therapeu-
tic communication because they allow the nurse to obtain
information from the patient. The nurse needs to ask per-
tinent questions, but not to the point that the patient feels
that he or she is being interrogated.
Arnold and Boggs (2011) suggest that questions can
be divided into three categories: open ended, close ended,
and circular. Open-ended questions are stated in such a
way that the patient is able to elaborate beyond a simple
yes or no answer. This gives the patient a way to “tell a
story.” Think of such a question as an essay question on a
test. It gives the patient a chance to express thoughts about
a problem or health need. Open-ended questions often
begin with words like “How,” “Why,” and “Can you de-
scribe.” Examples of open-ended questions are, “What
brought you to the hospital?” and “Can you tell me about
your being diagnosed with diabetes?” These questions are
general, rather than specific, and are open to the patient’s
interpretation.
Closed-ended questions require specific answers and
limit a patient’s response. These types of questions are best
used in emergency situations, and it may take more of
them to get the desired response. In this situation the nurse
wants to obtain information quickly, and the patient’s
emotional reactions are secondary. Examples of closed-
ended questions are, “When did the pain start?” and “How
long has it been since you saw the doctor?”
Circular questions focus on the impact of the illness or
injury and how it will affect the family and significant oth-
ers. Circular questions differ from open-ended questions
because the nurse is intentionally asking specific questions
to elicit responses from the patient or a family member.
The nurse uses circular questions as a type of family inter-
viewing strategy. The nurse can use the information that
the family or others provide as a basis for additional ques-
tions about the patient or other family members. For 
example, the nurse asks family members about the care of
a terminally ill patient (the mother) in their home. From
the family’s response, the nurse may receive multidimen-
sional information about the family that could not be
learned by asking specific questions. This approach pro-
vides a basis for open discussion of the patient and the
family’s circumstances.
Other Therapeutic Communication Techniques
Other techniques the nurse may use in therapeutic com-
munication are focusing, encouraging elaboration, and
looking at alternatives. Focusing means asking goal-
directed questions that help keep the patient focused on
the subject at hand. The nurse is also conveying that he
or she is helping the patient discuss the main areas of
concern. The nurse can also encourage elaboration. This
technique allows the patient to describe the concerns or
problems under discussion in a more detailed manner.
The nurse can look attentively at the patient and use
short responses such as “I see” and “Go on” to allow the
patient to continue to explore feelings. Looking at alter-
natives allows the nurse to help the patient increase the
patient’s perceived choices. This technique should not
be used until the patient has a clear understanding of the
current situation. Sometimes the patient has to deal with
emotions such as anger and denial before alternatives
come into play.
Probably one of the most difficult techniques the
nurse must learn is the use of silence, that period when
no words are being spoken between the nurse and the
patient. For Americans in particular, it takes experience
to become comfortable with pauses in the conversation.
Most people have a natural tendency to try to fill up the
empty spaces with words. By contrast, many Native
Americans consider silence essential to understanding
and respecting what the nurse has said. In traditional
Chinese and Japanese cultures, silence may mean that
the speaker wants the listener to consider the importance
of the content before continuing. British and Arab peo-
ple may use silence as a sign of respect for the individ-
ual’s privacy, whereas French, Spanish, and Russian
individuals may consider silence a sign of agreement.
Among some African Americans, silence is used to re-
spond to what is perceived as an inappropriate statement
(Andrews & Boyle, 1999).
In therapeutic relations, silent moments give the nurse
and the patient time to observe each other, digest what
messages have been communicated, and think of things to
say. Silence can be used deliberately and thoughtfully and
can be a powerful listening tool. On the other hand, long
silences may be very uncomfortable. By pausing briefly 
before continuing a conversation with a patient, the nurse
gives the patient a chance to reflect and come up with
questions of his or her own.
Barriers to Communication
In the therapeutic communication setting, the nurse must
be aware of certain responses that may lower the patient’s
self-esteem and limit full disclosure of patient information.
Among the responses that tend to block or present barriers
to communication (Box 6.3) are the following:
●Giving false reassurance is the use of clichés or com-
forting phrases in order to attempt to reassure the pa-
tient. These types of responses invalidate the patient’s
feelings or fears. Expressions such as “Everything will
be okay” and “Don’t worry” send a message to the 
patient that the nurse is not interested in the patient’s
true feelings.
CHAPTER 6 Effective Communication     ●
105
BOX 6.2
Reflection and Restatement
Patient: I don’t want to eat anything today. I can’t
even begin to think about food.
Nurse: You don’t want to eat, and you can’t think
about food. (Restatement)
Patient: All I can think about is what the doctor will
tell me about the biopsy. (Patient is wringing her
hands and almost crying.)
Nurse: The news about the biopsy result is worrying
you and makes you unable to eat. (Reﬂection)
Patient: Yes, I’m very nervous that it will mean 
that I have to have more surgery. I’m really 
frightened.

●Offering advice is telling the patient what to do or
making a decision for the patient. The nurse should
avoid offering personal opinions to the patient. Avoid
phrases such as “should do” or “ought to do.” These
types of responses tend to center the interaction on 
the nurse’s needs and perspective rather than on the
patient’s. If a patient asks a nurse for specific advice,
the nurse can use a reflective statement and explore 
the various choices the patient has in that situation.
●Probing is asking questions out of curiosity rather than
for information needed to assist the patient. Many 
of these questions begin with the word “Why.” These
types of questions from the nurse tend to put the 
patient in a defensive mode and also violate the 
patient’s privacy.
●Stereotyping is the process of attributing characteris-
tics to a group of people as though all people in 
that group possess those features. Stereotyping
groups patients in a category and does not value 
or recognize their individuality. Stereotypes lead the
nurse to make false conclusions about the patient,
and if they are based on strong emotions, stereotypes
can be identified as prejudices. It is important for
the nurse to convey acceptance of the patient as a
unique individual.
●Providing social comment refers to the use of 
polite, superficial comments that do not focus on
what the patient is feeling or trying to express to 
the nurse. The nurse can use social comments at the
beginning of an interaction to make a connection
with the patient. However, the nurse should focus
on a therapeutic interaction with the patient when
talking about issues or concerns that affect the 
patient’s health. Socialization is inappropriate when
a more serious approach to the patient’s situation 
is suitable.
●Changing the subject when the patient is trying to
communicate about another topic is rude and shows 
a lack of sensitivity. Changing the subject tends to
block communication; the patient may withhold 
information about important issues and fail to express
his or her feelings openly. If the nurse does have to
change the subject, the reason for this change should
be given to the patient.
●Using jargon—medical terminology that is used
among nurses and other health professionals—when
addressing the patient can cause confusion and 
anxiety. It may also be frightening to some patients.
Nurses should try to use common terms with which
the patient is familiar. If nurses need to use jargon,
they should make sure that they carefully explain 
what the terms mean.
COMMUNICATION WITH
COLLEAGUES
Healthcare is provided in a complex environment and
requires a team approach to deliver effective, safe, and
quality care to patients. In 2010, Congress passed 
and President Obama signed into law comprehensive
healthcare legislation. This legislation represents the
greatest change in healthcare since the 1965 creation of
the Medicare and Medicaid programs and is expected to
provide insurance coverage for an additional 32 million
uninsured Americans (Institute of Medicine, 2010). The
nursing profession will be asked to increase teamwork
and collaboration with other disciplines to enhance
safety, quality, and efficiency of the healthcare system
(Buerhaus et al., 2012).
Nurses must communicate effectively with a diverse
group of professionals and unlicensed personnel in caring
for patients. When members of the healthcare team com-
municate ineffectively with one another, delivery of
healthcare to the patient suffers. Nearly 70 percent of all
medical errors are a direct result of communication break-
down and are avoidable (Greenberg et al., 2007). Effective
communication has been shown to influence patient
safety. This finding has prompted several healthcare or-
ganizations, including the Institute of Medicine and the
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), to
call for improvement in communication skills among
healthcare workers, and they have provided strategies to-
ward that end. Furthermore, The Joint Commission has
included in its 2015 National Patient Safety Goals for
Hospitals a goal to “improve the staff communication”
(http://www.jointcommission.org/assets/1/6/2015_HAP_
NPSG_ER.pdf).
Given that communication is a part of everyday
work and an important requirement of patient safety,
organizations must recognize the value of teamwork and
work toward improving communication within the
team. In a team approach, each person recognizes the
boundaries of each discipline and values the contribu-
tion that every person makes. Methods of teamwork
must be adapted in the workplace to create an environ-
ment in which all levels of staff work together and 
respect each other’s opinions.
To achieve this atmosphere, team training can be pro-
vided. The U.S. Department of Defense, with assistance
from the AHRQ, developed a program known as Team-
STEPPS (http://teamstepps.ahrq.gov/), which stands for
Team Strategies and Tools to Enhance Performance and
Patient Safety. TeamSTEPPS is an evidence-based model
that gives instruction to healthcare professionals on how
to improve communication and teamwork skills. The goal
is to improve patient safety. Communication is an impor-
tant principle in this model. Because nurses are the man-
agers of patient care and are with the patient in healthcare
settings 24/7, they obtain a great amount of information
that must be communicated to other healthcare providers.
Nurses realize how important it is to communicate in a
clear fashion by thinking about the information that needs
106
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
BOX 6.3
Communication Barriers
●Giving false reassurance
●Oﬀering advice
●Probing
●Stereotyping
●Providing social comment
●Changing the subject
●Using jargon

to be shared and using a communication technique that
other individuals will be able to hear and accept.
Professional Collaboration
To work effectively in a team, nurses must understand
the concept of professional collaboration in the context
of today’s workplace. The Quality and Safety Education
for Nurses (QSEN) Institute defines teamwork and 
collaboration as the ability to “function effectively with
nursing and interprofessional teams, fostering open
communication, mutual respect, and shared decision-
making to achieve quality patient care” (http://qsen.org/
competencies/graduate-ksas/#teamwork_collaboration).
Collaboration is a complex process that requires indi-
viduals to be willing to share information about the 
patient from their own area of expertise. Each discipline
that cares for the patient has its own knowledge, skills,
and clinical experiences. Respect for each other’s knowl-
edge, skills, background, and clinical decision-making is
the backbone of a positive collaborative arrangement. It
is also important to find the common ground between
disciplines because there may be differing patterns of
communication (Grover, 2005). Individuals caring for
the patient bring unique contributions from the various
disciplines. Consider the following observation:
Collaboration is significantly more complex than 
simply working in close proximity to one another. It
implies a bond, a joining together, a union, and a de-
gree of caring about one another and the relationship.
A collaborative relationship is not merely the sum of 
its parts, but it is a synergistic alliance that maximizes
the contributions of each participant resulting in action
that is greater than the sum of individual works.
(Evans, 1994, p. 23)
Therefore, the challenge is to make the most of each
encounter and interaction so that the best knowledge and
ability of each team member are recognized and valued.
In addition to communication, other characteristics of
collaboration include accountability and mutual respect.
Each person must be accountable for his or her actions
and accept the results of his or her decisions or actions.
However, in the interest of the care of the patient, no
profession stands alone, and the use of good collaborative
skills is essential (Lindeke & Sieckert, 2006). Collabora-
tion allows the nurse to identify the contributions of 
the other disciplines and permits the integration of 
this information into the healthcare plan for the patient.
One study showed that as many as 85 to 95 percent of
healthcare workers do not feel able to speak up when
they see mistakes being made in patient care (Maxfield,
Grenny, McMillan, Patterson, & Switzler, 2005).
Nurses must make a concerted effort to have a col-
laborative relationship with team members, not just to
work in cooperation with them (Silva & Ludwick,
2002). They must value the other team members’ sug-
gestions and different perspectives. Using insights from
other disciplines and healthcare workers also helps 
enhance problem-solving skills. Collaboration with
other members of the healthcare team is essential for
the nursing profession to provide excellent healthcare
to all patients.
Workplace collaboration can be reflected on every level
of healthcare and is required to achieve cost-effectiveness,
quality improvement, and efficiency. Improving patient
care and creating gratifying work roles are added benefits.
Barriers to Communication 
with Colleagues
The many barriers to effective communication among
colleagues in healthcare include lack of time to commu-
nicate properly; stressful work environments of high 
patient acuity and staffing shortages; gender, genera-
tional, education, or cultural differences; and communi-
cation styles (e.g., nurses may give a more narrative
description of a patient’s condition, whereas physicians
may be more action oriented and want the problem to
be stated so that action can be taken) (Boaro, Fancott,
Baker, Velji, & Andreoli, 2010; Flicek, 2012; Nadzam,
2009). In addition, advances in technology have increased
the ways in which messages are delivered, including
text pagers, cell phones, and patient inbox messaging,
which can add to the complexity of communicating 
effectively (Flicek, 2012). 
Mutual respect is of utmost importance among all mem-
bers of the healthcare team and must be valued by each in-
dividual. In addition, all hierarchy must be eliminated
because a healthcare system that is hierarchal in nature does
not encourage collaborative practice. Hierarchy is also a 
barrier to communication. For example, some old-school
male physicians may still think that the nurse (traditionally
a position dominated by women) should be subservient and
have no contribution on a professional level.
In collaboration there is no implied supervision; it is a
two-way exchange of information. The relationship be-
tween individuals who are collaborating is nonhierarchical.
The power is shared and is based on the knowledge and
expertise that each individual brings to the setting, not on
role or title (Henneman, Lee, & Cohen, 1995). When
there is true collaboration in the workplace, the responsi-
bility for the patient is shared; the professionalism of all is
strengthened when each member of the group has partic-
ipated and has obtained success. The unique perspective
that each profession brings to a situation tends to result in
creative and practical solutions, and in turn, the patient’s
well-being is of utmost importance. To practice effective
communication in the workplace setting, each individual
must be willing to participate equally.
Strategies to Increase
Communication in Teamwork
Structured Communication Tools
The use of structured communication tools can help or-
ganize information, decrease hierarchy, and eliminate dif-
ferences in communication style. Standardized tools
provide strategies to improve the quality of communica-
tion between team members and prevent medical errors
(Boaro et al., 2010). Several tools are available. The SBAR
(Situation-Background-Assessment-Recommendation)
system is a format used to structure and standardize com-
munication between healthcare workers, especially during
CHAPTER 6 Effective Communication     ●
107

critical situations. Noncritical situation handoff and 
intershift reporting tools include the formats of “I 
PASS the BATON,” developed by TeamSTEPPS, and
ISHAPED, developed by the Institute for Healthcare
Improvement (IHI).
SBAR
The SBAR format provides a framework for communica-
tion between members of the healthcare team about a pa-
tient’s condition. It is particularly useful for reporting
changes in a patient’s status. Other common uses of SBAR
include “handoffs,” or changes of services. An example of
a handoff occurs when a patient is being transferred from
the emergency department and admitted to a bed on the
inpatient unit.
SBAR is easy to remember and useful for framing
any conversation, especially critical ones, requiring a
clinician’s immediate attention and action. It allows
users to organize information in a focused way to set 
expectations for what will be communicated and how it
will be communicated between members of the team,
which is essential for developing teamwork and fostering
a culture of patient safety. Nurses should organize fac-
tual data when presenting information to other team
members. The following is a breakdown for each SBAR
element:
●Situation: What is going on with the patient?
Mrs. Adams called me to her room to say that she feels
dizzy and her heart is racing.
●Background: What is the clinical background or 
context?
Mrs. Adams is a 72-year-old diabetic patient who has a
history of hypertension.
●Assessment: What do I think the problem is?
I think the problem is very likely related to Mrs. Adams’
heart and cardiovascular system.
●Recommendation: What would I do to correct it?
I think you should come to the unit to see Mrs. Adams to
examine her. We can also perform an electrocardiogram.
Intershift Report
Handoffs and intershift reports occur two to three times a
day or more. Intershift report is a face-to-face handoff be-
tween the oncoming and off-going nurses. Ineffective
handoffs have been identified as a barrier to patient safety
and quality by providing the potential for miscommuni-
cation, patient harm, and neglect (Thomas & Donahue-
Porter, 2012). Use of structured communication tools
assists healthcare workers to give complete and accurate
information.
“I PASS the BATON”
“I PASS the BATON” is a tool that was developed for the
TeamSTEPPS program to standardize communication in
patient care handoffs (Rawlings, 2011). It also can remind
clinicians of the key information and factors to include
during their medical handoffs. This tool promotes a cul-
ture that encourages staff to clarify, question, and confirm
information communicated about the patient. The com-
ponents of “I PASS the BATON” are as follows:
●Introduction
Introduce yourself and your role/job to the patient.
●Patient
Name, identifiers, age, sex, location
●Assessment
Presenting chief complaint, vital signs, and symptoms
and diagnosis
●Situation
Current status and circumstances, including code 
status, level of (un)certainty, recent changes, response
to treatment
●Safety Concerns
Critical laboratory values and reports, socioeconomic
factors, allergies, alerts (e.g., falls, isolation)
●THE
●Background
Comorbidities, previous episodes, current medications,
family history
●Actions
What actions were taken or are required, and brief 
rationale
●Timing
Level of urgency and explicit timing, prioritization of
actions
●Ownership
Who is responsible (nurse/doctor/team), including 
patient/family responsibilities
●Next
What will happen next; any anticipated changes; what
is the plan, including any contingency plans
Further explanation of this tool can be found online at
http://www.ahrq.gov/professionals/education/curriculum-
tools/teamstepps/instructor/fundamentals/index.html.
ISHAPED
The ISHAPED tool was developed by the INOVA
Health Systems in Falls Church, Virginia, with help from
the Picker Institute, for use during a handoff or intershift
report. The IHI chose the Picker Institute to develop sys-
tems to promote patient-centered and family-centered
healthcare. This tool is to be used at the bedside so that
the patient is involved in the report. Again, it assists
healthcare workers to communicate key information
while giving the opportunity for the receiver to clarify,
question, and confirm information. ISHAPED is an
acronym similar to SBAR. Its components are Introduc-
tion, Story, History, Assessment, Plan, Error Prevention,
and Dialogue.
The ISHAPED tool can be adapted to any clinical 
setting or system. The process should include the follow-
ing steps:
1. The handoﬀ happens at the bedside: S, H, A compo-
nents occur outside of the room; I, P, E, D components
occur in the room.
2. Clinical judgment and common sense are used to de-
termine whether a bedside component is inappropriate
for a particular patient.
3. The written ISHAPED handoﬀ template is completed
by the oﬀ-going nurse and given to the oncoming
nurse.
Additional information and tools are available at
http://www.ihi.org/resources/Pages/Tools/ISHAPEDPatient
CenteredNurseShiftChangeBedsideReport.aspx.
108
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

Other Techniques
The TeamSTEPPS approach teaches other strategies
that promote teamwork and thereby increase patient
safety. A technique using CUS words presents a method
in which a team member can resolve conflict, advocate
for patients, and give mutual support. Techniques of
face-to-face gathering of the team for a review of the
plan before the event, problem solving during the event,
or process improvement after the event are strategies
that can promote every team member being on the 
same page.
CUS Words
CUS words were developed in the TeamSTEPPS program
to provide another framework for conflict resolution, 
advocacy, and mutual support. CUS words are signal words,
similar to “danger,” “warning,” and “caution.” Using CUS
words, nurses can signal the need to stop, address real or
potential risks, and avoid patient safety events. CUS words
are C = I am concerned, U = I am uncomfortable, and 
S = there is a safety issue. They catch the listener’s atten-
tion. When CUS words are spoken, the team member or
members will understand clearly not only the issue 
but also the magnitude of the issue. The process of this
technique is as follows:
●First, state your concern.
●Then state why you are uncomfortable.
●If the conflict is not resolved, state that there is a 
safety issue. Discuss in what way the concern is related
to safety. If the safety issue is not acknowledged, a 
supervisor should be notified.
Briefs-Huddles-Debriefs
Under the construct of Leadership, the TeamSTEPPS 
program outlines three techniques used to promote team-
work. These are the brief, huddle, and debrief.
Brief is defined as a short planning session before 
the beginning of an event (AHRQ, 2012). The
“briefing” can be used to discuss who is on the
team, assign roles and responsibilities, establish 
expectations, and review the plan. If there is a
“checklist,” as with some procedures or in the 
operating room, these can also be completed at 
this time.
Huddle is deﬁned as an informal, unplanned team meet-
ing. There can be several reasons that a team would
use a huddle, including reinforcing a plan already in
place for the treatment of a patient, refocusing team
members to the plan of care, providing updated in-
formation requiring adjustment of the plan, and as-
sessing the need to change plans. Huddles also aﬀord
team leaders an opportunity to informally monitor
patient and unit-level situations that occur (AHRQ,
2012).
Debrief is deﬁned as a feedback or informal information
exchange session that occurs shortly after an event
(AHRQ, 2012). It is designed to improve team per-
formance and eﬀectiveness, focusing on what went
well, what did not go well, and what can be done in
the future to improve performance.
Nurses will be increasingly challenged to become
skilled team players as the delivery of care becomes more
complex. With various team members coming from dif-
ferent perspectives, effective communication is essential
to positive patient outcomes and will result in creative
and practical solutions (Pagana, 2011). Take the time
and effort to learn from others’ perspectives and to en-
courage new team members to share their experiences.
Basic therapeutic techniques of communication are es-
sential; nurses must be aware of the variables of gender,
hierarchy, and collegiality and have basic mutual respect
for each member of the health team. Nurses should con-
tinue to demonstrate that the nursing profession is
unique and that nurses bring a different perspective to
the patient’s care. The attitudes and skills associated
with collaborative relationships can be learned if all par-
ties are willing to participate.
CHAPTER 6 Effective Communication     ●
109
ONLINE CONSULT 
The American Communication Journal at 
http://www.acjournal.org/
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
Kalisch, Lee, and Rochman describe nursing teams on acute care patient units, noting that a higher level of
teamwork and perceptions of adequate staffing lead to greater job satisfaction with current position and occu-
pation. Teamwork and perceptions of adequate staffing were reported as the major contributors to job satis-
faction on acute care units (p. 945).
Question: How will you use this information as a nurse or nurse-manager to improve communication and
collaboration on your unit?
Source: Kalisch, B. J., Lee, H., & Rochman, M. (2010). Nursing staff teamwork and job satisfaction. Journal of Nursing 
Management, 18, 938–947.

110
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
K E Y  P O I N T S
●Effective communication within the nurse-patient relationship is a learned skill and is essential for provid-
ing effective nursing care.
●Communication models illustrate the complex process of communication with the basic components: the
source/encoder, the message, the medium, and the receiver/decoder.
●The health communications model uses a broad systems view of communication and emphasizes the
way in which a series of factors (relationships, transactions, and contexts) can affect interactions in the
healthcare setting.
●When people share information, they express messages in a complex composite of both verbal (spoken
or written) and nonverbal behaviors. Individuals express themselves through language, gestures, voice 
inflection, facial expressions, and use of space.
●Metacommunication is a broad term used to “describe all of the factors that influence how the message
is perceived” (Arnold & Boggs, 2011, p. 163).
●Oral communication is the use of words by people to think about ideas, to share experiences with 
others, and to validate the perceptions of the world.
●Potter and Perry (2013) state that the six most important aspects of verbal communication are 
(1) vocabulary, (2) denotative and connotative meaning, (3) intonation, (4) pacing, (5) clarity and
brevity, and (6) timing and relevance.
●Nonverbal communication is communication without words and includes messages that are created
through body motions, facial expressions, use of space and sounds, and use of touch. Arnold and Boggs
(2011) categorize areas in which nonverbal behaviors are used: touch, proxemics, nonverbal body clues,
facial expression, and clothing.
●For patients to perceive touch in a positive therapeutic relationship, Northouse and Northouse (1998)
suggest that nurses use the following guidelines: use touch that is appropriate to the particular situation,
do not use a touch that imposes more intimacy on a patient than he or she desires, and observe the 
patient’s response to the touch.
●Therapeutic communication is a purposeful form of communication that serves as a point of contact 
between the health professional and the patient and allows them to reach health-related goals through
participation in a focused relationship. Techniques include active listening, restatement, reflection, focus-
ing, encouraging elaboration, looking at alternatives, use of silence, and use of appropriate questions.
●Barriers to communication are certain responses that may lower the patient’s self-esteem, limit full 
disclosure of patient information, and block communication. These barriers include giving false reassur-
ance, giving advice, probing, stereotyping, providing social comment, changing the subject, and using 
jargon.
●Collaboration in the workplace depends on working in cooperation with other members of the health-
care team. The power is shared and is based on the knowledge and expertise that each member brings
to the setting; mutual respect is of utmost importance for successful communication.
●Several tools have been developed for teams to enhance and improve their communication, including 
the SBAR, ISHAPED, and CUS words for critical communication and handoffs and briefings, huddles, and
debriefings techniques for short team discussions.
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Contrast various communication models for use in the hospital versus the home setting.
2. Explain how nonverbal communication may be more “powerful” than spoken words.
3. Describe a collaborative relationship that you have experienced in your work setting.

CHAPTER 6 Effective Communication     ●
111
4. Read Coeling and Cukr’s (2000) article “Communication Styles That Promote Perceptions of Collaboration, 
Quality, and Nurse Satisfaction” in the Journal of Nursing Care Quality 14(2), 63–74. Form a study group and 
discuss the various aspects of this evidence-based practice study. How does this affect your workplace issues?
What new techniques could you introduce in your workplace?
5. Review the Chapter Thought on the first page of the chapter and discuss it in the context of the contents of the
chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.
REFERENCES
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). (2012).
TeamSTEPPS instructor guide. Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality, Rockville, MD: AHRQ. Retrieved
from http://www.ahrq.gov/professionals/education/
curriculum-tools/teamstepps/instructor/index.html
Andrews, M., & Boyle, J. (1999). Transcultural concepts in 
nursing care (3rd ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott.
Arnold, E., & Boggs, K. (2011). Interpersonal relationships: 
Professional communication skills for nurses (6th ed.).
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders/Elsevier.
Berlo, D. K. (1960). The process of communication: An introduc-
tion to theory and practice. New York: Holt, Rinehart &
Winston.
Birdwhistell, R. L. (1970). Kinesics and context. Philadelphia,
PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Boaro, N., Fancott, C., Baker, R., Velji, K., & Andreoli, A.
(2010). Using SBAR to improve communication in inter-
professional rehabilitation teams. Journal of Interprofessional
Care, 24(1), 111–114.
Buerhaus, P. I., DesRoches, C., Applebaum, S., Hess, R., 
Norman, L. D., & Donelan, K. (2012). Are nurses ready
for health care reform? A decade of survey research. 
Nursing Economic$, 30(6), 318–329.
Bush, K. (2001). Do you really listen to patients? RN 2001,
64(3), 35–37.
Cardillo, D. (2009). Projecting your professionalism. NSNA
Imprint, 30–31. Retrieved from www.nurse.com
Craven, R., & Hirnle, C. (2009). Fundamentals of nursing:
Human health and function (6th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: 
Lippincott-Raven.
Evans, J. (1994). The role of the nurse manager in creating an
environment for collaborative practice. Holistic Nursing
Practice, 8, 22–31.
Flicek, C. L. (2012). Communication: A dynamic between
nurses and physicians, MedSurg Nursing, 21(6), 
385–387.
Greenberg, C. C., Regenbogen, S. E., Studdert, D. M., 
Lipsitz, S. R., Rogers, S. O., Zinner, M. J., & Gawande, A. A.
(2007). Patterns of communication breakdowns resulting in
injury to surgical patients. Journal of the American College of
Surgeons, 204, 533–540.
Grover, S. (2005). Shaping effective communication skills and
therapeutic relationships at work. American Association of
Occupational Health Nurses Journal, 53(4), 177–187.
Hall, E. T. (1959). The silent language. Garden City, NY: 
Doubleday & Company.
Henneman, E. A., Lee, J. L., & Cohen, J. I. (1995). Collabora-
tion: A concept analysis. Journal of Advanced Nursing,
21(1), 103–109.
Institute of Medicine. (2010). The future of nursing: Leading
change, advancing health. Retrieved from http://www.iom.edu/
Reports/2010/The-Future-of-Nursing-Leading-Change-
Advancing-Health.aspx 
Kalisch, B. J., Lee, H., & Rochman, M. (2010). Nursing 
staff teamwork and job satisfaction. Journal of Nursing
Management, 18, 938–947.
Ku, L., & Flores, G. (2005). Pay now or pay later: Providing
interpreter services in health care. Health Affairs, 24(2),
435–444.
Lindeke, L., & Sieckert, A. (2005). Nurse-physician workplace
collaboration. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing. Retrieved
from http://www.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/
ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/TableofContents/
Volume102005/No1Jan05/tpc26_416011.html
Mangum, S., Garrison, C., Lind, A., Thackeray, R., & Wyatt,
M. (1991). Perceptions of nurses’ uniforms. Image: The
Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 23(2), 127–130.
Maxfield, D., Grenny, J., McMillan, R., Patterson, K., &
Switzer, A. (2005). Silence kills: The seven crucial conversa-
tions for healthcare. Vital Smarts, E45. Retrieved from
http://www.aacn.org/WD/practice/docs/publicpolicy/
silencekills.pdf
Mehrabian, A. (1981). Silent messages (2nd ed.). Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth Publishing.
Mitchell, R. W. (1991). Bateson’s concept of metacommunica-
tion in play. New Ideas in Psychology, 9(1), 73–87.
Nadzam, D. (2009). Nurses’ role in communication and patient
safety. Journal of Nursing Care Quality, 24(3), 184–188.
Northouse, P. G., & Northouse, L. L. (1998). Health 
communication strategies for health professionals (3rd ed.).
Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange.
Pagana, K. (2011). The nurse’s communication advantage.
Indianapolis, IN: Sigma Theta Tau International.
Potter, A., & Perry, G. (2013). Fundamentals of nursing
(8th ed.). St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
Rawlings, T. (2011). Passing the baton to standardize handoffs.
OR Nurse, 5(4), 48.
Rizk, K., & Bofinger, R. (2008). Florence Nightingale versus
Dennis Rodman: Evaluating professional image in the 
modern world. Annual Review of Nursing Education, 6,
189–204.
Ruesch, J. (1961). Therapeutic communication. New York: 
W. W. Norton.

Silva, M., & Ludwick, R. (2002). Ethics Column. Ethical ground-
ing for entry into practice: Respect, collaboration, and 
accountability. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing. Retrieved
from http://www.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/
ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/Columns/Ethics/
GroundingforEntryintoPractice.html
Thomas, L., & Donohoe-Porter, P. (2012). Blending evidence
and innovation: Improving intershift handoffs in a multi-
hospital setting. Journal of Nursing Care Quality, 27(2),
116–124. doi: 10.1097/ngc.obolse318241obsb
Watson, J. (1979). Nursing: The philosophy and science of caring.
Boston, MA: Little, Brown.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Brown, G. (1995). Understanding barriers to basing nursing
practice upon research: A communication model approach.
Journal of Advanced Nursing, 21, 154–157.
Buttaro, T. (2008). Primary care: A collaborative practice
(3rd ed.). St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
Leininger, M., & McFarland, M. (2002). Transcultural nursing:
Concepts, theories, research and practice (3rd ed.). New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Lindberg, J., Hunter, M., & Kruszewski, A. (1983). Introduction
to person-centered nursing. Philadelphia, PA: J. B. Lippincott.
Peplau, H. (1952). Interpersonal relations in nursing. New York:
G. P. Putnam’s Sons.
Peplau, H. (1960). Talking with patients. American Journal of
Nursing, 60, 964–966.
Riley, J. (2008). Communication in nursing (6th ed.). St. Louis,
MO: Mosby Elsevier.
Salle, A. (1999). Effective communication. In B. Cherry & 
S. Jacob (Eds.), Contemporary nursing issues, trends, and
management (pp. 378–402). St. Louis, Mo: Mosby.
Stapleton, S. (1998). Team-building: Making collaborative
practice work. Journal of Nurse-Midwifery, 43(1), 12–18.
United States Census Bureau. 2007-2011 American Community
Survey, Table B16001.
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
(2008). Indiana income limits [Data file]. Retrieved from
http://www.huduser.org/Datasets/IL/IL08/in_fy2008.pdf
ONLINE RESOURCES
The American Communication Journal
http://www.acjournal.org
Institute for Healthcare Improvement
http://www.ihi.org/Pages/default.aspx
The TeamSTEPPS program, available free of charge from the
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)
http://www.ahrq.gov/teamstepps
The Quality and Safety Education for Nurses (QSEN) Institute
http://qsen.org/
112
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Explain what the term critical thinking means.
2. Describe some important characteristics of the critical thinking process.
3. Discuss the relationships between the nursing process and critical thinking.
4. Apply the components of critical analysis to a given nursing practice situation.
5. Analyze problem-solving skills needed in nursing practice case studies.
Critical Thinking
Reflective Thinking
Reactive Thinking
Problem Identification
Data Collection
Hypothesis Testing
Moral Reasoning
Induction
Deduction
Assumption Identification
Concept Formation
Interpretation of Data
Application of Principles
Interpretation of Feelings, Attitudes,
and Values
113
“The whole science is nothing more than 
a refinement of everyday thinking.”
Albert Einstein, Physics and Reality (1936)
Key Terms
Critical Thinking
●Genevieve M. Bartol
7

The National League for Nursing mandates that schools
of nursing demonstrate that critical thinking is taught
and measured for accreditation. Thinking is quite sim-
ply the action of the mind to produce thought. How,
then, does the adjective “critical” modify the word
“thinking”? Etymologically, critical is derived from 
two Greek roots: kriticos (discerning judgment) and 
kriterion (standards). Critical also has several connota-
tions. Critical, for example, can also be understood as
an inclination to find fault, as an essential element, or
as a careful analysis of a problem. There is even plenty
of discussion in the literature that the term critical think-
ing should be renamed. Nevertheless, however the term
is defined or described, there is general agreement that
critical thinking is a core skill that is essential for nursing
practice (Robert & Peterson, 2013, p. 85).
The concept of critical thinking dates back at least to
Socrates in ancient Greece. Dewey (1910, 1933) prompted
educators to pay attention to how we think and to teach
students how to think. Glaser’s (1941) and Black’s (1952)
writings represent efforts to integrate critical thinking into
education (cited in Cassel & Congleton, 1993). Paul
(1990) reviewed the efforts to teach reasoning in the 1930s
and the 1960s. McPeck (1990) pointed out that before
1980, few schools were concerned with teaching critical
thinking, and even fewer theoretical analyses of the concept
existed. According to McPeck (1990), he had to search 
disparate sources to find any sustained published discus-
sions of critical thinking (p. 1) when he researched the topic
in 1979–1980. In 1990, Facione and Facione (1996) 
gathered a panel of 48 educators and scholars, including
leading figures in critical thinking theory, to work toward
a consensus on the role of critical thinking in educational
assessment and instruction.
Facione and Facione (1996) reported that the expert
researchers and theoreticians described critical thinking 
as the purposeful, self-regulatory judgment that results in
interpretation, analysis, evaluation, and inference, as well
as the explanation of the evidential, conceptual, method-
ological, criteriological, or contextual considerations on
which that judgment was based (p. 129). Rubenfeld and
Scheffer (2010) used a Delphi process to arrive at a con-
sensus statement and the components of critical thinking.
They determined that critical thinking is “an essential
component of professional accountability and quality
nursing care” (p. 32). They also identified 10 critical
thinking habits of mind and seven critical thinking skills.
As you read this chapter, you will see that despite this
statement, the literature is replete with definitions and de-
scriptions of critical thinking. The proliferation of journal
articles, monographs, essays, conference papers, and books
devoted to exploring critical thinking in nursing testifies
to the current interest but also suggests that a closer look
at the term is warranted. We generally recognize that the
professional practice situations that nurses encounter daily
are characteristically complex, rapidly changeable, ambigu-
ous, particular, and rife with conflict. We increasingly ac-
cept the fact that patients are dynamic systems within an
energy field that includes family, workplace, environment,
culture, and life history. We know that nurses base their
practice decisions on a broad pool of knowledge derived
from a variety of disciplines. The scope and standards of
holistic nursing practice define critical thinking as “an 
active, purposeful, organized cognitive process involving
creativity, reflection, problems solving, both rational and
intuitive judgment, an attitude of inquiry, and a philo-
sophical orientation toward thinking about thinking”
(Mariano, 2013, p. 59). 
With the holistic nursing practice definition in mind,
we will expand on and detail the context and role of crit-
ical thinking in nursing.
CRITICAL THINKING IN
NURSING
Nurses have been long taught to use the nursing process
to guide their practice. The nursing process provides 
a structure for using knowledge and thinking to provide
holistic care for individuals, families, groups, and com-
munities. The process can be used with all theoretical 
frameworks and patients in all settings. Although its com-
ponents may be expressed in slightly different ways, the
nursing process is basically a problem-solving method that
has served nurses well by helping them use empathic and
intellectual processes with scientific knowledge to assess,
diagnose, plan, implement, and evaluate nursing care and
patient outcomes. When used appropriately, the nursing
process involves critical thinking. For example, a nurse ob-
serves that a patient who underwent surgery 2 days ago
has suddenly become agitated. The nurse will consider sev-
eral possible reasons for the agitation. He or she will speak
with the patient, note anything that occurred before the
onset of agitation, and gather assessment data, such as vital
signs and signs of bleeding at the surgical site. The nurse
will then determine what intervention is needed and eval-
uate whether the chosen intervention is effective. Using
the nursing process in this manner requires active engage-
ment and cannot just be a matter of filling in the columns.
Rather, the person using the process must be able to rec-
ognize relationships, connections, and patterns that pro-
mote continuous bidirectional movement and openness
to new possibilities. 
New scientific understandings of living systems show
that our former mechanistic view of the world is inade-
quate (Bartol & Courts, 2013). Human beings are com-
plex, highly integrative systems that are embedded in and
supporting other systems. Schuster (2002) noted that the
commonly used five-column format in nursing care plans
was not promoting critical thinking (p. vii). Care plans
using this format were lengthy to write, time consuming,
and too often simply copied from a book. Furthermore,
the column format seemed to promote linear thinking and
failed to address the patterns and connections essential to
providing holistic nursing care. 
Schuster (2002) proposed using a diagrammatic teach-
ing and learning strategy to enable students and faculty to
visualize the interrelationships among medical diagnoses,
nursing diagnoses, assessment data, and treatments. In a
three-step process, the major medical diagnoses and the
problems that resulted from those diagnoses were identi-
fied (step 1), the data were organized into a hierarchy of
subordinate concepts (step 2), and the meaningful associ-
ations among concepts were indicated with lines and the
114
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

nursing diagnoses selected (step 3). Schuster called this
strategy concept mapping and suggested that it promoted
critical thinking. This visual map serves as a personal
pocket guide to patient care that can be revised as needed
throughout the day. The development of this process il-
lustrates the use of critical thinking to promote critical
thinking in students of nursing. 
The increasing diversity and complexity of nursing
practice and the exponential growth of knowledge require
nurses who can think critically. Nurses must master the
reasoning skills needed to process growing volumes of in-
formation. When nurses assess patients, the data they
gather need to be organized into meaningful patterns. Re-
sponses to treatment and care need to be evaluated con-
tinuously to determine whether the nursing diagnosis was
appropriate and the intended outcome achieved. In the
patient situation described previously, the patient may
have injured himself when he bumped into the corner of
the bedside table while trying to get to the bathroom with-
out assistance and is bleeding internally from injury to his
spleen. Even one additional piece of information related
to the patient may change the whole configuration and re-
quire a redefinition of the problem. In nursing, situations
change so rapidly that reliance on conventional methods,
procedure manuals, or traditions to guide judgments
about the appropriate nursing action required is insuffi-
cient. Although decision trees may serve as reminders for
the nurse, they cannot be relied on without using critical
thinking. Although the nursing diagnoses categorized by
major functional health patterns serve as useful tools and
aid in communication with coworkers in planning and im-
plementing nursing care, they are not sufficient. Not even
evidence-based practice relieves us of the need for critical
thinking. Individual differences must always be consid-
ered. Taleb (2010) argues that we must always be alert to
the highly improbable and that as we draw on evidence-
based practices for a particular condition, we need to keep
in mind the problem of the “circularity of statistics” 
(p. 269). To illustrate further: At one time it was believed
that all swans were white. The single sighting of a black
swan invalidated that general statement and points to the
fragility of our knowledge. There may well be an outlier,
and we need to remain open to surprise (Taleb, 2010, 
p. xvii). Furthermore, the writings of Malcom Gladwell
serve to remind us to be alert to how we make judgments
(Gladwell, 2005) and how our judgments can change with
a change in perspective (Gladwell, 2013). The question
always remains whether you have enough data to justify
confidence in your decision. Remember, as noted previ-
ously, that an additional piece of data may change the
whole configuration. We need to always keep in mind our
limitations. Furthermore, Gladwell (2005) cautions us
that we must understand that we all have not one mind
but two, and while our conscious mind may be blocked
at one point, our unconscious mind is busy scanning the
situation, sifting through possibilities, and processing every
conceivable clue (p. 71). Sometimes the direction in which
a situation turns is due to factors not directly related to
the present problem and completely out of our scope of
awareness (Gladwell, 2009, pp. 101–125, 208–292). Al-
though we cannot wait to act until all the data are in, we
need to remain open to correction.
Johns (2013) offers a practical guide to developing 
reflective nursing practice. He explores the value of using
structured models of reflection to help the nurse center on
the context of care and to promote a caring relationship
with patients. The nurse is guided to pay attention to what
is unfolding and hence to use reflection as a continual
process of assessment or awareness of the shifting and pat-
terns of the patient’s experience (p. 213). In what ways has
your nursing intervention altered the present state? Has
the analgesia you administered made a difference? Or has
your lack of presence and concern about another patient
tempered the effectiveness of the analgesia you adminis-
tered? According to Johns, the nurse should use narrative
to critically assess his or her own practice.
Then again, Taleb (2013) warns us to be alert to the
narrative fallacy in which we become so focused on a single
outcome that we fail to imagine other possible outcomes.
Quite simply, a critical thinker needs to be able to tolerate
ambiguity and remain open to surprises.
By now you realize that critical thinking requires 
attention to many factors. Complex legal, ethical, organi-
zational, and professional factors are involved in seemingly
simple decisions. For example, nurses consider ethical fac-
tors (e.g., keeping patient information confidential) and
scheduling factors (e.g., when to admit visitors) when they
decide not to admit visitors to a unit between 10 a.m. and
12 noon because patients are participating in a support
group in the commons room. Visitors passing by the com-
mons room may compromise patient confidentiality.
Nurses make inferences, differentiate facts from opin-
ions, evaluate the credibility of the sources of information,
and make decisions, all skills that require critical thinking.
Because each of these skills can be learned, at least to some
extent, an individual can enhance his or her potential to
become an effective critical thinker. We develop critical
thinking skills through attention and practice. Even
though our skills increase, at no time can we rest assured
that we have finished learning and are thus incapable of
making the wrong decision (Gladwell, 2009, p. 291;
Nance, 2008, pp. 11–24).
Nursing is sometimes described as a boundary disci-
pline because it draws heavily on knowledge from the sci-
ences and humanities. Using information from one subject
to shed light on another subject requires critical thinking
skills. Nursing is concerned with human beings—highly
complex integrative, yet open systems—whose care re-
quires a holistic orientation that attends to cyclic processes
and patterns in networks of relationships and not just signs
and symptoms. Consequently, nursing curriculums gen-
erally include courses from the liberal arts as well as from
the sciences. Readers Theater has served to help nurses and
physicians heighten awareness of and develop compassion
for patients and their families and thus enlarge their per-
spective (Savitt, 1969). According to oral tradition, it is
believed that legislators in early Greece were required to
attend the theater for those very purposes.
Conceptually, it may be argued that general critical
thinking abilities enhance the ability to make good clinical
judgments. Nurses can apply theoretical knowledge to a
specific clinical situation, thereby enhancing clinical judg-
ment and decision-making skills. The ability to apply
learning from a broad range of disciplines enables nurses
CHAPTER 7 Critical Thinking     ●
115

to expand and modify existing knowledge to accommo-
date new situations as well as simplify or speed up the task
of learning and performing in new situations. For exam-
ple, orthopedic nurses use critical thinking when applying
knowledge of physics (principles related to levers, ful-
crums, and balance in positioning and moving patients),
biology (characteristics of a bone in the early stages of 
healing), and psychology (ways of helping patients manage
the anxiety related to increasing mobilization) when safely
transferring a patient recovering from a serious car acci-
dent. Because educational programs cannot provide 
students with all of the clinical experiences and all of the
information they need to handle every future nursing 
situation they will encounter, students must learn to be
critical thinkers.
Critical thinking includes analyzing and evaluating the
soundness of the written information and expressed opin-
ions we encounter. We cannot assume that because the
information is published it is valid. We need to identify
the strengths and weaknesses in the author’s argument
and the evidence that is presented. We need to examine
any assumptions that the author may have made. We
need to consider the patient’s context as well as our own
for those times when a convenient shortcut is needed
(Gladwell, 2002, p. 257).
Definitions
What is critical thinking? Some nursing educators would
argue that it is really the same as the nursing process
(Jones & Brown, 1993; Kintgen-Andrews, 1991; White,
Beardslee, Peters, & Supples, 1990; Woods, 1993). 
Others insist that although the nursing process requires
critical thinking, critical thinking is much more. It is
generally maintained, however, that critical thinking is
a valuable skill or set of skills capable of being learned
and enhanced (Facione & Facione, 2000; Robert & 
Peterson, 2013; Rubenfeld & Scheffer, 2010; Schuster,
2002; Wilkinson, 2001).
Still, critical thinking is often considered a special, even
rare, skill. Although the characteristics of critical thinking
match those of sound clinical judgments, a review of 
the nursing literature indicates that there is no general
agreement about what critical thinking is. Definitions
abound in the nursing literature; Table 7.1 gives a sam-
pling. The definitions have common elements. Critical
thinking is viewed as engaging in a purposeful cognitive
activity directed toward establishing a belief or map of ac-
tion. Each definition speaks to the need for a person to
process and evaluate information actively, to validate 
existing knowledge, and to create new knowledge. Each
echoes Dewey’s (1933) urging to use reflective thinking
of the kind that turns a subject over in the mind and gives
it serious and consecutive consideration (p. 3). All are 
consistent with Dewey’s definition of reflective thinking
as active, persistent, and careful consideration of any belief
or supposed form of knowledge in the light of the grounds
that support it and the further conclusions to which 
it tends (Dewey, 1933, p. 9). All suggest using a thought
chain (Dewey, 1993, p. 4) that aims at drawing conclu-
sions. Critical thinking is a process that is engaged in not
for itself, but rather for the purpose of providing quality
patient care. A thought chain refers simply to the process
of moving methodically from one thought to another
while remaining open to multiple possibilities. Quite sim-
ply, one considers, reflects, decides, and yet remains open
to changes, always keeping in mind that one additional
piece of data can change the whole configuration and send
the process in a new direction.
Different elements are also evident in the definitions
and descriptions offered in the nursing literature. Some
seem to equate critical thinking with reactive thinking
(Kataoka-Yahiro & Saylor, 1994; Kintgen-Andrews,
1991). Reactive thinking implies a response to what is,
and not to what may yet be. Most view critical thinking
as a focused, rational analysis of existing knowledge with
very specific steps (Bandman & Bandman, 1994; Kataoka-
Yahiro & Saylor, 1994; Kintgen-Andrews, 1991). One
refers to creating new knowledge (Case, 1994), whereas
another implies that only existing knowledge is uncovered
(Bandman & Bandman, 1995). Jones and Brown (1993)
examine alternative views on critical thinking, arguing that
it is both a philosophical orientation toward thinking and
a cognitive process characterized by reasoned judgment
and reflective thinking (p. 72). 
The discussion about critical thinking continues. The
many definitions and descriptions suggest that consensus
on the role of critical thinking in nursing has not been
reached (Paul & Elder, 2008; Robert & Peterson, 2013;
Mariano, 2013). 
Descriptions
The following statements gleaned from the literature
and the author’s own thinking are an attempt to provide
a fuller description of the role of critical thinking in
nursing.
●Critical thinking is directed toward taking action. 
Although it is often associated with scientific reason-
ing, which includes problem identification, data 
collection, and hypothesis testing, it is not limited to
that activity. Critical thinking also includes the affec-
tive processes of moral reasoning and development of 
values to guide decisions and actions.
●Critical thinking presumes a disposition toward
thinking analytically. Uncritical acceptance of all
data is antithetical to critical thinking. An attitude
that welcomes intellectual skepticism and honesty 
is essential. Separating or breaking the whole into
parts to uncover the nature, function, and relation-
ships is helpful as long as one maintains a sense of
the whole.
●Critical thinking embraces thinking about how we
think. We need to monitor our approach to the prob-
lem and our reasoning process. An error in reasoning
may be as serious a barrier to finding a solution as a
116
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
ONLINE CONSULT 
Refer to the Interactive Exercises from Chapter 5,
on a thoughtful critique of research for evidence-
based practice, for questions that may help you
critically analyze what you read.

miscalculation in determining a proper drug dose. 
We should critique the process as well as the proposed
solution. Bandman and Bandman (1994) identify 
fallacies or errors in thinking that one should identify,
expose, and resist. To illustrate: A nurse reports that 
all the laboratory tests for a patient came back negative
and implies, therefore, that the patient’s symptoms
must be “all in her head.” The fallacy of the appeal to
ignorance consists in arguing that the absence of proof
against a diagnosis establishes proof that the patient’s
symptoms are imaginary.
●Critical thinking assumes maturity. Psychology re-
minds us that our thinking styles evolve as we grow
and develop. We think concretely before we think
abstractly. The ability to think abstractly is requisite
to critical thinking. We accept many beliefs as chil-
dren simply because an adult told us they were true.
Only as we grow do we question and examine those
beliefs. We need to reach the place where we have
confidence in our reasoning abilities.
●Critical thinking requires knowledge. A broad educa-
tional foundation and a healthy intellectual curiosity
are prerequisites. A solid educational foundation needs
to be informed by common sense and experience as
well as knowledge of one’s own biases and limitations
(Alfaro-Lefevre, 2013). Zealousness in seeking knowl-
edge and understanding through careful observation
and deliberate questioning with openness to possibili-
ties is essential (Rubenfeld & Scheffer, 2010).
●Critical thinking requires skills. We need to know 
how to gather and evaluate data. We need to distin-
guish facts from opinions and probe the assumptions
behind a line of reasoning. We need to know how to
draw inferences from facts and observations, evaluating
them as tenable or not. Precision is important. Know-
ing a fact is insufficient; we need to know how that
fact was obtained and from where it was derived. We
need to identify what data are missing. Throughout
the process, we need to suspend judgment until all the
evidence is weighed, even as the situation requires ten-
tative action. There are many ways to view a problem.
The way we view a situation influences our proposed
solutions.
●Critical thinking, however, is more than a set of
skills. Syllogistic thinking, inductive and deductive
reasoning, analysis, and synthesis are used, but other
styles of thinking are also needed. According to Lon-
ergan (1977), imagination is the highest function of
the intellect and precedes all other thinking activities.
Certainly, critical thinking uses imagination. Using 
a metaphor such as a computer or a holograph to 
describe a function of the brain, for example, can
provide additional insight into the process. Critical
thinking is creative. We reach original solutions by
drawing from past experiences and making creative
applications to new situations.
●Critical thinking includes feelings because they are 
inseparable from all thinking and behavior. Feelings
CHAPTER 7 Critical Thinking     ●
117
TABLE 7.1
Definitions and Descriptions of Critical Thinking
Definition 
“The rational examination of ideas, inferences, assumptions, principles, 
arguments, conclusions, issues, statements, beliefs and actions” (p. 5).
“Reflective and reasonable thinking about nursing problems without a single 
solution and is focused on deciding what to believe and do” (p. 352).
“A process and cognitive skill that functions in identifying and defining problems 
and opportunities for improvement; generating, examining and evaluating 
options; reaching conclusions and decisions, and creating and using criteria to 
evaluate decisions” (p. 101).
“Reasonable and reflective thinking that is focused on deciding what to believe 
or do” (p. 152).
“A process that encompasses a holistic perspective of the entire person—
composed of skills, abilities, beliefs, attitudes, goals, emotions, and experiences. 
In addition, critical thinking involves the ability to view the situation from a 
holistic perspective” (p. 377).
“Critical thinking is the process of purposeful, self-regulatory judgment. This 
process gives reasoned consideration to evidence, contexts, conceptualization, 
methods and criteria” (ERIC Document Reproduction No. ED 315).
“Critical thinking is an active, purposeful, organized cognitive process, involving 
creativity, reflection, problem-solving, both rational and intuitive judgment, an 
attitude of inquiry, and a philosophical orientation toward thinking about 
thinking” (p. 59).
Source, Date
Bandman & Bandman, 1994
Kataoka-Yahiro & Saylor, 1994
Case, 1994
Kintgen-Andrews, 1991
Thurmond, 2001
Facione, 1990
Mariano, 2013

cannot be eliminated or viewed as an inconvenience
that complicates the activity of critical thinking, but
rather are an integral part of all we do. Our feelings
can alert us to possibilities and lead us to creative solu-
tions (Bartol, 1986; Lonergan, 1977). To illustrate: A
busy staff nurse realized that she could not take time to
listen to an elderly patient who began to tell her about
his career as a pilot beginning in the 1940s. He was de-
scribing in detail the early planes he piloted. Anxious
to meet the needs of her other patients, she told the
patient that she had to take care of her other patients,
but that she knew someone who would very much 
like to hear what he had to say. With his permission
she called her teenage son who aspired to become a
pilot and handed the patient the phone. The patient
and her son talked for almost 2 hours to the benefit 
of both.
●Critical thinking frequently involves finding fault.
Questions, disagreements, and even arguments may 
be included in the process. Critical thinking always
challenges the status quo. Seeking the truth even if the
consequences are contrary to one’s assumptions and
beliefs is essential.
●Critical thinking considers the complexity and ambi-
guity of issues. At the same time, critical thinking seeks
to identify the essential elements and exclude whatever
is irrelevant to the matter being considered. Valid con-
clusions cannot be drawn or appropriate action taken
unless one knows what is to be considered.
●Critical thinking is a contextual activity. We must be
aware of our own context and how it influences our
thinking. Our social environment, past and present,
may bias our thinking, and we must be aware of how
this occurs and deal with it appropriately. We do not
think in a vacuum.
●Critical thinking is inseparable from language because
it is applied to language and expressed through lan-
guage (Smith, 1990). Attention should be directed to
the meaning of words. Words often acquire connota-
tive meanings that over time may differ radically from
their original meanings.
●Critical thinking is not always a self-conscious activity.
We may not be aware when we are engaging in critical
thinking, or even alert to its absence. Moreover, we
often unconsciously work on problems and reach 
solutions without knowing precisely how we arrived 
at them until we reflect on the process. Intuition is 
frequently an invaluable guide in highly stressful situa-
tions. Gladwell (2005) notes that whenever we are
faced with making a decision quickly and under stress,
we make the decision unconsciously (p. 12).
●Critical thinking is not an esoteric activity. It is some-
thing everyone does to some degree at least some of 
the time. Written guidelines, decision trees, algorithms,
and critical pathways formalize the critical thinking
process but cannot contain it wholly. Thinking criti-
cally is not just a solitary activity. We expose our beliefs
and actions, and the thinking that helped us arrive at
those beliefs and actions, to the scrutiny of others. We
invite this criticism in different ways—for example, 
by sharing with colleagues in a discussion or writing a
report. We often need others to help us see our errors.
●Critical thinking is a habit that improves with proper
use and withers with disuse. In the beginning, we use
structure to guide our practice. As we gain proficiency,
structure diminishes, but we must continue practicing
to improve or even maintain our ability to think criti-
cally. Following established protocols in a crisis situa-
tion may be helpful but can interfere with recognizing
new data.
●Critical thinking includes reflection or contemplation—
that is, giving serious thought to a situation with the
clear knowledge that even one small additional piece of
data may change the whole configuration.
All of these characteristics of critical thinking are present
during the process of critical thinking. We may be more
conscious of one particular characteristic at a specific point
during the process, but the others remain in the back-
ground, influencing the outcome. The habit of critical
thinking includes drawing from one’s unconscious mind
(Gladwell, 2005, p. 12).
Measures of Critical Thinking
How do you know if you are thinking critically? Evalua-
tion takes into account the purpose for which the infor-
mation is gathered, and then a suitable technique is
chosen. Many paper-and-pencil objective tests have been
designed to measure generic competency in critical think-
ing, but not specifically in nursing. The Watson-Glaser
Critical Thinking Appraisal (W-GCTA), the California
Critical Thinking Inventory, and the Cornell Critical
Thinking Tests Levels X and Z are the most widely known
and used (Norris & Ennis, 1989). The central aspects of
critical thinking—induction, deduction, and assumption
identification—are included in all three, but only the 
California Critical Thinking Inventory (Facione, Facione,
& Sanchez, 2000) attempts to measure the disposition 
toward critical thinking. These tests, however, are limited
and are used mostly for research and not primarily to
measure achievement. Probably the best way to increase
your critical thinking ability is to critique how you are
thinking and to practice critical thinking. Rubenfeld and
Scheffer (2010) offer a critical thinking inventory that may
help you examine and hone your critical thinking skills
(pp. 211–214).
DEVELOPING CRITICAL
THINKING SKILLS
Critical thinking skills can be developed. Nursing is a prac-
tice discipline. A body of knowledge is gained from classes
and study and applied in the clinical setting. Information
drawn from personal experience in the clinical setting in-
forms this body of knowledge. None of the knowledge in
either setting is obtained automatically. Information must
be cultivated, organized, and conscientiously arranged by
using critical thinking.
Raingruber and Haffer (2001) suggest four strategies
that nurses can use to develop critical thinking skills. First,
nurses can reflect on accounts of other nurses’ clinical ex-
periences. The narratives may be in the form of oral or
written accounts and may include anything from a simple
118
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

story of a clinical event to a detailed case study. Such 
activities enable you to reach across time and space to
broaden your base of knowledge before you encounter
those experiences in your clinical practice. 
Second, nurses can develop critical thinking skills by
applying Brookfield’s (1995) three critical thinking
processes:
●Securing contextual awareness and determining what
needs to be observed and considered
●Exploring and imagining alternatives
●Questioning, analyzing, and reflecting on the rationale
for decisions
Third, use mind maps as a visual learning tool. As-
sociations that play a major role in nearly every mental
function help you to identify the key elements in a sit-
uation and prompt you to generate solutions. For exam-
ple, you anticipate an assignment in a clinical setting in
which you have not previously worked. You are experi-
encing some anxiety before the assignment. You recall
being in a similar situation in the past and take steps to
reduce your anxiety. You may call a friend for support,
review appropriate material in a nursing text, imagine
several scenarios that you may encounter during the as-
signment, and visualize successfully providing quality
care to your patients. Briefly, you would rehearse caring
for your patients in your mind in anticipation of pro-
viding actual care.
Fourth, you can keep a journal of your clinical experi-
ences, noting your concerns about how you coped with
particular situations and your reflections about what you
could do to improve the care you delivered. Opportunities
to reflect in writing help to clarify meanings and promote
increased understanding. Examining your reasoning and
actions in writing reinforces learning and enables you to
draw on knowledge gleaned from such an activity in future
clinical situations. Even examining a brief process record-
ing of the verbal exchange you had with a patient can help
you gain insight into your style of communication and
what you can do to improve.
Critical thinking can also be enhanced through the
arts. In their psychiatric mental health textbook, Frisch
and Frisch (2011) use literary excerpts, movie clips, and
classic art pieces to stimulate critical thinking and self-
exploration. In doing so, the authors encourage the readers
to enter the patient’s world to understand the process and
effects of psychiatric disturbances on an individual’s over-
all health and functioning.
Readers are encouraged to examine how their own per-
sonal views and feelings influence their delivery of care.
THE NURSING PROCESS 
AND CRITICAL THINKING
Nurses can also develop a meaningful concept of infor-
mation and material needed to practice nursing by using
logical steps of the nursing process. Taba (cited in
Maleck, 1986) identifies four teaching phases necessary
for developing critical thinking. The first three phases—
concept formation, interpretation of data, and applica-
tion of principles—focus on the cognitive domain. The
fourth phase speaks to the affective domain and entails
interpretation of feelings, attitudes, and values.
1. Concept formation. Conception formation is similar
to the nursing process. First, the nurse needs to iden-
tify known data, determine common characteristics,
and prioritize data. 
2. Interpretation of data. Next, nurses are encouraged 
to diﬀerentiate between pieces of information they
gathered, determine cause-and-eﬀect relationships
among the information, if any, and draw tentative
conclusions.
These first two logical phases or steps in thinking prepare
nurses for the third phase.
3. Application of principles. Nurses analyze the nature of
the problem or situation. It is important to note that
nurses do not ask the analytic “why” questions until
this application phase. The premature use of why
questions produces deductive conclusions rather than
inductive alternatives. The question “Why does an 
infection cause an elevated temperature?” tends to 
lead to a rote response culled from classroom lectures
or the textbook. Conversely, a thought-producing
question such as “What factors related to an elevated
temperature suggest infection?” encourages nurses to
sift and combine cognitive knowledge to understand
an important clinical concept. Only after deﬁning 
the problem are nurses able to isolate the relationship
among the data. After these relationships are estab-
lished, nurses can apply factual information to predict
an outcome based on cognitive principles. This ap-
proach is not unlike the nursing process. However,
avoiding “why” questions and asking about “what 
factors” help the nurse avoid the trapdoor of drawing
premature conclusions.
4. Interpretation of feelings, attitudes, and values. The
fourth phase involves principles of interpersonal
problem solving and analysis of values. This activity,
although less concrete than the other three phases, is
imperative for determining the nature of attitudes
and perceptions developed through one’s life experi-
ences. For example, a nurse’s concern about a rising
temperature in a patient taking haloperidol (Haldol)
may be provoked by a past experience with a patient
who was taking the drug and developed neuroleptic
malignant syndrome. At this point, the nurse needs
to gather additional data to confirm or rule out the
possibility that the rising temperature is a sign of
malignant hyperthermia in the present patient, and
not leap to a premature conclusion. Additionally, the
nurse must be open to other possible explanations
for the elevated temperature. Appropriate action is
then taken, including gathering additional data when
indicated. Once again, this approach helps prevent
the common pitfall associated with using the nursing
process: drawing conclusions based on a formula that
does not allow for different possibilities. In other
words, it avoids the trap of fitting the patient into
the textbook model.
These phases have been described in terms of steps, but
they can occur almost simultaneously. Sequencing and
CHAPTER 7 Critical Thinking     ●
119

pacing questions are essential in critical thinking. Sequenc-
ing questions is important because the processes of
thought evolve from the simple to the complex. Clinical
instruction should follow a carefully sequenced set of ex-
periences and questions. As mentioned earlier, asking
“why” questions prematurely would only bring premature
closure. The principle of pacing allows nurses to match
questions to their levels of readiness and cognitive ability.
To accommodate pacing, nurses must pursue each ques-
tion long enough to permit a variety of responses. In this
way, they become active participants in the thinking
process, and not simply vessels for facts.
A closer look at the nursing process shows that follow-
ing it appropriately involves critical thinking. The five
steps of the nursing process are as follows:
1. Assessment
2. Diagnosis
3. Planning
4. Implementation
5. Evaluation 
This process provides a framework for identifying and
treating patient problems. The nursing process is an on-
going and interactive cycle that results in dynamic nurs-
ing care for all patients. Assessment is the foundation of
the process and leads to the identification of both nursing
diagnoses and collaborative problems. Nursing diagnosis
provides the primary focus for developing patient-
specific individualization of patient goals. The planning
process allows for individualization of patient goals and
nursing care within the context of managed care guide-
lines. Implementation involves providing nursing actions
to treat each diagnosis. Ongoing evaluation determines
the degree of success in achieving the patient goals and
the continued relevance of each nursing diagnosis and
collaborative problem.
The implementation of the nursing process requires
complex clinical and diagnostic knowledge and applica-
tion of critical thinking skills (Box 7.1). One should be
able to think outside the box rather than simply apply for-
mulas gleaned from textbook information. Textbook in-
formation is often based on the mythical average and can
serve only as a general guide; individuals are much more
varied. Learning and applying these skills are a continuing
challenge for the nurse and require much practice. If the
nurse uses the diagnostic reasoning process appropriately,
the result will more likely be effective nursing interven-
tions leading to desirable patient outcomes.
Nurses must be critical thinkers because of the nature
of the discipline and their work. Nurses are frequently
confronted with problem situations; critical thinking en-
ables them to make sound decisions. During the course of
a workday, nurses are required to make decisions of many
kinds. These decisions often determine the health of pa-
tients and even their very survival, so it is essential that the
decisions be sound. Critical thinking skills are needed to
assess information and plan decisions. Nurses need good
judgment, for example, to decide what they can manage
and what should be referred to another healthcare
provider. Nurses deal with rapidly changing situations in
stressful environments. Treatments and medications are
modified frequently in response to a patient condition.
Routine behaviors are often inadequate to deal with the
complex circumstances. Familiarity with the routine for
giving medications, for example, does not necessarily help
you intervene appropriately with a patient who is afraid
of injections. When unexpected complications arise, crit-
ical thinking ability helps nurses recognize important cues,
respond quickly, and adapt interventions to meet specific
needs.
Nurses use knowledge from other subjects and fields.
Using insight from one subject to shed light on another
subject requires critical thinking skills. Because nurses
deal holistically with human responses, they must draw
meaningful information from other subject areas to un-
derstand the meaning of patient data and plan effective
interventions. Nurses need knowledge from neurophys-
iology, social sciences, psychology, and nutrition, for 
example, to assist patients effectively who are severely
depressed.
Case studies offer us excellent opportunities to use
critical thinking. The case study presented in Box 7.2
contains data about Mr. Jones, a patient admitted to the
same-day surgery unit for repair of a right inguinal hernia.
To determine the appropriate care for Mr. Jones, the
nurse should organize her thoughts and actions as illus-
trated. The nurse must use critical thinking in determin-
ing appropriate data collection, assessment, nursing
diagnoses, and interventions for the care of the patient
and his family. Clearly, critical thinking is used in every
step of the nursing process as nurses collect, cluster, and
analyze data and formulate nursing diagnoses. Critical
thinking enables the nurse to provide high-quality care
that is appropriate, individualized, creative, sensitive, and
comprehensive.
120
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
BOX 7.1
Critical Thinking with the Nursing
Process
Assessment
●List the signiﬁcant assessment ﬁndings: objective
and subjective.
●Cluster the signiﬁcant assessment data by functional
health patterns.
●What general problem does the patient have?
●Develop data clusters for each of the general problems
identiﬁed.
Nursing Diagnosis
●From the clustered data, develop at least two diag-
nostic hypotheses using accepted nursing diagnosis
labels.
●Evaluate each of the diagnostic hypotheses by 
writing and comparing the deﬁnitions and applica-
ble deﬁning characteristics of each diagnosis.
●Write complete nursing diagnosis statements, by 
priority.
Planning
●Plan appropriate nursing interventions.
Implementation
●Implement appropriate nursing interventions.
Evaluation
●Evaluate the outcomes.

CHAPTER 7 Critical Thinking     ●
121
BOX 7.2
Case Study Mr. Jones
Health History and Range of Symptoms
Mr. Jones is a 45-year-old married man, employed as a supervisor with Parrish Construction Company. He is
brought by his wife to the same-day surgery unit for a presurgery assessment the day before his scheduled surgery.
His breath smells of alcohol.
Chief Concern
“I need to get this surgery over with. We have a big job to do at work, and it will be my butt if it is not completed
on schedule. I plan to cut down on my drinking. I know I drink too much sometimes, but it’s because of the pain
from this thing.” (Patient points to area of hernia.)
History of Present Illness
Mr. Jones was sent by the nurse from the construction company to the surgeon, Dr. Judge. Mr. Jones had experi-
enced periodic pain and swelling in his right groin area for at least 5 years and several times has seen the employee
health physician, who told him he had a right inguinal hernia that should be repaired. He admits to experiencing 
decreased appetite and insomnia for the past 10 days.
Social and Family History
Mr. Jones’s father died of cirrhosis at the age of 52 years. His mother is 80 years old and has a history of diabetes.
Mr. Jones is the youngest of six children. One brother died at birth, another died at age 6 years of a tumor, and a
third brother was a heavy drinker. Two sisters are alive and well.
Mr. Jones has been married to his second wife for 9 years; they have no children. His second wife has three boys,
aged 12, 14, and 16 years, who live with her ﬁrst husband and have no contact with Mr. and Mrs. Jones.
Mr. Jones has ﬁve children by his ﬁrst marriage; all are alive and well, living with his ﬁrst wife. He pays $50 a
week for child support for each child. The children visit him every other weekend.
There is no family history of tuberculosis, hypertension, epilepsy, or emotional illness.
Review of Systems
General: No current change in weight and usually feels good, except when the hernia acts up.
Skin: No symptoms.
Eyes: He wears glasses for reading.
Ears: No symptoms.
Nose: No symptoms.
Mouth and Throat: Experiences recurrent episodes of hoarseness. Denies dysphagia.
Neck: No symptoms.
Respiratory System: Denies pain, dyspnea, palpitations, syncope, or edema.
Gastrointestinal System: Reports eating only three “good meals” during the past 10 days. Appetite is good when not
drinking. Denies food intolerance, emesis, jaundice, ﬂatulence, diarrhea, constipation, or melena.
Genitourinary System: No symptoms.
Neurological: See “History” and “Interview with Signiﬁcant Other.”
Physical Examination
Mr. Jones is a 45-year-old white man with a dark complexion and a ruddy face who appears chronically ill. He is mildly
intoxicated and appears anxious. Weight is 136 pounds; height is 5 feet, 10 inches; temperature is 98.8ºF; pulse is 
92 beats/minute; regular respirations are 20 breaths/minute and not labored; and blood pressure is 160/90 mm Hg.
Skin: Well hydrated and without lesions.
Head: Normocephalic.
Eyes: PERRLA. Vision corrected with glasses. Visual acuity decreased to 3 mm print at 18 inches on the left and 
4 mm print at 18 inches on the right. Extraocular movements full; no nystagmus is noted. Visual ﬁelds are 
intact as tested per confrontation. Conjunctivae are slightly injected. Sclerae clear. Lenses are without opacities 
bilaterally. Funduscopic examination reveals the discs normally cupped and no vascular changes bilaterally.
Ears: External ears symmetrical, without lesions. Otic canal is clear. Tympanic membrane pearly gray bilaterally.
Hearing is within normal limits per watch tick at 6 inches.
Mouth and Throat: Lips, tongue, and buccal mucosa are pink and moist. Teeth are brown, crooked. Gingivae are 
atrophic. No inﬂammation of posterior nasopharynx.
Nose: Nasal septum in the midline. Nares are patent bilaterally. Sinuses not tender.
Neck: Full mobility and no signiﬁcant lymphadenopathy. Thyroid not enlarged, without nodules.
Chest: Bony thorax is without deformity or tenderness. Respiratory movement is full, and diaphragmatic excursion is
adequate bilaterally. Lungs are clear to percussion and auscultation.
Cardiovascular: The PMI is in the ﬁfth intercostal space of the LMCL. NSR without murmurs or gallops.
Abdomen: Abdomen is soft and ﬂat. Bowel sounds are heard in four quadrants. Liver is descended 5 cm below the
costal margin. No splenomegaly, tenderness, or mass. Surgical scar present in right lower quadrant.
Genitourinary: Normal male genitalia. No hernia palpated.
Rectal: Internal and external hemorrhoids noted at 5- and 7-o’clock positions. Normal sphincter tone. Anal canal
free of tenderness. Prostate is in the midline, ﬁrm without nodules, not enlarged.
Continued

122
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
BOX 7.2
Case Study Mr. Jones—cont’d
Extremities and Back: Muscular development symmetrical. Normal in appearance, color, and temperature. Peripheral
pulses palpable and symmetrical. Free of varicosities and edema.
Neurological: Speech is slurred, sensorium somewhat cloudy. Cranial nerves II through XII are intact as tested per
gross screen. Moderately tremulous. Biceps, triceps, brachioradialis, patella, and Achilles reﬂexes are symmetrical
but brisk. Babinski’s reﬂexes are down bilaterally.
Significant Laboratory Findings
Blood alcohol level: 0.29 U/L; Stool guaiac: negative; ECG: sinus tachycardia, otherwise WNL; Chest x-ray: no active
chest disease; Coulter-S: Hgb 16.0 g/dL (H), HCT 48.2% (H), MCV 101 m3 (H); CL 92 mEq/L (L); Uric acid 
8.04 mg/dL (H), SGOT 90 U/L (H); Liver panel: GGT 66 IU/L (H); Urine: bacteria 21, WBC 8–12.
Interview with Significant Other
According to Mrs. Jones, Mr. Jones works out of town from Monday morning to Thursday evening. When he returns
home, he begins to drink. He does not drink during the workweek. Mrs. Jones related the following incidents of the
past 10 days, which occurred when her husband was intoxicated: ran all of the children out of the home into the 
rain, scuﬄed with brother-in-law, and brandished a shotgun after an argument. Mrs. Jones reports that she left her
husband in June but returned to him about 4 weeks ago. She has never attended Al-Anon but has reviewed informa-
tion from the Alcoholism Information Center. This is the second marriage for Mrs. Jones; her ﬁrst husband and her
father were alcoholics.
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
Use of critical thinking in nursing involves careful and effective assessment skills. One of the National Guideline
Clearinghouse (2013) guidelines calls for a comprehensive health assessment for adults and children with sus-
pected social anxiety disorders. Social anxiety disorders are defined as: “persistent fear of or anxiety about one
or more social or performance situations that is out of proportion to the actual threat posed by the situation”
(NGC, 2013, p. 1). Following this, intervention and practices are recommended. 
Question: How will you use your critical thinking skills in conceptual care mapping for this individual?
Source: National Guideline Clearinghouse. (2013). Social anxiety disorder: Recognition, assessment and treatment. Retrieved from
http://www.guideline.gov/content.aspx?id=46234&search=detailed+health+assessment
K E Y  P O I N T S
●Critical thinking has been defined and described by many scholars. It is multifaceted and involves a combi-
nation of logical, rhetorical, and philosophical skills and attitudes that promote the ability to determine
what we should believe and do.
●Critical thinking is essential for professional nursing practice. The need for critical thinking in nursing has
greatly increased with the diversity and complexity of nursing practice. Reflective thinking is the “active,
persistent, and careful consideration of any belief or supposed form of knowledge in the light of the
grounds that support it and the further conclusions to which it tends” (Dewey, 1933, p. 9). 
●Reactive thinking implies a response to what is, and not to what may yet be. 
●Critical thinking is often associated with scientific reasoning, which includes problem identification, data
collection, and hypothesis testing, but it is not limited to these activities. 
●The central aspects of critical thinking are induction, deduction, and assumption identification. 
●Concept formation is similar to the nursing process. First, the nurse needs to identify known data, 
determine common characteristics, and prioritize data. 
●Interpretation of data occurs when nurses differentiate between pieces of information, determine 
cause-and-effect relationships among variables, and extract meaning from what they have observed.
●Application of principles occurs when nurses analyze the nature of the problem or situation and apply
factual information to predict an outcome based on cognitive principles.
●Interpretation of feelings, attitudes, and values requires interpersonal problem solving and analysis of values.

CHAPTER 7 Critical Thinking     ●
123
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Give an example from your clinical practice for five of the descriptive statements of critical thinking. 
2. Select a nursing issue, such as an open visiting policy in the surgical intensive care unit or family presence during a
code, and engage in a debate with a peer.
3. Select a problem at your place of work. Explore a solution to the problem with the help of a peer with whom 
you work. Analyze the problem-solving process you used to address the problem.
4. Review the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter and discuss it (online or in class) in the 
context of the contents of the chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.
REFERENCES
Alfaro-LeFevre, R. (2013). Critical thinking, clinical reasoning,
and clinical judgment: A practical approach (5th ed.). 
St Louis, MO: Saunders/Elsevier. 
Bandman, E. L., & Bandman, B. (1994). Critical thinking in
nursing (2nd ed.). Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange.
Bartol, G. M. (1986). Using the humanities in nursing 
education. Nurse Educator, 11(1), 21–23.
Bartol, G. M., & Courts, N. F. (2013). The psychophysiology
of bodymind healing. In B. M. Dossey, L. Keegan, & 
C. E. Guzzeta (Eds.), Holistic nursing: A handbook for 
practice (6th ed., pp. 705–720). Sudbury, MA: Jones &
Bartlett. 
Brookfield, S. (1995). Becoming a critically reflective teacher. 
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Case, B. (1994). Walking around the elephant: A critical think-
ing strategy for decision making. Journal of Continuing 
Education in Nursing, 25(3), 101–109.
Cassel, J. F., & Congleton, R. J. (1993). Critical thinking: An
annotated bibliography. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press.
Dewey, J. (1910). How we think. Boston, MA: D. C. Heath & Co.
Dewey, J. (1933). How we think. New York: D. C. Heath & Co.
Facione, N. C., & Facione, P. A. (1996). Externalizing the 
critical thinking in knowledge development and clinical
judgment. Nursing Outlook, 44, 129–136.
Facione, N. C., & Facione, P. A. (2000). Critical thinking 
assessment in nursing education programs: An aggregate data
analysis. Millbrae, CA: Academic Press.
Facione, N. C., Facione, P. A., & Sanchez, C. A. (2000) Test
manual: The California critical thinking skills test. Millbrae,
CA: California Academic Press.
Facione, P. (Project director). (1990). Critical thinking: A state-
ment of expert consensus for purposes of educational assess-
ment and instruction. The Delphi Report: Research findings
and recommendations prepared for the American Philosophical
Association (ERIC Doc. No. ED 315 423). Washington,
DC: ERIC.
Frisch, N. C., & Frisch, L. E. (2011). Psychiatric mental health
nursing (4th ed.). Clifton Park, NY: Delmar.
Gladwell, M. (2002). The tipping point: How little things can
make a big difference. New York: Little, Brown & Co.
Gladwell, M. (2005). Blink: The power of thinking without
thinking. New York: Little, Brown & Co.
Gladwell, M. (2009). What the dog saw and other adventures.
New York: Little, Brown & Co.
Gladwell, M. (2013). David and Goliath: Underdogs, misfits,
and the art of battling giants. New York: Little Brown & Co.
Johns, C. (2013). Becoming a reflective practitioner (4th ed.).
Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell Publishing.
Jones, S. A., & Brown, L. N. (1993). Alternative views on
defining critical thinking through the nursing process. 
Holistic Nursing Practice, 7(3), 71–76.
Kataoka-Yahiro, M., & Saylor, C. (1994). A critical thinking
model for nursing judgment. Journal of Nursing Education,
33(8), 351–356.
Kintgen-Andrews, J. (1991). Critical thinking and nursing 
education: Perplexities and insights. Journal of Nursing 
Education, 30, 152–157.
Lonergan, B. (1977). Insight: A study of human understanding.
New York: Harper & Row.
Maleck, C. J. (1986). A model for teaching critical thinking.
Nurse Educator, 11(6), 20–23.
Mariano, C. (2013). Holistic nursing scope and standards of
practice. In B. M. Dossey, L. Keegan, & C. E. Guzzeta
(Eds.), Holistic nursing: A handbook for practice (6th ed., 
p. 59). Sudbury, MA: Jones & Bartlett.
McPeck, J. E. (1990). Teaching critical thinking. New York:
Routledge.
Nance, J. J. (2008). Why hospitals should fly: The ultimate 
flight plan to patient safety and quality care. Bozeman, MT:
Second River Healthcare Press.
National Guideline Clearinghouse. (2013). Social anxiety disor-
der: Recognition, assessment and treatment. Retrieved from
http://www.guideline.gov/content.aspx?id=46234&search=
detailed+health+assessment
Norris, S. P., & Ennis, R. H. (1989). Evaluating critical 
thinking. Pacific Grove, CA: Midwest Press.
Paul, R. W. (1990). Critical thinking: Fundamental for a free
society. Educational Leadership, 41, 44.
Paul, R., & Elder, L. (2008). The miniature guide to critical
thinking: Concepts and tools. Tomales, CA: Foundation
for Critical Thinking Press.
Raingruber, B., & Haffer, A. (2001). Using your head to land on
your feet: A beginning nurse’s guide to critical thinking.
Philadelphia, PA: F.A. Davis.

Robert, R. R., & Peterson, S. (2013). Critical thinking at the
bedside: Providing safe passage to patients. MEDSURG
Nursing, 22(2), 85–118.
Rubenfeld, M. G., & Scheffer, B. K. (2010). Critical thinking
tactics for nurses (2nd ed.). Sudbury, MA: Jones & Bartlett.
Savitt, T. (1969). Readers Theater. Iowa City, IA: University of
Iowa Press.
Schuster, P. M. (2002). Concept mapping. A critical-thinking 
approach to care planning. Philadelphia, PA: F.A. Davis.
Smith, F. (1990). To think. New York: Teachers College Press.
Taleb, N. N. (2010). The black swan: The impact of the highly
improbable. New York: Random House.
Thurmond, V. A. (2001). The holism in critical thinking: A 
concept analysis. Journal of Holistic Nursing, 19(4), 375–389.
White, N. E., Beardslee, N. Q., Peters, D., & Supples, J. M.
(1990). Promoting critical thinking skills. Nurse Educator,
15(5), 16–19.
Wilkinson, J. M. (2001). Nursing process and critical thinking.
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Woods, J. H. (1993). Affective learning: One door to critical
thinking. Holistic Nursing Practice, 7(3), 64–70. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Adams, B. L. (1999). Nursing education for critical thinking:
An integrative review. Journal of Nursing Education, 38(3),
111–119.
Alfaro-Lefevre, R., & Juall, L. (2005). The nursing process 
made easy: Concept mapping and care planning for students.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Banfield, V., Fagan, B., & Jones, C. (2012). Charting a new
course in knowledge: Creating life-long critical core
thinkers. Dynamics 23(1), 24–28.
Barnet, S., & Bedau, H. (2004). Critical thinking, reading &
writing: A brief guide to argument. New York: Bedford/
St. Martins.
Beckie, T. M., Lowry, L. W., & Barnett, S. (2001). Assessing
critical thinking in baccalaureate nursing students: A longi-
tudinal study. Holistic Nursing Practice, 15(3), 18–26.
Bitner, N. P., & Tobin, E. (1998). Critical thinking: Strategies
for clinical practice. Journal for Nurses in Staff Development,
14, 267–272.
Bradley, H. E., & Taylor, L. A. (2013). The American health
care paradox: Why spending more is getting us less. New York:
Public Affairs.
Browne, M. N., & Keeley, S. M. (2003). Asking the right ques-
tions: A guide to critical thinking. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Person Education.
Chafres, J. (2005). Thinking critically. Boston, MA: Houghton 
Mifflin.
DeYoung, S. (2003). Teaching strategies for nurse educators.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Gerdeman, J. L., Lux, K., & Jackie, J. Using concept mapping
to build clinical judgment skills. Nursing Education in 
Practice, 13(2013), 11–17.
Gladwell, M. (2008). Outliers: The story of success. New York,
NY: Little, Brown & Co.
Green, C. J. (2000). Critical thinking in nursing: Case studies
across the curriculum. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Locsin, R. C. (2001). The dilemma of decision-making: 
Processing thinking critical to nursing. Holistic Nursing
Practice, 15(3), 1–3.
Nance, J. J., & Bartholomew, K. M. (2012). Charting the
course. Bozeman, MT: Second River Healthcare Press.
Nosich, G. M. (2004). Learning to think things through. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Patterson, B. J. (2013). Facilitating clinical reasoning in 
the skills laboratory: Reasoning model versus nursing
process-based kills checklist. Nursing Education Perspectives,
34(4), 265–267.
Porter, K. A. (1930). The jilting of Granny Weatherall. In
Flowering Judas and other stories (pp. 80–89). New York:
Harcourt, Brace.
Rew, L., & Barrow, E. M. (2007). State of the science: Intu-
ition in nursing, a generation of studying the phenomenon. 
Advanced Nursing Science, 30(1): E15–25.
Zori, S., & Morrison, B. (2009). Critical thinking in nurse 
managers. Nursing Economics, 27(2), 75–80.
ONLINE RESOURCES
Prince George’s Community College
http://academic.pg.cc.md.us/~wpeirce/MCCCTR/
The Critical Thinking Community
http://www.criticalthinking.org/
124
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Explain the techniques for effective communication in group settings.
2. Evaluate personal communication patterns used with patients and colleagues in a group.
3. Describe different types of groups, including their characteristics and roles of group members.
4. Differentiate between effective and ineffective groups and the characteristics of an effective group
leader.
5. Evaluate communication patterns in a group for effective functioning in meeting the group’s 
common goals.
Group
Group Process
Group Structure
Group Composition
Group Roles
Group Focus
Professional Groups
Work Groups
Educational Groups
Therapeutic Groups
Effective Groups
Goal Attainment
Member Participation
Cohesiveness
Decision Making
Communication Patterns
Attendance
Creativity
Power
Ineffective Groups
Stages of Group Development
Functional Task Roles
Functional Group-Building 
Roles
Nonfunctional Group Roles
Organizational Group
Virtual Meetings
125
“We communicate in many ways, especially when 
working with others toward a common goal.”
Rose Kearney-Nunnery
Key Terms
Working with Groups
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
8

Communication—verbal, nonverbal, and written—is
integral to working with individuals and groups.
DeWine, Gibson, and Smith (2000) identify four con-
texts or environments in which communication takes
place: interpersonal, group, organizational, and mass
communication. Nurses must be skilled in each of these
areas, from the interpersonal situation with a patient or
colleague, to small consumer or colleague groups, to
larger organizational settings, and, finally, to mass com-
munications with the public.
The concepts of effective group process are important
components in professional nursing practice and require
understanding of the types of groups, their composition
and functions, and the roles played by the members. As
nurses, we need to develop skills to use as both leaders and
members of various work and professional groups, as well
as to apply group process to intervene therapeutically with
patients. Working effectively with groups also addresses
the American Nurses Association (2010) Standards of 
Professional Performance concerning communication and
collaboration, both with patients and other healthcare
providers. Examining the group’s characteristics and eval-
uating the group’s effectiveness provide the knowledge and
skills needed to accomplish these goals. Note that under-
standing groups is an initial step in addressing the core
competency of working in interdisciplinary teams.
GROUPS
A group consists of three or more individuals with some
commonality, such as shared goals or interests. Living 
in society, we are members of many groups—family,
work, professional, and social. Each type of group has a
specific goal and membership. As nurses, we are involved
as participants in work groups and interact with groups
of individuals in their healthcare activities. We may 
also participate in therapy or support groups. We use the
principles of group process in all of these activities and in
assisting our patients. Some of these groups are structured
loosely, with minimal rules, whereas others have clearly
defined roles and limits. It is essential for the nurse to un-
derstand group processes to communicate, collaborate,
and function effectively in the group as both an individual
and a professional.
Group Process
Group process is the dynamic interplay of interactions
within groups of humans. Interplay includes what is said
and done in groups, as well as how members interact
with one another and the group leader. A group is actu-
ally a social system. Recall from Chapter 2 that systems
theory is concerned with holism as opposed to the iso-
lated parts. The basic components of a system are the
input, output, boundary, environment, and feedback. A
group, as a social system, is composed of people with
their unique characteristics and communication styles
but focused on the group goals as the output from the
system. And as Berlo (1960) pointed out in his classic
work on communication, “a knowledge of the composi-
tion and workings of a social system is useful in making
predictions about how members of that system will 
behave in a given communication situation” (p. 135).
This is particularly applicable to professional practice
with the nurses’ focus on the importance of working with
groups in a variety of practice settings—patient, family,
self-help, self-awareness, peer, and task groups.
Group Characteristics
Groups can be classified according to structure, composi-
tion, roles, and focus. A particular group often fits more
than one classification, especially in terms of its roles. For
example, the initial purpose of developing a cancer support
group might have been to provide the members with a
sense of sharing and support. But this type of group often
fills many other functions, such as education regarding
medications, traditional and nontraditional treatment pro-
grams, and healthcare providers; information sharing
about benefits, wills, and finances; and strategy sharing on
coping with symptoms and managing daily life.
Group Structure
Groups may be differentiated by group structure, such as
whether a group is formal or informal. Formal groups are
highly structured, with functions specified in job descrip-
tions, contracts, policies, and procedures. Formal groups
associated with nursing are the entire nursing staff and the
professional standards committee. Each of these groups
has particular requirements for membership and specific
rules, procedures, and standards of practice. A professional
group can also be viewed as a formal group, with require-
ments for membership, rules that govern meetings, and
specific member expectations. An advantage of structured
groups is their clear understanding of roles and expecta-
tions. This same benefit may become a disadvantage if 
the group is not open to changing to meet the needs of
the members. The leaders of more structured groups tend
to have greater power. By contrast, informal groups are
more loosely structured, at times disbanding or reconven-
ing according to the needs of the membership. Examples
of informal groups are special interest groups and support
groups. Informal groups benefit from some degree of 
flexibility in roles, expectations, and leadership.
Composition of Groups
Groups can also be differentiated by the unique composi-
tion of the membership. Group composition may be 
homogeneous or heterogeneous, depending on the char-
acteristics of the members. Members of homogenous
groups are similar in some aspect, such as all adolescent
male patients or female nurses employed in the intensive
care units. A benefit of working with a homogeneous
group is the sense of shared connection that the members
typically feel from the beginning. This sense may be ex-
pressed as “He has the same problem” or “She thinks the
same way I do.” Heterogeneous groups consist of a mix of
individuals, such as patients with various diagnoses or ages,
or a work group of both nurses and physicians working
with patients in a cardiac intensive care unit. This type of
group has a wider range of diversity and therefore usually
a greater variety of opinions, beliefs, and needs.
126
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

Facilitating a sense of connection among members is a
key challenge for the heterogeneous group. With a hetero-
geneous group, however, group members have the advan-
tage of learning from many different perspectives.
Roles for Members of the Group
A third way to classify groups is in terms of the leader and
participant group roles. Some groups are led by a profes-
sional who is responsible for instituting the rules, establish-
ing the structure, and determining the membership. There
are clear expectations for the leader and the participants.
An example is an outpatient recovery group, in which a
cardiac rehabilitation counselor leads the group, initiates
themes for discussion, and often sets criteria for member
participation. Other groups have informal leadership as
well as rules for members. Peer support groups are an 
example of this type. Traditionally, the leadership may be
shared by members, who are usually working on a common
issue. Members are free to attend or not, depending on
their own needs and schedules. At times, the group may
become engulfed in struggles for leadership, which can
compromise the group’s effectiveness.
Group Focus
Groups may also be classified according to their focus or
approach. The group focus can be work-related, educa-
tional, therapeutic, or professional. Professional organiza-
tions or nursing groups were described in Chapter 1, along
with their unique missions and membership requirements.
These professional groups are generally formal and are di-
rected at professional issues and at the objectives stated in
their mission statements. Work groups are task oriented,
focused on a particular work-related activity, as with a
nursing department budget committee and the task of 
allocating resources. Professional nursing organizations
may also have work groups focused on special projects 
assigned by the leadership of the organization.
Many of us are members of a variety of work groups.
Nurses on a particular unit constitute one group, whereas
the nursing department as a whole is another functioning
work group. Committees that meet monthly are probably
commonly viewed as work groups. They may be convened
ad hoc (as needed), or they may be more or less a perma-
nent standing group, such as the governance committee,
the safety committee, or the quality assurance committee.
The membership changes over time, and the structure
varies in level of formality. If the group is focusing on one
specific issue or task, members may be expected to fulfill
assigned roles. At other times there may be a more infor-
mal, shifting assignment of roles, as occurs in monthly staff
meetings on a care unit. Attendance varies, depending on
schedule, patient load, and the issues involved.
Educational groups have a teaching focus, whether
members are teaching patients about medications, treat-
ments, parenting skills, or a variety of health promotion
activities, or educating their colleagues in areas of expertise.
This type of group may actually convene only for an indi-
vidual session, if held in a clinic or institutional setting, or
it may have a series of sessions. An example is a stress 
reduction class for patients diagnosed with hypertension,
which is scheduled on a weekly basis in a clinic or out -
patient department. Membership and attendance vary de-
pending on educational needs and appointment schedules.
Although the group leader is a professional, the structure
is typically less formal and is directed at the learning needs
of the audience. Teaching and learning principles, dis-
cussed in Chapter 9, are important considerations, along
with the group process.
Therapeutic groups vary in nature, depending on the
specific treatment or patient needs. This group is led by 
a professional and is a formally structured group that typ-
ically specifies when members can join and when they can
leave the group. Examples of these groups are cognitive
therapy groups for depressed patients, behavioral therapy
groups for anger management, and therapeutic activity
groups, such as a music therapy group for patients who
have suffered cerebral vascular events. The group leader has
special training in the different therapeutic approaches
used. Advanced practice nurses (APRNs) can lead groups
in specific therapies as defined in practice standards and as
recognized by their state practice act.
Effective Groups
Effective groups have an identified purpose or need 
for the group and a commitment to the process. Once the
decision is made to form a new group, several issues are
involved in setting up or structuring the group. Arnold
(2011) terms this the pregroup phase, in which the 
following activities occur:
●Alignment of purpose and membership
●Determination of appropriate group size
●Creation of the appropriate environment
The first consideration is the purpose for forming the
group. This purpose must be clearly stated for specification
of the membership. Once the intended membership is 
determined, members can be recruited and goals set for
the group. The size of the membership must be appropri-
ate to addressing the group goals effectively. As noted by
Robert, Evans, Honemann, and Balch (2004) in their
guidelines on parliamentary procedure, once a group
reaches 12 to 15 people, meetings become more formal
and controlled (p. 4). In order to effect change, a profes-
sional group must be larger than a work group. A work or
therapeutic group becomes less effective when it grows too
large, becoming more heterogeneous and unable to focus
on the task or treatment aims. For some groups, the leader
also spends time interviewing potential members before
the initial meeting. This step serves as an orientation to
the group as well as a way to determine whether the indi-
vidual will “fit in.”
The room arrangement is another important factor for
creating the appropriate environment. When the room is
being set up, the goals of the group and interactions
needed among members should be considered. A large
conference table and chairs may be needed for a work
group, whereas placing chairs in a circle to allow individ-
uals to make eye contact without the barrier of a table is
imperative in many therapeutic groups. Neither of these
arrangements may be feasible or essential in an educa-
tional group.
CHAPTER 8 Working with Groups     ●
127

Other factors to consider in creating an effective group
include the following:
●The best meeting place and time for meetings
●Fees, dues, or cost factors
●Frequency and length of meetings
●Documentation needed for third-party payers or 
sponsoring organizations
An effective group will also determine whether there
will be a single leader or co-leaders. Those in favor of 
two-leader groups cite the enhanced ability to examine
dynamics, provide feedback, and manage absences of the
leader. Those against this style look at the possibility of
problems arising between these two individuals in terms
of power, equality, and accountability, with the potential
for splitting of the group, creating factions, and ineffective-
ness. The co-leaders need to understand their role, work
closely together, and consistently focus on the purpose 
of the group. The goal is to form a strong, viable group.
Before initiating a group, a nurse should consider all of
these concerns.
Evaluating Effectiveness
of Groups
Effective groups are those that work toward the stated
goals and whose members derive a sense of belonging and
acceptance. How these outcomes can be accomplished 
requires a closer look at behaviors, strategies, and goals. In
addition, organizations and third-party payers may deter-
mine their own criteria of effectiveness. General factors to
consider in determining effectiveness of any group are
identified in Box 8.1.
Goal attainment is the initial and most important
criterion in determining the effectiveness of any group.
It is an evaluation of whether the intended task or goal
was accomplished, especially in a work group. In a pro-
fessional association, goal attainment is focused on the
activities related to the organization’s mission and strate-
gic initiatives. In a therapeutic group, goal attainment
relates to the focus of the group, such as gaining insight,
awareness, or skills.
Member participation is another important criterion
for assessing the effectiveness of a group. Consider whether
all members are included in the discussion and what roles
they are playing as group members. On the other hand,
think about a situation in which an autocratic leader limits
the members’ ability to participate in the group discussions.
In an effective group, there is evidence of belonging, cama-
raderie, and acceptance. But participation does not imply
that all members should be in agreement on all issues.
“Group think” is the phenomenon by which all members
are in constant agreement, which can limit creativity and
lead to stagnation.
Cohesiveness among the group members indicates that
they are working together toward the group’s common
purpose or goal. If all members are not focused on the pur-
pose, the original goal for which the group was formed
will be difficult to attain, and conflict may arise. To
achieve cohesiveness, the group members must be refo-
cused on the original intent for the group, with the leader
and members supporting one another in their actions and
demonstrating agreement on the common goal.
In an effective group, decision making must occur at
the group level, with all members being involved in deci-
sions rather than unilateral actions being taken by the
leader or a disruptive member. A democratic leader and
involved, cohesive members directed toward the common
goal usually signify effective group functioning as they 
actively work toward that goal.
The communication patterns among the members
provide valuable information on whether there is a com-
mon focus, respect, and decision making. Evaluate how
the group’s decisions are made. The group leader should
facilitate effective communication patterns, thus allowing
all members to be heard and involved in the group process.
In some situations, the leader may ask each member if they
have something further to add to the discussion. In an 
effective group, members are actively involved in a mutual
communication process.
Attendance is regular and active in an effective group.
Members are punctual and involved, energetically focused
on the task or purpose of the group. When a group meet-
ing is arranged in advance, members in an effective group
honor their commitments to the meeting rather than
making excuses for not attending or demonstrating rou-
tine tardiness.
A high level of creativity among the members is an-
other sign of an effective group. The group members are
spontaneously generating novel ideas for solutions on the
common problem. Brainstorming sessions are focused on
the goals, and communication is encouraged, with all ideas
and contributions from members considered.
Typically, the leadership style in more effective groups
is described as democratic, and the interactions among the
members are interdependent and collaborative. Power
is distributed on the basis of the common purpose and
abilities of the members to achieve their goal in an effective
group. Power struggles disrupt group process, with mem-
bers focusing inwardly rather than working collaboratively
on the group’s goals.
Ineffective groups have low levels of productivity.
These groups contain much unrest and stagnation, and
members feel that they do not belong or that it is not safe
for them to share their thoughts, ideas, and feelings. The
group members demonstrate an uncaring attitude toward
one another, have little spontaneous involvement, or are
reluctant participants. The members do not appear to trust
one another, seem unwilling to take risks and, in work
groups, rarely volunteer for or willingly accept assignments.
128
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
BOX 8.1
Factors to Consider in Evaluating 
Effectiveness of Groups
●Goal attainment
●Member participation
●Cohesiveness
●Decision making
●Communication patterns
●Attendance
●Creativity
●Power

The attendance may be uneven, with a high rate of
dropouts and tardiness. The leadership style in less effective
groups is often described as autocratic or laissez-faire, and
the group interactions as independent and competitive.
THE BASICS OF GROUP
PROCESSES
Skills in group process are tailored to the developmental
stage of the group, and require effective leadership and
participation by the members.
The Stages of Group Development
Understanding the expected stages of group development
and how to facilitate groups during these stages is essential
to nursing practice, whether the nurse is a group member
or a leader. As with the developmental stages of individu-
als, groups go through predictable stages. In his classic
work, Tuckman (1965) identified five stages of group 
development: forming, storming, norming, performing,
and mourning or termination. Yalom and Leszcz (2005)
further describe the storming stage as one of conflict that
arises in the group. Arnold (2011) has further clarified the
stage of termination as one of adjournment that is more
applicable to the professional or work group. An effective
group leader must be aware of these stages and must mo-
tivate members and modify approaches accordingly.
We can use the traditional stages of the nurse-patient
relationship (initial, working, and termination), with the
addition of the conflict and norming stages before the
working phase, to understand the process of group 
development better. The stages of group development,
along with expected goals and examples of appropriate
nursing approaches, are illustrated in Table 8.1. Now,
let us consider the five stages of group development: 
initial or forming, conflict or storming, norming, work-
ing or performing, and termination or adjourning.
Forming
In the initial or forming stage, the group is being formed.
The members are becoming acquainted with one another,
the group, and the purpose and outcomes. Arnold (2011)
identifies the major group tasks during this forming stage
as establishing the group contract, developing trust, and
identification. The leader focuses on orienting the mem-
bers and determining the structure in terms of time, 
duration, and frequency of meetings, as well as the goals
for the group. Special educational resources may also be
provided in order that all group members have a similar
basis before the work of the group begins. Cohesiveness
of the group is enhanced by clearly stated goals and group
norms. Work groups require an introduction, identifica-
tion of goals and expectations, and orientation to the
structure. Patient groups also require this introduction and
orientation information, but issues of confidentiality and
personal disclosure are important considerations in the
forming stage. Another factor to consider is whether mem-
bers can join or leave at different times or whether all
members must begin and terminate together.
Storming and Norming
The next phase is the conflict or storming stage. This is
the time when members become more comfortable with
the group but may be ambivalent about the need for the
group and its intended goals. This ambivalence can 
be demonstrated by “testing” the authority of the leader
CHAPTER 8 Working with Groups     ●
129
TABLE 8.1
Group Stages, Expected Goals, and Nursing Techniques
Stage
Expected Goals
Nursing Techniques
Initial/forming
Sense of trust
Making introductions
Structuring group
Defining parameters and goals
Encouraging the sense of group
Conflict/storming
Sense of commitment
Encouraging verbalizations
Allowing interactions and role development
Handling confrontations and setting limits
Norming
Sense of purpose
Setting limits, rules, and expectations
Encouraging group cohesion
Working/performing
Sense of hope
Facilitating discussion
Identifying themes and progress
Refocusing as needed
Identifying processes
Termination/adjourning
Sense of accomplishment
Summarizing and evaluating goals
Facilitating transfer of knowledge and skills
Supporting closure

through questioning, skipping sessions, or coming late.
These issues must be dealt with openly and clearly so that
the group can settle into its work. This becomes the 
time of norming, with the identification of standards and
expectations of behavior. Some level of discomfort or con-
flict is often expressed overtly or covertly, until the group
becomes functional. All groups need this time to set norms
such as roles, rules, and structure.
Performing
The working or performance stage involves exactly that—
performance of the work of the group. In this stage, the
leader becomes less involved in running the group. The
members themselves decide what to discuss and how to 
address the goals and, to some degree, manage the group
themselves. Cohesiveness and creativity should be apparent
and encouraged. The leader’s role is one of facilitator to 
refocus and clarify as needed, handle problems and conflicts
if they arise, and identify the process as it develops. In this
process, members may avoid issues or tasks and engage in
disruptive reactions and behaviors. By bringing problems
and conflict out into the open, the participants can examine
these issues and make changes. Some groups establish dates
for each stage; others depend on the tasks and type of group.
Adjourning
Termination or adjourning is the formal ending of the
group. How long this stage lasts depends on the purpose
of the group and its duration. As in the orientation stage,
the group leader assumes an active role at this stage. The
goals are to assist the members in expressing what has been
accomplished and preparing for closure. This can be an
emotional stage, with some members striving for continual
closeness in some therapeutic groups or the continued 
camaraderie that is not experienced in the work setting.
On the other hand, some work-group members are 
relieved at having accomplished the intended goals.
The Role of the Group Leader
Role theory is applicable to groups in terms of both leader
and member roles. Recall that a group is a social system. As
such, the leader and the members will assume selected roles
based on expectations, gender, and learning. Roles are 
simply behaviors and expectations in a specific situation. In
the case of the group, the roles of the leader and members
reflect the group’s identified structure, composition, focus,
and associated expected roles. The role of the leader can set
the expectations for the group as the social system.
Leadership is an essential consideration for the viability
of many groups. One consideration is whether the leader has
been selected externally or determined internally through
group consensus. This appointment status may affect both
the leader and member behaviors within the group. Other
factors that may influence the particular leadership style
adopted by an individual are the person’s personality and
skills, the purpose of the group, and the characteristics of the
group and the participants or members.
Traditional group leadership styles have been described
as democratic, autocratic, or laissez-faire. Group leaders
often use a combination of styles or modify their style de-
pending on the group membership or the topic being dis-
cussed. With a democratic leadership style, the leader
shares the authority and decision-making tasks with mem-
bers. A democratic leader seeks greater participation by
and feedback from group members. One of the benefits
of this style is that it typically produces a greater sense of
satisfaction among members. On the other hand, the need
to have consensus or agreement may impede the progress
of the group by monopolizing the discussion.
An autocratic leadership style is one in which the leader
makes all pertinent decisions, informs members of the
rules, and structures the sessions. This style can facilitate
the group effectiveness and goal achievement because the
expectations have been clearly delineated and actions con-
trolled. At the same time, it may limit group interaction
and lead some members to feel that they are disenfran-
chised and that their opinions are not valued.
The laissez-faire leadership style is unstructured, allow-
ing members a great deal of freedom and the ability to
come and go at will. This style might also involve a change
of leader from session to session, which can be effective
with a highly functional, goal-directed population but will
not work well with poorly focused or unmotivated groups.
Regardless of the leadership style, characteristics of an
effective group leader include the ability to understand the
dynamics of the group, listen attentively, focus on the
goals, and facilitate the progress of the group. Again, effec-
tive communication and interpersonal skills are vital attrib-
utes of an effective leader. The maintenance of group
morale is a major role of the group leader.
Leadership Tasks and Skills
Consider the leadership tasks and skills necessary to manage
a group successfully by analyzing the group’s purpose,
structure, member participation, communication, and goal
attainment. One of the first tasks for the group leader is to
establish a structure that will promote an effective working
relationship. The leader is also responsible for securing a
meeting place, deciding the length and frequency of meet-
ings, and determining the goals for the group. These goals
must be clearly communicated to the members so that they
can assume their roles. At times, goal determination may
be delayed to allow members to participate in goal devel-
opment. The leader must also physically set up the room
or ensure that effective arrangements have been made. As
discussed earlier, the arrangement of the physical environ-
ment is crucial in some groups.
Another critical task for the group leader at this point
is to orient the members to the group and its expectations
and to allot sufficient time for the group to form before
initiating work. The leader can accomplish this by ensur-
ing that the interactions among the members during the
initial period of forming remain on a superficial level while
the members become acquainted. The stages of forming,
storming, and norming may be much briefer in a work
group, but the leader must ensure that there is some time
for the members to settle in. This may be accomplished
in one meeting, but some allowance for introductions and
getting to know one another is important, regardless of
the group’s focus.
130
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

Leadership skills are essential to facilitate the group in
its deliberation and discussion for decision making. En-
suring participation by all members, avoiding premature
closure on the topic, and recognizing the recurring themes
are important activities for an effective group leader. The
leader can set the tone for the level of communication,
whether superficial or personal, as well as set limits on 
appropriate and unacceptable communication styles. The
leader uses techniques such as restatement, reflection, clar-
ification, collaboration, and problem-solving while always
attempting to promote open communication among the
members. Another useful technique for the leader is role
modeling for the group members on how to provide con-
structive feedback. In this way, the group leader is actually
teaching the members effective communication skills.
Attaining group cohesiveness is another skill of the suc-
cessful group leader. Coming together as a group and 
focusing on the common goal or purpose are reinforced by
the effective group leader. This cooperative and cohesive
group esprit de corps can occur and endure when the group
leader provides the positive, supportive, and encouraging
lead or model for the group. Conflict can arise in any type
of group and must be managed. The best resolution entails
a “win-win” situation with a solution satisfying to both
sides. Conflict is a challenge for the group leader to direct
the members in creative problem-solving for both effective
and satisfying group process. Nurses commonly face con-
flict situations in work-group settings and need to keep in
mind the four functional problems that Turniansky and
Hare (1998) identified—meaning, resources, integration,
and goal attainment—as well as the four “must” activities
to address these problems with groups in organizations:
●An overall meaning of the activity that sets both a 
direction and boundaries for the group
●Resources adequate for the task
●Integration in the form of role differentiation and level
of morale for the group members to work together
●Enough coordination of the resources and the 
integration functions to provide for goal attainment.
(Turniansky & Hare, 1998, p. 111)
The Conflict Resolution Network (CRN, 2014) also
identifies 12 skills useful in a conflict situation (Box 8.2).
The CRN is an international organization based in 
Australia whose purpose is to research, develop, teach, and
implement the theory and practice of conflict resolution
through a national and international network. Other
techniques to use when dealing with difficult people are
discussed later in this chapter.
Leaders should avoid using the following ineffective
communication techniques: giving advice, giving approval,
blaming, and scapegoating. Giving advice and blaming are
considered nontherapeutic. Consider that a scapegoat is
taking the blame—especially the blame for others. Group
leaders must be vigilant not to scapegoat a member or allow
other group members to do so, especially a disruptive 
member. The leader needs to recognize these dynamics and 
intervene appropriately, creating a safe, open, and produc-
tive environment for the group. Giving approval is, perhaps
surprisingly, not helpful. Giving approval can interfere with
the group process and goal accomplishment by focusing on
one individual, which may be interpreted as favoritism.
Rather than express approval for an individual’s efforts or
successes, the leader can reflect back the accomplishment
to the person or other members, allowing them to express
their feelings. The leader can use the group format as a
means of teaching effective communication skills, such as
how to listen, give and receive feedback, and express feel-
ings or opinions.
Goal accomplishment has already been identified as a
benchmark of success for groups. Giving assignments,
such as recording the group’s discussion or trying out a
particular suggestion from the group, is one helpful mea -
sure. The use of assignments communicates the belief that
members are capable and that change involves work on
the part of group members. In a work group, members
are given specific areas to work on or research, with the
expectation that the group will reconvene to put these
pieces together. Ultimately, the leader is responsible for
ensuring that activities in the group remain focused on
the common goals that were set for the group.
Another leadership activity is facilitating closure. To
provide for group closure, the leader must summarize
progress at the end of each session as well as at the official
termination of the group. This summarization can be in
the form of a debriefing for evaluation of the group’s ac-
complishments, soliciting group feedback. If the members
enter and leave the group at various points, the leader may
choose to summarize at the start of each session to orient
CHAPTER 8 Working with Groups     ●
131
BOX 8.2
The Conflict Resolution Network’s 
12 Useful Skills
The Conﬂict Resolution Network recommends the
following 12 skills for dealing with conﬂict situations:
●The win-win approach
●Creative response
●Empathy
●Appropriate assertiveness
●Co-operative power
●Managing emotions
●Willingness to resolve
●Mapping the conﬂict
●Developing options
●Negotiation
●Mediation
●Broadening perspectives
Go to CRN’s Web site at http://www.crnhq.org/
twelveskills.html for strategies to address these 12 skills
and additional resources and training materials.
ONLINE CONSULT 
Visit the CRN at 
http://www.crnhq.org
Identify possible conflict situations in your next
work or group session.
Which techniques would you use for effective 
resolution?

newer and continuing members to current status, goals, and
tasks. This approach is also highly effective in educational
groups as it serves to reorient learners to prior content. 
Regardless of the focus of the group, periodic summaries
and closure can be essential for the successful functioning
of both the group and its members. Group members need
an opportunity to acknowledge their accomplishments and
be involved in the evaluation of the group process.
Roles of Group Members
Group members demonstrate a variety of roles during
particular meetings. These roles may be either functional
or nonfunctional for the group process. They may remain
similar or constant over the life of the group, or individ-
uals may alter their role from meeting to meeting. It is
vital for nurses to recognize the roles assumed in groups
and to intervene purposefully when necessary. Consider
the last unit meeting you attended. Who led the group?
Did anyone stall or disrupt the discussion? Were the top-
ics discussed major issues for the unit or “pet peeves” of
one individual? Did all members participate in the dis-
cussion? How could you, if you had been the group
leader, have changed this meeting?
Functional Group Roles
Functional group roles facilitate the group process and
determine the ultimate effectiveness of the group, especially
in accomplishing a task or attaining a goal. In any type 
of group, members may play both functional and nonfunc-
tional roles for various periods. For the effectiveness of 
the group process, the goal is for members to demonstrate
predominantly functional group roles. For nursing work
groups, Tappen (2001) differentiated between functional
task roles (Table 8.2), which contribute to completion of
the task, and functional group-building roles (Table 8.3),
which support development and meet relational needs.
Think about what you have observed in a group meeting.
Observe these roles in any work-group setting, such as
a committee or unit meeting. Many functional task and
group-building roles are demonstrated by the group
leader. The leader may start out as the information giver
and standard setter during the forming stage, but then
function as an information seeker, gatekeeper, and encour-
ager as the group process evolves in the working stage. The
leader may also demonstrate the functional roles of coor-
dinator, energizer, summarizer, and consensus taker to 
facilitate group process and attainment of the group goals.
Other group members will also serve in these functional
roles as they become more active and progress toward the
achievement of the group’s goals. Observe who acts as 
the procedural technician, helping the leader organize the
group and supplying needed equipment and materials. 
Examine who appears to be the more passive follower in
the group, who cracks jokes as the tension reliever, and
who records the actions and progress of the group.
Although these roles have been discussed mainly for the
work setting, they also apply to professional, educational,
and therapeutic group settings. In a professional group, 
observe the leadership roles shared by the officers, proce-
dural technician roles performed by the aides or room
monitors, and the standard setter role taken by the parlia-
mentarian. In an educational group, consider the specific
132
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
TABLE 8.2
Functional Task Roles
Initiator/contributor
Makes suggestions and proposes new ideas, methods, or problem-solving approaches
Information giver
Offers pertinent information from personal knowledge appropriate to the group topic 
or task
Information seeker
Requests information or suggestions from other members appropriate to the group 
topic or task
Opinion giver/seeker
Offers or requests views, judgments, or feelings about the topic or suggestions under 
consideration by the group
Provides the opportunity for values clarification by the group members
Disagreer
Identifies errors in statements made or proposes a different viewpoint
Coordinator
Suggests relationships between the different suggestions or comments made by the 
group members
Elaborator
Elaborates or expands on suggestions already made
Energizer
Stimulates the group into action toward the goals either by introducing certain issues 
or topics or by behavior
Summarizer
Summarizes suggestions, actions, and accomplishments that have occurred in the group
Procedural technician
Provides the technical tasks needed for the group functions, such as arrangement of 
the group, including media, equipment, and work supplies
Recorder
Takes notes to record the progress, suggestions, and decisions of the group
Source: Adapted from Tappen, R. M. (2001). Nursing leadership and management: Concepts and practice (4th ed.). Philadelphia,
PA: F. A. Davis.

content and the size of the audience. Observe the roles
taken by the teacher or facilitator, the people who are seated
close to the teacher, the people in the back of the room,
and the people who are asking most of the questions or
cracking jokes. In a therapeutic group, observe the partic-
ular role of the leader and how he or she facilitates sharing
of the members’ feelings and beliefs. Observe the members
who verbalize supportive comments versus those who dis-
agree or give further information about similar feelings.
Nonfunctional Group Roles
At times, group members demonstrate nonfunctional roles
when they interrupt the group process. An example is the
individual who provides negative comments on whatever
other group members propose. Nonfunctional group 
roles generally are disruptive to group-building, task 
accomplishment, and progress toward goal attainment. A
group can actually be mobilized to act in response to the
unacceptable actions of one member, however, such as
speaking up to the individual who repeatedly comes late
and then insists on being updated on what already oc-
curred. Tappen (2001) identified the following nonfunc-
tional roles: dominator, monopolizer, blocker, aggressor,
recognition seeker, zipper-mouth, and playboy. Smith
(2001) listed similar disruptive roles in a meeting as 
latecomers/early leavers, silent/shy persons, whisperers/side
conversationalists, and talk-a-lots, including loudmouths,
know-it-alls, and hostiles.
●The dominator or know-it-all controls conversations,
determines what will be discussed, and may attempt to
control or intimidate other members. The dominator
is focused on his or her own needs. An example of the
dominator in a work group is a unit coordinator at a
quality assurance meeting who suggests that the group
focus on the number of requests for schedule changes.
An example in a therapeutic group is a patient who
opens the group by describing her plans with her 
family for the upcoming holidays rather than address-
ing the group leader’s question on the assigned activity
from last week.
●The monopolizer or loudmouth seeks attention and 
demands that the group focus on him or her. He or 
she may repeatedly interrupt others and perceive his or
her issues and problems as the most important. A work-
group example is the nurse who goes on and on about
how he always has to work overtime. In a therapeutic
group, an example is a patient who repeatedly interrupts
and insists the group listen to her problem.
●The blocker interrupts the discussion, often focusing
on another topic or personal concerns. The blocker
can do this overtly or through side conversations,
which can be highly disruptive to the group.
●The aggressor or hostile attacks during the discussion,
making comments that may or may not be relevant to
it. Often this individual is focused inwardly on personal
needs and demands to be heard, regardless of relevance
to the discussion. This member criticizes other group
members because they do not have the same insights or
experiences from his or her perspective. This individual
is readily identified in professional, work, educational,
and therapeutic groups by his or her hostile comments.
Signs of discomfort or counterattacks may be apparent
among other group members.
●The recognition seeker consistently attempts to draw the
group’s attention to his or her personal beliefs, values,
and concerns. This individual has a need to stand out
among the group members and be heard, respected,
and perhaps admired. This member sometimes sounds
like the leader but is usually working on personal is-
sues. In a work-group example, this is the nurse who
declares, “It’s not all shifts that are short-staffed. Mine
is the one that’s always short-staffed with temps, but I
am able to orient them successfully after all.”
●The zipper-mouth in either a work or a therapeutic
group is the silent individual who sits quietly, feeling
unlucky to be in the group or even present in the situ-
ation. This is not the shy member, who is tracking the
meeting content and perhaps needs more time in the
group to develop trust, reflection, and opportunity.
●The playboy is the joker in the group and does not take
the group seriously. Unfortunately, we have all experi-
enced these individuals in a group setting and can 
easily recognize the disruption they make in the group
process. These individuals may also be consistently 
late without notice or may frequently leave early.
CHAPTER 8 Working with Groups     ●
133
TABLE 8.3
Functional Group-Building Roles
Encourager
Accepts and praises contributions 
of the group and other group 
members
Standard setter
Reinforces the standards or 
processes for effective group 
functioning
Gatekeeper
Ensures that all members have 
contributed to the discussion and 
that the group is not being 
monopolized by the views of 
more verbal members
Consensus taker
Seeks the weight of group 
sentiments or consensus on the 
issues
Diagnoser
Identifies barriers or blocks to 
group progress that are occurring
Expresser
Restates or identifies and 
expresses the feelings of the 
group
Tension reliever
Uses humor and mediation when 
group tensions rise and interfere 
with the group process and 
accomplishment of tasks
Follower
Consents to whatever is proposed 
by others in the group. 
Demonstrates no active participation 
without great encouragement
Source: Adapted from Tappen, R. M. (2001). Nursing leadership 
and management: Concepts and practice (4th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: 
F. A. Davis.

Dealing with Difficult People
The group setting is no different from routine interpersonal
interactions. You have probably encountered people who
are difficult to work with. Whether a leader or a group
member, you will inevitably encounter challenging person-
alities in the group setting. One of the most effective means
of dealing with a difficult member is when the leader, as
well as the members, address behaviors destructive to the
group process. Awareness of your own reactions, observa-
tion of the group behaviors and interactions, and problem-
solving are the steps toward effective group process, which
can make all the difference between stagnation or dissolu-
tion, and meeting group goals.
As with interpersonal communication skills, there are
effective ways to deal with difficult and disruptive group
members. Consider the suggestions in Box 8.3. The skill-
ful and effective group leader or member can use a variety
of these techniques, depending on the group structure,
composition, roles, focus, and situational factors. In 
addition, part of the ground rules can be that any group
member may request a break or 10-minute recess. If
group members do not ask but look uncomfortable, the
leader may ask the group if a break is needed, and this
can diffuse a stressful meeting and create a time-out when
a situation is getting out of control. Having this as one of
the ground rules empowers any member of the group to
intervene in a conflict situation. Effective communication
techniques and interpersonal skills are critical to success
in group process, whether a small working group or a
larger organizational setting.
ORGANIZATIONAL GROUPS
Communication issues among the larger organizational
group and less tangible groups are also worth exploring.
Interorganizational Versus
Intraorganizational Groups
Interorganizational groups are those that occur between
systems or organizations. Communication is a vital activ-
ity to reach out to these other groups or systems. Interor-
ganizational groups may consist of the hospital and the
community mental health center, the home health
agency, or the various subgroups of a health department.
Outpatient hospital groups and inpatient unit groups also
fit this category. These groups are often highly structured,
with functions specified in job descriptions, policies, and
procedures.
Nurses are involved with and provide leadership for
effective functioning between or among systems in in-
terorganizational groups. Communication and interper-
sonal skills are valuable attributes of professional nurses
in this process. Along with these skills, a full awareness of
each system or organization and its interrelationships is
needed. This awareness involves an understanding of each
organization’s goals and values, hierarchial structure, lead-
ership and management, interpersonal and communica-
tion systems, resources and technology, boundaries, and
external environments, as illustrated in Chapter 10. In
addition, consider the environment in which the different
organizations or systems exist. Nursing involvement in
interorganizational groups is growing as the complexity
of health care and professional practice expands among
different systems.
Collaboration among organizational groups is vital
for the patient and for effective use of resources.
Intraorganizational groups are those that exist within a
single, overall system or organization. The nursing, house-
keeping, and physical therapy departments are intraorgani-
zational groups within a hospital system. These groups are
somewhat similar in terms of their structure, with specified
roles, policies, and procedures. It is imperative for nurses to
learn how to interact and negotiate effectively with these 
intraorganizational groups. An example is how to obtain
needed supplies and services from the housekeeping depart-
ment. Accomplishing this task often depends on the ability
of members of each department to collaborate with the 
others. Activity for patients is a major consideration and 
incentive to work effectively together. For example, the 
patient is the focus for physical therapy and nursing depart-
ments. A physical therapist has certain scheduling needs
based on individual patient progress. The nurse manager
has different needs in scheduling staff for treatments, which
may be predetermined by patient census, staffing, and care
needs. Collaboration in this process is vital for the patient
and effective use of resources.
Communication in Organizational
Groups
In addition to the verbal and nonverbal interpersonal com-
munication techniques, additional methods of communi-
cation are routinely used in large groups and organizations.
The information we compile and the method we use to
transmit it vary. Considering the purpose of communica-
tion in an organization is indispensable. Whether we are
involved in health teaching or the transmission of physio-
logical findings, the method and receiver of the informa-
tion are important. Clear, concise, and timely transmission
of information is necessary for an effective process. The
time frame and ongoing evaluation are also factors in the
initial communication phase as well as in the feedback
phase of the process.
134
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
BOX 8.3
Communication Techniques in a Group
When Dealing with Difficult Members
●Make observations and acknowledge contributions.
●Use the communication techniques of reﬂection and
restatement.
●Refocus the discussion if it is getting oﬀ track.
●Set limits and adhere to the ground rules agreed
upon by the group.
●Focus on potential solutions raised.
●Provide constructive feedback, not corrective feed-
back, which should be done privately.
●Promote balanced participation from members.
●Assign functional group roles to members displaying
nonfunctional behaviors.
●Plan ahead and anticipate for the next group session.

Specifically, information can be sent or received by tele-
phone, fax, e-mail, or texting, depending on the sender’s
and receiver’s access to and skill with the available technol-
ogy. A classic problem in some organizational settings is fear
of technology among some people. Another problem is
overuse. Consider the use of e-mail in organizations. The
intent is to deliver information efficiently and rapidly to
other individuals or groups of individuals in the sender’s
network while reducing paper and administrative costs. But
some people avoid this form of communication, whereas
others regularly check for messages, and still others “reply
to all” or copy (or blind copy) multiple recipients, creating
great volumes of unnecessary messages. If the information
is not sent correctly or received appropriately, the message
is not communicated and the process is ineffective.
Personal skills in verbal and written communication
must be developed continually and refined through specific
techniques or technologies. For example, keep in mind that
e-mail can be forwarded easily to others, thus communi-
cating with a larger group. The original sender’s message
will be evaluated by others on the appropriateness of con-
tent, format, and presentation (including grammar and 
appearance). Evaluating the appropriate channels or perti-
nent audiences and preparing the information in the cor-
rect format are vital for effective communication in the
organizational setting. And careful proofreading should 
always take place, remembering that spell-checkers may miss
errors—for example, there versus their and heal versus heel.
In essence, organizational communication can be
thought of as being similar to the rights of administering
medications. In organizational communications, these
rights are as follows:
1. Information or content
2. Communication channel
3. Format, including use of correct grammar, terms, and
language
4. Level of understanding
5. Technology
6. Follow-up
It is a professional responsibility to transmit a correct,
credible, properly delivered message. The appropriate
communication channel must be selected, using the ap-
propriate chain of command to convey the message. The
correct format is essential for decision making. One must
decide whether to use an interdepartmental memorandum
or a formal letter. The nature of the message dictates the
format or type of communication. Correct grammar, ter-
minology, and language are essential to present a profes-
sional image. Knowing the level of understanding of your
intended audience is vital so that they can process the in-
formation. This means using the appropriate reading level
and vocabulary. And finally, selecting the appropriate
technology is important. Without the appropriate tech-
nology, recipients may not even receive your message. And
follow-up is a necessary consideration for efficacy.
Virtual Group Meetings
Groups are traditionally viewed as necessitating face-to-
face meetings. This situation has changed. Technology
now allows groups to meet electronically, whether in real
time or asynchronously. Electronic communications have
provided the means for virtual meetings, by which people
connect with others not in the same physical environment.
Virtual meetings can be used by work, educational, ther-
apeutic, or professional groups. The group is still focused
with a common goal, and members interact with some
leadership to organize and maintain the group. Ideas can
be exchanged, experiences and information shared, and a
common concern discussed. Teleconferencing or Web
conferencing may be used alone or along with computer
conferencing software that allows sharing of documents
and visual presentations. Nursing groups now have Web
sites and provide opportunities for students and profes-
sionals in groups to “discuss” core issues. Patients can 
interact with other patients and professionals via e-mail,
chat rooms, and scheduled Internet meetings.
Virtual groups meet the same characteristics as face-
to-face groups, in terms of group structure (formal or infor-
mal), composition (membership), roles (leader as facilitator
and participants), and focus (work-related, educational,
therapeutic, or professional). The virtual group experiences
the same five stages of group development—initial, conflict,
norming, working, and termination. The same set of eval-
uation criteria can be used to assess effectiveness of the 
virtual group. The role of the leader is more intense as a 
facilitator in the group process. The leader must employ a
variety of group-building roles, time and distance being
major considerations.
Like those of distance learning, the advantages of virtual
meetings are savings in time and travel and, perhaps, the
opportunity for involvement in which the travel distance
would have been prohibitive. Because these groups do not
meet face-to-face, preparation time and follow-up are more
intensive to allow all group members to have equivalent in-
formation and participation opportunities.
Disadvantages of virtual meetings include the need for
all members to have access to similar technologies and the
individual’s comfort level with their application. Analyzing
the functional and nonfunctional roles of the members as
virtual participants can be a bit challenging without the
face-to-face assessment of interactions. The functional role
of a participant can be identified in the text or content
communicated, for example as information giver/seeker
or elaborator. The nonfunctional members—dominator,
monopolizer, blocker, aggressor, and recognition seeker—
may appear to have a smaller impact (after all, members
can delete their messages), but the leader must still address
the underlying issues. And the issue of “talk-over” must
be addressed in teleconference situations when several 
people want to contribute at the same time. The leader is
challenged to have individuals identify themselves prior to
providing commentary and share the discussion time on
a conference call. 
Any group—whether virtual or traditional, organiza-
tional, work, professional, educational, or therapeutic—
demands the use of skills in observation, interpersonal
communication, and group process that are essential char-
acteristics of the involved professional nurse. These skills
are tailored to the developmental stage of the group and
the unique characteristics of its individual members. Pro-
fessional nurses function as both members and leaders of
such groups, and constant attention to these skills allows
them to be integral components of effective groups in the
profession and throughout the healthcare delivery system.
CHAPTER 8 Working with Groups     ●
135

136
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
The American Association of Critical-Care Nurses (AACN) issued a practice alert on assessing pain in the 
critically ill adult. In addition to listing expected practice and the supporting evidence, they provide the following
recommendations:
1. Obtain the patient’s self-report of pain using validated pain assessment tools.
2. Perform a pain assessment for patients who are unable to self-report using a validated pain scale.
3. Avoid referring primarily to vital signs for pain assessment.
4. Consider proxy reporting by family members or caregivers who know the patient and can identify behavior
indicative of pain. (AACN, 2013, p. 2)
Question: Consider the group process skills you will need for the three groups: (1) nursing staff education, 
(2) interdisciplinary work group, and (3) family and friends.
Source: American Association of Critical-Care Nurses (AACN). (2013). Practice alert: Assessing pain in the critically ill adult.
Retrieved from http://www.aacn.org/wd/practice/content/practicealerts/assessing-pain-critically-ill-adult.pcms?menu=practice
K E Y  P O I N T S
●A group consists of three or more individuals with some commonality, such as shared goals or interests.
Groups to consider in professional nursing practice include professional, work, educational, family, and
therapeutic groups, each with specific goals and membership.
●Group process is described as the dynamic interplay of interactions within and between groups of humans.
●Groups are classified according to structure (formal or informal), composition, group roles, and focus
(professional, work, educational, and therapeutic).
●The composition of a group may be homogeneous, with the group members sharing similar characteristics,
or heterogeneous, with a mix of individuals.
●The issues to be addressed in establishing a group are the need and objectives for change and basic 
setup activities, including specifying and aligning the group purpose with the intended membership and
determining the appropriate environment and group size.
●Effective groups are able to accomplish their goals in a manner that allows all members to participate,
whereas ineffective groups become fragmented or dysfunctional.
●Group leaders structure the sessions to promote communication and participation by all members.
●Conflict situations can arise in any type of group, and conflict resolution is a process that requires 
problem-solving for effective group process.
●Groups go through predictable developmental stages: forming, storming, norming, working, and 
adjourning. The leader modifies his or her approach according to the group’s current stage.
●Traditional group leadership styles are democratic, autocratic, and laissez-faire. Group leaders often use a
combination of styles or modify their styles, depending on the group membership or topic being discussed.
●Functional group roles facilitate the group process and the ultimate effectiveness of the group. They 
include both functional task roles and functional group-building roles. Nonfunctional group roles are 
disruptive of group-building, task accomplishment, and progress toward goal attainment.
●Organizational groups may be interorganizational or intraorganizational, depending on whether they exist
between organizational systems or within an organization.
●Even though technology has provided the opportunity for virtual groups, group process skills are still 
applicable at a distance in real time or asynchronously.

CHAPTER 8 Working with Groups     ●
137
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Identify at least three groups of which you are a member. Consider the membership, goals, leader, composition,
and focus of each group. What are the similarities and differences? Contrast the leadership styles and skills in the
three groups.
2. Be prepared to debate the advantages and disadvantages of heterogeneous and homogeneous groups in an online
or class discussion.
3. Observe the members of the next departmental committee or nursing study group you attend.
• Determine whether the group leader is the designated leader or a member who has assumed this role. If the
leader was designated, who made the designation (external or internal designation)? Describe any effect this
designation has had on the group function.
• Describe the roles other members have assumed. Are the group roles different from these individuals’ interac-
tions in other settings?
• Evaluate whether the members appear satisfied with the group’s outcomes.
• Evaluate whether this group or committee meets the characteristics of an effective group.
4. Review the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter and discuss it in the context of the contents
of this chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the exercises provided for this chapter.
REFERENCES
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses. (2013). Practice
alert: Assessing pain in the critically ill adult. Retrieved from
http://www.aacn.org/wd/practice/content/practicealerts/
assessing-pain-critically-ill-adult.pcms?menu=practice
American Nurses Association. (2010). Nursing: Scope and 
standards of practice (2nd ed.).  Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursesbooks.org.
Arnold, E. (2011). Communicating in groups. In E. Arnold &
K. Boggs (Eds.), Interpersonal relationships: Professional 
communication skills for nurses (6th ed., pp. 222–245).
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders/Elsevier.
Berlo, D. K. (1960). The process of communication: An introduc-
tion to theory and practice. New York: Holt, Rinehart, &
Winston.
Conflict Resolution Network. (2014). Conflict resolution skills.
Retrieved from http://www.crnhq.org/pages.php?pID=59
DeWine, S., Gibson, M. K., & Smith, M. J. (2000). Exploring
human communication. Los Angeles, CA: Roxbury.
Robert, H. M., Evans, W. J., Honemann, D. H., & Balch, T. J.
(2004). Robert’s Rules of Order newly revised in brief. 
Cambridge, MA: DeCapo.
Smith, T. E. (2001). Meeting management. Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Prentice Hall.
Tappen, R. M. (2001). Nursing leadership and management: Con-
cepts and practice (4th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Tuckman, B. (1965). Developmental sequence in small groups.
Psychological Bulletin, 63, 384–387.
Turniansky, B., & Hare, A. P. (1998). Individuals in groups and
organizations. London, UK: Sage.
Yalom, I., & Leszcz, M. (2005). Theory and practice of group
psychotherapy (5th ed.). New York: Basic Books.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Barnard, S. (2001). Running an effective meeting. In 
S. Barnard, P. J. Casella, C. Coffin, T. Hughes, 
J. W. Hurst, J. S. Rasey, D. Redding, R. J. Robillard, 
D. St James, & S. C. Ullery, Writing, speaking, and commu-
nication skills for health care professionals (pp. 293–304).
New Haven, CT: Yale University.
Berne, E. (1963). The structure and dynamics of organizations
and groups. New York: Grove Press.
Galanes, G. J., Adams, K., & Brilhart, J. K. (2007). Effective
group discussion (12th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Lundin, W., & Lundin, K. (1995). Working with difficult 
people. New York: American Management Association.
Merton, R. K. (1957). Social learning theory and social structure.
New York: Free Press.
ONLINE RESOURCES
Social-Role Theory
http://changingminds.org/explanations/theories/
social_role.htm
The Conflict Resolution Network (CRN)
http://www.crnhq.org
MeetingWizard.org
http://www.meetingwizard.org/meetings/effective-
meetings.cfm
Mindtools.com
http://www.mindtools.com/index.html

The Teaching-Learning
Process
138
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Discuss the components of teaching and learning.
2. Examine differences in the ways people learn.
3. Describe methods to assess learning readiness and motivation.
4. Propose different teaching methods for a variety of learning needs.
5. Devise a plan for patient education that contains behavioral objectives, a content outline with
appropriate teaching methods, and methods for evaluating learner outcomes.
Behaviorist Perspective
Classical Conditioning
Operant Conditioning
Gestalt Theory
Cognitive Theories
Social Cognitive Theory
Humanism
Andragogy
Transformative Learning
Multiple Intelligences
Teaching
Learning
Affective Domain
Cognitive Domain
Psychomotor Domain
Learning Environment
Cognitive Learning Styles
Readiness
Motivation
Behavioral Objectives
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
“To achieve a lasting change in observed behavior, 
the value of that change and the intellectual 
capacity to understand and process the 
information must first be present.”
Rose Kearney-Nunnery
Key Terms
9

Teaching and learning are integral parts of contemporary
nursing practice. Patient teaching has long been an expected
nursing role. As a process, teaching and learning are much
more than sharing and accepting information. There are
many components to consider in order for teaching and
learning to be effective.
NURSING PROCESS APPLIED
TO THE TEACHING-LEARNING
PROCESS
Consider the steps in the nursing process: assessment, 
diagnosis, outcome identification and planning, imple-
mentation, and evaluation. These same steps are applicable
to the teaching and learning process.
Assessment and Diagnosis
Think about both the teacher and the learner. They 
represent more than simply the provider and receiver of 
information. Communication—verbal, nonverbal, and
written—is a vital component in the teaching and learning
process. It is a mutual process in which critical thinking
is essential for both teacher and learner. Both teacher and
learner obtain information, use reasoning skills, make
analyses based on the data, and then move to decision
making or problem-solving on the learning need or the
acceptability of the problem or the information. The
learner learns from the teacher, but the teacher also gains
awareness and skill from each interaction with learners. In
the assessment stage, there is essential information we
need to know for an effective teaching-learning process.
Some of the following questions arise:
●What are the attributes of each individual teacher and
learner?
●Are there literacy, bilingual, or information processing
issues to be addressed?
●What are the learning needs of the learner?
●How does the learner learn best?
●What is the readiness for and motivation to learn?
●What changes in behavior or attitude are perceived as
being needed by both the teacher and the learner?
●What individual characteristics will enhance or inhibit
learning?
●What is the teacher’s teaching style?
●What is the cognitive style of the learner?
●What environmental factors will enhance or inhibit
learning?
●What activities and resources will enhance learning?
●How can both the teacher and the learner evaluate the
effectiveness of the learning process?
Assessing for a learning deficit or teaching need incor-
porates many factors. Notice that the concentration of
the assessment is on the process of teaching and learn-
ing, not on specific content to be included in a presen-
tation of information. Determining content is a discrete
task performed later in the process, on the basis of the
specific attributes and needs of the people and environ-
ment. Using this assessment information can lead to a
diagnosis about the learner’s particular teaching need.
Outcome Identification, Planning,
and Implementation
Next, developing behavioral objectives with specific out-
comes gives direction for a teaching plan and evaluation
of the learning. Teaching strategies, methods, and re-
sources to meet the diagnosed learning need, with specific
content, must then be identified. The next step is planning
for activities in the process, followed by implementation
of the plan.
Evaluation
The outcomes of the teaching-learning process are eval-
uated. The evaluation component focuses on how the
learner met the objectives and the specific outcome be-
haviors from the experience. Outcome objectives should
be assessed by both the learner and the teacher. Evalua-
tion is focused on the behavioral objectives specified for
the learner earlier in the process. Although the nursing
process provides a frame of reference for patient teaching,
teaching and learning theories provide direction in the
process.
TEACHING AND LEARNING
THEORIES
Educators have studied learning theories for many years
to understand and improve on the teaching-learning
process. There are several schools of learning theories.
Major examples of these theories applicable to professional
nursing practice are behaviorism, gestalt, social cognitive
theory, humanism, andragogy, transformative learning,
and multiple intelligences (Box 9.1).
Behaviorism: Classical Conditioning
In introductory psychology courses, classic stimulus-
response conditioning and operant conditioning are taught,
providing a behaviorist perspective on learning. Ivan
Pavlov’s pioneering research with dogs led to our under-
standing of classical conditioning, in which the reflexive
responses in behavior result from some stimulus. In classical
conditioning, we saw that the pairing of food (the uncon-
ditioned stimulus) with the sound of a bell as a neutral
(conditioned) stimulus led to salivation in dogs as an un-
conditioned response—first as an unconditioned response
CHAPTER 9 The Teaching-Learning Process     ●
139
BOX 9.1
Selected Theories of Learning
●Classical conditioning
●Operant conditioning
●Gestalt theory
●Cognitive development
●Social cognitive theory
●Humanism
●Andragogy
●Transformative learning 
●Multiple intelligences

for the sight of the food, and ultimately as a conditioned
stimulus with the sound of a bell alone. Using classical con-
ditioning with infants, John Watson provided further 
insight on learning with his focus on the environment and
emotional responses. Watson was a true behaviorist, look-
ing at the development of the emotions of fear, love, and
rage through classical conditioning and desensitization in
his research with children.
Use of classical conditioning in nursing practice is lim-
ited. One situation may be in teaching patients to inter-
vene as needed in response to physiological or emotional
cues, auras, or triggers before an allergic, metabolic, or
neural response. The individual with diabetes, a severe 
allergy, or epilepsy can be taught to perceive and make the
association with early signs or symptoms that could lead
to a larger physiological reaction. Classical conditioning is
useful for early intervention to circumvent the reaction
chain. Reflexes are important in this scenario to ensure
that the individual is in a safe environment and has the 
resources for prompt treatment. Another example is the
use of distraction, focusing, and breathing in certain reflex-
ive situations—for patients in labor, in pain, or experienc-
ing fear, for example.
Behaviorism: Operant Conditioning
Operant conditioning provides further clues to learning,
with a focus on purposive behaviors and the role of rein-
forcement. In Thorndike’s Law of Effect, reinforcement
of a behavior is more likely to lead to repetition of that be-
havior. B. F. Skinner’s research with rats and reinforce-
ment for learned behaviors provided much additional
information. In operant conditioning, the behavior is 
affected by the consequences (reinforcement), but the
process is not trial and error (Skinner, 2010, p. 1). This
theory introduced positive and negative reinforcers and 
reinforcement schedules to learning. The work of Skinner
led to behavior modification programs and programmed
instruction with shaping, reinforcement, and generalization
of behavior.
Behavior modification programs are widely used in
healthcare and education. They have been used effectively
in certain nursing situations, such as nutritional programs
that require a lifelong change in behavior. In such situa-
tions, old patterns are broken, stimuli are introduced to
effect positive outcomes, responses are generalized to spe-
cific dietary items, positive and negative reinforcements
are applied, and behavior is shaped over time. Another use
for behavioral techniques is with adult patients with 
urinary incontinence. One method of treatment includes
bladder retraining with the components of education,
scheduled voiding, and positive reinforcement.
Behaviorism focuses on observation and measurement
of actions in response to some association or condition-
ing. Rigorous use of the scientific process in the labora-
tory setting was a major factor in this perspective.
Dissatisfaction with the emphasis on conditioning and
reinforcement led to the evolution of other perspectives,
including gestalt theory, cognitive theories, social learning
theory, and humanism. In these later perspectives, we see
an increased focus on the human intellect and human
emotions.
Gestalt Theory
Gestalt theory focuses on meaning and thought, holding
that learning occurs through perception. In German,
gestalt refers to the perception of a whole form rather than
its component parts. More than 100 laws on this perspec-
tive evolved with the identification of major principles
concerning the way we perceive objects related to organi-
zation, proximity, similarity, direction, simplicity, back-
ground, and closure. Gestalt theorists view learning as
based on perception of and completion of patterns. Pat-
terns are perceived and reorganized by the person. In terms
of learning, this perspective focuses on how the learner per-
ceives the information and the unique environment. Kurt
Lewin’s field theory provided a major influence in this per-
spective with the emphasis on the importance of the envi-
ronmental field. The perception of this environmental
field by the person influences how that person, as a system,
responds within the larger environmental system.
The classic principle in the gestalt perspective is that
the whole is not merely the sum of the parts. This princi-
ple is consistent with the holistic view of human beings in
professional nursing practice. Consider the importance we
place on understanding how the person views the infor-
mation to be learned. This focus on the person involves
teaching materials that are used in addition to perceptual
values. Further consider the learning environment and the
importance we place on patient teaching in an unrushed,
private, and comfortable setting when teaching (or pro-
moting change for) specific health practices, as opposed 
to the hectic clinic environment where the person is dis-
tracted by children playing in the waiting room or verbal-
izations of discomfort expressed by others in the room. As
another example, consider the patient in same-day surgery
and the importance of preoperative teaching and the in-
clusion of significant others rather than the presentation
of information when the patient is experiencing the effects
from sedation and concerns over surgical outcomes.
Cognitive Theories
Cognitive theories of learning focus on the intellect
and the development of knowledge. Recall the example of
Piaget’s theory of cognitive development from Chapter 2.
Schemas were seen as patterns of thought or behavior that
become more complex with the addition of more infor-
mation. Assimilation is the acquisition of this information
and incorporation into the individual’s existing cognitive
and behavioral structures. Accommodation is the change in
the individual’s cognitive and behavioral patterns based
on the new information acquired. This acquisition of in-
formation is learning with the comprehension of concepts,
memory, and analysis.
There are many different cognitive theories, mostly fo-
cusing on information processing. In nursing practice, use
of cognitive theory is readily apparent with our focus on
the level of cognitive development and acquisition of
healthcare knowledge. We use principles of cognitive de-
velopment to tailor a teaching plan to the patient’s level
of development, whether the patient is an elderly diabetic
or a child with asthma. We are also concerned about the
way learners process information, so that we can tailor our
140
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

teaching strategies to suit their learning styles. In addition,
the use of behavioral objectives with patients provides a
focus for developing cognitive skills, moving from recall
of knowledge to understanding, application, analysis, eval-
uation, and creation, as we will see later in the revised tax-
onomy table (Anderson et al., 2001) that stemmed from
the classic work of Bloom’s (1956) taxonomy.
Social Cognitive Theory
Cognitive learning through observation and imitation was
the basis of Bandura’s early theory known as the Social
Learning Theory. Through the research of Bandura 
and his associates, aggressive and socialization behaviors
of children were documented after observation of both
symbolic and actual models. An important aspect of 
Bandura’s work is the modeling of behavior with television
and the effect of visualizing vicarious reinforcement and
punishment for behavior. A humanistic, rather than mech-
anistic, orientation is apparent in this theoretical focus.
Bandura (1977) explained the emphasis of vicarious, sym-
bolic, and self-regulatory processes on how humans learn
and influence their own destiny. Building on this broader
focus on the person, behaviors, and the environment with
the concept of self-regulation, Bandura proposed the 
expansion to the Social Cognitive Theory in the 1980s.
Since that time, Bandura has incorporated self-efficacy, a
theory important to patients in the healthcare setting as
well as in normal activities. Self-efficacy is demonstrating
a belief in your own competencies to produce a desired
outcome. “Efficacy beliefs influence how people think,
feel, motivate themselves, and act” (Bandura, 1995, 
p. 2). Bandura (1995) further identifies four sources
of efficacy beliefs: mastery experiences, vicarious experi-
ences, social persuasion, and physiological and emotional
states (pp. 3–5). Efficacy can have a powerful effect as 
individuals take ownership of their individual learning
needs. As Bandura (2007) proposes, social cognitive theory
highlights distinctly human attributes (p. vii).
Nursing applications of the social cognitive theory 
are prevalent in the development of psychomotor skills in
patients, such as self-administration of medications, pro-
cedures, and treatments. We often demonstrate skills to
patients and expect them to return the demonstration. We
provide positive reinforcement in the coaching function
during the process, by making comments such as, “That’s
good,” “That’s the way,” and “What a nice job.” We pro-
mote healthful practices with encouragement and the hope
for positive results as reinforcement for the new behavior.
We show patients videos on a procedure in which they see
modeling and reinforcement through a case scenario.
These nursing behaviors focus on the individual in the 
environment as a thinking, feeling, and reacting being.
Further, the concept of self-efficacy has long been used in
nursing research and practice as we strive for the patient’s
independence and positive healthcare outcomes. The iden-
tified sources of efficacy are consistent with nursing prac-
tice with a greater focus on the individual as we promote
mastery of skills, use of vicarious experiences in teaching,
social persuasion in health promotion activities, and con-
sistently integrate the physiological and emotional states
of patients in their plan of care.
Humanism
Humanism has provided a major perspective on learning
and one that has led to revision of older models. In this
perspective, the focus is totally on the person. Abraham
Maslow and Carl Rogers were major influences on this
learning theory. As Maslow (1971) stated:
[T]he humanistic goal . . . is ultimately the “self actual-
ization” of a person, the becoming fully human, the 
development of the fullest height that the human species
can stand up to or that the particular individual can
come to. In a less technical way, it is helping the person
to become the best that he is able to become. (p. 169)
The full range of human experiences is considered, 
as personally experienced and interpreted. Maslow’s 
humanistic focus included motivation as a vital concern.
Humanism is the basis of Carl Rogers’s person-centered
counseling. As described by his daughter, Rogers “above
all, valued the worth and dignity of the individual 
and trusted their capacity for self-direction if given the
proper environment” (Rogers & Freiberg, 1994, p. iii).
Personal growth and autonomy are key to the humanistic
perspective.
The humanistic perspective is consistent with the con-
cepts of professional nursing. We focus on the person and
assist in empowering him or her for health (whether an
emerging state or to a higher level) and advocating for
their active involvement in the health promotion process.
The environment should be considered in terms of the
person and his or her unique environmental setting and
culture. Self-direction and insight into personal beliefs,
attitudes, lifestyle, and behaviors are fundamental to the
learning process. Culture, literacy, and learning or infor-
mation processing deficits are also vital considerations
with this perspective. As viewed in the health models in
Chapter 4, cultural perspectives as a way of life must be
included in any useful and humanistic teaching-learning
plan. In addition, for effective teaching and learning to
occur, deficits in learning or information acquisition or
processing are humanistic factors that must be discovered,
along with an understanding of adaptive patterns. Most
consumers of nursing care are adults: parents, couples, in-
dividual adult or aging patients, families, community
groups, and even professional peers with unique learning
needs and characteristics.
Adult Learning Theories
Learning in adults requires the teacher to make adjust-
ments to meet the different characteristics of learners.
Adult learners differ from children in that they have past
experiences, good and bad, with both teaching and
learning.
Malcolm S. Knowles, who was a major force in adult
learning in the United States, focused on andragogy. The
term andragogical model was borrowed from European ed-
ucation (Knowles, 1990; Knowles et al., 1985). Expanding
the traditional pedagogical learning models used with chil-
dren to incorporate learning characteristics and needs of
adults, this developmental model proposes that the accu-
mulated life experiences of adults give them different
CHAPTER 9 The Teaching-Learning Process     ●
141

teaching and learning needs from younger learners. In the
pedagogical model, learners are generally dependent or
passive, have few prior experiences to build on, and have
external pressures from parents and others to learn some-
thing (Knowles et al., 1985, pp. 8–9). Adult learners are
self-directing, have experiences that have shaped their
identity, have experienced life events or a learning need
that triggers their readiness to learn, have internal moti-
vators, and demand an available, knowledgeable resource
to assist them with practical problems and identified needs
(Knowles et al., 1985).
As Knowles and associates (1985) have pointed out,
adult learners often initially assume the comforting and
passive learner roles of pedagogy, but then an inner conflict
develops with their self-directing nature. The adult’s ego
system is based on his or her self-concept and accumulated
knowledge and experiences, whereas a child is gratified by
impressing a parent, teacher, or peer. Knowles’s develop-
mental focus is demonstrated further with his identification
of life problems by age group in early, middle, and later
adult life groups. He specified life problems in the areas of
vocation and career, home and family life, personal devel-
opment, enjoyment of leisure, health, and community 
living (Knowles, 1990). Recall Bandura’s (1995) sources
of self-efficacy (mastery experiences, vicarious experiences,
social persuasion, and physiological and emotional states)
that are consistent with this view.
Adult teaching and learning depend on both physical
and psychological climates. Physical climate relates to the
learning environment. The setup of the room should not
replicate a stilted lecture setting and should promote com-
fort so that the learners can focus on learning needs and
problem-solving. Knowles emphasized the need for adults
to feel at ease in the learning environment, which leads to
the psychological climate for the adult learner. Knowles
identified seven characteristics of the psychological climate
conducive to adult learning: mutual respect, collaborative-
ness, mutual trust, supportiveness, openness and authen-
ticity, pleasure, and humanness (Knowles et al., 1985, 
pp. 15–17). Knowles viewed the teacher as the catalyst and
facilitator. A common thread running through teaching
and learning strategies for adults is mutuality—mutuality
in diagnosing, planning, learning, and evaluating. One key
to successful teaching and learning in adults is their active
involvement throughout the process.
On the basis of Knowles’s work, Vella further identi-
fied 12 principles for effective adult learning. Then, she
further considered six concepts from quantum thinking
(relatedness, holism, duality, uncertainty, participation,
and energy) and reinforced the 12 principles with adult
education, especially in the use of dialogue to promote 
optimal learning:
●Participation of the learners in their needs and 
resources assessment
●Safety in the environment and the process
●Sound relationships between teacher and learner 
●Careful attention to sequence of content and 
reinforcement
●Praxis (action with reflexion, or learning by doing)
●Respect for learners as decision makers
●Holistic ideas, feelings, and actions 
●Immediacy of the learning (relevancy)
●Clear roles and role development (participation in the
search for meaning)
●Teamwork and use of small groups
●Engagement of the learners in all domains of what they
are learning
●Mutual accountability for the learning. (Vella, 2002,
pp. 30–35)
These principles are consistent with our holistic view of
patients as unique individuals with respect for their envi-
ronment. It is critical to promote their empowerment to
address their distinctive healthcare learning needs. Con-
tent and actions must be meaningful to them for learning
to occur.
Transformation Theory
The basis for transformative learning is meaningfulness of
experiences, especially for adults who have accumulated
knowledge, cultural and environmental patterns, and ex-
periences. Think about the last time you said to yourself,
“I’m not going to do that again!”
One of the major theorists in this area is Mezirow
(2000), who defines transformative learning as follows:
. . . the process by which we transform our taken-for-
granted frames of reference (meaning perspective, habits
of mind, mind-sets) to make them more inclusive, dis-
criminating, open, emotionally capable of change, and
reflective so that they may generate beliefs and opinions
that will prove more true or justified to guide action.
(pp. 7–8)
Transformative learning involves three stages: critical
reflection of the situation, changing and integrating the
new perspective and understanding, and acting on that
new understanding. The key is the active and rational process
of reflective thinking on past experiences and personal 
assumptions of the situation. Mezirow (2000) describes
this process as reflective discourse: “that specialized use of
dialogue devoted to searching for a common understand-
ing and assessment of the justification of an interpretation
or belief” (pp. 10–11). This use of dialogue with adult
learners is similar to the one described by Vella and can
be used effectively in individualized or small group learn-
ing environments as adults are actively challenged to find
meaningfulness of the information.
Critical reflection involves challenging one’s assump-
tions and beliefs. Do they still hold true, or is there perhaps
a better way that is acceptable to the adult learner in his or
her unique context? This active and thoughtful process is
personally determined. This theory of learning has been de-
scribed as a “theory in progress” as further research evolves.
In addition, a current nursing model has evolved from this
theory (Fawcett, 2006, p. 504). Transformation theory is
consistent with nursing’s view of the person as a thinking,
feeling, rational being with past experiences and attributes
that influence behavior. But notice that the learners are 
the active ones in the process. They are assisted with the 
information for critical reflection, but they must challenge
their “habits of mind” and “resulting points of view” that
Mezirow (2000) refers to as the two components of one’s
“frame of reference” (p. 17). Then the person must decide
whether to take action on the revised perspective as the
142
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

transformation. As Kippers and Boden (2012) point out,
“at the heart of transformative learning is the notion of 
partnership” (p. 7). The involvement of the patient in the
learning experience must be a partnership for effectiveness. 
Adult learning theories have evolved from a humanistic
philosophy, focusing on the unique combinations of tal-
ents and abilities possessed by an individual based on prior
learning, skill sets, and contextual factors. 
Multiple Intelligences Theory
Another theory of learning focused on the person proposes
multiple intelligences (Gardner, 1993a, 1993b, 1999,
2006), all of which are considered equally important and
are most often found in combination in individuals to dif-
fering degrees. This theory looks beyond cognitive capac-
ity and encourages a view of the individual’s cognitive
profile. The basis for the theory is Gardner’s observations
of and work with children, adults, prodigies, and gifted,
normal, autistic, brain-damaged, and autistic savant indi-
viduals. Gardner (1999) has characterized the seven dif-
ferent multiple intelligences (Table 9.1) according to eight
criteria, two each derived from the biological sciences, log-
ical analysis, developmental psychology, and traditional
psychological research. From his original work, Gardner
(1999) refined his definition of an intelligence as:
A biopsychological potential to process information that
can be activated in a cultural setting to solve problems or
create products that are of value in a culture. (pp. 33–34)
Gardner (2006) further refers to these intelligences as a
“set of abilities, talents, or mental skills” (p. 6). The theory
of multiple intelligences allows a greater focus on individ-
uals and their unique talents and combinations of abilities
in their contextual setting. As Gardner (1999) points out,
“what matters is the use of intelligences, individually and
in concert, to carry out tasks valued by a society” (p. 208).
In addition, “owing to hereditary, early training, or in all
probability, a constant interaction between these factors,
some individuals will develop certain intelligences far more
than others; but every normal individual should develop
each intelligence to some extent, given but a modest op-
portunity to do so” (Gardner, 1993a, p. 278). Gardner has
also thought about two additional intelligences that he in-
dicates meet most of the criteria from his theory. Although
Gardner (2006) does not seem fully committed to these
additions, he names the potential for the naturalist and the
existential intelligences as the 81⁄2 Intelligences (p. 21).
Consider for a moment that you will be caring for 
two patients following hip replacement surgery and are
planning discharge teaching. One patient is an architect
who designs custom homes and meets with his customers
for at least an hour before he develops the house plans to
ensure that he truly understands their desires and ideas.
The other is a retired English professor who is concerned
about the rehabilitation schedule and the completion of a
collection of essays that he must submit to his publisher
in six weeks. Your approach to each will differ on the basis
of his unique talents and abilities.
The perspective of multiple intelligences is humanis-
tic, focusing on the unique combinations of talents and
abilities possessed by an individual. These unique indi-
vidual abilities are consistent with the practice of nursing
dealing with the individual and environmental influences.
Given the variety of learning theories, however, applica-
tion may involve selecting a more eclectic approach. 
Specific teaching guides involve our consideration of
human beings and the environment, given the particular
health focus in contemporary nursing practice. Certain
principles provide direction in this process.
TEACHING AND LEARNING
PRINCIPLES
The philosophical and theoretical structures of any dis-
cipline reflect how the teacher and learner are viewed. In
nursing, we view both the teacher and the learner as
thinking, reasoning, active participants involved in the
CHAPTER 9 The Teaching-Learning Process     ●
143
TABLE 9.1
Seven Intelligences (Gardner, 1999, pp. 42–43)
Intelligence
Description
Example(s)
Linguistic
Language and verbal
Poets, writers, speakers
Logical-mathematical
Mathematical cognitive skills in logic, mathematics, 
Mathematicians, scientists
and science
Spatial
Use of mental models of spatial world and 
Sailors, engineers, artists, pilots, 
manipulate patterns
architects
Musical
Innate musical sense and talent in performance, 
Musicians, composers
composition, and appreciation
Bodily kinesthetic
Use of body or parts of the body in 
Dancers, athletes, craftspeople, 
problem-solving
mechanics
Interpersonal
Understanding intentions, motivation, and 
Politicians, salespeople, teachers, 
desires of others
clergy
Intrapersonal
Understanding of self and one’s life course
Self-awareness

teaching-learning process. We believe individuals are 
influenced by and influence their environment. These
environmental influences, including persons, events, and
tangible surroundings, must be taken into account when
any teaching behavior is considered. In terms of health,
teaching in nursing reflects information to promote 
or maintain the highest level of health attainable. The
teacher’s and the learner’s definitions of health and well-
ness influence physical, psychological, emotional, and
spiritual health as personal determinants of behavior.
Teaching
Although the teaching-learning process is an interactive
communication process, its component parts must be con-
sidered. With this in mind, several processes can be seen
readily as inherent in the teaching-learning process, such
as communication and critical thinking. Teaching is more
than the transmission of information. The information
must be received, understood, evaluated, and accepted by
the learner. Teaching has been described as “an intentional
and reasoned act” (Anderson et al., 2001). Benner (1984)
has identified the teaching-coaching function of the expert
nurse working with acutely ill patients:
1. Use timing to capture learning readiness and 
motivation.
2. Assist with integration of learning into lifestyle.
3. Demonstrate an understanding of patient’s own 
interpretation of the situation.
4. Provide interpretations of situations and rationales 
for new behaviors.
5. Show, through example, coaching behaviors in 
culturally sensitive issues. (pp. 77–94)
These characteristics demonstrate the active roles of
both teacher and learner in the process. Readiness and
motivation must be present for both the teacher and the
learner during the process. The best teachers are those
who truly believe in the information they are sharing and
can communicate this belief. They provide the excite-
ment, or at least some reinforcement, for the learner, who
wants to know more. The active role of the learner in the
process is vital, because passive learning rarely results in
persistent change in attitudes or behaviors. The motiva-
tion of teacher and learner are also important, as the
teacher demonstrates an understanding of the learner’s
unique characteristics and perspective on the subject 
or situation. Providing information is the traditional role
of the teacher, but doing so in the context of the learner’s
reality helps provide a rationale for behavior changes. 
Finally, coaching through example, with sensitivity, is the
essence of expert teaching and nursing.
Teaching is an interactive process, not a unidirectional
transmission of information. As Benner demonstrates in her
examples of expert nurses, we also learn from those we teach.
Learning
Learning is the perception and assimilation of the infor-
mation presented to us in a variety of ways. Learning 
contains the following characteristics:
●Perception of new information
●Initial reaction to the information
●Ability to recall or repeat the information (simple
knowledge level)
●Rejection or acceptance of the information 
(understanding)
●Use of the information in a similar situation 
(application)
●Critical analysis of the information
●Incorporation of the information into the value 
system (evaluation)
●Use of the information in various situations and 
combinations (creation)
An increasing complexity emerges here as the learner
moves from receiving and recalling information through:
We see this process in the patient who accepts informa-
tion on the importance of breast familiarity, is able to per-
form the self-examination, does so on a regular basis in
combination with mammography and clinical examinations,
teaches her daughter or mother the process, and is now 
investigating regular screening for colon cancer for herself
and family members. This patient has moved from simple
knowledge to incorporation of knowledge into the value sys-
tem and behaviors of herself and other family members.
Learning can be enhanced via specific strategies or 
approaches with learners. Learning is not a linear process
of providing information and assessing recall and perfor -
mance. We must also take into account the person in his
or her environment and culture, and the various domains
of learning. Consider the difference between the knowledge
and the consistent demonstration of behaviors. We may
“know” something but either consciously or subconsciously
decide not to demonstrate that behavior. For example, a
patient may have been prescribed a low-fat diet and can
Understanding
⇓
Application
⇓
Analysis
⇓
Evaluation of the knowledge 
acquired and creation of new 
applications
144
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
ONLINE CONSULT 
Albert Bandura at 
https://psychology.stanford.edu/abandura
Howard Gardner at 
http://howardgardner.com/
Abraham Maslow at 
http://www.maslow.com
B. F. Skinner at 
http://www.bfskinner.org

tell you all about foods with high fat content, but may also
decide that ice cream is a part of the diet, ignoring its fat
content.
Domains
A domain is merely a category. There are three domains
of learning or knowledge: affective, cognitive, and 
psychomotor.
The affective domain includes attitudes, feelings, and
values. For example, how the patient feels about the impor-
tance of or the positive effect on his life of a needed dietary
change will influence whether he will make the change.
Often, the nursing goal is to incorporate the value of the diet
into the person’s belief system. Cultural influence, cultural
differences in the individual, family, or group, and the
nurse’s professional influences can all either positively or neg-
atively affect whether the goal is achieved, however.
The cognitive domain involves knowledge and thought
processes within the individual’s intellectual ability. Using
the same example of the patient and the low-fat diet, the
cognitive domain involves understanding the information
received about nutrition, diet, health conditions, and indi-
cations. The ability to conceptualize types of foods, gram
counts, and dietary needs involves comprehension, appli-
cation, and synthesis at an intellectual level before the 
patient performs the actual behaviors.
The psychomotor domain is the processing and demon-
stration of behaviors; the information has been intellectually
processed, and the individual is displaying motor behaviors.
To continue with the example, psychomotor skills are
demonstrated by how the patient has performed on the
changed diet, as seen in food diary reporting, preparing and
ingesting appropriate foods, and even laboratory reports
evaluating bodily functions.
It is important to consider these three domains in the
teaching-learning process. Behavioral objectives, teaching
content and methods, and evaluation of learning can be
very different for the three domains and should be distinct.
Remember, to achieve a lasting change in observed behav-
ior (psychomotor domain), the value of that change 
(affective domain) and the intellectual capacity to under-
stand and process the information for behavioral changes
(cognitive domain) must first be present.
Consistent with the philosophical focus of nursing, the
learning environment is important in any teaching or
learning activity. Physical comfort as well as respect and 
acceptance of the learner are humanistic factors. The con-
sumer of healthcare may also have physical, sensory, or psy-
chological deficits that can interfere with comfort in the
learning environment or in the teaching-learning process,
as seen in the physiological and emotional source of self-
efficacy proposed by Bandura. Comfort measures should
be validated with the patient before and during the process.
Physical comfort can include such things as the tempera-
ture of the room and the height or firmness of the chairs,
in addition to specific effects of acute or chronic health
problems. Sensory concerns include the extraneous sensory
stimuli perceived by the teacher or learner in the learning
environment, such as sounds, smells, and sights. In addi-
tion, the patient may have sensory deficits—such as visual,
hearing, or information processing problems—that may
interfere with learning or may require more resources. 
Psychological deficits, including fear, problems with cog-
nition, attention span, effects from medications, and worry,
can be major inhibitors to teaching and learning. Recep-
tivity of the learner to new and different ideas is vital. 
Creative measures taken by the nurse as teacher to provide
for an environment conducive to learning are essential.
To achieve a lasting change in observed behavior
(psychomotor domain), the value of that change
(affective domain) and the intellectual capacity
to understand and process the information
for behavioral changes (cognitive domain)
must first be present.
COGNITIVE LEARNING STYLES
The cognitive learning process is a broad area that examines
how meaning is perceived, evaluated, remembered, rein-
forced, and demonstrated. Piaget gave us information on
childhood cognition through observations of his own and
other children and provided us with the concepts of 
assimilation and accommodation. Recall that assimilation
is the acquisition and incorporation of new information
into the individual’s existing cognitive and behavioral
structures, and accommodation is the change in the indi-
vidual’s cognitive and behavioral patterns based on this
new information. Cognitive learning styles have been 
discussed with varied research for over 50 years in an 
attempt to improve teaching and learning outcomes.
In the mid-1980s, Kolb (1981) identified specific
learning styles as concrete experience, reflective observa-
tion, abstract conceptualization, and active experimentation.
And the research and the discussion continue as we seek
to understand better how individuals acquire meaning and
knowledge. Increasingly we are concerned with the active
involvement of the learner in the process, for learning to
truly occur. Cognitive learning styles or preferences are
simply the ways learners perceive, think, organize, use, and
retain knowledge. To understand this concept, merely 
recall colleagues in the same learning environment—those
who took copious notes, those who just listened, and those
who made notes or drawings on what they interpreted the
message in the lecture to be. Understanding the differences
in cognitive styles can help teachers and learners make more
informed decisions about which learning activities will 
be useful or productive to learners as individuals and as
members of learning groups or communities.
Stemming from a basis in Jung’s theory of the
unconsciousness and personality, the Myers-Briggs
Inventory was developed and has been used
widely in education and business applications
for learning styles. This personality inventory
uses the following four scales to identify 
16 personality types that can be further 
classified for learning preferences:
●Introversion–Extroversion
●Sensing–Intuition
CHAPTER 9 The Teaching-Learning Process     ●
145

●Thinking–Feeling
●Judging–Perceptive
Check your style with a similar inventory at 
http://www.humanmetrics.com/
cgi-win/JTypes2.asp
Teaching and learning strategies have developed to
match each learner with the teaching resources most effective
for his or her learning style or to develop strategies to adjust
to the prevalent teaching style. The main types of learning
styles look at preferences for visual learning (reading or
watching), auditory (listening or talking), and kinesthetic
(doing or participating). For example, some learners are
highly visual in the way they perceive information and derive
meaning. For these learners, a structured lecture with few vi-
sual aids is a less desirable learning environment than one
enhanced by visual aids. Others learn better through the
written word, either by reading or note taking. Learners who
are highly auditory in their learning preference derive greater
meaning from just listening to the information. The theory
of multiple intelligences can be useful in this situation, to
further tailor the learning to the individual’s talents.
Assessment data on learning style may be obtained from
the patient in a nursing interview rather than formal testing
inventories used with larger groups. In essence, good as-
sessment of the learner is vital to ensure the most effective
teaching and the most efficient and enjoyable learning.
READINESS AND LEARNING
Readiness is an important concept in learning, regardless
of the learner’s chronological age. Readiness relates to the
developmental needs and tasks of individuals. Consider
the views of two developmental theorists: Erikson (1963)
described readiness as critical periods, whereas Havighurst
(1972) referred to readiness as sensitive periods or the
“teachable moment.” For teaching to be effective and
learning to take place, the readiness of the learner must be
a prime consideration. A good example is the issue of com-
pliance and noncompliance in the patient group.
Compliance is an often misused and misunderstood
concept. We talk about patients being noncompliant when
they do not follow their discharge or healthcare teaching
instructions. The reasons and background for the behavior
in the patient group must first be realized and understood,
not assumed. Compliance is yielding to the desire of oth-
ers, possibly as a result of threats or force. But as we see
later in the change process, threats and force do not bode
well for a permanent change in behavior. Human behav-
ioral change is more effective when one is personally in-
volved in the process. Specifically, how do learning and
readiness apply to receiving and accepting information for
a change in lifestyle? Consider the teenager undergoing
dialysis who carefully monitors his sodium intake after
dialysis but fills up on fast food the day or morning before
the scheduled dialysis. Is this truly noncompliance or de-
velopmental maneuvering with peer pressure and dietary
restrictiveness? Now, consider the adult cardiac patient
with a strict dietary sodium restriction. Is noncompliance
by this individual due to a stubborn adherence to food
preferences, culture, or custom, or perhaps failed health
teaching for change because of a failure to achieve learning
readiness?
The learner must be willing to change and accept the
learning need. When this occurs, readiness for learning is
apparent. This can be seen in terms of King’s (1981) the-
ory of goal attainment: Both the nurse and the patient
must be focused on and sensitive to the same goal. Readi-
ness for the learning and teaching is then present. Ulti-
mately, the effectiveness of the teaching methods and
content is evaluated on the basis of the learning that did
or did not take place. Learning readiness involves the fol-
lowing factors: human motivation, understanding or cog-
nitive level, and applicability or acceptability.
Literacy and language issues are an additional consid-
eration in readiness. For the individual with a low literacy
level, years of adaptive behavior may disguise the inability
to read or process basic information. Likewise, an individ-
ual who speaks English as a second language may perceive
information differently. In each situation, the individual
may be unwilling to indicate to the nurse that he did not
fully understand or accept the information presented. In
addition, literacy and health literacy are different, with
health literacy compounded with new or different health
terminology that has different translational or cultural im-
plications. The readiness to learn is inhibited by additional
factors in these cases. As recommended by Singleton and
Krause (2009), “understanding a patient’s level of health
literacy requires an assessment of the patient’s linguistic
skills and cultural norms and the interpretation of these
skills and norms into health literacy strategies for the 
patient’s plan of care” (p. 6). In addition, the Joint Com-
mission (2013) has estimated that there are more than 
300 languages spoken in the United States and more 
than 90 million Americans have low health literacy (with
difficulty understanding and using health information),
thus recommending communicating health information
that encompasses language needs, individual understand-
ing, and cultural and other barriers (p. 1). 
Motivation
Motivation in humans is a manifestation of internal and
external personal and environmental factors that cause
people to respond to a situation in the way that they do.
Motivation has been classically viewed as needs, drives,
and impulses that cause behavior. One view of motivation
in humans is Maslow’s Theory of Human Motivation,
based on the hierarchy of basic needs. Maslow (1954)
identified 16 propositions about human desires or moti-
vation that implied a complex interrelationship in human
motivation based on internal and external factors as per-
sonally interpreted by the individual. Maslow’s work in-
dicated that the hierarchy of human needs is based on
motivation. But motivation is as intricate as the person,
not merely inherent impulses and drives. And even more
focused on the individual, Bandura (1995) proposed that
efficacy beliefs play a key role in the self-regulation of 
motivation in that people motivate themselves and guide
their actions anticipatorily by the exercise of forethought
and form beliefs about what they can do (p. 6).
The concept of motivation, then, considers the person’s
interpretations of the situation and his or her ability and
146
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

willingness. Readiness, therefore, involves motivation and
understanding. Understanding is the cognitive ability to
perceive and intellectualize the content and consequences
of information. Bandura believes that most actions are
under anticipatory control, as humans use symbolic repre-
sentation to envision future outcomes of behavior. The way
the person views these future consequences of behavior be-
comes the motivation to behave or proceed in the present.
This concept relates well to health teaching, in that the 
patient can be motivated to learn with a realistic anticipa-
tion of the situation and consequences. Nurses can recog-
nize patient anticipation  in the assessment phase, through
interview data, diagnosis of the teaching and learning
needs, and development of behavioral objectives. During
this process, motivation can be assessed and stimulated by
the patient as well as by the professional nurse.
Cognitive Level
A person’s cognitive level is a component of understanding;
the content provided must be at the person’s level of under-
standing. Piaget’s theory of cognitive development describes
the differences in learning levels between the sensorimotor
infant developing object permanence and the older child
who is able to learn abstract mathematical skills through for-
mal operations. Information must be available to the person
at his cognitive level for processing and development of
knowledge. The person may require concrete examples to
envision future consequences or may be able to handle more
abstract or even philosophical examples. An important con-
sideration here is the patient’s state of health. Current phys-
iological or psychological functioning and medications may
interfere with reasoning and understanding as well as with
attention span. Readiness for health teaching in this instance
may be at different levels, depending on physical and emo-
tional functioning.
Applicability and Acceptability
Another component of readiness for the teaching-learning
process is applicability and acceptability of the informa-
tion. The person must perceive that the information is 
applicable to him or her, as an individual, a member of
the family, or a member of a group. If the person denies
that a health problem exists, he or she will not be ready
for health teaching in that area. The information is not
perceived as personally applicable. Acceptability means that
the information must be within the person’s worldview.
Cultural influences are important, because values and 
belief systems influence understanding and acceptability
of information. The health problem and readiness must
be seen in the context of the individual’s belief system.
This is an important relationship, as we see in the health
belief model. Cultural assessment data provide important
information on the patient’s belief system that should be
incorporated into the teaching-learning process.
PRACTICAL TEACHING TIPS
Developing behavioral objectives sets the stage for
the teaching-learning process. Objectives lead to the plan-
ning phase with selection of appropriate teaching strategies
and methods, and evaluation of both the learning out-
comes and the teaching process.
Writing Behavioral Objectives
The purpose of writing behavioral objectives is to provide
a frame of reference for the intended outcomes of the
teaching-learning activity for both the teacher and the
learner. The use of behavioral objectives gives us a focus
on learners and evaluation of their experiences with spe-
cific measures for behaviors. Behavioral objectives are the
intended outcomes of the learners, not the teacher’s goals
for the activity.
Think of behavioral objectives in terms of the learner’s
“who, what, where, when, and how.” In viewing the indi-
vidual components of behavioral objectives, consider those
listed at the start of this chapter. Initially, there is the stem
statement, “On completion of this chapter, the reader will
be able to. . . .” This provides the “who”—the reader of
the chapter, and the “when”—after completion of the
chapter. The “what” and “how” are the action-oriented
outcomes that the learner will demonstrate in the listed
behaviors. Behavioral objectives do not address all of the
content that will ultimately be included in the teaching
plan. Rather, the “what” in the behavioral objectives is 
the outcome we wish to evaluate after the teaching has 
occurred. Consider the chapter objectives to determine the
“how” and “what” information:
1. Discuss (how) the components of teaching and 
learning (what).
2. Examine (how) diﬀerences in the ways people learn
(what).
3. Describe (how) methods to assess learning readiness
and motivation (what).
4. Propose (how) diﬀerent teaching methods for a 
variety of learning needs (what).
5. Devise (how) a plan for patient education that 
contains behavioral objectives, a content outline 
with appropriate teaching methods, and methods for
evaluating learner outcomes (what).
This example focuses on the learner at the end of the
prescribed learning activity, with action verbs—discussing,
examining, describing, proposing, and devising—as their
outcome ability, describing “how” they should be able to
perform.
The next focus is on the complexity that you as
the evaluator (whether learner or teacher) wish to see
demonstrated at the end of the activity. This is the degree
that can be measured, or the “where.” The type and com-
plexity of the outcome behavior are determined by the
level of the learning domain.
CHAPTER 9 The Teaching-Learning Process     ●
147
ONLINE CONSULT 
Joint Commission Hospitals, Language & 
Culture at 
http://www.jointcommission.org/assets/
1/6/ARoadmapforHospitalsfinalversion727.pdf
Think Cultural Health at 
https://www.thinkculturalhealth.hhs.gov/

When developing behavioral objectives, be sure to 
consider the domains of knowledge. Further, within each
domain there is a leveling process, or progress in attain-
ment of increasingly complex skills. From the work of
Bloom and other teaching and learning theorists, a revised
two-dimensional taxonomy was developed. The revised
taxonomy table considers the interrelationship of two 
dimensions: knowledge and cognitive processes (Anderson
et al., 2001). This is the knowledge or the “what” you wish
the learner to acquire, and the cognitive process is the
demonstration or “how” the learning is evaluated. The tax-
onomy table allows objectives to be developed that address
both knowledge and processes. Consider that the nursing
goal for the patient is to be at the procedural knowledge
level to apply a dressing change at home but also at the
factual knowledge level to evaluate signs of infection or
monitor the response to a prescribed medication.
Knowledge Dimension
In this revised taxonomy table, the knowledge dimension
represents the four rows of the table with the following
knowledge categories:
●Factual, as the basic elements
●Conceptual, or the interrelationships among elements
●Procedural, or demonstration of a set of skills
●Metacognitive, as the highest level of awareness of the
thought processes. (Anderson et al., 2001)
Consider the difference of these categories in nursing
practice, as in the case of a sterile field. “Factual” is simply
the knowledge of the components. “Conceptual” would be
the understanding of the interrelationship, as with spillage
and contamination of the field. “Procedural knowledge”
would be in the performance of a dressing change and
maintenance of the field. “Metacognitive knowledge”
would occur during practice with an unanticipated occur-
rence and resolution using critical thinking skills. In patient
education, we strive for the procedural level, for the return
demonstration of a set of skills, as in the dressing change
needed at home and the protection of the surgical or
wound site.
Cognitive Processes Dimension
In the revised taxonomy table, the cognitive process di-
mension is represented in the six columns of the table as
the following levels of increasing complexity:
●Remember, as recognizing and recalling
●Understand, as interpreting, exemplifying, classifying,
summarizing, inferring, comparing, and explaining
●Apply, as executing and implementing
●Analyze, to include differentiating, organizing, and 
attributing
●Evaluate, or making judgments based on certain 
criteria
●Create, or developing a new process (Anderson et al.,
2001)
Cognitive processes in this taxonomy build from the
simple recall of facts to the extrapolation into a new
process. Continuing to use our example, we want the nurse
in a preceptor position for a senior student or a new gradu-
ate to use cognitive skills through evaluation for the main-
tenance of the sterile field in all practice applications with
the novice nurse or nursing student. In advanced practice,
however, the nurse would consistently use all processes in
the domain for the specialty area, including the creation of
new processes within the selected scope of practice. In the
scenario of patient education, the goal would be for the 
patient to be able to remember, understand, and apply spe-
cific skills, and to analyze and evaluate when professional
intervention is needed, as in the case of potential infection
or a complication.
In the cognitive processes dimension, we first have
the knowledge received through recall or recognition.
Next, we proceed to an understanding of the information.
The final levels of the cognitive domain are applying the
information, analyzing, evaluating the information, and
finally creating for application of the knowledge in other
situations. Consider the levels in the cognitive processes
domain with the following action words in your behav-
ioral objectives for teaching a patient about his or her
condition:
1. Knowledge implies simply that the learner has per-
ceived the information and can report it back to the
teacher. Action verbs such as identiﬁes, recalls, recog-
nizes, and repeats are useful for behavioral objectives 
at this knowledge level of the cognitive domains, such
as the ability to recall a list of the signs of infection in
a learning situation.
2. At the next level, the learner demonstrates understand-
ing of the knowledge, based on the four levels of the
knowledge dimension. Action verbs for behavioral ob-
jectives at this level include explains and compares, as
illustrated by the patient who can explain how to look
for redness indicating infection in a surgical wound.
3. The third level of the cognitive domain is application,
demonstrating the ability to relate the learning to a
situation. The following action verbs are appropriate
for behavioral objectives for the learner’s outcomes at
this point: applies, demonstrates, employs, and uses. For
example, “The patient uses the dressing change skill at
home after discharge.”
4. Further critical thinking occurs at the next cognitive
level of analysis. The learner steps back and analyzes
the information objectively. Action verbs useful at this
level of complexity include assesses, appraises, organizes,
and diﬀerentiates. Now the patient has determined the
need to call the physician’s oﬃce for evaluation of 
potential complications from the surgery.
5. Evaluation occurs at the next level of cognitive
processes in which judgment is an essential compo-
nent. Action verbs appropriate for this level include
evaluates, tests, monitors, and critiques.
6. Creation is the highest level of the cognitive domain,
in which the learner manipulates the concepts from
the learning in new combinations and situations. Ac-
tion verbs addressing this level of complexity in the
taxonomy include creates, designs, devises, constructs,
and generates.
Both the cognitive and psychomotor domains appear
in the taxonomy table with the focus on knowledge and
148
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

the cognitive process. The psychomotor domain is easily
apparent in the application of the knowledge. It is impor-
tant to include behavioral objectives at the various knowl-
edge levels to measure patient progress from simple to
complex skills. For example, suppose you have taught a
newly diagnosed diabetic patient to self-administer insulin.
As the teacher, you must be able to see how the learner-
patient has accomplished this task, beyond the simple 
return demonstration with saline injections that you 
observe. At the next level of manipulation of the psy-
chomotor skill, the learner demonstrates the entire proce-
dure of proper injection of insulin, from filling the syringe
to disposing of the supplies. Precision of the psychomotor
skill is demonstrated when the learner can perform the in-
jection on schedule with a sense of comfort in her ability
in the process, expressed with the phrase “Demonstrates
skill in the procedure.” Articulation, or full use of the skill,
is demonstrated when the diabetic patient is able to 
manage at home with insulin, including testing blood 
glucose for additional needs during stressful periods. This
is reflected in the phrase “Uses results of blood glucose
monitoring to regulate. . . .”
The highest level of skill acquisition comes when the
individual has a sense of competence and the skill has 
become a natural part of his routine; the individual can
determine signs of hyperglycemia or hypoglycemia and
self-test as naturally as she dresses or bathes. The individual
has incorporated the process sufficiently to spend a month
traveling with a sense of independence, comfort, and con-
trol in the process. Action terms reflecting this level include
“Independently monitors and effectively regulates admin-
istration of insulin.” These actions demonstrate Bandura’s
concept of mastery experiences in self-efficacy.
The affective domain is less apparent in the revised tax-
onomy table but is inferred in the higher levels of knowledge
and cognitive processes. In fact, the creators of the revised
taxonomy propose that “nearly every cognitive objective has
an affective component” (Anderson et al., 2001). For the
affective domain, complexity progresses from receiving to
responding, valuing, organizing values, and finally charac-
terizing or standing for certain values transmitted. Consider
the newly diagnosed diabetic patient. Acceptance of her
condition is vital to developing long-range personal care
skills. But this is a difficult domain to measure because 
values and attitudes are more difficult to assess than knowl-
edge or psychomotor skills. Although action verbs for 
the affective domain include receiving, responding, valuing,
organizing values, and characterizing, this is a difficult do-
main of learning to evaluate. We must rely on the individual
to communicate her attitudes, feelings, and values honestly
through verbal and nonverbal behaviors.
Behavioral objectives are the intended action-oriented
outcomes of an educational process. These objectives are
tools for teaching, learning, and evaluating. Evaluation
data can provide useful feedback on whether the learner
has achieved the objective or requires repetition, reinforce-
ment, or revision.
Planning for Learning
Once the assessment of learners and teachers takes place
and the behavioral objectives have been developed, we
must plan for the specific content and how it will be trans-
mitted to the patient group. But this sounds very directive
and controlling. Recall that with the adult learner, the
focus is on the holistic individual based on the assessment
data and the mutually acceptable objectives.
The assessment data obtained earlier in this process
have been used to define and describe the patient, includ-
ing characteristics, attributes, learning assets and deficits,
readiness, and specific needs to be addressed. This proce-
dure was conducted with the patient as an individual,
family, or group to diagnose the learning needs and 
prepare for continuation of the process. Next, behavioral 
objectives were identified to guide the process and plan
for the evaluation of outcomes. Now we must plan the
content, teaching strategies and methods of delivery,
learning resources, and specific evaluation procedures.
Traditional lesson plans are frequently prepared in a
column format. The first column contains the behavioral
objectives developed for the learning activity. Subsequent
columns contain learning content, teaching strategies or
principles, learning resources, evaluation methods, and
timing, which can all be viewed easily in relation to the
behavioral objectives. A sample format is posted on the
Intranet site for this text. This format is actually the plan
for the teacher to ensure that the behavioral objectives are
addressed with appropriate content, methods, materials,
and evaluation methods. It may have to be more flexible
based on patient needs.
The learning content is the specific content outline 
designed to meet the objective. Teaching strategies relate
to the objective and the specific content, including varia-
tions for the learning setting and patients. Suggested learn-
ing resources and materials—perhaps identifying the
appropriate tear sheet, pamphlet, learning module, or Web
site—are proposed to enhance the teaching strategy and
meet the learner’s cognitive style, especially if a group or
lecture presentation is appropriate for the general audience
but may not meet the needs of individual learners. These
learning resources may also need to be provided as trans-
lations in the native language of the learner for reinforce-
ment in the home environment.
All of the planning so far is the proposal for the teaching-
learning activity. Before implementing it, one must 
specify evaluation methods along with a proposed time 
frame for the process. Implementation of the teaching-
learning process can then proceed using the strategies iden-
tified in the plan. Evaluation of the teaching-learning process
is essential and is designed to address the behavioral objec-
tives at the level of the taxonomy specified for acquisition of
affective, cognitive, and psychomotor behaviors.
Consider the simple example of a 56-year-old female
outpatient with unstable hypertension without angina.
She has come to the health clinic after being denied
health insurance last week because of the prepolicy 
examination requirement. Blood pressure measurements
ranged from 210/105 to 185/100 on two consecutive 
visits. She has had no serious illness or hospitalizations,
but she is leaving town in five weeks to visit family
abroad for a month. Today, her doctor prescribed daily
antihypertensive medication and a low-sodium diet. The
patient has verbalized the need to lower her blood pres-
sure for insurance purposes. She also reported that she
CHAPTER 9 The Teaching-Learning Process     ●
149

has used a salt substitute for the past three days and has
continued to play tennis three times a week. Her descrip-
tions of nutritional intake indicate high dietary fat and
sodium content in meals prepared at home and selected
in restaurants. She volunteers much information about
cooking for her family as well as attending gourmet cook-
ing classes at the local college, which she signed up for
because she wanted to watch the teacher and ask ques-
tions rather than just read the cookbooks.
The assessment data indicate a teaching deficit, learn-
ing readiness, and the motivation to adhere to a treatment
plan within a confined time frame. You and the patient
determine that you will schedule individualized teaching
sessions with her for her next four weekly visits. Behavioral
objectives for this teaching-learning process might include
the following:
1. Explains food selection and preparation techniques to
maintain a low-sodium diet.
2. Monitors blood pressure regularly.
3. Uses nisoldipine as prescribed, monitoring for side 
eﬀects, adverse eﬀects, and toxicity.
4. Makes appropriate food choices and preparations for
maintenance of a low-sodium diet.
5. Organizes activities including maintenance of her 
exercise program.
6. Reapplies for health insurance coverage.
The objectives should be mutually acceptable to both you
and the patient.
The learning content addresses the behavioral objec-
tives by teaching food selections and revisions needed with
food preparation, periodic assessment of blood pressure,
administration of medication, monitoring for side effects
and toxicity, and maintenance of a healthy nutritional and
exercise program. Teaching strategies are then selected for
the individualized cognitive style of the patient, using 
resources such as videos and written information to take
home. Evaluation methods are proposed to address each
of the behavioral objectives at the following four weekly
visits, specifying the time frame for each activity.
Teaching Strategies and Methods
Teaching strategies and methods are geared toward 
accomplishing the behavioral objectives in light of the
audience. Selection is also based on how the content can
best be delivered and addresses the affective, cognitive,
and psychomotor domains of learning. Teaching meth-
ods generally are lecture presentations, demonstrations,
discussions, modeling, role-playing, individualized 
instruction, programmed instruction, computer-assisted
instruction (CAI), other simulations, and group activi-
ties. This is the overall plan for the learning experience.
The instructional methods that best meet the learner’s
needs must still be determined.
Selection of a teaching strategy and some combination
of teaching methods depends on the patient. For a group
of 24, a lecture format followed by breaking out into 
four small groups to apply the lecture content may be
quite appropriate for presenting information on child de-
velopment and wellness practices. For a group of three
new mothers on the postpartum unit, a lecture would be
impersonal and less effective than a small-group discus-
sion on plans for returning home with their healthy
neonates. In our example of the patient with hyperten-
sion, individualized teaching would be most effective, 
because this individual prefers the interaction with a
teacher and has a limited time frame to accomplish the
behavioral outcome objectives. The characteristics of the
patient group and the intended outcomes, therefore,
guide the selection of appropriate teaching methods. For
further information on selected instructional methods,
refer to Table 9.2.
Enhancing the delivery of content and improving
learning on the basis of the cognitive style of the patient
require careful selection of learning resources. Teaching
aids and instructional technology are frequently used in
teaching situations to enhance the content and actively 
involve the learner in the teaching-learning process. Using
assessment data, consider how the patient told you that he
or she best learned information in the past. When prepar-
ing for larger group presentations, consider how smaller
group activities or assignments will address the needs of
learners who do not do their best in a large group setting.
Remember that adults learn best when actively involved
in the process, both intellectually and physically. Think of
ways to move the patient from a passive to an active learn-
ing situation.
A major consideration is how to enhance the content
for the learner’s own cognitive style. Some learners are
highly perceptive in one or several senses in learning in-
formation. They may be highly visual, auditory, tactile, or
perceptive in some combination of these senses. Recall the
usefulness of understanding multiple intelligences. When
you select teaching resources, consider whether the learners
are highly visual and obtain and process information
mainly through observation of the world around them.
These learners do well with visual aids that enhance the
content presented in the teaching strategy, such as with
presentation graphics or with information presented
through pamphlets, handouts, and online searches.
Compare a visual style to the learner whose auditory
sense is the most perceptive. Effective auditory teaching aids
include video clips, audiotapes, and recordings with well-
developed sound presentations. In addition, this learner may
do well using the voice notes recorder on a smartphone and
reinforce learning through review later. For the individual
who prefers to touch and manipulate new information, plan
for active involvement in the teaching and learning through
demonstrations, models, and samples.
Adults learn best when actively involved 
in the process. Think of ways to move 
the patient from a passive to an 
active learning situation.
Another consideration is whether the learner prefers
to be an individualist or to have other people in the learn-
ing environment for interaction and stimulation. Some
people learn in a very individualistic way. They prefer to
obtain information and then go their own way to process,
analyze, and synthesize the material. Having a group dis-
cussion to evaluate and apply information directly after
it is presented in a lecture is stressful, if not torturous, to
150
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

this individual, who needs time before sharing thoughts
or applying the information. Alternatively, some learners
enjoy interactions and learning in a stimulating group 
environment. A large, impersonal lecture is deadly boring
to this learner, who thrives on group discussion to work
on questions posed in a case study. But learners are gen-
erally not easy to classify; these characteristics can be com-
bined over a wide range. Pure types are rare, and the
challenge is to find those teaching strategies and resources
that enhance the teaching content and promote learning
for each individual. Resources for different cognitive
styles are presented in Table 9.3.
In addition to patient teaching, contemporary nursing
practice consists of collegial teaching and learning oppor-
tunities such as educational programs, lectures, demon-
strations, group discussions, professional and clinical
conferences, case studies, clinical preceptorships, grand
rounds, and chat rooms, just to mention a few. The same
steps are involved in this process as with assessment, diag-
nosis of learning needs, development of behavioral objec-
tives, preparation of a plan with selection of teaching
strategies and resources, and evaluation methods. The dif-
ference generally lies in the size of the group, which can
range from a one-to-one collegial conference to a meeting
of the unit staff to a large interdisciplinary group of 
professionals who are interested in the latest research on a
selected topic. With a large group, it is essential to assess
the prevalent characteristics of the learner population. This
includes the overall learning need that will become the
topic for the presentation. Behavioral outcomes should 
address what the learners are expected to have gained as
knowledge and skills at the end of the program or teaching
session, because they will be the ones providing the evalu-
ation data. Teaching strategies may include an interdisci-
plinary team approach, especially for presentations across
disciplines to foster the development of knowledge and
collaboration. Although active learning in small groups 
is highly effective with professional colleagues, this can 
effectively occur as a small-group breakout phase after the
basic information has been presented in a large group pre -
sentation format. Highly effective learning resources in
this case include multimedia presentations with presenta-
tion graphics, video clips, posters, models, photographs,
pamphlets, handouts, and reading lists. A word of warning
about presentation graphics: Do not read the entire pre -
sentation from the screen. Present the pertinent points
graphically to engage the audience rather than lose their
attention (Box 9.2). In addition, the presentation may be
printed as handouts for the audience in which the learner
can add additional pertinent notes. After the program or
presentation, the teacher or program coordinator receives
completed evaluation forms from the program participants
CHAPTER 9 The Teaching-Learning Process     ●
151
TABLE 9.2
Sample Teaching Methods
Method
Lecture
Group discussion
Computer-assisted 
instruction
Simulated 
environments, 
games, activities, 
and role-playing
Strategies
• To make more learner-centered, provide time for questions/
discussion or break-out sessions for discussion
• Must address mixed audience of visual, auditory, and 
kinesthetic learners
• Focus on important concepts and provide aids for 
application of knowledge by learners
• Requires good skills in group dynamics by the teacher to
keep on the topic and focus the learning
• Allows opportunities for application of critical thinking skills,
problem-solving, and teamwork by the group
• Ideal method for transformative learning
• Mixed audience of visual, auditory, and kinesthetic learners is
still a consideration on a smaller scale 
• May include demonstrations for active learning
• Requires careful design to maintain interest 
• Requires motivation and persistence by learner
• Design promotes individual learner feedback but limited
teacher-learner interaction
• Requires environmental staging and engaging activity
• Role-play may be done with descriptive scripts or be more
flexible
• Requires development of rapport and group skills
• Actively engages learners when the situation is presented in
a nonthreatening and nonpersonal manner and viewed as
“What if . . .”
Characteristics
Large group 
Controlled by the 
teacher
Small group 
Learner-centered as 
long as it does not 
revert to a mini-lecture
Learner-centered, 
independent and 
self-paced activity
Learner-centered, 
with an individual or 
in small groups

152
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
TABLE 9.3
Teaching Methods and Resources to Address the Cognitive Style 
of the Learner
Cognitive Style
Teaching Methods
Teaching Resources
Highly visual
Small-group discussion, role-playing, 
Multimedia presentations, videos, charts, posters, 
simulations, demonstrations, 
models, photographs, whiteboards/bulletin boards, 
programmed instruction, 
publications, handouts, reading lists, CAI with 
computer simulations
effective graphics, e-mail, chat rooms
Highly auditory
Lecture and discussion, role-playing, 
Videos, recordings (prepared audios or 
simulations, demonstrations
self-recorded tapes or notes), CAI with auditory 
reinforcers, telephone follow-up
Highly tactile
Small-group activities, individualized 
Models, bulletin boards, samples, books, pamphlets, 
teaching, role-playing, simulations, 
prepared handouts, CAI requiring responses to 
demonstrations, games, 
cues, chat rooms, e-mail
programmed instruction, 
computer simulations
Highly interpersonal
Small-group discussion, role-playing, 
Videos, audios, charts, posters, models, 
simulations, demonstrations, 
photographs, pamphlets, CAI, teleconferencing, 
some computer simulations
chat rooms, e-mail
Highly individualistic
Lecture, simulations, demonstrations, 
Multimedia presentations, videos, audios, charts, 
programmed instruction, computer 
posters, models, photographs, books, handouts, 
simulations, computer searches
paper and pencils for note taking, CAI, e-mail
BOX 9.2
Tips for Presentations
●Do not read from the screen. Presentation graphics should be used to engage the audience. Use the information on
the screen as talking points to keep you on track, not the audience distracted.
●Do not use all capital letters—they imply shouting and are not visually engaging.
●Use a clear font, not a fancy script that is hard to read and distracting for the audience.
●Limit the information on a slide or screen; for example, use only four or ﬁve lines on the screen and make sure
they are legible from the back of the room.
●Keep it simple. Limit the graphics and displays to important information without distracting background colors or
graphics.
●Consider the essential number of slides or displays, in terms of content, allotted time, essential information, and
printing costs if you are planning on handouts.
●Carefully proofread to avoid spelling and grammatical errors without reliance on the spell-checker function (e.g.,
three, their, and there are all in the dictionary).
●If you plan on distributing copies of your presentation as handouts or electronically, make sure the copies are read-
able, have the same information as your presentation, and include appropriate citations, if applicable.
●Remember your highly auditory learners—speak to them, while assisting your visual learners, who are watching
the display rather than you.
●For the active learner, consider a follow-up activity to reinforce the content you presented.
and then develops an overall analysis based on the evalua-
tion data the participants provide.
Evaluation of Outcomes
Evaluating outcomes is a vital component of the teaching-
learning process. It may be ongoing and may lead to impor-
tant information for revisions needed in subsequent sessions.
Although evaluation strategies focus on both the teaching
and the learning that occurred, the primary focus is on the
learner. Is the learner able to demonstrate the outcomes en-
visioned at the beginning of the process? As in the nursing
process, the evaluation phase of the teaching-learning process
is used to assess the effectiveness of the process and whether
the patient has resolved a knowledge deficit.
Patients are more difficult to evaluate than traditional
student learners. Cognitive domain learning activities of
students are easily measured with paper-and-pencil tests
and computer-adaptive testing that assesses knowledge and
cognitive processes. In the patient teaching situation, such

tests are rarely used except in research or large group situ-
ations. Patient evaluation can be complex, with problems
related to timing, access, continuity, measurement, and
other factors. In addition, recall that adult learners should
be involved in evaluating their own learning. Normally,
patient evaluation is done with methods such as return
demonstrations, observation, diaries, rating scales, discus-
sion, and electronic communication.
We used different action verbs to address the three 
domains of learning and levels, or taxonomy, within each.
Capturing evaluation data requires specificity in the be-
havioral outcome objective. The objectives should indicate
how you are measuring the outcomes of the teaching-
learning process.
The affective domain consists of attitudes, feelings, and
values. Evaluation data should show how the learner pro-
gressed from receiving to internalizing the values mutually
agreed on for the learning. In the case of a newly diagnosed
diabetic patient, the teacher and the learner must be able
to measure or see attitudinal or value changes through 
verbal and nonverbal behaviors. The action verbs in the af-
fective domain are receiving, responding, valuing, organizing
values, and characterizing specific values. We need the indi-
vidual to communicate her attitudes, feelings, and values
in verbal and nonverbal behaviors. Methods of evaluation
in this area include interviews, discussions, and observa-
tions that demonstrate certain beliefs and values. Another
means of evaluating affective learning is a reflective diary
in which the patient can record feelings and problems that
arise between teaching sessions. Analyzing the content of
the diaries with the patient can provide useful information
on the affective domain as well as knowledge gaps in cog-
nitive processes. And with the availability of electronic
communication, cognitive and affective domains can be
evaluated via e-mail or electronic postings.
In the cognitive domain, knowledge builds from simple
recall to understanding, application, analysis, evaluation,
and synthesis or creation of information. Interviews and
discussion with patients can be used to evaluate whether
the learner can repeat or report back the information as
knowledge gains. For understanding, the patient describes,
explains, and compares information during the interview.
Application of the information can be evaluated as the 
patient demonstrates and uses the information, providing
specific examples of how this was done. Critical thinking
and analysis take this one step further, as the patient 
explains problems and difficulties that arose and steps taken
to solve problems without the presence of the teacher. Eval-
uation by the learner occurs when the patient determines
which method worked best. Creation involves manipulat-
ing the learning in new combinations and effectively 
applying the information to a similar problem or situation.
The learner has devised a new way of handling a situation
on the basis of information obtained in another area. 
Occasionally, post-tests are used in patient teaching, but
test anxiety is a major deterrent to their use for some 
patients. The evaluation strategies most useful for both
teachers and learners to gauge cognitive learning are dis-
cussion, questioning, and allowing for description, whether
through face-to-face or by electronic means.
Evaluating patient outcomes in the psychomotor do-
main is easiest through direct observation of skill attain-
ment. At the simplest level of psychomotor skill attainment
is the patient’s ability to imitate, as seen in a return demon-
stration. This allows one to assess understanding and the
ability to perform a specific skill, such as testing one’s blood
glucose. But demonstration of a skill in a clinical setting
can be artificial, because the patient’s own environment
often has additional factors not present in the healthcare
agency, such as shared bathrooms or medication storage
problems in a home with toddlers. Flowcharts, diaries, and
checklists are easy for patients to use as reminders and 
reinforcers in the home, and they can then be discussed at
the next clinic visit or teaching session interview. The level
of psychomotor skills can be assessed with a checklist or
flowchart in terms of following instructions to proper
scheduling, precision, and problem-solving in the proce-
dure. The patient can be encouraged to note problems 
encountered and how they were handled, to demonstrate
skills in both cognitive and psychomotor domains. Con-
sider the use of electronic calendars or smart phones in
some patient situations. This will provide evaluation data
for both the patient, as the learner, and the nurse, as the
teacher.
In our example of the patient with hypertension, we
implemented an individualized teaching strategy within a
limited time frame to accomplish the outcome objectives
aimed at the cognitive and psychomotor domains. One
method of evaluation would be for the patient to maintain
a diary, including daily food intake and exercise, and list
daily blood pressure measurements, and medications
taken. This evaluation method provides visual data that
address the initial five behavioral objectives agreed on by
both the patient and the nurse. At each of the four patient
visits or teaching sessions, the information in the diary is
reviewed and discussed. When both the learner and the
teacher are satisfied that these objectives have been met,
control of the hypertension problem may be present. A
health certificate can then be provided by the primary care
provider so that the last objective, reapplication for health
insurance coverage, can be attempted with an outlook for
success. At the final teaching visit, the patient and the
nurse discuss the strategies and resources used during the
four-week process, to evaluate the teaching that took place.
Electronic communication provides an additional resource
for follow-up and evaluation.
Evaluation data can provide useful feedback that 
objectives have been met or that repetition, reinforce-
ment, or revision is needed. Teaching strategies, like
methods and resources, should be evaluated by both the
teacher and the learner. Discovering what worked and
what may have worked better helps the learner view the
process and reinforce the learning while sharing with the
teacher ways to improve and strategies for the future. 
Important factors here are encouragement and openness
for honest and constructive evaluation data from both
teacher and learner.
CHAPTER 9 The Teaching-Learning Process     ●
153
ONLINE CONSULT 
National Health Information Center at 
http://www.health.gov/nhic/
Health Literacy Information at 
http://nnlm.gov/outreach/consumer/hlthlit.html

154
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
In 2010, the Association of Women’s Health, Obstetric, and Neonatal Nurses (AWHONN) submitted infor-
mation on assessment and care of the late preterm infant included in the National Guidelines that included 
discharge planning including patient education, counseling, and validation of knowledge including signs and
symptoms of jaundice and strategies to prevent infection (NGC, 2010, p. 1).
Question: How will you use this information as part of discharge planning for the new family with a late
preterm infant? First, consider a mother and child within a traditional family with one older sibling. Second,
consider the mother and neonate discharged to a family environment with a maternal grandmother as the
leader of the family. Remember to consider your patients as individuals and families and their learning needs.
Source: National Guideline Clearinghouse. (NGC). (2010). Assessment and care of the late preterm infant. Evidence-
based clinical practice guideline. Retrieved from http://www.guideline.gov/content.aspx?id=24066&search=
discharge+planning#Section420
K E Y  P O I N T S
●There are several schools of learning theories. Major examples of these theories are behaviorism, gestalt,
social cognitive, humanism, andragogy, transformative learning, and multiple intelligences.
●Teaching is more than transmitting information. The information must be received, understood, and
evaluated by the learner.
●Learning is the perception and assimilation of the information presented to us in a variety of ways.
●Characteristics of learning include:
●Perception of new information
●Initial reaction to the information
●Ability to remember or repeat the information
●Rejection or acceptance of the information (understanding)
●Use of the information in a similar situation (application)
●Critical analysis of the information
●Incorporation of the information into the value system (evaluation)
●Use of the information in various situations or combinations (creation)
●There are three learning domains:
●Affective—attitudes, feelings, and values
●Cognitive—knowledge and thought processes
●Psychomotor—demonstration of behaviors
●Cognitive learning styles look at how information is interpreted, influences from others, and reasoning
methods. Teaching and learning strategies can then be developed to match the learner’s needs and 
resources.
●Readiness occurs when the learner is willing to change and view the learning need and includes motivation,
understanding, and applicability or acceptability. 
●The purpose of writing behavioral objectives is to provide a frame of reference for the intended outcomes
of the teaching-learning activity for both the teacher and the learner with the focus on the learner and
their intended learning outcomes.
●Teaching strategies are geared toward accomplishing the behavioral objectives in light of the audience.
●Evaluating learning outcomes of the teaching-learning process is essential and is designed to address the
behavioral objectives at the taxonomic level specified for the acquisition of affective, cognitive, and 
psychomotor behaviors.
●Evaluation of teaching strategies by the learner provides a further view of the process and reinforces the
learning.

CHAPTER 9 The Teaching-Learning Process     ●
155
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Explain which theory of learning and learning style is applicable to the way in which you learn best.
2. Remember those two patients following their hip replacement surgeries? One is an architect who designs custom
homes and meets with his customers for at least an hour before he develops the house plans to ensure that he
truly understands their desires and ideas. The other is a retired English professor concerned about the rehabilita-
tion schedule and the completion of a collection of essays that must be submitted to his publisher in six weeks.
Plan for their individualized discharge teaching using the theory of multiple intelligences.
3. Develop a staff conference as a seminar presentation on a clinical topic, with appropriate content for a unit 
staff of 10 registered nurses, 6 licensed practical nurses, and 15 certified assistive personnel. Propose assessment
data on the learners and ways to match cognitive styles and teaching strategies for the group. Be prepared to
participate in an online or class discussion, to be scheduled by your instructor.
4. Read the case studies in the Case Study Bank on the Intranet site and be prepared to discuss them in class.
5. Review the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter, and discuss it in the context of the
contents of the chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.
REFERENCES
Anderson, L. W., Krathwohl, D. R., Airasian, P. W., 
Cruikshank, K. A., Mayer, R. E., Pintrich, P. R., 
Raths, R. E., & Wittrock, M .C. (Eds.) (2001). A 
taxonomy for learning, teaching, and assessing: A revision 
of Bloom’s educational objectives (abridged ed.). 
New York: Longman.
Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Bandura, A. (1995). Exercise of personal and collective 
efficacy in changing societies. In A. Bandura (Ed.), Self-
efficacy in changing societies (pp. 1–45). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Bandura, A., Thoresen, C. E., & Plante, T. G. (2007). Spirit,
science, and health: How the spiritual mind fuels physical 
wellness. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Benner, P. (1984). From novice to expert: Excellence and 
power in clinical nursing practice. Menlo Park, CA: 
Addison-Wesley.
Bloom, B. S. (Ed.). (1956). Taxonomy of educational objectives.
New York: Longman.
Erikson, E. H. (1963). Childhood and society (2nd ed.). 
New York: Norton.
Fawcett, J. (2006). Nursing philosophies, models, and theories:
A focus on the future. In A. M. Tomey & M. R. Alligood
(Eds.), Nursing theory: Utilization and application (3rd ed.,
pp. 499–518). St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
Gardner, H. (1993a). Frames of mind: The theory of multiple 
intelligences (2nd ed.). New York: Basic Books.
Gardner, H. (1993b). Multiple intelligences: The theory in 
practice. New York: Basic Books.
Gardner, H. (1999). Intelligence reframed: Multiple intelligences
for the 21st century. New York: Basic Books.
Gardner, H. (2006). Multiple intelligences: New horizons. 
New York: Basic Books.
Havighurst, R. J. (1972). Developmental tasks and education
(3rd ed.). New York: David McKay.
Joint Commission. (2013). Facts about patient-centered communi-
cations. Retrieved from http://www.jointcommission.org/
assets/1/18/Patient_Centered_Communications_7_3_12.pdf
King, I. M. (1981). A theory for nursing: Systems, concepts,
process. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Kippers, S. M., & Boden, C. J. (2012). Pathways to transformation:
Learning in relationship. Charlotte, NC: Information Age.
Knowles, M. S. (1990). The adult learner: A neglected species
(4th ed.). Houston, TX: Gulf.
Knowles, M. S., & associates (1985). Andragogy in action. 
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Kolb, D. (1981). Learning style inventory. Boston, MA: McBer
and Company.
Maslow, A. H. (1954). Motivation and personality. New York:
Harper.
Maslow, A. H. (1971). The farther reaches of the human mind.
New York: Viking Press.
Mezirow, J. (2000). Learning to think like an adult: Core 
concepts of transformation theory. In J. Mezirow & 
associates, Learning as transformation: Critical perspectives 
on a theory in progress (pp. 3–33). San Francisco, CA: 
Jossey-Bass.National Guidelines Clearinghouse. (2010).
National Guideline Clearinghouse (NGC). 2010. Assessment
and care of the late preterm infant. Evidence-based clinical
practice guideline. Retrieved from http://www.guideline.gov/
content.aspx?id=24066&search=discharge +planning#
Section420
Rogers, C., & Freiberg, H. J. (1994). Freedom to learn
(3rd ed.). New York: Merrill/Macmillan.

Singleton, K., & Krause, E. M. S. (2009). Understanding 
cultural and linguistic barriers to health literacy. Online
Journal of Issues in Nursing, retrieved from http://www
.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/ANAMarketplace/
ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/TableofContents/Vol142009/
No3Sept09/Cultural-and-Linguistic-Barriers-.aspx 
Skinner, B.F. (2010). A brief survey of operant behavior. 
Retrieved from http://www.bfskinner.org/BFSkinner/
SurveyOperantBehavior.html
Vella, J. K. (2002). Learning to listen, learning to teach: The
power of dialogue in adult education. San Francisco, CA: 
Jossey-Bass.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ginsburg, H. P., & Opper, S. (1988). Piaget’s theory of intellec-
tual development (3rd ed.). New York: Prentice-Hall.
Knowles, M. S. (1980). The modern practice of adult education:
From pedagogy to andragogy (Rev. ed.). Chicago, IL: Follett.
Mezirow, J. (1991). Transformational dimensions of adult 
learning. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
ONLINE RESOURCES
Joint Commission
http://www.jointcommission.org
Carl Jung
http://www.cgjungpage.org
Howard Gardner
http://howardgardner.com/
Abraham Maslow
http://www.maslow.com
Myers & Briggs Foundation
http://www.myersbriggs.org/
156
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Apply systems theory to an organizational scenario.
2. Examine the goals, structure, functions, and culture of selected organizations.
3. Differentiate between management and leadership.
4. Analyze factors included in motivational and humanistic management and leadership theories.
5. Examine the various managerial and leadership roles for and skills of nurses in a healthcare
organization.
6. Apply methods for appropriate and effective delegation in a healthcare scenario.
7. Inventory your personal knowledge, skills, and abilities in management and leadership for professional
nursing practice.
Organization
Organizational Structure
Centralization
Decentralization
Flat Organizational Structures
Tall Organizational Structures
Organizational Functions
Management
Motivational Theories
Theory X
Theory Y
Hygiene Factors
Motivational Factors
Theory Z
Executive
Leadership
Organizational Culture
Power
Negotiation
Delegation
157
“I am where I am because 
I believe in all possibilities.”
Whoopi Goldberg
Key Terms
Managing and Leading 
in the Organization
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
10

Max Weber (1947), the renowned German sociologist, de-
scribed an organization in economic and social terms 
as “a system of purposive activity of a specified kind” 
(p. 151). An organization is simply an arrangement of
human and material resources for some purpose, as in the
creation of some institution or agency to meet a stated aim.
Organizations range from the single-purpose association to
multipurpose, monolithic institutions. They have been
studied for years in an effort to improve outputs as the in-
tended mission or purpose. Organizations can be viewed in
terms of their structure, function, and people. Most simply,
they can be envisioned as the open system described in
Chapter 2, with inputs, throughput or transformations, and
outputs. But understanding organizations, especially health-
care organizations, becomes more complex as organizations
expand, contract, and redefine themselves. Changes in 
organizations are particularly relevant in light of the need
for more operational transparency that occurred following
recent and highly visible organizational and executive 
scandals, along with a view of the global economy.
This chapter examines how organizations are structured,
managed, and envisioned to meet their intended mission
through management and leadership. Nursing management
and leadership in an organization must have a broad 
environmental, interpersonal, and dynamic vision, beyond 
patients and equipment in an isolated hospital or agency.
Principles of scientific management, management the-
ory, and leadership have undergone continued investigation
and change. Many writers have defined management, but
no one definition of management has been accepted uni-
versally. The same is true on theories of leadership and the
characteristics of a true leader. They discuss the leader and
the manager, sometimes interchangeably. Buckingham
(2005) looks at the difference in terms of the individual’s
focus: the leader on the future, the manager on staff, and
outcomes for the organization. Use of effective management
and leadership theories and skills are critical components 
of professional practice. Communication, negotiation, and
delegation are important factors for both the manager and
the leader in the organization. At times, the nurse may func-
tion as manager, as leader, or as both manager and leader.
However, there are differences between effective manage-
ment and true leadership.
We will initially consider the organization, since this
knowledge is essential to both the manager and the leader
for development of skills and abilities in managing and
leading. Next, we will consider management theory and
applications followed by leadership, since this is often the
course that nurses follow in their professional careers—
first effectively managing care for patients and care
providers and then providing leadership for effective, car-
ing, and innovative care for patients of nursing. Applying
these concepts to contemporary nursing practice is vital
for the operation of a successful organization and an 
effective healthcare system.
ORGANIZATIONS AS SYSTEMS
Systems theory provides a useful perspective for viewing
the internal and external influences with any organization.
In fact, Bertalanffy (1968), who provided the foundations
of general systems theory, stated that the only meaningful
way to study an organization is as a system (p. 9). The actual
selection of a particular systems model depends on the com-
plexity and uniqueness of the organization. It requires care-
ful assessment of the organization, examining mission and
goals, present structure, and the prevailing management and
leadership styles being used to guide practice and address
organizational goals. Interestingly, Hall and Tolbert (2005)
conclude that because organizations are so complex, orga-
nizational theories must be used in combination to address
the complex phenomena (p. 207).
Healthcare delivery systems are complex open envi-
ronmental systems. Agency administrative policy and 
operational structures internally influence and guide the
system. The surrounding environmental system of the 
organization is the healthcare arena that provides the pro-
fessional, specialization, economic, and additional value
structures for the organizational unit and its members.
The broader social environment reflects societal norms
and values through the real and potential needs of health-
care consumers. Direct or indirect linkages among all 
system parts are assumed to be essential for effectiveness
and continuity. Let us look further at this complex system
and the internal environment.
Intricacies of an Organization
A useful perspective for viewing the intricacies of a health-
care organization is to envision it as a system affected by
other systems and within the larger healthcare and societal
systems (environment or suprasystem). In addition, health-
care organizations focus on people and have the dynamic
influence of emerging technology. As a review, consider the
principles of systems theory and organizational characteris-
tics in Table 10.1. To understand the organizational system,
a careful assessment is needed of the organization’s goals and
values, hierarchical structure, leadership and management,
interpersonal and communication systems, resources and
technology, boundaries, and external environments.
Goals and Values
Goals and values are implied in a statement of purpose or
philosophy and are the basis of the organization’s existence.
The institutional mission statement and original or revised
incorporation papers contain important information on
values—how people within the organization are viewed as
customers, staff members, and administrators. Humanistic
versus mechanistic values are apparent in these statements
of mission, philosophy, and purpose. Organizational values,
as the reasons for existence, are provided in vision or goals
statements.
Hierarchical Structure
The hierarchical structure is the institutional design and
lines of authority, as demonstrated by a bureaucratic or
organic structure. The system structure is described in 
formal documents and further interpreted in operation
through informal sources, such as technical staff, to deter-
mine how tasks are actually accomplished in the organi-
zation. The structural design is intended to accomplish the
system’s mission to provide the intended services through
158
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

leadership and management practices. This structure may
be further characterized as complex or simple, centralized
or decentralized, tall or flat.
Leadership and Management
Leadership and management styles vary among organiza-
tions. As seen later in this chapter, these styles may be 
directed from the topmost governing board or corporate
officers downward. For example, in a bureaucratic orga -
nization leadership may come from the board of directors,
through the chief executive officer (CEO), and be highly
prescriptive. Management in this bureaucratic organiza-
tion operating under Theory X will also be directive. 
Alternatively, leadership and management may be more
flexible and participatory, as in Theory Z organizations.
Leadership will guide the organization and drive the mis-
sion. The management style pervasive in the organization
should be meeting the organizational goals.
Communication Systems
The interpersonal and communication systems are the psy-
chosocial and interdisciplinary relationships unique to the
organization—role relationships, attitudes, and values of
people and groups within the system. Examine the expected
behaviors of each member of the organization and the 
interrelationships, in both formal and informal interactions.
The organizational culture is a vital consideration here.
Resources and Technology
Resources and technology are the physical resources and 
collaborative human resources. Physical resources include
operating and investment capital, equipment, informa-
tion systems, services, and tangible assets. Collaborative
resources are the additional skills and expertise to provide
added input to system functions; this includes the re-
sources for evidence-based practice.
External Environments
Once the system itself is characterized, move outward into
the environmental layers of the open system, or the
suprasystem. To understand the external environment, we
must first reevaluate the organization’s mission. As in any
business, this provides us with market forces. Is a product
being produced or a service being delivered, and to whom?
Consider the differences between the environments of
local organizations focused on a specific community and
those of national or multinational conglomerates. To un-
derstand an organization’s initial environmental layer,
focus first on the immediate output of the system. Suppose
we are looking at a home care agency. This type of agency
CHAPTER 10 Managing and Leading in the Organization     ●
159
TABLE 10.1
Systems Theory Components and Organizational Characteristics 
of a Healthcare Agency
Systems Theory
Organizational Characteristics of a Healthcare Agency
Wholeness
Organizational components of the agency or units and their interactions with 
each other and their environments, including the healthcare system, community, 
patient base, external payors, and corporate system (if applicable). The components 
cannot stand alone.
Hierarchical Order
The organizational structure as defined through functional and reporting hierarchy 
and demonstrated by the leadership.
Exchange of Information 
Boundaries among the different organizational units internally and with external 
(Openness)
boundaries and environments. This includes communication internally and 
externally.
Progressive Differentiation
Self-organization. The system become increasingly complex to meet the stated 
organizational goals for the healthcare of individuals and groups. This is the area 
of rules and management procedures to meet the goal for positive healthcare 
outcomes.
Equifinality
Patient needs and conditions, as well as provider differences, determine system 
outcomes. These are the interpersonal relationships and the technology to meet 
the organizational goals, but they may be met in different ways with individual 
circumstances in a dynamic open system.
Teleology
The behaviors in the internal environment, with an arrangement of human and mate-
rial resources, are directed to meet the intended aims. The actions and the behaviors
in the organization are directed at the goal for optimal healthcare outcomes. These
outcomes are defined in the organizational mission, values, and goals statements and
demonstrated by the membership.

provides home care within specific specialty parameters to
an identified service area. In the environment, we initially
have the local community with a specific geography, 
patient population, healthcare provider groups, payment
streams, resources, and healthcare needs. This local agency
has additional environmental influences from state and
federal regulatory bodies and agencies, professional disci-
plines, and the larger healthcare system.
Now, consider these factors with a larger healthcare
agency, which offers more services to a larger patient pop-
ulation, such as a health science center or teaching hospital
with a broader service menu and service area. We have to
consider the geography, patient population, healthcare
provider groups, payment streams, resources, and health-
care needs across the state or perhaps across several states.
Services may include not only acute and chronic care but
also multispecialty clinics, research and development
(R&D), and outreach programs. There are more care
providers, including students, faculty, and visiting special-
ists from various healthcare disciplines. There are also
more requirements and regulations from state and federal
regulatory bodies and agencies and professional disciplines,
just by virtue of the expanded services, funding streams,
and service expectations. Coordination with the broader
healthcare system must also be considered, as people come
from and return to their local areas. External forces also
include inputs of energy, information, materials, and myr-
iad technologies received from the environment, trans-
formed, and returned to the environment as outputs.
In an open system, all boundary influences must
be identified and relationships evaluated to discover inter-
relationships and effects. All external layers and interrelat-
ing systems are important factors for a true understanding
of the influences on any particular open system, as with
community support for a local nonprofit agency. They
may be positive when speakers at public hearings support
county funding. These environmental influences can have
unanticipated repercussions on the system, when this pre-
vious support interferes with corporate leadership or man-
agement decisions.
The healthcare environment can easily be seen as
highly complex, dynamic, and uncertain. Changes occur
constantly. Change is influenced by consumers, techno-
logical advances, government, and third-party payers.
The external forces in the broader environment provide
inputs into the system and affect internal operations and
resultant outputs, such as patient outcomes. Healthcare
organizations must respond to external forces in a rapid,
dynamic, and innovative manner and cannot remain
static. A humanistic philosophy, with its focus on the
people in an organization, is needed for a contemporary
and innovative healthcare organization. It is the people
of the organization that create, define, and fulfill orga-
nizational goals with the patient system as the focus. This
brings us to an examination of the various structures of
organizational systems.
ORGANIZATIONAL 
STRUCTURES
Mintzberg (1983b) has defined organizational structure as
“the sum total of the ways in which its labor is divided into
distinct tasks and then [how] coordination is achieved
among these tasks” (p. 2). Generally, when we think of 
an organizational structure, we conceive of some type of
hierarchy that tells us about positions or roles, responsi-
bilities, status, channels of command or reporting relation-
ships, and tasks to be accomplished. The picture that
comes to mind is usually a bureaucratic structure with a
multitude of “red tape” with which to contend. This is not
always the case. The appropriateness of the structure 
depends on the organization’s purposes (goals and values),
how outcomes are best accomplished (leadership and 
management), the people in the organizational system, the
resources and technology used or available, and influences
from the external environment(s). These system influences
provide us with information on the size and complexity
of the organizational structure.
The structure demonstrates the relationships among
an organization’s components and presents us with its de-
sign. Looking at healthcare organizations, we find two
general structures: bureaucratic and organic. Mintzberg
(1983b) described these two organizational designs at op-
posite ends of a continuum of standardization (Fig. 10.1).
This range gives us a way of viewing organizational struc-
tures. At one extreme is the controlled, mechanistic, and
standardized classic bureaucracy; at the opposite extreme
is the humanistic organization that contains no standard-
ized processes, outputs, or skills across the structure.
Healthcare organizations generally fall somewhere between
the two extremes, depending on their mission.
Bureaucratic Organizations
The most recognized and traditional organization is the
bureaucratic structure. A bureaucracy is a mechanistic
model focused on outcomes. Weber (1864–1920) pro-
vided the original bureaucratic model, with a high degree
of efficiency and control. His work has been translated and
interpreted frequently in research on organizations and 
organizational theory. Merton (1957) further defined a
bureaucratic organization as “a formal, rationally organ-
ized social structure involving clearly defined patterns 
of activity in which, ideally, every series of actions is func-
tionally related to the purposes of the organization” 
(p. 195). The bureaucratic organization has a hierarchical
structure with designated lines of authority and control.
The mission of the organization is all-consuming. Actions
to meet the purposes and directives are taken in lower 
160
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
Bureaucratic
Structure
Organic
Structure
High standardization of
processes, outputs, and
skills
Absence of
standardization
Figure 10.1 Mintzberg’s Continuum of Standardization
in Organizations.  (Adapted from Mintzberg, H. [1983b].
Structure in fives: Designing effective organizations. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.)

layers, whereas policy-making, authority, and control 
reside primarily in the upper layers of the organization.
Specific characteristics of a bureaucratic organization are
as follows:
1. A clear-cut division of labor
2. Diﬀerentiated controls and sanctions
3. Roles assigned on the basis of qualiﬁcations and 
technical eﬃciency
4. Clearly stated rules and conformity to regulations
5. A premium placed on precision, speed, expert control,
continuity, discretion, and optimal returns on input
6. Strict devotion to regulations
7. Depersonalized relationships (Merton, 1957,
pp. 195–196)
Examples of bureaucratic healthcare organizations are
depicted in Figures 10.2 and Figure 10.3. In these exam-
ples, management and control flow downward from the
hospital board through the CEO or chief operating officer
(COO), who is appointed by the board and is responsible
for the organization’s mission, whether for-profit or not-
for-profit. To accomplish these aims, the executive layer
is responsible to the CEO or COO. The executives receive
mandates and strategic initiatives from the board through
the CEO or COO and decide on priorities, plan imple-
mentation, and regulations. Executives, in turn, direct
their administrative staffs, and on down the line. Titles
and functional areas may vary among organizations but
each employee has a specific role in carrying out the orga-
nization’s mission.
A bureaucratic organization is structured, standardized,
controlled, and in many instances, authoritarian. Written
and unwritten policies and regulations are prevalent, as are
specified channels of command. Efficiency and effective-
ness in achieving the organizational mission are organiza-
tional values. Bureaucratic organizational structures are
seen in the older, traditional, and large authoritarian 
settings in which control and the ultimate mission of the
institution are all-consuming. External influences should
be predictable to obtain the most efficient functioning of
the organization. Channels of command and productivity
are important components of the system. But in recent
years, a move toward more flexible and humanistic orga-
nizational structures, focusing on environmental influences
along with employee involvement and job satisfaction for
higher productivity, has led to a transformation to more
innovative practices.
Organic Organizations
Organic organizational structures, or adhocracies, have
evolved to meet the needs of organizations composed of
humans in dynamic and sometimes complex environmen-
tal settings. The term adhocracy implies that the structure
is a design that has been developed to meet the organiza-
tional mission and specific goals. Hall and Tolbert (2005)
characterize these organizations as closely linked to their
environments with a network structure of control, con-
tinual adjustment and redefinition of tasks, and a com-
munication context of information and advice replacing
the traditional supervisory lines (p. 31). These organiza-
tions represent a movement away from the standardized,
mechanistic bureaucracies to humanistic forms arising out
of behavioral organizational research and management
CHAPTER 10 Managing and Leading in the Organization     ●
161
Board of Directors/Trustees with
Chief Executive/Operating Officer as Chair
Vice President
    for Medicine/
    Medical Director
Vice President
    for Finance
Vice President
    for Nursing/
    Director of Nursing
Vice President
for Patient
Services
Directors:
    Plant Operations
    Security
    Resource Mgt.
    Accounting
    Purchasing
    Contracts
    Payroll
    Public Relations
    Computer & EHR
    Legal Counsel
Head:
    Medicine
    Surgery
    OB/GYN/
        Neonatology
    Neurology
    Cardiology
    Oncology
    Pediatrics
    Anesthesiology
    Pulmonology
    Nephrology
Patient Care:
        Coordinators:
    Medical Units
    Surgical Units
    OB/GYN, Peds, Clinics
    Special
    Units/OR/PACU/ER
Directors:
    Staffing
    Practice & Research
    Education
    Quality Assurance
    Infection Control
Directors:
    Laboratory
    Pharmacy
    Radiology
    Social Services
    Food Service
    Supplies
    Housekeeping
    Volunteers
    Physical Therapy
    Occupational
        Therapy
Unit Coordinators
Staff Members 
Medical Staff 
Nursing Staff 
Staff Members
Figure 10.2 Example of flat bureaucratic structure of a community hospital.

162
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
Chief Financial Officer
Hospital Adminstrator
Board of Directors/Trustees
President
Vice President
    for Operations
Vice President
    for Patient Services
Vice President for Nursing/
Director of Nursing
Plant Operations
     & Security
Accounting
Resource Mgt.
Computer & EHR
Purchasing & Contracts
Payroll
Office Heads
Department Staff
Supervisor/Medical-Surgical
Supervisor/Specialty Units
Supervisor/Clinics, ER
Director/QA, Infection Control
Director/Staffing & Education
Director/Practice, Research
Patient Care Coordinatiors
Advanced Practice Nurses
RNs, LPNs, CNAs
Medical Services
Therapeutic Services
Diagnostic Services
Social Services
Housekeeping Services
Volunteer Services
Food Services
Office Heads
Department Staff
Figure 10.3 Example of tall bureaucratic structure of a community hospital.
theories. Mintzberg (1983b) proposed that this structure
is the most useful in a complex and dynamic environment
in which experts, managers, and staff from different disci-
plines cooperate on decentralized project teams to meet a
system output goal innovatively. These organic structures
focus on dynamic environments and rapid responses to
market demands. Several organic designs are seen in health-
care organizations. The most prevalent organic or adho-
cratic designs are functional, product, and matrix forms.
Functional Structure
A functional structure, like the bureaucracy, focuses on
organizational outcomes; but unlike a bureaucracy, it has
control and responsibility spread horizontally across the
system to meet specific organizational functions. Daft
(2007) notes that this structure is most effective when 
in-depth expertise is critical to meeting organizational
goals and the focus is on efficiency. However, the main
weakness “is a slow response to environmental changes
that require coordination across departments” (p. 102). A
functional form can therefore be used in an organization
with a specific function, such as a rehabilitative facility.
The function of the rehabilitative care across specialty lines
is the organization’s purpose. The people in the organiza-
tion have the decision-making authority for their services
in the organization. Functional units are thus arranged in
specialty areas, as illustrated in Figure 10.4.
The organization is designed to focus on the function
of delivering rehabilitative care to the consumer. Two
distinct functions are apparent in our example of this
functional form: (1) finance and administration of the
agency and (2) delivery of rehabilitative health care. An
executive director or president oversees the organization
with the assistance of two directors. The main organiza-
tional function of rehabilitative care delivery is structured
as specialty units under the direction of the healthcare
director. Fragmentation, duplication of services across
specialties, and poor coordination limit this design. This
limitation becomes more severe as the organization grows
in size and complexity—for example, when services in-
crease and the service area is enlarged.
Product Structure
A product or divisional structure is similar to the func-
tional structure except that the organization is focused
only on the product as the outcome, and not also on the
means to the outcome. The people and processes in
the product structure are grouped accordingly to meet the
intended aim with the goals of coordination and patient
satisfaction. The product structure promotes flexibility
and change with decentralized decision making, a focus
on product goals, and coordination across functions (Daft,
2007, p. 104). Consider the example of a large homecare
agency (Fig. 10.5). The product is home care services, with

attention being given to the needs and desires of the home
care patient. The product units are organized in terms of
nursing services, physical therapy, and speech therapy.
Each unit has a director responsible to the president of
the agency for the home care product. Vice presidents are
responsible to the president for general functions of
healthcare referrals, contractual services, personnel, and
marketing. Product units are thus arranged in specified
areas (nursing, physical therapy, and speech therapy),
with each being directed toward service coordination, 
referrals, contractual services, and marketing to meet 
consumer needs.
The product structure works well with an organization
whose services and marketing are directed at the consumer.
This design is flexible in a dynamic or unstable environ-
ment, because consumer needs and satisfaction are of prime
concern. Divisions are separated by product—nursing care,
physical therapy, and speech therapy. But duplication of
services is an immediate problem, especially in healthcare,
in which coordination of therapeutic regimens is vital for
the consumer.
Matrix Structure
To address the need to coordinate consumer services, an-
other adhocratic design combines the functional and
product forms. Multidimensional decision making and
responsibility are the features of a matrix organization. In
a healthcare agency, this can refer to the product of state-
of-the-art care and the function of provision of services
to the patient as the consumer. An example of the matrix
design is an organization whose mission is directed at re-
search and development and provision of care. Research
managers in interdisciplinary areas, such as aging, acute
infectious processes, mental health, rehabilitation, and
health promotion, are located on one side of the matrix,
CHAPTER 10 Managing and Leading in the Organization     ●
163
Executive Director
Director: Finance and Administration
Director: Healthcare Services
Finance, Payroll, & Accounting
Marketing & Public Relations
Quality Assurance
Nursing Services
Medical Referrals
Physical Therapy
Occupational Therapy
Music Therapy
Recreation Therapy
Speech Therapy
Social Services
Homemaker Services
Laboratory Services
Figure 10.4 Example of a functional organization: rehabilitative agency.
Figure 10.5 Example of a product form organization: home care agency.
Agency President
VP Healthcare Referrals
VP Personnel
VP Marketing
VP Contract Services
Director:
    Nursing Division
Director:
    Physical Therapy 
        Division
Director:
    Speech Therapy
        Division
Service Coordinator
Healthcare Referrals
Contract Services
Marketing
Service Coordinator
Healthcare Referrals
Contract Services
Marketing
Service Coordinator
Healthcare Referrals
Contract Services
Marketing

with specialized healthcare providers on the other side
(Fig. 10.6). People as leaders, managers, and workers,
along with tangible resources in the environment, are all
represented in the matrix cells. Although this design is
challenging, it is consistent with the core competency for
health professionals identified in Chapter 1 for working
in interdisciplinary teams.
Consider the example of home care for an elderly 
patient following a hip fracture. Care for the patient and
the family along the continuum would move from acute
care to short-term rehabilitation to home care, with 
interdisciplinary care providers—including home care
coordinators, therapists, and specialists—all contributing
to the decision making and service provision. The com-
plexity of this system is initially breathtaking. Both func-
tions and products must be considered in coordination
of the services needed by the patient. This is a collegial
structure with integrated functions and products that 
require multilayered decisions and a good deal of trust
and collaboration. The number of people involved in the
matrix for decisions varies. Larger organizations may 
involve only the leadership and managers in the matrix,
with traditional departmental structures evolving under
each manager. Smaller organizations, such as the earlier
example of a home care agency, could realistically involve
leaders, managers and providers in the matrix according
to the scope of services (product) and resources (human
and material as functions).
The matrix design promotes innovative practices as a
result of a consumer focus, in the context of current tech-
nology, emergent practice problems, research informa-
tion, and specialty practice. R&D issues are directed at
current practice, with experts from each area represented
for problem-solving and decision making. This matrix
164
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
CEO/President
Research Focus Teams
Aging
Research
Team
Infectious
Diseases
Research Team
Mental
Health
Research Team
Rehabilitation
Research
Team
Health
Promotion
Research Team
Service Providers
Primary
Care
Areas
Acute
Care
Areas
Chronic
Care
Areas
Rehab
Service
Areas
Home
Care
Areas
Figure 10.6 Example of a matrix organizational structure.

design is seen more frequently in health settings with a
dual focus, such as education and service or research and
service. The complexity of the design and problems with
integration of all appropriate people and resources are
the main disadvantages of the matrix form. Daft (2007)
describes its disadvantages more fully as follows:
1. Participants experience dual authority, leading to 
confusion and frustration.
2. Good interpersonal skills and extensive training of
participants are needed.
3. It is time-consuming, with frequent meetings and
conﬂict resolution sessions.
4. Participants must understand and adopt collegial
rather than vertical-type relationships.
5. Dual pressure from the environment is required to
maintain a balance of power. (p. 111)
Coordination problems are a definite disadvantage of 
adhocratic designs. Experts and project teams or divisions
are focused on innovation and targeting of specific outcomes.
This focus may represent only one piece of the mission of
the organization, however. Thus, good communication and
coordination are critical. But coordination problems are
many times outweighed by the advantages of flexibility, 
innovation, and human involvement.
As an additional note, the organization may have more
than one organizational structure, either embedded or
mixed. Recall Mintzberg’s (1983b) continuum of stan-
dardization in Figure 10.1. The healthcare agency may
have a formal organizational structure leaning toward a
bureaucracy as seen in Figure 10.3. But patient services
may have a distinct rehabilitative service with a functional
structure seen in Figure 10.4. This will add to the com-
plexity of leadership and management.
Structural Components for
Leadership and Management
Organizations are also categorized by how the components
are arranged, as centralized or decentralized and flat or tall.
Centralized and decentralized organizational structures 
relate to the lines of control and decision making within
the organization. Centralization occurs when the span of
control or management is in the classic bureaucratic style,
governed from the top downward. Authority, control, and
decision making occur from the leadership and in upper
management, with less participation from the lower levels.
Decentralization distributes authority downward in an 
organization, allowing decision making and control at local
levels. Reasons suggested for decentralization are to estab-
lish a more collegial and participatory model, resulting 
in employee involvement, performance, and satisfaction.
Also, the people who are actually involved in the service are
making the decisions about it.
Organizations can also be described as having flat or
tall structures, depending on the layers of differentiation
for authority, decision making, and coordination. Flat
organizational structures have a wide base and few layers
or tiers for decision making and authority. Decisions,
controls, and governance are widely spread across the 
organization in a horizontal differentiation. Tall organiza-
tional structures have more tiers and lines of command,
with less local decision making at the lower levels. Tall
organizations have more management levels, with lines
of command resulting in a vertically differentiated hier-
archical structure. Compare the organizational structures
in Figure 10.2 and Figure 10.3. Both are bureaucratic
structures, but decisions and work functions are spread
more widely across the organization in flat structures.
Deciding whether a centralized or decentralized, tall or
flat structure is best depends on the characteristics of the
specific organization. As Hall and Tolbert (2005) have 
observed, high levels of centralization mean greater coor-
dination but less flexibility and overloaded communica-
tion channels as communications flow up and down the
hierarchy (p. 62). Many organizations have changed from
centralized, tall structures to encourage more employee 
involvement. But problems can arise when communica-
tion, coordination, and monitoring of activities in the 
organization demand integration for effective functioning.
As in his continuum of organizational standardization (see 
Fig. 10.2), Mintzberg (1983b) suggests that centralization
and decentralization be viewed as opposite ends of a
continuum rather than absolutes (p. 98). The degree of
centralization or decentralization actually should depend
on the organization’s size, structure, technology, people,
and mission to determine where decisions are made best.
ORGANIZATIONAL 
FUNCTIONS
The purpose or function of the organization is to meet the
pre-established goal as outputs from the system. The goals
and values described in the institutional mission and 
purposes statement are the basis for the organization’s 
existence. The mission statement is the overall purpose 
of the organization, including whether it is a for-profit 
organization or a not-for-profit organization. Stockholders
or shareholders expect to see some return on their invest-
ment in a for-profit (or proprietary) organization, and this
expectation is reflected in organizational goals. Not-for-
profit organizations receive funding from various sources,
but there is no sense of ownership. In a not-for-profit 
organization, profits are generally reinvested in the orga -
nization to keep it financially competitive.
Once the mission is understood, the targets to achieve
this mission become the issue. Organizational goals are spec-
ified for effective and efficient functioning. Mintzberg
(1983a) identified four types of goals that demonstrate in-
tent and consistency of behavior in organizations: ideologic,
formal, shared, and system.
●Ideologic goals relate to the values people in the 
organization share. An example of an ideologic goal
in a healthcare organization is access to and provision 
of high-quality healthcare for people of all ages.
●Formal goals are those authorized through the hierar-
chy from people with authority who have a power 
base in the organization.
●Shared goals are those set and pursued by a particular
group in the organization. Involvement of family
members in caregiving is an example of a shared goal
that a specialty group favors and implements in the 
organization.
CHAPTER 10 Managing and Leading in the Organization     ●
165

●System goals are those set to maintain the system.
Mintzberg (1983a) identified system goals as survival,
efficiency, control, and growth. System goals relate to
continuity of the organization and contain a strong
economic component. These survival system goals are
driving many healthcare organizations. These may also
be the strategic initiatives or priorities for the organiza-
tion and specified for action within a certain time
frame.
Organizations are now recognizing that goals that are
too broad can deplete the resources and effectiveness of
the intended outcomes and the system goals. We hear of
companies and major industries streamlining and getting
“back to basics.” They seriously consider examining what
they know best, and refining and focusing it, rather than
diversifying. Linkages with other organizations that can
handle the diversifications better may be more beneficial
to both the organization and the consumer group. This
development has been seen with restructuring in health-
care organizations.
There are three basic reasons for the changes in health-
care structures: environmental influences, changes in the
provider system, and changes in consumer needs and 
demographics. First, external environmental influences
have had a major effect on healthcare organizations, as
with diagnostic-related groups (DRGs), the prospective
payment system (PPS) for healthcare reimbursement, and
safety initiatives. Second, specialization and changes in
the healthcare provider system have confused consumers
and legislators. Disciplinary lines between healthcare
providers necessarily have some overlap as we implement
cross-training, interdisciplinary practice, and focus on 
humanistic and holistic values for persons and groups. An
example is the core competency of working in interdisci-
plinary teams. Coordination and collaboration are essen-
tial attributes in contemporary practice settings. Third,
changes in consumer needs related to increased longevity,
chronicity, personal involvement, and health promotion
must drive the system to provide safe and effective health-
care services.
Healthcare organizations are now seeing the wisdom
of a lesson learned in industry: Not every community 
hospital needs to offer every specialty service. Community
hospitals can offer services that are complementary rather
than duplicated and meager. Regionalization can be 
accomplished by having, for example, maternal and infant
or pediatric services in one agency and cardiac diagnosis,
surgery, and rehabilitation in another. This arrangement
prevents duplication and fosters quality. The population
and the health service needs must drive the goals of the 
organization. A needs assessment provides the information
for revision of organizational goals. Important considera-
tions include the specific operations of the organization
and the available technology.
Specialized knowledge and expertise of professionals
and nonprofessionals are represented in formal and infor-
mal organizational functions. Formal functions are those
defined by the organizational structure. For example,
compare the different managerial functions for a unit
manager in a vertical, bureaucratic organization with 
decision making in the upper levels of the hierarchy with
those for the unit as a cost and decision center in a more
horizontal adhocratic structure. This comparison demon-
strates a difference in formal operational functions. Infor-
mal functions facilitate goal accomplishment and include
effective communication channels and details about how
the organizational plans and how tasks are actually accom-
plished in relation to the available resources. It is essential
to be aware of the human factor—that is, the individuals
who coordinate the people and resources to meet the goals
of the organization, or the managers.
MANAGEMENT
Management, the coordination of resources to achieve or-
ganizational outcomes, involves critical thinking, problem-
solving, and decision making. Management should not
be confused with leadership. A leader mobilizes a group
to achieve great things, whereas a manager focuses on di-
recting the group to meet the desired outcomes for the
organization through thoughtful and careful planning,
direction, monitoring, recognition, development, and
representation.
An effective manager must be a good leader but with a
focus on the established organizational outcomes; the com-
bination of effective leadership and management skills pro-
vides the nurse with the attributes to face the multitude of
challenges in the current healthcare system and the various
organizational structures. Understanding the foundation
of effective management is essential to developing one’s
own management style.
Management Theories
Management has been studied extensively, with the devel-
opment of several major theories that are still used to guide
current practices. During the 20th century, the major
themes were a focus on management science, the process,
the people, and even the activities and the intended 
objectives. Other theories and models are evolving as we
attempt to understand and apply the best approaches to
“getting things done” efficiently and effectively with the
best possible outcomes. The concept of outcomes is an 
important component in the current view of management,
especially in the healthcare arena.
The origins of management theory are often attributed
to Frederick Taylor (1911), an engineer who used time-
and-motion studies to investigate and then apply efficiency
principles with the bottom-line focus on productivity. In
this early industrial period, training the right people for
the task at hand was vital, and these people were rewarded
monetarily as productivity levels rose. The focus was one
of efficiency, effectiveness, and quality control. This ap-
proach was viewed as “working smarter.” These principles
have been used effectively with production lines, as in the
early days of the automotive industry. Taylor’s efficiency
and productivity principles persist to this day, with the
focus on organizing the proper number of trained people
and activities to get a job done in the shortest time. These
principles have been followed in the use and examination
of nurse-patient staffing ratios and skill mix in hospitals.
In the early 20th century, Henri Fayol (1949) looked
further at the process of management and the role
166
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

and functions of the manager. His universal approach
highlighted 14 principles including authority, unity 
of command (one boss and a chain of command), and
communication. The role of the manager in this approach
encompassed five functions: planning, organizing, com-
manding, coordinating, and controlling. During the same
period, Max Weber (1947) was addressing organizational
structure and the need for consistent rules and tasks in the
hierarchical structure of the bureaucratic organization.
Other managerial theories evolved, focused on individ-
uals and the goals of organizations. Motivational theories
are used to identify and describe the forces that motivate
individuals toward a goal. Guided by these theories, an 
effective manager or leader motivates individuals, thus 
enhancing their productivity and achieving organizational
goals. Classic motivational theories have been proposed by
Maslow, McGregor, and Ouchi.
As seen previously, in Chapters 2 and 9, Maslow’s
(1954, 1970) theory of a hierarchy of human needs was
based on his 16 propositions on motivation. Motivation in
humans is a manifestation of internal and external personal
and environmental factors that cause people to respond to
a situation in the way that they do. In these principles, the
focus is on the individual in a dynamic, complex, and
changing environment. Motivation is as intricate as the
person, and an individual’s personal basic needs must be
satisfied before he or she can focus on higher needs, such
as self-esteem in one’s position and organizational goals.
For a manager, understanding individual motivation is as
important as understanding the skills the individual brings
to the task at hand.
McGregor (1960) critically reviewed motivation in 
The Human Side of Enterprise. He proposed his classic two
“theories” about human nature. The focus during this time
continued to be on the human factors of the worker and
how to get the work done. In Theory X, individuals are
viewed as lazy, needing motivation, avoiding responsibility,
and requiring constant direction and control by a manager
to fulfill their job responsibilities and meet the organiza-
tional goals. Rewards and reinforcement are necessary for
the individuals, along with a set of rules they must follow.
This theory of human nature fits well with the centralized,
tall, bureaucratic organizational structure. The role of the
manager is one of direction and control.
Alternately, McGregor (1960) postulated Theory Y,
in which individuals are motivated, self-directed, inter-
ested in working toward meeting organizational goals,
and willing to accept responsibility without the need 
for constant direction and supervision. In fact, constant
“management” by the supervisor could deter workers
from reaping inner rewards from the job. The role of the
manager in this situation should be one of coordination,
guidance, and support.
Herzberg’s (1966) two-factor theory organizes the in-
dividual’s motivation for his work according to hygiene
and motivational factors. Hygiene factors are mainte-
nance factors in the workplace, such as salary, supervision,
company policy, working conditions, status, job security,
and the job’s effect on personal life; these factors in the
workplace can lead to satisfaction or dissatisfaction and
are thus related to the organizational climate. Motiva-
tional factors are satisfiers within the job that motivate
people to higher levels of performance. Motivational 
factors include achievement, recognition, the work itself,
responsibility, and advancement. The manager helps 
improve job performance by ensuring that both hygiene
and motivational needs of the employees are met at some
level for both job satisfaction and incentive to achieve the 
organizational goals.
In the later part of the 20th century, the Japanese style
of collaborative management received much attention,
with the economic successes viewed within a participatory
approach. Ouchi (1981) described this style, Theory Z,
as an approach in which employees are trusted, empow-
ered, and actively involved in decision making. The 
components of Theory Z include collective values and 
decision making, long-term or lifetime employment,
slower but predictable promotions, indirect supervision,
and a holistic concern for employees (Ouchi, 1981). This
participatory style involves indirect supervision with the
focus on the group. Ouchi (1981) believed that more cre-
ative decision making and more effective implementation
occur with the full involvement and consensus of the
group (p. 43). There is a “buy-in” by all team members,
who are valued as individuals and as important members
of the organization. Important values of this theory are
trust, fairness, commitment, and loyalty to the organiza-
tion, which lead to long-term employment and reduced
turnover. The use of “quality circles” and “group think”
emerged from this theory. Competitiveness in some
American organizations is inconsistent with this style of
management.
Management by objectives (MBO) and the role of the
knowledge worker evolved in the business world from the
work of Peter Drucker. Originally from Austria, Drucker
profoundly influenced American businesses through his
many books and observations on organizations and how
they are managed. Drucker focused on the people (both
managers and workforce), the organizational functions,
and the results achieved in the process in line with the 
organizational mission. He believed that “since the man-
ager is someone who takes responsibility for, and con-
tributes to, the final results of the enterprise, the job
should always embody the maximum challenge, carry the
maximum responsibility, and make the maximum con-
tribution” (Drucker & Maciariello, 2008, p. 239). He
proposed that management comprises a few essential
principles; the first is that “its task is to make people 
capable of joint performance, to make their strengths 
effective and their weaknesses irrelevant. This is what an
organization is all about, and the reason that management
is the critical, determining factor” (Drucker & Maciariello,
2008, p. 23). In addition, Drucker (2002) described the
requirement in modern organizations for a manager to be
a knowledge worker or “executive, if by virtue of his posi-
tion or knowledge, he is responsible for a contribution that
materially affects the capacity of the organization to per-
form and to obtain results” (p. 5). The focus became one
of making a contribution to the organization by virtue 
of one’s intelligence, imagination, and knowledge. Recall
that applying quality improvement is one of the five core
competencies for all health professionals (Greiner &
Knebel, 2003). Drucker’s works on management cover a
wide range of businesses, including hospitals, and look at
CHAPTER 10 Managing and Leading in the Organization     ●
167

achievement and contributions of individuals within the
framework of organizational settings.
Nursing Management
The core competencies for health professionals are essential
characteristics in nursing management. The focus of the
nurse manager or nurse executive must be on the provision
of patient-centered care while fostering the use of evidence-
based practice and quality improvement. The complexity
of the interdisciplinary team and the use of informatics will
depend on the organizational system. All of these tasks 
involve people and managing resources for the provision
of safe and effective care and positive patient and organi-
zational outcomes.
Buckingham (2005) identified four key skills of
managers as picking good people, setting clear expecta-
tions, praising excellence, and showing you care for your
people—but above all, the manager must discover what is
unique about each person and capitalize on it (pp. 81–83).
But recall that Fayol (1949) identified management func-
tions as planning, organizing, commanding, coordinating,
and controlling. The question becomes one of consistency
of these functions with the humanistic view of nursing and
care of patients.
Planning and organizing are indeed talents of the
nurse manager. This is an outcome of the steps of assess-
ment and planning in the provision of nursing care in any
organizational context. It is setting clear expectations and
requires an in-depth understanding of the organization
and the people, the true culture of the organization. At
times, it will also involve leading the culture, as with 
incorporation of evidence-based practice in a particular
patient situation and planning for the efficient and effec-
tive use of resources.
Commanding in the context of nursing management
involves ensuring that the job is done through delegation
and supervision, as in the provision of care to patients. It
is picking the right people and capitalizing on their talents
and requires knowledge of the care requirements, the 
patients, and external system influences. It also involves
recognition of individual talents and “a job well done.” All
levels of staffing are a vital consideration, including assis-
tive personnel. Delegation is a skill that grows and evolves,
as the nurse manager grows from novice to expert. Dele-
gation is a skill critical to both the nurse manager and the
leader and one that needs careful and ongoing professional
development, as we will discuss later in this chapter.
In a nursing education program, students focus on
“total patient care” as they learn the interpersonal, tech-
nical, and clinical judgment skills needed in nursing prac-
tice. In the final phase of the educational program, they
are engaged in obtaining leadership or management skills.
This includes assignment and delegation of activities to
other healthcare providers, both licensed and unlicensed.
Often, these activities are performed with other students
rather than within the interdisciplinary team in the acute
care setting. Upon graduation and initial licensure, how-
ever, nurses are expected to manage the healthcare team
effectively and to delegate activities and functions to others
for the provision of efficient care to patients. Challenges
in the workplace, such as economics, constantly add new
twists. This leads to the need for coordination of resources,
including healthcare providers, for accomplishment of the
organizational goals and the provision of safe and effective
care for patients.
Coordinating is another talent of the nurse manager,
as skills in coordination of care have continued to be a
component of the practice scope and setting. Control-
ling in nursing management is ensuring that the care to
patients has been provided effectively. Recall, however,
that management is the coordination of resources to
achieve organizational outcomes and involves critical
thinking, problem-solving, communication, and decision-
making skills. In addition, remember that Drucker
(2002) identifies the executive’s vital talents of intelli-
gence, imagination, and knowledge. These talents are
also critical for leadership.
LEADERSHIP
Although the effective manager may also provide leader-
ship to the team in terms of accomplishing the goals or
objectives for the organization, a leader mobilizes indi-
viduals in group to achieve great things. Leadership
involves action, creativity, motivation, and visioning. It
is viewing the possibilities and motivating others to make
things happen. As Maxwell (2007) observed, “personal
and organizational effectiveness is proportional to the
strength of the leadership” (p. 25). There are many theo-
ries of leadership, yet no consensus on how these talented
individuals make things happen. Much also depends on
the environment and the people in that environment. As
reported by Sigma Theta Tau (2005), the leader is “some-
one who influences people, organizations, and situations
to bring about transforming change (in clinical, educa-
tion, administration, research and policy)” (pp. 5–6).
What has become critical in leadership situations is 
the human factor—the leader, the followers, and the con-
sumers. The increasing focus on the human factor has
emerged in the research and the evolution of leadership
theories and principles.
Leadership Theories
A multitude of studies and manuscripts have emerged on
leadership in an effort to make things happen for the suc-
cess and effectiveness of both the leader and the organiza-
tion. Often, the basis for the literature contains in-depth
research of individuals whose success in their roles has led
to the emergence of a highly effective business or organiza-
tion. Leadership theories have evolved from viewing the 
individual leader’s personal characteristics in the Great
Man and trait theories to those addressing environmental
influences, as in the contingency theory (see Table 10.2).
Understanding subordinates through interaction, coaching,
and enabling techniques has emerged from the focus on
giving direction to meet organizational goals. In her obser-
vations of this new direction in a chaotic world through a
focus on quantum physics and patterns in the universe,
Wheatley (2006) proposed that the leader’s task is to first
embody the organization’s governing principles (vision,
values, beliefs) and then understand that the people in the
organization are best mobilized by concepts that invite their
168
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

participation and energy to create astonishing complexity
and capacity (pp. 130–131). The people in the organiza-
tion are viewed as critical resources to be involved rather
than merely used.
Styles of Leadership
There are three basic leadership styles: bureaucratic, demo-
cratic, and laissez-faire. Leaders who are bureaucratic and
authoritarian generally issue directives and expect things
to happen. The image of the bureaucratic leader that
comes to mind is the captain of the ship, who issues orders
to the crew members to carry out and then walks away,
expecting results. The theories of leadership consistent
with this style of leadership are the Great Man and Trait
approaches. This leadership style has little to do with con-
temporary practice, except perhaps in the face of a dire
emergency. The people do not feel part of the process and
CHAPTER 10 Managing and Leading in the Organization     ●
169
TABLE 10.2
Leadership Theories
Theory
Great Man Approach
Trait Approach
Skills and Abilities 
Approach
Situational Approach
Contingency Approach
Transformational 
Leadership Approach
Authentic Leadership 
Approach
Description
One of oldest theories of leadership, this theory proposes that leaders are born
with the ability to lead and rise to this role. Examples would be royalty, who are
born into the role, and historical figures such as Lincoln, Churchill, and Napoleon.
Much research has been done on the personality characteristics and qualities that
leaders possess. Northouse (2010) identifies the major leadership traits that have
emerged in the literature as intelligence, self-confidence, determination, integrity, 
and sociability (p. 19). These leadership traits have been identified as a focus on the
leader and not the constraints in the environment.
Northouse (2010) describes this contemporary conceptual model that evolved out
of research in the U.S. Department of Defense, which suggests that leadership can
be learned and further developed and applied in an organizational setting and is
based on a set of three basic skills: technical, human, and conceptual. Technical skills
must be consistent with those of the organization. Human skills include the ability 
to understand and work with other people. Conceptual skills are those related to
visioning and conceptual problem solving. Again, the focus is on the characteristics 
of the leader.
This is a directive and supportive approach that is guided by the situation at 
hand. The focus is first on the situation, including both the environment and the
subordinates. Northouse (2010) proposes that “the essence of situational leadership
demands that leaders match their style to the competence and commitment of 
the subordinates” (p. 89). From the situation or environmental context, the leader
directs and redirects subordinates to accomplish tasks and meet the intended aims
in the organization.
This theory matches the leader to the organizational context and setting. There 
are three basic components in this theory: human relations (especially leader and
follower), structure of the work for task accomplishment, and the authority or
legitimate power of the leader in their position. This same leader may not be as
effective in all settings, since it is contingent on the human relations, the work
involved, and the leader’s authority in a given environment.
Northouse (2010) describes this approach as a process that changes and transforms
people and is concerned with emotions, values, ethics, standards, and long-term
goals (p. 171). The transformational leader has the vision and enables others to
promote environmental change. The humanistic dimension in this approach is vital,
with the leader serving as role model, influencer, and enabler to promote change.
This approach is focused on character-based leadership. One model focuses 
on problem identification and decision making and another on leadership
development for effectiveness. Critical to this approach is a genuine and
demonstrated understanding of oneself and others. As Shirley (2006) has indicated,
it is the authenticity component—inclusive of character, knowing oneself, and
demonstrating relational transparency—that differentiates authentic leadership 
from other types of leadership (p. 261).

the solutions for the organization when given authoritarian
commands.
The democratic leader involves others in the process,
seeking group participation and consensus. People are 
valued not only for their ability but also for their cognitive
input into the situation. These people, as subordinates, are
involved and active in discussion and decisions. A focus is
directed at group process and group effectiveness, all 
directed at accomplishment of the task or to address the
problem to meet the organizational mission, values, and
goals. The more contemporary leadership theories em-
brace the democratic leadership style.
The laissez-faire leader is a passive leader, expecting
the group to progress toward goals with little active in-
volvement on the part of the leader. This type of leader
has little relation to our leadership theories. Coaching
and empowerment of subordinates toward a common 
vision, values, and goals are not active endeavors of this
type of leader. This leadership style is one of sitting back
and letting the group members take on the initiatives 
toward progress.
As you can imagine, the people in the environment
can influence and are influenced by the leadership style.
As proposed by the Sigma Theta Tau (2005) Leadership
Institute, “leaders failing to be adaptive and innovative in
the expression of their roles will simply cease to be effec-
tive” (p. 12). The ultimate measure of effective leadership
is whether things are happening or changing to address
the possibilities.
Leadership Competencies
Recall from our discussion in Chapter 1 that leadership
in both the practice setting and in the profession was one
of the standards of professional performance (ANA,
2010) for registered nurses. The identified competencies
for the nurse include oversight, accountability, vision,
good communication, collegiality, commitment, advo-
cacy, and professional involvement. These competencies
address the Skills and Abilities approach (Table 10.2), in
which leadership skills can be developed and enhanced.
In this theoretical approach, there are three basic skills:
technical, human, and conceptual.
In healthcare leadership, technical skills comprise 
two areas, clinical expertise and leadership knowledge.
Clinical expertise provides an understanding and appre-
ciation for what is involved in task requirements and for
efficiency and efficacy in their accomplishment. Leader-
ship knowledge provides a foundation in the principles
needed, along with abilities and evidence of past success-
ful leadership. These two areas of technical skills also
provide credibility to the leader in the eyes of peers and
subordinates.
Human skills are required to provide effective over-
sight, share the vision, use effective communication, and
promote collegiality and commitment to the project. A
keen understanding of the people, use of effective coaching
and motivational strategies, and promoting their assets for
attainment of the goals are invaluable. Personal skills of
the leader, through commitment and professionalism, 
infuse the group with further confidence and constant
focus on the vision, values, and goals.
Conceptual skills allow for dealing with a sometimes
chaotic environment and the mental skills needed to envi-
sion possibilities and plausible approaches. The leader must
be able to deal with ambiguity in the environment and in
the vision. For example, when dealing with the group in a
brainstorming session, the leader must be able to reframe
suggestions within the context of the problem and have the
group address options for the progress toward the vision
and goals without getting lost in the minutia and while
keeping everyone focused.
Bennis (2000) has identified four key competencies of
leaders (Box 10.1). Management of attention is a firm
focus on the vision and the direction to meet the goals to-
ward that vision. Management of meaning is consistently
communicating the message of the goal so that there is
clear focus and no diversion. Management of trust is being
consistent and transmitting a consistent message so that
others are not thinking there are different rules for differ-
ent people or different days. And finally, management of
self is understanding your own strengths and weaknesses.
It is building on these strengths and minimizing weak-
nesses for success toward the vision and goals and taking
the next steps.
All of these competencies require time, commitment,
and energy. As identified by Tichy and Bennis (2007),
“good leaders are able to triage their time and energy and
focus on the consequential” (p. 23).
Leadership in Nursing
When we think of leaders in nursing, images come to
mind of Florence Nightingale, who made great changes in
the care of injured soldiers in the Crimean war and in
nursing education, providing a basis for our history of
nursing practice, theory, research, and administration.
Other nursing leaders that come to mind are our nurse
theorists in the late 20th and early 21st centuries, who pro-
vided practice paradigms. Still other nursing leaders guide
our practice sites as nurse executives, our colleges of nurs-
ing as deans, our knowledge base as researchers, and our
organizations as officers and elected officials. Leadership
is apparent in many venues in nursing and healthcare. But
remember that a leader mobilizes individuals in a group
to achieve great things through action, creativity, motiva-
tion, and visioning to make things happen.
The American Organization of Nurse Executives
(AONE, 2012) is focused on representation of leadership
through their mission to improve healthcare through in-
novation and expert nursing leadership with their stated
values of creativity, diversity and inclusivity, excellence,
integrity, leadership, and stewardship through identified
170
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
BOX 10.1
Leadership Competencies (Bennis,
2000)
●Management of attention
●Management of meaning
●Management of trust
●Management of self

behaviors of broker, convener, designer, futurist, innova-
tor, maximizer, partner, provocateur, and synthesizer 
(p. 1). These values and behaviors demonstrate the active
role of nursing leadership in the process of creating a new
vision for healthcare. These leaders are the drivers of 
improvements in health and nursing care in patient care
arenas. However, leadership is driven not only by the chief
nursing executive but also by talented nursing leaders
throughout the organization, enabled through their re-
spective roles. The focus becomes leadership in nursing
and healthcare.
From a qualitative study with nursing leaders from a 
variety of leadership positions, essential nursing leadership
competencies were identified as a set of five themes:
●Communication proficiency with emphasis on 
listening skills
●Conflict resolution skills
●Ability to communicate a vision, motivate, and inspire
●Ability to use data and technology in decision making
and fiscal savviness
●Courage to be proactive with change and not reactive
and crisis driven (Eddy et al., 2009, p. 8)
Each of these themes is consistent with the skills and
abilities categorized as technical, human, and conceptual.
But notice the identification of fiscal competencies and
the need to not be driven by crisis situations. Another
characteristic in recent literature is the emotional intelli-
gence (Eason, 2009; Feather, 2008; Goleman, 1995),
which includes emotional and impulse control, under-
standing frustration of both self and others, and main-
taining motivation. Malloch (2010) also refers to this as
emotional competence propensities. This demonstrates
a commitment to the vision, despite challenges that will
intervene throughout the process. Effective leadership
will be challenged and be challenging, for both leaders
and followers.
Kouzes and Posner (2002) propose five practices of 
effective leadership:
●Model the way.
●Inspire a shared vision.
●Challenge the process.
●Enable others to act.
●Encourage the heart. (p. 13)
These practices are ideal in the healthcare setting. First, as
Kouzes and Posner (2002) point out, “titles are granted, but
it is your behavior that wins you respect . . . and people
first follow the person, and then the plan” (pp. 14–15).
Modeling the behavior is the technical ability you present
with and your commitment to action. Communicating
the vision and creating buy-in and ownership is next in
the process. Next, expect obstacles, but the whole idea is
a new vision and not business as usual. Encouraging 
collaboration and helping other to excel in the process 
requires all of the human skills that nurses have developed.
The challenge is not to get lost in details and keep focused
on the vision and bring others along in this process. And,
finally, celebrate accomplishments, no matter how small,
and recognize the achievements of others.
Now, imagine a change you see as needed on an acute
care unit in a hospital. Perhaps it is something as ordinary
as changes in a fall prevention program for elderly patients.
You may think that this is already in place with the quality
improvement project that is mandated in policy. But 
suppose you have noticed a couple of near misses and one
actual incident of a patient who fell in the bathroom last
month. Perhaps improvements can be made. So first, be-
come the champion for looking at the issue further. There
is a good deal of literature and evidence-based practice on
the topic. But are there special considerations with the 
patient population in your area or on your unit? You take
the time to look further, and others see you as leading
change in this area. Perhaps you have identified that more
individual patient information would assist in the process.
You propose a new patient profile process that includes
home practices and medications that the patient has taken
and those that are currently prescribed.
You are sharing a vision with colleagues that there
may be more to the picture (your vision). And you are
challenging the current fall prevention program, or per-
haps some gaps that may not have been noticed. You
propose a pilot on your unit and have it approved. The
cost and staff time with this new process have been in-
cluded, and the administration recognized your talent
and commitment. Now, you have a plan to implement
this additional patient assessment procedure, including
identification of risk situations and individuals and
staffing adjustments needed during peak periods. But,
others will need to be encouraged to follow the plan and
evaluate its effectiveness. Everyone is recruited to interact
with those patients identified with a potential risk of
falls, no matter how remote. At the end of the next
month, there are no falls and no near misses, and the 
patient surveys for your unit demonstrated increased 
patient and family satisfaction with staff—from nurses to 
therapists to unlicensed assistants—as caring and helping
them to prepare for returning home. Your employee of
the month list has changed to employees of the month,
and you celebrate your newer and safer environment.
You modeled the way, inspired a shared vision, chal-
lenged the current practices, enabled others to participate
in the process, and celebrated success. You are a nursing
leader.
However, healthcare environments and consumers are
constantly changing. Leadership challenges will continue
to emerge in this dynamic environment. Huston (2008)
proposes competencies for the nursing leader in 2020 as
follows;
●Global perspective
●Technology skills
●Expert decision-making skills
●Focus on quality and safety
●Political astuteness
●Collaborative skills
●Ability to balance authenticity and performance 
expectations
●Ability to effectively cope with change and chaos 
(p. 906)
These skills are expectations for all nursing leaders. Lead-
ership can be found in all environments, the national
organization, the school of nursing, the healthcare or
community agency, or even in a unit of one of these 
CHAPTER 10 Managing and Leading in the Organization     ●
171

environments. Empowering groups for positive changes
with a vision of the future is a sign of leadership. The 
ultimate measure of effective leadership is whether things
are happening or changing to address the possibilities.
There are several areas of common concern to both
leaders and managers. Recall that the leader mobilizes
the group and shares a vision, and the manager coordi-
nates the resources to address the goals of that vision.
However, understanding the organizational culture,
bases of power, negotiation strategies, and delegation
skills are critical to achievement of the goals and the 
vision for the organization.
ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
The organizational culture is perceptible as the culmina-
tion of the norms, attitudes, and values imbedded in the
organizational mission and in the expected behaviors of
the employees. Daft (2007) views organizational culture
as having two dimensions: visible observable symbols (e.g.,
ceremonies, stories, slogans, behaviors, dress, physical 
settings) and the underlying values, assumptions, beliefs,
attitudes, and feelings of the people (p. 361).
Scrutiny of the organizational culture can provide a
sense of the prevailing level of humanism present in the
organization—in other words, how people are viewed as
employees and consumers. New organizational values and
behaviors have emerged as we redefine and recreate orga -
nizations for functioning in today’s world. We moved from
the belief that humans in organizations are lazy and need
direction, in McGregor’s (1967) Theory X, to the age of
humanism. The humanistic perspective is a more positive
one that considers the importance of the people in the
organization. Still, during times of cost-cutting, a human-
istic perspective and recognition of contributions can
quickly disappear when the focus turns to head counts or
full-time equivalents (FTEs).
Important clues on the involvement, satisfaction, and
effectiveness of the people in the organization are reflected
in management and leadership styles and the behaviors and
attitudes of those in the environment. In healthcare, the
organizational culture includes both the consumers and the
providers in the agency. The organizational culture is also
influenced by the environment—the immediate institu-
tional or agency environment as well as societal expecta-
tions and mandates.
As with any set of cultural expectations, the employ-
ees are expected to enculturate (adapt and adopt) and 
espouse the prevailing principles. Failure to enculturate
results in being ostracized or terminated. These cultural
expectations are the customary ways of thinking and 
behaving shared by members of the organization, as a
form of socialization and allegiance to the norms of the
organization. Incorporation of the specific expectations
encompasses this organizational socialization process. An
example is adopting and using a specific theory that
guides the operation of the organization. At the most
ideal level, if the nurse cannot view or provide care for
patients in accordance with the specific model used at
that agency, such as self-care, the best remedy would be
to seek employment at another agency more consistent
with the nurse’s own worldview.
A growing focus on the importance of the organiza-
tional climate is apparent from professional groups and
associations. In their white paper on the hallmarks of pro-
fessional nursing practice settings, the American Associa-
tion of Colleges of Nursing (2002) identified eight key
characteristics of the environment that should be evalu-
ated in the organizational climate. Based on a study in
2002, the American Organization of Nurse Executives
(McManis & Monsalve Associates, Inc., & AONE, 2003)
proposed six critical factors for achieving work environ-
ment excellence (p. 5). In 2005, the American Association
of Critical-Care Nurses also started a multi-year Healthy
Work Environment Initiative that includes six standards
also applicable to the organizational culture. And consider
the value placed on the organizational culture by the
American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC) Magnet
Recognition Program (2014b) and the Pathway to Excel-
lence Program (2014c). Go to the Online Consult and
find the five model components of transformational lead-
ership, structural empowerment, exemplary professional
practice, new knowledge, innovation and improvements,
and empirical quality outcomes and how these evolved
from the 14 “Forces of Magnetism” in the Magnet Recog-
nition Program (ANCC, 2014b) and evaluate their con-
tribution to the organizational culture of a hospital
system. What these positions and initiatives have in 
common is the focus on the organizational culture that
includes positive leadership, communication, participa-
tory management and local decision making, and collab-
oration and interdisciplinary relationships. The concepts
are particularly appropriate to understanding the people
as individuals and groups in healthcare organizations.
Nursing Leadership
The cultural climate generally supports the predominant
leadership style. That is why it is so critical that environ-
ments have strong nursing leadership. This is emphasized
by the AONE as “the importance of forging a supportive,
empowering work environment that values and nurtures
continuous organizational learning and innovation” 
(McManis & Monsalve Associates, Inc., & AONE, 2003,
p. 8). In addition, part of the requirements for Magnet
Recognition is that the nursing leadership meets minimal
education requirements, participates in decision-making
172
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
ONLINE CONSULT 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing at 
http://www.aacn.nche.edu
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses at 
http://www.aacn.org
American Organization of Nurse Executives at 
http://www.aone.org
Magnet Recognition Program at 
http://www.nursecredentialing.org/Magnet/
International/MagnetProgOverview
Pathway to Excellence Program at 
http://www.nursecredentialing.org/Pathway

bodies, and meets the expected professional standards for
nurse administrators.
Leadership style is a major influence on organiza-
tional culture. Nurse leaders must have the qualities to
envision the future and assist others in the organization
to meet the goals of quality healthcare outcomes for 
patients. The American Association of Critical-Care
Nurses (2006) emphasizes that nurse leaders function as
role models in skilled communication for true collabo-
ration, effective decision making, meaningful recogni-
tion, and authentic leadership (p. 38). But, as Leininger
(2006) points out, nurse administrators “as leaders need
to make their practices congruent with changing cultural
values, beliefs, and the lifeways in their local workplace,
but must also reasonably fit with societal and world-wide
trends” (p. 367). These talented leaders must constantly
be attuned to both the internal and external environ-
ments of the organization.
Communication
Communication of ideas and views is vital in the organi-
zational context. But the prevailing organizational culture
may dictate the communication channels and styles. Being
able to communicate with patients is quite different from
having your ideas heard, considered, and implemented at
the organizational level. Portraying yourself as an expert
and as a colleague is necessary in both patient and profes-
sional interactions within the organization. Whether by
ensuring that all committee or group members have the
opportunity to express their opinions or by making special
efforts to demonstrate recognition and give credit for an-
other’s ideas, attention to cultural differences is important.
It can make the most of the talents, abilities, and skills of
the human resources in the organizational system, espe-
cially in management of interdisciplinary teams. We will
look further at communication in organizations later in
this chapter.
Participatory Management 
and Local Decision Making
Closely related to leadership style is management focus,
whether on individualism and achievement or on collec-
tivism or teamwork as the norms, attitudes, and values of
the organization. Management styles have an important
influence here. Consider the differences in management
with Theory X, which is focused on individual perfor -
mance, versus Theory Z, which emphasizes collectivism
and cooperation. The organizational focus on individual-
ism or collectivism is apparent in promotion and evalua-
tion structures. Administrative policies and procedures
provide important clues to the organization’s official po-
sition. Subgroups or minority groups within the organi-
zation may create factions, however. These subgroups may
set certain expectations for collectivism and cooperation
in behavior or function. For example, the organization
may be highly bureaucratic, with expectations and rewards
valuing individual performance, competition, and task ac-
complishment; but if cooperation is the prevailing value
in the nursing department, it will be translated into ac-
complishing outcomes at the upper level of management.
Think about the need for participatory management
and decision making. The American Organization of
Nurse Executives (McManis & Monsalve Associates, Inc.,
& AONE, 2003) have described this empowered collabo-
rative decision making as follows:
Nurse empowerment combined with collaborative multi-
disciplinary decision-making is an essential attribute of a
work environment that values nurses as professionals and
provides policy development roles for nursing leaders and
staff. (p. 5)
Participatory management and decision making are
also a requirement for Magnet Recognition institutions.
For eligibility, decentralized, shared decision-making
processes must be apparent with nurses in both direct-
care and managerial roles involved in decision-making bod-
ies and organizational policy. ANCC (2014b) describes
this as a component of transformational leadership, rep-
resenting the forces of magnetism as the quality of the
nursing leadership and the management style.
Collaboration and Interdisciplinary
Relationships
One of the core competencies for all health professionals
is to work in interdisciplinary teams. As noted in the 
Institute of Medicine (IOM) report, “teams tend to reduce
the utilization of redundant or duplicate services, and they
also tend to develop more creative solutions to complex
problems because of their members’ diverse academic
backgrounds and experience” (Greiner & Knebel, 2003,
p. 54). Collaboration is a challenge among professionals,
especially when scope of practice issues arise, time is lim-
ited, and workloads increase. But teamwork is apparent in
some organizational climates that foster interdisciplinary
practice.
In 2004, the IOM focused on safety and work envi-
ronment of nurses. They identified two necessary precur-
sors to collaboration: individual clinical competence and
mutual trust and respect (Page, 2004, pp. 212–213).
These two characteristics seem quite basic, but person-
alities, a challenging and demanding environment, and 
incorporation into the organizational culture are issues.
The IOM report further identified the characteristics of
collaboration, including shared understanding of goals and
roles, effective communication, shared decision making,
and conflict management (Page, 2004, p. 213). All of
these characteristics must be given heed in the culture of
a healthcare organization.
Other Concepts in
Organizational Culture
In addition to understanding the people and groups in the
organizational system, other factors provide information
on the organizational culture and the operational climate.
The organization’s history provides a lasting influence.
Discovering the critical decisions made in founding the
organization reveals the original intent for the organization
and views for the future. Closely related to the founding
decisions are the current guiding ideals and mission. The
guiding ideals and mission relate to the service orientation.
CHAPTER 10 Managing and Leading in the Organization     ●
173

Consider the difference between missions and the intended
consumer groups in not-for-profit and for-profit organiza-
tions. This could range from elected fee-for-service care in
the for-profit setting to a not-for-profit agency focusing on
healthcare to the indigent. The philosophy of the organi-
zation provides important information about the current
ideals and mission. If revisions have been made over the
years, it can be quite helpful to look back at old versions to
determine whether the philosophy changed in response to
environmental factors.
Looking into the community can also influence the 
organizational culture. Although nurses are quite mobile and
no longer tied to a geographic area, community ties with a
rural hospital may provide a profound influence. Remem-
bered history and symbolism of the organization contribute
additional information, for example, about an institution de-
signed to provide hospital care for a county that has evolved
into a regional referral and tertiary-care center. Remembering
the traditions of personalized obstetric care, a local woman’s
group may provide funding for a special prenatal program
for indigent pregnant teenagers.
Finally, institutional arrangements and linkages, such as
consortia and cooperating or referral agencies, are frequently
quite complex but provide essential information on organi-
zational relationships and interrelationships. These facts are
necessary for understanding the culture and influences on
the organization. But, as Hall and Tolbert (2005) point out,
“culture is not a constant. . . . [V]alues and norms change
as the events affect the population involved” (p. 183). The
potential for change in the organizational culture requires
diligent assessment and communication skills on the part
of the nurse manager or leader.
COMMUNICATION UNIQUE 
TO ORGANIZATION
Communication is vital in complex, highly technological,
and dynamic organizations. As was illustrated with orga-
nizational functions, the structure of the organization plays
an important role in communication channels. Formal
channels are easily apparent in highly bureaucratic struc-
tures, as dictated by the organizational diagram. But 
informal communication channels (“grapevines”) are
sometimes less evident and can be highly effective in such
a structure. Consider the need for supplies in some areas
of an agency. Ordering can easily be handled through the
computerized entry system. But what if some urgently
needed item is unavailable through the system? An infor-
mal channel may be used to locate a supply from which
the item may be “borrowed,” to be replaced as soon as the
official order is fulfilled. The departmental administrative
assistant or clerk who has an informal chain of communi-
cation may be able to use his or her knowledge of these
informal systems effectively in such a procurement process.
Communication channels are important considera-
tions for effective decision making to achieve quality out-
comes. Organizational goals and values must be translated,
transmitted, and reinforced throughout the system to meet
the institutional mission. The specialized knowledge,
skills, and resources represented by people require excellent
communication within the system and from external envi-
ronments to be current and responsive to changes in the
knowledge base and technology. Communication is the
action component of interpersonal and interdisciplinary
roles, behaviors, and relationships in the organization 
system. The formal and informal communications and in-
teractions are the essence of the organizational culture.
The organizational structure is the formal design—with
its hierarchy or lines of authority—for the communication
channels. Communications may be formally dictated in a
linear manner by the bureaucratic structure, or they may
be flexible and circular in adhocratic matrix designs. 
Informal communications must be identified to reveal 
the actual flow of information, decision making, and goal
accomplishment. Communication of information and 
expectations stems from the pervasive leadership and 
management styles. Evaluation of the appropriate channels
is vital for effective functioning in the organizational 
setting.
Organizations routinely use methods of communica-
tion in addition to the verbal and nonverbal interpersonal
communication techniques. Consider the informatics
available in organizational settings. We have computer net-
works, fiber optics, satellite, and teleconferencing technol-
ogy. Computers manage information storage, inventory,
and rapid retrieval, data processing, data analysis, report
generation, and even meetings at a distance. The informa-
tion we compile and the methods we use to transmit it
vary with the nature of the communication channel we are
using. For example, a general rule in an organization is to
limit memos to one page or less and disperse them to the
appropriate parties; however, the sender must consider the
available and appropriate technology, such as interoffice
paper copies or e-mail or messaging.
Considering the purpose of communication in an 
organization is indispensable. Whether we are commu-
nicating with patients or assistive personnel, both the
sending method and the receiver of the information are
important. Clear, concise, and timely transmission of in-
formation is necessary for an effective management
process. Recall from Chapter 8 the “rights” of organiza-
tional communications: (1) the right information or con-
tent, (2) the right communication channel, (3) the right
format, including use of correct grammar, terms, and 
language, (4) the right level of understanding, (5) the right
technology, and (6) the right follow-up. The appropriate
communication channel must be selected, using the appro-
priate chain of command to convey your message.
NURSING: POWER,
NEGOTIATION, DELEGATION
In the past decades, healthcare organizations have under-
gone radical change and restructuring. We are now 
focused on outcomes, patient satisfaction, safety, adequacy
of reimbursement for services provided, and the imperative
to address health disparities and health literacy.
Systems theory fits well with changes going on in
healthcare organizations. But as the system becomes more
and more multilayered, the focus shifts to the openness and
flexibility of the system boundaries, greater attention to 
environmental forces, and expanding relationships among
organizations. Special attention to external influences is 
essential for effective leadership and management. This 
174
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

includes a focus on the organization, considering its human
resources, information systems, and governance structures
for delegation and coordination. Ongoing feedback and
evaluation become essential. Professional nurses have major
roles in all steps of this process as we now focus on strategic 
initiatives.
Administrative nursing positions in healthcare systems
have been expanded at all levels. Director and supervisor
roles, when still apparent in an organizational chart, have
been greatly expanded. Nurses have major leadership 
responsibilities in healthcare organizations. Nurses influ-
ence many different types of colleagues. Nurse managers
have knowledge of people and the environmental influ-
ences on healthcare needs. This is the domain of nursing.
In addition, nurses are now well prepared in organizational
theory, finance, and policy. We have entered the adminis-
trative arena as interdisciplinary care managers, coordina-
tors, and leaders. Strategic planning, public relations, and
cost containment have become essential skills. Nurses who
have this knowledge have legitimate power in healthcare
organizations. But, along with this power comes responsi-
bility, accountability, and the need for effective negotiation
and delegation skills.
Power
Max Weber (1947) defined power as “the probability that
one actor in a social relationship will be in a position to
carry out his own will despite resistance, regardless of the
basis on which this probability rests” (p. 152). More spe-
cific to organizations, Mintzberg (1983a) defines power as
“the capacity to effect (or affect) organizational outcomes”
(p. 4). This latter definition has much relevance for pro-
fessional nursing practice, because nurses in healthcare or-
ganizations are positioned to effect (or affect) positive
healthcare outcomes. These outcomes can be viewed as
outputs from the healthcare system, such as patients with
improved health status. Legitimate power is the authority
to effect change within one’s position. The professional
relationship provides the opportunity for legitimate power,
and many nurses now have legitimate power by virtue of
their position, role, and expertise. Informal power is the 
assertion of one’s will over a situation to achieve a goal
without formal or “vested” authority.
Mintzberg (1983a) identified five general bases of power
(Box 10.2). These power bases are applicable to professional
nursing, especially in organizational settings. First, nurses
have demonstrated effective management of resources in 
decentralized and vertical organizations. They are being
vested with responsibility especially with regard to decisions
and resources needed for effective organizational function-
ing. Second, care of patients involves technical skills that
must be performed or supervised by nurses. Third, nursing
continues to develop its unique body of knowledge needed
for evidence-based practice and the health of patients. The
fourth base of power involves the legal prerogatives granted
and implied under the practice acts, licensure, certification,
and professional codes described in Chapter 1. And finally,
nurses in interdisciplinary practice have access to colleagues,
patients, and influential people on whom they rely for access
to the other bases of power. To effect positive healthcare
outcomes, skills in negotiation are often necessary.
Negotiation for power must first be related to the goals
of the organization. Nurses have the ability and responsi-
bility to negotiate for legitimate power in organizations.
Nurses certainly have access to these power sources if devel-
oped, effectively negotiated, and used.
Negotiation
As discussed in Chapter 8, conflict situations can easily
arise in a group setting. And the healthcare organization
provides the potential for many groups with different
compositions, all with the potential for conflict situations
to arise. Both the nurse leader and manager will frequently
encounter conflict among individuals or groups that 
necessitates artful use of interpersonal and negotiation
skills. Effective conflict resolution requires negotiation
and, ultimately, coming to some compromise. This com-
promise is most effective when the result is acceptable at
some level to all parties involved.
Negotiation involves a discussion process whereby in-
dividuals or groups with different views on some issue at-
tempt to reach a compromise acceptable to all involved on
an area of dispute or conflict. The best scenario is a “win-
win” situation with collaboration. In this situation, the so-
lution is satisfying to both sides, who have collaborated, and
each side senses some satisfaction and feeling of a “win” sit-
uation. Alternately, one side prevails (“win-lose” situation)
or both sides experience a compromise that is not really sat-
isfying to either side, thus a “lose-lose” situation.
An effective negotiator should consistently refine and
nurture negotiation skills (Box 10.3). First, the negotiator
must have excellent communication and interpersonal skills.
The negotiator must be a skilled communicator, for under-
standing the concerns of both sides and promoting awareness
and collaboration. He or she must focus on the facts (verbal
and nonverbal) and try to diffuse emotions with effective
communication. Aiken (2004) describes negotiation as a
communication process with exchanges of needs and prior-
ities to achieve consensus on critical issues and to gain ad-
vantages in the process (p. 439). In this process, power
contests may be expected but need to be diffused with a focus
on reconciliation of interests on the issue at hand.
As with any nursing care situation, assessment skills are
needed to understand the interpersonal and situational 
influences from all sides. For example, consider a conflict sit-
uation that arises in the intensive care setting as the group of
physicians and nurses attempt to implement a collaborative
practice model. The ultimate goal is for the effective care of
CHAPTER 10 Managing and Leading in the Organization     ●
175
BOX 10.2
The Five General Bases of Power
●Control of resources
●Control of a technical skill
●Control of a body of knowledge
●Exclusive rights or privileges to impose choices (legal
prerogatives)
●Access to people who have and can be relied on for
the other four
Source: Data from Mintzberg, H. (1983a). Power in and around 
organizations. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

the patient; the negotiator must have an understanding of
all of the facts in order to uncover the common ground 
for all—physicians, intensivists, advanced practice nurses
(APRNs), staff nurses, technicians, therapists, associated ser -
vice providers, and patients. The skillful negotiator must un-
derstand what is being said and what is actually occurring in
the setting, and should be sensitive to all behaviors, nonver-
bal and expressed cues, and views. The skillful negotiator
must assess not only content but also context, culture, be-
haviors, and players involved.
The ability to envision what potential outcomes could
be and how they would affect each side, individually and
collectively, is key. The vision of the potential outcomes
must be framed for the individuals involved, on the basis 
of the facts of the situation and the resources available. 
Endurance is a definite prerequisite throughout the process
and during the inevitable peaks, valleys, and stalemates that
can occur. There are times when the negotiation process
must be halted to allow the various individuals or groups to
refocus on facts and dilute emotions.
The acute awareness of the negotiator must prevail
throughout the entire process, from identification of con-
flict, alertness to all behaviors and actions throughout, to
the levels of satisfaction of both parties once the resolution
has been agreed upon. This awareness of behavior and sit-
uation will have to be restated to all parties on an ongoing
basis to focus on the facts continually.
Another important characteristic of the negotiator is
trustworthiness. All parties must sense the fairness of the
negotiator in the process. Building trust is a necessary skill,
not only to gain the cooperation of both sides during the
negotiation but also to help build trust in the process and
the ultimate resolution. The process is often not a smooth,
linear activity when one is dealing with people, partiality,
and conscious or unconscious behaviors.
Marquis and Huston (2015) identify destructive or
manipulative negotiating tactics as the use of ridicule, in-
appropriate questioning, flattery, demonstrating a sense of
helplessness, and aggression or taking over the situation
(pp. 503–504). These tactics are ineffective and may delay
resolution or even escalate the conflict. Such tactics inhibit
the building of trust and negate the collaborative process.
The result of the negotiation process must be a compro-
mise acceptable to all at some level of satisfaction. If a com-
promise cannot be reached, an impasse results. In this
situation, the conflict will escalate at some later point, 
perhaps in a different form or with different players.
Ideally, the negotiation process should take place
on neutral ground, or at least in a secure environment 
acceptable to both parties. Specific terms are used in 
negotiation tactics, like “reaching a stalemate” (an im-
passe) and “tradeoffs” (concessions), of which the nego-
tiator must be aware. Marquis and Huston (2015)
recommend further that upon resolution of the conflict,
the negotiator send a follow-up letter to both parties 
describing the agreed terms (p. 504). This follow-up
serves as reinforcement for both recognition of individual
involvement and the results of the process. The correspon-
dence can take the form of a formal memo or an electronic
communication commending the participation of both
sides in the resolution and restating the agreed-upon con-
ditions. The attributes of a successful negotiator are also
essential in delegation activities.
Delegation
Delegation is defined as the “transfer of responsibility of
the performance of a task from one individual to another
while retaining the accountability for the outcome” (ANA,
2010, p. 10). Further, the National Council of State
Boards of Nursing (NCSBN, 2005) views delegation as 
“a skill requiring clinical judgment and final accountability
for patient care” (p. 1).
Delegation activities are required when the novice nurse
enters practice on the first day of professional practice. But,
as mentioned, educational preparation provides the con-
cepts for the process, although seldom the opportunity to
truly develop these critical skills, especially when the new
nurse is confronted with long-term interdisciplinary staff
who may be entrenched in a certain way of providing care.
The new nurse is responsible for the care of a group of 
patients and works with assistive personnel necessary for the
provision of quality care. But delegation is a difficult activity
for the novice whose skills are being developed and refined.
And the accountability for the delegated act is not consis-
tently internalized, as simple tasks are performed by others
for the delivery of care. It is not a matter of simply “assign-
ing” a list of tasks or relying on a nurse manager to make
these assignments. Consider the standard practice of routine
vital signs taken by assistive personnel like certified nursing
assistants (CNAs) or unlicensed assistive personnel (UAPs).
We have lost the concept of “monitoring” vital signs when
the nurse assumes that the readings will be reported by 
the assistive personnel in a timely manner. Consider the
problems with this arrangement:
●Skill of the assistive personnel
●Accuracy of readings according to a prescribed 
schedule
●Accuracy and proper functioning of equipment
●Environmental influences and artifacts on both the 
patient and the assistive personnel
●Report on the findings
●Interpretation of readings
●Nursing judgment on readings, their accuracy, and
other variables in the patient’s condition
●Alternate comfort measures or positioning that could
have an effect on readings
And the list goes on.
Delegation is not the “handoff” of a routine task. Appli-
cation of the principles of delegation is essential to effective
leadership and management as well as for patient safety.
176
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
BOX 10.3
Attributes of a Skilled Negotiator:
CAVEAT
●Communication and interpersonal skills
●Assessment skills
●Vision and application of needed resources
●Endurance
●Awareness
●Trustworthiness

Principles of Delegation
In 2006, the ANA and the NCSBN announced a joint state-
ment on delegation. Subsequently, the ANA (2012) further
detailed Principles for Delegation to unlicensed assistive per-
sonnel. Basic principles of delegation involve awareness of the
differences between assignment, delegation, responsibility,
and accountability. “Assignment is the distribution of work
that each staff member is responsible for during a given work
period” (ANA, 2012, p. 5). Delegation “is the transferring to
a competent individual the authority to perform a selected
nursing task in a selected situation “however, the nurse retains
accountability for the delegation (NCSBN, 2005 p. 1). The
responsibility for completion of the task has been delegated,
but not the accountability for ensuring that the task has been
completed correctly by the right person, who has been super-
vised appropriately. Recall from Chapter 1 that according to
the ANA Code of Ethics for Nurses, responsibility is defined as
“an obligation to perform required professional activities at a
level commensurate with one’s education and in compliance
with applicable laws and standards . . .” (ANA, 2015, p. 45)
whereas, accountability is being answerable to self and others
for one’s own choices, decisions and actions as measured
against a  a standard . . .” (ANA, 2015, p. 41). The nurse
maintains both the responsibility and the accountability for
the delegated action. Delegation is required of both the leader
and the manager to address the intended goals and, especially
with some activities, for necessary care of the patient and to
ensure patient safety.
Process of Delegation
NCSBN (2005) envisions delegation as a four-step process:
assessment and planning, communication, surveillance,
and evaluation and supervision and feedback. The impor-
tance of delegation as a process is based on good assessment
of the patient, the environment, and providers who are 
capable and able to be delegated to provide appropriate care
for the patient. The process does not stop with delegation.
The delegation of a responsibility must be based on this 
assessment and must be made to the correct person, with
monitoring by the nurse, who maintains the accountability
for the function. NCSBN (2005) has further provided de-
cision trees in their position paper, located on their public
Web site, one as a tool to assist in the process of delegation
to assistive personnel and one for accepting assignment to
supervise assistive personnel. (See the Online Consult.)
These decision trees are also available in Appendix B of the
Joint Statement on Delegation by the ANA and NCSBN
(ANA & NCSBN, 2006). Both of these decision trees pro-
vide specific questions to be addressed for safe practice with
delegation. The delegation tree developed by the ANA
(2012) clearly illustrates that the nurse assesses the patient,
the delegate, the setting, and the task, but that the nurse
retains the accountability for the delegation and the patient
outcomes. Even when the situation involves the leader 
delegating a management responsibility to a nurse manager
in a situation not involving direct care to a patient popula-
tion, the leader is accountable for selection the correct man-
ager to achieve the intended and effective outcomes for the
situation. Nursing judgment plays a role in the entire
process through the evaluation phase. It is vital to remem-
ber that nursing judgment cannot be delegated.
In their classic work on delegation, NCSBN (1998)
identified five “rights” of delegation (Box 10.4). These five
rights were further endorsed in the 2006 ANA/NCSBN
Joint Statement. First, the task must be the right one for
the patient. The nurse must use clinical judgment, not
merely assign a CNA a group of rooms for taking vital
signs. The circumstances must be right for the particular 
patient and the care needs—again a nursing judgment—
as well as for delegation. The right person means the right
person for the care activity, nurse, technician, or assistive
personnel. This person, who will be delegated the care of
the patient, must clearly understand what is involved with
the care to be given (direction). Two-way communication
skills are critical. The fifth right is the provision of the cor-
rect supervision and evaluation of the care and the person
who was delegated to provide the care. Once again, super-
vision and evaluation require the use of nursing judgment.
Where is the patient in a nursing management situa-
tion? Consider the patient, fresh from surgery, who has just
arrived on the floor: The nurse first makes the assessment
of the patient to determine status and care needs. The nurse
then decides what type of monitoring of vital signs is
needed for the patient’s well-being. The assistive person has
been trained to take vital signs and has demonstrated this
skill (that is, has been certified to perform it). But does this
nurse know that the vital signs will be taken accurately and
as directed; in other words, is this the right person for the
job? If this assistive person is the correct person, then 
the nurse gives clear, understandable directions, including
the reporting cycle back to the nurse for the nurse’s clinical
judgment. Along with this, the nurse provides the appro-
priate supervision and evaluation of the care given.
Delegation involves giving responsibility 
but not abdicating the accountability 
for the task or activity.
The manager’s or the leader’s knowledge of her staff is
critical to successful delegation. The education, experience,
prior performance, willingness, trustworthiness, and expert-
ise of the person should be considered before appropriate
delegation can occur. It is the responsibility of the delegator
to make an adequate assessment, which should include how
long the individual will need supervision and what type of
supervision. Individual Nurse Practice Acts in some states
provide specific language and requirements for appropriate
delegation by nurses. Be aware of both the provisions in your
state practice act and the agency policies and procedures. You
must abide by the legal authority in your practice act.
CHAPTER 10 Managing and Leading in the Organization     ●
177
BOX 10.4
The Five Rights of Delegation
The RIGHT
●Task
●Circumstances
●Person
●Direction/Communication
●Supervision/Evaluation
Source: From National Council of State Boards of Nursing. (1998).
The five rights of delegation. Chicago, IL: Author.

Delegation errors can jeopardize the patient. The cor-
rect balance is the key. Delegation is necessary to provide
effective care for patients. The nurse must be the one 
involved with the clinical judgment for the patient’s well-
being but cannot perform all tasks involved in this
process. Delegation is an essential skill of the nurse. 
Delegation is described in Provision 4 in the Code of
Ethics for Nurses (ANA, 2015) specifies that “nurses in
management and administration have a particular respon-
sibility to provide a safe environment that supports and
facilitates appropriate assignment and delegation” (ANA,
2015, p. 17). This environment includes appropriate ori-
entation, mentoring, and protections for patients. Once
again, we have the core competencies for the nurse as pro-
viding patient-centered care that is based on evidence of
efficacy and quality improvement, provided in an inter-
disciplinary team, and communicated with the assistance
of informatics.
As observed by Northouse (2010), “to be effective, or-
ganizations need to nourish both competent management
and skilled leadership” (p. 11). These competent managers
and skilled leaders address the quote provided at the 
beginning of this chapter by Whoopi Goldberg: “I am
where I am because I believe in all possibilities.” Change
for the good of patients or the healthcare industry can be
a result of applying principles of management and theories
of leadership in healthcare organizations and addressing
innovative possibilities. As we will see in the next chapter,
professional nursing practice has an integral role in this
process of change and innovation.
178
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
ONLINE CONSULT 
ANA Principles for Delegation at 
http://nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories
/Policy-Advocacy/Priority-Issues/ANAPrinciples
/PrinciplesofDelegation.pdf (if an ANA member)
ANA/NCSBN Joint Statement on Delegation at 
https://www.ncsbn.org/Delegation_joint
_statement_NCSBN-ANA.pdf
NCSBN Delegation Documents at 
https://www.ncsbn.org/1625.htm
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
You have read an article on how nursing leaders can promote evidence-based practice as a value in their
organizational environments. The article reports that “transformational nursing leaders promote learning
cultures, engendering commitment that brings competitive advantages for organizations as new knowledge
is transferred to practice” (Halm, 2010, p. 377). The article supported practices of transformational leaders
including providing a shared vision, challenging current processes, enabling action by others, and encourag-
ing individual actions. You start thinking about the acute care unit where you are a nurse manager and
about the leadership that is needed to foster more evidence-based practice despite staff changes.
Question: How will you use this information to provide leadership and additional focus on the application
of evidence-based practice? Identify the skills you will use and those you wish to develop in the nursing staff.
Source: Halm, M. A. (2010). “Inside looking in” or “Inside looking out”? How leaders shape cultures equipped for evidence-
based practice. American Journal of Critical Care, 19, 375–378.
K E Y  P O I N T S
●An organization is simply an arrangement of human and material resources for some purpose, such as
creating an institution or agency to meet a stated aim. Organizations can be viewed in terms of their
structure, function, and people.
●Organizational structure is the design of the organization, including the type of hierarchy that tells us
about positions or roles, responsibilities, status, channels of command or reporting relationships, and tasks
to be accomplished. The major organizational structures are bureaucratic and organic (adhocratic).
●Centralized versus decentralized organizational structures involve the lines of control and decision making
within the organization.
●Organizations are also described according to the layers of differentiation for authority, decision making,
and coordination. Flat organizational structures have a wide base and few layers or tiers for decision 
making and authority, whereas tall organizational structures have more tiers and lines of command, 
with less local decision making at the lower levels.
●Organizational functions include goals and operations to fulfill the mission of the organization.
●Management is the coordination of resources to achieve organizational outcomes and involves critical
thinking, problem-solving, and decision making.

CHAPTER 10 Managing and Leading in the Organization     ●
179
K E Y  P O I N T S—cont’d
●From a focus on the organization and increasing productivity, humanistic theories of management emerged,
including the classic motivational theories proposed by Maslow, McGregor, Herzberg, and Ouchi.
●Drucker (2002) proposes that a manager is an executive who is focused on contributing to the 
effectiveness of organization by virtue of intelligence, imagination, and knowledge (p. 2).
●Leadership involves action, creativity, motivation, and visioning. It is viewing the possibilities and 
motivating others to make things happen.
●The three basic leadership styles are bureaucratic, democratic, and laissez-faire.
●The organizational culture involves the culmination of the norms, attitudes, and values related to the 
organizational mission, accompanied by the expected behaviors of people.
●The organizational communication process can also be thought of as containing “rights”: (1) information 
or content, (2) communication channel, (3) format, including use of correct grammar, terms, and language,
(4) level of understanding, (5) technology, and (6) follow-up.
●Power is the ability to effect change in people’s behavior or in the organization. Legitimate power is the
authority to effect change within one’s position. Power bases are built on control of resources, technical
skills, and a body of knowledge as well as exclusive rights and access to other people with power.
●Effective conflict resolution requires negotiation or coming to a win-win solution.
●Delegation is the “transfer of responsibility of the performance of an activity from one individual to 
another while retaining the accountability of the outcome” (ANA, 2010, p. 64).
●The five “rights” of delegation are the right task, the right circumstances, the right person, the right 
direction or communication, and the right supervision or evaluation (NCSBN, 1998).
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Characterize the organization where you work. Describe the structure, functions, lines of decision making, commu-
nication patterns, and sources of power relative to the organizational mission. Be prepared to participate in a 
discussion (online or in class) to be scheduled by your instructor.
2. Differentiate between management and leadership. Where do the two roles overlap?
3. Interview a member of the administrative team from a large healthcare facility on the various positions held by
nurses. Describe their roles, changes that have occurred, areas of legitimate power, and the skills professional
nurses need in this setting. Be prepared to participate in a discussion to be scheduled by your instructor.
4. Locate an evidence-based practice summary in your area of clinical interest. Describe how you, as the leader,
would plan for practice changes and utilize the practices of effective leadership to describe your strategies in the
process. Recall that these five practices are as follows:
• Model the way.
• Inspire a shared vision.
• Challenge the process.
• Enable others to act.
• Encourage the heart. (Kouzes and Posner, 2002, p. 13)
5. Observe the start of a shift on a nursing unit. Describe the differences between assignment and delegation. Be
prepared to participate in a discussion to be scheduled by your instructor.
6. Review the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter, and discuss it in the context of the contents
of the chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.

REFERENCES
Aiken, T.D. (2004). Legal, ethical, and ethical issues in nursing
(2nd ed). Philadelphia, PA: FA Davis.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2002).
AACN white paper: Hallmarks of the professional nursing prac-
tice environment. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu
/publications/white-papers/hallmarks-practice-environment
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses. (2005). AACN’s
standards for establishing and sustaining healthy work 
environments: A journey to excellence. Retrieved from http://
www.aacn.org/WD/HWE/Docs/HWEStandards.pdf
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2010). Nursing: Scope
and standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Spring, MD:
Nursesbooks.org.
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2012). ANA’s principles
for delegation by registered nurses to unlicensed assistive 
personnel. Silver Spring, MD: Nursebooks.org. Retrieved
from http://nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories
/ThePracticeofProfessionalNursing/NursingStandards/ANA
Principles/PrinciplesofDelegation.pdf (members only site)
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2015). Code of ethics for
nurses with interpretive statements. Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursesbooks.org.
American Nurses Association (ANA) & National Council of
State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN). (2006). Joint statement
on delegation. Retrieved from https://www.ncsbn.org
/Delegation_joint_statement_NCSBN-ANA.pdf
American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC). (2014a). 
Addendum: Changes to the 2014 Magnet® application manual. 
March 2014. Retrieved from http://www.nursecredentialing
.org/2014-MagnetManualUpdates
American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC). (2014b). 
The Magnet Recognition® Program: Program overview. 
Retrieved from http://www.nursecredentialing.org/
Magnet/ProgramOverview
American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC). (2014c). 
Program overview: Pathway to Excellence® Program: Program
overview. Retrieved from http://www.nursecredentialing.org
/Pathway/AboutPathway
American Organization of Nurse Executives (AONE). 
(2012). 2014-2016 strategic plan. Retrieved from
http://www.aone.org/membership/about/docs
/2014-2016%20AONE%20StratPlan.Final.pdf
Bennis, W. (2000). Managing the dream: Reflections on leader-
ship and change. Cambridge, MA: Basic Books.
Bertalanffy, L. V. (1968). General system theory: Foundations, 
development, applications. New York: George Braziller.
Buckingham, M. (2005). The one thing you need to know . . .
about great managing, great leading, and sustained 
individual success. New York: Free Press.
Daft, R. L. (2007). Organizational theory and design (9th ed.).
Mason, OH: Thompson South-Western College 
Publishing.
Drucker, P. F. (2002). The effective executive revised. New York:
Harper Collins Publishers.
Drucker, P. F., & Maciariello, J. A. (2008). Management
(rev. ed.). New York: Collins Business.
Eason, T. (2009). Emotional intelligence and nursing leadership:
A successful combination. Creative Nursing, 15, 184–185.
Eddy, L. L., Doutrich, D., Higgs, Z. R., Spuck, J., Olson, M.,
& Weinberg, S. (2009). Relevant nursing leadership: An 
evidence-based programmatic response. International 
Journal of Nursing Education Scholarship, 6. Retrieved 
from http://www.bepress.com/ijnes/vol6/iss1/art22/
Fayol, H. (1949). General and industrial management
(C. Storrs, Trans.). London, UK: Pittman & Sons.
Feather, R. (2008). Emotional intelligence in relation to 
nursing leadership: Does it matter? Journal of Nursing 
Management, 17, 376–382.
Goleman, D. (1995). Emotional intelligence: Why it can matter
more than IQ. New York: Bantam Books.
Greiner, A. C., & Knebel, E. (Eds.). (2003). Health professions
education: A bridge to quality. Washington, DC: Institute of
Medicine.
Hall, R. H., & Tolbert, P. S. (2005). Organizations: Structures,
processes, and outcomes (9th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Pearson Prentice-Hall.
Halm, M.A. (2010). “Inside looking in” or “Inside looking out”?
How leaders shape cultures equipped for evidence-based
practice. American Journal of Critical Care, 19, 375–378.
Herzberg, F. (1966). Work and the nature of man. Cleveland,
OH: World Publishing.
Huston, C. (2008). Preparing nurse leaders for 2010. Journal of
Nursing Management, 16, 905–911.
Kouzes, J. M., & Posner, B. Z. (2002). The leadership challenge
(3rd ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Leininger, M. (2006). Culture care theory and uses in nursing
administration. In M. Leininger & M. R. McFarland, Cul-
ture care diversity and universality: A worldwide nursing the-
ory (2nd ed., pp. 365–379). Boston, MA: Jones & Bartlett.
Malloch, K. (2010). Innovation leadership: New perspectives 
for new work. Nursing Clinics of North America, 
45, 1–9.
Marquis, B. L., & Huston, C. J. (2015). Leadership roles and
management functions in nursing: Theory and application
(8th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.
Maslow, A. H. (1954). Motivation and personality. New York:
Harper.
Maslow, A. H. (1970). The farther reaches of the human mind.
New York: Viking Press.
Maxwell, J. C. (2007). The 21 irrefutable laws of leadership: 
Follow them and people will follow you (rev. ed). Nashville,
TN: Thomas Nelson.
McGregor, D. (1960). The human side of enterprise. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
McGregor, D. (1967). The professional manager. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
McManis & Monsalve Associates, Inc., & American 
Organization of Nurse Executives. (2003). Healthy work 
environments, Vol. 2: Striving for excellence. Chicago: 
American Organization of Nurse Executives.
Merton, R. K. (1957). Social theory and social structure
(Rev. ed.). Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Mintzberg, H. (1983a). Power in and around organizations. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Mintzberg, H. (1983b). Structures in fives: Designing effective 
organizations. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN).
(1998). The five rights of delegation. Chicago: Author.
National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN).
(2005). Working with others: A position paper. Retrieved
from https://www.ncsbn.org/1625.htm
180
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

Northouse, P.G. (2010). Leadership: Theory and practice
(5th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ouchi, W. G. (1981). Theory Z: How American business can
meet the Japanese challenge. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Page, A. (ed.). (2004). Keeping patients safe: Transforming the
work environment of nurses. Washington, DC: Institute of
Medicine.
Shirley, M. R. (2006). Authentic leaders creating healthy work
environments for nursing practice. American Journal of 
Critical Care, 15, 256–267.
Sigma Theta Tau. (2005). Resource paper and position statement
on: Leadership and leadership development priorities. 
Retrieved from http://www.nursingsociety.org/aboutus
/PositionPapers/Documents/position_leadership.pdf
Taylor, F. W. (1911). The principles of scientific management.
New York: Harper & Row.
Tichy, M. N., & Bennis, W. G. (2007). Judgment: How winning
leaders make great calls. New York: Penguin.
Weber, M. (1947). The fundamental concepts of sociology 
(A. M. Anderson & T. Parsons, Trans.). In T. Parsons
(Ed.), Max Weber: The theory of social and economic 
organization (pp. 87–157). New York: Oxford University
Press.
Wheatley, M. J. (2006). Leadership and the new science: 
Discovering order in a chaotic world (3rd ed.). 
San Francisco, CA: Berrett-Koehler.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
American Nurses Association. (2009). Nursing administration:
Scope and standards of practice (3rd ed.). Silver Spring, MD:
Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Credentialing Center. (2014). Transforma-
tional leadership: Criteria for nursing excellence. Silver Spring,
MD: Author.
Disch, J. (2009). Generative leadership. Creative Nursing, 15,
172–173.
George, B. (2004). Authentic leadership: Rediscovering the secrets
to creating lasting value. New York: John Wiley.
Grossman, S. C., & Valiga, T. M. (2012). The new leadership
challenge: Creating the future of nursing (4th ed.). 
Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Hendren, R. (2010). Six steps to ensure new nurse manager 
success. Retrieved from http:// www.healthleadersmedia
.com/content/NRS-252808/Six-Steps-to-Ensure
-New-Nurse-Manager-Success.html
Houser, B., & Player, E. (2010). Pivotal moments in nursing:
Leaders who changed the path of a profession, Volume I. 
Indianapolis, IN: Sigma Theta Tau.
Johansen, B. (2012). Leaders make the future: Ten new 
leadership skills for an uncertain world. San Francisco, CA: 
Berrett-Koehler.
Locke, E. A. (1982). The ideas of Frederick W. Taylor: An
evaluation. Academy of Management Review, 7(1), 14.
ONLINE RESOURCES
American Nurses Association
http://nursingworld.org
American Association of Colleges of Nursing
http://www.aacn.nche.edu
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses
http://www.aacn.org
American Organization of Nurse Executives
http://www.aone.org/
Dale Carnegie and Associates
http://www.dalecarnegie.com
Magnet Recognition Program
http://www.nursecredentialing.org/Magnet
National Council of State Boards of Nursing
http://www.ncsbn.org
Peter F. Drucker
http://www.druckerinstitute.com/link/about-peter-drucker/
CHAPTER 10 Managing and Leading in the Organization     ●
181

Change and Innovation
182
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Differentiate among the theories of change.
2. Apply the stages of change to a patient situation.
3. Given a practice situation, describe the roles and characteristics of an effective change agent.
4. Discuss differences needed in the change process for use with individuals, families, and groups.
5. Describe the process and strategies for effective organizational change.
6. Evaluate his or her personal change quotient.
Change
Planned Change
Change Agents
Restraining Forces
Driving Forces
Unfreezing
Moving
Refreezing
Innovation
Transtheoretical Approach
Transitions
Internal Sources of Change
External Sources of Change
Change Quotient
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
“We must always change, renew, 
rejuvenate ourselves; 
otherwise we harden.”
Johann von Goethe 1749–1812
Key Terms
11

In professional practice, we need to focus on the process
of planned change, being proactive rather than reactive. In
fact, nursing professionals have been challenged to take a
leadership role in healthcare. The Institute of Medicine’s
(2011) seminal report, “The Future of Nursing: Leading
Change, Advancing Health,” clearly states: “By virtue of
its numbers and adaptive capacity, the nursing profession
has the potential to effect wide-reaching changes in the
health care system (p. S-1). This statement provides a
clear directive for change and innovation with nurses as
major players in the process. 
Change is a part of normal daily life. We talk about
changing our hair color, our attitude, someone else’s
mind, and so on. Change can be defined as a process that
results in altered behavior of individuals or groups.
Change that is accidental, spontaneous, or haphazard is
caused by outside forces. On the other hand, intentional
or planned change involves conscious effort toward some
goal as a deliberate and collaborative process. Change is
an integral and essential component of professional nurs-
ing practice, with nurses as change agents in healthcare
settings.
In today’s world, change must be viewed as affecting
both the individual and the group. One example of
planned change would be an individual going on a diet.
The result (the change) is a decrease in weight. Such a
change may also come about unintentionally, through
outside influence. A family crisis or a bout of depression
may lead to weight change. Or suppose the individual
started eating a lot of chocolate. Gaining weight was not
the intention—eating chocolate was—but weight gain was
an unintended consequence. In contrast, as a planned
change process, the same individual may have gone to
Weight Watchers. Improved nutrition and eating practices
also influence other family members through food selec-
tions and meal preparation in the home, and may even 
influence friends and colleagues through the individual’s
example.
Change is a daily occurrence in society. Think about
the number of times you have read or heard of global re-
lations, changes in political forces, and changes in health-
care organizations as restructuring. More people are
beginning to embrace change since Johnson (2002) pub-
lished his now classic Who Moved My Cheese? comparing
the mice and the Littlepeople doing simple things that can
either work or immobilize the situation when things
change. Still, making change is not an easy process for 
individuals or organizations.
In professional practice, we need to focus on the
process of planned change, being proactive rather than re-
active. As we saw in the previous chapter, the ability to
embrace change and innovation is a leadership character-
istic. Planned changes for individuals or groups in the en-
vironment require structural shifts or altered behaviors for 
improved functioning. Improved functioning involves
new (changed) behaviors, attitudes, and relationships. Pro-
fessional nurses are change agents for people and health.
Their role is to move for needed, planned change for in-
dividuals, families, community groups, and society. Such
practice should occur in individual practice as well as on
an organizational level.
THEORIES OF CHANGE 
AND INNOVATION
Understanding the theories of change applicable to indi-
viduals, families, groups, and society is the first step in
moving from being reactive to unintended change to be-
coming proactive in creating positive, planned change.
Chinn and Benne (1976) described three classic
change philosophies: (1) the empirical-rational nature of
man, (2) normative-reeducative philosophy, based on
human motivation and norms (attitudes, values, skills,
and relationships), and (3) power-coercive philosophy,
based on leadership and the application of power (p. 23).
The change models that follow reflect the empirical-
rational and the normative-reeducative philosophies.
These two philosophical orientations focus on the nature
of the person or the group in the context of the environ-
ment and are consistent with contemporary leadership 
theories.
Lewin
The classic change theorist was Kurt Lewin, with his nor-
mative-reeducative model based on human motivation
and norms in the group. Lewin (1951) developed a model
based on his Field Theory, a method of ana lyzing causal
relationships and building the scientific constructs for
change (p. 45). The mathematical model in his theory
merely indicates that human behavior is based on the
human being (or group) and his or her environment at
that point in time. Lewin (1951) focused on social change,
pointing out that “group life is never without change,
merely differences in amount and type of change exist” 
(p. 199). In groups and organizations, multiple influences
from individuals and their reactions to the environment
cause group behaviors and norms. Field Theory proposes
that the status quo, or a state of equilibrium, is maintained
when restraining forces and driving forces balance each
other. To achieve change, the restraining forces must be
weakened and the driving forces strengthened. Consider
the illustration of change in Figure 11.1.
Restraining forces in society resist change; they include
norms, values, relations among people, morals, fears, per-
ceived threats, and regulations. In essence, these restrain-
ing forces are the “old guard” that maintains the status
quo. Driving forces, on the other hand, support change
and include the desire to please or the desire for more
novel, effective, efficient, or merely different activities. 
System imbalance becomes the impetus for change. The
process involves weakening the restraining forces and
strengthening the driving forces. To do this, Lewin pro-
posed three methods: unfreezing, moving, and refreezing
of group standards.
Unfreezing involves disequilibrium, discontent, and
uneasiness. Lewin (1951) states that “to break open the
shell of complacency and self-righteousness, it is some-
times necessary to bring about deliberately an emotional
stir-up” (p. 229). The restraining and driving forces 
are identified, and comparisons are drawn between the 
ideal and the actual situation. To bring about change, 
participants must make the need for change apparent and
CHAPTER 11 Change and Innovation     ●
183

accepted. In many situations, making individuals uneasy
and discontented with the environmental system is the ini-
tial step in the process. Malcontents want change, whereas
individuals who are satisfied and comfortable with the cur-
rent state of affairs resist changes that will create disequi-
librium. Activities are centered on unfreezing the existing
equilibrium.
Moving occurs when the previous structure is re-
arranged and realistic goals are set. The system is moved
to a new level of equilibrium. Choices must be made about 
accepting the change agent and the roles of the group
members in the change process. At this stage, group deci-
sions are preferable for moving toward permanent change.
This represents the distribution of power among the group
members to make them driving forces engaged in the
process. The individual involved in the change process acts
as a member of a group in which new social values and
norms are being established.
A new status quo is established with refreezing. Re-
freezing describes the new level of equilibrium and rein-
forcement needed for the new patterns of behavior. The
focus is on maintaining the goal achieved and highlighting
the present benefits over past practices.
Consider Lewin’s model with a patient population.
The individual with heart disease who is started on a 
low-salt, low-fat diet has a teaching need to bring perma-
nent change to his diet. You discover through interviews
with the patient and family members that the diet at 
home is highly seasoned and high in animal protein and
fats. Restraining forces in this situation are cultural values;
family traditions; individual and group (family) prefer-
ences in food selection and preparation; attitudes toward
diet, foods, or food preparation; fears of further illness
with changes in diet; and attitudes toward restrictions on
personal lifestyle.
Now consider each of these factors in relation to all
members of the household and the patient’s work, recre-
ation, and social environments. Think about the driving
forces: fear of further illness without the dietary changes,
respect for advice given, support network, educational pre-
sentations, role models, and so forth. Unfreezing involves
the identification of the restraining and driving forces, 
motivating the patient toward change, and assessing 
readiness for teaching. Moving consists of supporting a 
positive attitude toward change and providing nutritional
information, including food selection, preparation, and
presentation options. Refreezing would occur with the 
patient’s stabilization, evidenced through subjective 
reports (e.g., food diary), objective observations (e.g.,
health assessment), and laboratory findings in the rehabil-
itation phase. Valuable nursing theories to support nursing
actions include King’s Theory of Goal Attainment and
Orem’s Self-Care Agency. Supporting attitudinal and be-
havioral changes could occur through follow-up telephone
or e-mail service after discharge or interviews at clinic ap-
pointments. A similar application could be developed for
group change using Lewin’s Field Theory or the Health
Promotion Model. See Chapter 4 for more information.
Lippitt
As an outgrowth and expansion of Lewin’s theory, Lippitt
(1973) pointed out that “if we want to understand, explain,
or predict change in human behavior, we need to take into
account the person and his environment” (p. 3). He iden-
tified several complex factors of human behavior that must
be considered: motivation, multiple causation, and over-
rationalized habits. Looking at both individual and orga-
nizational change, he focused further on the change agent
and defined seven specific phases (Fig. 11.2) within an idea,
similar to Lewin’s change model. Thus, Lippitt described
more specific activities that are still applicable to the three
steps of unfreezing, moving, and refreezing.
Unfreezing, Moving, Refreezing
For unfreezing, there is the need to collect data and 
diagnose the problem and the key people. The driving and
184
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
Restraining Forces
Driving Forces
(Equilibrium)
Restraining Forces
Driving Forces
(Unequilibrium; setting for change)
STATUS QUO
STATUS QUO
Figure 11.1 Illustration of restraining and driving forces in the change process.
7.
6.
5.
4.
3.
2.
1.
 
Terminating the Relationship
 
Maintaining the Change
 
Choosing the Change Agent’s Role
 
Selecting Change Objectives
 
Change Agent’s Motivation and Resources
 
Assessment of Motivation and Capacity for Change
Diagnosis of Problem
Figure 11.2 Lippitt’s (1973) seven stages of planned
change.

restraining people, environmental, and organizational
forces are identified, defined, and targeted. Second, the
motivation and resources are assessed to identify the desire
and capacity for change. This includes the resistance and
readiness of the people in the environment. In the third
step, the change agent’s motivation, commitment, and re-
sources must be assessed for the potential success of the
change activity. The skills, efforts, and responsibilities are
critical planning pieces in this phase of change.
For moving, change objectives must be selected with
consideration of activities for progressive change. Lippitt
uses the leverage point concept as the starting point at
which receptivity for change is apparent and the objectives
are initiated. Planning and evaluation are  primary activities
in this step. Then, following the development of an action
plan with evaluation criteria, the change agent and group
roles are selected and assigned. Acceptance and selection
of an appropriate role is critical in defining the power, out-
comes, and strategies of the change agent.
Refreezing, or maintaining the change, occurs through
ongoing training, communication, and support of the peo-
ple in the environment. Communication by both sides,
the driving and the restraining forces, advertises the success
of the change using actual evaluation results. In many
cases, the loudest and most visible of the restraining forces
become the change agent’s greatest supporters when they
accept the merits of the process with evaluation. How
many times have you heard someone say, “I never thought
it could be done but . . .” or “I was behind that all along
but I did not want to show it”? Finally, terminating the
helping relationship is necessary on the part of the change
agent and major players for the change to become part of
the people and the environment, and not just the activity
of a select individual or group. Rather, it becomes the new
norm of the people or the organization.
Role of Change Agent
A major piece of Lippitt’s (1973) model involves the roles
for the professional change agent. He proposed four major
roles for the change agent:
●Specialist
●Coordinator
●Fact finder and information link
●Consultant
Lippitt views the selection of the appropriate role for
the change agent as essential in the moving phase of
change. As a specialist, the change agent is the expert in
the environment on methods and strategies for change.
As a coordinator, the change agent functions as manager,
who plans, organizes, and co ordinates efforts and pro-
grams for the change. The change agent as a fact finder
and information link serves as a seeker, clarifier, synthe-
sizer, reality tester, and provider of information, as well
as a communications link among all participants in the
system (Lippitt, 1973, pp. 60–61).
The consultant role is viewed as the most important
role for the change agent, both inside the system and with
external individuals, groups, and environments. In fact,
Lippitt (1973) developed a model of eight  specific activity
roles within this consultant role, which are viewed along
a continuum from advocate through expert, trainer, al-
ternative identifier, collaborator, process specialist, fact
finder, and reflector (p. 63). The correct role for the
change agent depends on the  people, the environment,
and how much direction is needed from the agent to im-
plement the change. As the advocate, the change agent as
a consultant is highly directive in leading the group to-
ward change. Conversely, the change agent is the least di-
rective as a reflector, helping the group clarify and
evaluate their efforts. The change agent must have knowl-
edge, skill, and perseverance in the work-intensive process
of change.
Consider, again, our example of the patient who
must change to a low-salt, low-fat diet. Under Lippitt’s
model, first, you need to collect data on meals, food pref-
erences, and preparation at home. You identify, define,
and target the environmental forces—family, friends, and
cultural and collegial (work or recreational) forces. Second,
you assess the motivation, resistance, readiness, and re-
sources of the patient and his family to identify the desire
and capacity for change in dietary habits. In the third step,
your motivation, commitment, and resources must be re-
alized as the nurse–change agent. Your skills, efforts, and
responsibilities are critical in this planning phase. Lippitt’s
concept of leverage point occurs when the patient and his
family are receptive to change and the action plan is initi-
ated with evaluation criteria. Your role as change agent is
defined specific to the patient and his needs. Consider the
applicability of Orem’s three modes of nursing, especially
the supportive-educative mode, in relation to his contin-
uum of consultant activities. Your role as change agent
may alter rapidly as the patient moves from the hospital
setting to the home and clinic settings. Empowerment of
the patient and his significant others is critical for success
in this type of change. And with the maintenance of the
change in diet and health status that occurs through on-
going training in dietary management, communication,
support, and reinforcement during the follow-up period,
the patient and family are moved into the termination
phase. The helping relationship is no longer necessary and
the dietary changes have become part of the person and
family in their environment.
Havelock
Havelock (1971) used a system and process model to de-
pict an organization with the following major concepts:
role, linkages, and communication for transfer and use of
knowledge. Using the three major perspectives of prob-
lem-solving, research-development-diffusion, and social
interaction, Havelock further examined the linkage process
to view the change in the broader system (Havelock &
Havelock, 1973). His model reflects the empirical-rational
nature of humans. 
Building on Lewin’s stages of change, Havelock added
steps highlighting communication and interpersonal 
activities:
●Perception of need
●Diagnosis of the problem
●Identification of the problem
●Devising a plan of action
CHAPTER 11 Change and Innovation     ●
185

●Gaining acceptance of the plan
●Stabilization
●Self-renewal (Havelock & Havelock, 1973)
Unfreezing, Moving, Refreezing
For unfreezing, the perception of a need for a change in
the system is followed by diagnosis and identification of
the problem. At this time, a reciprocal relationship devel-
ops between the user (patient) system and a resource 
system. Linkages with needed resources are made in this
initial stage before moving on the change. Havelock and
Havelock (1973) stress that the problem-solver must be
“meaningfully linked to outside resources” (p. 23).
Moving toward change requires devising a plan of ac-
tion and gaining acceptance of the plan in the system. This
is a stage of searching for a solution and applying that 
solution to the identified problem, using resource linkages
in the environment. 
In the final step, refreezing, stabilization and the need
for self-renewal are specified. First, stabilization in the
system is specified to sustain the change (refreezing).
Havelock describes self-renewal as being needed to
 sustain the patient system in the future. This sense of
self-renewal is the empirical-rational nature of people
where the new values, goals, and activities of the system
become the norm.
Role of Change Agent
The importance of and roles for the change agent are also
key components of Havelock’s model, which lists four
roles for the change agent:
●Catalyst
●Solution giver
●Process helper
●Resource linker (Havelock & Havelock, 1973, p. 60)
These roles become increasingly complex. The catalyst
serves as the impetus for change. The resource linker
brings people, environments, and resources together at the
system and macrosystem levels (Havelock & Havelock,
1973, pp. 60–64). For effective functioning within these
roles, Havelock further developed a training program for
preparing effective change agents.
Havelock’s model can also be used with the example
of dietary change for our patient with heart disease. Com-
munication and interpersonal activities are core ingredi-
ents in the nurse-patient relationship. Identifying the need
for altering dietary salt and fat relates to the patient’s med-
ical condition. The personal, environmental, social, cul-
tural, and dietary habits are assessed through interview, to
define the problem. A reciprocal relationship between the
patient system and a resource system occurs through link-
ages, including meeting with a nutritionist for food selec-
tion and preparation options. Informational lists on
cookbooks, restaurants, and community associations ad-
vocating healthy eating with low-fat, low-salt meals are
provided. Using this model, the nurse encourages linkages
with outside resources such as the American Heart Asso-
ciation, American Association of Critical-Care Nurses, 
and collegial relationships with nutritionists, rehabilitation
specialists, and cardiologists. The plan for dietary change
is devised in collaboration with the patient system and in-
cludes linkages with community resources acceptable to
the patient and his family. Recall the concept of cultural
competence from Chapter 4 and how it is necessary in this
model. Linkages must be retained with the patient after
discharge, in the home, clinic, or rehabilitation setting.
This follow-up is necessary for stabilizing the diet, given
the patient’s physiological and psychosocial system influ-
ences. The role of the nurse-change agent has moved from
catalyst and solution giver in the initial phase of problem
identification, to process helper in the planning phase, and
then to resource linker. The changes in diet must become
a part of the patient’s value system. The nurse–change
agent then terminates the relationship with the patient,
while linkages with external resources provide the patient
with self-renewal.
Rogers
As an outgrowth of the change model, Rogers developed
the Diffusion of Innovations model. In 1971, Rogers and
Shoemaker stated the following:
Although it is true that we live more than ever before in
an era of change, prevailing social structures often serve
to hamper the diffusion of innovations. Our activities in
education, agriculture, medicine, industry, and the like
are often without the benefit of the most current research
knowledge. The gap between what is actually known
and what is effectively put to use needs to be closed. 
(p. 1)
This is still true today, more than 40 years later. We live
in a time of even greater social change. This model was
used in nursing in the 1980s to promote research-based
practice and is quite appropriate today with the imperative
for evidence-based practice. We are not just changing from
one practice to another. We want change to be evidence-
based, for efficacy related to patient outcomes. Often, this
will involve innovation or moving to a new, more novel
or advanced approach than the one used in the past.
Rogers and Shoemaker (1971) focus on communi -
cation and view change as the effects of a new idea or in-
novation being adopted and put into use or rejected.
Change may occur at the level of the individual, group,
organization, or society. The model was first proposed
with four major steps in the process of social change:
knowledge, persuasion, decision, and confirmation
(Rogers & Shoemaker, 1971, p. 25). Rogers (1983) then
extended the Innovation-Diffusion process to five stages:
●Knowledge
●Persuasion
●Decision
●Implementation
●Confirmation
The interest and commitment of key people and policy-
makers are critical in this model.
Notice how these stages are similar to those in the ACE
Star Model of Knowledge Transformation (see Fig. 5.1).
Recall that the steps in knowledge transformation were
discovery, summary, translation, integration, and evalua-
tion (Stevens, 2009).
186
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

Unfreezing, Moving, Refreezing
Developing a sequence of knowledge, persuasion, and de-
cision making is the key activity in the unfreezing stage.
To develop knowledge, key people and policy-makers are
introduced to the innovation to gain understanding. Then
comes persuasion to develop attitudes on the innovation.
Rogers (1983) uses persuasion to focus on the individual
whose attitudes change, either positively or negatively to-
ward the innovation, not on the external force that
changes one’s mind. The decision to adopt or reject an in-
novation is the bridge between the unfreezing and moving
stages in Rogers’ model.
Implementation applies to the stage of moving. Revi-
sions, potential adoption, or rejection of the innovation oc-
curs in this implementation phase. Rogers’ fifth step, when
the innovation changes from being novel to being part of
the routine or norm, involves refreezing the equilibrium. He
calls this step confirmation, in which reinforcement is sought
and the key people and policy-makers decide to maintain
or discontinue the innovation. Rogers (1983) admitted that
the research evidence shows no clear distinction between
the implementation and confirmation steps. This may be
related to the idea of a flexible time span between imple-
mentation and confirmation, when the process of refreezing
for the innovation occurs. Rogers (1983) describes the final
confirmatory stage as “routinization” of the innovation.
Throughout the entire process, five attributes deter-
mine the rate of adoption of an innovation by members
of a social system:
●Relative advantage
●Compatibility
●Complexity
●Trialability
●Observability (Rogers & Shoemaker, 1971, p. 39;
Rogers, 1983, pp. 238–240)
These attributes should be included in all evaluation
plans and data on the change. Relative advantage is deter-
mined through comparison of the innovation with what
was done in the past. The advantage may be effectiveness
as well as efficiency, and the process has been described as
weighing economic advantages or the cost-effectiveness.
Compatibility with the values, beliefs, and needs of the
group is the second factor. The complexity (difficulty in
use), trialability (experimental trials), and observability
(visible evidence) are all considered in the implementation
stage and have a direct effect on adoption, revision, or dis-
continuation of an innovation.
Role of Change Agent
Rogers’ model also highlights the roles of the change agent,
which occur in the following sequence:
1. Develops the need for change
2. Establishes the relationship with the individual system
3. Diagnoses the problems
4. Motivates the individual system for change
5. Translates intent for change into the actions needed
6. Stabilizes change in system and “freezes” new behavior
7. Terminates the relationship (Rogers, 1983, 
pp. 315–317)
Like Lippitt, Rogers views the change agent as a profes-
sional, skilled in change for effective functioning in 
the role.
We take a slightly different approach with the appli-
cation of Rogers’ Innovation-Diffusion process model to
our example of the patient who needs to change his diet.
You have found research studies on effective dietary com-
pliance in cardiac rehabilitation. You now wish to bring
this innovation into practice in your organization to use
in patient teaching programs. During the initial devel-
opment of knowledge, key people and policy-makers in
nursing service and cardiology are introduced to the
teaching program content and methods, along with 
the results from use with patients in other settings. Next,
you need to persuade people of the effectiveness and 
applicability of this approach—the organization and its
resources as well as the patient population. The decision
is made to either adopt or reject the new teaching pro-
gram. If it is decided to try the teaching program with 
a patient population, the phase of implementation is 
entered. The teaching program may be revised, adopted,
or rejected on the basis of its specificity and acceptability
to the patient group and the organization. If the teaching
program is found to be applicable and advantageous, it
is “confirmed” as the agency procedure or organizational
norm. If the procedure is not adopted, the key people
and policy-makers must confirm the decision to discon-
tinue the program. These are the steps toward imple-
menting evidence-based practice at the organizational
level.
The Transtheoretical Approach
Another model of change arose from a behaviorist perspec-
tive and psychotherapy. Prochaska, DiClemente, and Nor-
cross (1992) describe their program of research focused on
how people as “self-changers” intentionally change their
behavior, both with and without psychotherapy (p. 1102).
This led to the emergence of their Transtheoretical 
Approach to change, which they describe as an eclectic
model that does not dictate adherence to a specific type of
psychotherapy. The empirical basis for this theory provides
a broad range of studies on individuals and groups (both
inpatients and outpatients), from family therapy to addic-
tive conditions and health-promotion activities. One 
of the original core concepts of this theory is that people
who change or who recover from an addictive condition
experience an invariant series of stages for the change to
occur (Prochaska & DiClemente, 1984, p. 21). Key com-
ponents of this model are stages of change and processes
for intentional change to occur. Developmental and envi-
ronmental changes can also occur, but unless individuals
see this as an intentional change, they will feel coerced,
and reversion to the prior behavior may occur (Prochaska
& DiClemente, 1984, p. 80).
Originally, the Transtheoretical Model included five
linear stages (precontemplation, contemplation, deci-
sion, action, and maintenance) but was then modified
based on statistical analysis to four stages, because 
the individual’s decision to make a change included
both contemplation and action. The four stages of
change—precontemplation, contemplation, action, and
maintenance—were envisioned as a revolving door with
CHAPTER 11 Change and Innovation     ●
187

the potential for relapse (Prochaska & DiClemente,
1984, p. 23). 
Further research provided the basis for the refinement
of the model, as a spiral with five stages of change, in
which relapses were the norm, resulting in regression and
the potential for later progression through the five stages
(Prochaska et al., 1992, p. 1104). Consider these five
stages as described in Table 11.1. Termination with the
firm establishment of the changed behavior does not occur
until the individual no longer has to make any conscious
efforts to avoid a relapse to the prior behavior (Prochaska
& DiClemente, 1984, p. 29). The research has indicated
that most “self-changers” will “recycle several times
through stages before achieving long-term maintenance”
(Prochaska et al., 1992, p. 1111).
In addition to the stages of change through which the
individual progresses, the model proposes that  certain be-
haviors or processes are more apparent and effective in se-
lected stages of change. A behaviorist philosophy to change
is apparent in the 10 proposed processes that occur in the
different stages of change as follows:
●Consciousness raising with education and information
●Self-reevaluation as with values clarification
●Self-liberation with a commitment to action
●Counter-conditioning as with alternatives to the 
behavior
●Stimulus control or counteracting negative stimuli
●Reinforcement management or self-rewards for 
positive behaviors
●Helping relationships, both social and therapeutic 
support systems
●Dramatic relief or expressing feelings
●Environmental reevaluation as with the effect of the
problem on the environment
●Social liberation and advocacy (Prochaska et al., 1992,
p. 1108) 
Subsequent research has identified that the most fre-
quently used processes across the various types of inten-
tional change were helping relationships, consciousness
raising, and self-liberation, except in the case of overweight
individuals who used more self- liberation and stimulus
control (Prochaska et al., 1992, p. 1107). These change
processes focus on cognitive, affective, and psychomotor
behaviors. In the early precontemplation and contempla-
tion stages of change, the cognitive change processes can
lead to preparation for change. Active behavioral change
processes are critical in the action and maintenance stages,
however (Prochaska et al., 1992, p. 1112). 
188
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
TABLE 11.1
Transtheoretical Model and the Stages of Change
Stage of Change        Behavioral Characteristics                                           Changes Processes
Precontemplation            Satisfaction with the current situation. The                           Consciousness raising
                                    individual indicates no intention to change and           
↓
        Dramatic relief
                                    may deny the existence of a problem.                       ↓
Contemplation                Acknowledges that a problem exists but has             ↓        Environmental reevaluation
                                    not made a commitment to change                                    
                                    the negative behavior. An important clue for             ↓        Self-reevaluation
                                    this stage is a lack of readiness for the change                       
                                    despite thoughtful consideration of the                                
                                    positives and negatives of the situation.
Preparation                     In this stage the commitment to change is                 ↓        Self-liberation
                                    made and the individual is intending to take 
                                    action in the near future.
Action                            Positive actions are now taken for a change               ↓        Reinforcement management
                                    in behavior.
                                    Individuals in this stage have altered their                  ↓        Helping relationships
                                    behavior for a period from one day to six 
                                    months (Prochaska et al., 1992, p. 1104).                   ↓        Counter conditioning
Maintenance                   The new behaviors have now replaced the               ↓        Stimulus control 
                                    prior ones. The individual is committed to the 
                                    change on an ongoing basis. The theorists 
                                    describe the “hallmarks” of this stage as 
                                    stabilizing behavioral change and avoiding 
                                    relapse, which can last from six months to a 
                                    lifetime (Prochaska et al., 1992, p. 1104). 
Source: Prochaska, J. O., DiClemente, C. C., & Norcross, J. C. (1992). In search of how people change: Applications to 
addictive behaviors. American Psychologist, 47, 1102–1114.

CHAPTER 11 Change and Innovation     ●
189
Unfreezing, Moving, Refreezing
The five stages of change in the Transtheoretical Model
are also consistent with Lewin’s stages of change. Unfreez-
ing occurs in the stages of precontemplation, contempla-
tion, and preparation, especially with the cognitive change
processes. Moving starts with the stage of preparation for
the change and then into action. Recall that in the action
stage of the Transtheoretical Model, the individual has im-
plemented a changed behavior from one day to six
months. Refreezing occurs in the maintenance stage with
the stabilization of the behavior.
The Individual as the Change Agent
In this theory, the individual is the agent of change, with
external assistance of “helping relationships” in the change
process. The focus is clearly on the individual and the po-
tential for relapse and is applicable for individuals as “self-
changers,” especially given a situation for patient teaching.
Applications of the theory have been noted in the case
of both addictive behaviors and for promoting healthier
lifestyles. For use with groups, effectiveness depends on
whether the individuals are at the same stage of change
(Prochaska & DiClemente, 1984). For example, for effec-
tiveness, group members must be homogeneous in terms
of their readiness for change as opposed to a group with
some individuals in the precontemplation stage (and sat-
isfied with the status quo) and others in the action or
maintenance stages. 
The focus of the Transtheoretical Approach is on the
individual, and the potential for relapse is consistent with
the focus of nursing on human beings in their unique
environment and with their unique characteristics and
needs. They may need additional time to succeed in the
changed behavior. As previously noted by the theorists,
many need to “recycle” through the stages. As with our
example of the patient who must change to a low-salt,
low-fat diet, assessment of individual and environmental
characteristics is still essential, as is readiness for change.
This assessment of readiness will direct your use of
change processes to assist the individual through the 
particular stage of change. For example, with patient
teaching as a helping relationship, you may be providing
informational materials in the precontemplation and
contemplation stages as consciousness raising activities.
Also consider the use of active behavioral change activi-
ties with food diaries and reinforcement management in
the active stages of change. A key component of the self-
liberation process in change in the Transtheoretical 
Approach is the concept of choice, with the component
of decision-making and commitment to the decision
(Prochaska & DiClemente, 1984, p. 38). And individual
differences, self-esteem, and motivation must be consid-
erations in the case of a relapse. 
TRANSITIONS
In the area of organizational change, the concept of transi-
tions, as a corporate change phenomenon, has emerged with
the move to more humanistic organizational theories as
these same organizations struggle to survive and thrive in
the economic climate. As illustrated in the Harvard Business
Essentials publication (2003), “accepting the necessity and
inevitability of change enables [businesses] to see times of
transformation not as threats but as opportunities—
opportunities for reinventing the company and its culture”
(pp. 1–2). Numerous consultants as change agents assist
corporations through these transitions. Organizational
changes fall generally in the areas of mergers, cost-cutting,
 customer service, or changes in processes of how things get
done (Harvard Business Essentials, 2003). In healthcare we
have seen all of these types of changes, with process changes
an imperative as we focus on safety initiatives and evidence-
based practice. Two particular change models reflect the
humanistic focus of organizations in transition.
Bridges
Rather than focusing on change as a situation like reloca-
tion, Bridges (2009) looks at the psychological processes
in stages of transition (Box 11.1), where people must
“come to terms with the details of the new situation that
the change brings about” (p. 3). These three stages of tran-
sition are interacting and nonlinear and may be occurring
at the same time at different parts of the organization and
with different people.
In the initial stage, this theory focuses on people who
have to first “let go” of the comfortable and safe in their
day-to-day lives and experience loss. Resistance is to be
expected; Bridges (2009) regards this initial stage as an
ending in that “before you can learn a new way of doing
things, you must unlearn the old way” (p. 23). He de-
scribes a grief and mourning process requiring acceptance
of and assistance from the people in the organization.
Bridges (2009) describes the second stage as one of
great uncertainty, chaos, and the opportunity for innova-
tion. People have given up the old way of doing things but
need support in innovation and assistance in the process.
He describes Neutral Zone Management as the “only way
to ensure that the organization comes through the change
intact and that the necessary changes actually work the
way they are supposed to” (Bridges, 2009, p. 42). He even
recommends the use of transition teams composed of or-
ganizational members to monitor the process, progress,
and to be the communication channel to the leadership of
the organization. 
The third stage is the New Beginning, described as a
release of new energy in a new direction and with a new
identity (Bridges, 2009, p. 57). Again, the humanistic
perspective is apparent, with celebrations of the new 
corporate identity and the people in the new culture 
actively involved and rejuvenated. Bridges actively
speaks to leadership and provides examples of successes
BOX 11.1
Bridges’ Stages for Managing 
Transitions
●Ending, Losing, Letting Go
●The Neutral Zone
●The New Beginning
Source: Bridges, W. (2009). Managing transitions: Making the most of
change (3rd ed.). Cambridge, MA: DaCapo Press.

and pitfalls that occur in the transition. Organizational 
leadership must focus on the culture, with respect 
for transition to the new beginning. Checklists are pro-
vided to address questions on progress throughout the
process. 
Bridges’s three stages of organizational change can par-
allel the three stages of unfreezing, moving, and refreez-
ing, but this model focuses on the management and
people in the organization for success in the process. As
Bridges (2009) points out, “we have learned how self-
defeating it is to try to overcome people’s resistance to
change without addressing the threat the change poses to
their world” (p. xi).
Four Quadrants of Change
Another organizational change model focuses on the hu-
manistic factors within the organization, with important
considerations of personal transformation. Although not
related to particular stages, the Four Quadrants of Change
(see Box 11.2) is illustrated as a circle divided into quarters
as interacting and vital considerations for success in the
organizational change process. The top two quarters rep-
resent the individual in the organization but first with psy-
chological, spiritual, and cognitive attributes that must be
considered in the transformation process. Quadrant one
focuses on the inner development of people, and the
recognition that no substantive change is possible without
a change in the consciousness of the people (Anderson,
Klein, & Stuart, 2000, p. 32). Quadrant two represents
the interpersonal and technical skills for motivation and
peak performance in the organization (Anderson et al.,
2000, p. 32).
At the bottom of the circle, quadrants three and four
represent the organizational influences. Quadrant three
is the organizational culture and traditions. Quadrant
four is the organizational design with technology, policies,
procedures, and workflow that determine performance of
the organization (Anderson et al., 2000, p. 33). Consid-
eration of all four quadrants is vital in the change process
for an organization, but the theorists caution that the 
humanistic quadrants are vital for an organizational
change to succeed. They consider this a personal trans-
formation and a conscious choice because “organizational
change is not a question of skills and structure 
alone, but of identity and worldview” (Anderson et al.,
2000, p. 34). 
The Role of the Change Agent
In both transitions models, the role of the change agent
is the leadership driving the change, with management
firmly focused on the organizational culture for rein-
venting the organization and survival in a humanistic
environment. Understanding of human nature and its
resistance to change as a loss of the comfortable is nec-
essary for the change agent. The transitions models
are focused on organizational change, but the view of
change as a transition with the concepts of loss and 
rejuvenation are still applicable to our example of the 
patient with a need for a change in diet. The grief,
mourning, and loss over past heritage and practices must
be considered along with the uncertainty and potential
for innovation during the time of transition to the new
dietary regime. Perhaps this could be a family cookbook
of new recipes and preparations. An important thought
is the celebration of the new beginning and whether we
help our patients sufficiently celebrate their success with
a changed behavior. 
The various models of change are summarized in
Table 11.2. Selecting an appropriate model to guide
practice involves how you look at the world and what 
is most helpful in driving your skills as an agent in 
the change process. Moving from the theoretical 
stages of change to strategies for change and innovation
brings the focus to the external influence or change
agent.
CHANGE AGENTS
Our second step in becoming a major player in the change
process is to develop greater understanding of the roles and
attributes of a successful change agent. We have seen the
importance of the change agent emerge in the models of
Lippitt, Havelock, and Rogers. Recall that in the Trans-
theoretical Approach, your role as an agent of change will
be a part of the “helping  relationship.” Table 11.3 sum-
marizes the roles and activities of the change agent in these
models. In Lewin’s original model, change in humans is a
function of the person and his or her environment at that
point in time. Consider the roles of the change agent in
the three general phases of change.
Unfreezing
Good interpersonal and assessment skills are needed to
acquire data to weaken restraining forces and enhance
driving forces in the present system, and the agent must
consider both internal and external system forces. The
change agent must then establish a climate that encour-
ages and supports change. Needs assessment, diagnosis,
and the establishment of a professional relationship have
occurred consistently during the unfreezing phase in all
models. Now consider the similarity of this stage to 
the assessment and diagnosis activities of the nursing
process.
190
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
ONLINE CONSULT 
William Bridges & Associates at 
http://www.wmbridges.com
BOX 11.2
The Four Quadrants of Change
●Quadrant 1: Individual/Internal
●Quadrant 2: Individual/External
●Quadrant 3: Collective/Internal
●Quadrant 4: Collective/External
Source: Anderson, B., Klein, E., & Stuart, J. (2000). Why change is a
consciousness choice. The Journal for Quality and Participation, 23,
32–36. 

CHAPTER 11 Change and Innovation     ●
191
TABLE 11.2
Comparison of the Stages of Change Represented in Theoretical Models
Theorist                                                                        Stages                                               
In the nursing process, health assessment data are col-
lected and problems are identified. Assessing the patient’s
characteristics, current level of satisfaction with the health
problem and condition, and perception of the situation 
is an essential component of this activity. Diagnostic 
statements are developed after needs identification. Asking
questions and diagnosing the problem for changed behav-
iors or responses lead to the planning stage of the nursing
process.
Moving
The change agent must help the patient set and strive for
clear, realistic goals. A good deal of the change agent’s time
and energy is needed during this phase for strategies to
deal with those who are resisting change. Again, interper-
sonal and motivational skills are critical. The change agent
must constantly assess and evaluate resistance, conflict,
readiness for change, and motivation in the individual sys-
tem, and must maintain movement toward the goals and
objectives of change.
As in the nursing process, the major activities of the
moving stage are implementing plans, goals, and objec-
tives and collecting evaluation data. Patient data are
 analyzed, interpreted, and acted upon. The nurse actively
uses critical thinking, decision-making, interpersonal,
and evaluation skills. The same skills are necessary to
move toward change. This stage will probably be the
most comfortable for the nurse functioning as a change
agent, because skills in this area are developed through
nursing practice.
Refreezing
Providing rewards and reinforcement for the change is a
major part of the change agent’s role in the third stage.
Evaluation data for reinforcement of change must be used
as supportive evidence. Activities for the change agent 
during this stage are supportive initially, but involvement
decreases with the need to terminate and have the patient
system totally involved in and responsible for the change
without external intervention from the change agent. 
Recall that in the Transtheoretical Approach, the stage of
maintenance may last a lifetime until the individual no
longer has to make any conscious effort to avoid a relapse,
and the helping relationships may be the social support
system.
In the nursing process, the nurse-patient relationship
is terminated when objectives are achieved and nursing 
diagnoses are resolved. The nurse has prepared the
 person or family for this termination long before
 discharge orders are written or the person leaves the
Lewin 
(1951)
Force Field
Lippitt 
(1973)
Planned 
Change
Havelock
(1971)
Linkages
Rogers 
(1983)
Innovation-
Diffusion
Prochaska 
et al. (1992)
Transtheo-
retical 
Approach
Bridges 
(2009)
Making 
Transitions
[1]
Unfreezing
[1]
Diagnosis 
of prob-
lem
[1]
Perception 
of need
[1]
Knowledge
[1]
Precon-
templation
[1]
Ending, 
Losing, 
Letting Go
[2]
Assessment
of motivation
and capacity
for change
[2]
Diagnosis of 
the problem
[2]
Persuasion
[2]
Contempla-
tion 
[2]
Moving
[4]
Selecting 
change 
objectives
[4]
Devising a 
plan of 
action
[4]
Implementa-
tion
[4]
Action
[5]
Choosing
change
agent’s role
[5]
Gaining ac-
ceptance of
plan
[3]
Refreezing
[6]
Maintaining
the change
[6]
Stabilization
[5]
Confirma-
tion
[5]
Maintenance
[3]
The New
Beginning
[7]
Terminating
the relation-
ship
[7]
Self-renewal
[3]
Change
agent’s moti-
vation and
resources
[3]
Identification
of the 
problem
[3]
Decision
[3]
Preparation
[2]
The Neutral
Zone

192
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
TABLE 11.3
Comparing Roles for the Change Agent from Different Theoretical Models
Stages of 
Change
Unfreezing
Moving
Refreezing
Lippitt 
(1973)
A specialist in the di-
agnosis and assess-
ment of patient
system and change
agent as:
• Information seeker
• Clarifier
• Synthesizer
• Reality tester
• Provider
• Problem-solver
Communication 
link viewed within 
one of eight 
directive to 
nondirective 
consultative roles:
• Advocate
• Expert
• Trainer
• Alternative identi-
fier
• Collaborator
• Process specialist
• Fact-finder
• Reflector
Consultation for:
• Maintenance of the
change
• Termination of the
relationship
Havelock 
(1973)
A catalyst in the
identification of
needs, diagnoses, 
and all aspects of the
problem within the
roles of:
• Clarifier
• Synthesizer
• Reality tester
• Provider
• Problem-solver
Solution giver and 
process helper as:
• Clarifier
• Synthesizer
• Reality tester
• Provider
• Problem-solver
Resource linker for
stabilization and self-
renewal as:
• Clarifier
• Synthesizer
• Reality tester
• Problem-solver
Rogers 
(1983)
Range of roles from
support to consultant
for sharing knowl-
edge, building persua-
siveness, and leading
the group toward de-
cision making on in-
novation through
activities of:
• Needs identification
• Establishment of
professional 
relationship with
patient system
• Diagnosis of 
problems
• Motivation of 
patient system
Range of roles from
support to consultant
to translate intent for
change into the ac-
tions needed
Range of roles from
support to consultant
for:
• Confirmation of
change and stabiliz-
ing the adoption to
prevent discontinu-
ance and reinforce
new behaviors
• Termination of 
relationship
Bridges 
(2009)
The critical ingredient is the
match or at least a working
understanding of the consis-
tency between the character
type of the organization and
the change agent.
Acceptance and acknowl-
edgment of the grief and
mourning process for the loss
is vital.
The need for detailed in-
formation on the plan be-
cause the transition must be
transmitted and reinforced.
Good listening and communi-
cation skills are essential with
a focus on the person as a
member of and part of the
organization.
The Neutral Zone is a time
of uncertainty and uneasiness
in the organization and
among the people. 
Once again, excellent com-
munication skills are vital to
keeping people informed, on
target, and to avoid the de-
velopment of damaging coali-
tions, which can inhibit the
transition. A transition moni-
toring team keeps manage-
ment aware of the progress
of the grass-roots members
in their transition. Bridges
(2009) does point out that
role of the team is to moni-
tor progress and should be
time limited.
The New Beginning is a time
of excitement and celebration
for members of the organiza-
tion in the new ways of the
organization. 
Important roles for both the
change agent as the manager
of the transition and also for
the leadership of the organi-
zation with the new culture.

CHAPTER 11 Change and Innovation     ●
193
agency environment. Just as discharge planning starts
with admission, this last stage must be planned for and
worked toward during the entire change process, with
the person, family, or group taking increasing responsi-
bility for the new behaviors.
The interventions of a skilled change agent can make
all the difference in the planned change process. The 
essential skills of change agents include the following:
●Vision for the future and creativity
●Ability to look at a situation narrowly and broadly 
(assessment and critical thinking skills)
●Good interpersonal skills, including those of
communication, motivation, assertiveness, problem-
solving, and group process
●Flexibility and a willingness to consider alternative
views
●Perseverance and a positive attitude
●Integrity and commitment
●Ability to manage conflict and resistance
●A focus on human beings and celebrating their accom-
plishments
CHANGE IN INDIVIDUALS,
FAMILIES, AND GROUPS
As noted earlier, Chinn and Benne (1976) categorized
change strategies into three major types: empirical-
rational, normative-reeducative, and power-coercive.
Power-coercive strategies are based on the application
of power by legitimate authority. Nursing concerns are
with human beings and their empowerment for healthy
behaviors or the creation of optimal health status. Ap-
plying power as “the authority” is inconsistent with 
empowering people. One can alter practices, procedures,
or the environment in organizations as a coercive change
by imposing major policy, but think of the upheaval this
change creates. Coercive change may be necessary in an
emergency situation or when the person or family must
have major assistance. The problem is that the change
may not persist unless the person or group has internal-
ized it into the value system.
The philosophical basis of nursing is consistent with
the empirical-rational or the normative-reeducative strate-
gies for change. The empirical-rational strategy assumes
that people are rational and have self-interest in change.
Power for the individual or group occurs through knowl-
edge. The normative-reeducative approach is based on 
social norms and the person’s interaction with the envi-
ronment. The normative-reeducative philosophy can be
viewed as empowerment with an emphasis on interper-
sonal skills. Both of these philosophical orientations are
consistent with nursing, but their applicability differs 
according to the nursing model selected for practice. For
example, King’s Theory of Goal Attainment, Orem’s Gen-
eral Theory of Nursing, and Roy’s Adaptation Model con-
tain philosophical assumptions similar to the reeducative
strategies, with the person viewed as a thinking, feeling,
reacting being in the context of his or her environment.
Because nursing looks at human beings and their 
interactions within the environment, several factors 
must be considered in the change process. These include
resistance to change, empowerment or involvement of the 
individual, and environmental, cultural, or situational 
factors.
Resistance to Change
A major concern of the change agent is the person’s or
group’s resistance to change. To handle this resistance, one
must evaluate what makes people resist change. People are
naturally threatened by change. Change involves loss. It is
a threat to their value system and a loss of the comfortable
status quo. They feel vulnerable and insecure. Stress is cre-
ated and must be managed. The need for the change may
also be mistrusted or  misunderstood. Another innately
human characteristic is the fear of failure or being unable
to perform the new activities or tasks. This creates more
stress. This is the state of relapse in the Transtheoretical
Approach in which the individual can then “recycle”
through the stages.
Resistance to change can be reduced by several 
techniques:
●Careful planning
●Allowing sufficient time
●Support and reinforcement
●Involving the person or group
Understanding the full impact of individual or group
norms and planning for a change in attitudes can lead to
changes in behavior. Recall the adage, “Fools rush in. . . .”
Allowing sufficient time for the change to occur and per-
sist is essential. A gradual move toward change is more ef-
fective than a radical move. The time needed depends on
the physical, psychosocial, cultural, and attitudinal char-
acteristics of the individual or group. Patience, persistence,
perseverance, and creativity are essential traits of the
change agent. Another strategy for decreasing resistance to
change is good communication with key and resource peo-
ple throughout the entire process. In addition, a good deal
of support and reinforcement will be needed. This requires
excellent interpersonal skills, verbal and nonverbal, with
both individuals and groups.
The involvement of the person or group is needed for
lasting change. It is essential to build on their readiness,
motivation, self-concept, abilities, and resources through-
out the process. Involving people in planning and decision
making both reduces resistance to change and creates 
empowerment. Strategies for involving people include 
education, training, socialization and persuasion (not im-
posing), and facilitation. This is a “helping relationship.”
It would often be easier to make the change yourself 
as an external force, but the action by the individual is
slower and more enduring. Note that education and 
training involve enlightenment and preparation rather
than preaching. This creates the empowerment and sets
the stage for a revision of the norm or value system and
self-efficacy.
Environmental Assessment
Looking at the situation or environment is critical in the
change process. First, one must understand the past or 

the personal history of the individual, family, or group.
You include a past, personal, psychosocial, family, and 
environmental history in a health history. These are 
important basic items of information to obtain before
doing the physical appraisal in any health assessment. The
same thing is needed in the change process. The following
questions will help in understanding the  situation and 
people:
1. What types of change has the person or group faced in
the past? Information on experience and success with
change is valuable to determine whether this person is
a novice with change, has embraced change through-
out life, or falls somewhere between these experiential
extremes.
2. How has the person or group handled change? Stress
and coping factors will emerge with this information.
You can then discover how to  motivate and support
behaviors.
3. What resources have been available or used in 
previous change activities?
4. What is the person’s or group’s perspective on the 
applicability of the resources in the environment to
the present situation? Human resources are support
systems, and can include family, friends, colleagues,
clergy, professionals, and even “ideal” role models.
These resources may help the person or group. If these
are not available or appropriate, linking the person or
group with similar resources may be eﬀective. Some
people do well in support groups whereas others need
more individualized support.
HEALTHCARE
ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE
Both internal and external influences in contemporary
healthcare are major considerations for change in health-
care institutions. As Hall and Tolbert (2005) propose,
“organizational survival, or the avoidance of death, is . .
. the ultimate test of an organization, but at any time,
unless death is imminent, what goes on in the organiza-
tion is based on both environmental pressures and goals”
(p. 155).
Everyone within an organization has faced organiza-
tional change, from minor changes in policy to restruc-
turing of services. Many have experienced or know a
colleague who has experienced a radical reorganization,
with restructuring and managerial shifts, layoffs, or own-
ership changes. With organizational change comes ten-
sion and conflict as a natural function of stress on the
system, its people, and their daily activities and interac-
tions. Transitions and the sense of loss are important
considerations.
Systems theory provides a useful perspective for view-
ing the internal and external forces of any organization.
A healthcare institution or agency is an open environmen-
tal system with great complexity. The organization must
be considered in terms of the system, as well as the
macrosystem and patient system. Internal sources of
change come from agency administrative, policy, and 
operational factors guiding the system. Bridges (2000) 
describes this as the character of the organization. The
surrounding environmental system of the organization is
the healthcare arena, which provides the professional, spe-
cialization, reimbursement, and additional value struc-
tures for the organizational unit and its members. The
broader social or macroenvironment reflects societal
norms and values through the needs and potential needs
of consumers of healthcare. Linkages among all system
parts are assumed as necessary for effectiveness and con-
tinuity. But look further at this complex system and the
internal environment.
When change is proposed for an agency or institutional
system, an in-depth look at the organizational environ-
ment is needed. Internal sources of change can arise from
any one or some combination of these system compo-
nents. Consider the traditional healthcare agency, the hos-
pital. The associated internal forces can be described as
follows:
●Goals and values for healthcare are specified for an
organization as a purpose, philosophy, vision, or
mission statement. Valuable information on the
internal forces is apparent with this organizational
view of people, health, and healthcare before
translation into departmental or policy statements.
Insight can also be obtained from the historical
documents on how the institution evolved into a
modern healthcare organization.
●The knowledge and skills of the healthcare providers
and physical resources in the system are vital consid-
erations. Consider internal forces from the specific
equipment, services, and expertise of professional 
and nonprofessional labor forces in the organizational
setting.
●Interpersonal and interdisciplinary relationships with
role relationships, attitudes, and values of people and
groups within the system must also be considered.
Nurses are expected to exhibit behaviors related to the
roles of healthcare provider, manager, teacher, re-
searcher, and advocate and to collaborate with mem-
bers of other healthcare disciplines. 
●The organizational design to provide healthcare serv-
ices must also be considered. In addition to organiza-
tional charts, position descriptions, and  policy and
procedure manuals, informal sources, such as technical
and clerical staff, can provide valuable information on
the organization’s daily operations to illustrate how
tasks are accomplished in the organization.
●Governance by a governing board and corporate offi-
cers may include paid or volunteer board  members, re-
quired institutional review boards, and the chief
executive team or officers.
External environmental influences are the next factors
to consider in terms of impact on the system. External
sources of change include inputs of energy, information,
and materials received from the environment, trans-
formed, and returned to the environment as outputs. One
input into the hospital environment is the patient system.
The patient enters the hospital with a health deficit and,
through the care received while hospitalized (throughput),
strives for a higher level of wellness as the intended out-
come (output). But, environmental influences add more
complexity. External forces are the broader environment
194
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

providing inputs into the system. As with any open sys-
tem, however, the external forces affect internal opera-
tions, and an exchange of information is returned to the
environment as outputs.
External forces have a major impact on the function
of the traditional hospital. Suppliers to be considered in-
clude physicians, drug and equipment companies, vol-
unteers, and educational facilities. Physicians supply
patients. Drug and equipment companies compete for
contracts, and organizations seek purchasing power with
consortia or multiorganizational contracts. Volunteers
provide valuable transportation, recreational, and inter-
personal services without which many hospitals could
not survive. Educational suppliers provide additional
services, with trainees as residents, interns, nurses, ther-
apists, and other preparers of ancillary personnel, as well
as the future workforce. And national safety initiatives
add additional responsibility and complexity. In addi-
tion, new staff members bring different ideas and meth-
ods into the system.
Customers are generally thought of as the patient sys-
tem: inpatients, same-day surgery patients, and clinic 
patients. But the concept of customer can be seen more
broadly to include community initiatives, educational pro-
gramming, health contracts with business and industry,
health maintenance organizations (HMOs), and provider
practice groups. Large corporate entities, intraorganiza-
tional agreements, health insurers, and second- and third-
party payers are major service and economic influences on
the patient system. Federal legislation, state laws, local or-
dinances, regulatory bodies, court precedents, insurers,
and professional organizations all have a legal effect on the
hospital.
On a broader, macrosystem level, consider changes
predicted for the population. The increase in the elderly
population, especially frail elders and those with chronic
diseases, has a great impact on services that will be needed.
The national, state, and local economies, with their asso-
ciated concerns about costs, are other societal factors that
have a profound effect on hospitals and healthcare organ-
izations. All of these factors, individually and combined,
influence how the hospital markets and cares for its cus-
tomers and personnel and meets their organizational man-
dates and mission. And then, consider the changes in those
insured and reimbursement dictates.
But let us return to the change process and activities
in the phases of unfreezing, moving, and refreezing. Dur-
ing unfreezing, the major change activities include assess-
ment, diagnosis, and establishment of a professional
relationship. Assessment must involve in-depth analysis
and synthesis of both internal and external forces. As with
individuals, families, and groups, methods for data col-
lection include interviews and observation. But with a
larger group of people, methods can include question-
naires or surveys for timely and, at times, confidential col-
lection of data.
Like the past and personal change history obtained on
a smaller scale with the person, family, or group, an orga-
nizational history provides valuable insights. The organi-
zational history can reveal information on development
and problem resolution to this point. Methods for 
gathering an organizational history require not only skillful
interviewing of key people but also a careful review of
records and documents of the organization.
Consider all environments, including the constraints,
demands, and opportunities present. Resources in the 
environment—people and physical resources—provide
major influences on any organizational change. Identifying
the driving forces and individuals in the system is essential
to building a base of support. Analyze external environ-
ments, especially population trends.
Diagnosis of problems becomes more complex as the
volume of information and number of people increase.
Whether the change agent is selected from within the or-
ganization or is an external consultant, he or she will need
a high level of skill to achieve organizational change. Clear
understanding of both internal and external forces will be
necessary, along with a good deal of fortitude to survive
the experience. And keep in mind the sense of loss mem-
bers of the organization may experience in this initial stage
of transition.
The moving phase in organizational change involves
developing strategies to match resources with constraints,
demands, opportunities, and history as part of the plan-
ning process for change to proceed. Changes in goals and
values must be reflected in organizational documents. Key
work groups will be needed for decision making and policy
formation. People in the organization will need some re-
training and educational programs to transmit knowledge
of resources and to refine skills. A great deal of time and
energy will be needed for the people. Role and status 
relations will require finesse and great sensitivity. Relating
to the variable and altering readiness, resistance, and mo-
tivation of many individuals and groups will be quite a
challenge.
People must be actively incorporated and empowered
in this decision-making and implementation phase. Re-
member that this may be an opportunity for innovation
in moving to a new organizational design or initiative.
Involvement of people in the organizational change
process necessitates use of excellent leadership and skills
in group dynamics, conflict management, and team
building. This is especially true when the methods for
accomplishment of work activities have undergone major
revisions. Communication links with management must
be increased and reinforced as  organizational members
are included rather than alienated from key planners and
controllers in the system. Minimizing people’s stress and
turmoil is a major function of the change agent in this
phase.
A formalized evaluation plan must be in place and
must be initiated in this moving phase. Data collection
and feedback on the process, communicating even small
results, are vital and must be ongoing. People in the system
need to be continually aware of the result of their efforts.
If indicated in the evaluation data, additional resources or
linkages must be sought. This is the feedback loop that
continues through the phase of refreezing and is essential
to any successful organizational change. Evaluation data
must be systematically recorded, analyzed, interpreted, 
and communicated. Evaluation data can be communi-
cated through distribution of short reports, articles, or ob-
servations from various sources in newsletters and on
bulletin boards, electronically, and in formal and informal
CHAPTER 11 Change and Innovation     ●
195

discussion groups. Keeping people on track and moving
toward new organizational goals and norms requires stam-
ina and a positive outlook despite the inevitable pitfalls
and sidetracking that will occur.
Involvement of people in the organizational
change process necessitates use of 
excellent leadership and skills in group 
dynamics, conflict management, and team
building.
Refreezing the change may take longer than antici-
pated in the multilevel organizational system. The tur-
moil and differences that have arisen in the organization
environment and the strength of external forces will in-
fluence the firm establishment of the change as the new
organizational norm. Support and reinforcement are 
indispensable activities of the change agent, along with
ongoing analysis, interpretation, and communication of
the evaluation findings. The role of the change agent
will naturally become more consultative as termination
approaches. At this point, the change should be a part
of the expectations of the organization and its members.
Ownership of the change is held by the people in the in-
stitutional or agency environment and not by key people
or the change agent.
Consider the following example of organizational
change, extending services from the traditional hospital
into the community. Needs assessment, diagnosis of prob-
lems, and motivation in agency subsystems must occur in
the unfreezing phase for organizational change. In addi-
tion to the traditional hospital, this change may involve
outpatient departments and clinics, homecare agencies, re-
habilitation or nursing home settings, care provider
groups, and therapy group practices.
Internal restraining and driving forces are also impor-
tant. Organizational goals and values for healthcare in the
mission statement must change with the move from hos-
pital to home, outpatient, or community care. The phys-
ical resources, knowledge, and skills of the healthcare
providers must now be broadened, such as intravenous
and other therapies requiring periodic skilled in-home
nursing care. Extended interpersonal and interdisciplinary
relations are needed with a move into the community,
along with coordination of services, role relationships, at-
titudes, and values of people. Nursing roles of healthcare
provider, manager, teacher, researcher, and advocate are
expanded to include service facilitator and coordinator.
The organizational structure is enlarged, with agencies
providing both inpatient and community services, and it
becomes more flexible and interactive with other environ-
ments providing healthcare services. Management is 
similarly broadened to include overseeing corporations,
resulting in buying power, larger constituencies, and over-
riding governing boards. This translates into more com-
plex goals and policies and comprehensive strategic
initiatives provided by the governing board in an effort to
reach out into the community. 
The design for the provision of care has changed 
from the image of the traditional 120-bed community
hospital. The external forces that drove the need for
change include healthcare needs of the patient popula-
tion, reimbursement policies, provider restrictions, 
and societal trends. Earlier hospital discharge and high-
technology home care have driven service providers from
the traditional hospital setting into the community. A
good deal of this move into the community environ-
ment has been secondary to the reimbursement and 
insurance restrictions.
Organizational Change Suggestions
Organizations will continue to change and evolve in 
response to internal and external forces and the needs of
patients. This may require more innovative approaches.
Recall that innovation is moving to a new, more novel
or advanced approach than the one used in the past. 
Innovation has become a hot topic in top business prac-
tices and healthcare organizations as they attempt 
address consumer needs and capture new markets. 
In business, Kelley (2001) describes a five-step process
(Box 11.3) that has led to new product designs. These
steps can be used in the change process when a new, in-
novative approach is needed.
Understanding the market, client, technology, and
constraints is part of the assessment process in the unfreez-
ing step. However, this assessment also involves observing
real people and real life. It is stepping back and looking at
the situation, putting away preconceived ideas. Look at
what is really occurring in the environment. This will
allow you to visualize new concepts and individual needs.
Evaluating and refining prototypes occurs in the stage of
moving when you also implement the new concept. Test-
ing and evaluation occurs throughout this process and
leads to refreezing if the innovation is effective, as in
Rogers’ model of inno vation. Consider how you could use
this process on a surgical unit.
Look at changes in the patient group. Perhaps you
are seeing more patients with limited literacy skills or
those of a different cultural group. We know that teach-
ing for care at home must occur before those discharge
orders are written. Understanding patients as consumers
includes literacy, cultural preferences, and the available
technology. You know that time for teaching is a con-
straint. However, teaching can take more time if the best
materials are not available or the methods are ineffective.
What are the patients’ needs in their real life, at home
and in their community? A preconceived idea may be
196
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
BOX 11.3
Basic Steps for the Process 
of Innovation
●Understand: the market, client, technology, and
constraints.
●Observe: real people and real life
●Visualize new concepts and customers
●Evaluate and reﬁne prototypes
●Implement the new concept
Source: Kelley, T. (2001). The art of innovation. New York: 
Doubleday

that the instruction sheet that has been translated into
another language is the answer. But perhaps it may be
ignored, along with the other forms received before dis-
charge. Look at what is really occurring in the environ-
ment and the patient’s interactions with family and
friends. This will allow you to visualize new concepts and
patient needs. Perhaps the patient could  benefit from a
calendar to help in checking off when medications or
dressing changes are due. Perhaps the instruction sheet
that had been translated is too “dense” and needs illus-
trations to promote better understanding. Evaluating 
and refining your teaching materials as prototypes will
help address these new patient groups and assist with 
the implement of new and more effective materials for
discharge. 
Nurses have a growing responsibility for more  creativity
and involvement in change. The American Organization of
Nurse Executives (AONE, 2010) has identified the need
for nurses to embrace change, stating that “dramatic change
and revolutionary thinking are imperative” and indeed are
the basis for their guiding principles (p. 1). Nurses function
as members of change teams, as change agents, and as de-
velopers of organizational systems. This will continue and
expand in interdisciplinary practice as their skills in change
are recognized and sought. Remember the following steps
regardless of the extent of the organizational change:
●Always do your homework. Be prepared with informa-
tion about and knowledge of the organization. Spend
the time and acquire the information and background
needed before acting or reacting. Then proceed from a
solid theoretical base. Understand the change process
and all the steps. Review your talents for change 
strategies.
●Know your restraining and driving forces. Take the
time to understand or, at minimum, recognize 
these behaviors. Share information. Make both 
sides aware of the situation. Take more time to un-
derstand behavioral reactions. Cultivate the driving
forces and become viewed as the champion for the
cause. Use all your skills in interpersonal relation-
ships, and develop more.
●Be sensitive to environments. Increase your awareness 
of what is occurring in society and healthcare. Look
beyond your immediate environment. Analyze the 
internal and external forces and imagine how your 
environment could be affected by these forces. Use 
intuition and insight as well as foresight. Be both 
inspired and inspiring.
●Maintain a positive attitude and refuse to be diminished
by negativity. Negative colleagues and superiors will al-
ways be present. They are an environmental hazard.
Someone will always be available to tell you that some-
thing never has been or never can be done. If your
“homework” background knowledge told you differ-
ently, become the agent of change instead of another
restraining force. Have courage.
●Be open and receptive to new ideas. No matter how you
long to keep things as they currently are, be mindful 
that there may be a better way of doing things. Refuse 
to be limited by the present, and look to the future
and evidence-based practice—a core competency. 
Remember, conventional wisdom can be a barrier to
needed change.
●Be open to new people. Venture out of your discipline.
View the situation as larger than nursing care. 
Collaborate with other health professionals. Discuss.
Debate. Interact. Try to recognize when turf issues
arise, and negotiate on the basis of facts and 
what will be best for the patients and the organiza-
tion while maintaining the integrity of your 
profession.
●Involve others. Try not to do it all yourself. Remember
that the most successful and enduring changes occur
when others are involved. The change has to become
the norm and the expectation of the people in the 
environment.
●Refine skills. Cultivate your change agent skills. Recall
the skills and roles of the change agent. Continually
develop and refine these skills. Make adaptations 
necessary for the people and the environments. Look
at yourself as objectively as you look at others. If 
assistance or collaboration is needed, get it. 
●Reassess and evaluate. Remember to evaluate activity 
and progress continually. Sufficient time for the change
to occur and persistence are necessary components of
organizational change. Recall Rogers’ (1983) attributes
in the diffusion of innovations, which determine the
rate of adoption by members of a social system: relative
advantage, compatibility, complexity, trialability, and
observability. Include these attributes in your evaluation
process.
●Persevere, persevere, persevere. Have fortitude. Use
resources to cope with your stress and frustration
levels. Organizational change is not easy. Look for
small gains as major steps in the process. Strive for
the finish line, but do not look for accolades.
Terminate the relationship as the organizational
norm takes hold and the organization congratulates
itself on the accomplishment. Celebrate successes.
The philosophical basis of nursing focuses on the
health of human beings as individuals, families, groups,
and society in a complex environment. And practice
must be based on the latest evidence of efficacy and 
acceptability. In this role, nurses can be highly effective
change agents. How comfortable are you with change?
Think about your change quotient as your ability to 
address needed change and to help others as a change
agent.
In addition to his work in psychology on multiple in-
telligences, Gardner (2008) has identified five capacities
that individuals need to address the future (Box 11-4).
As was illustrated in Chapter 3, the discipline of nursing
has a unique body of knowledge. Although we draw on
other knowledge disciplines, we have a unique and valued
discipline, as has been illustrated in the IOM report on
the Future of Nursing. Gardner (2008) identifies the
components of synthesis as goals, ideas, approaches, and
feedback. The use of evidence-based practice embodies
this process. As Gardner (2008) points out, “synthesizing
the current state of knowledge, incorporating new find-
ings, and delineating new dilemmas is part and parcel 
of the work of any professional who wished to remain 
CHAPTER 11 Change and Innovation     ●
197

198
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: CONSIDER THIS....
You are reading an EBP article on sleep deprivation that addresses individual differences for patients, environ-
mental considerations, and the influences from nursing interventions. One of the recommendations was that
“critical care nurses can optimize the sleep environment by restructuring work-flow habits” (p. 33). You start
thinking about the acute care unit where you work and the routines during the evening and night. You know
staffing is an issue but are concerned about the assessment and documentation of the patients’ sleep quality
and sleep patterns.
Question: How will you use this information as a change agent to implement a program on your unit for
assessment of patients’ sleep patterns and restructuring work-flow patterns?
Source: Makic, M. B. F., Rauen, C., Watson, R., & Poteet, A. W. (2014). Examining the evidence to guide practice: Challenging 
practice habits. Critical Care Nurse, 34(2), 28–44. 
K E Y  P O I N T S
●The classic change model was developed by Lewin (1951), based on his Field Theory. This model con-
tained three phases in the change process: unfreezing, moving, and refreezing.
●Building on Lewin’s work, Lippitt (1973) considered human motivation, multiple causation, and habits. He
defined seven specific phases in the change process: diagnosis of the problem, assessment of motivation
and capacity for change, change agent’s motivation and resources, selecting change objectives, choosing
the change agent role, maintaining the change, and terminating the relationship. A focus on the change
agent emerged with four specific roles and skills.
●Havelock’s change model contains the major concepts of role, linkages, and communication. This adds
steps to the three stages of change, with heightened communication and interpersonal activities. Have-
lock and Havelock’s (1973) seven steps in the change process are perception of the need, diagnosis of
the problem, identification of the problem, devising a plan of action, gaining acceptance, stabilizing the
plan, and self-renewal. Four different roles for the change agent are proposed in Havelock’s model.
●Rogers’ (1983) Diffusion of Innovations model has a five-stage view of change: knowledge, persuasion,
decision, implementation, and confirmation. Rogers also considers five factors that influence the rate of
adoption of an innovation and that may be used as evaluation criteria in the change process. Seven roles
for the change agent are highlighted in this model of change.
●The Transtheoretical Approach to change focuses on the individual as a ”self-changer” and is depicted as
a spiral with five stages of change: precontemplation, contemplation, preparation, action, and mainte-
nance, with 10 associated change processes that occur in the different stages of change (Prochaska et al.,
1992).
●Bridges (2009) looks at the psychological processes of change within the stages of (1) ending, losing, 
letting go, (2) the neutral zone, and (3) the new beginning.
BOX 11.4
The Five Minds for the Future
●1: The Disciplined Mind
●2: The Synthesizing Mind
●3: The Creating Mind
●4: The Respectful Mind
●5: The Ethical Mind
Source: Gardner, H. (2008). 5 Minds for the future. Boston: 
Harvard Business Press.
current with her craft” (p. 6). Creativity is a component
of leading change. As noted by Gardner (2008), “rewards
accrue to those who fashion small but significant changes
in professional practice” (p. 7). Respect and ethics are core
components of professional nursing practice. Whether in-
teracting with patients and groups or professional col-
leagues, respect needs to be present and shared. And as
illustrated in Chapter 1, nursing has a distinct ethical
code, and some issues that affect daily practice will be dis-
cussed in the next chapter. 

CHAPTER 11 Change and Innovation     ●
199
●The roles and attributes of a skilled change agent are included in the models by Lippitt, Havelock, and
Rogers. General roles for the change agent are assessor or evaluator, communicator, translator, encour-
ager, mediator, and consultant.
●In relation to the activities in the nursing process, the phases of change are consistent with assessment, 
diagnosis, planning, implementation, and evaluation for resolving the problem or stabilizing the change.
They can also lead to the implementation of evidence-based practice in place of traditions from the past.
●The skills of change agents include having a vision for the future and creativity, good assessment skills,
good interpersonal skills, flexibility, perseverance, and a positive attitude, integrity and commitment, the
ability to manage conflict, and resistance.
●Strategies for reducing resistance to change include careful planning and timing, along with good commu-
nication and interpersonal skills.
●Empowerment or involvement of the patient is needed for lasting change. Strategies for patient involvement
include education, training, socialization and persuasion, and facilitation.
●Environmental or situational factors relative to individuals, families, and groups provide additional informa-
tion in the change process. Past experience, stress and coping factors, motivational clues, and resources
are important data sought by the change agent.
●To view organizational change, look at internal and external forces with a multisystem approach. And
consider the concept of transitions.
■Suggestions for people involved in organizational change include (1) being knowledgeable about the or-
ganization, its restraining and driving forces, and the environments, (2) maintaining a positive attitude and
being receptive to new ideas and people, (3) involving other people in the change, (4) continuing to re-
fine skills and reevaluating the situation, and (5) persevering throughout the process.
K E Y  P O I N T S —cont’d
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Recall a change that has taken place in your family. Using Lewin’s theory, identify the restraining and driving forces.
2. Identify some specific sources of internal change in your organization and name the driving forces.
3. Recall a change that has taken place in your organization. Using Lippitt’s theory, identify the seven stages of
planned change and the roles of the change agent(s) in the process.
4. List at least six specific environmental factors that could influence change in a healthcare organization. Be prepared
to discuss these factors in class or online, as scheduled by your instructor.
5. Use Lewin and the Transtheoretical Approach to explain the steps of the process for permanent change to help a
new 18-year-old single mother with a normal 7 lb, 9 oz full-term infant (appropriate for gestational age [AGA],
Apgar score of 9) develop parenting skills and healthcare, including prevention and health maintenance.
6. Read Who Moved My Cheese? by S. Johnson (2002) and determine which character you most resemble and which
one you most want to be like. Be prepared to participate in a discussion on your selection of characters, either
online or in class as scheduled by your instructor. 
7. Review the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter, and discuss it in the context of the chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.

REFERENCES
American Organization of Nurse Executives (AONE). 
(2010). AONE Guiding Principles for the role of the nurse in
future patient care delivery toolkit. Retrieved from http://
www.aone.org/resources/PDFs/AONE_GP_for_Role_of_
 Nurse_Future.pdf
Anderson, B., Klein, E., & Stuart, J. (2000). Why change is 
a consciousness choice. The Journal for Quality and 
Participation, 23, 32–36.
Bridges, W. (2000). The character of organizations: Using person-
ality type in organization development. Mountain View, CA:
Davies-Black.
Bridges, W. (2009). Managing transitions: Making the most of
change (3rd ed.). Cambridge, MA: DaCapo Press.
Chinn, R., & Benne, K. D. (1976). General strategies for 
effecting change in human systems. In W. G. Bennis, K. D.
Benne, R. Chinn, & K. E. Corey (Eds.), The planning of
change (3rd ed., pp. 22–45). New York: Holt, Rinehart 
& Winston.
Gardner, H. (2008). 5 Minds for the future. Boston, MA: 
Harvard Business Press.
Hall, R. H., & Tolbert, P. S. (2005). Organizations: Structures,
processes, and outcomes (9th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Pearson Prentice-Hall.
Harvard Business Essentials (2003). Managing change and 
transition. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Havelock, R. G. (1971). Planning for innovation through 
dissemination and utilization of knowledge. Ann Arbor, MI:
Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan.
Havelock, R. G., & Havelock, M. C. (1973). Training for
change agents: A guide to the design of training programs in
education and other fields. Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for 
Social Research, University of Michigan.
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2011). The future of nursing:
Leading change, advancing health. Washington, DC: 
National Academies Press. Retrieved from http://www
.thefutureofnursing.org/sites/default/files/Future%20of
%20Nursing%20Report_0.pdf
Johnson, S. (2002). Who moved my cheese? New York: G. P.
Putnam’s Sons.
Kelley, T. (2001). The art of innovation. New York: Doubleday.
Lewin, K. (1951). Field theory in social science. New York:
Harper & Row.
Lippitt, G. L. (1973). Visualizing change: Model building and
the change process. La Jolla, CA: University Associates.
Makic, M. B. F., Rauen, C., Watson, R., & Poteet, A. W. (2014).
Examining the evidence to guide practice: Challenging 
practice habits. Critical Care Nurse, 34, 28–44. 
Prochaska, J. O., & DiClemente, C. C. (1984). The transtheo-
retical approach: Crossing traditional boundaries of therapy.
Homewood, IL: Dow Jones–Irwin.
Prochaska, J. O., DiClemente, C. C., & Norcross, J. C. (1992).
In search of how people change: Applications to addictive 
behaviors. American Psychologist, 47, 1102–1114.
Rogers, E. M. (1983). Diffusion of innovations (3rd ed.). 
New York: Free Press.
Rogers, E. M., & Shoemaker, F. F. (1971). Communication of
innovations: A cross-cultural approach (2nd ed.). New York:
Free Press.
Rose, J. (2009). Quiz on resistance to change. Retrieved from
http://www.suite101.com/content/quiz-on-resistance-to-
change-a110891 
Stevens, K. R. (2009). Essential competencies for evidence-based
practice in nursing (2nd ed.). San Antonio, TX: Academic
Center for Evidence-Based Practice.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bennis, W. (2000). Managing the dream: Reflections on leadership
and change. Cambridge, MA: Basic Books.
Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of
behavioral change. Psychological Review, 84(2), 191–215.
Flower, J. (1996). The four quadrants of change. Retrieved from
http://well.com/user/bbear/quadrant.html 
Levesque, D. A., Prochaska, J. O., Cummins, C. O., Terrill, S.,
& Miranda, D. (2001). Assessing Medicare beneficiaries’
readiness to make informed health plan choices. Healthcare
Financing Review, 23(1), 87–104.
Lippitt, G. L., & Nadler, L. (1967). Emerging roles of the
training director. Training and Development Journal, 9, 2–10.
ONLINE RESOURCES
William Bridges & Associates Transition Training
http://www.wmbridges.com 
200
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Examine ethical principles in professional practice. 
2. Apply the terminology used in ethical decision making.
3. Analyze ethical dilemmas in contemporary healthcare situations.
4. Apply the components of the ANA Code of Ethics for Nurses to a healthcare scenario.
5. Identify ethical decision making in the practice setting in patient and collegial situations.
Right
Basic Human Rights
Beneficence 
Nonmaleficence
Justice
Fidelity
Self-determination (autonomy)
Full Disclosure
Veracity
Informed Consent
Privacy
Confidentiality
Utilitarianism
Deontology
Code of Ethics
Standards of Care
Advance Directives
Euthanasia
Human Genome
Impaired or Incompetent Colleagues
201
“When we do the best we can, we never know 
what miracle is wrought in our life 
or the life of another.”
Helen Keller, 1880–1968
Key Terms
Professional Ethics
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
12

As a professional nurse, you are confronted by ethical is-
sues on a daily basis. But have you carefully considered all
the implications? Are they ethical dilemmas? Dahnke and
Dreher (2006) define an ethical dilemma as a problem
with options that seem equally unfavorable (p. 4). Let’s
look at some of the principles and issues in daily practice.
In patient situations, think about informed consent, ad-
vance directives, a persistent vegetative state, organ procure-
ment and donation, and genomics. In addition, consider
ethical dilemmas in interdisciplinary practice, with impaired
or incompetent colleagues. However, before looking at spe-
cific situations, consider the basis of ethical decision making
and professional ethics.
ETHICAL PRINCIPLES
We hear a good deal about human rights. First, consider
the concept of rights. A right is an agreed-upon entitle-
ment. It is a constant and does not change with the
 circumstances. Husted and Husted (2008) warn that it is
a grave ethical mistake to regard the term rights as a polit-
ical term that can be an ever-changing product of legisla-
tion, rather than a more fundamental ethical term. Aiken
(2004) describes this blurring of ethical and political use
of the term and differentiates among welfare rights, ethical
rights, and option rights. Welfare rights are legal rights
guaranteed by law, such as freedom of speech. However,
legal rights can be changed or modified through legislation.
Ethical rights are based on ethical principles like self-
determination and autonomy of the individual. Option
rights allow some freedom of choice within certain param-
eters, like choices with advanced directives and not active
euthanasia. With this in mind and with our prior focus
on the rights of subjects in research, consider more broadly
the following ethical and basic human rights: 
●Beneficence 
●Justice and fidelity
●Self-determination and autonomy
●Full disclosure and veracity
●Informed consent
●Privacy and confidentiality
Beneficence is the principle of doing good with the
person’s best interests as the goal of all actions. This in-
cludes the concept of nonmaleficence in that we “do no
harm” to the individual, family, or group. In healthcare,
our role is to help, but the person may be at risk of harm
with the treatment. We must be vigilant to protect the per-
son from avoidable harm or error. We will consider this
further in the following chapter on safety initiatives in
healthcare environments and in the community, as with
the use of bar coding to reduce medication errors. Associ-
ated with the concept of beneficence are justice and fi-
delity. Justice is fairness to all and avoidance of favoritism.
All patients deserve fair access to quality healthcare. The
concept of justice embodies health equity and fair distri-
bution of resources. Fidelity is loyalty to the person. If we
tell a patient we will be back to check on his or her pain
relief in ten minutes, we need to be true to that time
frame.
Full disclosure and self-determination are associated
ethical principles. Self-determination or autonomy is the
sense a person has the right to determine his or her fate.
The development of a living will or advanced directives are
examples of self-determination when the patient makes
decisions in advance of a cri tical situation. However, to
make life decisions, the person must have complete infor-
mation, or full disclosure. The individual deserves all 
relevant information about his or her health status to 
make an informed decision. Full disclosure includes the
principle of veracity, or providing truthful information.
Informed consent incorporates these ethical principles. 
Informed consent occurs when the individual has com-
plete information on all sides of the issue and makes a 
decision freely and without constraint after careful
consideration of both advantages and disadvantages of the
action. Think about the patient signing an informed con-
sent form for a procedure. Does that individual under-
stand what is being agreed to, or is he or she in pain and
merely signing all forms in the hope that the pain will be
relieved? And closely associated with this is the considera-
tion of the significant others. Do they really understand
what their loved one wants and is requesting? In addition,
will they adhere to the wishes of the significant other in a
time of emotional crisis? And think how healthcare pro-
fessionals are responsible for fidelity to the patient and sig-
nificant others, especially in stressful, critical, or conflicting
situations.
Privacy and confidentiality are also closely associated
concepts. Privacy means that the person has the right to
determine and control the amount of information to re-
veal about himself or herself. The professional relationship
allows the person to provide this private information with
the knowledge that it will be respected and remain private.
This is confidentiality—the information that the person
does reveal is respected and not revealed to others except
as necessary as part of this professional relationship. This
situation can be a delicate one, as in the example of a fam-
ily history of mental illness, or in any past situation from
which the patient feels sensitivity or unease. And how se-
cure is the information from being revealed to others? The
patient must have trust in the healthcare professional to
feel comfortable to reveal such sensitive information.
Again, add the complexity of significant others who may
be directly involved in private communications with
healthcare providers or be remote and unaware of infor-
mation shared. Both hard copy and electronic data storage
of information are considerations. All of these ethical prin-
ciples are guided by the way we look at the world. And
with our expanding channels of information, including
electronic information and health records, the ANA de-
veloped a position paper on privacy and confidentiality
with nine principles that address patient advocacy and
trust in the professional relationship and emphasize that
“confidentiality protections should extend to not only
health records, but also to all other individually identifi-
able health information, including genetic information,
clinical research records, and mental health therapy notes”
(ANA, 2006, p. 1). The International Council of Nurses
(ICN, 2008) states that patients should be the primary
owners of their health information, and this “includes in-
formation related to their health problems, the actions
proposed or taken by caregivers, and the consequences of
these actions” (p. 1).
202
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

As a healthcare provider, you have had required orien-
tation to the Health Insurance Portability and Accounta-
bility Act (HIPAA) legislation from 1996. Think about
what this legislation means to you: more forms for signature,
codes for release of any patient information, even to family
members, and additional regulation of healthcare? And what
does it mean for the patient? Does she understand that you
cannot tell her nephew about her condition, even when he
keeps calling the unit? And the ethical question: Have
HIPPA regulations provided patient confidentiality or ad-
ditional burden? Is this a potential burden to the patient or
to the healthcare professionals? And are protections in place
or being worked around? Think about it.
SYSTEMS OF ETHICAL 
DECISIONS
Ethics has been defined as a “system of standards to mo-
tivate, determine, and justify actions directed to the pur-
suit of vital and fundamental goals” (Husted & Husted,
2008, p. 315). There are two systems of standards that
can be differentiated based on consequence or outcome
(utilitarianism) or the obligation for action or inaction
(deontology). Utilitarianism is focused on the conse-
quence or the outcome. It is based on two basic ideas:
happiness and the greatest good for the greatest number.
Decisions are made in this framework in terms of means
that justify the way of getting there—for the greatest good
in the end. Some ethicists further differentiate utilitari-
anism into rule and act utilitarianism. Rule utilitarianism
draws on past experiences to formulate personal rules to
determine what you consider to be the “the greatest
good” for the intended outcome. Act utilitarianism is
based on the unique situation in the present circum-
stances for the determination of what is considered
“right” and best to reach the intended consequence. As
noted by Aiken (2004), this system is oriented toward the
good of the population in general, and rules and regula-
tions are not necessarily followed to reach the intended out-
come. Think about the times you may have been posed
with the question of who should be in the lifeboat? Or who
should be saved? Using the system of utilitarianism focuses
on the consequences for the greatest number and the great-
est chance of happiness and success, regardless of the means
of getting there. With our focus on each individual’s
unique needs and characteristics, this system does pose lim-
itations when making decisions. Do the “ends” really justify
the “means”? Think about it! And who is the one to decide
what is the “best” outcome in the situation? Should it be a
collaborative decision with the patient as the captain de-
ciding the decision? How will the patient be sure that he
or she asks the correct questions and receives the appropri-
ate information upon which to make a critical decision?
And further, consider the differences that will be made on
past experiences or a unique situation. 
The second system, deontology, is based on obligations
as rules and unchanging principles. Based on the writings
of the German philosopher Immanuel Kant (1724–1804),
this system requires adherence to a set of established rules.
The absolute rules are the means to reach the decision.
These rules are absolute and unchanging, as is seen in some
religious ethical decision-making systems. As with utilitari-
anism, deontology is divided into two subsets, rule versus
act deontology. With rule deontology, the ethical standards
or rules are made by people—past or present. These rules
must be followed and do not change, regardless of the situ-
ation or individual factors. In act deontology, the highest
value is placed on the moral values of the individual. You
must make the same decision in any similar situation, re-
gardless of the circumstances. As opposed to rule deontol-
ogy, with act deontology, you are the one following the
rules, based on data you obtain about the situation. But you
make the decision and act in a consistent manner, following
those rules. You must arrive at the same decision in similar
circumstances. Consider this system of ethics and the issue
of patient autonomy and self-determination. First, consider
who will be making the decisions and which rules and 
principles are being considered. 
CODE OF ETHICS
A professional abides by a certain code of ethics app licable
to the practice area. Developed within the profession, the
code addresses general ethical practice issues. The Code 
of Ethics for Nurses developed by the American Nurses 
Association (ANA) is the ethical standard for professional
nursing practice. As the ANA states, the “The Code is
non-negotiable in any setting. . . . [and expresses] the 
values, virtues, and obligations that shape, guide, and 
inform nursing as a profession” (ANA, 2015, p. vii). The 
interpretative statements promote understanding for ap-
propriate application of the code of ethics in professional
practice. The ethical principles of human rights, self-
determination, privacy and confidentiality, autonomy, and
responsibility and obligations are specifically addressed in
the code of ethics. Adherence to this specific code may be
regulated in your state’s practice act. In addition, additional
competencies for the nurse prepared at the graduate level
are expectations based on preparation, knowledge level, and
performance expectations. However, there are other ethical
codes, including those of other countries, such as Canada
(Canadian Nurses Association, 2008), and globally with the
International Council of Nurses (ICN, 2012) Code of Ethics
for Nurses. As we discussed in Chapter 1, the ANA is one of
almost 140 nurses organizations from around the world that
are members of ICN. The International Code of Ethics for
Nurses presents four elements associated with nurses: people,
practice, the profession, and coworkers (ICN, 2012). In ad-
dition, for each of the elements it illustrates the roles of prac-
titioners and managers, educators and researchers, and
national nursing associations. The Code of Ethics for Regis-
tered Nurses of the Canadian Nurses Association (2008)
identifies seven values of ethical nursing practice. Achieving
professional status requires ethical standards for expected
behaviors with patients, colleagues, and other professionals.
Further information on these ethical codes can be found at
their Web sites. 
CHAPTER 12 Professional Ethics     ●
203
ONLINE CONSULT 
Official HIPAA site at
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/

Associated with a code of ethics is the concept of stan-
dard of care. Aiken (2004) defines standards of care as
“the average degree of skill, care, and diligence exercised by
members of the same profession under the same or similar
circumstances” (pp. 38–39). Definition of practice and spe-
cific practice standards are further specified within the pro-
fessional community through major nursing associations.
The ANA has specified a variety of practice standards for
the profession, both general and specific to certain practice
areas. The ANA has prepared several specialty standards
documents jointly with the particular  specialty organization
to reflect the expectations for specialized professional prac-
tice. These standards are described as “authoritative state-
ments of the duties of all registered nurses, regardless of
role, population, or specialty, are expected to perform com-
petently” (ANA, 2010a, p. 2).
The publication Nursing: Scope and Standards of Prac-
tice (ANA, 2010a), for example, prescribes standards of
practice and standards of professional performance. Stan-
dards of practice address safe practice and use of the nurs-
ing process with the actions of assessment, diagnosis,
outcome identification, planning, implementation, and
evaluation (ANA, 2010a). Standards of professional per-
formance (Box 12.1) are expected professional roles and
behaviors, including ethics, education, evidence-based
practice and research, quality of practice, communication,
leadership, collaboration, professional practice evaluation,
resource utilization, and environmental health (ANA,
2010a, p. 3). Under the area of ethics, the registered nurse
is required to adhere to the Code of Ethics for Nurses 
with Interpretative Statements “to guide practice” (ANA,
2010a, p. 47).
Further, standards of specialty practice are provided
through the certification process with specialized educa-
tion, testing, and ongoing learning requirements. Prac-
tice standards and expectations have also been developed
by the applicable specialty organization. Adherence to
standards of practice is designed to  promote safe and 
effective care, but nurses still face ethical dilemmas on a
daily basis.
204
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
ONLINE CONSULT 
ANA (2015) Code of Ethics for Nurses at 
http://nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories
/EthicsStandards/CodeofEthicsforNurses
ANA Position Statements at
http://nursingworld.org/positionstatements
.aspx
ICN Code of Ethics for Nurses at
http://www.icn.ch/images/stories/documents
/about/icncode_english.pdf
Canadian Nurses Association Code of Ethics for
Registered Nurses at
http://www.cna-aiic.ca/en/on-the-issues/best
-nursing/nursing-ethics
Canadian Nurses Association Position Statements at 
http://www.cna-aiic.ca/en/advocacy/policy
-support-tools/cna-position-statements
BOX 12.1
Standards of Professional Performance: Ethical Competencies (ANA, 2010a)
The ANA (2010a) has identiﬁed the following competencies for ethical practice by the registered nurse:
●Uses the Code of Ethics for Nurses with Interpretative Statements (ANA, 2001) to guide practice.
●Delivers care in a manner that preserves and protects healthcare consumer autonomy, dignity, rights, values, and
beliefs.
●Recognizes the centrality of the healthcare consumer and family as core members of any healthcare team.
●Upholds healthcare consumer conﬁdentiality within legal and regulatory parameters.
●Assists healthcare consumers in self determination and informed decision making.
●Maintains a therapeutic and professional healthcare consumer-nurse relationship within appropriate professional
role boundaries.
●Contributes to resolving ethical issues involving healthcare consumers, colleagues, community groups,  systems,
and other stakeholders.
●Takes appropriate action regarding instances of illegal, unethical, or inappropriate behavior that can  endanger or
jeopardize the best interests of the healthcare consumer or situation.
●Speaks up when appropriate to question healthcare practice when necessary for safety and quality  improvement.
●Advocates for equitable healthcare consumer care.
Source: American Nurses Association. (2010a). Nursing: Scope and standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursesbooks.org.
MAKING ETHICAL DECISIONS
Making ethical decisions is not an easy task. The choice may
be between two equally unpleasant options. In the search
for assisting with ethical dilemmas, several models for ethical
decision making have been proposed and evaluated over the
past years. For example, Husted and Husted (2008) have pro-
posed analysis through extremes to clarify relationships and
discover the right thing to do when what is wrong is easier to
determine (p. 125). Aiken (2004) proposed a five-step model:
data collection and interpretation, stating the dilemma, con-
sidering choices of action, analyzing the advantages and 
disadvantages of the options, and making the decision 
(pp. 104–106). A classic model by Curtain (1978) provides
the following steps for the ethical decision-making process:
1. Obtaining background information
2. Identifying the ethical components
3. Identifying the ethical agents or people involved
4. Identifying the options available

5. Applying ethical principles to the issues, like self-
determination
6. Making a ﬁnal resolution or decision to the ethical
dilemma
Think about an ethical dilemma that you have encoun-
tered in the past. Return to the basic information and 
ignore the resolution that was reached. Follow Curtain’s
(1978) six steps and evaluate the resolution that did occur
in that situation.
Despite our code of ethics, that provides direction, or
the ethical principles we use, ethical dilemmas arise on a
daily basis in healthcare situations. These decisions are not
easy, and are made even more complex since they are not
made in isolation. Other professionals, and most notably
the patient, must be part of the decision to address our
ethical principles. And often, these decisions remain a part
of us as we recall events and considerations. Interestingly,
Husted and Husted (2008) have proposed several charac-
teristics of an unflawed ethical decision as follows:
●The decision is going to be acted upon
●Will guide actions to a justifiable end
●Affects one’s life and character over time
●Provides the belief that the actions will make life better
●Allows changing one’s direction during action (p. 16)
Consider the following issues in nursing practice and
the ethical dilemmas involved.
Informed Consent. One of the most common ethical situ-
ations concerns self-determination with true informed con-
sent. We are not speaking of simply getting the patient to
sign a form. This is not a role for the nurse. The issue of in-
formed consent contains many of the ethical principles we
have reviewed: beneficence (doing good with the person’s
best interests as the goal), justice (avoidance of favoritism),
fidelity (loyalty to the person, rather than to what we may
see as the reasonable treatment), full disclosure (with com-
plete information on the risks, benefits and options), self-
determination (to decide for oneself and not for the sake of
others), and without constraint after careful consideration of
the situation, knowing that one’s privacy is being protected
in the confidentiality of the patient-professional relationship.
This is what we would want for ourselves. So now, look back
at the steps in the decision-making model.
Can you identify the six steps of Curtain’s model? First,
consider whether all background information has been ob-
tained, including culturally appropriate information. Recall
that some medical or surgical procedures are acceptable to
certain people or cultures and not to others. So, has appro-
priate background infor mation been obtained, assumed, dis-
cussed, or ignored with a focus on our healthcare model?
Have all the  ethical components of the procedure and the
situation been explained appropriately and been given careful
consideration by the patient? And have all the ethical agents
or people involved been identified, including relevant ex-
tended family members? What are the options available to
the patient, and have these been explained and are they fully
understood? Now is the time to apply the ethical principles
to the issues, like self-determination. What do you think? As
for your final resolution to the informed consent—was it
true to the ethical principle? You see now why this is not as
simple as completing a consent for treatment form!
Advance directives. Most healthcare providers are famil-
iar with advance directives, in which individuals provide
specific written instructions for their wishes relative to their
future health, illness, and care at a time when they are able
to specify their wishes, in the event that they are unable to
communicate these wishes at that time. The ethical prin-
ciples of autonomy and self-determination are the basis for
advance directives, which can take the form of a living will
or healthcare proxy and durable power of attorney. 
Advance directives have their basis in both law and
ethics. Originally enacted in law and revised in the 1980s,
the Uniform Rights of the Terminally Ill Act provides for the
development of a living will specifying personal requests on
care and life support in the case of a terminal illness or in-
jury. A healthcare proxy may also be developed to appoint
a person to make decisions on care in the event that the per-
son cannot make them. Making decisions in advance of a
critical situation allows the person self-determination of
their fate. Yet, when not faced with a terminal diagnosis,
additional emotions and considerations may be ignored. In
addition to self-determination, there are other ethical prin-
ciples that must also be honored. When developing advance
directives, the individual must understand his or her options
and have full disclosure and understanding of the terminol-
ogy, especially when standard forms are used. The individ-
ual must understand the options for the different life
support equipment and hydration and nutrition. As re-
ported by the ANA (2012), difficulties and confusion about
DNR orders still exist despite efforts to assist consumers in
making informed decisions (p. 1). This is also the time to
address the choice for organ donation. The documents must
be witnessed and notarized, and state requirements should
be considered, especially if the individual travels or lives in
multiple states. The person can change his or her mind, but
a revised document must be developed.
The individual must also have full trust in the person
identified as the proxy. This is not a time for favoritism, but
one of trust that one’s wishes will be honored with judg-
ment and fidelity. Consider the  person who has been des-
ignated as the “proxy.” Is that person agreeable to serve in
that role? Does he or she feel compelled to serve, or instead
comfortable serving and adhering to the patient’s wishes?
Does he or she have the resources to advocate for the patient
when  family members with divergent options arrive on the
scene? When a patient is transported to the emergency de-
partment, does the individual serving as the proxy have ac-
cess to the legal documents that will need to be part of the
patient’s record? Privacy and confidentiality are also im-
portant concepts in that one’s advance directives are just
that—private, not public information, even if the family
members do not consider themselves as “the public.” It is
the individual’s self-determination to make the advance de-
cisions and have the documents available to the healthcare
proxy, healthcare providers, legal counsel, and family. 
Ultimately, it is the individual’s decision and autonomy. 
However, recall the concept of option rights: The range
of decisions for the individual to make in advance directives
vary by state and nation. In the United States, for example,
there are differences among states like Oregon that enacted
legislation on physician-assisted suicide. As noted by Bosek
and Jannette (2013), three other states (Washington, 
Montana, and Vermont) have now legislated a form of 
CHAPTER 12 Professional Ethics     ●
205

“patient-directed dying” (p. 136). Proposed legislation in
Maine “died in committee” in 2013, and Arizona provided
language to assist in palliative care and a proposal for access
to non-FDA-approved drugs. Many states have specific
forms and language that must be included to be considered
a legal and enforceable document. Active euthanasia or
“mercy killing” is not a component of advanced directives
in this country. However, in the Netherlands, Belgium,
and Luxembourg, voluntary active euthanasia is legal under
strict conditions for valid adult consent (Campbell, 2013,
p. 107). The Code of Ethics for Nurses (ANA, 2015) dictates
that nurses should be knowledgeable about advance direc-
tives and “should provide interventions to relieve pain and
other symptoms in the dying patient consistent with pal-
liative care practice standards and may not act with the sole
intent to end life” (p. 3).
Some people feel that advance directives lessen the bur-
den on the family in the case of a crisis. The focus here is on
the individual’s autonomy and wishes. However, families are
made up of individuals who may be facing the dilemmas of
beneficence in adhering to the person’s best interests, justice
in ensuring that all appropriate care is provided, and fidelity
in being loyal to the person’s wishes. Although the family
does not have to “second guess” the individual’s wishes, since
these decisions have been specified in the advance directives,
at an end-of-life event, many conflicting emotions may sur-
face, and healthcare professionals must be supportive to both
the individual and the family while upholding legally en-
forceable directives. Check out some of the online informa-
tion available to patients, but ensure that patients are
accessing reputable and appropriate information.
Additional dilemmas involved with advanced directives
include the following:
●The patient and the family are not in agreement.
●The patient/family is not in agreement with the
healthcare provider(s).
●There is disagreement about the issues of 
• “Do not resuscitate” orders
• Hydration versus nutrition
• Ventilation
• Dialysis
• Pain management
• Religious and cultural differences 
• End-of-life final requests and planning
• Organ and tissue donation
• The meaning of palliative care and what it will be like
for the patient, the proxy, and the significant others
What others can you identify?
As noted by the ICN (2012b), “the roles of nurses and
other healthcare professionals in caring for dying patients
continues to be debated, and nurses must be knowledge-
able about the current issues and legislation about end
stage of life issues” (p. 2). The concepts of hospice care
and palliative care continue to evolve and be differentiated.
As reported by the ANA (2013), “both the definition and
the terminology associated with palliative sedation have
been widely debated” (p. 5), and nurses are urged to take
a leadership role in patient advocacy and interprofessional
collaboration while adhering to the Code of Ethics.
The Persistent Vegetative State. Another dilemma that
has had major legal and ethical challenges over the past
years is the identification of the persistent  vegetative state.
The pronouncement of “brain death” is well established
and has objective data that must be met. However, the
persistent vegetative state has been debated in the courts
with specified criteria now proposed. But there is still
much discussion, debate, and media coverage. Perry et al.
(2005) have illustrated the issues and dilemmas involved
in the case of Terri Schiavo, a young woman who was in
a constant vegetative state and who persisted in this state
beyond the limits of a normal period of recovery. As the
authors reported, “no patient, even those with traumatic
brain injury, has been reported to recover after a full year
of being in a persistent vegetative state” (p. 744). As a re-
sult of all the legal contests and ethical debates, Schiavo
persisted in this vegetative state for 15 years. However, as
a result of her condition and the plight of her family, with
debates in the legal and medical communities, specific cri-
teria to understand the persistent vegetative state criteria
were developed to address both traumatic and nontrau-
matic brain injuries. So, think about the dilemmas within
the family and in the medical community:
●Would or could she recover?
●The criteria for brain death were not met.
●What would this young woman want since there were
not advance directives in place?
●What does the family know, want, perceive, and 
interpret?
●What different perceptions and feelings exist in the
family structure?
●What are the benefits and risks of each treatment to
the patient, the family, and society?
●What if you were reliant on a feeding tube for 
existence?
●What about the use of healthcare resources and the
chances of meaningful life?
What others can you identify?
206
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
ONLINE CONSULT 
AARP at 
http://www.aarp.org/home-family/caregiving
/legal-and-money-matters/
FamilyDoctor.org: Advance Directives and Do Not
Resuscitate Orders at 
http://familydoctor.org/familydoctor/en/
healthcare-management/end-of-life-issues/
advance-directives-and-do-not-resuscitate
-orders.html
MedlinePlus: Advance Directives at 
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus
/advancedirectives.html
National Alliance on Mental Illness: Advance 
Directives at
http://www.nami.org/Content/ContentGroups
/Policy/Issues_Spotlights/Psychiatric_Advance
_Directives_An_Overview.htm
National Cancer Institute: Advance Directives at 
http://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/managing
-care/advance-directives
Medline Plus: Organ Transplantation at
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus
/organtransplantation.html

Organ Procurement and Donation. Although organ
transplants have become a common procedure, there are
ethical concerns on both sides of the donation situation.
Consider the dilemma of “harvesting,” access, self-deter-
mination, and cultural beliefs, among others. In the case
of procurement or harvesting organs, care must be given
to the dignity and wishes of the donor. Family issues are
also of concern, with grief on the donor’s side and hopeful
expectation for the other family. Consider the physiolog-
ical and emotional issues of the patient in failing health
who is awaiting an organ donation, and the care concerns
and emotions impacting the significant others. Access
continues to be an issue, with cost and accessibility to
healthcare. In addition, coming from a utilitarian stance
is consideration of the greatest good for the greatest num-
ber and issues of care and success as the consequence. In
the case of deontology, consistent rules are applied for ac-
cess, regardless of individual considerations. Self-determi-
nation applies, as the wishes of both the donor and the
recipient. Cultural beliefs are also a consideration. As
noted by Spector (2013), organ donation is permitted in
many religious groups but not in the case of Jehovah’s
Witness followers. 
Returning to Curtain’s steps in the decision-making
process, obtaining background information is vital in the
assessment process for both the donor and the recipient as
the ethical components, ethical agents, and the available op-
tions are identified, and the ethical principles are applied in
the final decision. Understandably, individuals on a waiting
list are in a constant state of unease and rapidly failing health
and functioning. In addition to the disease process limiting
the person’s functioning, the individual and significant oth-
ers are facing potential mortality if a suitable organ is not
available, along with the emotional impact of being a num-
ber on a waiting list and thus constantly on alert in case an
appropriate donor emerges. The individual may not retain
the same placement on the waiting list if his or her condition
changes or if another individual emerges with higher prior-
ity for a transplant. In addition to the numbers of individ-
uals on waiting lists, there are other complex issues to
confront with the type of donation (blood, tissue, organs,
and stem cells) and the individuals involved (youth, aged,
minorities, religious and cultural groups). Consider the on-
line information available to the donors and individuals in
need and their families. Overall, respect for individuals is
an issue. How will you reply when renewing your driver’s
license if you are asked whether you want your donor status
indicated on your license? And, what about the response of
a family member to this same question?
Genomics. The Human Genome Project has been a
 significant scientific achievement that provided new infor-
mation on gene structure, function, and dysfunction. 
The DNA sequencing of the human body has been a
breakthrough in modern science, providing valuable in-
formation on the human genome or the complete set of
the human DNA. We now know what gene is affected in
specific genetic diseases such as sickle cell disease and cystic
fibrosis. Current research is ongoing on the genetic muta-
tions that occur with various cancers. Use of individual
DNA in the criminal system  frequently makes news and
is the topic of television entertainment series. But what
about the individual’s right to privacy? Also consider in-
dividual responsibility, as more information is known on
certain conditions that can be affected by either heredity
or environment. And think about tailoring drug doses for
individual DNA profiles. This balance of privacy and 
responsibility presents numerous ethical dilemmas.
Consider the rights of parents and children. Recall that a
right is an agreed-upon entitlement. Genetic mapping “can
offer firm evidence that a disease transmitted from parent to
child is linked to one or more genes . . . and can be used to find
the single gene responsible for relatively rare inherited disorders
. . . or more common disorders, such as asthma” (National
Human Genome Research Institute, 2012, p. 1). So consider
knowledge of transmission versus ignorance of a pre-existing
genetic trait—from both the parents’ and child’s perspective. 
We continue to gain much needed scientific informa-
tion from research on human DNA, but the ethical consid-
erations cannot be ignored in the quest for knowledge or
medical breakthroughs. And the ethical issues become as
complex as the individual human genome. For example, as
Huddleston (2013) describes, genetic-informed consent is
more than a signed document and the permission to per-
form genetic testing because, as some have argued, it is not
possible to provide informed consent for genetic research
when knowledge is advancing so rapidly that we do not
know what tests will be possible or what variants may be
identified next week (p. 2). Over a decade ago, Pang (2002)
noted that advances in genomics are likely to alleviate in-
fectious diseases and chronic disorders but that “attention
must be paid to complex ethical, legal, social and economic
issues, as well as to public education and encouragement”
(p. 1077). And this is still true as the technology evolves.
And what about cloning beyond sheep? At the national
level, the Ethical, Legal, and Social Implications (ELSI) Re-
search Program has been established to address the ethical
challenges with genomic research. Some of the current re-
search priorities include recruitment issues, such as diversity,
perceptions of risks and benefits, informed consent, privacy
and identifiability of genomic information, data sharing and
data security, governance structures, compensation and dis-
tribution of benefits, and the role of community and con-
sultation engagement (National Human Genome Research
Institute, 2014). These issues are just a peek at the future
dilemmas that the scientific and the healthcare communities
will confront. As originally stated by Collins et al. (2003),
CHAPTER 12 Professional Ethics     ●
207
ONLINE CONSULT 
U.S. News on msnbc.com: “Schiavo autopsy 
shows irreversible brain damage” at 
http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/8225637/ 
Terri Schiavo Life & Hope Network at 
http://www.terrisfight.org/
ONLINE CONSULT 
U.S. Government Information on Organ and Tissue
Donation and Transplantation at
http://www.organdonor.gov/ 
Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network at 
http://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/

“society must formulate policies to address many of the
questions raised by genomics” (p. 845). 
One of these questions addressed consumers’ fears with
genetic testing and involvement in research with the use of
genetic information and discrimination in health coverage
and employment. The Genetic Information Nondiscrimi-
nation Act (GINA) of 2008 was enacted to provide consis-
tent protections throughout the United States to prohibit
discrimination in health insurance coverage and employment
based on genetic information. For example, this law provides
protection against an increase in the overall premium rate
for an employer group plan based on genetic information of
an individual. The employer can still determine eligibility or
premium rates for an individual with the disease but not use
the plan to increase rates for all. Think about the incidence
of breast cancer in families. In this case, genetic information
and family history cannot be used to discriminate for em-
ployment or for health coverage based on this information
for an individual who does not manifest the disease or con-
dition. If the person does manifest the condition, he or she
may be denied coverage or pay additional premiums. How-
ever, the employer cannot raise all premiums in an effort to
project costs and coverage impacts on the company’s plan.
The American Nurses Association, in collaboration with
stakeholder groups, published essential competencies for
nurses and for curriculum in the area of genetics and ge-
nomics in 2006, with revisions in 2008 and further com-
ments on the competencies of graduate nurses solicited in
2010. These competencies address practice standards for
registered nurses. In the area of professional responsibilities,
awareness of one’s own values, advocacy for patients, and
competency in the nursing role relative to genetics and ge-
nomics are  minimum competencies. In the practice do-
main, the ANA (2008) competencies focus on nursing
assessment; identification of patients, valid information, and
ethical standards; referral activities, and the provision of ed-
ucation, care and support (pp. 11–13). These  competencies
include the need for critical analysis, advocacy, and collab-
oration with patients and other healthcare providers. Aware-
ness of the terminology, current developments, and ethical
standards are vital. To demonstrate the effect of this area on
current health priorities, federal agencies such as the Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality have included acti vities
in their annual line item budgets related to genomics. In-
vestigate some of the fact sheets provided at the Web site of
the National Human Genome Project and the expected
professional competencies.
Impaired or Incompetent Colleagues. As an advocate
for effective healthcare for patients, a nurse does not want
to be faced with impaired or incompetent colleagues.
Unfortunately, it does happen, and this creates ethical
dilemmas. The ICN (2006b) addresses continuing com-
petence as a professional responsibility and a public right
and further mandates the “report of practitioners who 
fail to deliver competent professional practice” (p. 1). 
This mandate addresses both impaired and incompetent
practice of any healthcare professional and is highlighted
in the revised ANA Code of Ethics for Nurses. The Code
states, “nurses must be alert to and take appropriate action
in all instances of incompetent, unethical, illegal, or im-
paired practice or actions that place the rights or best in-
terests of the patient in jeopardy” (ANA, 2015, p. 12).
Again, no one likes to think about working with or
being aware of an incompetent or impaired colleague. It is
dangerous to both the patient and others. It endangers pa-
tients first but also impacts family members, colleagues,
managers, organizational leaders and managers, the profes-
sion, and the community at large. Chemical dependency is
a complex disease. Drug dependency can be a result of prior
conditions that required pain management in the nurse’s
personal life, a complex biochemical and mental health
issue, or psychological issues. Drug diversion, or taking
drugs from a patient or the institution, whether for personal
use or for a friend or family member, is a criminal offense.
The patient may be denied effective pain management or
only receive partial doses. This situation is a form of harm
to the patient both physiologically and economically. But,
the health professional is also being harmed. Healthcare
providers have controlled access to drugs like opiates in their
care of patients, and this can be a powerful inducement at
a time of chemical or emotional weakness or even workload
stress. It can also be quite frightening to co-workers who
notice unusual behavior in a colleague. As described by
Wolf (2012), “when substandard, neglectful nursing care is
tolerated or ignored, intense moral distress follows” (p. 22).
In a case of impaired practice, discovery is upsetting to
the individual, colleagues, and management. And the 
patient may have experienced harm from the failure to re-
ceive their prescribed medications. Administration may be
called and intervene, requesting that the employee submit
to a drug screen immediately. This confrontation can en-
gender defensive or escapist behaviors. Discovery may also
occur when the employee is off duty during an investiga-
tion of drug administration or control irregularities, and
the employee is called in to meet with administration or
an employee assistance representative. Regardless, if diver-
sion of controlled substances is suspected, drug enforce-
ment and control officials may be called, and the employee
may face arrest and criminal prosecution. This criminal
action will be in addition to an investigation by the Board
of Nursing and perhaps immediate suspension of the li-
cense and privilege to practice. The impaired professional
may be referred to a special rehabilitative program during
this process. Angres, Bettinardi-Angres, and Cross (2010)
describe that this referral source expects a treatment provider
to determine whether the nurse needs a detoxification pro-
gram and subsequent treatment including follow-up treat-
ment, family services, and after-care (p. 17). Employment
and earning potential may be severely affected for the em-
ployee and his or her family. The organization is affected
operationally, economically, and emotionally. The entire
situation is upsetting and harmful to all involved, especially
208
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
ONLINE CONSULT 
Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act 
(GINA) of 2008 at
http://www.genome.gov/10002077#al-2
National Human Genome Research Institute at 
http://www.genome.gov/
American Nurses Association at
http://www.nursingworld.org/MainMenu
Categories/EthicsStandards/Genetics-1
/default.aspx

the patient. Consider the principles of beneficence, non-
maleficence, justice, fidelity, and veracity. And drug diver-
sion, whether directly from patients or from the organization,
impacts both the patient and the healthcare system.
Bettinardi-Angres and Angres (2010) encourage nurses
in authority to understand the disease of addiction as a
biopsychosocial disease process and chronic health problem
and to use an effective and compassionate approach to ben-
efit the addicted nurse, the healthcare profession, and so-
ciety (p. 31). Impaired nurses can not only injure
themselves and their patients through unprofessional prac-
tice, but could seriously impact the performance of col-
leagues in the performance of their role or even injure or
kill others in a motor vehicle  accident on the way to or
from the healthcare setting. The scope of this discussion is
not directed at understanding the disease of chemical ad-
diction or dependency but the effect in the organization
and on the leadership and management. In cases that are
not subject to criminal charges, the employee assistance
program may seek to assist the impaired professional. But
reporting an impaired professional to the Board of Nursing
starts an investigative process with the potential for disci-
pline and is a requirement that has an impact on the em-
ployee, the organization, and society. As the nursing leader
or manager, you may be faced with such a situation. You
will be confronted with reporting requirements, employee
rehabilitation potential or termination, and damage control
in the situation and interpersonal situations, and you may
even be required to provide testimony to state or law en-
forcement representatives or agencies. The best scenario is
to provide employee assistance and intervention before the
impaired practice or diversion occurs. This may not be pos-
sible given longstanding physiological and emotional issues.
But, consider how to react and respond in the situation.
The first consideration in knowing the legal requirements
in your nurse practice act, as the statue or law, and in the
regulations that interpret and explain the law. 
Incompetent practice, or failure to meet the standard of
care, is also harmful to the patient, colleagues, the organiza-
tion, and the profession. Consider the  reactions of a colleague
who observes this situation: disbelief, denial, making excuses,
or perhaps blame directed at the situation or the environ-
ment. Consider a possible ethical dilemma: protection of the
patient or “whistle-blowing” on a colleague. Once again, re-
turn to the ethical decision-making model in this situation: 
●Obtaining background information
●Identifying the ethical components
●Identifying the ethical agents or people involved
●Identifying the options available
●Applying ethical principles to the issues, like self-
determination
●Making a final resolution or decision to the ethical
dilemma
First, you will have to collect the facts on what happened.
These facts will also be necessary for an incident report or ob-
servation that you will need to provide. Next, in your under-
standing of the situation, a critical determination will be
patient safety and your consideration of the principles of ben-
eficience, nonmaleficence, justice and fidelity. Veracity is di-
rected at the patient, the colleague, and the organization as
you identify the ethical agents and the people involved. Next,
consider your options and what immediate interventions are
needed on the part of the patient and the colleague as you
function as a professional and a patient advocate. These in-
terventions for beneficience and fidelity to the patient’s safety
will be of paramount concern. At the same time, your patients
will need the appropriate level of care to ensure their care and
safety. Your final steps in the resolution will be based on the
facts, ethical principles, and your professional obligations and
accountability. Advocacy for patients in the case of an im-
paired or incompetent colleague presents an ethical dilemma
that requires intervention and addressing patient safety while
facts surrounding a situation are being collected and blame
and personal conflict are minimized.
You will encounter other ethical dilemmas throughout
practice. As described in the ANA (2010b) position state-
ment on The Nurse’s Role in Ethics and Human Rights,
“clearly articulated ethical positions, astute understanding
of human rights, careful discernment of human rights vi-
olations and bold acceptance of responsibility converge to
provide a backdrop for all nursing activities” (p. 2). Ad-
herence to ethical principles is a part of clinical judgment
and professional practice. Your skills in assessment, critical
analysis, and nursing process will be invaluable as you 
confront the situations as they arise.
CHAPTER 12 Professional Ethics     ●
209
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
In 2010, the Food and Drug Administration requested that the Institute of Medicine examine when and how
to conduct clinical trials ethically in order to evaluate the safety of drugs. The basis for this request is to ad-
dress both ethical and patient safety concerns especially when patients are involved in clinical trials. 
In its report, the IOM (2012) concluded that the FDA’s current approach to drug oversight is not suffi-
ciently systematic to ensure that it assesses the benefits and risks of drugs consistently over the drug’s life
cycle and recommended adopting a framework standardized across all drugs that is flexible enough to make
the decision-making process more predictable, transparent, and proactive (p. 1). 
Suppose clinical drug trials are currently being conducted in your organization. Read the current informa-
tion and response provided by the IOM at http://www.iom.edu/Reports/2012/Ethical-and-Scientific-Issues-in-
Studying-the-Safety-of-Approved-Drugs.aspx.
Question: How would you apply the ethical decision-making process by Curtain (1987) to this situation
with the current information on this topic?

210
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
K E Y  P O I N T S
●Rights are agreements that may be welfare or legal rights (based on laws that may be revised), ethical or
moral rights (based on an ethical system or rules of conduct) and option rights (with differences within
the overall legal parameters). 
●Basic human rights include beneficence, justice and fidelity, full disclosure and veracity, self-determination
and autonomy, informed consent, and privacy and confidentiality. 
●Beneficence is the principle of doing good with the person’s best interests as the goal of all actions. Asso-
ciated ethical principles include justice (fairness) and fidelity (loyalty).
●Self-determination is the sense of autonomy, where the person has the right to determine their fate. 
●Full disclosure occurs when the individual has complete and relevant information to make an informed
decision and includes the principle of veracity or providing truthful information.
●Informed consent occurs when the individual has complete information on all sides of the issue and
makes a decision for care (or not) freely and without constraint given careful consideration on both 
advantages and disadvantages of the action.
●Privacy means that a person has the right to determine and control the amount of information to reveal
about himself or herself, while confidentiality means that the information that the person does reveal is
respected and not revealed to others except as necessary as part of this professional relationship. 
●Standards of care are the accepted practice that is reasonable under a given set of circumstances for a
specific profession.
●The two generally established systems of ethical decision making are utilitarianism (based on the conse-
quence) and deontology (based on the consistent obligations as rules and unchanging principles). 
●The Code of Ethics for Nurses developed by the American Nurses Association is the ethical standard for
professional nursing practice in the United States.
●There are various ethical decision-making models. A classic model includes obtaining background infor-
mation, identifying the ethical components, identifying the ethical agents or people involved,  identifying
the options available, applying ethical principles, and making a final decision on the dilemma (Curtain,
1987).
●Advance directives are legal documents (living wills and durable powers of attorney) that provide specific
written instructions for an individual’s wishes relative to the future healthcare and end-of-life decisions at
a time when the person is able to specify his or her wishes. 
●Active euthanasia is also called “mercy killing,” with an active role with the sole intent to end life is not 
allowable in the Code of Ethics for Nurses (ANA, 2015, p. 3).
●The Human Genome Project has been an outstanding scientific achievement that provided new informa-
tion on gene structure, function, and dysfunction for the human genome (the complete set of the human
DNA). 
●Advocacy for patients in the case of an impaired or incompetent colleague presents an ethical dilemma
that requires intervention and addressing patient safety while facts surrounding a situation are being col-
lected and blame and personal conflict is minimized.
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Reflect carefully and identify an ethical dilemma and debate each side with a colleague, one of you using the utili-
tarianism philosophy and the other using deontology.
2. Identify the basic human rights reflected in the ANA Code of Ethics for Nurses (2015).
3. What commonalities can you identify in the ANA Code of Ethics for Nurses (2015), the Canadian Nurses Associa-
tion Code of Ethics (2008), and the ICN Code of Ethics for Nurses (2012)?

CHAPTER 12 Professional Ethics     ●
211
4. Review one standard of care from your facility’s policy and procedure manual and investigate its basis in the pro-
fessional literature.
5. Find a peer from a different ethnic or cultural background and share your values on an ethical topic of your choice.
6. Discuss the Chapter Thought in the context of professional ethics.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.
REFERENCES
Aiken, T. D. (2004). Legal, ethical, and ethical issues in nursing
(2nd ed). Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2006). Position 
statement: Privacy and confidentiality. Retrieved from
http://nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/Ethics
Standards/Ethics-Position-Statements/Privacyand
Confidentiality.html
American Nurses Association. (2008). Essentials of genetic
and genomic nursing: Competencies, curricula guidelines, 
and outcome indicators (2nd ed.). Retrieved from http://
nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/EthicsStandards
/Genetics-1/Background-Genetics-and-Genomes
/EssentialNursingCompetenciesandCurriculaGuidelines
forGeneticsandGenomics.pdf
American Nurses Association. (2010a). Nursing: Scope and 
standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursesbooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2010b). Position Statement: The
nurse’s role in ethics and human rights: Protecting and promot-
ing individual worth, dignity, and human rights in practice
settings. Retrieved from http://www.nursingworld.org
/ethicsrole 
American Nurses Association. (2012). Nursing care and do not
resuscitate (DNR) and allow natural death (AND) decisions.
Retrieved from http://www.nursingworld.org/MainMenu-
Categories/EthicsStandards/Ethics-Position-Statements
/Nursing-Care-and-Do-Not-Resuscitate-DNR-and-Allow
-Natural-Death-Decisions.pdf
American Nurses Association. (2013). Euthanasia, assisted sui-
cide, and aid in dying. Retrieved from http://nursingworld
.org/MainMenuCategories/EthicsStandards/Ethics
-Position-Statements/Euthanasia-Assisted-Suicide-and
-Aid-in-Dying.pdf
American Nurses Association. (2015). Code of ethics for 
nurses with interpretative statements. Silver Spring, MD:
Nursebooks.org.
Angres, D. H., Bettinardi-Angres, K., & Cross, W. (2010).
Nurses with chemical dependency: Promoting successful
treatment and reentry. Journal of Nursing Regulation, 1, 
16–20.
Bettinardi-Angres, K., & Angres, D. H. (2010). Understanding
the disease of addiction. Journal of Nursing Regulation, 1,
31–35.
Bosek, M. S. D., Jannette, J. (2013). Attitudes of nurses toward
patient-directed dying: A pilot study. JONA’S Healthcare,
Law, Ethics, and Regulation, 15(4), 135–139.
Campbell, A. V. (2013). Bioethics: The basics. London, UK: 
Routledge.
Canadian Nurses Association. (2008). Ethical practice: The code
of ethics for registered nurses. Retrieved from http://www
.cna-aiic.ca/en/on-the-issues/best-nursing/nursing-ethics
Collins, F. S., Green, E. D., Guttmacher, A. E., Guyer, M. S.
(2003). A vision for the future of genomics research: A 
blueprint for the genomic era. Nature, 422(6934), 835–847.
Retrieved from http://www.genome.gov/11007524
Curtain, L. L. (1978). A proposed model for critical ethical
analysis. Nursing Forum, 17(1), 12–17.
Dahnke, M., & Dreher, H. M. (2006). Defining ethics and 
applying the theories. In V. D. Lachman (Ed.), Applied
ethics in nursing (pp. 3–13). New York: Springer.
Department of Health and Human Services. (2009). GINA:
The Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008:
Information for researchers and health care professionals.
Retrieved from http://www.genome.gov/Pages/PolicyEthics
/GeneticDiscrimination/GINAInfoDoc.pdf 
Huddleston, K. (December 23, 2013). Ethics: The challenge of
ethical, legal, and social implications (ELSI) in genomic
nursing. OJIN: The Online Journal of Issues in Nursing,
17(1). Retrieved from http://nursingworld.org
/MainMenuCategories/ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals
/OJIN/Columns/Ethics/Ethical-Legal-Social-Implications
-in-Genomic-Nursing.html
Husted, G. L., & Husted, J. H. (2008). Ethical decision 
making in nursing and health care: The symphonological 
approach (4th ed.). New York: Springer.
Institute of Medicine. (2012). Ethical and scientific issues in
studying the safety of approved drugs: Retrieved from
http://www.iom.edu/reports/2012/ethical-and-scientific
-issues-in-studying-the-safety-of-approved-drugs.aspx
International Council of Nurses (ICN). (2006). Position state-
ment: Continuing competence as a professional responsibility
and public right. Retrieved from http://www.icn.ch/images
/stories/documents/publications/position_statements/B02
_Continuing_Competence.pdf
International Council of Nurses (ICN). (2008). Position state-
ment. Health information: Protecting patient rights. Retrieved
from http://www.icn.ch/images/stories/documents
/publications/position_statements/E05_Health_
Information_Patient_Rights.pdf
International Council of Nurses (ICN). (2012a). The ICN code
of ethics for nurses. Retrieved from http://www.icn.ch
/icncode.pdf 
International Council of Nurses (ICN). (2012b). Nurses’roles in
providing care to dying patients and their families. Retrieved
from http://www.icn.ch/images/stories/documents
/publications/position_statements/A12_Nurses_Role_Care
_Dying_Patients.pdf 

National Human Genome Research Institute. (2012). Genetic
mapping. Retrieved from http://www.genome.gov/10000715
National Human Genome Research Institute. (2014). ELSI 
Research Program. Retrieved from http://www.genome.gov
/10001618#al–2
Pang, T. (2002). Health policy and ethics forum: The impact
of genomics on global health. American Journal of Public
Health, 97(7), 1077–1079.
Perry, J. E., Churchill, L. R., & Kirshner, H. S. (2005). The
Terri Schiavo case: Legal, ethical, and medical perspectives.
Annals of Internal Medicine, 143, 744–748.
Spector, R. E. (2013). Cultural diversity in health & illness (8th ed.). 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Blasi, A.E. (2012). An ethical dilemma: Patients & profits v. 
access & affordability. Journal of Legal Medicine, 33, 115–128.
Blennerhassett, M. (2013). Breast cancer screening: An ethical
dilemma or an opportunity for openness? Quality in 
Primary Care, 21, 39–42.
Collins, F., & Barker, A. (2007). Mapping the cancer genome:
Pinpointing the genes involved in cancer will help chart a
new course across the complex landscape of human malig-
nancies. Scientific American, 296(3), 50–57. 
Greipp, M. E. (1995). A survey of ethical decision making mod-
els in nursing. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 1(1–2), 51–60.
Health; End of Life; Patient Directed Dying Act, VT LEG
262460.1. Retrieved from http://www.leg.state.vt.us/docs
/2012/Bills/Intro/H-274.pdf
Lea, D. H. (2009). Basic genetics and genomics: A primer for
nurses. OJIN: The Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 14(2).
Retrieved from http://www.nursingworld.org/Main
MenuCategories/ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN
/TableofContents/Vol142009/No2May09/Articles
-Previous-Topics/Basic-Genetics-and-Genomics.html
Lea, D. H. (2009). The Genetic Information Nondiscrimina-
tion Act (GINA): What it means for your patients and fam-
ilies. OJIN: The Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 14(2).
Retrieved from http://nursingworld.org/MainMenu
Categories/ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN
/TableofContents/Vol142009/No2May09/Articles
-Previous-Topics/The-Genetic-Information
-Nondiscrimination-Act-GINA.aspx
McCue, C. (2010). Using the AACN framework to alleviate
moral distress. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 16(1).
Retrieved from http://nursingworld.org/MainMenu
Categories/ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/
TableofContents/Vol-16-2011/No1-Jan-2011/Articles
-Previous-Topics/AACN-Framework-and-Moral-Distress.html
Sofaer, N., & Strech, D. (2011). The need for systematic 
reviews of reasons. Bioethics, 26, 315–328.
Ulysse, F. G., Balicas, M., & Xu, Y. (2011). Ethical dilemma:
Therapeutic nondisclosure. Clinical Scholars Review, 4(2), 
115–118. 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2010).
Health information privacy. Retrieved from http://www
.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/ 
Winters, N. (2013). Whether to break confidentiality: An 
ethical dilemma. Journal of Emergency Nursing, 39,
233–235.
Wolf, Z.R. (2012). Nursing practice breakdowns: Good and
bad nursing. MESURG Nursing, 21(1), 16–22, 36.
ONLINE RESOURCES
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
http://www.ahrq.gov
AARP
http://www.aarp.org/home-family/caregiving/
American Nurses Association
http://www.nursingworld.org
Bioethics Databases
http://bioethics.od.nih.gov/withinnih.html
Familydoctor.org
http://familydoctor.org/familydoctor/en/healthcare
-management/end-of-life-issues.html
HIPAA
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/ 
MedlinePlus 
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/medlineplus.html
Medline Plus: Organ Transplantation
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus
/organtransplantation.html
National Alliance on Mental Illness
http://www.nami.org
National Cancer Institute: Advance Directives
http://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/managing-care
/advance-directives
National Human Genome Research Institute
http://www.genome.gov/
Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network
http://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/
Terri Schiavo Life & Hope Network
http://www.terrisfight.org/
U.S. Government Information on Organ and Tissue 
Donation and Transplantation
http://www.organdonor.gov/ 
212
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

S E C T I O N  III
Quality Care 
for Individuals, 
Families, and Groups
T
his section starts with a focus on quality and safety in Chapter 13, and the national ini-
tiatives that have driven this process. Theoretical models for quality are discussed, along
with strategies for continuous quality improvement, safety, and efficacy in the healthcare en-
vironment. In Chapter 14, the focus is on population health. The progress of the Healthy People
initiatives in the United States is presented. Special populations that are highlighted include
the aging population, minorities, and those living in rural areas, with the focus on health pro-
motion for the population and health equity.
In Chapter 15, we look at one of the core competencies for health professionals, the use of
informatics. Health information systems in the clinical setting are discussed along with the im-
plementation of the electronic health record (EHR). Informatics competencies for nurses, infor-
matics nurses, and informatics specialists are described in this evolving specialty in the discipline. 
Quality care includes a focus on healthcare economics and policy as presented in Chapter
16. Policy and the associated costs are changing dramatically as we focus on safe, effective,
and equitable care for individuals and groups. Stemming from a focus on healthcare policy
are the political advocacy skills needed by the politically active nurse in Chapter 17. These
skills include both understanding the legislative process and promoting policy improvements
for the health of individuals and groups.
In Chapter 18, Sister Rosemary Donley challenges us to consider our progress on health-
care reform and global and domestic issues that affect healthcare policy, healthcare delivery,
and nursing education and practice. The active participation of professional nurses in policy
formulation will strengthen the profession and patient care outcomes.
Finally, in Chapter 19, we look at the trends in professional practice and the competencies
needed in future professional practice. You are challenged to develop your own personal
strategies for your future contributions to professional practice.

Quality and Safety 
in Healthcare 
214
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Describe the steps in the processes of continuous quality improvement. 
2. Discuss the role of regulatory agencies in promoting safety and evaluating quality in healthcare settings.
3. Discuss the changes in quality improvement and safety standards and expectations and their impact on
current professional nursing practice. 
4. Differentiate between the cultures of safety and blame.
5. Explain the use of a root cause analysis for a sentinel event.
6. Identify quality improvement factors to be considered at the unit, organizational, and system levels.
Quality
National Patient Safety Goals
National Hospital Quality 
Measures 
Transformation
Quality Planning
Quality Control
Quality Improvement
Learning Organization
Total Quality Management (TQM)
Continuous Quality Improvement
(CQI)
Benchmarking
Quality Assurance
Risk Management
Just-in-time learning
Just Culture 
Sentinel Event
Root Cause Analysis
Process Teams
QI Tools
Flow Chart
Cause-and-Effect Diagram
Data Sheets
Check Sheets
Surveys
Indicators
Variation
Work Redesign
●Francoise Dunefsky  ●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
“Quality is shared and is everyone’s
responsibility.”
Francoise Dunefsky
Key Terms
13

CHAPTER 13 Quality and Safety in Healthcare     ●
215
In healthcare arenas, we continue to examine the
 definition of quality and its relationship to costs. This 
effort has been stimulated by several factors: the necessity
to compete in a global marketplace, where production
costs are often significantly lower; the ongoing explosion
in technological advances; exponentially increasing expen-
ditures for healthcare services; individual and corporate
consumer pressures to improve value, and portability of
health information; potential reduction of fragmentation
of care; and, of critical importance, the safety of healthcare
consumers.
Healthcare institutions are attempting to understand
and apply principles and techniques previously reserved
for the business world. In their codes of ethics and stan-
dards of practice, professional groups, including nurses
and physicians, have historically expressed the intent of
ensuring that individual patients receive optimal care. The
impact of structures and processes on these individual and
aggregate outcomes was previously not documented nor
necessarily understood.
In addition, societal forces are shifting the healthcare
paradigm from a paternalistic model of delivering care 
and services to one that responds to customer demands.
Making providers accountable for evaluating the quality
of care they deliver, and for communicating that quality
effectively to the public, is an emerging task influenced by 
corporate buyers of services, who want to know what they
can expect to receive for their money. Much progress has
been made in the last decade to create an infrastructure
that can be used to improve the entire system of care for
all stakeholders. In fact, the Agency for Healthcare Re-
search and Quality (AHRQ) is now required to report to
Congress annually on healthcare quality and disparities.
In a recent report, the AHRQ (2014) noted that health-
care quality was fair but improving, with 70 percent of
recommended care actually received, but there was varia-
tion across states, with hospital care improving more rap-
idly and ambulatory, diabetes, and maternal and child care
lagging (p. H-1).
With its professional commitment to patients, respon-
sibility for coordinating care, and roots in the psychosocial
and physical sciences, nursing is poised to play an 
important role in the ongoing development and imple-
mentation of care delivery models that are effective and
efficient, meet customer expectations, and ensure excellent
clinical outcomes and safety. The dictionary defines qual-
ity as a “degree of excellence or distinguishing attribute”
(Merriam-Webster Dictionary, 2014). In healthcare, we
previously defined it as being “free of mistakes” or perfect
relative to process. The standard of perfection, or 100 per-
cent compliance, was focused within. The current quality
movement is evolving a definition of quality that includes
“meeting customer needs” and focusing on outcomes, ef-
ficacy, and safety. The Institute of Medicine (IOM) uses
the following definition: “The degree to which health serv-
ices for individuals and populations increase the likelihood
of desired health outcomes and are consistent with current
professional knowledge” (IOM, 2001, p. 232). A new par-
adigm for clinical practice across disciplines is  contributing
to nursing’s body of knowledge, current standards of prac-
tice, nursing care outcomes, and the consistent use of ev-
idence-based practice. Recall that we have previously
defined evidence-based practice as “an integration of the
best evidence available, nursing expertise, and the values
and preferences of the individuals, families, and commu-
nities who are selected” (Sigma Theta Tau, 2005, p. 1). 
Healthcare providers have consistently looked at clin-
ical care as the measure for quality. Traditionally, the qual-
ifications of clinicians, state-of-the-art technology, and
episodic interventions that cure illness and “do no harm”
were considered indices of quality. But asking customers
how they perceive “quality” has enabled a more complex
picture to emerge. The consumer expects expert clinical
care. But equally important are safe, timely, courteous, and
respectful treatment, easy access to caregivers and infor-
mation, unfragmented care delivery, reasonable costs, and
the ability to maneuver through the system without too
many obstacles. Understanding the convergence of the
consumer’s perspective of quality and use of evidence-
based nursing practice, together with an ongoing focus on
continuous improvement, are an integral part of meeting
our professional commitment.
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVES
Human societies have always strived for excellence. 
Reliance on professional associations such as guilds and
inspection by consumers are centuries-old methods of
judging quality. Societal values, however, are changing the
context in which quality is evaluated.
Pre–World War II healthcare delivery in the United
States was mostly a cottage industry. This time is referred
to as the “charitable era of healthcare.” The wealthy and
fortunate rural populations relied on services delivered in
the home. The poor and urban working classes were sent
to hospitals in critical circumstances or died at home. A
sudden growth in technology and treatment modalities
and the building of hospitals stimulated by the Hospital
Survey and Construction Act of 1946, also known as the
Hill-Burton Act, began the corporatization of healthcare
delivery. This “technologic era” lasted for more than 
30 years. Extensive development of policies, procedures,
standards of practice, and professional disciplines ensued.
It took 20 years before the industrial model of reliance on
departmental inspection and supervisory audits became
part of the fabric of healthcare. The role of Medicare and
federal and state government accelerated this growth.
The early 1970s saw the beginning of formalized meas-
urement of clinical performance and outcomes. Organi-
zations such as the Joint Commission (formerly known as
the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare 
Organizations, or JCAHO), professional review organiza-
tions (PROs), and some state health departments played
a major role in the initial movement. Retrospective audits,
investigation of problems, and indicator measurements
were all attempts to discover less than acceptable perform-
ance by an individual, discipline, or department. The ob-
jective was to discover the “bad apples,” implement a
corrective action plan, and monitor its effectiveness
through ongoing measurement. It was assumed that qual-
ity was a result of the performance of individuals or groups
of individuals. The tools of the corrective action plans were
education, disciplinary action, and increased resources
such as technology and staffing.

216
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
A gradual quality paradigm shift began in the  second
half of the 1980s. The “economic era” of healthcare was
emerging. Other industries purchasing healthcare for their
employees at rapidly rising costs challenged the healthcare
sector to provide “more” and “better” for “less.” The
Japanese were successfully invading the American market-
place as a result of quality methodologies developed by
Deming, Juran, and others. Deming had persuaded the
Japanese  government and industry that they should focus
on quality rather than price and costs. Knowing that this
focus would take time and commitment, they infused their
businesses with the belief that work is performed by inter-
dependent teams, that individuals want to do a good job,
that those who do the work itself know its processes better
than anyone else, and that mass inspection and fear do not
automatically result in quality.
Juran proposed the notion that by planning for quality,
one avoids multiple trial-and-error situations and costly
rework, often referred to as “the cost of poor quality.”
Quality could be cost-effective. Improvement required
even higher goals for quality. Reliance on systems analysis
and statistical methods and techniques produced better-
quality products than did supervision and inspection of
individual human behaviors.
During the next 10 years, companies began to recog-
nize that care is delivered by individuals who function as
members of cross-functional and interdisciplinary teams,
and those individuals and teams are tools for, rather than
objects of, improvement. Currently a body of scientific re-
search is emerging that tests the new  theories that care is
supported by environmental, managerial, support, and
governance structures, and that ensuring accepted clinical
outcomes is not enough to meet customer needs.
Many individuals and organizations have contributed
to the quality journey over the past 30 years. The Joint
Commission, the Institute for Healthcare Improvement,
and the IOM are but a few organizations that deserve
recognition for being driving forces in the implementation
of the new quality care models. In 1996, the IOM, a 
member of the National Academies, began a multiple-
phase Quality Initiative; its landmark reports include To
Err is Human: Building a Safer Health System (2000),
Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the
21st Century (2001), Keeping Patients Safe: Transforming
the Work Environment of Nurses (Page, 2004), and more
recently, in collaboration with the Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation, The Future of Nursing: Leading Change, 
Advancing Health (2011). These and other IOM reports
focus on the quality problems and on the multiple levels
of system reform needed. 
Largely as a result of the IOM’s activities and reports,
the Joint Commission in 2002 approved National Patient
Safety Goals. Requirements define performance expecta-
tions with respect to structure, process, and outcomes in
order that patient safety and quality may be enhanced. The
requirements to meet these goals are surveyed in all health-
care organizations seeking their accreditation. Since then,
these goals have undergone revision and updating to focus
efforts on current issues and strategies, all directed at pa-
tient safety in a variety of environments. 
In 1998, the Joint Commission began the journey to-
ward the standardization of core measures with the goal
of quality improvement of patient outcomes. In 2004, the
Joint Commission partnered with the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid (CMS) on the core measures for
greater standardization as common measures. These core
measures became National Hospital Quality Measures
identified as integral to improving the quality of care pro-
vided to hospital patients and bring value to stakeholders
by focusing on the actual results of care with common and
consistent measurement (Joint Commission, 2013h). At
first, the focus was on metrics through the identification
and implementation of these national measures, followed
by expansion and enhancement across the national system
for demons trable improvement in healthcare quality and
patient safety. Of note is the collaborative work through-
out this endeavor between the Joint Commission, CMS,
and the National Quality Forum (NQF), as well as other
partners. In 2010, hospitals were required to submit data
to the Joint Commission on a minimum of four core stan-
dards or a combination of applicable core measures or
noncore measures, depending on agency size and focus
(Joint Commission, 2010, p. 1). (See current core mea -
sures, identified in Box 13.1.) Separate systems can now be
compared by using core measures in a standardized fashion.
By using specific performance measures for diseases such
as acute myocardial infarction or stroke and their manage-
ment, hospitals regardless of geographical location could
be easily compared. In addition, the aim was to minimize
 redundancy in data collection. Initially the work was hos-
pital-based. However, the measures have now been ex-
panded to provide a greater scope of selection options in
long-term care, home care, behavioral healthcare, and am-
bulatory care, so standardized performance improvement
is implemented throughout the entire continuum of care.
CMS has well-established “Compare” websites for hos-
pitals, nursing homes, HHAs, and ESRD facilities. In
March 2008, it began posting cost in addition to quality
information on Hospital Compare about selected inpa-
tient hospital stays provided to Medicare patients. More
recently the site has added 10 new measures of patient 
experiences of care (Hospital Consumer Assessment of
Healthcare Providers and Systems, or HCAPs). Con-
sumers now have access to the three critical elements of
quality, satisfaction, and pricing information for specific
procedures performed at their hospitals when making in-
formed decisions about where to seek care.
Simultaneously with the Compare activities, CMS 
developed the Roadmap for Implementing Value Driven
Healthcare in the Traditional Medicare Fee-for-Service
Program. This included promoting efficiency in resource
ONLINE CONSULT 
The Joint Commission at 
http://www.jointcommission.org/
The Joint Commission’s Quality Report at 
http://www.QualityCheck.org
The Institute for Healthcare Improvement at 
http://www.ihi.org
The Institute of Medicine: Quality and Patient
Safety at 
http://iom.edu/Global/Topics/Quality-Patient
-Safety.aspx

use while providing high-quality care, namely paying for
value. Initial steps required Medicare to stop paying for
certain reasonably preventable Hospital Acquired Condi-
tions (HACs). As of fiscal year 2013 steps have been im-
plemented to move hospitals from a pay-for-reporting to
a pay-for-performance program, called Value-Based Pur-
chasing (VBP). Other providers are preparing for the next
phase of the VBP implementation.
The role nursing plays in all of the quality and safety
work has been pushed to the forefront. The American
Nurses Association, through its National Database of
Nursing Quality Indicators (NDNQI), has identified
acute care patient outcomes that are dependent primarily
on nursing care, commonly referred to as “nurse sensitive.”
On the basis of evidence-based practice, targets are being
set for nurse-sensitive outcomes such as patient falls, pres-
sure ulcers, and peripheral intravenous infiltration. Na-
tional Database of Nursing Quality Indicator (NDNQI,
2014) guidelines now exist on data collection on nurse-
sensitive indicators such as nursing care hours per patient
day, skill mix, falls, and falls with injury. 
One initiative in nursing education was the develop-
ment and promotion of the Quality and Safety Education
for Nurses (QSEN) competencies by the American 
Association of Colleges of Nursing. These QSEN compe-
tencies were developed along with the IOM competencies
for all health professionals, patient-centered care, teamwork
and collaboration, evidence-based practice, quality im-
provement, safety, and informatics (see Chapter 1). Knowl-
edge, skills, and attitudes were identified for each of the
competencies. Subsequently, these competencies were in-
corporated into the Essentials of Baccalaureate Education for
Professional Nursing Practice (AACN, 2008). Baccalaureate
program faculty were trained on these QSEN competencies
with content now incorporated in the undergraduate cur-
riculum. This movement then spread to the incorporation
of QSEN competencies in graduate nursing education. In
addition, QSEN Web-based learning modules are available
on each of the six core competencies. The competency for
quality improvement has been defined as “the use of data
to monitor the outcomes of care processes and use im-
provement methods to design and test changes to contin-
uously improve the quality and safety of health care
systems” (Cronenwett et al., 2007, p. 127; Smith, Cronen-
wett, and Sherwood, 2007, p. 133). The knowledge 
required in the area of quality improvements includes the
following:
●Care outcomes in the setting
●Interprofessional systems and tensions affecting these
outcomes
●Importance of variation and measurement to assess
quality of care
●Various approaches for changing processes 
(Cronenwett et al., 2007)
Check out the knowledge, skills, and abilities required
for quality improvement and the other QSEN competen-
cies at http://qsen.org/. Quality improvement is now an
expectation in all professional practice arenas, from basic
education through professional practice. 
What has become evident is the focus on quality 
improvement and the use of evidence-based metrics.
THEORETICAL MODELS
FOR QUALITY
The models used for quality improvement have come
from industry. Some have been adapted for healthcare, but
all share the common theme of using the scientific process.
Deming’s Principles 
for Transformation
W. Edwards Deming was the first to challenge seriously
the managerial notion that quality and increased produc-
tivity are incompatible. In doing his research and devel-
oping his 14 Points for Management (Box 13.2), he
assumed the radical new approach of listening to
CHAPTER 13 Quality and Safety in Healthcare     ●
217
BOX 13.1
National Hospital Quality Measures
Core Measures:
●Acute myocardial infarction
●Children’s asthma care (CAC)
●Emergency department
●Heart failure
●Hospital-based inpatient psychiatric services
●Hospital outpatient department
●Immunization
●Perinatal care
●Pneumonia measures
●Stroke
●Substance use
●Surgical care improvement project (SCIP)
●Tobacco treatment
●Venous thromboembolism
Source: Joint Commission. (2014a). Core measure sets. Retrieved from
http://www.jointcommission.org/core_measure_sets.aspx. 
Specifications Manual for National Hospital Inpatient Quality Measures
Discharges 01-01-15 (1Q15) through 09-30-15 (3Q15).
ONLINE CONSULT 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing at
http://www.aacn.nche.edu/qsen/home
CMS Quality of Care Center at 
https://www.cms.gov/Center/Special-Topic
/Quality-of-Care-Center.html
National Patient Safety Foundation at
http://www.npsf.org/
NDNQI at
http://pressganey.com/ourSolutions/performance
-and-advanced-analytics/clinical-business
-performance/nursing-quality-ndnqi
QSEN Institute at
http://qsen.org/
The Joint Commission at
http://www.jointcommission.org/facts_about_joint
_commission_accreditation_standards/

those who actually do the work (Deming, 1982, 1986).
Deming contended that the model can be applied any-
where, including service industries. Nursing leaders at all
levels of the organization can apply the principles in their
quest to implement quality care. The more  pervasive the
quality culture in the organization, the easier the model
application becomes. The stronger and more visible lead-
ership is in its  support for quality, the more rapidly a qual-
ity culture transformation can be implemented.
The 14 Points for Management
Following is a brief description of each of Deming’s (1982,
1986) 14 Points of Management:
1. Create constancy of purpose for improvement of product
and service. Innovation is the foundation for the fu-
ture. It requires a belief that there is a future and an
unshakable commitment to quality and productivity.
Resources must be put into  education and research so
we can constantly improve. The aim is to meet our
mission and serve our customers, because otherwise we
will not stay in business. We must address day-to-day
problems without getting stuck in them. Nurse man-
agers must plan their resources, energy, and time to
deal with the future; work better, not harder, to plan
new services. Meeting our customers’ needs, and
training and retraining personnel, will help deal with
required change.
2. Adopt the new philosophy. Do not accept existing levels
of mistakes or staﬀ members who are not adequately
prepared to perform. Become the change agent who
meets the challenge. Propose, develop, and implement
improvements in systems and services.
3. Cease dependence on mass inspection. The inspection
stage is too late to improve quality. Quality comes
from improvement in production processes. Tools,
such as 100 percent case review, will not improve 
care, are time-consuming, and require resources 
that could be better spent in improving design or 
systems. Measuring incomplete records, medication
errors, or service delays, in and of themselves, will 
not improve the delivery of care.
4. End the practice of awarding business on the basis of
price tag alone. The nurse manager has a responsibil-
ity to include total cost when recommending the
purchase of goods or services. This includes not
only the “up-front” price but also the cost of dispos-
ables and maintenance, amount of vendor support
provided, ease of training in use, labor costs, and
cross-functional use. It is a managerial responsibility
to make well-prepared, comprehensive recommen-
dations to the executive team. Deming believes that
limiting the suppliers we deal with and establishing
long-term relationships with vendors creates inter-
dependency, which assists in the achievement of
quality.
5. Improve constantly and forever the system of produc-
tion and service. Quality must be built and incorpo-
rated during the design phase in order to avoid
costly rework. Teamwork is essential in this process,
especially in service industries such as healthcare, in
which we rely on interdependent, cross-disciplinary
teams to deliver the care that is our product. As our
customers’ needs and available resources change, we
are obliged to improve existing systems. Reductions
in length of stay, shifts in delivery of care along the
continuum, and changing demographics all require
us to seek opportunities to “do it better.” It is no
longer acceptable to think, “We always did it this
way and it worked.”
6. Institute training. Learning must be lifelong and per-
vasive. The principles of adult learning, and an appre-
ciation for the fact that diﬀerent people learn by
diﬀerent methods, apply at all layers of the organiza-
tion, regardless of length of employment. All must un-
derstand the institution’s mission, values, customer
needs, and expectations. What the assignment is, what
acceptable work is, and how we prepare people all
must be deﬁned. For the manager, this includes
knowing which processes are assigned and under-
standing variation in these processes. We must be-
come learning organizations.
7. Adopt and institute leadership. The job of  management
includes leadership—namely, vision and communica-
tion of that vision—not just supervision. The assign-
ment is to work on quality of service, designing 
for quality and  delivering an actual product. The man-
ager must understand the work supervised and must
remove barriers that prevent the staﬀ members from
doing their work.
8. Drive out fear. Fear of reprisal, fear of admitting
mistakes, fear of not having necessary new knowl-
edge, and fear of not meeting deadlines or quotas
interfere with seeing opportunities for improve-
ment. Errors, complaints, and areas that appear 
218
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
BOX 13.2
Deming’s 14 Points
1. Create constancy of purpose for improvement of
product and service.
2. Adopt the new philosophy.
3. Cease dependence on mass inspection.
4. End the practice of awarding business on the basis
of price tag alone.
5. Improve constantly and forever the system of 
production and service.
6. Institute training.
7. Adopt and institute leadership.
8. Drive out fear.
9. Break down barriers between staﬀ areas.
10. Eliminate slogans and targets in the workplace
that urge increased productivity.
11. Eliminate numerical quotas for the workplace 
and management.
12. Remove barriers that rob people of pride in 
workmanship.
13. Encourage education and self-improvement for
everyone.
14. Take action to accomplish the transformation.
Source: Reprinted from Out of the crisis by W. Edwards Deming by
permission of the W. Edwards Deming Institute®. Copyright 1986
by The W. Edwards Deming Institute®.

out of control must be studied and analyzed for
opportunities to improve.
9. Break down barriers between staff areas. This point
has proved especially difficult in healthcare, where
the struggle to establish distinct professional do-
mains fostered accountability, review, and discipli-
nary actions within professions. The emergence of
matrix organizations, patient care departments, use
of product- or service-line teams, cross-training,
and decentralization of services will assist in the im-
plementation of patient care teams focused on the
patient rather than the professional. Simultane-
ously, this will create a new challenge to ensure that
no one can hide behind or dominate the team. All
professional groups must be held accountable for
their professional practice and for quality in service
delivery.
10. Eliminate slogans and targets in the workplace that
urge increased productivity. The assumption that
one can improve quality and productivity by trying
harder does not take into account that most prob-
lems come from systems rather than individuals.
The role of management is to improve the system
with the results of sound statistical methods.
11. Eliminate numerical quotas for the workforce and
management. Quotas assume that the target is cor-
rect, not too high or too low, and that all can attain
them. They have a negative eﬀect on pride in work-
manship. Productivity should be studied, analyzed,
and understood. Everyone should know what to do
and how to do it. A sustained requirement for all to
participate in setting goals and  ﬁguring out how to
reach them is needed.
12. Remove barriers that rob people of pride in workman-
ship. Make clear what the job is and what the ex-
pectations are. Improving the system to make 
it easier for people to work well will help them 
invest in the organization, reducing turnover and
absenteeism.
13. Encourage education and self-improvement for every-
one. Study and development should not focus only
on the immediate needs of the organization or de-
partment. Develop the organization and its members
for the future as well as for the present.
14. Take action to accomplish the transformation. The
leaders must adopt the new philosophy with 
pride. It must be explained often and well to a 
critical number of individuals. Everyone in the 
organization must be asked to participate. This 
requires substantial and sustained commitment
and energy.
Obstacles to Quality Transformation
Deming (1982, 1986) also recognized obstacles to the
transformation:
●Desire to achieve instant results by hiring a 
consultant
●Supposition that solving problems creates
 transformation
●Belief that one can simply transfer systems from 
another organization
●Belief that the quality department takes care of 
quality
●Belief that your problems are different
●Poor understanding of statistical methods
Deming (1982, 1986) referred to more serious blocks
as “deadly diseases” because of their severity and resistance
to eradication:
●Lack of constancy of purpose
●Emphasis on short-term profits
●Evaluation of performance without long-term 
improvement in mind
●Mobility of management
●Management by numbers only
When considering applying Deming’s principles for
transformation, the nurse has to acknowledge realities
in the organization. It may be necessary to maintain an-
nual performance review, existing merit systems, strict
organizational and professional hierarchies, and a focus
on monthly budget fluctuations. Nevertheless, the gen-
eral principles of constancy of purpose, focus on im-
provement, creating a learning environment, reducing
fear, and removing barriers to pride in workmanship can
be adopted by anyone in any setting.
Juran Trilogy
Deming offers a framework for how to transform any or-
ganization by incorporating quality, but the Juran Trilogy
focuses on the tools that organizations can use while doing
the work. The two models are complementary and are
often used together.
Joseph Juran (1989) defines quality as “fitness for use.”
This definition assumes both freedom from defects and
presence of the multiple elements required to meet the
total needs of a customer. The freedom from defect does
not guarantee that this is the product the customer wants.
The patient assumes we can deliver care without errors.
Waiting time, ease of access, and cleanliness may be crucial
factors in determining whether a patient chooses a partic-
ular provider or urgent care center. Patients may opt to
seek urgent care services in freestanding facilities with
shorter wait times or diagnostic mammographies in 
zen-like women’s health centers.
The Juran Trilogy utilizes three managerial processes:
planning, control, and improvement (Box 13.3). The tril-
ogy’s proposed procedural steps and tools are unique.
Quality Planning
Planning for programs or services requires that quality is
built into them. This stage of quality planning follows
five distinct steps:
1. Determine who the customers of the program or
service are. They can be external customers, 
internal customers, or both. In healthcare, patients,
families, and payers are all external customers. 
Departments and providers are internal customers
of one another. Nursing receives services from 
dietary or medical records, and those departments 
in turn are customers of nursing. Independent
CHAPTER 13 Quality and Safety in Healthcare     ●
219

 medical staff members are often considered 
both internal and external customers because of
their ability to choose the institution and their 
influence and provision of services within the 
institution.
2. Determine the customers’ needs. Surveys, focus
groups, individual patient interviews, complaint re-
views, and market analysis can be used to determine
what our customers want.
3. Develop product features that respond to the cus-
tomer’s needs. Consider oﬀering services outside 
traditional business hours. Weekend day surgery, 
diagnostic procedures early and late in the day, and
respite care are but a few examples.
4. Develop processes that are able to produce those 
product features.
5. Transfer the resulting plans to the implementation
team.
For example, while teaching breast self-examination
at a customer-friendly breast clinic, a nurse hears patients
express concerns about the time it takes to receive
 mammography results. In response to complaints, the
nurse, working with the department and a local women’s
group, initiates a formal survey of women who currently
use the center and women who do not. The survey re-
veals that women want to receive test results within
24 hours and to be able to refer themselves for mammog-
raphy. As a result, the services at the center are redesigned
to incorporate these features. The clinic applies for and
obtains an expanded license for self-referral. It institutes
policies, procedures, and standards to ensure that the im-
proved services are implemented and monitored.
Quality Control
The three steps of quality control involve:
1. Evaluating actual quality performance. This requires
knowledge of statistical methods of measurement and
analysis.
2. Comparing actual performance with quality goals.
3. Acting on the diﬀerence. This assumes understanding
of common and special cause variation. Variation is
part of any process. Constant reaction to it may desta-
bilize an otherwise stable process.
220
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
BOX 13.3
Juran Trilogy
A. Quality Planning
1. Determine who the customers are.
2. Determine the needs of the customer.
3. Develop product features that respond to the customer’s needs.
4. Develop processes that are able to produce these product features.
5. Transfer the resulting plans to the operating forces.
B. Quality Control
1. Evaluate actual quality performance.
2. Compare actual performance to quality goals.
3. Act on the diﬀerence.
C. Quality Improvement
1. Establish an infrastructure.
2. Identify needs for improvement.
3. Establish project teams for each project.
4. Provide the teams with resources, motivation, and training.
Source: Adapted with the permission of The Free Press, a division of Simon & Schuster Adult Publishing Group, from Juran, J. M. (1989). Juran on
leadership for quality. New York: The Free Press, © 1988 by The Juran Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.
Example
1. Measure the number of women who underwent
mammography and received their results within 
24 hours.
2. Compare the number to the agreed-upon
 benchmark.
3. Analyze the discrepancies for special cause  variation
and develop an improvement plan.
Quality Improvement
Raising performance to unprecedented levels or quality
improvement requires four steps:
1. Establishing the infrastructure needed to secure
ongoing quality improvement. The infrastructure,
which may comprise a quality council, departmental
teams, and assigned roles, ensures that quality
improvement is part of the way business is done.
2. Identifying speciﬁc needs for improvement. Data
from quality control, feedback from customers,
and goals of the organization help determine
what needs to be improved and what needs to be 
prioritized.
3. Establishing a project team for each project. Responsi-
bility must be deﬁned clearly. This includes the objec-
tive for improvement and  measures of success.
4. Providing resources, motivation, and training for the
teams to diagnose causes of lesser quality, stimulate 
a remedy, and establish controls to hold the gains in
improvements.

Juran’s work has shown that most of the potential for
eliminating errors and improving the system does not lie
in changing workers. The 85/15, rule as it is now com-
monly referred to, states that 85 percent of problems can
be corrected only by changing systems.
Both Deming and Juran have provided the foundation
for today’s quality movement in industry and in health-
care. The national initiatives aimed at both quality and
safety have helped in the transition from quality assurance
to quality improvement.
Monitoring and Evaluation as a
Goal of Accreditation
The Joint Commission takes the position that improve-
ment requires effective monitoring and that effective mon-
itoring requires good indicators. Quality assurance evolved
into quality improvement largely as a result of this posi-
tion. The monitoring and evaluation process has been re-
vised over time but remains part of the foundation on
which many of quality activities are based. The process re-
quires identifying the most important aspects of care for a
particular organization or division, selecting indicators that
reflect these aspects, taking opportunities to improve care,
taking action, and evaluating the effectiveness of that ac-
tion. Doing the right thing includes efficacy and appro-
priateness. Doing it well involves availability, timeliness,
effectiveness, continuity, safety, efficiency, and providing
services with respect and caring.
You may have been involved in survey visits at your
agency. The Joint Commission (2013a) describes the ac-
creditation process as designed to help organizations
strengthen community confidence in the quality and
safety of care, treatment, and services and to organize and
strengthen patient safety efforts (p. 1). The process is de-
signed to monitor compliance with standards and ongoing
quality improvement. The leaders in the organization are
responsible for fostering quality improvement and setting
priorities for assessment and improvement. Leaders are de-
fined as the leadership of the board; the executive team,
including the nurse executive; the leaders of the medical
staff; and department directors. Nurse managers and other
leaders in the nursing staff have direct responsibility for
quality. 
The unique character of the organization and the scope
of services must be viewed consistently by all to be clear
about who patients are and what these patients need. Key
functions in the organization warrant ongoing monitoring
and prioritization. The key function in outpatient areas
are often very different from those in bedded units, as are
the ones from services focusing on prevention, action, or
chronic illness. Timeliness as an aspect of care may vary
based on the scope of service and aspects of care of a par-
ticular service. Interdisciplinary teams develop and select
indicators for those aspects of care that have been priori-
tized. As an example, turnaround time for laboratory re-
sults could be an indicator selected to reflect timeliness in
an emergency department. Further, the team determines
at what level and time evaluations will be triggered. Iden-
tifying thresholds that are not met after quarterly reviews
is an example of how to implement evaluation. The review
of every unexpected return of a patient to the surgical suite
within 24 hours after surgery may be another.
Defining data sources and methodology for col lection,
the actual data collection, and organization all are parts of
this process. Once it is determined that  further evaluation
is needed, other feedback may be taken into consideration.
Intensive evaluation should be performed by teams. Ac-
tions for improvement are identified and include changes
in the system, education, designation of clear authority
and accountability, and development of standards. These
actions must undergo ongoing evaluation for effectiveness.
In addition to this intensive analysis of the processes
of the organization, attention to and report of national 
accountability measures is now required as part of the ac-
creditation process. The collection of national information
on core measures of performance began in 2002. Collab-
oration on these core measures with other national groups
concerned with quality and safety led to the establishment
of national quality measures as accountability measures.
The Joint Commission (2014b) defines these accounta-
bility measures as “quality measures that meet four criteria
designed to produce the greatest positive impact on patient
outcomes when hospitals demonstrate improvement” 
(p. 1). The four criteria for these accountability measures
are as follows:
1. Are evidence based
2. Have proximity, in that the care is connected to the
patient outcome
3. Accurately measure the provision of care
4. Have little or no adverse consequences (Joint 
Commission, 2014b, p. 1) 
These accountability measures are used to compare in-
stitutions and to present a national vision on quality of pa-
tient care. Consumers can readily check the quality reports
of healthcare organizations in their community and region
on these measures at http://qualitycheck.org. In the past
years, the focus from within departments to processes, the
level of accountability, the understanding and application
of statistical methodologies, the role of leadership, and
accoun tability to the public have evolved significantly. 
CHAPTER 13 Quality and Safety in Healthcare     ●
221
Example
The special cause variation for the delay in result re-
porting of the mammographies appears to be linked to
the day of the week (Friday) and the shift (evening).
The radiology nursing staﬀ is drastically reduced on
Saturdays with only interventional radiology nursing
staﬀ covering for the mammography service. After
training this staﬀ regarding the necessary skills about
results reporting, you resume measuring and see a
marked improvement.
ONLINE CONSULT 
The W. Edwards Deming Institute at 
http://deming.org
Juran: The Source for Quality at 
http://www.juran.com

Organizational leaders can no longer delegate respon -
sibility to the quality department. Hiding behind profes-
sional or departmental boundaries is not acceptable.
Leaders of boards, executive and management teams, and
the medical staff are all being held accountable for delivery
of quality care and for participation in the transformation
of the healthcare system. The focus is on continuous qual-
ity improvement and safety.
The right thing includes efficacy and
appropriateness. Doing it well involves 
availability, timeliness, effectiveness, 
continuity, safety, efficiency, and providing 
services with respect and caring.
CONTINUOUS QUALITY
IMPROVEMENT IN
HEALTHCARE
Healthcare organizations strive to embed quality in every
service they provide. Their success lies in their ability to
incorporate quality as a key component of their strategic
mission and to implement a model by which they contin-
ually evaluate and improve quality.
Quality as Strategy
The guiding members of any organization are responsible
for developing the mission, vision, and core strategies cho-
sen to achieve the vision. Not every business will choose
quality as a strategy. Instituting competitive pricing, in-
stilling a customer service focus, promoting access to the
product, and creating a niche market are all examples of
different strategies. It is not accidental that agencies ac-
credited by the Joint Commission are required to include
a quality plan in their strategic plan. To survive and thrive
requires a formal, well-thought-out approach with a focus
on the communities we serve.
“Doing the right things right” means that we have
identified the “right things.” They will vary according to
the needs of the particular community and the mission
and vision of the organization. Not every hospital can or
should serve all the healthcare needs of its community.
Such needs may be met better by other community agen-
cies or tertiary care centers. Once the healthcare agency
defines what the “right things” are, or what the scope of its
services is, it must design quality into the structures and
processes, monitor and analyze performance, and identify
opportunities for improvement in order to ensure that the
right things are “done right” and that the desired outcomes
result.
A successful strategic plan also requires identifi cation
of needed core competencies and methods to address ex-
isting gaps. Core competencies define the organizational
capabilities as well as the subsequent employee competen-
cies needed to achieve the vision through utilization of the
strategic plan. Core com petencies are not stagnant; they
change with the organization’s strategies. The recruitment,
retention, development, and performance management 
of everyone working in or for the organization plays a 
key role. Creating a learning organization, in which skill
development is dynamic, is strategic in and of itself. Un-
derstanding how to build quality and safety into structures
and processes, knowing the tools and measures to be uti-
lized, knowing how to monitor and analyze performance,
and understanding team process, group dynamics, and im-
provement methods all require learning, which must be
included in the organizational development strategies.
Quality is everyone’s responsibility. It is a business
strategy, or centralized philosophy, with accountability 
at every service level. Because quality is everyone’s job,
everyone must be educated and must demonstrate com-
petence about quality—the leadership, the providers, and
the customers.
Total Quality Management and
Continuous Quality Improvement
The terms total quality management (TQM) and con-
tinuous quality improvement (CQI) have been used in-
terchangeably. TQM is mostly linked with industrial
models, whereas CQI has received wide acceptance in
healthcare. Because the underpinnings of the two terms
are the same, CQI is used throughout the remainder of
the chapter.
The basic concepts of CQI are that quality improve-
ment is an ongoing process that utilizes proactive and 
reactive strategies. The process goes beyond meeting pre-
established goals or catching up to the competition; rather,
it involves exceeding expectations and creating new op-
portunities. Improvements can be large-scale or incremen-
tal. Quality is defined as satisfying the needs of external
and internal customers, including anticipating developing
needs and introducing new services. Teamwork is the 
underlying framework. Improvement activities and meas-
urement are always linked, because without measurement
we cannot be sure that improvement has occurred. 
Additionally, measurement keeps teams focused on
concrete opportunities and provides feedback regarding
which core strategies helped achieve the vision and mission
of the organization. Choosing measures to analyze internal
trends may precede the need for external comparisons.
Benchmarking, the process of comparing with the best
of the industry, requires understanding of statistical meth-
ods, including the validity and reliability of the tools 
and measures used in both organizations, understanding 
systems variation, and sampling methods.
Transition from Quality Assurance
to Continuous Quality Improvement
The traditional model of quality assurance (QA)—
relying on inspection to catch problems and correcting in-
dividual performances—has already evolved in many seg-
ments of the healthcare industry. The expectation of
perfection is gone, but the search for safety and excellence
is essential.
To assume that the journey through quality assurance
was wasted fails to recognize that many of the tools used
in quality assurance are still used in quality improvement,
and the journey helped define what  constitutes quality
care. There are many differences, however. CQI is widely
recognized as being broader in scope, involving the 
222
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

leadership and many more people, and blurring bound-
aries. The Joint Commission uses the term performance
improvement (PI) to integrate the concepts and activities
of both QA and CQI. The PI standards support the role
of leadership in priority setting and systems development,
data collection, and data analysis to identify trends, pat-
terns, and opportunities for improvement.
It is important to understand that the evaluation of in-
dividual performance must continue. Standards for hiring
competent team members are more important than ever.
Results of individual performance should be looked at for
trends across shifts, units, and departments. Findings can
be used for staff and leadership development. Individual
competence remains a professional obligation. The shift
in focus from individual to team does not change our stan-
dards or our accountability to those we serve. Department-
or unit-based quality programs remain valuable and
should not be demolished. They are an important vehicle
for teaching the concepts of CQI and provide needed
mechanisms for ongoing measurement and application of
standards. They also recognize that much improvement
does not require large teams but can occur at the unit level.
Risk management evaluates the legal standards and
their application to the delivery of care, the environment
of care, and other services and functions. As with quality
assurance, it relies on inspection; however, the focus is on
how to protect the assets of the organization against lia-
bility. Table 13.1 highlights the differences and similarities
between quality improvement, quality assurance, and risk
management.
An example of how the same problem may be ap-
proached differently with the three approaches is in deal-
ing with a medication error. In the environment of quality
improvement, the investigation will search for what system
weaknesses may have contributed to the error: Is the dis-
pensing system weak? Are high-risk medications kept sep-
arate? and so on. At the unit level, quality assurance may
investigate the individual nurse’s competencies and per-
formance. In the risk management arena, the focus may
be on documentation problems that could be discoverable
in court in a malpractice claim.
Putting a Continuous Quality
Improvement Structure in Place
It is now widely accepted that quality journeys are lengthy
and costly. They require a well-developed structure and
plan to connect the vision with the implementation. Be-
cause CQI is, first and foremost, a management philoso-
phy, the leaders must be competent in its principles and
methodologies.
The actual mechanisms of setting up the program are
beyond the scope of this chapter. Creating a structure
usually involves a quality council and designation of 
a CQI coach. The coach functions as the facilitator, 
educator, and expert in tools and techniques. For organ-
izations seeking Joint Commission accreditation, well-
established guidelines and widely used tools are readily
available. The function of the council is to create inte-
gration, prioritize efforts, allocate resources, develop a
learning organization, and charter cross-functional
teams. The journey is usually expected to take between
three and five years, depending on the resources avail-
able and the readiness for change.
Leaders and followers alike need to internalize the new
beliefs and learn to use the new techniques and tools.
Many organizations fail in the quest to implement the new
quality organization because the efforts are all focused on
the beginning of the journey. Just-in-time learning, the
process of acquiring knowledge and skills as they are
needed and used, tends to eliminate the feeling that CQI
may be another managerial gimmick gone awry.
Another common mistake is the failure to prioritize ef-
forts. Improvement activities require resources and should
be linked to strategic objectives, serious quality and safety
concerns, or identified needs. Quality costs money, espe-
cially in the time and effort of human resources, and few
organizations can afford to attempt to improve on all
CHAPTER 13 Quality and Safety in Healthcare     ●
223
TABLE 13.1
Comparing Quality Improvement, Quality Assurance, 
and Risk Management
Quality Improvement
Quality Assurance
Risk Management
Broad in scope 
Organizational leadership 
designs and sets priorities
Purpose is improvement
Focus is on customers
Uses problems as opportunities 
for improvement
Focus is on the system as a whole
Based at unit or departmental 
level
Often uses separate department
or committee to design and 
set priorities
Compares against standards
Focus is on the organization
Continuous ongoing monitoring 
identifies problems (inspection)
Focus is on individual 
performance
Often its own, separate department
Looks at legally acceptable level of 
care or service
Purpose is risk reduction
Focus is on preventing loss
Continuous ongoing monitoring 
(inspection)
Focus is on protecting organization’s
assets

fronts at once. However, safety is of primary concern. Ul-
timately leaders, including nursing leaders at the unit, or-
ganizational, and systems level are responsible for setting
priorities and for providing resources that support safety
and quality.
A CALL TO SAFETY
We have seen nursing and healthcare change radically in
recent years with care that must be framed in the context
of safety, evidence-based practice, and patient involve-
ment. This imperative requires acute attention to safety
and a new vision of the culture of healthcare.
Health professions and consumers of healthcare were
alarmed with the release of reports from the Institute of
Medicine (IOM) of the National Academies on the high
incidence of medical errors. There was a definite call to
improve safety to patients, and the IOM continued this
important work identifying rules for healthcare, overall
aims, and core competencies for health professionals. 
Patient safety and effectiveness of outcomes became major
national objectives and directed additional attention to
nursing. Research by the Agency for Healthcare Research
and Quality (AHRQ) has focused on expanding the
knowledge base on how the quality of the healthcare work-
place affected the quality of healthcare provided, especially
in the areas of workload and working conditions, effects
of stress and fatigue, reducing adverse events, and the or-
ganizational climate and culture. Patient outcomes were
now being investigated, along with nursing-sensitive indi-
cators and factors that promote safe and effective practice.
In late 2003, nursing itself was the focus of the IOM in
their report, Keeping Patients Safe: Transforming the Work
Environment of Nurses. The IOM’s Committee on the
Work Environment and Patient Safety provided specific
recommendations to both acute care and long-term care
organizations on issues of management practices, work-
force capability, work design, and the organizational safety
culture (Page, 2004, p. 3). At the same time, another 
report from the IOM, Patient Safety: Achieving a New
Standard of Care, was released with the focus on data stan-
dards for patient safety—i.e., standardized representations
of clinical data important to systems that promote patient
safety or, in essence, a new health information infrastuc-
ture to support safety programs nationally (Committee on
Data Standards for Patient Safety, 2004, p. 40). 
In subsequent years, the IOM investigated health dis-
parities, the role of the government (including Medicare),
rural health, healthcare reimbursement practices, and
mental health conditions among other quality improve-
ment initiatives. Of particular note was a study mandated
by the United States Congress on preventing medication
errors. In July 2006, the IOM report released on Prevent-
ing Medication Errors presented information available on
the incidence of medication errors in acute care settings,
long-term care, and in ambulatory care—including errors
in the homes of consumers—in an effort to develop an
agenda for the nation to reduce preventable errors and 
adverse drug events and enhance medication safety. 
Although the incidence rates were approximated based 
on the data, the report did emphasize that these rates 
were most likely underestimates, based on available and
reportable data and the incidence of adverse events. It 
was reported, however, that at least 25 percent of all harm-
ful adverse drug events are preventable (Aspden et al., 
2006, p. 4). 
Based on the ten rules from the earlier Quality Chasm
report in 2001, the IOM (Aspden et al., 2006) recom-
mended the transformation of the entire system to a pa-
tient-centered, integrated-use system with specific action
agendas to support the consumer-provider partnership for
healthcare organizations; the pharmaceutical, medical 
device, and health information technology industries; 
research on safe medication use; and oversight, regulation,
and payment.
The IOM (Aspden et al., 2006) focused further on
these seven recommendations:
●Consumer empowerment for self-medication
 management
●Improvement and standardization of resources by 
governmental agencies
●Implementation of patient-information and decision-
support technologies nationwide
●Improved labeling, packaging, and distribution, 
including studies on use of samples
●Standards for drug information technologies, includ-
ing design and alert systems
●Funded research on safe and appropriate
medication use across settings, especially on error
prevention
●Adoption of broad practices, technologies, and profes-
sional behaviors focused on safety and error reduction
In the past, errors resulted in incident reports and some-
one being identified as the cause. Such finger-pointing 
at an individual or individuals promotes a  culture of
blame. This culture and associated practices did not gen-
erally yield improvements but, rather, loss of opportunities
to make improvements and, at times, secretive practices.
Consumers, insurers, and the media became concerned for
safety and often questioned too much or too little care and
testing. Systemic issues in the healthcare environment were
now questioned and targeted for improvement. In a report
on Leadership in Healthcare Organizations addressing the
hospital culture and system performance, five key systems
were identified for improving safety and quality of care:
“using data, planning, communicating, changing perform-
ance, and staffing” (Schyve, 2009, p. 19). Further, in a
meta-analysis review of the patient safety literature de-
signed to describe the patient safety “culture,” Sammer,
Lykens, Singh, Mains, and Lackan (2010) identified the
following themes as “subcultures”:
●Leadership
●Teamwork
●Evidence-based practice
●Communication
●Learning
●Just Culture
●Patient-centered care (p. 157)
We have entered the culture of safety, in which the en-
vironment and the entire system is the focus to allow
healthcare providers and consumers to address quality im-
provement. For years, safety investigations in healthcare,
224
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

with the goal of quality improvement, have investigated a
broad range of safety concepts, including information and
applications from the aviation industry in their quest to
make air travel safer. Crew Resource Management (CRM)
is a safety system used by multiple industries in which
human error can have devas tating effects. The Federak Avi-
ation Administration (FAA) defines CRM as “the effective
utilization of all available resources—Hardware, software,
and personnel—to achieve safe, efficient flight operations”
(Driskell and Adams, 1992, p. 8). It is an integrated train-
ing, process improvement, and management system with
roots in aviation but recommended by the Joint Commis-
sion for preventing patient injury. The purpose is to create
a culture of open communication among team members,
to provide a framework for an approach to procedures, es-
pecially in high-risk, highly chaotic environments, that is
standardized, thorough, and routine. The recent reports on
healthcare environments demonstrated the change of focus
from an individual causative agent to an environmental
practice that needed to change. Concerted efforts must now
be collaborative among professionals, governmental agen-
cies, suppliers, educators, and regulators, with the con-
sumer involved in the process. We have moved from a
culture of blaming isolated individuals to a culture of safety,
or a Just Culture. Sammer et al. (2010) have defined a Just
Culture as “a culture that recognizes errors as a system fail-
ure rather than individual failures and, at the same time,
does not shrink from holding individuals accountable for
their actions” (p. 157). Further, in their position paper en-
dorsing the Just Culture concept, the American Nurses As-
sociation (ANA, 2010) stated, “By promoting system
improvements over individual punishment, a Just Culture
in healthcare does much to improve patient safety, reduce
errors, and give nurses and other health care workers a
major stake in the improvement process” (p. 7). The focus
is firmly on safety, positive patient outcomes, evidence-
based practice, and continuous quality improvement. 
Healthcare Safety Initiatives
Ongoing efforts have been mandated to provide a safer
healthcare environment. We have seen the Joint Commis-
sion’s focus on safety and the quality of patient care move
from not only the performance of the entire agency and
system with periodic onsite reviews and annual reports to
the inclusion of safety statistics and annual performance
on specified accountability measures. We have also seen
the implementation of various safety initiatives, including
physician order entry, bar coding, intensivists, and limi-
tations on abbreviations that lead to errors. In 2004, the
Joint Commission (2013c) published the official “DO
NOT USE” list in an effort to further reduce medication
errors from faulty or misinterpreted orders.
As part of the safety movement, annual healthcare
safety goals for the various healthcare agencies have been
specified. For example, the goals for acute care hospitals
include accurate patient identification, improved staff
communication, safe medication practices, using alarms
safely, prevention of infections, identification of patient
safety risks as in suicide prevention, and prevention of mis-
takes in surgery (Joint Commission, 2014e). Evidence-
based practice is a vital component of these goals and the
quest to improve safety.
When an error or adverse event occurs, it is not a matter
of completing an incident report but conducting a careful
analysis of the event. The Joint Commission (2013g) defines
a sentinel event as “an unexpected occurrence involving
death or serious physical or psychological injury, or the risk
thereof . . . [and] signal the need for immediate investigation
and response” (p. 1). (See Box 13.4.) The investigation in
the case of a sentinel event takes the form of a special analysis.
A root cause analysis is an intensive questioning into the
cause of a problem, with the goals of providing corrective ac-
tion, eliminating the problem from recurrence, and instilling
quality improvements. This type of intensive analysis con-
siders the entire system, not just individuals. It considers
what happened, why it happened, and the causative factors,
including factors relating to the following:
●Human beings, including communication, leadership,
and management practices
CHAPTER 13 Quality and Safety in Healthcare     ●
225
ONLINE CONSULT 
The Joint Commission: Do Not Use List at 
http://www.jointcommission.org/about_us
/patient_safety_fact_sheets.aspx
ONLINE CONSULT 
The Joint Commission: National Patient Safety
Goals at
http://www.jointcommission.org/standards
_information/npsgs.aspx
BOX 13.4
Types of Reportable Sentinel Events
in Hospitals (Joint Commission, 2013g)
●An unanticipated death or major permanent loss of
function not related to the natural course of the 
patient’s illness or underlying condition
●Suicide of any patient receiving care in a staﬀed, 
24-hour setting within 72 hours of discharge 
●Discharge of infant to the wrong family
●Abduction of any patient receiving care, treatment,
and services 
●Hemolytic transfusion reaction from blood group
incompatibilities
●Invasive procedure, including surgery, on the
wrong patient, at the wrong site, or using the
wrong procedure 
●Prolonged ﬂuoroscopy
●Rape, assault (leading to permanent loss of function),
or homicide of any patient receiving care or of a staﬀ
member, licensed independent practitioner, visitor,
or vendor while on site at the healthcare organization
●Severe neonatal hyperbilirubinemia
●Unanticipated death of a full-term infant
●Unintended retention of a foreign body in a patient
after surgery or other invasive procedures

●Equipment, both in terms of proper operation and as
contributor to the problem
●Environment, especially those that can be controlled
To assist in the process, special teams are involved, soft-
ware and consultants may be used, and forms and matrices
to assist in the analysis are available on the Joint Commis-
sion Web site. The result is the development of an action
plan to prevent recurrence of the sentinel event. In addi-
tion, the Joint Commission (2013g) has policies and pro-
cedures for sentinel events and encourages organizations
to report sentinel events and the results of the root cause
analysis to be shared with other organizations and inter-
ested parties in a special newsletter alert.
Notice that the effort is on problem-solving and find-
ing solutions rather than blaming individuals. Recall that
a system has inputs, throughputs, and outputs. In this
case, the sentinel event was an output from the system as
an adverse event. The people involved, the processes that
took place, and the equipment and environmental factors
are scrutinized. However, the healthcare professionals are
still accountable for actions and decisions.
The Joint Commission is one of many organizations
that actively promote patient safety. ANA has long focused
on safety and quality improvement for the profession 
and for consumers. ANA’s National Center for Nursing
Quality (NCNQ®) addresses both the safety and quality
of nursing care for patients and the quality of the nurses’
work environments. As described, in the mid 1990s, as
part of a safety and quality initiative, ANA began research
on nursing-sensitive indicators that looks at care and pa-
tient outcomes most affected by nursing care. A database
has been developed and continues to be tested nationwide
on these nursing-sensitive indicators. ANA (2006) has also
developed a position paper on the association between pa-
tient safety and healthy nursing work hours to ensure that
nurses have adequate resources especially in terms of
scheduling, sufficient compensation, and appropriate
staffing.
A notable leader for quality and safety in healthcare has
been the Leapfrog group, formally established after the
IOM report on patient safety. This organization is made
up of major corporate leaders and employers (such as
Aetna, Dow Chemical, FedEx, Toyota, Verizon, and
many others) who want the most for their employees, in
terms of both safety and purchasing power. They reward
best practices and publish “report cards” on provider per-
formance. The Leapfrog Group (2014) has identified four
basic quality practices, called “leaps,” based on the safety
research:
●Computerized physician order entry (CPOE) systems
●Staffing ICUs with intensivists
●Referrals to hospitals with the best results for treating
certain high-risk conditions
●Implementation of the Leapfrog Safe Practices, en-
dorsed by the National Quality Forum (NQF)
Hospitals are scored on their safety records and the imple-
mentation of these proven safe practices. The major cor-
porate members are also purchasers for healthcare, and
they want the best for their purchasing power.
The NQF has endorsed selected safe practices in
healthcare as they address the quality of healthcare in the
nation. With a broader composition of both public and
private partners, including organizations and national,
state, and local governmental agencies, the NQF (2014)
describes its mission to lead “national collaboration to im-
prove health and healthcare quality through measure-
ment” (p. 1). Current topics of focus include affordable
care, effective communication and care coordination,
health and well-being, patient safety, person- and family-
centered care, and prevention and treatment of cardiovas-
cular disease (NQF, 2014).
The Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI) is a
not-for-profit organization focused on patient safety and
quality improvement worldwide. This organization strives
to build awareness through education, collaborative im-
provement, and system redesign to promote quality im-
provement for worldwide healthcare community. It
focuses on best practices and sharing the information and
unifying the healthcare industry on quality improvement.
The IHI (2014) identifies its aims to “improve health and
health care worldwide” (p. 1).
Many more organizations, groups, and individuals are
actively pursuing patient safety at the local, state, national,
and international levels. The few that have been described
here will lead to other collaborations and initiatives 
focused on the quality and safety in healthcare.
TOOLS AND TECHNIQUES
USED IN QUALITY
IMPROVEMENT
An entire body of knowledge has been created in the area
of valid techniques to be used for improving quality. In-
novation requires team techniques such as brainstorming,
boarding, decision matrices, multi-voting, management of
conflict, and quality communication.
Process Teams
Not all improvement projects require a process team. If
the project or problem crosses functions and disciplines
226
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
ONLINE CONSULT 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality at 
http://www.ahrq.gov/qual/
American Nurses Association at
http://www.nursingworld.org/MainMenu
Categories/ThePracticeofProfessionalNursing
/PatientSafetyQuality
Institute for Healthcare Improvement at 
http://www.ihi.org/ihi
Joint Commission at 
http://www.jointcommission.org
Leapfrog Group at 
http://www.leapfroggroup.org
National Patient Safety Foundation at 
http://www.npsf.org
National Quality Forum at 
http://www.qualityforum.org

and cannot be resolved in the day-to-day operations,
a process team is usually necessary. These “project” teams
focus on improving or developing specific processes and
come together to achieve a specific goal, such as analyzing
variation, and have a beginning and an end. Process teams
must be chosen carefully to  represent those involved in 
or affected by the process. If the team is very large, the
project chosen may be too big and may have to be broken
into steps.
How, then, does one choose an improvement project?
Listen to your customers. Repeated complaints or requests
for a particular service may require action. Suppose the
evening charge nurse in a nonsectarian hospital receives
ongoing requests for pastoral services from patients and
their families. Each request requires multiple telephone
calls and often results in delays. The nurse recognizes that
the nursing department cannot address this problem
alone. It involves not only the hospital but also the com-
munity. The nurse develops a proposal for a process team.
Other methods for selecting or recognizing processes 
to be improved include asking the people in the process,
reviewing existing reports, and recognizing excess com-
plexity or long delays.
Process teams require resources. Because resource allo-
cation is a leadership function, many organizations require
the development of a proposal and subsequent approval
by the quality council. All teams should develop an op-
portunity statement (what is wrong or needs improving),
define the expected output of the project, and include
measures of success. Members of the team must include,
at a minimum, a team leader who is invested in the
process, a facilitator who brings CQI skills, and a recorder
or minute taker. Depending on the skills and information
systems available, analytical and statistical support may be
necessary.
Because process teams are groups, they will need to go
through the stages of group development—forming,
storming, norming, performing, adjourning. (Refer to
Chapter 8 on Working with Groups.) All teams must ma-
ture to perform. It is important to recognize that anxiety,
testing of boundaries, competition for control, and mini-
mal completion of work are all part of the early stages.
Early cohesiveness and work do not start until the norm-
ing stage. Real performance and “team” feeling belong to
the performing step. Many teams also struggle with the
adjourning phase— namely, meeting the final deadlines
and dissolving the group.
The process team must adopt a model or method for
doing its work. This model is usually organization-wide.
There is value in choosing one model, because it minimizes
relearning and allows different teams to communicate 
easily. Some common models are the Juran (1989) quality
improvement project model and Deming’s (1982, 1986)
PDCA (Plan-Do-Check-Act) cycle.
Quality Improvement Tools
Quality improvement (QI) tools can usually be divided
into four categories, those used for:
●Process description
●Data collection
●Data analysis
●Process improvement
Many excellent texts provide further assistance in this
area. The ultimate purpose of all the QI tools is to have
data that can be used and translated into information.
The novice in QI tools and techniques may need 
assistance from the CQI coach or further study of these
techniques.
Process Description Tools
One tool for process description is the flow chart, which
describes the process in detail, from beginning to end, as
accurately as possible. It is a picture of the movement of
information, people, or materials. The top-down flow
chart (Figure 13.1) takes the major steps in the process,
writes them in a horizontal sequence, and illustrates the
substeps to be taken under each step. Flow charts show
the rework that gets done, the number of substeps or com-
plexity in each area, the number of handoffs between in-
dividuals and departments, and when subteams need to
be formed from a particular process team. A flow chart
that is too detailed makes it difficult to focus and impedes
progress or action.
The cause-and-effect diagram (Figure 13.2), also
called the fishbone or Ishikawa diagram, helps identify 
the root causes of a problem. Typical categories are 
equipment, personnel, method, materials, and environ-
ment. The main arrow points toward the problem or 
CHAPTER 13 Quality and Safety in Healthcare     ●
227
ONLINE CONSULT 
The PDCA cycle at 
http://www.isixsigma.com/dictionary/deming
-cycle-pdca/
http://asq.org/learn-about-quality/project
-planning-tools/overview/pdca-cycle.html
Substeps
STEP 1
Substeps
STEP 2
Substeps
STEP 3
Substeps
STEP 4
Figure 13.1 Top-down flow chart.

desired result. It is important to remember that cause-and-
effect diagrams point only toward possible causes, and
more data must be collected to identify the root causes.
Cause-and-effect diagrams are most effective after the
process has been described, because flow charts help iden-
tify what must be included in the diagram.
Tools for Data Collection
Tools for data collection include asking the right ques-
tions, and using, among other things, data sheets, check
sheets, surveys, focus groups, and interviews. Often, data
are collected that turn out to be useless because the ques-
tion asked was wrong, too broad, or poorly formulated.
Data sheets and check sheets are both used to record data
(Figure 13.3). They differ in that data sheets need further
analysis. Ordinarily, a data sheet is completed for each oc-
currence or event in the study. The data are subsequently
aggregated and then sorted according to categories of 
interest.
Check sheets are used to record multiple events
by simply putting a mark in the appropriate box. The
best check sheets are those that are easy to use, do not
require much interpretation, and visually display the
data. An example in which either tool could be used
is the study of the delivery time of medications to a pa-
tient care unit. With data sheets, every time a medica-
tion is taken from the pharmacy, the runner uses a new
data sheet. At the end of the study, all the sheets are
gathered and analyzed. With the check sheet, the runner
could calculate the time it took to deliver the drug and
check the appropriate time box on a check sheet. Both
data sheets and check sheets may be either in hard or
electronic copy.
There are obvious advantages and disadvantages to
both tools. Data sheets tend to be more accurate because
only one event is recorded on each. Check sheets quickly
display trends as they occur without requiring a lengthy
analysis. Data sheets and check sheets should be tested be-
fore project-wide work is undertaken, so that improve-
ments can be made to ensure that only useful data are
collected.
Surveys are a tool for obtaining input from large
groups. The response rate and the specificity of the ques-
tions affect the usefulness and quality of the information
obtained. Focus groups and individual interviews are
time-consuming and expensive and may require the use
of experienced interviewers, but they enable one to ask
open-ended questions and probe deeper, if necessary.
Data Analysis Tools
Tools for data analysis include those that compare
 categories. Bar and pie charts and the Pareto diagram 
(Figure 13.4), for example, analyze data within a category,
such as numerical and graphic summaries. The Pareto
principle, sometimes called the 80/20 rule, was applied to
management by Juran. It identifies the few sources of
problems that contribute most to the outcome. By ranking
problems on a bar graph in descending order, from left to
right, Pareto diagrams focus attention on the most com-
mon problems and often build consensus about where to
concentrate attention and effort.
Analysis of a particular category can include numerical
summaries such as average, median, mode, and standard
deviation. Graphic summaries—line graphs, histograms,
scatter diagrams, and control charts—are especially valu-
able for working in diverse groups. They provide pictorial
display of data, possible analysis and interpretation of pat-
terns, relationships between variables, and the ability to
distinguish between common and special cause variation.
Improvement Activities
Criteria-based information and tools are essential in evi-
dence-based practice, performance improvement, and 
patient safety initiatives. The AHRQ launched its Web
site in 2003 as a repository of practical, ready-to-use tools
for assessing, measuring, and improving the quality and
safety of healthcare.
DEVELOPING A
MEASUREMENT PROGRAM
As previously mentioned, improvement and measurement
or evaluation are linked. Measurement of the capability
of the organization, or its competence, determines the or-
ganization’s ability to provide, and competence in pro-
viding, quality and safe care. Measurement of outcome
determines whether the process yielded favorable results.
For example, the Breast Care Clinic used as an earlier 
228
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
Equipment
Method
Materials
Environment
Problem
Personnel
Figure 13.2 Cause-and-effect 
diagram.
ONLINE CONSULT 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality:
Health IT Tools and Resources at 
http://healthit.ahrq.gov/health-it-tools-and
-resources

CHAPTER 13 Quality and Safety in Healthcare     ●
229
AVERAGE DELIVERY TIME
AVERAGE DELIVERY TIME
DATA SHEET
CHECKSHEET 
A
B
Time you left the department_______________
Time you deliveredthe item ________________
Delay - YES - NO
Time you left the department_______________
_____________________________________
_____________________________________
_____________________________________
1
#
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 Minutes 
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Figure 13.3 Average delivery time (A) data sheet and (B) check sheet.
example will not only focus its review on the ability to re-
port examination results within 24 hours and on whether
there is a system in place allowing women to self-refer for
mammography, it will also measure whether these out-
comes actually occur.
Selecting Indicators for
Measurement
Indicators are events that are measured. They are
 categorized by type. They can be structure, process, or
outcome indicators chosen in the functions of patient
care, services that support the delivery of patient care,
practices, and leadership/governance. Structure encom-
passes the policies or standards regarding how service is
delivered and resources made available. Process refers to
the activities, and outcome is the result of activities based
on policies, standards, and resources. For example, ac-
cording to policy, patients receiving conscious sedation
shall be monitored by a professional nurse certified in
advanced life support (structure), professional nurses
competent in advanced life support are hired and creden-
tialed for those services (process), and all patients receiv-
ing conscious sedation are monitored according to policy
(outcome).
Practice indicators measure professional standards 
used in the delivery of patient care. Examples of practice

indicators include measurement of documentation fre-
quency and content, and utilization of aseptic technique
as required. Leadership indicators measure organizational
function, namely how the system affects the delivery of
care and services.
When standards are clearly written and defined, are
valid, and can be measured, indicators are more easily 
selected and usable. Meaningful indicators are specific,
relevant, reliable, valid, and measurable. They use a 
numerator and denominator, have a target (internal or
external benchmark), relate to specific standards, and 
define where the data or information can be found. For
example, the number of individuals monitored by an ad-
vanced life support credentialed nurse (numerator) of all
the patients receiving conscious sedation (denominator)
based on the standard, as documented in the outpatient
record.
Many national organizations are currently working on
indicators that can be used as external benchmarks, such
as the Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information 
Set (HEDIS) from the National Committee for Quality
Assurance (NCQA). Other professional groups continue
to refine and expand the available  indicators. Utilizing ex-
ternal performance measures exclusively is not sufficient.
Internal performance indicators based on the scope of
service, mission, vision, strategic plans, core competen-
cies, organizational culture, and values ensure that overall
organizational effectiveness is measured. In turn, external
benchmarks compare that performance with the best in
the industry. As previously stated, the Joint Commission’s
work started around the identification, implementation,
and use of standardized tools for measuring and improv-
ing patient care. By 2004, the implementation of core
measures in all acute care hospitals was implemented,
with the goal for expansion into other clinical areas 
and further study these measures. The focus on under-
standing quality and safety continues with transparency
to consumers.
Understanding Variation
Variation is part of any process. People, equipment, sup-
plies, procedures, techniques, and inaccuracies in the data
all contribute to variation in data from an otherwise stable
process. Common-cause variation is the ongoing, minute
variations that are part of nature. Special-cause variation is
much larger and can be attributed more easily to contribu-
tors through statistical methods such as run charts and con-
trol charts. These charts can monitor processes because,
even though individual data points may be unpredictable,
a fluctuating pattern will emerge over time. The normal
pattern is bell-shaped, meaning that most points are near
the center.
The manager of a process must know when to react
to particular data or situations and when it is necessary
to improve the entire process. For example, suppose you
have monitored medication errors on your unit for
many months. When you calculate the number of errors
over the number of doses administered, a percentage
230
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
Type
100
80
60
40
20
0
%
Figure 13.4 Pareto diagram.
ONLINE CONSULT 
National Committee for Quality Assurance: 
HEDIS at 
http://www.ncqa.org/tabid/59/Default.aspx
The Joint Commission at 
http://www.jointcommission.org/performance
_measurement.aspx

ranging between 0.01 and 0.02 percent emerges. This
is probably the common-cause type of variation. You
may want to compare that figure against those of other
local institutions, of similar type or size, to evaluate
whether this is an acceptable error rate. If, for the first
time ever, you see a rise to 0.03 percent, it would be wise
to analyze the data further before taking action or de-
ciding to wait. Are all the errors of the same type attrib-
utable to a few individuals, or have new systems been
introduced? Constant tinkering with systems, without
understanding what the causes of the variation are,
destabilizes the process. Understanding variation is im-
portant. Common-cause variation requires an answer to
the question “Is this level acceptable when looked 
at over time?” Special-cause variation needs careful 
evaluation to identify the cause and make appropriate,
focused interventions. And there is a directive to ensure
that these interventions are safe for the consumers of
healthcare, whether through actions by healthcare
providers or by the consumer once back in the commu-
nity or home setting.
CONTINUOUS QUALITY
IMPROVEMENT IN CONTEXT
CQI in practice requires a number of cost and implemen-
tation considerations and varies significantly with the con-
text of the healthcare organization. The rapid changes in
healthcare and the added focus on patient safety have re-
quired redesign of its delivery. We have a professional ob-
ligation to ensure that the way we deliver care is evaluated
along the continuum. Despite our frustration with cost
containment efforts, we must prudently manage resources
to enable us to provide the greatest benefit safely to the
largest number of patients possible. We may need to de-
velop new delivery models that optimize the role of the
professional nurse, delegate tasks, and meet the needs of
our customers.
Case management and work redesign have been used
across the country for delivery redesign. Case manage-
ment requires collaboration in the process of providing
options for services that meet an individual’s health needs
and that promote quality and safe cost-effective out-
comes. Critical pathways are tools commonly used in this
process. Brainstorming, data-driven decision making,
consensus seeking, process flow charting, evaluation of
costs, and satisfaction are all tools used in case new quality
model.
Work redesign—the process of analyzing how work
is done and what system changes need to be implemented
to achieve effective and efficient care delivery—also re-
quires quality to be built in up front. Professionals need
to participate actively in this evolving course. Reliance on
inspection and control will not ensure delivery of quality
care. Simultaneously, we cannot insist on doing it the old
way. Review of studies on the implementation of redesign
activities demonstrate that many focused largely on 
increasing efficiency and that the changes may not have
been managed effectively, resulting in loss of trust in the
administration and reduction of clinical nursing leadership
(Page, 2004).
Brainstorming, data-driven decision making,
consensus seeking, process flow charting,
evaluation of costs, and satisfaction are 
all tools used in case management 
as well as in the new quality model.
Continuous Quality Improvement
in the Managed Care World
Managed care has received some favor as a methodology
for controlling escalating healthcare costs. Buyers of man-
aged care, such as employers and state and federal govern-
ments, have something to say about quality, access, choice,
and satisfaction with services. The more competitive the
environment becomes, the more important demonstrated
quality will become, to differentiate between one contract
or provider and another. The managed care industry is al-
ready developing nationally accepted outcomes and indi-
cators. Report cards on customer satisfaction with
individual providers and organizations have gained popu-
larity. Nursing must take an aggressive professional role in
ensuring that the data on care delivery reflect direct nurs-
ing care delivery, coordination provided by nursing, pa-
tient and family teaching, and nursing management along
the continuum of care delivery. Recommendations on the
need to develop reliable and valid methods to measure
nursing care requirements and minimum staffing levels in
acute care and long-term care are considered essential
(Page, 2004). As more research evolves on the nurse-
sensitive indicators, further evidence-based practice can
evolve in this area.
Ongoing Role for
Regulatory Agencies
Agencies such as the Joint Commission, professional re-
view organizations (PROs), and state and federal govern-
ment will continue to have a significant role in the
assurance that quality, safe healthcare is delivered. Many
of the organizations actively collecting benchmarking in-
formation. The Joint Commission, in particular, acts as
an external change agent with regard to guaranteeing that
all providers accept and implement the new paradigm.
The hospital associations are helping their members deal
with uniform responses to the report cards required by
many managed care contracts. Regulators and providers
alike are struggling with the implementation of signifi-
cant change in the delivery of quality healthcare. As
noted by Amer (2013), quality “is not a finite goal but
rather an ongoing process that is subject to the changing
needs of society and the knowledge, expertise, and 
creativity of the healthcare team and the scientific com-
munity” (p. 236). The goal is for continuous quality 
improvement for patient safety and efficacy of healthcare
outcomes.
CHAPTER 13 Quality and Safety in Healthcare     ●
231

232
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
In 2013, the Joint Commission (2013f) issued an alert on medical device safety in the hospital based on 
research over a 3-year period and identified the following major causal factors from 98 reported events:
●Absent or inadequate alarm system  
●Improper alarm settings  
●Alarm signals not audible in all areas 
●Alarm signals inappropriately turned off 
Alarm fatigue was identified as the most common contributing factor (Joint Commission, 2013f, p. 2). 
The recommendations can be reviewed at http://www.jointcommission.org/assets/1/18/SEA_50_alarms
_4_5_13_FINAL1.PDF
Question: Have there been any of these events in your hospital over the past year? Who oversees medical 
device and alarm safety at your organization? What is the level of risk in patient care units, intensive care units,
and the emergency department? And, how can you be involved in policy development for promoting medical
device alarm safety in your organization?
Joint Commission. (2013f).  Sentinel event alert: Medical device safety in hospitals, issue 50, April 8, 2013. Retrieved from http://www.jointcommission
.org/assets/1/18/SEA_50_alarms_4_5_13_FINAL1.PDF
K E Y  P O I N T S
●Rapid changes in healthcare have prompted a new way of doing business.
●Reliance on inspection and control against pre-established standards (the traditional quality assurance
model), although of ongoing value, is no longer sufficient.
●Quality models, such as Deming’s Principles for Transformation, the Juran Trilogy, and the requirements for
accreditation by the Joint Commission provide an excellent foundation for improving quality of care.
●Quality improvement does not just entail correcting problems but also requires ongoing improvement.
●Specific knowledge, tools, and techniques are required to create a new quality and include cross-
 functional teamwork, lifelong learning, and process improvement.
●Process teams are required for those improvement activities that cross functions and disciplines and 
cannot be dealt with in the day-to-day operations.
●Variation is part of all processes. It requires statistical analysis before actions that may destabilize the
process are taken.
●Benchmarking is the process of comparison with the best practices in the industry.
●Tools for improvement can be divided into four categories: those used for process description, such as
flow charts and cause-and-effect diagrams; those used for data collection, such as data sheets and check
sheets; those used for data analysis, such as bar and pie charts and the Pareto diagram; and those used
for process improvement.
●In the “culture of blame,” someone is traditionally identified as the cause of an adverse event. Systemic is-
sues are questioned and targeted for improvement in the “culture of safety,” in which the environment and
the entire system is the focus to allow healthcare providers and consumers to address quality improvement.
●Sammer et al. (2010) have defined Just Culture as “a culture that recognizes errors as a system failure
rather than individual failures and, at the same time, does not shrink from holding individuals accountable
for their actions” (p. 157). 
●The Joint Commission (2013g) defines a sentinel event as “an unexpected occurrence involving death or
serious physical or psychological injury, or the risk thereof” (p. 1). 
●A root cause analysis is an intensive questioning into the cause of a problem with the goals of providing
corrective action, eliminating the problem from recurrence, and instilling quality improvements. 
●To improve quality, you must improve the system.

REFERENCES
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). (2013).
National healthcare quality report 2013. Retrieved from
http://www.ahrq.gov/research/findings/nhqrdr/index.html 
Amer, K. S. (2013). Quality and safety for transformational 
nursing: Core competencies. Boston, MA: Pearson.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2008).
The essentials of baccalaureate education for professional 
nursing practice. Washington, DC: Author.
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2006). Assuring patient
safety: The employer’s role in promoting healthy nursing work
hours for registered nurses in all roles and settings. Retrieved
from http://www.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories
/Policy-Advocacy/Positions-and-Resolutions
/ANAPositionStatements/Position-Statements
-Alphabetically/AssuringPatientSafety.pdf
American Nurses Association. (2010). Position statement: Just
culture. Retrieved from http://www.nursingworld.org
/MainMenuCategories/Policy-Advocacy/Positions-and
-Resolutions/ANAPositionStatements/Position-Statements
-Alphabetically/Just-Culture.html
Aspden, P., Wolcott, J., Bootman, L., & Cronenwett, L. R.
(Eds.). (2006). Preventing medication errors. Washington,
DC: National Academies Press. 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2009).
Roadmap for implementing value driven healthcare in the 
traditional Medicare fee-for-service program. Retrieved from
http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality-Initiatives-Patient
-Assessment-Instruments/QualityInitiativesGenInfo/
Downloads/RoadmapOverview_OEA_1-16.pdf
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2013).
Medicare hospital quality chartbook: Performance report on 
outcome measures. Retrieved from https://www.cms.gov
/Medicare/Quality-Initiatives-Patient-Assessment-Instruments
/HospitalQualityInits/Downloads/
Cronenwett, L., Sherwood, G., Barnsteiner, J., Disch, J., 
Johnson, J., Mitchell, P., . . . Warren, J. (2007). Quality and
safety education for nurses. Nursing Outlook, 55, 122–131. 
Driskell, J. E, & Adams, R. J. (1991). Crew resource management:
A introductory handbook. Springfield, VA: National Technical
Information Service. Retrieved from http://aireform.com
/wp-content/uploads/19920800..-CRM-Handbook
-contracted-for-FAA.pdf
Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI). (2014). IHI vision
and values. Retrieved from http://www.ihi.org/about/pages
/ihivisionandvalues.aspx
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2000). To err is human: Building
a safer health system. Washington, DC: National Academy
Press.
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2001). Crossing the quality
chasm: A new health system for the 21st century. Retrieved
from http://books.nap.edu/openbook.php?
record_id=10027&page=232 
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2011). The future of nursing:
Leading change, advancing health. Retrieved from
http://books.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=12956 
Joint Commission. (2010). The evolution of performance
measurement at The Joint Commission 1986-2010: 
A visioning document. Retrieved from http://www
.jointcommission.org/performance_measurement
.aspx 
Joint Commission. (2013a). Benefits of Joint Commission 
accreditation. Retrieved from http://www.jointcommission.
org/benefits_of_joint_commission_accreditation/ 
Joint Commission. (2013b). Facts about the national patient
safety goals. Retrieved from http://www.jointcommission
.org/standards_information/npsgs.aspx 
CHAPTER 13 Quality and Safety in Healthcare     ●
233
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. You are the nurse manager of an ambulatory surgery unit. Recently, you have seen a sudden rise in the number of
surgical patients coming through the unit. Simultaneously, patients, physicians, and other providers have started to
complain about long delays during pretesting.
• Would you attempt to fix this problem by addressing it during a staff meeting? Why or why not?
• Compare how to address this problem using a process team versus using the staff meeting approach.
• Describe how you would analyze the process.
• Explain which tools are appropriate to use for the analysis.
2. A sentinel event has just been identified at your hospital and you have been identified to serve on the team con-
ducting a root cause analysis. Choose a sentinel event from the list provided in Box 13.4. Describe the process for
the root cause analysis and suggest learning strategies for staff for continuous quality improvement.
3. To foster professional accountability, discuss how you would plan and implement an interdisciplinary staff educa-
tion session on Just Culture. Be prepared to participate in an online or class discussion on this topic, to be sched-
uled by your instructor.
4. Discuss the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter and discuss it (online or in class) in the 
context of the contents of the chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.

Joint Commission. (2013c). Facts about the official “do not
use” list. Retrieved from http://www.jointcommission.org
/assets/1/18/Do_Not_Use_List.pdf
Joint Commission. (2013d). Facts about ORYX® for hospitals
(national hospital quality measures). Retrieved from http://
www.jointcommission.org/facts_about_oryx_for_hospitals/ 
Joint Commission. (2013e). Root cause analysis and action
plan framework template. Retrieved from http://www
.jointcommission.org/sentinel_event.aspx 
Joint Commission. (2013f). Sentinel event alert: Medical device
safety in hospitals, Issue 50, April 8, 2013. Retrieved 
from http://www.jointcommission.org/assets/1/18/
SEA_50_alarms_4_5_13_FINAL1.PDF
Joint Commission. (2013g). Sentinel event policy and proce-
dures. Retrieved from http://www.jointcommission.org
/Sentinel_Event_Policy_and_Procedures/
Joint Commission. (2013h). Specifications manual for national
hospital inpatient quality measures. Retrieved from
http://www.jointcommission.org/specifications_manual
_for_national_hospital_inpatient_quality_measures/ 
Joint Commission. (2014a). Core measure sets. Retrieved from
http://www.jointcommission.org/core_measure_sets.aspx
Joint Commission. (2014b). Facts about accountability 
measures. Retrieved from http://www.jointcommission.org
/facts_about_accountability_measures/
Joint Commission. (2014c). Facts about patient safety. Retrieved
from http://www.jointcommission.org/about_us/patient
_safety_fact_sheets.aspx 
Joint Commission. (2014d). Improving America’s hospitals:
The Joint Commission’s annual report on quality and safety
2013. Retrieved from http://www.jointcommission.org
/annualreport.aspx 
Joint Commission. (2014e). National patient safety goals. Re-
trieved from http://www.jointcommission.org/standards
_information/npsgs.aspx 
Juran, J. M. (1989). Juran on leadership for quality: An executive
handbook. New York: Free Press.
Leapfrog Group. (2014). The Leapfrog Group fact sheet.
Retrieved from http://www.leapfroggroup.org/about_
leapfrog/leapfrog-factsheet
Merriam-Webster Collegiate Dictionary. (2014). Retrieved from
http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/quality 
National Database of Nursing Quality Indicators (NDNQI).
(2014). About NDNQI. Retrieved from http://www
.nursingquality.org/About-NDNQI 
National Quality Forum (2014). About NQF. Retrieved from
http://www.qualityforum.org/about/ 
Page, A. (Ed.) (2004). Keeping Patients Safe: Transforming the
Work Environment of Nurses. Washington, DC: National
Academy Press. 
Sammer, C. E., Lykens, K., Singh, K. P., Mains, D. A., &
Lackan, N. A. (2010). What is patient safety culture? A 
review of the literature. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 42,
156–165.
Sigma Theta Tau. (2005). Evidence-based nursing position 
statement. Retrieved from http://www.nursingsociety.org
/aboutus/PositionPapers/Pages/EBN_positionpaper.aspx
Smith, E. L., Cronenwett, L., & Sherwood, G. (2007). Current
assessments of quality and safety education in nursing.
Nursing Outlook, 55, 132–137.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Barnsteiner, J. (2011). Teaching the culture of safety. Online 
Journal of Issues in Nursing, 16(3), Manuscript 5. Retrieved
from http://www.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories
/ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/TableofContents
/Vol-16-2011/No3-Sept-2011/Teaching-and-Safety.html
Barnsteiner, J., & Disch, J. (2012). Second generation quality
and safety education for nurses. Nursing Clinics of North
America, 47, xi–xiii.
Barnsteiner, J., Disch, J., Johnson, J., McGuinn, K., & 
Swartwout, E. (2012). Diffusing QSEN competencies
across schools of nursing: The AACN/RWJF Faculty 
Development Institutes. Journal of Professional Nursing, 
29, 68–74. 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2013).
Medicare hospital quality chartbook: Performance report on
outcome measures. Retrieved from https://www.cms.gov
/Medicare/Quality-Initiatives-Patient-Assessment
-Instruments/HospitalQualityInits/Downloads/
-Medicare-Hospital-Quality-Chartbook-2013.pdf
Chassin, M. R., Loeb, J. M., Schmaltz, S. P., & Wachter, R. M.
(2010). Accountability measures: Using measurement to
promote quality. New England Journal of Medicine, 363,
683–688.
Deming, W. E. (1994). The new economics for industry, govern-
ment, education (2nd ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hughes, R. G. (ed). (2008). Patient safety and quality: An 
evidence-based handbook for nurses (AHRQ Publication 
No. 08-0043). Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare
Quality and Research. Retrieved from http://www
.ahrq.gov/qual/nurseshdbk/ 
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2010b). Quality and patient
safety. Retrieved from http://www.iom.edu/Global
/Topics/Quality-Patient-Safety.aspx 
International Council of Nurses (ICN). (2012). ICN position:
Patient safety. Retrieved from http://www.icn.ch/images/
stories/documents/publications/position_statements/
D05_Patient_Safety.pdf 
Juran, J. M. (1988). Juran on planning for quality.New York:
Free Press.
Nace, J. J. (2008). Why hospitals should fly: The ultimate flight
plan to patient safety and quality care. Bozeman, MT: 
Second River Healthcare Press.
Orsini, J. N. (Ed.). (2013). The essential Deming: Leadership
principles from the father of quality. New York: McGraw-Hill.
National Database of Nursing Quality Indicators (NDNQI).
(2014). Frequently asked questions. Retrieved from
http://www.nursingquality.org/FAQ 
National Quality Forum. (2012). National voluntary consensus
standards for patient safety measures: A Consensus report. 
Retrieved from http://www.qualityforum.org/Publications/
2012/06/National_Voluntary_Consensus_Standards_for
_Patient_Safety_Measures_A_Consensus_Report.aspx
President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology
(PCAST). (2014). Report to the president: Better health care
and lower costs: Accelerating improvement through systems 
engineering. Retrieved from http://www.whitehouse.gov
/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/PCAST/pcast_systems
_engineering_in_healthcare_-_may_2014.pdf
234
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

QualityNet. (2014). Hospital inpatient quality reporting (IQR)
program overview. Retrieved from
https://www.qualitynet.org/dcs/ContentServer?c=Page&
pagename=QnetPublic%2FPage%2FQnetTier2&cid=
1138115987129
Sullivan, D. T., Hirst, D., & Cronenwett, L. (2009). Assessing
quality and safety competencies of graduating prelicensure
students. Nursing Outlook, 57, 323–331. 
ONLINE RESOURCES
American Association of Colleges of Nursing
http://www.aacn.nche.edu/qsen/home
National Committee for Quality Assurance
http://ncqa.org
National Database of Nursing Quality Indicators (NDNQI) 
http://pressganey.com/ourSolutions/performance-and
-advanced-analytics/clinical-business-performance
/nursing-quality-ndnqi
PDCA Cycle
http://www.isixsigma.com/dictionary/deming-cycle-pdca/
http://asq.org/learn-about-quality/project-planning-tools
/overview/pdca-cycle.html
http://www.ihi.org/resources/Pages/HowtoImprove
/ScienceofImprovementHowtoImprove.aspx
QSEN Institute
http://qsen.org/
The Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI)
http://www.ihi.org/IHI/
The Institute of Medicine
http://www.iom.edu
The Joint Commission 
http://www.jointcommission.org
The Joint Commission: Quality Check
http://www.QualityCheck.org
CHAPTER 13 Quality and Safety in Healthcare     ●
235

Population Health
236
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Describe the national initiatives aimed at improving health equity and reducing health disparities.
2. Identify trends and health needs of our at-risk populations.
3. Discuss strategies for reducing health disparities for at-risk population groups.
4. Discuss the characteristics of the aging population.
5. Examine the issues to address in minority health promotion activities.
6. Contrast urban and rural community needs and resources.
7. Identify the role for professional nurses in community and public health initiatives.
Public Health 
Population Health
Healthy People
Healthy Communities
Health Promotion Strategies
Health Protection Strategies
Preventive Services
Determinants of Health
Leading Health Indicators
Topical Areas
Foundational Health Measures
Aging Adults
Disability
Chronicity
Minority Health
Health Equity
Social Determinants of Health
Urbanized Area
Rural Area
Rural Health
Community Health Nursing
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
“Wherever we look upon this earth, 
the opportunities take shape 
within the problems.”
Nelson Rockefeller, 1908–1979
Key Terms
14

CHAPTER 14 Population Health     ●
237
Initiatives to address the health and wellness of the pub-
lic have been in existence for hundreds of years. Re-
cently, however, efforts to address the health of
population groups locally, nationally, and globally have
become more visible. The mission of public health con-
tinues to focus on protection of the public from health
threats. The Committee for the Study of the Future of
Public Health (1988) traced the history of public health
in the United States over the past 200 years, from the
18th century efforts directed at control of the spread of
diseases like cholera through isolation and quarantine;
to the implementation of sanitary standards, water pu-
rification, immunization, and the establishment of state
health departments; to personal clinical care and health
promotion activities of private and governmental agen-
cies in the 20th century. Community health nursing has
had a vital role in these activities since the early 20th
century when Lillian Wald established the Henry Street
Settlement with a focus on immigrant populations,
which became the Visiting Nurses Service in New York
City. The ultimate aim is to treat and promote health
in population groups. As noted by Kindig and Stoddart
(2003), population health does not have a precise def-
inition but is generally a research approach focused on
determinants of health (p. 380). This lack of a precise
definition was further supported by the IOM (2014) in
its workshop summary and implications with the pas-
sage of the Accountable Care Act in 2010.
Population health and measures for the determinants
of health have become a constant theme as we strive to im-
prove health status and outcomes and address health dis-
parities. Two major community health initiatives began
in the last decades of the 20th century in the United
States: Healthy People and Healthy Communities. The
focus became the health of the nation as a whole through
concentration on wellness and healthful initiatives as a
strategic planning process for disease prevention and
health promotion.
As a corollary to this movement, we have seen a
greater focus on consumer and public protection. In
1998, the President’s Advisory Commission on Con-
sumer Protection and Quality in the Industry presented
a report with more than 50 objectives identified to ad-
dress problem areas, including avoidable errors, both
underutilization and overuse of services, and variation
in services. Measures proposed to strengthen the health-
care industry included use of group purchasers, having
informed consumers with access to services, accounta-
bility, reducing errors and increasing safety, and ad-
dressing the needs of vulnerable populations. Sources
of vulnerability were identified as economic status and
geographic location; health, age, and functional or de-
velopmental status; communication barriers; and unex-
plained vulnerability associated with race, ethnicity,
and sex (The President’s Advisory Commission on
Consumer Protection and Quality in the Health Care
Industry, 1998, pp. 130–132). At the end of the 20th
century and into the next decade, the focus on patient
safety was highlighted further with the subsequent 
Institute of Medicine (IOM) reports on the current
state of healthcare for consumers and calls for safety 
improvements.
The nation’s population profile is changing. We are
older and more diverse. Although we remain a youth-
oriented society, the aging of the baby boomers has had a
profound effect on the demographics and the health needs
of the population. In addition, we are becoming more cul-
turally diverse and must endeavor to celebrate, respect, and
embrace our differences while eliminating health dispari-
ties. Professional nursing practice has a vital role in utiliz-
ing and expanding knowledge of health determinants,
promoting health initiatives, and in eliminating health 
disparities.
HEALTHY PEOPLE
For Healthy People 2000 (U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, Public Health Service [USDHHS,
PHS], 1992), groups at higher risk were identified as part
of the design more extensively than in the 1990 objec-
tives according to demographic and socioeconomic di-
mensions of risk (p. vii). This focus continued as a
national commitment with Healthy People 2010, which
was introduced in 2000, and Healthy People 2020, which
was introduced late in 2010. Healthy Communities was
designed to help implement these objectives in commu-
nity settings. It became an accepted fact that healthy be-
haviors and prevention are vital for individuals, families,
and society.
In Healthy People 2000, three general goals were
stated as national health promotion and disease preven-
tion objectives (see Table 14.1). This initiative took a
major step in that it did not merely look at the health of
the nation, but rather, it devised strategies for improve-
ment. The outcome was the specification of 22 priority
areas for health promotion and disease prevention. For
each priority area, the workgroup formulated objectives
with specific targets to measure success in addressing the
three major goals. The priority areas were further classi-
fied as health promotion, health protection, and preven-
tive services. Recall the discussion on levels of prevention
(primary, secondary, and tertiary) in Chapter 4. The ter-
minology from Healthy People 2000 (USDHHS, 1992)
identified health promotion strategies as individual
lifestyle and personal choices. Health promotion activi-
ties are both protective and preventive, but they require
consumers to be actively involved in all levels of preven-
tion. Health protection strategies consist of environ-
mental or regulatory measures that confer protection on
population groups. Preventive services comprise coun-
seling, screening, immunization, and chemoprophylactic
interventions.
Findings on the 22 priority areas were reported along
with identification of problem areas. For example, in the 
area of health promotion, in terms of physical activity and
fitness and nutrition, they found a decline in coronary deaths
but overweight prevalence, iron deficiency, and a need for
more physical activity. In addition, health disparities were
becoming apparent with the identification of increased
pregnancy rates in adolescents, marijuana use in adoles-
cents, increased diabetes, and cirrhosis deaths in certain 
minority groups. 
The initiative also looked at specific age groups (in-
fants, children, adolescents and young adults, adults, and

238
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
TABLE 14.1
Overall Goals for Healthy People Initiatives, 2000, 2010, and 2020
Healthy People 2000               Healthy People 2010            Healthy People 2020
(USDHHS, 1992, p. 6)            (USDHHS, 2000a)               (USDHHS, 2010c, p. 1)
¬
Goals:
• Increase the span of healthy
life for Americans
• Reduce health disparities
among Americans
• Achieve access to preventive
services for all Americans
Priority Areas (22)
Health Promotion
• Physical Activity and Fitness 
• Nutrition
• Tobacco
• Alcohol and Other Drugs
• Family Planning
• Mental Health and Mental 
Disorders
• Violent and Abusive Behaviors
• Educational and Community-
Based Programs
Health Protection
• Unintentional Injuries
• Occupational Safety and
Health
• Environmental Health
• Food and Drug Safety
• Oral Health
Preventive
• Maternal and Infant Health
• Heart Disease and Stroke
• Cancer
• Diabetes and Chronic
Disabling Conditions
• HIV Infection
• Sexually Transmitted Diseases
• Immunization and Infectious
Diseases
• Clinical Preventive Services
Other
• Surveillance and Data Systems
Goals:
• Increase the quality and
years of healthy life
• Eliminate health disparities
Focus Areas (28)
• Access to Quality Health
Services
• Arthritis, Osteoporosis,
and Chronic Back
Conditions
• Cancer
• Chronic Kidney Disease
• Diabetes
• Disability and Secondary
Conditions
• Educational and
Community-Based
Programs
• Environmental Health
• Family Planning
• Food Safety
• Health Communication
• Heart Disease and Stroke
• HIV
• Immunization and
Infectious Diseases
• Injury and Violence
Prevention
• Maternal, Infant, and Child
Health
• Medical Product Safety
• Mental Health and Mental
Disorders
• Nutrition and Overweight
• Occupational Safety and
Health
• Oral Health
• Physical Activity and Fitness
• Respiratory Diseases
• Public Health Infrastructure
• Sexually Transmitted
Diseases
• Substance Abuse
• Tobacco Use
• Vision and Hearing
Goals:
• Attain high-quality, longer lives free of preventable
disease, disability, injury, and premature death
• Achieve health equity, eliminate disparities,
and improve the health of all groups
• Create social and physical environments that
promote good health for all
• Promote quality of life, healthy development,
and healthy behaviors across all life stages
Topical Areas (42)
• Access to Health Services
• Adolescent Health
• Arthritis, Osteoporosis, Chronic Back Conditions
• Blood Disorders and Blood Safety
• Cancer
• Chronic Kidney Disease
• Dementias, including Alzheimer’s Disease
• Diabetes
• Disability and Health
• Early and Middle Childhood
• Educational/Community-Based Programs
• Environmental Health
• Family Planning
• Food Safety
• Genomics
• Global Health
• Health Communication and Health IT
• Healthcare-Associated Infections
• Health-related Quality of Life and Well-being
• Hearing/Other Sensory or Communication
Disorders
• Heart Disease and Stroke
• HIV
• Immunization and Infectious Diseases
• Injury and Violence Prevention
• Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Health
• Maternal, Infant, and Child Health
• Medical Product Safety
• Mental Health and Mental Disorders 
• Nutrition and Weight Status
• Occupational Safety and Health
• Older Adults
• Oral Health
• Physical Activity 
• Preparedness
• Public Health Infrastructure
• Respiratory Diseases
• Sexually Transmitted Diseases
• Sleep Health
• Social Determinants of Health
• Substance Abuse
• Tobacco Use
• Vision

older adults) and special populations (low-income, minori-
ties, and people with disabilities) in order to address spe-
cific health promotion and disease prevention efforts
within these divergent groups. For example, a dramatic
decline in the infant mortality rate had occurred; however,
continued attention was needed in the area of maternal
and infant health. In addition, progress was demonstrated
with a decrease in injuries in children with the increased
use of child restraint systems in motor vehicles; however,
a continued problem area was the asthma hospitalization
rate for children, which was identified as a major cause of
morbidity. Additional differences were identified for other
age groups.
Healthy People 2000 focused also on health disparities.
A disparity existed between African Americans and the
overall population with respect to average life expectancy,
with African Americans having a significantly lower life
expectancy (USDHHS, 2000a, p. 12). Disparities also 
included differential rates in infant mortality, receipt of
prenatal care, maternal mortality,homicides, AIDS, lung
cancer, breast cancer, coronary heart disease, diabetes com-
plications and related deaths, and immunizations. For 
Native Americans and Alaskan natives, seven health areas
were highlighted: alcoholism and substance abuse, child
and family violence, diabetes, women’s health, the health
of the elderly, maternal and child health, and injuries.
Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders were found to have
a higher life expectancy than the population as a whole.
However, several health problems were particularly note-
worthy for these groups, including increasing rates of cere-
brovascular diseases and cancer deaths. Elimination of
these health disparities became a major initiative in
Healthy People 2010.
People with disabilities and those in low-income groups
were also investigated. Although a decline was found 
in nonfatal head injuries and spinal cord injuries, there 
was an increase in other conditions that led to disability,
including fetal alcohol syndrome, visual impairments,
asthma, and complications of diabetes. An escalating 
relationship between lower incomes, limitations in activity,
health promotion and screening activities, insurance cov-
erage, and chronic conditions was also a finding from
Healthy People 2000.
During the same period, the American Public Health
Association (APHA, 1991) published Healthy Communi-
ties 2000: Model Standards to assist planners in adapting
the Healthy People 2000 objectives to the needs and re-
sources of individual communities. The conceptual basis
of healthy communities included an emphasis on health
outcomes, flexible planning, a focus on the entire commu-
nity with the involvement of local governments and local
flexibility, uniform standards and guidelines, and an 
emphasis on accessibility of programs (APHA, 1991, 
pp. xvii–xix). 
By the final review point for Healthy People 2000, most
states, the District of Columbia, and Guam had statewide
objectives, some with compre hensive strategic plans and
assessment projects that addressed the objectives. The
strategic planning process continued with a look to revised
resources to address the newer national initiatives in
Healthy People 2010.
The prevention agenda for the nation and the asso-
ciated objectives for the next decade were introduced in
January 2000 as Healthy People 2010 (USDHHS,
2000a), with two major goals that were more aggressive
than the 2000 objectives. For instance, Healthy People
2000 sought to reduce health disparities, whereas
Healthy People 2010 proposed to eliminate them. Build-
ing upon Healthy People 2000, Healthy People 2010
specified 28 focus areas (Table 14.1) containing objec-
tives and targets for the nation to address the specific
trends of the decade, such as diversity and the aging
population. Healthy People 2010 used a systematic ap-
proach to health improvement guided by a model with
four key elements: goals, objectives, determinants of
health, and health status. The objectives were designed
to “focus on the determinants of health, which encom-
pass the combined effects of individual and community
physical and social environments and the policies and
interventions used to promote health, prevent disease,
and ensure access to quality health care” (USDHHS,
2000a, p. 7).
Specific objectives in each focus area were designed to
address the health initiative as subgoals under the direc-
tion of a lead government agency. Objectives were both
measurable (with specific set  targets for which data were
tracked) and developmental (for which no baseline data
were available). Availability of data and interagency col-
laboration were essential components of this aggressive
and evidence-based project to address the health of the
nation.
The midcourse review of Healthy People 2010 was con-
ducted in 2005 on the status of the objectives and was
based on public comments and expert evaluation of the
data, apparent trends, and emerging knowledge. Objectives
were revised, clarified, and some recommended for deletion
if there was not a valid data source. For some developmen-
tal objectives, researchers established targets because data
were now available for baselines and the objectives could
now be measured and tracked. For example, the develop-
mental objective on reducing the number of school or work
days missed by persons with asthma now had an established
baseline of about six days for persons aged 5 to 64 years,
with a target set to reduce the days to two by 2010 
(USDHHS, 2006a).
Other developmental objectives were dropped when
no data source could be established, as with the objective
to increase the number of state prison systems that provide
comprehensive education on sexually trans mitted diseases.
Some developmental objectives were retained if the data
source was identified and the objective clarified with the
potential for measurement prior to 2010, as with the ob-
jective for reducing the proportion of females with human
papillomavirus (HPV) infection (USDHHS, 2006b).
Other objectives and subobjectives were retained and were
being measured or had revisions in language, baselines, 
or targets.
Reducing health disparities involved addressing the
needs of individuals or groups at risk. The needs of these
at-risk populations were identifiable in the focus areas and
objectives to be addressed. The demographic characteristics
identified and targeted for action included gender, age, race
and ethnicity, income and educational level, disability, 
geographic location, and sexual orientation.
A component of the Healthy People 2010 document
was the identification of leading health indicators
CHAPTER 14 Population Health     ●
239

(Box 14.1). “The leading health indicators reflected the
major public health concerns in the United States and
were chosen based on their ability to motivate action, the
availability of data to measure their progress, and their rel-
evance as broad public health issues” (USDHHS, 2000a,
p. 24). These 10 indicators, linked to the Healthy People
2010 objectives, were designed for the ability to provide a
snapshot at a point in time by which to view the health of
the nation to “illuminate indi vidual behaviors, physical
and social environmental factors, and important health-
system issues that greatly affect the health of individuals
and communities [and] underlying each of these indicators
is the significant influence of income and education” 
(USDHHS, 2000a, p. 24).
An emphasis on health promotion and disease
 prevention is evident in these identified leading health
indicators. And continued emphasis from the Healthy
People 2000 results was apparent, as with physical activ-
ity and obesity. For example, although the benefits of
physical activity have been demonstrated, sedentary
lifestyles were still common in the United States, which
is a major public health concern. This health indicator
targeted perceived barriers to regular, moderate physical
activity and sought to prevent conditions associated with
lack of activity. Disparities were identified with gender,
age, race, educational level, geography, and socioeco-
nomic status. At-risk groups were identified as females,
the elderly, African Americans, Hispanics, low-income
individuals, the disabled, and individuals in the south-
ern and northeastern states (USDHHS, 2000b). In ad-
dition, increasing trends and associated conditions like
heart disease,  diabetes, and other chronic illnesses can
be directly attributed to overweight and obesity. The in-
teraction with physical activity is evident, along with
metabolic and genetic factors, as well as behaviors af-
fecting dietary intake and physical activity; environmen-
tal, cultural, and socioeconomic components also play
a role (USDHHS, 2000b, p. 19–4). Disparities were re-
ported both within and among population groups 
related to gender, race, ethnicity, and socioeconomic sta-
tus. Obesity and overweight continue to be a concern
in children and adolescents. Objectives in both this area
and under physical activity were directed at these pop-
ulation groups.
The use of tobacco and substance abuse were two ad-
ditional leading health indicators. Tobacco use, whether
by smoking, chewing, or exposure to secondary smoke
in the physical environment or in utero, has long been
associated with serious complications and consequences.
Objectives addressed use of specific products in selected
groups, cessation efforts, secondhand exposure, and
needed social and environmental changes for limitations
or cessation in select popu lations. Disparities existed by
age, gender, race and  ethnicity, socioeconomic status, ed-
ucational level, and geography. Several refinements to the
objectives, subobjectives, and baseline data were made for
this indi cator at the midcourse review, as with revisions of
data sources or elimination of subobjectives due to unre-
liable sources for data. Substance abuse represents more
than the use of illicit drugs; it includes adverse drug 
consequences such as motor vehicle and other accidents,
domestic violence, intentional or unintentional overdoses,
experimentation with other substances, bingeing, lost pro-
ductivity, and associated conditions. Substance abuse
crosses all ages, genders, racial and ethnic groups, regions,
educational levels, and socioeconomic groups.
In Healthy People 2010, sexually transmitted diseases
(STDs) were described as “common, costly, and prevent-
able” (USDHHS, 2000b, p. 25–7). Although they exist
in all gender, racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic groups,
differences in responsible sexual behaviors were identified
within and among groups for use as targets for interven-
tion activities in the stated objectives. Several developmen-
tal objectives were deleted for this indicator at the
midcourse review, and refinements in others were based
on data and current trends. For example, the objective for
a reduction in the proportion of cases of HPV infection
was made specific to females rather than humans, as more
became known about data sources and the infection.
“Mental health is a state of successful performance of
mental function, resulting in productive activities, fulfilling
relationships with other people, and the ability to adapt to
change and to cope with adversity” (USDHHS, 2000b, 
p. 18–3). Although differences have been identified within
and among groups, “mental disorders occur across the lifes-
pan, affecting persons of all racial and ethnic groups, both
genders, and all educational and socioeconomic groups”
(USDHHS, 2000b, p. 18–3). Comorbidities and secondary
240
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
BOX 14.1
Healthy People 2010 and Healthy 
People 2020
Healthy People 2010 Leading Health Indicators
●Physical activity
●Overweight and obesity
●Tobacco use
●Substance abuse
●Responsible sexual behavior
●Mental health
●Injury and violence
●Environmental quality
●Immunization
●Access to healthcare
Healthy People 2020 Leading Health Indicators (LHI)
(26 LHI organized under the following 12 topics):
●Access to Health Services (2)
●Clinical Preventive Services (4)
●Environmental Quality (2)
●Injury and Violence (2)
●Maternal, Infant, and Child Health (2)
●Mental Health (2)
●Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Obesity (4)
●Oral Health (1)
●Reproductive and Sexual Health (2)
●Social Determinants (1)
●Substance Abuse (2)
●Tobacco (2)
Sources: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2000a). Healthy People 2010: Volume 1 (2nd ed.). Washington,
DC: Author.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS). (2014f).
Leading health indicators. Retrieved from http://healthypeople.gov/
2020/LHI/default.aspx

problems are vital considerations for this indicator, as are
treatment opportunities. The midcourse review resulted in
revised data, objectives, and targets for this indicator, in-
cluding a focus on the homeless. New targets were aimed
at treatment rather than merely the identification of the pro-
portion of the homeless who are identified with serious
mental health problems.
Objectives related to the leading health indicator on
injury and violence called for the reduction in injuries, dis-
abilities, and deaths. Healthy People 2010 noted that 
“although the greatest impact in injury is human suffering
and loss of life, the financial cost is staggering [including
costs of] . . . direct medical care and rehabilitation as well
as lost income and productivity” (USDHHS, 2000b, 
p. 15–4). In addition, disparities in rates of injuries by age,
racial and ethnic group, and economic status were noted.
The four developmental objectives for this indicator be-
came measurable and provided baseline data and targets
at the midcourse review, as with bicycle helmet use and
protective equipment in school sports activities.
The environmental quality indicator addressed air and
water quality and toxic influences in homes, at worksites,
and in the community to promote public health and pro-
tection. Individuals of certain races and socioeconomic sta-
tus were identified as being at greater risk for indoor air
pollution, inadequate heating or cooling, sanitation, or 
environmental structural issues including fire hazards 
(USDHHS, 2000a, p. 8–7). The midcourse review pro-
vided data enhancement and refinement, as with the meas-
urability that became available for fish contamination in
the nation’s lakes and rivers, providing baseline and 
target data.
Strategies to address the identified increase in infectious
diseases included immunization recommendations and
programs, both universal and targeted, as well as concen-
trating on selected infectious processes and antimicrobial
resistance. Particular at-risk populations were identified re-
lated to age, ethnicity and race, and geography. Updated
information on tuberculosis, hospital-acquired infections,
and immunization recommendations arose and are avail-
able on an ongoing basis with the data provided through
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Access to quality services was identified as a leading
health indicator and continues to be a concern. Consider
the implications of this leading health indi cator and its tar-
get of 100 percent health insurance  coverage by 2010.
Needless to say, the target was not met. The objectives for
this indicator addressed clinical preventive care, primary
care, emergency services, and long-term care and rehabil-
itative services. Disparities have been monitored during
the data collection process. At the June 2002 progress re-
view, lower levels of insurance were noted in the Latino,
Native American, and Alaskan Native populations. Lower
levels of health insurance and ongoing sources of care were
also noted in populations with lower levels of family in-
come and education. Racial and ethnic representation in
the health professions were also under study with this ob-
jective, as a component of cultural com petence. Little
change has been demonstrated, with minority underrep-
resentation persistent in the health professions. In Healthy
People 2010 (USDHHS, 2000a), access to quality health-
care services was viewed through selected indicators con-
sidered “pre dictors” of availability and acceptability of
quality services. These indicators or predictors included
having health insurance, having a regular provider of on-
going care, and the use of prenatal care as a preventive
service (USDHHS, 2000a). The baseline year was 1997,
with 83 percent of persons under 65 years of age with
health insurance, and we remained at the same percentage
in 2010.
At the local levels, Healthy Communities 2010 was in-
volved with initiatives and data collection. States  initiated
Healthy People 2010 plans specific to their population and
geography. For example, Alaska implemented a Talking
Circle, Arizona had 12 Focus Areas, Michigan concen-
trated on 25 specific Focused Indicators, and Vermont had
specific Goals for Healthy Vermonters.
At the national level, ongoing collaboratives to address
the public’s health continued. For example, preventing
medication errors was included as an issue related to pre-
vention of injury in the focus area of  medical product
safety. Following an act of the United States Congress, the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) spon-
sored a study by the IOM in 2006 with the aim of devel-
oping a national agenda for reducing medication errors in
hospitals, long-term care and ambulatory-care facilities,
and in community and home settings (Aspden, Wolcott,
Bootman, & Cronenwett, 2006). Activities to address
error reduction and adverse drug events address the
Healthy People 2010 goals to eliminate health disparities
and increase the quality and years of healthy life. 
The work on Healthy People 2020 began in 2007
 following the midyear review for Healthy People 2010. 
Unlike with the past two projects, for this new initiative,
a statement of vision, mission, and goals was developed
based on data and public input. The overarching goals
were stated as follows:
●Attain high-quality, longer lives free of preventable 
disease, disability, injury, and premature death.
●Achieve health equity, eliminate disparities, and 
improve the health of all groups.
●Create social and physical environments that promote
good health for all.
●Promote quality of life, healthy development, and
healthy behaviors across all life stages. (USDHH,
2014a)
Notice that the focus is now firmly on quality of life
for all, across the life span. Now, there were 42 identified
topical areas (see Table 14.1) with four foundation
health measures to monitor the health of the nation both
for progress and in terms of quality of life issues:
●General Health Status
●Health-Related Quality of Life and Well-Being
●Determinants of Health
●Disparities (USDHHS, 2014b).
A continuing focus remained on most of the focus
areas from Healthy People 2010—for example, access to
health services as well as certain chronic and infectious dis-
eases like arthritis, osteoporosis and chronic back condi-
tions, diabetes, kidney disease, respiratory diseases, and
HIV. Selected groups for continued attention remained
as well, as with maternal, infant, and child health. Health
promotion activities were carried forward with oral health,
physical activity, and environmental health. However, 
CHAPTER 14 Population Health     ●
241

additional age groups received added focus, such as early
and middle childhood, adolescent health, and older adults,
as with Healthy People 2000. Thirteen newer focus areas
emerged, for example, genomics, global health, and social
determinants of health. For the development of the objec-
tives for these goals, specific criteria were established, and
each objective must include the following:
●Reliable data source
●Baseline measurement
●Specific improvements targeted to be achieved by
2020 (USDHHS, 2014g)
These objectives were to be relevant, reliable, current,
reflective of the population, and measurable. Public
meetings were held and comments were requested. The
criteria that were set for the objectives were rigorous to
include measurability and based on scientific evidence.
The model for the process had added complexity from
the 2010 objectives and has become an action model
looking at assessment, monitoring, evaluation, and dis-
semination of interventions and outcomes for determi-
nants of health through interconnected variables using a
life span perspective.
Proposed objectives were also based on the data from
Healthy People 2010. Some of the 2010 objectives were re-
tained, revised, or moved to a different topical area with
data sources identified. For example, in the first topical
area on Access to Health Services, five of the objectives in
this area were retained from Healthy People 2010 to con-
tinue toward the target. Vital areas carried over from the
Healthy People 2010 initiative included the proportion of
people with health insurance, those with a usual primary
healthcare provider, and access to and use of emergency
medical services. Three of the 2010 objectives in this area
were also retained but modified for additional specificity
to address the targets or had a portion removed from the
objective since it was best measured in another topical area
of Healthy People 2020. Five of the 2010 objectives in this
area were moved to other areas in Healthy People 2020. 
Six other 2010 objectives were archived because the pre-
vious target had been met, there was inadequate data to
address the objectives, or they duplicated measures in
other areas (USDHHS, 2008). Two new objectives were
added to Healthy People 2020 focused on evidence-based
and primary care, both developmental to assess adequacy
of data sources. In late 2010, the Institute of Medicine
provided direction for addressing healthcare quality and
disparities and appointed a  special committee to work to-
ward recommending leading health indicators and objec-
tives for Healthy People 2020.
As illustrated in Box 14.1, Healthy People 2020 was 
focused on additional metrics with specified targets to 
assess the health of the public. Moving from the 10 Lead-
ing Health Indicators (LHI) in 2010, there were now 
26 specific measures organized under 12 topical areas. 
At the progress review in March 2014, positive progress
was reported on many of the indicators on the Healthy
People 2020 targets as follows:
●15.4% (4 LHI) met or exceeded the targets
●38.5% (10 LHI) demonstrated improvements
●30.8% (8 LHI) demonstrated little or no change
●11.5% (3 LHI) demonstrated a decline in performance
●3.8% (1 LHI) had only baseline date (USDHHS,
2014e, p. 2)
The targets were met in the areas of environmental
quality (air quality and children exposed to secondhand
smoke), number of homicides, and on the physical activity
of adults. For example, for adults meeting the recom-
mended aerobic physical activity indicator, the target was
20.1% with the baseline of 18.2% in 2008 and the 2012
measure of 20.6% (USDHHS, 2014e, p. 3). Although the
targets were not met in 2014, improvements were demon-
strated in the areas of adults receiving colorectal screening,
adults with controlled hypertension, childhood immuniza-
tions, the number of injury deaths, infant mortality and
pre-term births, knowledge of serostatus among HIV-
positive individuals, students awarded a high school
diploma four years after starting ninth grade, adolescents
using alcohol or illicit drugs, and cigarette smoking in
adults. For example, the target for adolescents using alcohol
or illicit drugs was set at 16.6% with a 2008 baseline of
18.4% and the 2014 measure of 17.4% (USDHHS,
2014e, p. 4). Little or no detectable change was reported
in 2011–12 for two LHI in the access to health services,
but this may be significantly improved with the implemen-
tation of the Affordable Care Act in 2014–15. Little or no
improvement was also reported in the areas of diabetes,
obesity, intake of vegetables, and adolescent cigarette smok-
ing. Performance declines were reported on two mental
health indicators and percentage of visits to a dentist.
One of the most notable factors in this process is the re-
liance on measurability and the use of scientific evidence.
Data were available on a variety of measures and were evolv-
ing in other areas. Support of interventions and outcomes
with evidence is of prime concern. We are concerned about
individuals, families, groups, and communities as we strive
to raise the health status of the nation. These activities are
especially important in light of our aging population and
attendant health challenges.
OUR AGING POPULATION
The term healthy life applies not only to longevity but 
also to functional independence and the perception of
healthy days. Older adults are now included back into
Health People 2020 as a distinct area for attention as we
focus on the issue of quality of life and healthy life ex-
pectancy. The major causes of death in people 65 years
and older are heart disease, cancer, and stroke. Consider
the life expectancy trends reported in Table 14.2. 
Although life expectancies for both men and women have
increased, the years of functional health and independence
after age 65 are less than the 12 to 19 actual remaining
years of life. In addition, disparities exist by gender and
race. On the other hand, trends in limitation of activities
of daily living, defined as physically unhealthy days, have
declined only marginally for aging adults 65 years and
242
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
ONLINE CONSULT 
Healthy People 2020 at 
http://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/
aboutdefault.aspx

older living in the community with disability percentages
showing an increase to 37.9 percent in 2010 (CDC,
2013d, p. 15). The annual trend report for mean number
of unhealthy days reported by age group has changed little,
especially for the 65 to 74 and 75+ age groups. The rates
were 4.8, 5.1, and 4.9 and 6.1, 6.4, and 6.0 for the years
1993, 2003, and 2010 for the 65 to 74 and 75+ age groups,
respectively (CDC National Center for Chronic Disease
Prevention and Health Promotion, 2012). When consid-
ering self-reported activity limitations due to poor physical
health, there were 2.4 and 2.9 days in the last 30 days 
reported by the 65 to 74 and 75+ age groups, respectively
(CDC, 2011b). In addition, more activity limitations and
physically unhealthy days were reported with lower educa-
tional levels, with lower annual household income, and for
race/ethnicity other than Asian and white/non-Hispanic
(CDC, 2011a, 2011b). The difference between healthy life
and unhealthy life is the loss of independence in activities
of daily life and increasing dependence on others.
The percentage of the population aged 65 years and
older has been steadily increasing, with 13 percent of the
population in this age group according to the 2010 census.
To look further at this perspective, there were 30 million
people in this age group in 1988, with a projected 40 mil-
lion in 2011 and 50 million in 2019 (National Institute
on Aging, 2009, p. 5). And, 72 million older Americans
are predicted to be alive in 2030 when the last of the “baby
boomers” turns 65 years old (CDC, 2013, p 1). In fact,
the population 85 years and older grew dramatically from
1950 to 1990. According to U.S. Census Bureau esti-
mates, there were 5.7 million Americans aged 85 and older
in 2010, with the projection that this number will grow
to 8.5 million in 2030 and 18.2 million in 2050 (National
Institute on Aging, 2009, p. 5). Worldwide, the popula-
tion over 65 years of age and older was estimated as 
524 million in 2010 (8 percent of the global population)
with a projection that by 2050 there will be 1.5 billion
older people, or 16 percent of the global population 
(National Institute on Aging, 2011, p. 4). The country
with the greatest percentage of people over 65 is currently
Japan, but with the rapid population growth by 2050, 
65 and older population predictions are expected in China
(330 million from 110 million in 2010) and India 
(227 million from 60 million in 2010) (National Institute
on Aging, 2010, p. 5). 
Despite Medicare coverage, the growing population 
of aging Americans, especially those over 85 years, is 
experiencing differences in purchasing power and socioe-
conomic status. The affordability of healthcare and med-
ications is a serious concern to our aging population. For
example, in 2008, older Americans averaged a 57 percent
increase of out-of-pocket expenditures since 1998 and
spent an average of $2,844 for insurance, $793 for medical
services, $821 for drugs, and $143 for medical supplies
(Administration on Aging [AOA], 2009, p. 15). Medicare
Part D and new provisions with the Affordable Care Act
will reduce some of these escalating expenditures.
However, disposable income is a consideration in 
retirement. In 2008, approximately 3.7 million elderly
persons (9.7%) were living below the federal poverty level,
with another 6.3 million classified as “near poor” at 125 per-
cent of the federal poverty level (Administration on Aging,
2010, p. 11). In 2010, this percentage of elderly people living
at the federal poverty level had declined to 9 percent, 
with 26 percent classified in a low income group (Federal
Interagency Forum on Aging-related Statistics, 2012, 
p. 13). There has been some change related to availability
of pensions to workers in the second half of the 20th cen-
tury in addition to Social Security assistance, but differ-
ences in income are evident related to socioeconomic
status, race, gender, marital status, and geography.
The difference between healthy life and unhealthy 
life is the loss of independence in activities of daily life
and increasing dependence on others for health and rou-
tine care. We now see chronic illness rather than acute 
illness as the major morbidity factor in aging adults. Pre-
vention of disability and promotion of independent func-
tioning are essential and can be aided by healthy behaviors
such as smoking cessation, good nutrition, reduction 
of sodium intake and body weight, reduction in social 
isolation, regular physical activity, and availability of 
primary care services.
Approximately one-third of people hospitalized are
older than 65 years. In the acute care setting, the average
length of stay for individuals over 65 years was 5.6 days,
compared with 4.8 days for individuals of all ages (AOA,
2010, p. 13). Even though the average length of hospital
stays has shortened, those older than 65 years require a
great proportion of our resources, both in and out of the
acute care setting. With projections for a dramatic increase
in the older population and the associated costs, several
national projects and metrics have been initiated to pro-
mote healthy lifestyles and lifestyle changes for seniors. As
noted by the director of the Centers for Disease Control
CHAPTER 14 Population Health     ●
243
Life Expectancy (in Years) at Birth, 65, and 75
1900
1950
1980
1990
2000
2010
At Birth
47.3
68.2
73.7
75.4
76.8
Males 76.2 Females 81.0 Both sexes 78.7
At 65 Years
11.9
13.9
16.4
17.2
17.6
Males 16.0 Females 19.0 Both sexes 17.6
At 75 Years
—
—
10.4
10.9
11.0
Males 11.0  Females 12.9, Both sexes 12.1
Sources: National Center for Health Statistics. (2013). Life expectancy at birth, at age 65, and at age 75, by sex, race, and Hispanic
origin: United States, selected years 1900–2010. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/hus13.pdf#018
TABLE 14.2

and Prevention (CDC, 2013d), “more than a quarter of
all Americans and two out of three older Americans have
multiple chronic conditions, and treatment for this pop-
ulation accounts for 66% of the country’s health care
budget” (p. ii). For example, think about safety with med-
ications (availability, administration, and interactions) and
in the prevention of falls and the associated cost factors.
Theories on and Types of Aging
With the focus on health promotion and quality of life for
the growing aging population and the entry of the in-
creased number of baby boomers into this category, re-
search has evolved in several disciplines, all proposing
different theories on aging. No agreement on a specific the-
ory has emerged. Research continues, and our knowledge
of the aging process grows with biological, sociological, psy-
chological, longevity, medical, and nursing theories on
aging. For example, medical theories highlight disease-
related influences on physiological functioning of the per-
son, while nursing theories propose functional consequences
in which age-related changes are the risk factors.
Interestingly, aging has also been classified as success-
ful, usual, or pathological (Rowe & Kahn, 1987). In suc-
cessful aging, there is a positive interaction between the
individual’s genes and the environment. Such an interac-
tion results in no serious detriment in functioning from
the middle 20s until the early 70s. Minimal measurable
changes in functioning are seen, with these  individuals as
the energetic and functional “survivors” in aging. Success-
ful agers represent only about 5 to 10 percent of the pop-
ulation. These individuals are the aging “stars” we aspire
to be—those active, energetic, and involved elders we 
revere, admire, or respect.
Usual aging occurs in the vast majority of indivi duals.
With usual aging we observe an interaction between the
person’s genetic endowment and their environment. A
neutral or negative environment has positive or neutral
genes. Think about diet, cholesterol, and heredity, and in-
dividual differences for the person as affected by heredity
and the unique environment. This raises concern for the
reversible risk factors that occur with aging. The gene-
environment interaction leads to obvious functional lim-
itations, but the limitations are not serious enough to af-
fect activities of daily living (ADLs) as long as the person
makes compromises and adaptations. An example is the
person whose mobility is limited but who adjusts to the
limitation and is still able to live independently without
assistance in daily life. With usual aging, we may also see
genetic diseases, but again, adaptations are made that do
not significantly interfere with independent daily func-
tioning. This is the quality of life focus for the increasing
numbers of aging adults.
At the opposite extreme is pathological aging. Here we
see a negative interaction between genetic and environ-
mental factors. Some combination of negative or neutral
influences arises from both the individual’s genes and the
environment. We often see clinical evidence of genetic dis-
eases in these aging individuals. This gene-environment
interaction leads to serious functional limitations for the
individual, such as being unable to take care of personal
needs, inability to  perform ADLs, and sometimes the in-
ability to sustain life. These functional limitations require
substantial intervention. Prevention of disabilities and
quality of life issues in this population are the focus of
healthy initiatives.
Characterizing Aging Americans
We have acknowledged that aging adults represent a grow-
ing segment of our population, especially those 85 years
and older and those who are members of minority groups.
As these population proportions increase even more, we
will need to consider individual differences, needs of age
groups, cultural and ethnic trends, and changing family
patterns. Intergenerational issues will involve more than
children, parents, grandparents, and great-grandparents.
Consider the complexity of a family with two or three
older adult groups, those in their middle to late 60s, 80s,
and 100s, as well as the family members younger than age
60. The concern also arises as to who will be the caregiver
for the frail older adult. Will the 80-year-old be caring for
a frail spouse as well as a 99-year-old mother, or will the
60-year-old be caring for both the 80-year-old parents and
the 99-year-old grandmother and perhaps be the head of
the household also caring for grandchildren? Older women
are expected to continue to outnumber men by at least
three to two, according to life expectancy projections.
Residential Changes
About 30% (11.3 million) of noninstitutionalized older
persons live alone (8.3 million women, 3.0 million men).
Half of older women (49 percent) aged 75 years and older
live alone. 
Living arrangements are an important factor for aging
adults. Most aging adults live in the community, usually
with a spouse, alone, or with adult offspring. The propor-
tion of people older than 65 who are living in nursing
homes is less than 5 percent. And approximately 30 per-
cent, or 11.3 million aging adults, live alone in the com-
munity, with 49 percent of women 75 years of age and
older living alone (AOA, 2010, p. 1). Decisions about liv-
ing arrangements should include considerations for optimal
promotion of functional independence and health. Oppor-
tunities for social interactions and access to resources and
caregivers, when needed, are vital considerations.
Various housing options are considered by aging
adults. In our more mobile society, being tied to a home-
stead may no longer be preferable, especially for urban
and younger aging adults. Retirement planning may in-
clude relocating to a more temperate climate or closer to
grandchildren. Instead of the large family home, smaller
detached homes, condominiums, town homes, gated re-
tirement communities, continuing care communities, as-
sisted-living apartments, senior homes, and group homes
are options, depending on needs, affordability, and acces-
sibility. In addition, a frail elder may relocate again to live
with a child or other relative after the death of the spouse,
sale of the retirement home, or growing loss of functional
independence.
Physical Changes
Characteristics of aging adults continue to be as varied as
the individuals themselves. Aging adults come with years
244
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

of unique experiences that have molded their  psychosocial
profile. Physically and physiologically, aging adults also
differ in development and progression of age-related
changes. Aging is progressive and irreversible, but the
manner in which these changes occur is variable. Appear-
ance changes and motor activities slow down. But things
do not stop without some disease process. Aging adults are
more susceptible to disease and environmental factors.
Maintaining homeostasis is more difficult.
Age-related changes occur in biological systems. Skin
becomes less elastic. Sweat glands, temperature recep-
tors, pigment, and subcutaneous fat decrease. This
makes the aging adults more susceptible to temperature
extremes (cold and hot), sunlight, and injury. Other
senses are affected by aging as well. Visual and hearing
acuity diminish. Adaptation of the lens and ocular 
muscles decreases, with a decrease in depth perception.
Glare and driving at night become stressful, especially
if the aging person looks at oncoming headlights. The
home environment must be well illuminated, but with
nonglare lights. For example, reducing the glare with
fluorescent lights can also lower the chance of accidents,
especially falls. Print may need to be larger and bolder.
Eye examinations are important. The loss of the driver’s
license may be devastating to an aging person, even if
his driving is limited.
Moreover, muscle mass and strength decrease, and
joints may be stiff with arthritis. Muscle mass may be re-
placed with connective tissue. Osteoporosis occurs with
calcium losses and hormonal changes, and worsens with
inactivity. Low-impact, isometric, and routine exercises
can prevent further immobility and loss of function. 
Digestion and slower motility are improved with small
meals. Food may taste and smell bland. Herbs and sea-
soning can be used, but one must beware of hidden
sodium content.
Changes in level of consciousness and delirium are
not normal signs of aging. Neurological changes do
occur but may indicate an underlying pathology or drug
interaction. If this situation continues, possibilities
should always be investigated further with referrals.
Time rather than loss should be the first thought with
the delays that may happen; it may take a little more
time to remember something, but that does not mean
that the memory is lost.
Sexuality and sexual intercourse continue, but adapta-
tion may be needed as well, such as more time for arousal,
excitement, and foreplay, or lubrication for vaginal dry-
ness. Impotence should be evaluated for pathology or pos-
sible drug side effects. Counseling, erectile aids, reduction
in alcohol consumption, and changes in medications are
all possible treatments. Sexual activity need not stop be-
cause of advancing age, although partner availability may
become an issue.
Major Health Problems 
of Aging Adults
Chronic illness and frailty are primary concerns of aging
adults and their healthcare professionals. Diseases com-
mon to aging include osteoporosis, diabetes, stroke, de-
pression, arthritis, dementias, cancer, and cardiovascular
disease.
Consider the key health indicators of older Americans
listed in Box 14.2. The first one, physically unhealthy 
days, measures the number of days out of the previous 
30 days that a respondent’s physical health, including
physical illness and injury, was self-reported as “not good.”
A slight but insignificant decline in the mean number of
days was reported between 2004 (5.1 days for adults 
65 to 74 years and 6.4 days for adults 75+ years) and 2010
(4.9 days for adults 65 to 74 years and 6.0 for those 
75+ years of age) for all states (CDC, 2012), but some
states had lower scores reported by aging adults, as with
respondents in Hawaii, New Hampshire, North Dakota,
and Connecticut in 2010. Self- perception of health status
was also assessed in 2009, with 41.6 percent of older per-
sons assessing their health as excellent or very good in the
overall population, and little difference between men and
women over 65 years (AOA, 2010). However, there were
differences among racial groups, with older African Amer-
icans (25.1 percent), American Indians/Alaska Natives
(23.2 percent), and Hispanics (28.0 percent) less likely to
rate their health as excellent to very good than their coun-
terpart of older whites (41.8 percent) or Asians (35.2 per-
cent) (AOA, 2010). Another study on disability and
activity limitations in 2007 found that 25 percent of older
adults living in the community had difficulty performing
one or more ADLs (AOA, 2010, p. 14), however, these
limitations were increased markedly by age groups 65–74,
74–84, and 85 and older. Older individuals living in the
community increasingly report limitations of daily activi-
ties as a result of at least one chronic illness. In addition,
it has been noted that the presence of a severe disability 
is associated with lower income levels and educational 
attainment (AOA, 2010, p. 14).
Consider the difference between disability and
chronicity. Disability is the inability to do something be-
cause of a physical or mental impairment. Chronicity is
CHAPTER 14 Population Health     ●
245
BOX 14.2
Key Indicators of Older Adult Health
Health Status
●Physically Unhealthy Days 
●Frequent Mental Distress 
●Oral Health; Tooth Retention
●Disability 
Health Behaviors
●Leisure Time Activity in the Past Month 
●Fruits and Vegetables Consumed Daily 
●Obesity 
●Current Smoking
●Medication for Hypertension  
Preventive Care and Screening
●Flu Vaccine in the Past Year 
●Pneumonia Vaccine 
●Mammogram Within the Past 2 Years 
●Colorectal Cancer Screening 
●Up-to-date on Preventive Services 
Injuries
●Fall Within the Past Year  
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013b). Healthy
people targets. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/aging/help/
DPH-Aging/healthy-people.html   

related to duration or recurrence of a condition. The in-
dividual may have a chronic condition but, with healthy
behaviors, he or she can limit, delay, or prevent disability.
Hence, health promotion behaviors and empowerment of
the individual are essential for taking charge of one’s own
life. Unlike the irreversible normal changes of aging, risk
factors can be reduced and in some cases eliminated.
Risks in aging adults include physical, environmental,
psychosocial, and chemical factors. Physical risks affect the
biological system and related physiological function. 
Examples of physical risks are limitations in flexibility lead-
ing to falls and vision changes, resulting in automobile 
accidents. Environmental risks can be natural or artificial.
Natural environmental risks include ultraviolet radiation
and weather extremes. Examples of artificial or human-
made environmental risks are poor air quality, hazards in
housing, and lack of maintenance of equipment. Psychoso-
cial risks are a part of everyday life, whether the aging 
person is isolated or active. Stress levels from illness of self,
family members, or friends take an increasing toll on the
individual. An inward focus on problems may make the
aging person more egocentric and, as a result, more iso-
lated. To address these risks, the special needs of aging
adults should be considered.
Needs of Aging Adults
The major needs of aging adults roughly parallel the lead-
ing health indicators in Healthy People 2010 and have been
made a distinct topical area for Healthy People 2020.
Longevity factors that have been supported by research 
include genetics, gender, environment, physical activity,
alcohol consumption, sexual activity, nutrition, and social
factors (such as economics, marital status, and family), 
religious beliefs, purpose in life, and laughter. Positive 
behaviors must be directed at promoting and maintaining
health and functional independence and at reducing risk
factors and disability. The aging adult also requires access
to affordable healthcare, including transportation and 
acceptability of the provider to the person.
Family needs and issues are another consideration.
Given the proportion of aging adults living in the
 community and projections for population increases, espe-
cially in the group 85 years and older, family needs are a
major issue in health promotion and care activities. Much
can be found in the literature about family decisions for
nursing home placement and the “sandwich generation” of
caregivers. But recall that only a small proportion of older
adults live in institutional settings, the great majority being
cared for in the community. In addition, consider the pro-
jected increase in number of aging adults in minority
groups and the importance of the extended family in some
cultures. Likewise, the growing older population uses many
resources, placing a strain on society as a whole.
Lay Caregivers
The fact is that caring for a frail older adult takes a major
toll on the caregiver and the family. The number of infor-
mal and family caregivers is approaching 40 million na-
tionwide, most of them women caring for relatives, adult
children with disabilities, or their grandchildren. The
physical and emotional toll on the caregiver can be enor-
mous while the caregiver continues maintaining other
family, social, work, and personal obligations. The physi-
cal and emotional strains on the caregiver often compro-
mise her health. Financial and economic difficulties can
compound the strain on the caregiver.
The concept of respite care, to give the caregiver 
a break, is ideal but is not always perceived as available, 
affordable, or even emotionally acceptable. Regardless, the
caregiver will need some form of respite, and this must be
determined, sought, and used regularly. The reauthoriza-
tion of the Older Americans Act supported demonstration
projects on caregiving and authorized the National Family
Caregiver Support Program. This program provides sup-
port and resources at the state and local levels for informal
caregivers providing care for their older relatives or adults
with disabilities. User-friendly Web sites are available to
provide information on resources and support for both
caregivers and professionals. Tax credits and reimbursable
services are available in some areas for lay care of elders.
In addition, family leave through the Family and Medical
Leave Act (FMLA) also addresses the need for care of
spouses and parents with serious health conditions.
Societal Needs
Societal needs and issues are another consideration for
aging adults. Public policy issues include the availability
and allocation of resources for aging adults as well as the
use of these resources. Some people contend that aging
adults are using the vast majority of the resources with
their chronic health problems. Focusing on the prevention
of these health problems in the baby boomers is critical.
Healthcare legislation and financing for aging adults
occur mainly through the Social Security amendments and
246
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
ONLINE CONSULT 
CDC: The State of Aging and Health in America
Report at 
http://www.cdc.gov/features/agingandhealth/state_
of_aging_and_health_in_america_2013.pdf
ONLINE CONSULT 
AARP: Caregiving at 
http://www.aarp.org/relationships/caregiving/ 
Administration for Community Living at
http://www.acl.gov/Index.aspx
CDC: Family Caregiving: The Facts at
http://www.cdc.gov/aging/caregiving/facts.htm
Family Caregiver Alliance at 
https://caregiver.org/about-fca
National Alliance for Caregiving at 
http://www.caregiving.org/ 
AOA: The National Family Caregiver Support 
Program at
http://www.aoa.acl.gov/AoA_Programs/HCLTC
/Caregiver/index.aspx
The Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 at
http://www.dol.gov/whd/fmla/index.htm

budget reconciliation acts, which include Medicare and
Medicaid funding. With Medicaid, the role, legislation, and
funding levels fall within the domain of the state of resi-
dence. But what about part-time residents who spend half
of the year in a state in which they do not claim primary
residence? What about the issue of reverse migration of frail
aging adults who, after years of retirement in a satisfactory
condition in one state, lose a spouse and become increas-
ingly frail, move to be cared for by their children? Their af-
fluence was spent somewhere else, but when they move near
the children, the new community must absorb the cost of
chronic health conditions and increasing frailty. Similar sit-
uations can have great impact on society and resources.
Elder Abuse
Another area of concern at the individual, family, and 
societal levels is elder abuse. This includes physical neglect
or violence, verbal abuse, psychological or emotional
abuse, financial exploitation, and sexual abuse. It may be
intended or unintended in active or passive actions of the
abuser. Those aging individuals most at risk are the frail
elderly who are functionally impaired and depend on oth-
ers. The Administration on Aging (AOA, 2014a, 2014b)
provides information on this serious situation and finan-
cially funds the National Center on Elder Abuse. The 
National Center on Elder Abuse (2014a) has reported that
elder abuse perpetrators are frequently family members,
both men and women, most often the victim’s adult child
or spouse. The  elders may be in dysfunctional family sit-
uations or even in nursing homes, but they often fear
being alone more than the abuse or neglect they are expe-
riencing. The National Center on Elder Abuse (2014b)
has described the abuse of noninstitutionalized, institu-
tionalized, and disabled elders but cannot determine the
exact extent of the problem because many cases are not 
reported. Assessment, reporting, education, and counsel-
ing are responsibilities of providers and members of soci-
ety. Elder abuse has also been related to caregiver stress.
Special efforts being made to address this growing problem
include the Older Americans Act and other national leg-
islation for awareness and outreach. “Additionally, a new
indicator has been included in the Healthy People 2020
 initiative, increasing the number of states that collect and
publicly report incidences of elder maltreatment” (Federal
Interagency Forum on Aging-Related Statistics, 2012, 
pp. 72–73).
Elder abuse is only one aspect of the broader domestic
violence problem in this country. The frail elder is cer-
tainly not the only one affected by abuse or violence in the
environment. Spouses, parents, and significant others are
all considerations in cases of domestic violence. In fact, es-
timates are that almost 15 percent of women and 4 percent
of men have been injured as a result of intimate partner
violence that included rape, physical violence, and/or
stalking (National Domestic Violence Hotline, 2014).
If you suspect that an older person is being abused or
neglected, you must call the adult protective services of
the state where the elder is located. Proof is not required,
and calls are confidential. Some states have separate 
reporting lines for domestic versus institutional elder abuse.
Access the agency to contact in your state at http://www
.thehotline.org/help/resources/#tab-id-1
MINORITY HEALTH
In pursuit of the goal to eliminate health disparities, Healthy
People 2010 identified the following demographic groups
within which health disparities occur: gender, race or eth-
nicity, education or income, disability, geographic location,
and sexual orientation. In the area of race or ethnicity,
Healthy People proposed that the identified disparities were
“the result of the complex interaction among genetic varia-
tions, environmental factors, and specific health behaviors”
(USDHHS, 2000a, p. 12). The following disparities be-
tween white and minority populations were documented:
●Higher infant mortality rates for African Americans,
Native Americans, and Alaskan Natives
●A higher incidence of cancer and heart disease for
African Americans
●Higher mortality from HIV/AIDS for African 
Americans
●Increased diabetes-related deaths for Hispanic 
Americans and a higher incidence of diabetes for 
Native Americans and Alaskan Natives
●A higher incidence of hypertension and obesity in 
Hispanic Americans
●High death rates from unintentional injuries and 
suicide for Native Americans and Alaskan Natives
●High rates of tuberculosis in Hispanics, Asians, and
Pacific Islanders
●High rates of hepatitis in Asians and Pacific Islanders.
(USDHHS, 2000a, p. 12)
Health disparities continued despite the goal for elim-
ination in the Healthy People 2010 goal. The Healthy Peo-
ple 2020 goal directed in this area is to “achieve health
equity, eliminate disparities, and improve the health of all
groups” (UDHHS, 2014a, 1). Clearly, the reasons for the
occurrence of the health disparities among ethnic groups
are multifaceted and complex and the focus of many dif-
ferent initiatives to address the national goals. A large focus
of minority health is on the special needs of groups char-
acterized by race or ethnicity. The Office of Minority
Health and Health Equity of the CDC (2014) classifies
racial or ethnic minority populations as follows:
●American Indian and Alaskan Native
●Asian
●Black or African American
●Hispanic or Latino
●Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander
CHAPTER 14 Population Health     ●
247
ONLINE CONSULT 
Administration on Aging: What is elder abuse? at 
http://www.aoa.gov/AoA_programs/elder_rights
/EA_prevention/whatisEA.aspx
National Family Caregiver Support Program at
http://www.aoa.gov/AoA_programs/HCLTC
/Caregiver/index.aspx
National Center on Elder Abuse at
http://www.ncea.aoa.gov/
National Domestic Violence Hotline at 
http://www.thehotline.org

During Healthy People 2010, a 2001 study con-
ducted by the Commonwealth Fund documented racial
and ethnic disparities in the areas of insurance coverage,
health perceptions, incidence of and mortality from
chronic conditions, and higher utilization of emergency
services and no source of regular care (Collins et al.,
2002, p. 39). In a further study on racial and ethnic
data-collection processes, the researchers concluded,
“minority data collection and reporting was inconsistent
and sometimes contradictory” (Perot & Youdelman,
2001, p. 24). Stabilization was recommended. And we
continue to investigate the issues and differences among
population groups and the needs of the members. The
Commonwealth Fund identified that racial and ethnic
disparities exist in numerous areas of diagnosis, treat-
ment, and preventive care (even when income, insurance
status, and other socioeconomic factors are held con-
stant). California, Florida, and Louisiana have been 
active in dealing with minority health issues through
statutes (Gamble et al., 2006, p. 2) to address their large
diverse populations.
Addressing the Disparities
Plans are ongoing to address current and emerging mi-
nority issues in order to achieve the goal of elimination
of disparities. Federal, state, and local initiatives are ac-
tively focusing on the needs of the nation. In 1999, Con-
gress (Public Law 106–129) directed the Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) to examine
priority populations, including minority groups, low-in-
come groups, women, children, the  elderly, individuals
with special needs, and rural residents. In 2000, Congress
passed the Minority Health and Health Disparities Re-
search and Education Act (Public Law 106–525), estab-
lishing the National Center on Minority Health and
Health Disparities under the National Institutes of
Health (NIH). The NIH, along with its Specialty Insti-
tutes and Centers, integrated this initiative to eliminate
health disparities into the strategic plans for the various
agencies, including the National Institute of Nursing 
Research. Initiatives continue to address not only health
habits and access to care but also provider-patient inter-
actions in their research support.
In 2003, the Kaiser Family Foundation, the Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation, and national heart organiza-
tions, in response to a meta-analysis research on  disparities
in cardiac care in different population groups, led a na-
tional initiative for physician outreach about racial and
ethnic disparities in medical care. This research reviewed
prior rigorous studies in the literature and documented ev-
idence of racial or ethnic differences in cardiac care, with
African Americans less likely to receive certain procedures
and care than their white counterparts despite similar 
patient characteristics (Lillie-Blanton, Rushing, Ruiz,
Mayberry, & Boone, 2002). Mixed findings were reported
for Hispanic patients.
Then, in their 2005 report, the AHRQ (2005) noted
four major themes: disparities still exist, some disparities
are diminishing, opportunities remain for improvement,
and the information on disparities is improving (p. 3). In
2011, the Offices of Minority Health were established
within the following six governmental agencies as a 
requirement of the Affordable Care Act:
●Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)
●Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
●Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
●Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
●Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA)
●Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Adminis-
tration (SAMHSA)
At this time, the CDC Office was renamed from the
Office of Minority Health and Health Disparities to the
Office of Minority Health and Health Equity (OMHHE)
in response to “compelling evidence that race and ethnic-
ity correlate with persistent, and often increasing, health
disparities among US . . . and to advance the science 
and practice of health equity”(p. 2). “Health equity is
achieved when every person has the opportunity to attain
his or her full health potential and no one is disadvan-
taged from achieving this potential because of social po-
sition or other socially determined circumstances” (CDC,
2013a, p. 1). However, the AHRQ (2012) identified that
minority populations continued to lag behind whites in
areas including quality of care, access to care, timeliness,
and outcomes of care and that other problems dispropor-
tionally affect minorities such as provider bases, poor
communication, and health literacy issues (p. 1). Three
new themes were subsequently identified in this report
published in 2012 (Box 14.3). As a leading health indi-
cator, social determinants of health are vital considera-
tions. Social determinants of health have been defined
by the World Health Organization (WHO, 2015) as “the
conditions in which people are born, grow, live, work and
age; these circumstances are shaped by the distribution of
money, power and resources at global, national and local
levels” (p. 1). Social determinants of health are a leading
health indicator in Healthy People 2020 (USDHHS,
2014c) and are described as “in part responsible for the
unequal and avoidable differences in health status within
and between communities” (p. 1). 
Providers and communities must address the docu-
mented disparities. Doing so requires an understanding of
248
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
BOX 14.3
Themes from National Health 
Disparities Report (AHRQ, 2012)
●Health care quality and access are suboptimal, espe-
cially for minority and low-income groups.
●Overall quality is improving, access is getting worse,
and disparities are not changing.
●Urgent attention is warranted to ensure continued
improvements in: 
●Quality of diabetes care, maternal and child health
care, and adverse events
●Disparities in cancer care
●Quality of care among states in the South 
Source: Agency for Health Care Research and Quality (AHRQ).
(2012). 2012 National Healthcare Disparities Report. Rockville,
MD. Retrieved from http://www.ahrq.gov/research/findings/
nhqrdr/nhdr12/index.html 

the evidence and the people. Under the U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services, a national partnership 
was created “to mobilize and connect individuals and 
organizations across the country to create a nation free 
of health disparities, with quality health outcomes for all
people” with the following aims:
●Increase awareness of the significance of health disparities
●Strengthen and broaden leadership for addressing
health disparities at all levels
●Improve health and healthcare outcomes for racial,
ethnic, and underserved populations
●Improve cultural and linguistic competency and the
diversity of the health-related workforce 
●Improve data availability and coordination, utilization,
and diffusion of research and evaluation outcomes
(DHHS National Partnership for Action, 2011, p. 1).
Resources for health professionals and consumers are
available through these governmental agencies (see Online
Consult).
Nevertheless, delivery of services to specific minority
populations such as the Alaskan Native and Hispanic/
Latino groups is influenced by the availability, accessibility,
and acceptability of services. Difficulty with communica-
tion and other problems may hamper acceptance of early
care or access. Acceptability of services may be limited by
the patient’s healthcare beliefs and practices or other fac-
tors. Continuing development in cultural competence is
essential for the nurse to address minority disparities. A
major resource for professionals can be the faith commu-
nity specific to the particular minority population.
The projection for an increase in minority popula-
tions necessitates immediate action for the health of the
nation. Improved data collection has been designed for
enhanced practice based on better evidence. Initiatives
for cultural competence in the current system, improved
communication, and greater diversity of providers are
designed to address existing disparities and perceived
quality of care and health status. And these initiatives
must be reflective of and driven by their local commu-
nities. Collaborative efforts are growing at the national,
state, and local levels. However, the lack of data on cer-
tain populations was noted as a persistent barrier by the
CDC (2013c) in their annual report that called for the
ongoing need to identify disparities and monitor them
over time as a necessary first step toward the develop-
ment and evaluation of evidence-based interventions
that can reduce disparities (p. 186).
RURAL HEALTH
Geographic location has also been identified as a demo-
graphic characteristic for which definable health disparities
exist. Geographic location, both urban and rural, has also
been identified as an area for documenting and addressing
health disparities in the plan for Healthy People 2020. The
National Rural Health Association (NRHA, 2014) identifies
the issues with rural Americans facing a unique combination
of factors that create disparities in healthcare not found in
urban areas, including economic factors, cultural and social
differences, educational shortcomings, lack of recognition by
legislators, and the sheer isolation of living in remote areas
(p. 1). Rural areas have been defined in several ways in the
literature and at the federal level. These divergent definitions
impeded research and policy-making. Most definitions have
been based on population or population density of a speci-
fied area. In 2013, criteria based on the 2010 census were
released, defining an urbanized area with a populated sur-
rounding area of 50,000 or more people, urban clusters with
at least 2,500 and less than 50,000 people, and no explicit
definition of rural or areas with less than 2,500 people. At
the same time, the White House Office of Management and
Budget designates counties as metropolitan (area with a pop-
ulation of 50,000 or more people), micropolitan (areas with
a population between 10,000 and less than 50,000 people),
or neither, with all counties not considered a metropolitan
statistical area designated as rural (HRSA, 2014). However,
the National Rural Health Association (NRHA, 2014a)
“recommends that definitions of rural be specific to the pur-
poses of the programs in which they are used and that these
are referred to as programmatic designations and not as 
definitions” (p. 1).
Certain health problems have been identified as
 particular to people living in rural areas. In fact, Healthy
People 2010 characterized rural health issues as follows:
Twenty-five percent of Americans live in rural areas,
that are with fewer than 2500 residents. Injury-related
death rates are 40 percent higher in rural populations
than in urban populations. Heart disease, cancer, and
diabetes rates exceed those for urban areas. People living
in rural areas are less likely to use preventative screening
services, exercise regularly, or wear seat belts. Timely 
access to emergency services and the availability of 
specialty care are other issues for this population group.
(USDHHS, 2000a, p. 16)
According to 2008 population estimates, 70.5 million
people (23% of the population) in the United States lived
in rural areas compared with the 233.5 million in urban
CHAPTER 14 Population Health     ●
249
ONLINE CONSULT 
USDHHS OMH at 
http://minorityhealth.hhs.gov/ 
AHRQ at 
https://innovations.ahrq.gov/qualitytools/office
-minority-health-resource-center
CCD OMHHE at 
http://www.cdc.gov/minorityhealth/OMHHE.html 
CMS at  
http://www.cms.gov/About-CMS/Agency
-Information/CMSLeadership/Office_OMH.html 
FDA at 
http://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/CentersOffices
/OC/OfficeofMinorityHealth/default.htm
HRSA at 
http://www.hrsa.gov/culturalcompetence
/index.html
SAMHSA at 
http://www.samhsa.gov/minorityfellowship/

areas. And, with Healthy People 2020, the term rural was
replaced with geography to better reflect disparities in the
population for people in both rural and urban areas.
Further complicating matters is the fact that rural com-
munities may share some features but are not all the same.
For example, characteristics and problems of rural resi-
dents in South Georgia may be quite different from those
of rural residents in Montana or New Mexico. It is impor-
tant to be aware that the large majority of rural residents
are not farmers. But for those who are, agriculture is a 
dangerous occupation with great risk of injury and illness,
even for children.
The National Rural Health Association (2014b) char-
acterized the health issues and care for the nearly one-fourth
of the population who live in rural areas as follows:
●Death and serious accidents account for 60 percent of
total rural accidents compared with 48 percent of
urban accidents related to delayed emergency response
times (estimated as 8 minutes longer in rural areas).
●Only about 10 percent of physicians practice in rural
America.
●Rural residents are less likely to have employer-
 provided healthcare coverage or prescription drug 
coverage, and the rural poor are less likely to be 
covered by Medicaid benefits. 
●Rural residents are nearly twice as likely to die from
unintentional injuries other than motor vehicle acci-
dents, with a significantly higher risk for death by 
gunshot.
●Rural residents tend to be poorer, and nearly 24 percent
of rural children live in poverty.
●People who live in rural America rely more heavily on
the federal food stamp program.
●Abuse of alcohol and use of smokeless tobacco is a 
significant problem among rural youth. 
●The majority of first responders in rural areas are 
volunteers.
●There are 60 dentists per 100,000 population in urban
areas, versus 40 per 100,000 in rural areas.
●Dental care and mental health services are less available
in rural areas.
●The incidence of hypertension is higher in rural areas,
as well as the incidence of suicide, particularly among
adult men and children. 
●Medicare payments to rural hospitals and physicians
are dramatically less than those to their urban counter-
parts for equivalent services. 
●Medicare patients with acute myocardial infarction
(AMI) who were treated in rural hospitals were less
likely than those treated in urban hospitals to receive
recommended treatments and had significantly higher
post-AMI death. 
●Rural residents have greater transportation difficulties
reaching healthcare providers and hospitals.
The urban setting features a high volume of patients
with an emphasis on technology-intensive and inpatient
services. The rural setting focuses more on ambulatory care
and features a much lower patient volume, usually more
elderly patients or those with advanced and chronic illnesses. 
The rural health literature addresses a variety of problems.
Two recurring concerns seem to predominate: chronic illness
(particularly in the elderly) and inadequate prenatal care. Just
consider the issue of access in rural areas, especially with chal-
lenges related to reliable transportation, limitations in activ-
ities of daily living secondary to a chronic illness, and cost
factors with additional childcare or loss of income from time
off work. Census data indicates a growth in minority popu-
lations in rural areas, particularly Hispanic or Latino. Not
surprisingly, rural growth is also higher in the more temper-
ate climate areas of the South and the West. Demographic
factors such as age, gender, race and ethnicity, socioeconomic
status, and educational level are all considerations when rural
geography and health status are investigated.
Delivery of services in rural communities is heavily in-
fluenced by the availability, accessibility, and acceptability
of services. Rural communities have fewer resources. Dis-
tance, lack of communication, and other problems may
hamper access. Acceptability of services may be limited by
the patients’ beliefs and practices or other factors. In addi-
tion, the rural community health nurse may well be the
only health professional in the community, working with
very limited resources. Rural residents tend to be religiously
and politically conservative, self-sufficient, and wary of out-
siders (especially urbanites). Thus, the community health
nurse cannot expect to rush eagerly into a rural community
with good intentions and gain immediate acceptance.
Building rapport with residents of a rural community takes
time, and showing respect for their values and beliefs is im-
perative. In other words, the nurse must be sensitive and
must demonstrate cultural competence. A further challenge
is presented when the rural residents are also members of
an ethnic group that is different from that of the nurse.
The rural community health nurse must beware of assum-
ing that these patients (and their problems) are the same as
those of their urban counterparts. Their ruralism may be
as significant as their ethnic identity.
RURAL HEALTH CLINICS
Under Public Law 95-210, rural health clinics (RHCs)
were established in 1977 to provide primary care  services
for residents of medically underserved areas. Under
budget reconciliation acts, requirements for these clinics
have resulted in some changes during their inception.
250
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
ONLINE CONSULT 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality: Rural
Health at 
http://www.ahrq.gov/research/ruralix.htm
CDC Office of Minority Health and Health 
Equity at 
http://www.cdc.gov/minorityhealth/populations
/atrisk.html#Geography
Health Resources and Services Administration:
Rural Health at
http://www.hrsa.gov/ruralhealth/index.html
National Rural Health Association at 
http://www.ruralhealthweb.org/
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services:
Office of Minority Health at 
http://minorityhealth.hhs.gov/

These clinics are located as permanent facilities or mobile
units throughout the nation with most staffed with ad-
vanced practice nurses (APRNs). To be certified as a
RHC, two general requirements must be met: be located
in a nonurban area and be in a designated shortage area.
There are certain exceptions that may be applied for to
continue as a RHC and receive Medicare designation and
payment for services. One of the newer requirements is
that the RHC employ a nurse practitioner or physician
assistant and have a nurse practitioner, physician assistant,
or certified nurse midwife staffing the clinic at least 
50 percent of the time that services are provided (DHHS
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 2013, p. 5).
In addition to this staffing requirement, the clinics are
certified by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
(CMS) and have specified service and reimbursement
components. Federal legislation has also created the Fed-
erally Qualified Health Center (FQHC) program, which
includes the Migrant Health Center (MHC) and Com-
munity Health Center (CHC) programs funded under
the Public Health Service Act to provide primary care for
medically underserved rural populations. Agencies receiv-
ing funding under the FQHC program must provide pri-
mary services for all age groups including diagnostic and
lab, pharmacy, preventive health and dental, transporta-
tion, case management after hours care, hospital/specialty
care, and emergency medical services either onsite or
through provider arrangements. The RHC program re-
quires similar primary services.
Reimbursement
Reimbursement policy is a major issue for providers 
of rural healthcare. Although some improvements have 
occurred, especially in designated health professional
shortage areas, urban providers are reimbursed by
Medicare at a higher rate than rural providers. Individ-
ual states direct Medicaid reimbursements, so these vary.
An important consideration is economy of scale, in that
certain key services must be available despite the low 
volume of service in rural agencies compared with their
urban counterparts. Home healthcare is also more costly
in the rural area because of low volume and longer travel
distances.
In 2000, reimbursement for care was changed from
cost-based to a prospective payment system (PPS). In ad-
dition, there are specific requirements for payments by
the patients or their secondary insurance. Each year the
allowable payment may change since the per-visit limit is
established by Congress based on the Medicare Economic
Index. Further information on payment systems is pro-
vided in Chapter 16. 
Telecommunication
The use of telecommunications technology in healthcare
(telemedicine or telehealth) has greatly increased in recent
years. It is being used extensively in some areas to en-
hance care of rural residents, as with a specialist at an
urban medical center consulting on a patient in a remote
rural area via telecommunications. This is also occurring
globally, providing consultations, preparation of imaging,
or interpretation of findings. There is a tremendous po-
tential for greater access with telemedicine, but it is not
without problems. Issues such as reimbursement, 
liability, patient privacy, and credentials and licensure
must be addressed.
Based on pilot programs to provide telehealth to rural
areas, the Rural Healthcare Connect Fund was established
in 2013 to expand healthcare provider access to broadband
services and to encourage the formation of state and re-
gional broadband networks linking healthcare providers.
The Rural Healthcare program (FCC, 2014) received fed-
eral funding capped at $400 million dollars annually with
the following goals:
●Increase access to broadband for healthcare providers
(HCPs), especially those serving rural areas.
●Foster development and deployment of broadband
healthcare networks.
●Maximize impact of the FCC universal service health-
care funding.
This available funding to healthcare providers includes
hospitals, rural health clinics, local health departments,
community health centers or health centers providing
healthcare to migrant workers and postsecondary educa-
tional institutions offering heathcare instruction, teaching
hospitals, and medical schools. Linkages to the rural com-
munities are designed to improve both the quality and
quantity of healthcare. As with the national Healthy Peo-
ple 2020 initiative, initiatives with this program will pro-
vide greater outreach and improved health for the rural
population.
COMMUNITY NURSING 
IN THE CONTEXT OF 
HEALTHY PEOPLE
The nature of nursing practice in the community is 
different, dynamic, and responsive. Community health
nursing crosses age, demographic, and specialty groups.
Community health nursing is built upon the principles
CHAPTER 14 Population Health     ●
251
ONLINE CONSULT 
National Rural Health Association at 
http://www.ruralhealthweb.org/
Rural Health Research Gateway at 
http://www.ruralhealthresearch.org/
Rural Healthy People 2020 at
http://sph.tamhsc.edu/srhrc/rhp2020.html
HRSA: Rural Health Centers at 
http://www.hrsa.gov/healthit/toolbox/
RuralHealthITtoolbox/Introduction/ruralclinics.
html
HRSA: Telehealth at 
http://www.hrsa.gov/ruralhealth/about/telehealth/
telehealth.html
USDA Rural Economy and Population at 
http://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/rural-economy-
population/rural-classifications/what-is-rural.aspx

of nursing and public health, with the broader focus on
the patient in the context of his environment for health
promotion and illness treatment and prevention. Com-
munity health nursing crosses many traditional bound-
aries, is holistic, and is not limited to a particular age
group, diagnostic category, or narrow set of specialized
skills. Although patients include individuals and families,
community health nursing may have a group or even an
entire community as a client. Patients may be well or ill.
Their health risks or needs may be either physical or 
mental in nature. In addition, spiritual needs are also 
a consideration, especially with parish- or faith-based 
nursing care.
Several factors determine the roles, activities, and in-
tervention strategies of an individual community health
nurse, working in the context of Healthy People:
●Mission, philosophy, and priorities of the employing
agency
●Level of prevention at which intervention is aimed
●Definition of patient/client
The mission, philosophy, and priorities of a private agency
or a faith-based organization can be quite different from
those of an official government agency. The level of fund-
ing influences how well the agency is able to implement
its priorities, which should be based on identified health
needs in the community.
Another factor that influences the functions for the
community health nurse is the agency’s level of prevention
focus. Community health nurses are involved in all three
levels of prevention. However, historically these nurses
have played a key role in primary prevention efforts. For
more than 100 years they have been involved in health
promotion and disease prevention. Over the past years,
and despite initiatives like Healthy People, these traditional
services have suffered under-reimbursement, with health
departments compelled to provide more direct clinical
services. Consequently, many public health nurses have
taken on a role that is more illness-oriented. Nevertheless,
Healthy People priorities clearly reflect a need for commu-
nity health nurses, especially those in public health agen-
cies, to renew and strengthen their role in primary
prevention.
Community health nursing is frequently described
in the literature as a synthesis of nursing and public
health. Public health is unique because it broadens con-
cerns to the “public” with a population and collaborative
focus. The mission of the Public Health Nursing Sec-
tion of the American Public Health Association (APHA,
2014) is to “advance the health of the population in
partnership with the community through evidence-
based practice, education, and research” (p. 1). They
further state that “in any setting, the role of public
health nurses focuses on the prevention of illness, injury
or disability, the promotion of health, and maintenance
of the health of populations” (American Public Health
Association, 2014, p. 2).
In published standards of public health, the American
Nurses Association (2013), in collaboration with other
public health nursing organizations, identified six stan-
dards of public health nursing practice consistent with 
the nursing process (assessment, population diagnosis and
priorities, outcomes identification, planning, implemen-
tation, and evaluation) and 10 standards of professional
performance (ethics, education, evidence-based practice
and research, quality of practice, communication, lead-
ership, collaboration, professional practice evaluation,
resource utilization, environmental health, and advo-
cacy). The focus is on promoting and protecting the
health of populations. Clearly, an interdisciplinary
focus is necessary to address the health of the commu-
nity and the people who make up that community. 
An important consideration, as mentioned in Healthy
People, is the environmental concerns that affect the
health of the community. This includes population
threats as well as the promotion of health of individuals
and groups and a healthier environment for the popu-
lation. In addition to Healthy People 2020, the National
Prevention Strategy released in 2011 with the annual
report in 2013 documented progress across governmen-
tal agencies to address the following four strategic 
directions: 
●Healthy and Safe Community Environments
●Clinical and Community Preventive Services
●Empowered People 
●Elimination of Health Disparities (National Preven-
tion, Health Promotion, and Public Health Council,
2013)
The documented multiagency involvement is appar-
ent with interprofessional collaboration vital to advance
the health of the public. As noted by Teutsch, Chokshi,
Stine, and Fielding (2013), “the public health orientation
toward geographic populations and the clinical focus on
individuals engaged in care can be difficult to unite in
shared accountability’” (p. 1). However, “the aim of pop-
ulation health as a discipline is virtually synonymous with
public health: to maintain and improve the health of a
defined human population, correct deviations from good
health, and reduce health inequities across population
groups” (White, Stallones, and Last, 2013, pp. 106–107).
These are shared values for clinicians, politicians, policy
analysts, and consumers. And nurses practicing in public
health or community health settings are a vital part of this
initiative to improve the health and environment of the
public. Population-focused nursing is fundamental to
baccalaureate generalist practice focused on population
health and clinical prevention (AACN, 2008), described
more specifically in the supplement, Public Health: Recom-
mended Baccalaureate Competencies and Curricular Guide-
lines for Public Health Nursing (AACN, 2013), which
requires “an ecological perspective in health assessment,
planning, and interventions with individuals, families, and
groups” (AACN, 2013, p. 25). 
Challenges exist in many areas for professional nurs-
ing practice as we address the health needs of national
and global populations. Whether talking about the aging
member of a minority population, the well elder in the
community, the rural child with asthma, or the individual
with diabetes, health professionals focus on high-quality
lives free of preventable disease, health equity and the elim-
ination of health disparities, environments that promote
good health, and quality of life and healthy development
as stated in the goals for Healthy People 2020.
252
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

CHAPTER 14 Population Health     ●
253
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ, 2014) reported that Americans in 2011 made
about 421 visits to the emergency department (ED) for every 1,000 individuals in the population, and more
than five times as many individuals who visited an ED were discharged as were admitted to the same hospital.
In addition, for patients younger than 18 years, the most common reasons for admission to the hospital after
an ED visit were acute bronchitis (infants younger than 1 year), asthma (patients aged 1 to 17 years), and
pneumonia (infants and patients aged 1 to 17 years); in adults aged 45 to 84 years, septicemia was the most
frequent reason for admission to the hospital after an ED visit (AHRQ, 2014, p. 1). They also found that ED
visits were potentially preventable in that access to high-quality community-based healthcare can prevent the
need for a portion of the ED visits (AHRQ, 2014, p.1).
You are working as a nurse manager in the emergency department in a rural hospital and have noticed an
increased number of low-income elderly patients who have been diagnosed with hip  fractures.
Question: What are the characteristics of your patient population? What health promotion activities 
will you discuss at your next staff meeting? And how can these activities be implemented in your emergency
department?
Source: Agency for Quality and Research (AHRQ). (2014). Overview of emergency department visits in the United States, 2011: Statistical brief #174.
Retrieved from http://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/reports/statbriefs/sb174-Emergency-Department-Visits-Overview.jsp. Retrieved from
http://www.ahrq.gov/news/nn/nn111810.htm 
K E Y  P O I N T S
●Public health focuses on protection of the public from health threats.
●Population health is an area of inquiry measured by health indicators, such as social, economic, and physi-
cal environments, personal health practices, individual capacity and coping skills, human biology, individual
development, health services, and demographic forces that shape the composition of populations (White,
Stallones, and Last, 2013, p. 106).
●Healthy People 2010 built upon the information from the prior decade but was developed with the two
major goals of increasing the quality and years of healthy life and eliminating health disparities. It uses a
framework of 28 focus areas, 467 objectives, and 10 leading health indicators.
●Leading health indicators reflected the major public health concerns in the nation.
●Healthy People 2020 builds on the work of the 2010 initiative but is guided by a vision, mission, and four
goals to address the health of the nation. Objectives under 42 topical areas were developed based on the
data from 2010, specific criteria, and input from the public. In addition, four foundation health measures
were specified to monitor the health of the nation for both progress and in terms of quality of life issues.
●Proportional increases in the population of aging adults are predicted, with the greatest increase in those
85 years and older. Women currently account for a large proportion of this group. Predictions include an
increase in minority groups represented in our aging population.
●Chronic illnesses and increasing frailty are the major causes of morbidity in aging adults. Disability is the
inability to do something because of a physical or mental impairment. Chronicity is related to duration or
recurrence of a condition.
●Aging adults face physical, environmental, psychosocial, and chemical risk factors. The risks commonly af-
fect many aging adults, creating conditions that interfere with activity. Health-promotion activities are vital
in this area to maintain functional ability and reduce the incidence of frailty and disability.
●Evidence that health disparities exist among ethnic groups of all ages has been documented; however,
reasons for their occurrence are multifaceted and complex. Minority health is an important initiative for
the health of the nation.
●The Office of Minority Health and Health Equity of the CDC (2014) classifies racial or ethnic minority
populations as American Indian and Alaskan Native, Asian, Black or African American, Hispanic or Latino,
and Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander.
Continued

254
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
K E Y  P O I N T S—cont’d
●Health equity is achieved when every person has the opportunity to attain his or her full health potential
and no one is disadvantaged from achieving this potential because of social position or other socially de-
termined circumstances (CDC, 2013a, p. 1).
●Social determinants of health are the conditions in which people are born, grow, live, work, and age and
are shaped by the distribution of money, power, and resources at global, national, and local levels
(WHO, 2015).
●In 2013, new criteria based on the 2010 census were released, defining an urbanized area as a central city
with a densely populated surrounding area of 50,000 or more. Rural areas are generally defined as areas
with a population of less than 2,500. However, the White House Office of Management and Budget 
designates counties as metropolitan (area with a population of 50,000 or more people),  micropolitan
(area with a population between 10,000 and less than 50,000 people), or neither, with all counties not
considered a metropolitan statistical area designated as rural (HRSA, 2014). 
●Rural health clinics (RHCs) have been established to provide primary care services for residents of under-
served areas. Federal legislation has also created the Community Health Center (CHC) and Migrant
Health Center (MHC) programs to provide primary care for medically underserved rural populations. 
●Community health nursing is frequently described in the literature as a synthesis of nursing and public
health. The mission of the Public Health Nursing Section of the APHA has as its mission “advance the
health of the population in partnership with the community through evidence-based practice, education,
and research” (American Public Health Association, 2014, p. 1).
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Consider one of the goals of Healthy People 2020: “attain high-quality, longer lives free of preventable disease, 
disability, injury, and premature death” (USDHHS, 2014a). Be prepared to share your impressions on achievement
of this national goal in a discussion to be scheduled by your instructor.
2. Another goal of Healthy People 2020 is to “promote quality of life, healthy development, and healthy behaviors
across all life stages” (USDHHS, 2014a). Select one objective in Healthy People 2020 from one of the following
topical areas: Adolescent Health; Early and Middle Childhood; Maternal, Infant and Child Health; and Older Adults.
Be prepared to share your impressions on the targets set for this goal and how it is or could be addressed in your
community in a discussion to be scheduled by your instructor.
3. What initiatives and training materials are available in your hospital or agency for the recognition and reporting of
domestic or child abuse?
4. Determine whether your community is a metropolitan statistical area (MSA), a micropolitan area, or a rural popu-
lation area. Investigate what public/community health clinics are available to residents in your community. 
5. Review the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter and discuss it in the context of this chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.
REFERENCES
Administration on Aging (AOA). (2010). A profile of older
Americans: 2010. Retrieved from http://www.aoa.gov/
aoaroot/aging_statistics/profile/2010/docs/2010profile.pdf
Administration on Aging (AOA). (2014a). Elder rights protec-
tion. Retrieved from http://www.aoa.gov/AoARoot/
AoA_Programs/Elder_Rights/index.aspx
Administration on Aging (AOA). (2014b). Prevention of elder
abuse, neglect, and exploitation (Title VII-A3). Retrieved
from http://www.aoa.gov/AoARoot/AoA_Programs/
Elder_Rights/EA_Prevention/index.aspx
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). (2009).
Health care in urban and rural areas, combined years 2004–
2006. Retrieved from http://www.ahrq.gov/policymakers/
health-initiatives/meps/chbook13up.html 

Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). (2011).
Rates of hospital emergency department use greater among
women and low-income, older, and rural Americans. 
Retrieved from http://www.ahrq.gov/news/newsletters
/research-activities/jan11/0111RA23.html 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). 
(2012). 2012 National disparities report. Retrieved from
http://www.ahrq.gov/research/findings/nhqrdr/nhdr12
/index.html#
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ).
(2013a). 2012 National Healthcare Disparities Report.
Rockville, MD. Retrieved from http://www.ahrq.gov
/research/findings/nhqrdr/nhdr12/index.html 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ).
(2013b). Minority health: Recent findings. Retrieved from
http://www.ahrq.gov/research/minorfind.pdf 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). (2014).
Overview of emergency department visits in the United States,
2011: Statistical brief #174. Retrieved from http://www
.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/reports/statbriefs/sb174-Emergency
-Department-Visits-Overview.jsp
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2008).
The essentials of baccalaureate education for professional 
nursing practice. Washington, DC: Author.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2013).
Public health: Recommended baccalaureate competencies and
curricular guidelines for public health nursing. Washington,
DC: Author.
American Nurses Association. (2013). Public health nursing:
Scope and standards of practice 2nd ed. Silver Spring, MD:
Nursebooks.org.
American Public Health Association (APHA). (1991). Healthy
communities 2000: Model standards: Guidelines for commu-
nity attainment of the year 2000 objectives. Washington, DC:
American Public Health Association.
American Public Health Association (APHA). (2014). Public
health nursing section. Retrieved from http://www.apha
.org/membergroups/sections/aphasections/phn/about/
Aspden, P., Wolcott, J., Bootman, J. L., & Cronenwett, L. R.
(Eds.). (2006). Preventing medication errors. Washington,
DC: National Academies Press.
Bolin, J. N., & Bellamy, G. (2014). Rural healthy people 2020.
Retrieved from http://sph.tamhsc.edu/centers/srhrc
/images/rhp2020
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2010a).
Data2010 focus area 01—access to quality health services:
The Healthy People 2010 Database, January, 2010 ed. 
Retrieved from http://wonder.cdc.gov/data2010/
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2011a).
Mean physically unhealthy days in last 30 by demographic
characteristics, chronic disease conditions, and risk factors,
adults >=18 years, BRFSS 2009. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/hrqol/data/tables/table4a.htm
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2011b).
Mean recent activity limitation days in last 30 by demographic
characteristics, chronic disease conditions, and risk factors,
adults >=18 years, BRFSS 2009. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/hrqol/data/tables/table2a.htm
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2012).
Health-related quality of life: Nationwide trend. 
Retrieved from http://apps.nccd.cdc.gov/HRQOL
/TrendV.asp?State=1&Category=3&Measure=2
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013a). Health
equity. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease
/healthequity/index.htm 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013b). Healthy
people targets. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/aging
/help/DPH-Aging/healthy-people.html 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013c). Conclu-
sion and future directions: CDC health disparities and in-
equalities report—United States, 2013. Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report, Supplements 62(03), 184–186. 
Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview
/mmwrhtml/su6203a32.htm?s_cid=su6203a32_w
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013d). The 
state of aging and health in America. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/aging/help/DPH-Aging
/state-aging-health.html
Centers for Disease Control and Protection Office of Minority
Health and Health Equity (CDCOMHHE). (2014). 
Minority health. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov
/minorityhealth/populations.html#REMP
CDC National Center for Health Statistics (CDCNCHS).
(2014). NCHS data on health insurance and access to care.
Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/
health-insurance.htm
CDC Office of Minority Health and Health Equity (CDC
OMHHE). (2013). About OMHHE. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/minorityhealth/OMHHE.html
CDC Office of Minority Health and Health Equity. (2013).
CDC health disparities and inequalities report. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/minorityhealth/CHDIReport.html
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid (CMS). (2013). 
Medicare benefit policy manual Chapter 13 - Rural Health
Clinic (RHC) and Federally Qualified Health Center
(FQHC) services. Retrieved from http://www.cms.gov
/Regulations-and-Guidance/Guidance/Manuals/
Downloads/bp102c13.pdf
Collins, K. S., Hughes, D. L., Doty, M. M., Ives, B. L., Edwards,
J. N., & Tenney, K. (2002). Diverse communities, common
concerns: Assessing health-care quality for minority Americans.
New York: The Commonwealth Fund.
DHHS National Partnership for Action. (2011). Learn about
the NPA. Retrieved from http://minorityhealth.hhs.gov
/npa/templates/browse.aspx?lvl=1&lvlid=11#mis
Federal Communications Commission (FCC). (2014). Rural
health care program. Retrieved from http://www.fcc.gov
/encyclopedia/rural-health-care
Federal Interagency Forum on Aging-Related Statistics. (2012).
Older Americans 2012: Key indicators of well-being. Retrieved
from http://www.agingstats.gov/agingstatsdotnet/Main
_Site/Data/2012_Documents/Docs/EntireChartbook.pdf
Gamble, V. N., Stone, D., Ladenheim, K., Gibbs, B. K., et al.
(2006). Special Issue: Comparative perspectives on health 
disparities. Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law, 
31(1), 1–9.
Health Resources Services Administration (HRSA). (2014).
Defining the rural population. Retrieved from http://
www.hrsa.gov/ruralhealth/policy/definition_of_rural.html 
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2014). Population health implica-
tions and the Affordable Care Act: Workshop summary. 
Washington, DC: National Academy Press. 
Kindig, D., & Stoddart, G. (2003). What is population health?
American Journal of Public Health, 93, 380–383. 
CHAPTER 14 Population Health     ●
255

National Center on Elder Abuse. (2014). Elder abuse prevalence
and incidence. Retrieved from http://www.ncea.aoa.gov/
Main_Site/pdf/publication/FinalStatistics050331.pdf
National Domestic Violence Hotline. (2014). The hotline.
Retrieved from http://www.thehotline.org/is-this-abuse
/statistics/
National Institute on Aging. (2009). Aging in the United States:
Past, present, and future. Washington, DC: U.S. Department
of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration, 
Bureau of the Census.
National Institute on Aging. (2011). Global health and 
aging (NIH Pub. No. 111-7737). Retrieved from
http://www.nia.nih.gov/sites/default/files
/global_health_and_aging.pdf
National Prevention, Health Promotion, and Public Health
Council. (2013). Annual status report. Retrieved from
http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/initiatives/prevention
/about/annual_status_reports.html
National Rural Health Association (NRHA). (2014a). How is
rural defined? Retrieved from http://www.ruralhealthweb.org
/go/left/about-rural-health/how-is-rural-defined
National Rural Health Association (NRHA). (2014b). 
What’s different about rural health care? Retrieved from
http://www.ruralhealthweb.org/go/left/about-rural-health
/what-s-different-about-rural-health-care
Perot, R. T., & Youdelman, M. (2001). Racial, ethnic, and 
primary language data collection in the health care system: An
assessment of federal policies and practices. New York: The
Commonwealth Fund.
President’s Advisory Commission on Consumer Protection and
Quality in the Health Care Industry. (1998). Quality first:
Better health care for all Americans (Final report to the 
President of the United States). Columbia, MD: Consumer
Bill of Rights.
Rowe, J. W., & Kahn, R. L. (1987). Human aging: Usual and
successful. Science, 237, 143–149.
Secretary’s Advisory Committee on the National Health 
Promotion and Disease Prevention Objectives for 2020.
(2008). Phase I report: Recommendations for the framework
and format of Healthy People 2020. Washington, DC: 
Author.
Teutsch, S. M., Chokshi, D. A., Stine, N. W., & Fielding, J. E.
(2013). HALE—unificaion theory or clinical medicine and
population health. Washington, DC: Institute of Medicine.
Retrieved from http://iom.edu/~/media/Files/Perspectives
-Files/2013/Discussion-Papers/BPH-HALE.pdf
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2000a). Healthy People 2010: Volume 1 (2nd ed.). 
Washington, DC: Author
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2000b). Healthy People 2010: Volume 2 (2nd ed.). 
Washington, DC: Author.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2006a). Objective 24–5 school or work days lost, asthma.
Healthy People Midcourse Review. Washington, DC: Author.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2006b). Objective 25–5 human papillomavirus infection,
viral STD illness and disability. Healthy People Midcourse 
Review. Washington, DC: Author.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (USDHHS,
2008). The secretary’s advisory committee on national 
health promotion and disease prevention objectives for 
2020: Phase I report recommendations for the framework
and format of Healthy People 2020. Washington, DC: 
Author. 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2014a). About Healthy People. Retrieved from http://
www.healthypeople.gov/2020/about/default.aspx 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2014b). Disparities. Retrieved from http://www.healthy
people.gov/2020/about/disparitiesAbout.aspx
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2014d). Healthy People 2020 leading health indicators:
Social determinants. Retrieved from http://www.healthy
people.gov/2020/LHI/HP2020_LHI_Soc_Determ.pdf 
U. S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2014e). Healthy People 2020 leading health indicators: Progress
update. Retrieved from http://www.healthypeople.gov
/2020/LHI/progressUpdate.aspx
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2014f). Leading health indicators. Retrieved from
http://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/about/default.aspx 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2014g). Objective development and selection process. Re-
trieved from http://healthypeople.gov/2020/about
/objectiveDevelopment.aspx
White, F., Stallones, L., & Last, J. (2013). Global public health.
New York: Oxford University Press.
World Health Organization. (2015). Social determinants of
health. Retrieved from http://www.who.int/topics/
social_determinants/en/
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). 
(2013). Minority health: Recent findings. Retrieved from
http://www.ahrq.gov/research/findings/factsheets
/minority/minorfind/index.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2000).
Measuring healthy days: Population assessment of health-
related quality of life. Atlanta, GA: Author. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/hrqol/pdfs/mhd.pdf 
Federal Interagency Forum on Child and Family Statistics.
(2013). America’s children in brief: Key national indicators 
of well-being, 2013. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office. Retrieved from http://www.childstats.gov
/americaschildren/
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA). (2014).
The Affordable Care Act and Health Centers. Retrieved from
http://www.bphc.hrsa.gov/about/healthcenterfactsheet.pdf
Koh, H. K., Graham, G., & Glied, S. A. (2011). Reducing
racial and ethnic disparities: The action plan from the 
Department of Health and Human Services. Health Affairs,
30, 1822–1829. 
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2009). Race, ethnicity, and 
language data: Standardization for health care quality im-
provement. Washington, DC: National Academies Press. 
National Center for Health Statistics. (NCHS). (1999). Healthy
People 2000 review, 1998–99. Hyattsville, MD: Public
Health Service.
National Center for Health Statistics.  (2012).  Healthy People
2010 final review. Hyattsville, MD. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/healthy_people/hp2010
/hp2010_final_review.htm
256
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

Niew, M.A., & McEwen, M. (2015). Community health nursing:
Promoting the health of populations (6th ed.).  St. Louis, MO:
Elsevier Saunders.
Public Health Agency of Canada. What is the population health
approach? Retrieved from http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca
/ph-sp/approach-approche/index-eng.php
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2011). 
HHS action plan to reduce racial and ethnic health disparities:
A nation free of disparities in health and health care.
Retrieved from http://www.minorityhealth.hhs.gov
/npa/templates/content.aspx?lvl=1&lvlid=33&ID=285
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of
Public Health and Science, Office of Disease Prevention
and Health Promotion (USDHHS, OPHS). (2001).
Healthy people in healthy communities: A community 
planning guide using Healthy People 2010. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
ONLINE RESOURCES
AARP: Caregiving
http://www.aarp.org/relationships/caregiving/ 
AHRQ
http://www.ahrq.gov/research/ruralix.htm
Administration on Aging
http://www.aoa.gov/ 
Administration for Community Living at
http://www.acl.gov/Index.aspx
CDC: Family Caregiving—The Facts
http://www.cdc.gov/aging/caregiving/facts.htm
CDC Office of Minority Health and Health Disparities
http://www.cdc.gov/omhd/
http://www.cdc.gov/minorityhealth/populations/atrisk.html
#Geography
CDC Healthy Aging
http://www.cdc.gov/aging/
http://wonder.cdc.gov/
http://www.cdc.gov/features/agingandhealth/state_of_aging
_and_health_in_america_2013.pdf
Family Caregiver Alliance
https://caregiver.org/about-fca
U.S. Department of Labor Family and Medical Leave Act at
http://www.dol.gov/whd/fmla/index.htm
Health Resources and Services Administration
http://www.hrsa.gov/ruralhealth/index.html
Healthy People 2020
http://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/about/default.aspx
Rural Health Centers 
http://www.hrsa.gov/healthit/toolbox/RuralHealthI
Ttoolbox/Introduction/ruralclinics.html
National Alliance for Caregiving 
http://www.caregiving.org/ 
National Domestic Violence Hotline
http://www.thehotline.org
Home and Community Based Long-Term Care
http://www.aoa.acl.gov/AoA_Programs/HCLTC/Caregiver
/index.aspx
Rural Health 
http://www.ruralhealthweb.org/
http://ers.usda.gov/publications/eb-economic
-brief/eb24.aspx
Rural Health Research Gateway database
http://www.ruralhealthresearch.org/
Rural Healthy People 2020
http://sph.tamhsc.edu/srhrc/rhp2020.html
USDHHS Office of Minority Health
http://minorityhealth.hhs.gov/
CHAPTER 14 Population Health     ●
257

Informatics and
Documenting 
Outcomes
258
Nursing Informatics
Health Information Systems
Electronic Health Record (EHR)
Standardized Nursing Language
Taxonomies
Nursing Management 
Minimum Data Set 
(NMMDS)
Electronic Prescribing (CPOE)
Office Applications
Handheld PCs
Telehealth
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
“There is a better way to do it; find it.”
Thomas A. Edison
Key Terms
15
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Describe computer and informatics applications used in nursing practice, education, and research.
2. Define the basic terminology used in nursing informatics.
3. Describe the relationship between healthcare provision and health management information systems.
4. Define the specialty practice of nursing informatics and the integration of that role into the nursing
services of a healthcare institution.
5. Identify opportunities for interdisciplinary collaboration from an informatics perspective.
6. Explain telehealth applications and their effect on patients and providers.
7. Describe nursing career opportunities in informatics.

CHAPTER 15 Informatics and Documenting Outcomes     ●
259
“Nursing informatics (NI) is a specialty that integrates
nursing science with multiple information and analytical
sciences to identify, define, manage, and communicate
data, information, knowledge, and wisdom in nursing
practice” (American Nurses Association [ANA], 2015b,
pp. 1–2). Graves and Corcoran (1989) promoted nursing
informatics as a specialty area, and it was quickly sup-
ported by several nursing graduate programs of study.
Nursing informatics was recognized as a specialty for reg-
istered nurses by the American Nurses Association in 1992
and earned credibility through the offering of a certifica-
tion examination by the American Nurses Credentialing
Center. NI as a specialty grows and changes as quickly as
the computer industry and the technology we use in daily
life. This chapter addresses the use of informatics in prac-
tice, education, and research, as well as computer applica-
tions that support nursing activities.
OVERVIEW OF NURSING
INFORMATICS
The primary interest of nursing informatics is to expand how
data, information, and knowledge are used within practice.
Those conducting research on informatics issues seek to iden-
tify and explain relationships between healthcare data and
nursing care. However, as described by ANA (2015b), the
definition of nursing informatics as a specialty was expanded
from the science of information and knowledge acquisition
to include the provision of wisdom. “Wisdom is defined as
the appropriate use of knowledge to manage and solve human
problems . . . . and an appreciation of the consequences of se-
lected actions” (ANA, 2015b, p. 3). The actual work of in-
formatics specialists varies with settings, according to
organizational needs, individual practice interests, and specific
research questions. The common element in all functions
within informatics practice is the transformation of data to
information and knowledge and, ultimately, to provide the
wisdom that supports and advances nursing practice.
The common element in all functions within 
the informatics practice is the transformation 
of data to information and knowledge and, 
ultimately, to provide the wisdom that 
supports and advances nursing practice.
Within healthcare delivery institutions such as hospitals,
long-term care facilities, and home health agencies, the NI
specialist could be involved with both the tasks of nursing
and improvement of the quality of care. Carrington and
Tiase (2013) describe nursing informatics as a “subdiscipline
of health informatics that applies information technology to
the skills and work of nurses in health care” (p. 136). Task-
related NI activities include staffing and scheduling systems,
effective implementation of the electronic health record,
safety monitoring, real-time retrieval of patient information,
and use of evidence-based practice information, telehealth
applications, and interpretation of nursing needs for the 
interdisciplinary informatics team. Clinical performance
measures initiatives as required and certification programs as
promoted by the Joint Commission (2014a, 2014b) and the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS, 2013,
n.d.) require the input and retrieval of data demonstrating
use of evidence-based practice guidelines. These guidelines
are also available electronically (Box 15.1). The NI specialist
is instrumental in creating communication standards and
pathways to provide ease in accessing necessary information
for reporting to these and other organizations. National
benchmarking and accreditation databases and agencies now
accept and return information only in electronic format.
Nursing informatics applications in academic settings
have grown to include both the use of tech nology in the
teaching process and the teaching of an informatics-focused
curriculum. Many schools of nursing use a learning content
management system (LCMS), such as BlackBoard or
eCollege, to provide Web-enhanced or totally Web-based
courses that include discussion boards, chat rooms, assign-
ment drop boxes, online testing, and grade books, as well
as areas to post interactive exercises and graphics presen-
tations. Nursing and health science programs and ori-
entation and residency programs in the practice setting
are also using simulation activities in live classroom and
laboratory settings. These activities include the use of
human simulators like SimMan or MetiMan or the 
virtual patient in teaching simulations. The human sim-
ulators are programmed to present a variety of case sce-
narios and respond to the students’ interventions in
planned ways. Information can be downloaded from the
simulators or video-recorded to provide feedback and de-
briefing opportunities on time management, decision
making, and nursing competence. Students participate
as active participants with the human simulators and as
observers to the interventions of others. In a virtual pa-
tient situation, actors adhere to scripts in a class situation.
Following the simulation, a group debriefing provides an
opportunity for reflection and vicarious learning prior to
the live patient situation. Both of these types of teaching
activities enhance the learning process in a safe, simulated
environment as a result of technological advances.
In addition to technology projects conducted within
schools and colleges, electronic journals have made articles
available online. These publications have gone through the
peer review process of their print counterparts but are
more accessible for readers. The Online Journal of Nursing
Informatics and the Online Journal of Issues in Nursing were
the first for nursing pro fessionals. Because they are exclu-
sively online, these journals differ from the electronically
accessible versions of printed journals that may be accessed
BOX 15.1
Evidence-Based Practice Electronic
Resources
National Guideline Clearinghouse
http://www.guidelines.gov/
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
http://www.cdc.gov
Nursing Knowledge International
http://www.nursingknowledge.org
The Cochrane Collaboration
http://www.cochrane.org/
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
http://www.ahrq.gov

through major publishers, association Web sites, and sub-
scribers to health science libraries. Online journals can give
nurses an electronic format to share findings, experiences,
perceptions, knowledge, and wisdom with nursing col-
leagues involved in all facets of their specialties. The intent
is to exercise the power of technology to create an elec-
tronic nursing community that provides both virtually 
accessible and timely information about nursing globally.
Online journals may also enhance the speed of peer review
and communications through an expedited editorial
process that provides rapid turnaround, publication, and
availabilty of information. Downloading one copy of these
electronically accessible articles is permitted for scholarly
work, but proper citation is required. Other selected titles
of electronic journals are listed in Box 15.2.
E-books, electronic versions of printed reports and books,
are also now available both in libraries and for purchase. 
E-books and pdfs of national reports are convenient ways to
access reference material. In addition, e-textbooks are avail-
able for purchase for a negotiated period of time and down-
loaded to your computer. Additional study resources may
also accompany selected e-books. Many printed textbooks
also come with electronic support in the form of a Web site
(for access to additional learning resources, as with the site
for this text) or DVDs to supplement the materials.
Given these advances in informatics, one might think
that nursing is well evolved in the specialty. However, recall
that the Institute of Medicine (IOM) formally identified
utilizing informatics as one of the five competencies for all
health professionals (Greiner & Kneibel, 2003).“Utilizing
informatics” encompasses the responsibility to communi-
cate, manage knowledge, mitigate error, and support deci-
sion making through the use of information technology. 
Essential nursing informatics content in nursing edu-
cation is a consideration as we address this imperative for
safe and effective patient care. In a descriptive study of in-
formatics competencies of both baccalaureate and graduate
nursing students, Choi and DeMartinis (2013) found that
students in both programs did not perceive themselves
competent in applied computer skills and clinical infor-
matics roles (p. 1974). However, in an earlier study, com-
pared with prelicensure baccalaureate nursing students,
both RN and BSN students perceived themselves as more
competent in these roles, which the researcher attributed
to experience in clinical practice (Choi, 2012, p. 7). To 
address competencies in undergraduate nursing education,
the Canadian Association of Schools of Nursing (2012)
identified specific nursing informatics competencies, with
the overarching competency of “uses information and com-
munication technologies to support information synthesis
in accordance with professional and regulatory standards
in the delivery of patient/client care” (p. 5). In the Essentials
of Baccalaureate Education for Professional Nursing Practice
(AACN, 2008), “baccalaureate graduates are expected to
ethically manage data, information, knowledge, and tech-
nology to communicate effectively; provide safe and effec-
tive patient care; and use research and clinical evidence to
inform practice decisions” (p. 18).
Competencies in informatics and information technol-
ogy are further supported in the American Association of
Colleges of Nursing (AACN) in their Essentials for Bac-
calaureate, Master’s and Doctoral Education in Nursing
(AACN, 2008, 2011, 2006). The applications of informat-
ics discussed in this chapter are derived from the specific in-
formatics competencies described in the IOM reports and
in the professional scope and standards of practice (ANA,
2015b). In addition, all nurses are expected to utilize infor-
matics, whether beginning nurse, expert nurse, or specialty
practitioner. Consider the informatics competencies for
nurses identified in Box 15.3 that were part of the prior
scope or practice (ANA, 2008). Since that time, a role de-
lineation study by the American Nurses Credentialing Cen-
ter (2013) resulted in refinements to the credentialing exam
for the informatics nurse with baccalaureate preparation on
current professional practice. However, with rapid enhance-
ments to technology, including the implementation of the
electronic health record across multiple settings and evi-
dence of meaningful use, informatics competencies evolve
and become expectations in practice. In the newly revised
scope and standards of practice, basic computer competen-
cies are an expectation for all nurses, including the novice
nurse. However, a pathway from novice nurse, to aspiring
informatics nurse with a minimum of 5 years in practice is
recommended with graduate preparation for advanced spe-
cialty practice in nursing (ANA, 2015). In addition, the
ANA (2015b) has identified further specialist competencies
for the NI Specialist in practice areas of outcome identifi-
cation, implementation, and evaluation and in standards of
professional performance (ethics, education, evidence-based
practice and research, quality of practice, leadership, collab-
oration, professional practice evaluation, resource utiliza-
tion, and environmental health. 
Nursing informatics is an evolving specialty area. Infor-
matics and evolving technology are changing how nurses
teach, deliver, communicate, and improve nursing care.
Students and practitioners are able to learn more from
home, creating new opportunities for formal and continu-
ing education. Updating professional skills for those resid-
ing in isolated areas and accessing expert consultation from
clinicians in distant geographic areas are two more reasons
to embrace technology in nursing and healthcare.
TRANSFORMATION OF
DATA TO INFORMATION,
KNOWLEDGE, AND WISDOM
The transformation of data into information, knowledge,
and wisdom is essential in important informatics practice. A
datum is a value placed on a variable. It exists without mean-
ing or explanation. An example is the blood pressure (BP)
measurement. The value of the BP, such as 90/54, is the
datum for the BP. This value has little meaning until it is
put into some context along with other data. For instance,
260
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
BOX 15.2
Selected Online Journals
The Online Journal of Issues in Nursing
http://www.nursingworld.org/ojin/
Online Journal of Nursing Informatics
http://ojni.org/
Online Journal of Rural Nursing and Health Care
http://rnojournal.binghamton.edu/index.php/RNO
Online Brazilian Journal of Nursing
http://www.objnursing.uﬀ.br/index.php/nursing

if this were a 35-year-old adult, the BP might have one in-
terpretation, but for a 10-year-old child, 90/54 would mean
something very different. Age and BP may not be enough
data to offer much information. You may also want to know
the person’s pulse and weight, which would allow you to un-
derstand the BP’s significance better. Data viewed in associ-
ation with one another provide meaning. Knowledge arises
from using information, often from combined sources, to
determine new meanings, make new discoveries, or expand
understanding as wisdom. For example, patient diagnoses
arise through the transformation of combined laboratory
data, radiology data, symptomatology, and other informa-
tion into a whole, the outcome of which is knowledge. Then,
wisdom is the appropriate understanding and application of
this knowledge to solve human problems (ANA, 2015b).
An informatics nurse is someone who has a 
specialty practice in nursing, not simply a 
computer expert who happens to be 
working on a nursing-related problem.
Informatics nurses seek to create new knowledge and  then
wisdom by working first with data and then with information.
Informatics specialists work as an integral part of an interdis-
ciplinary team to support, promote, and advance the delivery
of nursing care. They work toward informatics solutions,
which may be an application, product, method, tool, work-
flow change, or other recommendation with competencies in
both information literacy and management (ANA, 2015b, 
p. 46). Indeed, an informatics nurse is someone who has a spe-
cialty practice in nursing, not simply a computer expert who
happens to be working on a nursing-related problem. Further,
information nurse specialists with master’s preparation analyze
information for risk reduction and improvements in delivery
and policy in practice while informatics specialists prepared at
the doctoral level lead in the design, section and integration
of technology systems (ANA, 2015b, p. 46).
In the past, nonintegrated health management systems
were seen in larger health information management systems
that hospitals, clinics, home health agencies, nursing homes,
and health maintenance organizations to manage their various
functions (Fig. 15.1). These systems often operated as sepa-
rate, noncommunicating units, creating frustrations in the
workplace and with the efficiency of care delivery. The goal
is for these systems to operate seamlessly as we move toward
full implementation of a totally computerized health record
that allows for information capture, retrieval, and exchange.
It is vital that nurses recognize that they are contributing data
every time they carry out a nursing function. These data have
the potential of providing powerful information when they
are well understood within the environment of healthcare de-
livery (Hebda, Czar, & Mascara, 2008).
HEALTH INFORMATION
SYSTEMS
Because few systems can address every component of health-
care and organizational management, there is generally 
an overriding information system with both clinical and ad-
ministrative components, known as the health information
system. Clinical systems include those functions that di-
rectly support patient care—documentation, order entry,
and diagnostic reporting. Administrative systems address
the financial, personnel, and managerial functions of the fa-
cility. Together, these systems use technology to process data
into information for multiple uses.
Currently, no one health information system fits all or-
ganizations. However, the current use of certified electronic
health records and the goals for portability have created the
need for more common functioning. In 2010, the Depart-
ment of Health and Human Services issued a regulation with
standards and certification criteria that the electronic health
record must meet (Blumenthal & Tavenner, 2010, p. 504).
The information system should accomplish two goals.
First, it should support the way that nurses operate, giving
them flexibility and permitting app ropriate documentation.
Second, the system should support and improve nursing prac-
tice through access to information and tools (Hebda et al.,
CHAPTER 15 Informatics and Documenting Outcomes     ●
261
BOX 15.3
Informatics Competencies For Nurses
Beginning nurses:
●Computer literacy skills for administration, communication, data access, documentation, education, monitoring,
and basic desktop software
●Informatics knowledge on impact, privacy and security, and systems, and for patient safety
Experienced nurses:
●Computer literacy skills for communication, documentation, education, monitoring, basic desktop software, 
and systems
●Information literacy on evaluation, roles, and system maintenance
●Informatics knowledge on impact, privacy and security, systems, research, and organizational change management,
and for patient safety
Informatics nurse specialists:
●Computer literacy for monitoring, desktop software, systems, quality improvement, research, and project management
●Informatics skills for evaluation, roles, system maintenance, analysis, data structures, design and development, 
implementation, management (including ﬁscal), programming, and system, agency, and agency requirements
●Informatics skills and knowledge for system, selection, testing and training, knowledge on impact, privacy and 
security, systems, regulations, usability, education, theoretical structures, taxonomies and classiﬁcation systems, 
systems theory and operational change, and promotion of patient safety
●In addition, speciﬁc functional specialty areas have other expected competencies for those functional areas.
Source: Adapted from American Nurses Association. (2008). Nursing informatics: Scope and standards of practice. Silver
Spring, MD: Nursesbooks.org.

2008). It is essential in an evidence-based practice environ-
ment to expect easy access to healthcare databases. Addition-
ally, Intranet service often includes access to drug guides,
policy and procedures, and patient teaching information. 
Box 15.4 describes how the integration of systems can help
reduce medication errors.
Electronic Health Record
A major national effort to develop an electronic health
record (EHR) has been under way for a number of years,
and institutions have had challenges and some success in
this area. The EHR is an electronic version of the patient
record. As described in a report on the usability of the EHR
for the Agency for Healthcare Research Quality (AHRQ),
“EHRs are clinical support tools with the potential to 
reduce strains on clinician memory and cognition while
improving efficiency in workflow and effectiveness in care
quality and coordination (Armijo, McDonnell, & Werner,
2009, p. 2). Benefits of a fully functional and integrated
EHR are listed in Box 15.5.
The purposes of creating EHRs are to improve the abil-
ity to share patient-specific information, create permanent
lifelong health records, and have ready access to additional
262
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
Healthcare Information Management System
Clinical Systems
Nursing System
Physician Order Entry System
Pharmacy System
Imaging System
Laboratory System
Ancillary Systems
Administrative Systems
Registration System
Financial System
Human Resources System
Risk Management System
Performance Management System
Purchasing/Supplies System
Monitoring Systems
Scheduling Systems
Figure 15.1 The Healthcare Information Management System.
BOX 15.4
System Integration to Reduce Medication Errors
1. The provider enters a medication order into the order entry system, eliminating confusion from handwriting 
and providing clinical decision support.
2. This information is transmitted to the pharmacy.
3. The pharmacy system checks for dosage, allergies, and potential interactions. Alerts are generated.
4. The medication order is ﬁlled by the pharmacy, using a barcode or robotic system.
5. The nurse checks the order against the electronic medication administration record and is alerted to administra-
tion times as well as any special considerations.
6. The nurse documents that the medication has been administered and notes the patient’s response.
7. Reminders for reorders and 24-hour chart checks are generated automatically.
Adapted from: Cohen, M. R. (Ed.). (2007). Medication errors (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: American Pharmacists Association.

the specified service. However, there were just reporting 
requirements on the quality measures in Stage 1.
The first stage began in 2011 with specific criteria to
electronically capture health information to track key clin-
ical conditions. Although this information could be used
for care coordination for individual patients, the ultimate
aim has also been to address population health with the
reporting of clinical quality measures and public health in-
formation. Eligible providers and eligible hospitals could
apply for the CMS Initiative Program if they could meet
the requirements presented in core objectives (Table 15.1).
CMS (2014b) reported that “between 2009 and 2012,
EHR adoption nearly doubled among physicians and
more than tripled among hospitals [and] nine in 10 eligi-
ble hospitals and eight in 10 eligible professionals had
taken the initial step of registering for the Medicare or
Medicaid EHR Incentive Programs as of October 2013”
(p. 1). This program made more than $15.5 billion eligible
to providers and hospitals (JASON, 2014, p. 2).
In Stage 2, most objectives were retained, with in-
creased thresholds expected. Some objectives were com-
bined or eliminated, as illustrated in Table 15.1. CMS
(2012) expected that providers who reached Stage 2 would
be able to demonstrate meaningful use of their EHR tech-
nology for an even larger portion of their patient popula-
tion. Some new objectives were also introduced as menu
objectives. However, as in Stage 1, exclusions could be
claimed on some objective measures by certain providers
who did not provide the specified service.
Stage 3 will be developed further based on data from
Stage 2 but will focus on improvements in quality, safety,
and efficiency; providing decision support for national high
priority conditions; and improving population health. The
IOM (2014) was charged with convening a committee to
identify domains and measures that capture the social de-
terminants of health to inform the development of recom-
mendations for Stage 3 (p. S-2). The IOM addressed this
charge in two phases; the Phase 1 report was issued in 2014
with the identification of sociodemographic, psychological,
behavioral, individual social relationship, and neighbor-
hood/community domains for inclusion in the EHR. 
Advances in the development of large data repositories
held within hospitals and other healthcare institutions allow
linkages between an electronic patient record and adminis-
trative, bibliographic, clinical expertise, and research data-
bases. Through these large data sets using common language
and data values, trends and the basis for evidence-based
practice can occur more readily. The domains identified
were based on areas in which evidence was available on their
association with health outcomes, with the goal of identify-
ing measures in Phase 2 to develop strategies for improving
health status of Americans (IOM, 2014, p. S-6). 
Creating an EHR is far more difficult than may at first
be apparent. Standardized language, data collection, record
format, access, confidentiality, cost, and other ethical issues
are but a few of the perceived barriers. To build an EHR
that can be shared among institutions and providers, data
must be collected and coded in a similar fashion. With the
new certification requirements for EHRs, compatibility
among systems and standards for vendors is the goal.
JASON (2014), a research and advisory group for the 
federal government, reported that “the current inoperability
among the data resources for EHRs is a major impediment
CHAPTER 15 Informatics and Documenting Outcomes     ●
263
BOX 15.5
Benefits of a Fully Functional 
Electronic Health Record
●Patient access to own health information
●Better access to patient records by healthcare
providers
●Decreased errors in health records
●Decreased unnecessary diagnostic testing and 
procedures
●More complete and accurate health records and data
●Improved longitudinal tracking of patients and pa-
tient groups
●Improved standards of care; reduction in medical errors
●Provision of research data to better inform clinical
care, public health, and biomedical research
●Facilitation of better communication among pa-
tients and healthcare providers
●Facilitation of detection of healthcare fraud
●Improved tracking of healthcare costs and beneﬁts
for improvement in healthcare delivery and 
economics
Adapted from: JASON. (2014). A robust health data infrastructure.
(AHRQ Publication No. 14-0041-EF). Retrieved from http://www
.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/ptp13-700hhs_white.pdf
BOX 15.6
Stages of Meaningful Use 
Stage 1 (2011-2012): Data capture and sharing
Stage 2 (2014): Advanced clinical processes
Stage 3 (2017): Improved outcomes
Source: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2014a). EHR in-
centive programs. Retrieved from http://www.cms.gov/Regulations
-and-Guidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms/
information that will improve the quality and safety of pa-
tient care. In 2009, passage of the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act provided major funding incentives to
hospitals and eligible practitioners over the next several
years to encourage the adoption and meaningful use 
of EHRs. CMS reported the identification of the “mean-
ingful use” goals and standards, planned in three stages 
(Box 15.6). This incentive program could provide maxi-
mum payments over 5 years in excess of $43,000 for eligi-
ble providers that began participation in 2011 or 2012,
with a reduction for starting in 2013 and no incentive pay-
ments for those starting after 2014. Eligible hospitals were
similarly incentivized. The incentive payment is 75% of
their Medicare-allowed charges up to a maximum annual
cap, as long as their meaningful use requirements are met
in their data reporting. Eligible providers included physi-
cians, advanced practice registered nurses, dentists, thera-
pists, and other qualified professionals who were not
hospital based, with greater than 90% of services provided.
And the program was with the individual provider, not a
group practice. There were 90-day reporting periods, and
the certified EHR provided the data for the objectives that
had to meet a specified threshold. Reporting was required
on core objectives, five menu objectives, and selected qual-
ity measures. Some exclusions could be claimed on some
objective measures by certain providers who did not provide

264
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
TABLE 15.1
Stage 1 Meaningful Use Requirements for Eligible Providers and Hospitals
Eligible Provider Core Objectives                            Eligible Hospital Core Objectives 
Source: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2014b). EHR incentive programs. Retrieved from http://www.cms.gov/
Regulations-and-Guidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms/
• Implement CPOE
• Perform drug-drug and drug-allergy checks
• Record demographics
• Maintain an up-to-date problem list of current and 
active diagnoses
• Maintain active medication list
• Maintain active medication allergy list
• Record and chart changes in vital signs, including body
mass index and growth charts for children 2 to 
20 years of age
• Record smoking status for patients 13 years or older
• Implement clinical decision support 
• Report ambulatory clinical quality measures to CMS
and states
• Provide patients with an electronic copy of their
health information, on request
• Provide patients with an electronic copy of their dis-
charge instructions at time of discharge (eliminated in
2014; not in Stage 2)
• Allow exchange of key clinical information among
providers electronically (eliminated in 2013; not in
Stage 2)
• Protect electronic health information
• Implement drug-formulary checks
• Incorporate clinical laboratory test results as struc-
tured data
• Generate lists of patients by specific condition for
quality improvement
• Identify specific patient education resources and pro-
vide these to the patient, if relevant
• Perform medication reconciliation if patient received
from another setting or provider, if appropriate
• When transitioning patient to another care setting or
provider, provide a summary of care record for each
transition
• Submit electronic data to immunization registries of
systems
• Submit electronic data on reportable laboratory test
results to public health agencies and actual submission
• Implement computerized provider order entry
(CPOE)
• Perform drug-drug and drug-allergy checks
• Allow E-prescribing (eRx)
• Record demographics
• Maintain an up-to-date problem list of current and 
active diagnoses
• Maintain active medication list
• Maintain active medication allergy list
• Record and chart changes in vital signs
• Record smoking status for patients 13 years or older
• Implement clinical decision support
• Report ambulatory clinical quality measures to 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
and states
• Provide patients with an electronic copy of their
health information, on request
• Provide clinical summaries for patients for each office
visit
• Allow exchange of key clinical information electroni-
cally (eliminated in 2013; not in Stage 2)
• Protect electronic health information
• Implement drug-formulary checks
• Incorporate clinical laboratory test results as struc-
tured data
• Generate lists of patients by specific condition for
quality improvement
• Send reminders to patients for preventative and 
follow-up care
• Provide patients with timely electronic access to their
health information (eliminated in 2014; not in Stage 2)
• Identify specific patient education resources and pro-
vide these to the patient, if relevant
• Perform medication reconciliation if patient received
from another setting or provider, if appropriate
• When transitioning patient to another care setting or
provider, provide a summary of care record for each
transition
• Submit electronic data to immunization registries of
systems
• Submit electronic data on reportable laboratory test
results to public health agencies
for the effective exchange of health care information” (p. 3).
This group has made recommendations on the software ar-
chitecture required for the effective exchange of health in-
formation among EHRs and systems. JASON (2014) also
recommended the principle that the patient is the ultimate
owner of the health record and that privacy issues be
mapped into well-defined architectural elements in the data
infrastructure (p. 4).
One issue regarding the EHR that will continue to be
addressed is patient confidentiality. Fortunately, the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) was
implemented in 2003 in an effort to eliminate unnecessary,
unwarranted, and inappropriate sharing of individual 
and personal information. In addition, one of the core re-
quirements for meaningful use by eligible providers or hos-
pitals is the protection of patient information in the EHR.

There are clear guidelines for when information can and
cannot be shared and how to handle electronic communi-
cation (CMS, 2013a). Password protection for facility and
personal computers is recommended for any patient, in-
cluding name, age, gender, and Social Security number.
However, consumers still have concerns, owing to the fear
of identity fraud, that their records are not going to be pro-
tected, and that other personal information will be accessed.
Encryption, passwords, audit trails, workstation security,
and firewalls all serve to preserve the integrity of the
EHR. Information for consumers on privacy and security
is available at http://www.healthit.gov/patients-families
/protecting-your-privacy-security.
Another consideration for implementation is the lead-
ership required for the change. Getting people in the or-
ganization “on board” for the project requires committed
and strong leadership. Various successful EHR implemen-
tation projects have been reported. Adler (2007) reported
on an early successful implementation that required the
three Ts: “team refers to people and organizational issues,
tactics to specific techniques and choices made in design
and setup, and technology to the software” (p. 33). Quality
improvements, ease of communication, assistance with de-
cision support, and enhanced safety are a few of the ben-
efits with a successful implementation of an EHR.
The issue becomes the need for a common language
to create a standard for the exchange, management, and
integration of healthcare information. The goal is to create
seamless systems that exchange information between and
among each other to increase accessibility and safety for
the healthcare patients.
Standardized Nursing Language
Common vocabulary, terminology, and usage are require-
ment for consistent understanding and application across
nursing settings and practice environments with a stan-
dardized nursing language. A standardized nursing lan-
guage benefits the profession and nursing practitioners,
other colleagues, reimbursement practices, and patients. It
provides a common basis and understanding. Rutherford
(2008) has identified the following advantages of a stan-
dardized nursing language for the clinical nurse:
●Improved communication among nurses and other
healthcare providers
●Increased visibility of nursing interventions
●Improved care for healthcare consumers
●Enhanced classification of data to evaluate nursing
outcomes
●Greater adherence to standards of practice and care
●Facilitated assessment of nursing competency (p. 8)
The goal is for a common understanding and commu-
nication of what nurses do to affect patients’ care and health
outcomes. As a result, the profession has generated several
taxonomies, or classification systems, for this common un-
derstanding and usage of terminology. 
In 2012, the ANA recognized 12 terminologies or tax-
onomies that supported nursing practice. Subsequently, the
ANA (2015a) focused further on the need for standardized
terminologies to support the EHR. Perhaps the most widely
known is the North America Nursing Diagnosis Association
(NANDA), which expanded to an international taxonomy
with NANDA-I. Almost 30 years of experience in the identi-
fication and refinement of this classification system have been
described by the president-elect of NANDA-I as follows:
The NANDA-I concepts support nurses in a clinical 
reasoning process to evaluate the holistic needs of patients,
families, or communities, to make accurate decisions
about care, and to document the health requests, patient
safety risks, and the actual problems as “succinct” diag-
nostic concepts in the electronic health records and 
available for exchange between settings. (Brokel, 2010,
pp. 184–185)
NANDA-I terminology and nursing diagnoses provide
a standardized language that is evidence-based and that
undergoes continual revision on a biannual basis based
upon evidence in current practice. “The NANDA-I con-
cepts include culturally sensitive concepts that have been
translated into 10 languages—Spanish, German, Japanese,
Portuguese, French, and others including third world
countries” (Brokel, 2010, p. 185). Especially useful with
this taxonomy is the identification of defining character-
istics and related factors in addition to the diagnostic labels
used to identify nursing diagnostic statements. This tax-
onomy is consistent with nursing’s focus on functional
health patterns as well as other nursing taxonomies. Thede
and Schwiren (2011) discovered through survey research
that most nurses are familiar with the NANDA taxonomy
and less familiar with others. 
The Center for Nursing Classification and Clinical Ef-
fectiveness (CNCCE), housed at the University of Iowa,
has taken on the challenge of developing standardized
nursing language and has published nursing interventions
and outcomes (Appendix B) with definitions to be used
in documentation systems. The Center also has collabo-
rated with the NANDA-I to integrate these interventions
and outcomes with nursing diagnosis language.
In the pursuit of comparability of data using common
terminology, other classification systems have evolved over
time, some specific to practice settings or expanded to other
practice settings. A long-standing taxonomy used in nursing
is the Omaha System (2013). This system was originally de-
veloped for home care but is now applicable to a wide range
of settings with comparable data and language. SNOMED
CT (Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine—Clinical
Terms) is an interdisciplinary and international terminology
system. In SNOMED CT each concept had a code for
identification and a unique meaning used by more than 
25 countries that are members of the International Health
Terminology Standards Organisation (2014).
Another example of a taxonomy specific to nursing was
developed and validated in the perioperative area. The Pe-
rioperative Nursing Data Set (PNDS) was developed by
nurses to document the perioperative patient experience
from preadmission through discharge, is recognized by the
ANA, and is incorporated into SNOMED (AORN,
2013). This data set provides a platform for the evaluation
of patient outcomes and also is the basis for evidence-based
practices present and opportunities for further evaluation
and research. (AORN, 2013).
For many years, we have also had the Nursing Man-
agement Minimum Data Set (NMMDS) in long-term
care to categorize nursing care and patient care needs.
Long-term care facilities are required to make electronic 
CHAPTER 15 Informatics and Documenting Outcomes     ●
265

reports of the nursing MDS to CMS. Nurses must both
assess residents on an ongoing basis and report this infor-
mation using the electronic tools and standardized lan-
guage. More than 16,000 long-term care facilities in the
United States are required to comply with this reporting
using this taxonomy.
The International Council of Nurses (ICN) has also
been working on a language and taxonomy to improve
 communication of nursing activities across the globe as
the International Classification for Nursing Practice
(ICNP®). The vision for this classification system is fo-
cused on nursing to provide an infrastructure informing
healthcare practice and policy to improve patient care
worldwide (ICN, 2013).
Each of these classification systems must be useful in the
identification and comparison of practice and be fully func-
tional with the electronic health record. The critical concern
for nursing is the con sistent application of a terminology or
classification system that is sensitive to measure and demon-
strates the effectiveness of nursing care.
Electronic Prescribing
An important component in the EHR for patient safety
is electronic prescribing or computerized physician order
entry (CPOE). The most sophisticated level of this tech-
nology is full integration with the EHR, has been shown
to provide the highest degree of patient safety and the
largest return on investment (AHRQ, 2013). Nursing per-
sonnel have found both positive and negative attributes of
electronic prescribing. On the positive side, the provider
must take responsibility for the patient care order and
not rely upon the nurse for interpretation, assistance, or
completion. The system cues the provider with correct
spellings, dosages, and evidence-based guidelines, and
alerts the provider to potential and known contraindica-
tions and interactions. The provider can view the pa-
tient’s diagnostic results and initiate appropriate orders
from home, office, or other Web-based settings. An elec-
tronic flag will appear in the patient’s record, which in-
dicates that a new electronic order has been entered for
the patient; it has simultaneously been sent to the diag-
nostic or therapeutic department for processing. If a
nurse does not acknowledge this electronic flag in a
timely manner, the patient may have labs drawn before
the nurse has time to inform the patient. The intent is
to provide timely communication and intervention for
the healthcare consumer through direct entry of orders,
to eliminate careless errors, to improve efficiency in
processes, and to reduce adverse events through medica-
tion management and an alert system for dosages, inter-
actions, and contraindications. Providers who engage in
this system generally become reliant upon this electronic
tool as an adjunct for decisional support and for real-time
modifications to the patient’s plan of care. Cowan (2013)
reports two human factors associated with errors and
CPOE, namely work-arounds for the alerts generated and
altered communication patterns between physicians and
nurses due to the reliance on the technology. These be-
come additional safety considerations.
In addition, medication reconciliation as another pa-
tient safety practice is now a requirement for all hospitals
and other settings accredited by the Joint Commission.
Medication histories must be current for each transition
made by the patient, whether from the emergency depart-
ment, to the intensive care unit, to the acute care unit, to
home, or to a skilled care facility.
Computer Applications
Common office applications—word processing, spread-
sheet, database, and presentation graphics—are useful in
nursing practice, education, and research. Students in
nursing programs are expected to submit papers using
word processing, and sometimes electronically as attach-
ments or in assignment drop boxes in Web-based courses.
Oral or group presentations are accompanied with presen-
tation graphics as a background. Spreadsheet and database
management become increasingly important as nurses
share in decision making and must understand the per-
formance improvement data in order to contribute ideas
to improve practice. Specialized applications have been
created to improve management and dissemination of
nursing information. In practice, nurses most commonly
266
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
ONLINE CONSULT 
ANA Recognized Terminologies at
http://www.nursingworld.org/MainMenu
Categories/Policy-Advocacy/Positions-and
-Resolutions/ANAPositionStatements/Position
-Statements-Alphabetically/Inclusion-of
-Recognized-Terminologies-within-EHRs.html
International Council of Nurses Classification
for Nursing Practice at
http://www.icn.ch/pillarsprograms/international
-classification-for-nursing-practice-icnpr/
NANDA-I at
http://www.nanda.org/
Nursing Interventions Classifications (NIC) at
http://www.nursing.uiowa.edu/cncce/nursing
-interventions-classification-overview
Nursing Outcomes Classifications (NOC) at
http://www.nursing.uiowa.edu/cncce/nursing
-outcomes-classification-overview
Minimum Data Set (MDS) at
http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality-Initiatives
-Patient-Assessment-Instruments/NursingHome
QualityInits/NHQIQualityMeasures.html
OMAHA System at
http://www.omahasystem.org
Perioperative Nursing Data Set (PNDS) at
http://www.aorn.org/syntegrity/
SNOMED CT at
www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct/
ONLINE CONSULT 
AHRQ Health Information Technology at
http://healthit.ahrq.gov/
CMS EHR Incentive Program at
https://www.cms.gov/EHRIncentivePrograms/

use computers to document care and access patient data.
Documentation often involves selection of interventions
and outcomes from a prepared list of appropriate terms,
with little need for lengthy narrative comments. However,
with a fully integrated EHR, there will be greater access
to records and data files for a complete patient profile in
the digital format.
Handheld Devices
Increasingly, reference materials accessible through the
computer have become a necessary adjunct to effective
care. Handheld computer devices in the form of smart
phones and handheld PCs (personal computers) are quite
 popular with direct care providers since textbook publish-
ers now provide many common references in this elec-
tronic format. Nursing students now have an array of
reference materials electronically in the clinical setting.
Clinical nurses no longer need to return to the nurse’s sta-
tion to review a drug guide or laboratory reference and are
able to scroll through an electronic resources on a hand-
held PC in the patient’s presence and answer his or her
questions with confidence and competence. Password pro-
tection helps the nurse maintain confidentiality and com-
pliance with HIPAA regulations. However, a word of
caution when using the applications on a smart phone;
consumers, observers, and colleagues may misinterpret
that the smart phone is being used for personal commu-
nication. Use of a smart phone may be restricted to certain
areas in some clinical settings.
Independent Learning Activities
Computers have become a popular way for nursing pro-
grams to provide independent learning activities; computer-
assisted instruction (CAI) replaced the video, which
replaced the audio-film strip. CAI consists of text, graphics,
vignettes, and self-assessment quizzes. These can be loaded
onto computers in a lab, played from a DVD, or down-
loaded from an account over the Internet. Although dis-
tance learning has been available since the first continuing
education was provided by radio and then on special televi-
sion stations, it has become now evolved into digital media
and become a convenient way to complete continuing 
education requirements and for degree-seeking nurses.
For students, classes can be delivered via the Internet
from a server on a campus or from a business through a
LCMS. Students can access courses at times convenient to
their individual schedules and have access to numerous re-
sources linked to the course and real-time results through
online assessments. A paperless system is  created for the
submission of reflective journals and assignments, group
discussion can be  conducted in a synchronous (live) or
asynchronous (everyone at a different time) format.
Searching for information on new medications and treat-
ments, current information on obscure conditions, and
national standards and guidelines can be easily accom-
plished using search engines. Registration for courses,
records of educational compliance, and transcripts are
managed by the college’s learning management system.
Many students are likely using a learning content manage-
ment system to access information for the course sup-
ported by this textbook.
Noncredit continuing education activities are now
readily available to assist active practitioners, whether for
relicensure or recertification requirements or to enhance
personal lifelong learning. These Web-based programs are
available through various companies,  professionals organ-
izations, and select membership groups. There are also
companies that assist professional by documenting their
continuing education hours. However, hard copies of 
certificates of completion should be maintained through-
out the licensure or certification period for audit purposes.
Some nurses may also be required to enter this informa-
tion electronically in the database of their respective state
to renew their license.
Generally, nurses select to complete continuing educa-
tion hours in their interest or specialty area. Some states
have required as well as open content hours to meet the 
renewal requirements. Currency of content is a considera-
tion, as well as the specific content. Some programs are
time-limited for receiving credit. Remaining current in the
area of nursing informatics is an option using this medium.
However, in a study by Kleib, Sales, Lima, and Andrea-
Baylon (2010), relatively low proportions of nurses re-
ported continuing education in informatics, especially
those working outside of hospitals or providing direct 
patient care (p. 329).
Evidence-Based Practice
As described in Chapter 5, evidence-based practice implies
that nursing care is delivered on the basis of knowledge
generated from research and documented evidence of ef-
ficacy. Demonstration of evidence-based practice is now
a requirement in hospitals and other agencies for accredi-
tations. Practicing nurses have access to this growing body
knowledge and practice guidelines—and can enhance their
practice using this knowledge—by simply searching for it.
The National Guideline Clearinghouse is a product of the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; nurses
can search directly at its Web site or through their profes-
sional association Web sites to find the latest guidelines
on topics such as pain management, continence care, and
teaching protocols for congestive heart  failure, to mention
just a few. The Sigma Theta Tau product Nursing Knowl-
edge International serves as a repository for clinical, re-
search, career, and con tinuing education resources. This
is a huge managed database with links to published, pro-
prietary, and  government resources. Using the speed and
power of computer search engines, this database places 
accurate and current information in the hands of practi-
tioners. Several evidence based practice resources are listed
in Box 15.1.
Database Management
Access to data and databases has become increasingly im-
portant, especially in our global and electronic society. We
search the Web for information on a question of interest
when in the past we would wait until we could get to the
library. In addition to e-commerce, online auctions, live
chats, listservs, and other computer-based services, data-
base management and access is a growing application for
computers. A special tracking system through the Cen-
ters for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) allows
CHAPTER 15 Informatics and Documenting Outcomes     ●
267

tracking of environmental effects (e.g., air and water
quality) and specific conditions (e.g., asthma and can-
cers) in the different states. States can be compared on
these measures as a result of this  massive governmental
database.
The National Healthy People initiative has progressed
from identification of objectives and reports at the middle
and end of the 10-year cycle to a searchable database of
findings at any point in time. This database is provided
by the CDC and the National Center for Health Statistics
(NCHS) and provides practitioners, educators, planners,
and the general public with current information on the
state of the health of the nation and select groups and 
populations.
The National Database for Nursing Quality Indicators
(NDNQI) is an example of an analysis and storage unit
for nursing quality information. This is a proprietary data-
base, and members can get reports comparing perform-
ance of their units to those of other similar facilities and
can use the data about falls, skin breakdown, and nurse
satisfaction to make decisions about organizational im-
provements (NDNQI, 2014).
These are just a few examples of the use of databases
containing current information that provides opportuni-
ties for proactive decisions that cannot wait for published
reports. But do make sure you verify the date of the last
update to the database, which will  probably be indicated
at the top or bottom of the Web page.
Telehealth
Telehealth ranges from patient education television in a
hospital room to analysis of urine in a smart toilet and
transmission of the finding to a monitoring organization.
In this age of healthcare provider shortages, the time it
takes to travel to remote locations suggests that specialists
such as mental health providers might better serve groups
by hosting a net meeting where all participants can view
each other and engage in the therapeutic discussion via a
computer. One of the oldest telehealth applications is the
transmission of pacemaker function via the telephone. By
definition, telehealth is “the use of electronic information
and telecommunications technologies to support long-
distance clinical health care, patient and professional
health-related education, public health and health admin-
istration [through] . . . videoconferencing, the Internet,
store-and-forward imaging, streaming media, and terres-
trial and wireless communications” (Health Resources
and Services Administration [HRSA], 2014, p. 1).
HRSA wants to provide access to the underserved
populations through telehealth in the following ways:
●Foster partnerships within HRSA, and with other 
federal agencies, states, and private sector groups to
create telehealth projects.
●Administer telehealth grant programs.
●Provide technical assistance.
●Evaluate the use of telehealth technologies and
 programs.
●Develop telehealth policy initiatives to improve access
to quality health services.
●Promote knowledge exchange about “best telehealth
practices.” (HRSA, 2014, p. 1)
The underserved populations are also those addressed in
the Healthy People inititives, including the uninsured, 
underinsured, low-income, rural, and remote groups.
Telehealth best practices can reach out to these groups
with both primary and specialty care services. For example,
an initiative in Ontario, Canada, has 24-hour access to a
nurse using telehealth.
The National Council of State Boards of Nursing has
recognized the challenges that practicing across state lines
present and embarked upon a multistate regulation ini-
tiative called the Mutual Recognition Compact. In order
to support telehealth and other interstate nursing prac-
tices, 24 states have joined the Compact, allowing regis-
tered nurses and licensed practical/vocational nurses to
practice in all the listed states and thus provide long-
distance services to patients (National Council of State
Boards of Nursing, 2014). And pending legislation is
present in additional states. However, the nurse must
have a residence in a home state that is a member of the
Compact and be granted a multi-state license and practice
in accordance with the respective party states where he or
she is granted the privilege to practice. There is also a
compact for APRNs, but currently only two states are
members of this APRN compact, given the current nature
of the variability of practice regulations in advanced prac-
tice among the states.
Technologies currently in use include home monitor-
ing with otoscopes, stethoscopes, and EKG monitors,
which can transmit data to a home health agency. A digital
image of a radiograph or ultrasound image can be con-
veyed to a radiologist or disease specialist in another loca-
tion, even across the globe. Robotics can be used to
perform skilled procedures when the skilled surgeon is in
another location. The electronic ICU allows for experi-
enced critical care nurses to monitor patients in partner-
ship with remotely located critical care nurses. It is
interesting to think about the monitoring that is provided
through Homeland Security and the possibilities of know-
ing that an older adult has fallen or hasn’t gotten out of
bed for several days through previously surreptitious sur-
veillance modes.
NURSING INFORMATICS: THE
SPECIALTY
ANA (2015b) has identified that “the nursing informatics
specialty and its constituent members contribute to
achieving the goal of improving the health of populations,
communities, groups, families, and individuals . . .
[through] the identification of issues and the design, de-
velopment, and implementation of effective informatics
solutions and technologies within the clinical, adminis-
trative, educational, and research domains of practice”
(p. 2). It is not unusual to see implementation of new tech-
nology and computer applications in the healthcare setting
nearly every day. Without the aid of NI specialists, these ap-
plications might offer little improvement in patient care and
create inefficiencies and errors. NI specialists can guide the
collection, documentation, analysis, and aggregation of
data with the intent of improving patient care, eliminating
errors, and developing a body of knowledge based on evi-
dence, as the wisdom we seek from their specialty practice.
268
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

Educators skilled in teaching informatics or NI specialists
skilled in nursing applications are the best people to teach
nurses how to use computer applications and other inte-
grated technology. NI specialists possess the characteristics
of a specialty (Box 15.7). The functional areas of NI prac-
tice include the following:
●Administration, leadership, and management
●Systems analysis and design
●Compliance and integrity management
●Consultation
●Coordination, facilitation, and integration
●Development of systems, products, and resources
●Educational and professional development
●Genetics and genomics
●Information management and operational architecture
●Quality and performance improvement
●Policy development and advocacy
●Research and evaluation
●Safety, security, and environmental health
●Telehealth and informatics (ANA, 2015b, pp. 18–36).
Nursing informatics is interested in phenomena of
nursing: human beings, health, the environment, and
nursing. However, interdisciplinary collaboration is a ne-
cessity to effectively provide knowledge and wisdom in in-
formatics solutions that must be highly integrated for
functionality. Nurses in clinical specialties tend to focus
on the content of data and information. Currently, NI
specialists are working to refine nursing’s language, imple-
ment efficient telehealth systems, propagate NI educa-
tional programs, expand the use of NI in research, and
address new and emerging technologies.
The standards of Nursing Informatics Practice were re-
vised in 2015. As with the current scope and standards of
nursing (ANA, 2010) described in Chapter 1, the Infor-
matics Standards of Practice also contain standards of prac-
tice and standards of professional performance with
measurement criteria. The standards of practice are also
aligned with the nursing process, as follows:
●Assessment: skillful needs assessment toward the goal
of informatics solutions using analytical models and
standardized data measures
●Problem and issues identification: careful analysis and
validation of the data with multiple stakeholders in the
interdisciplinary environment
●Outcomes identification: the expected outcomes with
additional criteria for the informatics nurse specialist,
who is expected to provide further wisdom as evolving
evidence-based practice with clinical guidelines
●Planning and implementation: customization with the
multiple stakeholders with consideration of regulatory
requirements, financial implications, standardization,
effective change strategies, safety, and continuous 
quality improvement
●Evaluation: informatics solutions (ANA, 2015)
Note that for this area of specialty practice, further im-
plementation standards are specified with measurement
criteria and additional measurement criteria for the NI
specialist. The additional categories of implementation
standards include coordination of activities; health teach-
ing and health promotion, and consultation (ANA,
2015b). The evaluation standard contains two additional
measurement criteria for the NI specialist and their lead-
ership that will provide informatics solutions for further
innovation and practice protocols and policy changes.
There are 10 standards of professional performance for
the informatics nurse and the NI specialist, again similar
roles to that of general nursing:
●Ethics
●Education
●Evidence-based practice and research
●Quality of practice
●Communication
●Leadership
●Collaboration
●Professional practice evaluation
●Resource utilization
●Environmental health (ANA, 2015b).
Within these role expectations, we see specialty practice
emerge with directions for the future. Additional measure-
ment criteria for the NI specialist are included with the stan-
dards for all of the performance areas listed above with the
exception of communication. Again, the NI specialist is
charged with taking a lead in development of innovative and
interdisciplinary practices and the creation and promotion
of evidence-based practices. As noted by Murphy (2010), as
the practice of the NI specialist evolves, NI will not only sup-
port the process of care delivery, but also promote better pa-
tient outcomes and improvements in health (p. 205).
The NI specialty is represented by several professional
associations, such as the American Nursing Informatics As-
sociation, a working group of the American Medical Infor-
matics Association (AMIA), a group of the International
Medical Informatics Association, and other international,
regional, and local organizations. Although baccalaureate
programs may have a requirement for competency in com-
puters, some offer an elective in informatics. Specialization,
however, is at the graduate level, with a master’s degree in
NI being offered first at the Universities of Maryland,
Utah, and Colorado, and now by others, such as the Uni-
versity of Michigan, University of Iowa, and Excelsior Uni-
versity. Educa tional preparation for this specialty area can
start with a nursing elective in a baccalaureate program to
targeted continuing education opportunities to graduate
preparation in either a degree or certificate program.
The American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC,
2014) offers certification in Nursing Informatics, with a
baccalaureate in nursing or a related field and documented
CHAPTER 15 Informatics and Documenting Outcomes     ●
269
BOX 15.7
Attributes of a Specialty in Nursing
Informatics
●A diﬀerentiated practice
●A deﬁned research program
●Organizational representation
●Educational programs
●A credentialing mechanism
Source: From Panniers, T. L., & Gassert, C. A. (1996). Standards of
practice and preparation for certification. In M. E. Mills, C. A. 
Romano, and B. R. Heller (Eds.), Information management in 
nursing and health care. Philadelphia: Springhouse.

education and practice in NI. The designation reads RN-
BC once awarded. Informatics nurses may also elect to pur-
sue additional interdisciplinary certifications. When more
candidates have been prepared at the specialty level of mas-
ter’s, an advanced practice test may be developed. Since a
graduate degree is not yet a requirement for this certifica-
tion opportunity, experience and education are required
for the ANCC examination, which covers systems, er-
gonomics, technologies, information technology, manage-
ment and generation of knowledge, theories, roles, and
practice trends.
CAREERS IN NURSING
INFORMATICS
The diversity of informatics projects and programs has led
to tremendous professional career opportunities. Managers
in the rapidly changing healthcare environment demand
more and more information, patients receive care in many
settings, and organizations have redesigned their services
and care models. These changes mean continued growth
for nursing and general health information systems and
the creation of new positions in nursing informatics. In
addition, a recent report by the Institute of Medicine
(IOM, 2010) on the Future of Nursing: Leading Change,
Advancing Health has the potential for the creation of fu-
ture opportunities for NI specialists. Although the findings
from this report will be discussed in greater detail in Chap-
ter 19, one of the key messages was that “effective work-
force planning and policy making require better data
collection and an improved information infrastructure”
(IOM, 2010, p. S-3). To this end, increased NI specialists
will be needed in healthcare organizations, educational in-
stitutions, charitable organizations, and governmental and
regulatory agencies.
Many of the future informatics jobs are yet to be de-
fined. As the technology changes, so too will the work
necessary to maintain and further the acquisition of in-
formation, knowledge, and wisdom for practice improve-
ments. Currently, informatics nurses are working in
healthcare organizations, for software and hardware ven-
dors, in educational settings, and for insurance compa-
nies, to name only a few. In any position, the informatics
specialist works closely with professionals from all other
healthcare disciplines.
Positions in Healthcare
Organizations
A variety of roles exist for the specialist in nursing infor-
matics within hospitals, home health agencies, long-term
care facilities, and other healthcare facilities. As organi-
zations fully implement EHR, informatics nurses serve
an important function in assessing the institution’s in-
formation needs, evaluating available products and ven-
dors, and assisting with product installations. The NI
specialist may also serve to assist the organization in 
development and implementation of competency assess-
ments and quality improvement initiatives. As commu-
nicator and interpreter, the NI specialist serves as a
liaison between the nursing staff and the information 
systems people. When a system is ready for use (to “go
live”), the NI specialist remains on site; later, the special-
ist is on call to provide expert assistance to staff, as coach
and mentor. Once the system has been installed, modi-
fications are made on the basis of user feedback, and the
NI specialist is on to the next project. Informatics is a
specialty that changes rapidly.
Electronic reporting is required in most regulated or-
ganizations in contemporary society. And the informatics
nurse will be involved, if not leading this project, especially
for data identification, coding, harvesting, and analysis.
For example, long-term care facilities are required to
make electronic reports to CMS of the MDS, an assess-
ment tool for residents of long-term care facilities in
which nurses must both assess residents on an ongoing
basis and report this information using the electronic
tools and standardized language. The vast numbers of
these long-term care facilities that are required to comply
with this reporting create many job opportunities for reg-
istered nurses. Quality improvement activities need NI
competencies to navigate through the myriad of systems,
reports, and guidelines that direct and document these
improvement activities. Compliance offices require access
to all the systems in a facility. The annual National 
Patient Safety Goals have created requirements for train-
ing staff for enhanced patient safety by improving, in part,
data retrieval, management, and reporting. Performance
improvement is  concerned with national safety goals, clin-
ical indicators of quality, and evidence-based practice
guidelines. Informatics supports the achievement of these
safety goals through providing information retrieval to
support medication reconciliation, safe patient handoff,
prevention of recording sound-alike/look-alike drugs, and
accurately recording patient identifiers.
From safety reporting to reimbursement opportuni-
ties, informatics skills are necessary. And with the IOM
(2010) recommendations for effective workforce plan-
ning and an improved information infrastructure, NI
specialists will be essential to the success of this ambitious
initiative.
Positions with Systems and
Software Vendors
Producers of software and information systems seek to
hire NI specialists. Nurses work to develop new products,
market products and services, and install systems. Expe-
rience with documentation and standardized nursing lan-
guage is an asset. Clinicians with enough patient care
experience to predict barriers to implementation are ex-
tremely useful. NI experts serve as liaisons between the
vendor and the healthcare organization, because they are
able to comprehend and articulate the issues for both par-
ties. Increasingly nurses with expertise are sought for these
positions.
Positions in Educational Settings
With the expectation that beginning and experienced
nurses must possess informatics competencies, the 
270
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

responsibilities of educators have grown. Whether it is
expertise in instructional design to create a new and ef-
fective Web-based or Web-enhanced course or DVD, the
effective use of electronic resources like e-books and
handheld devices, or the effective use of simulation ac-
tivities in the laboratory setting, this area presents many
opportunities. While these are areas for the experienced
nurse educator with a specialty in instructional design,
the NI specialist is often consulted. The NI specialist can
be an invaluable asset in the campus skills lab in imple-
menting and revising scenarios to assist with the use of
human simulator experiences. These laboratory experi-
ences often require a faculty member to be working with
the student group while another technician or lab assis-
tant is running and revising the scenario for an effective
learning experience. Part of the debriefing may also in-
volve reviewing tapes of the student experience for review
and commentary. In addition, recommendation of any
required remediation activities may often require expert-
ise in electronic resources and documentation of these
activities.
Lifelong learning, changes in educational preparation,
residency programs, interdisciplinary education, and work-
force planning were important components of the IOM
(2010) report on The Future of Nursing: Leading Change,
Advancing Health. NI specialists will be of enormous as-
sistance in all phases of analysis, planning, and reporting
to address this national mandate.
Positions in Managed Care
Organizations and Insurance
Companies
As forms of managed care continue to develop, the demand
for data and information will grow, as will the opportuni-
ties for informatics specialists. Informatics nurses are now
working directly with care delivery institutions in develop-
ing data and information systems, as well as with the mech-
anisms involved in the internal reporting processes. New roles
are emerging continuously, many of which have been de-
signed and articulated by NI specialists as this new specialty
continues to evolve.
For more information, search the various informatics
association Web sites and read the Online Journal of Nurs-
ing Informatics. As with many nursing specialties, nurses
should look for opportunities and then create the position
that will best serve the organization.
DOCUMENTING OUTCOMES
We have looked at the evolving specialty practice in nurs-
ing informatics. These talented practitioners help us or-
ganize and make sense of the data and give us the wisdom
to make changes in practice. They help us focus on the
outcomes of care through standardized languages to avoid
misunderstanding and to see the commonalities that create
the evidence for quality practice. In doing so, they are as-
sisting in the documentation of outcomes, whether on 
an EHR for a specific patient situation or in a database
provided to a regulatory or accrediting agency. Their role
in workforce analysis and monitoring is also critical for 
addressing the challenges posed by the IOM (2011) on
The Future of Nursing: Leading Change, Advancing Health.
Consider for a moment informatics nurses’ focus on out-
comes of health care:
●Assist clinicians to “speak” the same language in 
documentation
●Assist students in understanding consistent language
unique to the healthcare setting
●Analyze stated outcomes to ensure that they are meas-
urable and reflect the clinical situation
●Work with interdisciplinary colleagues to ensure that
there is a common understanding on the outcome that
nurses wish to accomplish in collaboration with the
patient
●Make sure that the databases have consistent and 
valid data
●Guarantee that administrative reports for regulatory and
accrediting bodies have sufficient and quality data
●Monitor patient acuity and care requirements and
workforce supply and demand considerations
●Provide valid databases for researchers who seek 
answers to questions of clinical concern
●Provide informatics solutions to new, novel, and 
complex technology issues ensuring that outcomes 
are documented in a retrievable format
And the list goes on.
What is apparent is the focus on documenting outcomes.
The documentation of outcomes must be understandable to
all, through the use of a common vocabulary. This vocabu-
lary must be applicable to the various taxonomies to build
on the body of knowledge and improve care for healthcare
consumers. In the process, informatics solutions ensure effi-
cient workflow and effective outcomes. The body of knowl-
edge can be built on firm, comparable evidence. They do
provide the wisdom to improve care through the evidence
as documented outcomes of efficacy. So, it’s all about quality
outcomes.
CHAPTER 15 Informatics and Documenting Outcomes     ●
271
ONLINE CONSULT 
American Medical Informatics Association at
http://www.amia.org
American Nursing Informatics Association-Caring at
http://www.ania-caring.org
Alliance for Nursing Informatics at
http://www.allianceni.org/
Canadian Nursing Informatics Association at
http://www.cnia.ca/
Informatics Nurse Certification at
http://www.nursecredentialing.org
/NurseSpecialties/Informatics.aspx
Healthcare Information and Management
Systems Society at
http://himss.org
International Medical Informatics Association, 
Nursing Informatics Special Interest Group at
http://www.imiani.org

272
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
You have noticed that the nurses on your unit are increasingly focused on the computer workstations, espe-
cially after you read last month’s results from the patient satisfaction survey. You are searching for guidance on
increasing effective nurse-patient interactions. You have just read a commentary that in their visits to health-
care institutions identified for leadership in the use of technology, Stead and Lin (2010) found that in one insti-
tution nurses reported only half of their time spent in direct patient care, with the rest of their time spent in
documentation reportedly for regulatory or legal purposes rather than for improvements in care. In your role
as the nurse manager for your unit, you consult with the nurse informatics specialist your hospital to increase
both patient and nurse satisfaction with the use of electronic charting. Based on his recommendation, you
both come up with a plan for a unit conference on documentation, standardized languages, and goals for im-
proving quality of care that include patient involvement.
Question: How will you structure this clinical conference to encourage a focus on electronic documenta-
tion as a means or tool for improved patient care with both nurses and patients collaborating further on the
content for documentation to allow further time for interaction and focus on care improvements?
Source: Stead, W. W., & Lin, H. S. (2010). New directions for health care information technology. National Quality Measures
Clearinghouse. Retrieved from http://qualitymeasures.ahrq.gov/expert/expert-commentary.aspx?id=16453&search=health+
care+information+technology
K E Y  P O I N T S
●“Nursing informatics (NI) is a specialty that integrates nursing science with multiple information and ana-
lytical sciences to identify, define, manage, and communicate data, information, knowledge, and wisdom in
nursing practice” (ANA, 2015b, p. 1–2).
●Nursing informatics as a specialty grows and changes as quickly as telecommunications technologies.
●Few systems can address every component of healthcare, so there is generally an overriding information
system with both clinical and administrative components.
●The EHR is an electronic version of the patient record used as a clinical support tool to assist clinicians
and improving efficiency in workflow and effectiveness in care quality.
●Standardized languages offer common vocabulary, terminology, and usage and are a requirement for con-
sistent understanding and application across nursing settings and practice environments.
●The Nursing Management Minimum Data Set (MDS) is used in long-term care to categorize nursing care
and patient care needs.
●An important component in the EHR for patient safety is electronic prescribing. Full integration of e-prescribing
with the EHR has been shown to promote patient safety and a return on investment (AHRQ, 2010).
●Telehealth has begun to explore the possible applications and innovations that could advance the provi-
sion of healthcare.
●Common office applications—word processing, spreadsheet, database, and presentation graphics—
are useful in nursing practice, education, and research.
●The ANA (2015b) has identified that “the nursing informatics specialty and its constituent members con-
tribute to achieving the goal of improving the health of populations, communities, groups, families, and in-
dividuals . . . [through] the identification of issues and the design, development, and implementation of
effective informatics solutions and technologies within the clinical, administrative, educational, and re-
search domains of practice” (p. 2).
●The NI specialty is represented by several professional associations, is supported by advanced education,
and is credentialed through certification.
●The primary interest of nursing informatics is to expand how data, information, and knowledge are used
to create wisdom within nursing practice.
●In practice, nurses most commonly use computers to document care and to access patient data. Yet,
there are many applications for education and research.
●The diversity of informatics projects and programs has led to tremendous professional career and inter-
disciplinary opportunities.

REFERENCES
Adler, K. G. (2007). How to Successfully Navigate Your EHR
Implementation. Family Practice Management, 14(2), 33–39. 
Agency for Healthcare Research Quality (AHRQ). (2013). 
Electronic prescribing. Retrieved from http://healthit.ahrq
.gov/key-topics/electronic-prescribing
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2006).
The essentials of doctoral education for advanced nursing 
practice. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu
/publications/position/DNPEssentials.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2008).
The essentials of baccalaureate education for professional nursing
practice. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu
/education-resources/BaccEssentials08.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN, 2011).
The essentials of master’s education in nursing. Retrieved 
from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/education-resources
/MastersEssentials11.pdf
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2008). Nursing informat-
ics: Scope and standards of practice. Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursesbooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2010). Nursing: Scope and 
standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursesbooks.org.
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2015a). Inclusion of rec-
ognized terminologies within EHRs and other health informa-
tion technology solutions. Retrieved from http://www
.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/Policy-Advocacy
/Positions-and-Resolutions/ANAPositionStatements
/Position-Statements-Alphabetically/Inclusion-of
-Recognized-Terminologies-within-EHRs.html
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2015b). Nursing infor-
matics: Scope and standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver
Spring, MD: Nursesbooks.org.
American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC). (2013). Nurs-
ing informatics role delineation study: National survey results.
Retrieved from http://www.nursecredentialing.org
/Certification/NurseSpecialties/Informatics/RELATED
-LINKS/Informatics-2013RDS.pdf
American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC). (2014). Infor-
matics nursing certification eligibility criteria. Retrieved 
from http://www.nursecredentialing.org/Informatics
-Eligibility.aspx
AORN. 2013 AORN SYNTEGRITY (R) framework. Retrieved
from http://www.aorn.org/syntegrity/
Blumenthal, D., & Tavenner, M. (2010). The “meaningful
use” regulation for electronic health records. New England
Journal of Medicine, 363(56), 501–504. doi: 10.1056
/NEJMp1006114. Retrieved from http://www.nejm.org
/doi/pdf/10.1056/NEJMp1006114
Brokel, L. (2010). Moving forward with NANDA-I nursing 
diagnoses with Health Information Technology for 
Economic and Clinical (HITECH) Act legislation: News
updates. International Journal of Nursing Terminologies 
and Classifications, 21, 182–185.
Carrington, J. M., & Tiase, V. L. (2013). Nursing informatics year
in review. Nursing Administration Quarterly, 37, 136–143.
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2012).
Stage 2 overall tipsheet. Retrieved from http://www
.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Legislation
/EHRIncentivePrograms/Downloads/Stage2Overview
_Tipsheet.pdf
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2013a).
HIPAA General Information: Overview. Retrieved from
http://www.cms.hhs.gov/HIPAAGenInfo/
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid. (2013b). Progress on 
adoption of electronic health records. Retrieved from http://
www.cms.gov/eHealth/ListServ_Stage3Implementation
.html
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2014a).
2014 definition stage 1 of meaningful use. Retrieved from
http://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Legislation
/EHRIncentivePrograms/Meaningful_Use.html
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2014b). EHR in-
centive program: Stage 2. Retrieved from http://www.cms
.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Legislation/EHRIncentive
Programs/Stage_2.html
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (n.d.a). An introduc-
tion to the Medicare EHR Incentive Program for Eligible 
CHAPTER 15 Informatics and Documenting Outcomes     ●
273
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Since you were initially licensed as an RN, identify some of the technological advances and changes you have ob-
served in nursing practice and healthcare.
2. What would happen in your agency if the computer system “went down”? How would the failure affect patient
care? What are the backup and redundant systems?
3. What is the representation of NI nurses in your facility?
4. How can handheld technology improve care for healthcare consumers?
5. What telehealth application would you like to invent to improve access to healthcare?
6. How would you explain the EHR and privacy to your patients? Be prepared to participate in an in-class or online
discussion to be scheduled by your instructor.
7. Review the Chapter Thought on the first page of the chapter, and be prepared to discuss it online or in class.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the exercises provided for this chapter.

Professionals. Retrieved from http://www.cms.gov/Regulations
-and-Guidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms/
downloads/Beginners_Guide.pdf
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (n.d.b). Research,
statistics, data, and systems. Retrieved from http://www
.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Research-
Statistics-Data-and-Systems.html
Cohen, M. R. (Ed.) (2007). Medication errors (2nd ed.). 
Washington, DC: American Pharmacists Association. 
Cowan, L. (2013). Literature review and risk mitigation strat-
egy for unintended consequences of computer order entry.
Nursing Economic$, 31(1), 27-31, 11.
Graves, J. R., & Corcoran, S. (1989). The study of nursing in-
formatics. Image: The Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 21,
227–231.
Greiner, A. C., & Knebel, E. (Eds.). (2003). Health professions
education: A bridge to quality. Washington, DC: Institute of
Medicine.
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA). (2014).
Telehealth. Retrieved from http://www.hrsa.gov/telehealth/
Hebda, T., Czar, P., & Mascara, C. (2008). Handbook of infor-
matics for nurses and health care professionals (4th ed.). Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2011). The future of nursing:
Leading change, advancing health. Retrieved from http://
www.nap.edu/catalog/12956.html
Institute of Medicine. (2014). Capturing social and behavioral
domains in electronic health records: Phase 1. Retrieved from
http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=18709 
International Council of Nurses (ICN). (2013). About ICPN®.
Retrieved from http://www.icn.ch/what-we-do
/international-classification-for-nursing-practice-icnpr/
International Health Terminology Organisation. (2014).
SNOMED CT: Adding value to electronic health records. 
Retrieved from www.ihtsdo.org/resource/resource/
16/SNOMED_CT/SnomedCt_Benefits_20140219.pdf
JASON. (April, 2014). A robust health data infrastructure (AHRQ
Publication No. 14-0041-EF). Retrieved from http://healthit
.gov/sites/default/files/ptp13-700hhs_white.pdf
Joint Commission. (2014a). Improving America’s hospitals: 
The Joint Commission’s annual report on quality and safety.
Retrieved from http://www.jointcommission.org
/annualreport.aspx
Joint Commission. (2014b). Top performance on key quality
measures (R). Retrieved from http://www.jointcommission
.org/accreditation/top_performers.aspx
Kleib, M., Sales, A. E., Lima, I., Andrea-Baylon, M., & Beaith,
A. (2010). Continuing education in informatics among regis-
tered nurses in the United States in 2000. The Journal of
Continuing Education in Nursing, 41, 329–336.
Lustig, T. A. (2012). The role of telehealth in an evolving health
care environment: Workshop summary. Retrieved from
http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=13466
Murphy, J. (2010). Nursing informatics: The intersection of
nursing, computer, and information sciences. Nursing 
Economic$, 28, 204–207.
National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN).
(2014). About Nurse Licensure Compact (NLC). Retrieved
from https://www.ncsbn.org/nlc.htm
National Database of Nursing Quality Indicators (NDNQI).
(2014). About NDNQI.  Retrieved from http://pressganey
.com/ourSolutions/performance-and-advanced-analytics
/clinical-business-performance/nursing-quality-ndnqi
Omaha System. (2013). The Omaha System ICPN. Retrieved from
http://www.omahasystem.org/overview.html
Rutherford, M. A. (2013). Standardized nursing language: What
does it mean for nursing practice? Online Journal for Issues in
Nursing, 28(1). doi: 10.3912/OJIN.Vol13No01PPT05 
Retrieved from http://www.nursingworld.org/Main
MenuCategories/ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN
/TableofContents/vol132008/No1Jan08/ArticlePrevious
Topic/StandardizedNursingLanguage.html
Thede, L., & Schwiran, P. (February 25, 2011). Informatics:
The standardized nursing terminologies: A national survey
of  nurses’ experiences and attitudes–survey. OJIN: The 
Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 16(2). doi: 10.3912
/OJIN.Vol16No02InfoCol01. Retrieved from http://www
.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/ANAMarketplace
/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/TableofContents/Vol-16-2011
/No2-May-2011/Standardized-Nursing-Terminologies.html
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (n.d.). An introduc-
tion to the Medicare EHR Incentive Program for Eligible Pro-
fessionals. Retrieved from http://www.cms.gov/Regulations
-and-Guidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms
/downloads/Beginners_Guide.pdf
Eichner, J., & Dullabh, P. (2007). Accessible health information
technology (IT) for populations with limited literacy: A guide
for developers and purchasers of health IT (AHRQ Pub. No.
08-0010-EF). Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Re-
search and Quality. Retrieved from http://healthit.ahrq.gov
/sites/default/files/docs/page/LiteracyGuide_0.pdf
Health Level 7 (2014). About HL7. Retrieved from http://www
.hl7.org/about/index.cfm?ref=nav
Herdman, T. H., & Kamitsuru, S. (Ed.). (2014). Nursing diag-
noses: Definitions and classifications 2015-2017 (10th ed.).
Oxford, UK: Wiley Blackwell.
Institute of Medicine. (2012). The role of telehealth in an evolv-
ing health care environment: Workshop summary. Retrieved
from http://www.nap.edu/download.php?record_id=13466
Moorhead, S., Johnson, M., Maas, M. L., & Swanson, E.
(eds.). (2008). Nursing Outcomes Classification (NOC)
(4th ed.). St. Louis: Mosby Elsevier.
Murphy, J. (2010). The journey to meaningful use of electronic
health records. Nursing Economic$, 28, 283–286.
Topaz, M. (2013). The hitchhiker’s guide to nursing informat-
ics theory: Using the data-knowledge-wisdom framework 
to guide informatics research. Online Journal of Nursing 
Informatics, 17(3). Retrieved from http://ojni.org/issues
/?p=2852
University of Iowa College of Nursing Centers (2014). Center
for Nursing Classification and Clinical Effectiveness. Retrieved
from http: //www.nursing.uiowa.edu/center-for-nursing
-classification-and-clinical-effectiveness
ONLINE RESOURCES
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
http://healthit.ahrq.gov/
American Medical Informatics Association
http://www.amia.org/
ANA Recognized Terminologies
http://www.nursingworld.org/Terminologies 
274
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

http://www.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/Policy
-Advocacy/Positions-and-Resolutions/ANAPosition
Statements/Position-Statements-Alphabetically
/Inclusion-of-Recognized-Terminologies-within
-EHRs.html
American Nursing Informatics Association
http://www.ania.org
British Computer Society: Health Informatics (Nursing) 
Specialty Group
http://www.bcs.org/server.php?show=conWebDoc.1220
Canadian Nursing Informatics Association
http://www.cnia.ca/
CMS: EHR Incentive Program
https://www.cms.gov/EHRIncentivePrograms/
Informatics Nursing Certification
http://www.nursecredentialing.org/InformaticsNursing
International Council of Nurses Classification for Nursing
Practice at
http://www.icn.ch/icnp.htm
NANDA-I
http://www.nanda.org/NursingDiagnosisFAQ.aspx
Nursing Interventions Classifications (NIC)
http://www.nursing.uiowa.edu/cncce/nursing-interventions
-classification-overview
Nursing Outcomes Classifications (NOC) at
http://www.nursing.uiowa.edu/cncce/nursing-outcomes
-classification-overview
Omaha System
http://www.omahasystem.org
Online Brazilian Journal of Nursing
http://www.objnursing.uff.br/index.php/nursing
Online Journal of Issues in Nursing
http://www.nursingworld.org/ojin/
Online Journal of Nursing Informatics
http://ojni.org/
Online Journal of Rural Nursing and Health Care
http://rnojournal.binghamton.edu/index.php/RNO
Perioperative Nursing Data Set (PNDS)
http://www.aorn.org/syntegrity/
SNOMED CT
http://www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct/
CHAPTER 15 Informatics and Documenting Outcomes     ●
275

Economics and
Healthcare Policy
276
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery  ●William Himmelsbach
16
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Demonstrate an understanding of the basic principles in healthcare economics and financing.
2. Characterize the history and processes used to provide healthcare to individuals and groups in the
United States along with solutions proposed with the ACA.
3. Examine the major payment systems and access to healthcare coverage.
4. Discuss the major issues that nursing managers and leaders confront when healthcare coverage issues
are addressed.
5. Evaluate policy issues and the role of professionals in clinical practice settings.
Economics
Healthcare Economics
Gross National Product (GNP)
Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act (ACA)
Cost of Healthcare
Reimbursement
Payers
Prospective Payment System (PPS)
Fee-for-Service (FFS) Plan
Managed Care
Point-of-Service (POS) Plan
Preferred Provider Organization
(PPO)
Medical Savings Account (MSA)
Accountable Care Organization
(ACO)
Medicare
Health Maintenance Organization
(HMO)
Medicaid
Children’s Health Insurance Program
(CHIP)
Health Equity
Fiscal Responsibility
“I am an optimist. It does not seem too much use
being anything else.”
Winston Churchill, 1874–1965
Key Terms

CHAPTER 16 Economics and Healthcare Policy     ●
277
We talk about the economy on a daily basis, whether com-
paring prices that have risen or the effect on people strug-
gling to make mortgage payments or maintain business
operations. However, consider the term economics, which
is the study of production of a product or service along with
issues of supply and demand and distribution of that prod-
uct or service for the continuity or well-being of some en-
tity. You may have taken courses in macroeconomics
focusing on the decisions for national or global entities or
microeconomics considering decisions of individuals or busi-
nesses on supply and demand in a defined marketplace.
Healthcare economics has been defined as a specialty area
of economics that analyzes how the different parts of the
healthcare system work to supply and deliver healthcare
services for patients (Miller, Chang, & Pfoutz, 2012, 
p. 309). This is not a simple issue of supplying services to
meet the ongoing and increasingly complex health needs
of individuals, families, and groups. Leaders and managers
in the healthcare industry are challenged on a daily basis
with regulatory requirements and restrictions, reimburse-
ment considerations for continuity, professional boundary
issues for service delivery, and ethical concerns for efficacy,
equity, quality, and safety of patient outcomes. The health-
care leader using skills of vision, commitment, and empow-
erment or the manager focused on coordinating and
directing resources for effective outcomes for both the or-
ganization and the patient are challenged far beyond the
production of a discrete item to meet the demand of the
consumer in a marketplace. Economic trends and the 
financing of healthcare are major considerations.
TRENDS IN HEALTHCARE
ECOMOMICS
Everyone recognizes that healthcare is a big business and
is viewed as costly. However, consider the trends in
healthcare services and costs and the changes in the sys-
tem that have occurred over time. The gross national
product (GNP) is the goods and services produced in a
nation and is measured on an annual basis. Alternately,
you will see comparisons on the gross domestic product
(GDP), which is restricted to the goods and services pro-
duced within the nation, thus excluding business not 
located in the particular nation.
Annual per capital expenditures for healthcare in the
United States is the highest in the world (Thomson, Os-
born, Squires, & Jun, 2013, p. 134). Figure 16.1 illustrates
healthcare expenditures by nation in 2011 and documents
$8,507.60 per capita spending in the United States. We
see the GDP used in comparisons on the rising costs of
healthcare. Consider the trends in healthcare costs for the
United States compared with other selected countries iden-
tified in Figure 16.1. As reported by the Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD, 2013),
in 2011, the United States spent 17.7 percent of its GDP
on healthcare, nearly twice the average amount spent by
other countries and significantly more than comparable in-
dustrial nations (Table 16.1). Consider the trends identi-
fied in Table 16.2. These costs include not only the
provision of care to patients as goods and services but also
physical resources, the preparation of practitioners across
disciplines, research and development, and methods of 
financing all of these. In 2010, spending on healthcare in
the United States was reported as $2.6 trillion, equating to
$8,402 per person (Martin, Lassman, Washington, Catlin,
& the National Health Expenditure Accounts Team, 2012,
p. 208). And the upward trend has continued, although at
a slower pace during the economic decline. Consider some
of the differences in costs of healthcare for some of these
countries illustrated in Table 16.3. For example, the United
States and Canada have similar expenditures on inpatient
care, with differences in percentage of expenditures for 
$0
$2,000
$4,000
$6,000
$8,000
$10,000
U.S.
Norway
Switzerland
Canada
Austria
Germany
France
United Kingdom
Sweden
Spain
Italy
Israel
Korea
Czech Republic
Chile
Figure 16.1 Total health expenditure per capita, United States and selected countries, 2011. (Adapted 
from Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development [OECD]. [2013]. Health at a glance 2013: OECD indica-
tors. Retrieved from http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/social-issues-migration-health/health-at-a-glance_19991312;jsessionid=
612e179lbg8ul.x-oecd-live-01; and OECD [2013]. Total expenditure on health per capita, Health: Key tables from OECD,
no. 2. doi: 10.1787/hlthxp-cap-table-2013-2-en)

outpatient and long-term care. The United States spends
almost twice the amount on healthcare insurance and ad-
ministration compared with Canada and more than the
other nations listed except for France. However, the United
States and France, as some of the highest spenders on
healthcare, also see households financing a relatively small
share of the healthcare costs directly, with most spending
made through public or private third-party arrangements
(OECD, 2011a, p. 158). 
An atypical trend has started to occur in the United
States. Healthcare inflation has declined over the past 
10 years from 10% to 4%. This line has gotten close to
the overall inflation rate. If such a trend continues, or even
flattens out, the implications are significant. For example,
the Medicare Trust Fund projections may improve. In ad-
dition, state tax resources to fund the state’s share of Med-
icaid may not be such a burden as it has been in the past.
As reported in a 2014 poll conducted by the Kaiser Family
Foundation (Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, 2014b)
on the decline in healthcare expenditures trend, “when
asked their perceptions of the cost of health care in the na-
tion, half of the public says that over the past few years,
costs have been going up faster than usual (50 percent),
and only 8 percent say costs have been going up slower
than usual” (p. 1). In addition for this period, researchers
reported that “out-of pocket medical spending did not de-
cline, which suggests that consumers began to bear more
of the burden for medical care directly” (Herrera, Gaynor,
Newman, Town, & Parente, 2013, p. 1721). The poten-
tial effect on the private insurance market (payers, employ-
ees, and individuals) is unsettled because implementation
of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA)
is not occurring as prescribed in the Act. Some of the de-
cline in expenditures has been attributed to the downturn
in the economy, with people delaying healthcare expendi-
tures, especially preventative services. Nonetheless, future
use of healthcare services is a factor as demand increases.
This increased demand could be significant.
Financing healthcare in the United States, however,
is more than simply a supply-and-demand equation.
The four major factors driving healthcare costs are tech-
nology and prescription drugs, chronic disease, aging of
the population, and administrative costs (Kimbuende,
Ranji, Lundy, & Salganicoff, 2013, p. 550). Technology
is increasing at a speed we can barely keep pace with, yet
278
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
TABLE 14.2
Expenditures on Health as a
Percentage of Gross Domestic
Product, 2005 versus 2011
Country
2005 (%)
2011 (%)
United States 
Norway 
Switzerland 
Canada 
Austria 
Germany 
France 
Sweden
United Kingdom 
Spain 
Italy 
Israel 
Korea 
Czech Republic 
Chile
Source: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). (2013). Total expenditure on health. Health: Key tables
from OECD, no. 1. doi: 10.1787/hlthxp-total-table-2013-2-en.
TABLE 16.1
15.8
9.0
10.9
9.8
10.4
10.8
11.0
9.1
8.3
8.3
8.7
7.9
5.6
6.9
6.6
17.7
9.3
11.0 
11.2
10.8
11.3
11.6
9.5
9.4
9.3
9.2
7.7
7.4
7.5
7.5
TABLE 16.2
Differences in Healthcare Expenditures for Selected Countries, 1990–2011
OECD 
United 
United 
Countries
States
Ireland
Kingdom 
Netherlands 
France
Mexico 
China 
Average 
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
1990
2000
2009
2010/
2011
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). (2013). Health at a glance 2013: OECD indica-
tors. Retrieved from http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/social-issues-migration-health/health-at-a-glance_19991312;jsessionid=
612e179lbg8ul.x-oecd-live-01; and Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). (2011). Health at 
a glance 2011: OECD indicators. Retrieved from http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/social-issues-migration-health/health-at-a-
glance-2011_health_glance-2011-en;jsessionid=60v7lrkqqook1.x-oecd-live-01.
9.6
9.5
4.0
4.5
<7.0
6.2
NA
4.6
4.6
5.1
8.4
10.1
11.8
11.6
8.0
8.0
12.0
12.0
5.9
7.0
9.8
9.6
6.0
6.1
9.5
9.2
12.4
13.7
17.4
17.6

CHAPTER 16 Economics and Healthcare Policy     ●
279
afford. Prescription drugs are similarly multiplying as
we chemically attempt to treat conditions as unique as
the individuals themselves. And consumers are exposed
to these new prescription drug options in the media on
a daily basis. Chronic diseases and the aging of the pop-
ulation are well-documented trends as we now attempt
to address population health and health promotion. And
it is estimated that at least 7 percent of healthcare ex-
penditures are for administrative costs, like marketing
and billing (Kimbuende et al., 2013, p. 550). Financing
healthcare has become a major challenge for consumers,
employers, and payers.
HEALTHCARE FINANCING: 
A HISTORICAL CONTEXT
To address healthcare financing, we first consider the con-
trol of the money and resources to cover the cost of health-
care. Healthcare costs are generally covered in one of four
ways: through health insurance, governmental healthcare
coverage, individual or family assets, or charitable coverage. 
As noted by Kovner and Knickman (2011), in the
United States, the healthcare financing system has evolved
continuously since the middle of the 20th century when
health insurance began to be marketed (p. 49). Health in-
surance is obtained in two ways: through employer cover-
age or individual contracts. Employer coverage occurs as
a component of a worker’s compensation or benefit pack-
age as part of employment to provide for individual or
family coverage. As part of a group plan, an economy of
scale provides for coverage of a defined group. Risk-
to-benefit ratios are an important part of this process, hop-
ing for an employee population that uses a predictable
amount of resources that is covered through premiums.
However, increased costs to employers are considered as
business and employee costs, with employers transferring
some of this cost liability to employees through increased
individual employee premiums, copays, and deductibles.
This cost shifting has affected individuals and families as
usable income declines, even in a time of a stable income.
Insurance companies address the issue of individuals using
more healthcare services when covered than if they were
not provided by insurance through deductibles and copay-
ments. Unruh and Spetz (2012) describe this situation as
a moral hazard that leads to greater demand for services
and increased cost with use (p. 155).
As noted by Cowan and Hartman (2005), an increase
in premiums resulted from increased costs and use, as well
as the decline in manufacturing jobs and a resultant in-
crease in service sector jobs, which occurred earlier in this
decade and impacted worker benefits because service sector
jobs are less likely to provide health insurance (p. 11). Em-
ployers contract through insurers to provide coverage for
their employees. However, in recent years some major em-
ployers became their own insurers as the cost of group in-
surance premiums rose and coverage was questioned for
cost-effectiveness or safety. Health insurance can also be
obtained through personal funds, but this has often been
cost prohibitive and has caused individuals and families to
delay preventive healthcare when costs are considered part
of the family monthly budget. Another coverage compo-
nent is when a worker leaves, loses a position, or has a
qualified event that allows for legal continuation of health
insurance for a specified period of time through a group
plan according to the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Rec-
onciliation Act of 1985 (COBRA). However, this could
still be a costly individual or family expense at a time with
perhaps limited assets. As we will later see with the ACA,
a focus on prevention, health promotion, and the devel-
opment of insurance exchanges was the basis to address
some of these issues.
Governmental healthcare coverage occurs through na-
tional, federal, or state provisions and entitlements. In the
United States, federal programs are in place for special
populations like active or retired members of the military
TABLE 16.3
Differences in Healthcare Expenditures for Selected Countries, 2009
Healthcare 
Healthcare 
Healthcare 
Expenditures on 
Expenditures 
Expenditures on 
Expenditures on
Healthcare Insurance
on Inpatient 
Outpatient 
Long-Term 
and Administration
Country
Care (%)
Care (%)
Care (%)
(%)
United States
Canada
Norway
Sweden
France
Germany
Japan
Source: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). (2013). Health at a glance 2013: OECD indicators.
Retrieved from http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/social-issues-migration-health/health-at-a-glance_19991312;jsessionid=
612e179lbg8ul.x-oecd-live-01.
7.0
3.7
0.8
1.4
7.0
5.4
1.9
51
33
26
42
23
29
34
6
15
27
8
12
12
9
19
20
32
28
36
29
32

or their dependents and the aging population. Other pro-
grams for children or disabled individuals are shared
through federal, state, and local governments. We have
seen how changes in plans and coverage have established
reimbursement and coding plans that provide direction to
reimbursement from the other sources. Further details on
the initiatives associated with Medicare and Medicaid in
the United States are presented in a later section.
Individual or family assets may be used to provide for
healthcare, whether for insurance, copays, care, or private
pay. In the past, individuals could seek private insurance
or payment plans, but often at an increased cost without
the purchasing power of numbers that occurs with a
group plan. The Insurance Exchanges called for by the
ACA were envisioned as a means to promote private in-
surance coverage through a federal or state “group” plan
or insurance exchange.
Charitable coverage may be available in secular or re-
ligious communities by virtue of membership. Charitable
coverage as uncompensated care may also occur on an
episodic basis when an organization or institution “writes
off” selected charges as a component of their contribution
to the community, a tax liability, or an operational agree-
ment, especially in the situation of uninsured or underin-
sured patients. 
PRICE, COST, AND
REIMBURSEMENT
The price and cost of healthcare are not the same when
the issue of reimbursement is considered. The actual cost
of healthcare is the price or the monetary amount of goods
and services to cover the episode of care. On the other
hand, reimbursement is the amount of money provided
to pay for that particular episode of care based on an
agreed or approved process. In healthcare, we have seen
several accounting systems used for reimbursement be-
cause we are generally dealing with third-party payers.
Providers usually do not know the true cost of providing
their services.
Consider the payers for healthcare as first, second, and
third parties. First-party payers are those seeking the
healthcare service, whether an individual who is a private
payer or a member of a group plan with specified copays
or minimums to be met. The second-party payers are the
providers, plan administrators, or employer who collects
premiums, pays, or copays for a group of individuals.
Third-party payers are the insurers who collect the premi-
ums, assess and accept the risk of the group, and reimburse
the providers for the service. 
To pay for the healthcare service, several methodolo-
gies are used and have evolved as healthcare costs are ad-
dressed, whether in advance of the service, through prior
anticipation or negotiation for the service, or after the
service. 
Retrospective payment plans were predominant before
the middle 1980s and the introduction of diagnostic-
related groups (DRGs). With the retrospective systems,
hospitals and other providers were paid after services and
treatments were performed through a complicated “cost-
based” formula. Leading to the implementation of DRGs,
a technical review committee noted that “until 1982,
Medicare employed a retrospective cost-based reimburse-
ment approach whereby hospitals could recover from
Medicare most of what they spent on Medicare benefici-
aries . . . [with] little incentive to contain costs” and en-
couraged additional capacity, technologies, and complex
services (Office of Technology Assessment, 1983, p. 3).
DRGs were developed to address case load, costs, and re-
ward structures for cost savings.
The prospective payment system (PPS) is a fixed pay-
ment method that is based on a predetermined amount
for the usual care needed for a patient with a specific con-
dition. If the care is more expensive, the provider must ab-
sorb the additional costs. If the cost of the patient care
comes in at a lesser amount, the provider benefits.
Providers would like to come in under budget to use the
funds for systems maintenance and reinvestment, but
safety and quality are vital and ethical considerations. Clin-
ical or critical pathways and care maps have been used to
standardize care for patients along expected trajectories
and in line with evidence-based protocols and practice.
Monitoring and evaluation are important components of
this process that is alert for variations in patient conditions
and care provisions.
Fee-for-service (FFS) plans are the traditional payment
methods in which each service is charged separately, as
with provider visits, laboratory tests, and supplies. Unin-
sured individuals are billed separately for each of these
services. As a member of a group plan, individuals pay a
premium based on risk assessments and historical use of
services (typically 3 years), along with plan-associated de-
ductibles and copays.
Managed care covers a variety of treatment and pay-
ment options. As noted by Chang, Price, and Pfoutz
(2001), managed care combines the financing and delivery
of services into a single entity (p. 88). Several forms of
managed care have evolved and continue to address this
concept, as with provider networks and selected plans.
However, the ultimate goals are to maintain health and
prevent disease and disability, thus reducing healthcare
costs. A major concept in managed care is capitated pay-
ments, in which each enrollee is entered into the plan with
a payment based on a risk ratio. The goal is to reduce the
risk for high healthcare costs and to promote savings.
Point-of-service (POS) plans generally occur through
a specified network of providers. The patient selects a pri-
mary care provider from this network. The primary care
provider serves as a gatekeeper, and consultations with
others must have prior approval for reimbursement. The
patient may elect to go to providers outside the network,
but that is a choice, and care can be more costly. Health,
wellness, and illness prevention are goals for these plans
to limit cost.
A preferred provider organization (PPO) is a provider
or provider agency included as part of a network and
agrees to negotiated rates for patients who use the PPOs
listed. If the patient goes out of the network to another
provider, additional and non-reimbursed patient charges
will be incurred for that preference. An important consid-
eration is the menu of negotiated rates and what may re-
sult in additional charges.
A medical savings account (MSA) is a federal tax in-
centive program used by employers or Medicare recipi-
ents in which a high deductible is agreed on with an
280
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

CHAPTER 16 Economics and Healthcare Policy     ●
281
amount provided in a nontaxable savings account to pay
for initial care. Self-management of healthcare cost is a
key feature, with payments made to the plan rather than
insurance premiums. Money in the account will earn in-
terest and can accumulate over the years until needed for
a major medical expense. Tax liabilities are a considera-
tion if the account funds are not used for approved ex-
penses that reduce the deductible amount. After the
deductible is met, services are provided without addi-
tional cost to the patient.
The accountable care organization (ACO) has
evolved as a component of the ACA as a shared savings
organization designed to promote accountability, risk
management, and coordinated care. Beginning with pilot
programs in 2012, care for minimum groups of Medicare
FFS beneficiaries under Parts A, B, and D would be pro-
vided by selected groups of providers of services and care.
The goals of these high-quality, efficient care coordina-
tion provider groups are to keep the Medicare recipients
out of hospitals and encourage investment in infrastruc-
ture and redesigned care processes with quality reporting.
As further described by the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS, 2013a), a provider that be-
comes an ACO “succeeds in both delivering high-quality
care and spending health care dollars more wisely [and]
will share in the savings it achieves for the Medicare pro-
gram” (p. 1). However, of the 32 original ACOs selected
to participate in this program, a significant number sub-
sequently withdrew from the program by 2014 based on
the financials of the initiative.
MEDICARE, MEDICAID, AND
THE CHILDREN’S HEALTH
INSURANCE PROGRAM
In the United States, Medicare, Medicaid, and state 
Children’s Health Insurance Programs (CHIP) are major
governmental entities that provide healthcare for select
populations. Medicare was the first program, beginning
in 1965 with the Social Security Act under Title XVIII.
Refer to Table 16.4 for major timelines for these federal
programs.
As a refresher, consider the four parts of Medicare:
A, B, C, and D. Recall that Medicare is available for
Americans aged 65 years or older, those with certain dis-
abilities, and those with end-stage renal disease. Medicare
Part A provides for inpatient hospital, skilled rehabilita-
tive, hospice, and home care services for enrolled indi-
viduals. Payment for this coverage occurred while
working as employment taxes or may be provided
through enrollment in Part B or through a documented
disability. Coverage of charges depends on hospital ad-
mission and specific treatment orders. Medicare Part B
TABLE 16.4
Timelines on Medicare, Medicaid, and Children’s Health Insurance
Program
Medicare
In excess of 19 million Americans 65 years and older to receive health-
care coverage
Medicare eligibility extended to selected individuals with disabilities
Home health services broadened and Medicare supplemental insurance
available
Diagnostic-related groups (DRGs) implemented for all Medicare-
participating hospitals
Emergency departments to provide screening and treatment stabilization
(EMTALA)
Protections for nursing home residents (Omnibus Reconciliation Act)
Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act (MCAA) for hospital/skilled facilities
Spousal impoverishment costing with institutional and community living
MCCA repealed and new schedule of fees implemented
Managed care plan choices established to slow spending
Increased payments for some Medicare providers
Improved coverage for managed care
Prescription drug discounts and prevention coverage 
Part D voluntary drug benefit and subsidies to retiree programs
Part D premium differentials depending on incomes of beneficiaries
Establishment of Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs) and payments
linked to quality outcomes as part of the Patient Protection and Afford-
able Care Act (ACA)
1966
1972
1980
1983
1985
1987
1988
1989
1997
1999
2000
2003
2006
2009
Continued

covers approved outpatient care, necessary and selected
preventive services, and equipment, usually by virtue of
an additional premium based on a prior year’s annual in-
come paid with Social Security. Medicare Part C is a se-
lected “Advantage Plan” in which Part A and Part B
services are provided by a FFS, PPO, health maintenance
organization (HMO), or a special plan selected by the
participant, who follows the rules of the selected health-
care organization and pays the required premium.
Medicare Part D is the optional prescription drug cov-
erage plan. Monthly Part D premiums are based on the
drug plan and the prior year’s annual income and may
be deducted from the monthly Social Security check.
The provision of Medicare Part D through the
Medicare prescription Drug Improvement and Modern-
ization Act of 2003 has been noted as the “the most signif-
icant improvement to senior health care in nearly 40 years”
(CMS, 2013c, p. 1). In excess of 50 million Americans are
covered by Medicare, but not all are enrolled in the op-
tional Part D. As reported by the Henry J. Kaiser Family
Foundation (2013a), at least 10 percent of Medicare ben-
eficiaries do not have credible drug coverage despite the
fact that 39 million Medicare beneficiaries were enrolled
in Medicare Part D, a Medicare Advantage Drug Plan, or
an employee-sponsored retiree drug plan (p. 2). Subsidies
are available and can be applied for, but outreach is an im-
portant consideration. One of the main issues with Part D
is the “donut hole” that occurs when high users reach the
maximum allowable amount and then must use personal
resources to pay for medication until the next plateau for
coverage is reached. Reducing this cost is one of the features
of the ACA, which started in 2011 as a small rebate and
then in 2014 became a reduction in the program feature.
Many Medicare recipients, however, carry supplemen-
tal insurance to pay for needed inpatient and outpatient
expenses. “Due to Medicare’s relatively high cost-sharing
requirements, the vast majority of beneficiaries have some
source of coverage that supplements Medicare, including
nine million Medicare beneficiaries who purchase Medi-
gap policies” (Jacobson, Huang, & Neuman, 2014, p. 1).
This “Medigap” market has seen similar economic
scrutiny as healthcare costs have escalated and measures
have been directed at controlling Medicare spending for
recipients, many of whom are on limited or fixed incomes
282
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
TABLE 16.4
Timelines on Medicare, Medicaid, and Children’s Health Insurance
Program—cont’d
Medicaid
State Children’s 
Health Insurance 
Program
(CHIP)
Source: Adapted from: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2005). Key milestones in Medicare and Medicaid
history, selected years: 1965–2003. Health Care Financing Review, 27(2). Retrieved from http://www.cms.gov/Research-
Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Research/HealthCareFinancingReview/downloads/05-06Winpg1.pdf 
State phase-in process for children without parental support and their
caregivers, and low-income individuals and individuals with disabilities
Eligibility extended for individuals with disabilities
Hospitals with high percentage of low-income patients received additional
state support [Disproportionate share hospitals (DSH)]
State optional Medicaid coverage for pregnant women and infants
Mandated coverage for pregnant women and infants at 100% federal
poverty level (FPL)
Coverage of pregnant women and children <6 years under 133% of FPL
with expanded screening and treatment 
Expanded coverage of children 6–16 years under 100% FPL and Medicaid
Prescription Drug Rebate program established
Medicaid controls established
Welfare link to Medicaid reformed
Work incentives for Medicaid recipients and improved funding to 
hospitals and women’s health services
Federal health and rural health clinics established
Exanded eligibility and funding as part of the ACA with specific 
requirements from 2014–2019
Program establishment under the Balanced Budget Act as Title XXI of the
Social Security Act for uninsured children not eligible for Medicaid
Program extended through March 2009; Reauthorized in 2009
States required to maintain eligibility through September 30, 2019 with
funding increases from 2014–2019 under the ACA of 2009
1966
1972
1981
1986
1988
1989
1990 
1991
1996
1999
2000
2009
1997
2007–2009
2009

CHAPTER 16 Economics and Healthcare Policy     ●
283
and some who have additional supplementary retiree or
federal coverage.
The Medicaid program was authorized under Title
XIX of the Social Security Act in 1965 but was designed
to be phased in as a joint program between federal, state,
and local governments. Medicaid funding and programs
at the state and local levels are provided by some federal
funding and regulated through eligibility requirements.
Primary recipients of Medicaid are pregnant women, chil-
dren, parents and caregivers, seniors, and people with dis-
abilities. However, Medicaid is the primary payer for
long-term care services, with $257 billion spent in 2011
for long-term care for elders in nursing homes, for com-
munity diversion programs, and for assistance in payment
of Medicare premiums (Henry J. Kaiser Family Founda-
tion, 2013c, 2014c). 
States address both federally mandated eligibility groups
and other optional populations. For some groups, man-
dated eligibility requirements are based on 100 percent of
the federal poverty level (FPL). The FPL is updated on an
annual basis. For 2014, the FPL for a family of four was
an annual income of between $23,850 and $27,430, 
depending on state of residence. Low income is only one
test for Medicaid eligibility, and other financial resources
have threshold levels determined by each state within the
federal guidelines (Klees & Wolfe, 2013, p. 22). States can
apply to increase the eligibility level, and many states pro-
vide benefits and care for pregnant women significantly
above the minimum level. Additional eligibility require-
ments include state residency, immigration status, and doc-
umentation of citizenship. Optional populations include
the medically needy, as identified by the state, and selected
groups who earn above the minimum income requirement.
In addition, the state can assess premiums or copayments
to optional groups. The ACA provides additional eligibility
for adults with the standard of 133 percent of the FPL be-
ginning in 2014. 
As noted by Cowan and Hartman (2005), “Medicaid
accounts for the largest portion of State and local govern-
ments’ health care expenditures” (p. 17). And this burden
is increasing, especially given the additional eligibility with
the ACA. But as these researchers continue to point out
regarding the burden at the state and local levels, “unlike
the Federal Government that can support deficit spending,
almost all State governments must balance their budgets
each year, making the pressure they face from rising State
healthcare costs particularly acute” (Cowan & Hartman,
2005, p. 23). Promoting health and keeping residents
healthy are less costly than chronic care, but this is still a
controversial issue in many state governments. The ACA
of 2009 gave states the option of expanding Medicaid el-
igibility in 2014 to 138 percent of the FPL. However,
states were allowed to opt out of this requirement follow-
ing a Supreme Court decision in 2012. 
The Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP)
was originally enacted in 1997 as Title XXI of the Social
Security Act for a 10-year period as SCHIP to provide
health coverage for uninsured children who were not eli-
gible for Medicaid. The program provides federal match-
ing funds to states to provide this coverage. After the
original 10-year period, it was extended for another 2 years
and then reauthorized in April 2009 and renamed the
CHIP program. To encourage state participation and to
provide enhanced coverage for this program, the federal
annual matching funds rate is higher than the Medicaid
program. The CHIP program was further enhanced and
extended through the ACA with funding to continue
through fiscal year (FY) 2019 at increased levels, for ex-
ample as follows:
FY 2012: $14,982,000,000
FY 2013: $17,406,000,000
FY 2014: $19,147,000,000
FY 2015: $18,211,000,000 (CHIP, 2011)
Further special CHIP initiatives are provided through
the ACA. Although this program is jointly funded by the
federal government and the individual states, the District
of Columbia, and the territories, it is designed and deliv-
ered by the individual states in accordance with guidelines
from the CMS. Some states, territories, and the District
of Columbia use the federal program as an expansion of
their Medicaid program, whereas other states treat CHIP
as a separate program or a combination of the two. In ad-
ditional to healthcare and health promotion services, ben-
efits of the program include early detection and screening
programs and dental care.
ONLINE CONSULT 
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services at:
http://www.medicare.gov/
http://www.medicaid.gov/ 
The Children’s Health Insurance Program at
http://www.medicaid.gov/CHIP/CHIP-Program-
Information.html 
Coding and Comparisons
An important consideration for reimbursement is the cod-
ing of care for reimbursement or payment. As mentioned
previously, the introduction of DRGs in 1982 provided a
system of prospective reimbursement based on a typical
case scenario in response to rapidly escalating hospital costs
for Medicare recipients. Lack of cost controls with reim-
bursement methods and the expanding technology were
blamed for dramatically increasing costs between 1967
(covering 19.5 million recipients at a cost of $4.7 million
as 9.2 percent of healthcare expenditures) and 1985 (with
31.1 million Medicare recipients at a cost of $72.3 billion
16.9 percent of healthcare expenditures) (Office of 
Inspector General Office of Evaluation and Inspections
Region IX, 2001, p. 2). In 1983, Medicare payments were
capped, based on the diagnostic category on a per case
basis. The effects of this system were not restricted to
Medicare; private insurance reimbursements rapidly fol-
lowed the lead with a PPS rather than a retrospective cost-
based system or formula. 
DRG categories “bundle” costs on a per case basis and
include operating and delivery costs, such as care delivery,
supplies, diagnostic studies, and equipment and technol-
ogy. DRGs set the payment for a particular diagnosis, not
for the costs of the actual services and care to the patient.

In the current DRG structure, more than 700 DRGs are
identified and weighted. Claims for reimbursement for
Medicare Part A inpatients were coded in accordance with
International Classification of Diseases, initially under the
ninth revision (ICD-9). DRGs are reimbursed for services
considering certain “weighted” factors, such as case com-
plexity as with case “outliers,” geography (urban versus
rural), labor costs, and special functions as with teaching
hospitals and those hospitals caring for a larger proportion
of low-income patients. In 2011, the three most fre-
quently billed DRGs related to joint replacements, psy-
choses, and severe infection (Modern Healthcare, 2013).
DRG classifications and weights and Medicare Part B
premiums and deductibles are evaluated by CMS on an
annual (calendar year [CY]) basis for reimbursement con-
siderations. For example, the Medicare Part A inpatient
deductible was $1,184 in 2013 and $1,216 in 2014
(Medicare Program, 2013). 
Approved IDC codes lead to reimbursement for ser -
vices and date back to their origin in 1899 when the focus
was on causes of death. The first revision was IDC-1 and
was in use from 1900 to 1909. With implementation of
DRGs in the 1980s, IDC-9 codes were used from 1995
to 2011. In 2012, the ICD-9 system began the transition
to ICD-10 with the deadline of October 1, 2015 for all
diagnoses and inpatient procedures. There were nearly
5,000 classifications of disease in IDC-9, but this expands
to nearly 8,000 in IDC-10, with increased details and
focus on causes of morbidity (Moriyama et al., 2011).
The IDC-10 uses three- to seven-digit codes and affects
all diagnosis and inpatient coding for everyone covered
by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act (HIPAA).
In the case of coding for Medicare Part B (outpatient
services), Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes
are used. The CPT coding system is maintained by the
American Medical Association and updated on an annual
basis. The CPT coding system is used by practitioners to
identify services and procedures provided for which they
will bill private and public health insurance programs. To
provide more transparency on this complex system, CMS
(2014c) began providing a public data set on Medicare
FFS beneficiaries, with information on services and pro-
cedures provided to Medicare beneficiaries by physicians
and other healthcare professionals, including payment and
submitted charges organized by the National Provider
Identifier (NPI) and the Healthcare Common Procedure
Coding System.
Coding and the use of the electronic health record have
allowed for better data collection and comparison infor-
mation. For example, the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services Office of Inspector General (USDHHS;
2014) reported that Medicare beneficiaries paid higher co-
payments for outpatient services at critical access hospitals
(CAHs). CAHs are certified to provide essential services
to residents in rural areas and are reimbursed at higher
rates for the provision of these needed services. However,
it was found that Medicare beneficiaries paid between two
and six times the amount in coinsurance than they would
have paid for comparable services in acute care hospitals
and with a demonstrated increase from 2009 to 2012
without this CAH designation (USDHHS, 2014). This
report resulted in a recommendation for reform in the 
calculation of coinsurance for Medicare recipients.
HEALTHCARE POLICY 
AND REFORM 
Healthcare reform efforts are not new. When Florence
Nightingale transformed care for soldiers in the Crimea in
the middle of the 19th century, her actions and initiatives
transformed healthcare there and around the globe. Many
examples, before and after, of her influence on the envi-
ronment and hygiene can be identified as a reform initia-
tive. More recent efforts in the Unites Stated include the
initiation of Medicare in 1965 and DRGs in the 1980s.
Political leaders have endeavored to address the needs of
their constituents through attempts at legislation, some
limited, with many efforts “dying” in committee. 
Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act
The ACA was passed in 2010 with regulations and legal
challenges that continued for several years, including a
Supreme Court ruling in 2012. The legislation is wide-
spread and far reaching and was designed for a phased-in
implementation. The overall goals of the law were to ex-
pand healthcare coverage and improve the system, includ-
ing attempts to control escalating costs. The law addresses
quality, safe, and affordable care for people in the United
States. Quality and accountability are key ingredients of
the legislation that is designed to transform healthcare and
stem the rising numbers of uninsured and underinsured
individuals and families. 
The text of the law is more than 1,200 pages in length
and includes 10 sections. Benefits of the ACA have been
categorized in three areas:
●Care and Access
• Preventive care
• Drug discounts for seniors
• Choice of providers and access to emergency services
●Coverage and Costs
• Coverage of adults younger than 26 years under
patent’s policy
• Health insurance marketplace 
• Fraud protection 
• Tax credits for small businesses
●Consumer Protections
• Elimination of exclusion for preexisting conditions
• Consumer assistance
• Removal of lifetime limits
• Protection from unjustified premium increases 
(USDHHS, 2014.)
Initial provisions of the legislation began in 2011 with
the insurance reforms, including the coverage of depend-
ent children up to age 26 years and protections from can-
cellation of policies. Care coordination for individuals
eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid was also a goal
to make care more efficient. The “donut hole” for
Medicare Part D was also a focus, with beginning plans to
first offer a small rebate and then to slowly reduce the costs
284
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

CHAPTER 16 Economics and Healthcare Policy     ●
285
for high use of medications. Beginning in 2014, health in-
surance exchanges were implemented to assist individuals
and employers to obtain insurance coverage. As noted pre-
viously, Medicaid coverage will be expanded for adults and
families and especially for children thorough the CHIP
program, depending on state policies. 
Another key feature of the law is the encouragement
of coordinated care models. New healthcare delivery
models and projects began in 2012 with a focus on co-
ordinated care linked to reportable outcomes with a focus
on quality and safety. According to CMS (2013a), ACOs
are groups of doctors, hospitals, and other healthcare
providers that give coordinated high-quality care to
Medicare patients. CMS further delineates three models
of ACOs (Table 16.5). 
As noted by Colpas (2013) on the analysis for the pro-
posed ACO regulation, “Medicare could potentially save
$960 million over three years” (p. 6). The efficacy of these
models will depend on the data obtained to document
the results of their innovations in care coordination and
any resultant cost savings. “The high cost of being able
to report the requisite quality metrics and to institute the
information system plus clinical and financial manage-
ment tools to improve performance over time were some
of the main reasons many organizations decided not to
become ACOs” (Nichols, 2012, pp. 711–712). Anderson
and Hogan (2013) even address the concept of a “super
ACO” for large systems that can expand geographic cov-
erage, reduce competition, and garner the effects of
economies of scale that smaller organizations could not
address (p. 88). However, not all organizations can rein-
vent themselves as an ACO. As discussed by Hayen, van
den Berg, Meijboom, and Westert (2013), “ACOs need
to reconsider their provider configuration and make it ca-
pable of managing clinical and financial risk” (p. 517).
The financial considerations being the reason for some
ACO withdrawals in 2014. Further, Berry and Beckham
(2014) emphasize the importance of a team-based model
and of changing the culture for this emphasis. 
Health promotion and prevention activities are high-
lighted with an enhanced focus on access, evidence-based
practices, and system integrity and transparency through
ACOs. Improved technology and system improvements
for healthcare insurers and providers are key features. In
the Report to Congress: National Strategy for Quality Im-
provements in Health Care, the national aims were specified
as better care, healthy people/healthy communities, and
affordable care (Healthcare.gov, 2011, p. 2). However, the
effectiveness of ACOs has not yet been fully demonstrated,
both clinically and in terms of cost. 
In the inaugural year (2013–2014), health insurance
exchanges received much attention and criticism. The U.S.
Supreme Court upheld the regulation requiring health in-
surance coverage or the imposition of a penalty. The initial
individual penalty would initially be applied on the 2015
income taxes, but this would increase in subsequent years.
The penalty for those not covered in 2014 was $95 per
adult and $47.50 per child, or 1 percent of the family in-
come, whichever was higher. However, the penalty in-
creases each year, as from $95 for a noncovered adult in
2014 to $325 in 2015, or 2 percent of the income, and
higher in 2016. Insurance exchanges were either the fed-
erally facilitated marketplace for 26 states or the state-
based marketplace. The accessibility of online access to the
federal exchange was a major barrier because the original
online system was not designed to handle the volume.
Variable reports on registration goals were reported at the
closing of the first enrollment period. 
Initially, individual perception of “sticker shock” was
reported, with consumers not expecting the cost required
for the basic coverage. The exchanges provide basic, essen-
tial coverage but also have different levels of coverage
(bronze, silver, gold, and platinum coverage). Although the
exchanges were designed for “purchasing power,” as op-
posed to the individual in the past attempting to obtain
high-cost private health insurance, there is not an employer
contribution to the cost of the premium. In addition, both
individual risk scores (based on age, gender, and diagnoses)
TABLE 16.5
Accountable Care Organizations 
Medicare Shared 
Advanced Payment 
Savings 
Model
Pioneer Model
FFS for coordinated care, accountability, 
and encouraging investment in 
infrastructure and redesigned care 
processes. “The Shared Savings 
Program will reward ACOs that lower 
their growth in healthcare costs while 
meeting performance standards on 
quality of care and putting patients 
first” (CMS, 2013a, p. 1).
Source: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2013a). Accountable care organizations. Retrieved from
http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-Payment/ACO/
Project involved 23 experi-
enced, coordinated care health-
care organizations and providers
to move to a population-based
payment model. This model is
designed to work in coordina-
tion with private payers by 
aligning provider incentives to
improve quality and health out-
comes and achieve cost savings.
Upfront and monthly payments
are made for coordinated care
and investments in infrastructure
for small and rural practices in
an effort to demonstrate
whether these advanced pay-
ments result in increased partici-
pation, improved care, and
demonstrated Medicare savings. 

and average risk scores for the individual plans are consid-
erations. However, also consider the new ACA requirement
that individuals could not be excluded for preexisting con-
ditions. Insurance policies consider the “risk pool” and do
not want to be at the higher end, resulting in more costs
paid out. The ACA has another provision to encourage
program participation and address the nonexclusion clause
for prior existing conditions. The “temporary risk corridor
program is intended to promote accurate premiums in the
early years of the exchanges (2014 through 2016) by dis-
couraging insurers from setting them high in response 
to uncertainty about who will enroll and what they will
cost . . . by cushioning insurers participating in exchanges
and marketplaces from extreme gains and losses” (Henry
J. Kaiser Family Foundation, 2014a, pp. 7–8). With this
program, targets were set for insurers at 80 percent of costs
of healthcare and quality improvement. If the insurers fell
below or above the allowable range, they would either be
reimbursed or be required to reimburse the risk pool pro-
gram. Note that this program targets both allowable costs
and quality improvement initiatives. All of this requires a
focus on access, quality improvement, and equity.
One of the goals of healthcare reform is to provide
health equity and to promote population health. Health
equity has been defined by the National Partnership for
Action to End Health Disparities (2011) as follows:
[T]he attainment of the highest level of health for all
people. Achieving health equity requires valuing everyone
equally with focused and ongoing societal efforts to ad-
dress avoidable inequalities, historical and contemporary
injustices, and the elimination of health and healthcare
disparities. (p. 1)
The issue of health equity has an important role in
healthcare reform and cost containment. Each organiza-
tion will address this in its mission, policies, and proce-
dures. Shared governance in nursing will also be a major
contributor in this process.
286
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
ONLINE CONSULT 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act at
http://www.hhs.gov/healthcare/rights/law/
Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Reform at
http://kff.org/health-reform/ 
Supreme Court Ruling at
http://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/11pdf/
11-393c3a2.pdf
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
Consider the issue of healthcare resources and the ability to benefit. The cost of healthcare services has esca-
lated, with cost controls sought on a daily basis by both users and providers. Think about the amounts paid
through the Medicaid program for long-term care. These costs include covering the elderly in both nursing
homes and in the community. The goal is to keep elders in the community, and some states have imple-
mented “diversion programs” to keep frail elders in the community rather than in nursing home settings. 
Review the conditions and eligibility for one Medicaid Diversion Program at http://elderaffairs.state.fl.us/doea/
cares.php
Question: What are your thoughts about safety, cost-effectiveness, and health equity?
We discussed accountability and responsibility in
Chapter 10 with delegation skills. Both of those con-
cepts are also critical in terms of economics and health-
care policy. Accountability and responsibility mean we
are answerable to our patients and the healthcare system
for quality, cost-effective outcomes. The demonstration
of these moral and ethical imperatives is provided in
our commitment to evidence-based practices and the
metrics we use to analyze and evaluate these practices.
With the current initiative for transparency, this ac-
countability is apparent to consumers, professionals,
and society. Fiscal responsibility involves being answer-
able to our patients, our colleagues, and the healthcare
system for quality, cost-effective outcomes. As Levine
(2009) has observed on the topic of healthcare reform,
“great savings could be achieved in two areas: adminis-
trative costs and unnecessary care” (pp. e16(1)–e16(2)).
To do this requires ethical collaborative practice and
involvement in healthcare policy and change. The
American Nurses Association (2010) Standards of Pro-
fessional Performance are particularly applicable here,
especially evidence-based practice, quality of practice,
communication, leadership, collaboration, and resource
utilization. Involvement of nurses in policy making and
politics is an imperative for professional practice, as we
will discuss in Chapter 17.
K E Y  P O I N T S
●Economics is the study of production of a product or service, along with issues of supply and demand
and distribution of that product or service for the continuity or well-being of some entity. Healthcare
economics is a specialty area of economics focused on the different parts of the healthcare system that
supply and deliver services.

CHAPTER 16 Economics and Healthcare Policy     ●
287
K E Y  P O I N T S —cont’d
●The gross national product (GNP) is the goods and services produced in a nation and is measured on an
annual basis. The gross domestic product (GDP) is restricted to the goods and services produced within
the nation.
●The cost of healthcare is the price or the monetary amount of goods and services to cover the episode
of care.
●Reimbursement is the amount of money provided to pay for that particular episode of care based on an
agreed or approved process. 
●First-party payers are the individuals; second-party payers are the providers, plan administrators, or em-
ployers who collect the premiums; and third-party payers are the insurers who assess and assume the
risks of the group and reimburse the healthcare providers for their services.
●The prospective payment system (PPS) is a fixed payment method that is based on a predetermined
amount as the usual care needed for a patient with a specific condition.
●Fee-for-service (FFS) plans are the traditional payment methods in which each service is charged sepa-
rately, as with provider visits, laboratory tests, and supplies. 
●Managed care covers a variety of treatment and payment options, with the ultimate goals to maintain
health and prevent disease and disability, thus reducing healthcare costs. 
●Point-of-service (POS) plans generally occur through a specified network of providers, whereby the pri-
mary care provider serves as a gatekeeper and consultations with others must have prior approval for 
reimbursement. 
●Preferred provider organizations (PPOs) are providers and provider agencies that are included as part of
a network and agree to negotiated rates for patients who use the PPOs listed in the network.
●Health maintenance organizations (HMOs) are focused on managed care within a specified system, keep-
ing capitated members healthy, and avoiding costs of expensive diagnostic and medical procedures. 
●A medical savings account (MSA) is a federal tax incentive program used by employers or Medicare 
recipients for self-management of healthcare in which a high deductible is agreed on with an amount 
provided in a savings account to pay for initial care. 
●Accountable care organizations (ACOs) have evolved as a component of the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act (ACA) as shared savings organizations designed to promote accountability, risk 
management, and coordinated care. 
●In the United States, Medicare, Medicaid, and state Children’s Health Insurance Programs (CHIP) are
major governmental entities that provide healthcare for select populations. Medicare was the first pro-
gram, beginning in 1965 with the Social Security Act under Title XVIII. Refer to Table 16.4 for major
timelines for these federal programs.
●Medicare is available for Americans aged 65 years or older, those with certain disabilities, and those with
end-stage renal disease. Medicare Part A provides for inpatient hospital, skilled rehabilitative, hospice, 
and home care services. Medicare Part B covers approved outpatient care, necessary and selected pre-
ventive services, and equipment, usually by virtue of an additional premium. Medicare Part C is a selected
“Advantage Plan” in which Part A and Part B services are provided by an FFS, PPO, HMO, or a special
plan. Medicare Part D is the optional prescription drug coverage plan. 
●The Medicaid program was authorized in 1965 under Title XIX of the Social Security Act with programs
at the state and local levels provided by some federal funding and regulated through eligibility 
requirements. 
●The Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP), originally enacted in 1997 as Title XXI of the Social 
Security Act, provides health coverage for uninsured children who are not eligible for Medicaid. 
●Health equity has been defined as “the attainment of the highest level of health for all people” (National
Partnership for Action to End Health Disparities, 2011, p. 1).
●Fiscal responsibility involves being answerable to our patients, our colleagues, and the healthcare system
for quality, cost-effective outcomes.

REFERENCES 
American Nurses Association. (2010). Nursing: Scope and 
standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursesbooks.org.
Anderson, D., & Hogan, N. (2013). Emerging ’super ACOs’
fill unique needs. Healthcare Financial Management, 67(10),
88–94.
Berry, L. L., & Beckham, D. (2014). Team-based care at 
Mayo Clinic: A model for ACOs. Journal of Healthcare 
Management, 59(1), 9–13.
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2005).
Key milestones in Medicare and Medicaid history, selected
years: 1965-2003. Health Care Financing Review, 27(2). 
Retrieved from http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-
Data-and-Systems/Research/HealthCareFinancingReview
/downloads/05-06Winpg1.pdf 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2013a).
Accountable care organizations. Retrieved from http://www
.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-Payment/
ACO/ 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2013b).
The IDC-10 transition: An introduction. Retrieved from
http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Coding/ICD10/Downloads
/ICD10Introduction20140819.pdf
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2013c).
Prescription drug coverage: General information. Retrieved
from https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Prescription-Drug
-Coverage/PrescriptionDrugCovGenIn/index.html
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2014).
Medicare provider utilization and payment data. Retrieved from
https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems
/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/Medicare-Provider-Charge
-Data/
Chang, C. F., Price, S. A., & Pfoutz, S. K. (2001). Economics and
nursing: Critical professional issues. Philadelphia: F. A. Davis. 
Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP). (2011). Allot-
ment methodology and states’ fiscal years 2009 through
2015 CHIP allotments. 42 CFR § 457. 
Colpas, P. (2013). Accountable care organizations help to coor-
dinate care. Health Management Technology, 34(7), 6–9.
Cowan, C. A., & Hartman, M. B. (2005). Financing health
care: Businesses, households, and governments, 1987–2003.
Health Care Financing Review Web Exclusive, 1(2). Retrieved
from https://www.cms.gov/HealthCareFinancingReview
/Downloads/Cowan2.pdf. 
Hayen, A. P., van den Berg, M. J., Meijboom, B. R., &
Westert, G. P. (2013). Accountable care organizations:
How to dress for success. American Journal of Managed
Care, 19(6), 517–519.
Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. (2013a). Fact sheet: The
Medicare Part D prescription drug benefit. Retrieved from
http://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2013/11
/7044-14-medicare-part-d-fact-sheet.pdf 
Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. (2013b). Medicaid and its 
role in state/federal budgets and health reform. Retrieved from
http://kff.org/health-reform/fact-sheet/five-key-questions-and
-answers-about-medicaid/ 
Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. (2013c). Medicaid and the
uninsured. Retrieved from http://kaiserfamilyfoundation
.files.wordpress.com/2012/05/8139-03.pdf 
Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. (2014a). Explaining health
care reform: Risk adjustment, reinsurance, and risk corridors.
Retrieved from http://kff.org/health-reform/issue-brief
/explaining-health-care-reform-risk-adjustment-reinsurance
-and-risk-corridors/
Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. (2014b). Kaiser health pol-
icy news index: January 2014. Retrieved from http://kff.org
288
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
Thought and Discussion Questions 
1. Discuss the values and demands for healthcare from the perspectives of:
• An employer who is trying to choose a health plan
• An employee who will be using the services of the health plan
• An uninsured family who is seeking coverage through the state insurance exchange
2. From a public policy standpoint, can the U.S. healthcare system continue to reduce the number of uninsured while
controlling demand and limiting overall costs with the current fragmented insurance structure? Would a single-
payer system be better?
3. Describe how you would evaluate the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of strategies designed to limit
costs. Provide examples of nursing-sensitive patient outcomes.
4. Discuss the financial implications of providing the following services in your community:
• Ambulatory services
• Hospital care
• Preventative services
• Rehabilitation
5. Review the Chapter Thought at the beginning of the chapter and be prepared to discuss its meaning in the 
context of the chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter. 

CHAPTER 16 Economics and Healthcare Policy     ●
289
/health-reform/poll-finding/kaiser-health-policy-news-index
-january-2014/ 
Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. (2014c). Visualizing health
policy: A short look at long-term care for seniors. Retrieved
from http://kff.org/infographic/visualizing-health-policy-a
-short-look-at-long-term-care-for-seniors/ 
Herrera, C-N., Gaynor, M., Newman, M., Town, R. J., 
& Parente, S. T. (2013). Trends underlying employer-
sponsored health insurance growth for Americans younger
than age sixty-five. Health Affairs, 32(10), 1715–1722.
Jacobson, G., Huang, J., & Neuman, T. (2014). Medigap 
reform: Setting the context for understanding recent 
proposals. Kaiser Family Foundation Issue Brief. Retrieved
from http://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com
/2014/01/8235-02-medigap-reform-setting-the-context
-for-understanding-recent-proposals1.pdf 
Kimbuende, E., Ranji, U., Lundy, J., & Salganicoff, A. (2013).
U.S. health care costs. In C. L. Estes, S. A. Chapman, C.
Dodd, B. Hollister, & C. Harrington (Eds.), Health policy
crisis and reform (6th ed., pp. 548–553). Burlington, MA:
Jones & Bartlett.
Klees, B. S., & Wolfe, C. J. (2013). Brief summaries of Medicare
& Medicaid: Title XVIII and Title XIX of the Social Security
Act as of November 1, 2013. Washington, DC: Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid. Retrieved from http://www.cms
.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends
-and-Reports/MedicareProgramRatesStats/Downloads
/MedicareMedicaidSummaries2013.pdf 
Kovner, A. R., & Knickman, J. R. (Ed.). (2011). Health care
delivery in the United States (10th ed.). New York: Springer.
Levine, R. A. (2009). Fiscal responsibility and health care re-
form. New England Journal of Medicine, 361, e16(1)–e16(3).
Martin, A. B., Lassman, D., Washington, B., Catlin, A., & the
National Health Expenditure Accounts Team. (2012).
Growth in US health spending remained slow in 2010;
health share of gross domestic product was unchanged from
2009. Health Affairs, 31(1), 208–219. Retrieved from
http://content.healthaffairs.org/content/31/1/208 
Medicare Program (2013). Inpatient Hospital Deductible 
and Hospital and Extended Care Services Coinsurance
Amounts for CY 2014, 78 Fed. Reg. 2013-25595 (filed 
10-28-13). Retrieved from http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg
/FR-2013-10-30/pdf/2013-25595.pdf
Miller, L. M. P., Chang, C. F., & Pfoutz, S. K. (2012). Health-
care economics. In R. Kearney-Nunnery (Ed.), Advancing
your career: Concepts for professional nursing (5th ed., 
pp. 309–334). Philadelphia, PA: F.A. Davis.
Modern Healthcare (2013, October). Most frequently billed
DRGs ranked by 2011 Medicare patient discharges. Modern
Healthcare, 32.
Moriyama, I. M., Loy, R. M., Robb-Smith, A. H. T., 
Rosenberg, H. M., & Hoyert, D. L. (2011). History 
of the statistical classification of diseases and causes of death.
Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/misc
/classification_diseases2011.pdf 
National Partnership for Action to End Health Disparities.
(2011). Health equity and disparities. Retrieved from http://
www.minorityhealth.hhs.gov/npa/templates/browse.aspx?lvl
=1&lvlid=34
Nichols, L. (2012). Accountable care organization pathways: 
Diverse but ultimately parallel. Mayo Clinic Proceedings,
87(8), 710–713.
Office of Inspector General Office of Evaluation and Inspec-
tions Region IX. (August 2001). Medicare Hospital
Prospective Payment System How DRG Rates Are 
Calculated and Updated (OEI-09-00-00200). Retrieved
from https://oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/oei-09-00-00200.pdf
Office of Technology Assessment. (1983). Diagnostic related
groups (DRGs) and the Medicare program: Implications for
medical technology–a technical memorandum. Retrieved
from http://www.fas.org/ota/reports/8306.pdf
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). (2011a). Health at a glance 2011: OECD indica-
tors. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/health
_glance-2011-en 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). (2013). Total expenditure on health, Health: Key
tables from OECD, no. 1. doi: 10.1787/hlthxp-total-table-
2013-2-en; http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/social-issues
-migration-health/health-at-a-glance_19991312;jsessionid
=612e179lbg8ul.x-oecd-live-01 
Thomson, S., Osborn, R, & Jun, M. (Eds.). (2013). International
profiles of health care systems, 2013. The Commonwealth
Fund. Retrieved from http://www.commonwealthfund.
org/~/media/Files/Publications/Fund%20Report/2013/Nov
/1717_Thomson_intl_profiles_hlt_care_sys_2013_v2.pdf
Unruh, L., & Spetz, J. (2012). A primer on health economics.
In D. J. Mason, J. K. Leavitt, & M. W. Chaffee (Eds.), 
Policy and politics in nursing and health care (pp. 153–161).
St. Louis, MO: Elsevier/Saunders.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2011). 
Report to congress: National strategy for quality improvement
in health care. Retrieved from http://www.ahrq.gov
/workingforquality/nqs/nqs2011annlrpt.htma
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Office of In-
spector General. (2014). Medicare beneficiaries paid nearly
half of the costs for outpatient services at Critical Access Hospi-
tals. Retrieved from http://oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/oei
-05-12-00085.pdf
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). (2015).
Fact Sheet: Healthcare cost and utilization project (HCUP).
Retrieved from http://www.ahrq.gov/research/data/hcup/
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2012).
Your guide to Medicare medical savings account (MSA) plans.
Retrieved from http://www.medicare.gov/Publications
/Pubs/pdf/11206.pdf
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2013).
Critical access hospitals. Retrieved from http://www.cms
.gov/Medicare/Provider-Enrollment-and-Certification
/CertificationandComplianc/CAHs.html
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2013).
PPS overview. Retrieved from http://www.cms.gov
/ProspMedicareFeeSvcPmtGen/
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2013).
Premiums, deductible, and coinsurance amounts. Retrieved
from http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data
-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/Medicare
ProgramRatesStats/PremiumsDeductiblesCoinsurance.html 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). 
(2013). Prospective payment systems general information:

Overview. Retrieved from http://www.cms.gov/
ProspMedicareFeeSvcPmtGen/ 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2014).
HIPPA general information: Overview. Retrieved from
https://www.cms.gov/MedHCPCSGenInfo/
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2014).
Medicare and you. Retrieved from http://www.medicare
.gov/medicare-and-you/medicare-and-you.html
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2014).
Medicare coverage general information: Overview. Retrieved
http://www.cms.gov/CoverageGenInfo/ 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (n.d.). In-
patient prospective payment system hospital and long term care
hospital review and measurement fact sheet. Retrieved from
http://www.cms.gov/AcuteInpatientPPS/Downloads
/InpatientReviewFactSheet.pdf
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (n.d.). The
Affordable Care Act: Helping providers help patients—a menu
of options for improving care. Retrieved from http://www
.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-Payment
/ACO/Downloads/ACO-Menu-Of-Options.pdf
Democratic Policy Committee (DPC) Reports. (2009). Legisla-
tive bulletin: H.R. 3590, the legislative vehicle for the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2009. Retrieved from
http://dpc.senate.gov/dpcdoc.cfm?doc_name=lb-111-1-151 
Hogan, C., Lunney, J., Gabel, J., & Lynn, J. (2012). Medicare
beneficiaries’ costs of care in the last year of life. Health 
Affairs, 20(4), 188–195. Retrieved from http://content
.healthaffairs.org/content/20/4/188.full 
Hussey, P. S., Ridgely, M. S., & Rosenthal, M. B. (2011). The
PROMETHEUS bundled payment experiment: Slow start
shows problems in implementing new payment models.
Health Affairs, 30(11), 2116–2124. Retrieved from http://
content.healthaffairs.org/content/30/11/2116.full.html 
Kaiser Family Foundation. (2014). Many Medicare outpatients
pay more at rural hospitals, Federal report says. KHN Kaiser
Health News. Retrieved from http://www.kaiserhealthnews
.org/Stories/2014/October/08/Report-Finds-Higher
-Outpatient-Costs-For-Many-Medicare-Patients-At
-Rural-Hospitals.aspx 
Martin, A. B., Hartman, M., Whittle, L., Catlin, A., & the 
National Health Expenditure Accounts Team. (2014). 
National health spending in 2012: Rate of health spending
growth remained low for the fourth consecutive year.
Health Affairs, 33(1), 67–77.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). (2011b). Why is health spending in the United
States so high? Retrieved from http://www.oecd.org
/dataoecd/12/16/49084355.pdf
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2009. Retrieved
from http://democrats.senate.gov/pdfs/reform/patient
-protection-affordable-care-act-as-passed.pdf 
State Health Access Data Assistance Center. (2014). For kids’
sake: State-level trends in children’s health insurance. A state-
by-state analysis. Retrieved from http://www.rwjf.org
/content/dam/farm/reports/reports/2014/rwjf412274
Supreme Court of the United States. (2012). National Federa-
tion of Independent Business et al. v. Sebelius, Secretary of
Health and Human Services, et al. No. 11–393. Retrieved
from http://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/11pdf
/11-393c3a2.pdf
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2014). Read
the law. Retrieved from http://www.hhs.gov/healthcare
/rights/law/index.html 
ONLINE RESOURCES 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
http://cms.gov
COBRA Insurance
http://cobrainsurance.com
The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation
http://kff.org/
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
http://www.oecd.org/ 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
http://www.hhs.gov/healthcare/rights/law/index.html 
290
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Explain why it is important for nurses to possess political efficacy.
2. Discuss the process for the enactment of laws and associated regulations.
3. Identify the major committees at the federal and state levels, especially those that influence health
policy.
4. Identify how nurses can influence the passing of legislation.
5. Analyze statutes and regulations governing nursing practice.
6. Examine the roles and activities of nurses and professional associations in influencing health policy
decisions.
7. Demonstrate political involvement on a current health policy issue.
Political Efficacy
Government
Law
Bill
Committee Structure
Conference Committee
Regulations
Precedent 
Nurse Practice Acts 
Title Protection
Lobbying
Grassroots Effort
Political Action Committees (PACs)
Workplace Issues
Community or Civic Involvement
Professional Organizations
Voice of Agency
291
“There are risks and costs to a program of action, 
but they are far less than the long range risks 
and costs of comfortable inaction.”
John F. Kennedy, 1917–1963
Key Terms
The Politically Active
Nurse: An Imperative 
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
17

292
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
Hillary Rodam Clinton (2003) once observed, 
A political life, I’ve often said, is a continuing education
in human nature, including one’s own. . . . In each place
[of my involvement], I met someone or saw something
that caused me to open my mind and my heart and
deepen my understanding of the universal concerns that
most of humanity share. (p. x)
Politics is a process for finding solutions to these uni-
versal concerns of humanity, one being the concern for
public health and safety. Nurses likewise are engaged in
finding solutions to problems of humanity on a daily basis.
These problems are not restricted to a location or practice
area. The nursing professional advocates for the health of
people and policies aimed at health protection and pro-
motion. This imperative for change requires a broader
view of what is involved in making changes in public 
policy at the local, state, and national levels. Nurses have
become increasingly interested in public policy, realizing
that both their personal and their professional lives are 
significantly influenced by governmental policy and 
programs.
Nurses are effective in the political process when they
understand the sources of power and are willing to be in-
volved and make a difference. Interestingly, Wilson and
Dilulio (2004) have defined political efficacy as having
two components: internal political efficacy and external
political advocacy. Internal political efficacy is personal
competence or the “ability to understand and take part
in political affairs” (Wilson & Dilulio, 2004, p. 93). Ex-
ternal political advocacy is the “ability to make the sys-
tem respond to the citizenry” (Wilson & Dilulio, 2004,
p. 93). Nurses must develop their internal political effi-
cacy by being increasingly able to take part in the polit-
ical process. This will further the external political
efficacy of the nursing profession. These two compo-
nents are the political imperative of the profession. Ex-
ternal political efficacy is possible by virtue of the
number of nurses in the  profession who are skillful in
promoting change. In addition, we see the active involve-
ment of nursing organizations in political initiatives to
effect change in health policy. As described by Leininger
(2002), “political aspects of nursing are now a dominant
and frequent topic in hospitals and schools of nursing in
the current era” (p. 189).
Both internal efficacy and external political efficacy are
growing with the increasing involvement of nurses. As
noted by Mason, Leavitt, and Chaffee (2011), healthcare
is a political endeavor at all levels of government and in-
fluenced by healthcare institutions in the private  sector.
This is one area of influence for nursing professionals and
their political efficacy. The first step in the development
of political efficacy is understanding the political process
in government.
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION
OF GOVERNMENT
When we think of the term government, different images
may come to mind. We may be thinking of the federal
structure with its three components, executive, legislative,
and judicial. Or, at the local level, we may be envisioning
the organizational, local, and state influences on the 
operation of the healthcare unit. Government is merely
the controlling entity that has the authority to make deci-
sions and regulations for the public good. Milstead (2013)
describes government as an “iron triangle” of members of
Congress, bureaucratic staff, and interest groups. Nursing
has the responsibility to contribute to this process by pro-
viding the information needed and offering support for
wise policy decisions that protect the public and the pro-
fession. To participate most effectively in the political
process, one must understand the structure of government
at each level. Because government structures do vary, it 
is essential to be familiar with your own local and state
governing bodies. 
Branches of Government
Each branch of government plays a significant role in the
development and implementation of health policy. The
federal government and most state governments have three
branches: legislative, executive, and judicial. The powers
of the three federal branches are vested in accordance with
the U.S. Constitution.
Executive Branch
At the federal level, the executive branch consists of the
president, the cabinet-level departments, and regulatory
agencies. The executive branch is responsible for the ad-
ministration of government and the laws enacted. The
president sets the legislative agenda for Congress and the
annual budget for the nation. The president’s budget 
influences the funding available for healthcare programs,
reimbursement, and education. In addition, the agenda
set by the president determines what programs have a high
priority for the administration. The president can recom-
mend legislation and can approve or veto legislation passed
by Congress. It is also the executive branch that makes 
appointments to government departments, courts, boards,
and committees, as with the appointment of the surgeon
general or the secretary of health and human services. The
Constitution mandates that certain executive appoint-
ments be confirmed by the legislative branch.
Legislative Branch
The legislative branch comprises the two houses or cham-
bers of the U.S. Congress, the Senate and the House of
Representatives. Congress is responsible for lawmaking,
representation, and administrative oversight, including
oversight of the agencies of the executive branch. Congress
also provides the operational funding for the administra-
tive agencies. The composition of and qualifications for
the U.S. Congress are listed in Table 17.1. Compare these
qualifications with those for the president. Also consider
the reelection cycle and how the priorities, policies, and
laws can be influenced by executive and legislative agendas
and majority control.
Judicial Branch
The judicial branch includes the Supreme Court, which
interprets laws and, through its judicial review process, can

CHAPTER 17 The Politically Active Nurse: An Imperative
●
293
TABLE 17.1
Qualifications for Service in the U.S. Congress or Executive Office
Senate
House of Representatives
Presidency
Number
Term
Reelection
Qualifications
100 senators (two 
from each state) Equal
representation 
Senior senator (elected
first) and junior senator
Elected for a term of 
six years, on alternate
schedules
Every two years, one
third of senators face 
reelection
At least 30 years of age
Citizen of United States
for nine years
Resident of the state
represented when
elected
435 members 
Representation based on state popu-
lation; minimum of one from each
state with reapportionment every 
10 years based on the U.S. census
The House also includes delegates
from the District of Columbia, Guam,
the Virgin Islands, American Samoa,
and Puerto Rico, who have voting 
rights in committees but not in 
matters before the full House
Elected for a term of two years
Entire membership is up for 
reelection every two years 
At least 25 years of age Citizen of
United States for seven years
Resident of the state represented
when elected
One; In the case of the inability
of the president to fulfill his or
her role, succession of power
occurs as follows: vice presi-
dent as second in line, then
speaker of the house, and then
president pro tempore of the
Senate
Elected for a term of four years
Eligible for reelection once 
(two-term limit)
At least 35 years of age
A natural-born citizen of the 
United States and a resident 
for at least 14 years
declare an act of Congress or the president unconstitu-
tional. The nine federal Supreme Court Justices are ap-
pointed for life by the president after their selection has
been confirmed by the Senate. The federal system also
comprises lower courts and appellate or circuit courts. Fed-
eral judges are nominated by the executive branch and
confirmed by the Senate. This system of checks and bal-
ances is designed to create equilibrium, vesting limited
power in each branch with oversight by another branch.
State and Local Systems
State government structures are similar to those described
at the federal level. They also receive their mandates from
the U.S. Constitution, with which their respective state
constitutions must abide. Like the president, the governor
can sign legislation into law and use the power of the veto.
State legislatures can also override a governor’s veto. In
some states, members of the state board of nursing, or
other important health commissioners, are appointed by
the governor. As with the federal government, some leg-
islative branches must confirm selected executive appoint-
ments. State supreme courts and lower courts interpret
the law and make decisions under their power of judicial
review.
County government generally entails a board of super-
visors or an elected board of commissioners and a county
executive or county manager. Cities, towns, and villages
also have a variety of elected officials similar to those of
county government. Local health policies and politics
must be consistent with state and federal law but can also
have a profound influence on the health and welfare of a
community, as with public utilities and local programs.
Although nurses are most often involved with the leg-
islative branch of government, the executive branch and
the judicial branch can also be of great importance to nurs-
ing and healthcare. It is essential that nurses understand
the functions of the different branches of government and
how laws and regulations are enacted and implemented.
HOW LAWS ARE MADE
A law is a mandate of prescribed conduct, grants  certain
rights, requires certain responsibilities, or a combination
of these attributes. A law can come from a constitution,
from the legislature, or from the courts. Administrative
agencies promulgate regulations, which supplement and
further interpret the laws. Consider the types of laws and
regulations identified in Table 17.2.
The idea for a law may originate with an individual, a
professional group, a legislator, or the executive branch.
Statutory law is legislation that has been approved by both
legislative houses of Congress and signed by the executive
branch. The legislation starts as a bill or a proposal for a law
authored or sponsored by either a representative or a senator,
who introduces it after it has been written in appropriate 

294
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
TABLE 17.2
Types of Law
Type                  Description                                                              Example
Constitutional
Statutory
Administrative
Court, case, or 
common law
Specific guarantees granted by the U.S. Constitution
Formal laws enacted by federal, state, and local 
legislative branches of government
Regulations created by administrative agencies under
the direction of the executive branch of government
Laws created from judicial decisions Judgments 
create a precedent on which future decisions are
based
Freedom of speech
Nurse practice acts
Regulations associated with nurse prac-
tice acts to assist with implementation
“Miranda Rights” must be read to an
arrestee before he or she is taken into
custody
language by the legislative counsel of either the House or the
Senate. A bill may also be introduced from a legislative com-
mittee. A bill proposed in the Senate is designated “S.” 
followed by a number, and a bill introduced in the House of
Representatives is designated “H.R.” followed by a number.
Congressional Committees
At the federal level, bills are referred to full committee and
sometimes to a subcommittee, because of the thousands of
bills introduced each year. The U.S. Senate has standing
committees, with a variable number of associated subcom-
mittees, depending on the scope and work of the committee,
and select or special committees. The House of Representa-
tives also has standing committees and additional special or
select committees. There are also joint committees, staffed
by both houses that focus on common oversight functions
for taxation and economics.
It is within the committee structure that most of the
work of Congress takes place, at both the federal and
state levels. Committee action is perhaps the most im-
portant phase of the congressional process because it is
at this phase that proposed measures are given the most
intensive consideration and people have an opportunity
to provide testimony for consideration and incorpora-
tion into the record. The committee or subcommittee
level is where nursing can have a powerful impact. The
subcommittee studies the issues contained in each bill
carefully, holds hearings, and reports back to the full
committee with recommendations. Each committee has
jurisdiction over certain subjects. Some of the commit-
tees identified in Table 17.3 focus specifically on health-
related issues.
Committee action is perhaps the most important
phase of the congressional process, because it is
at this phase that proposed measures are given
the most intensive consideration.
States operate much like the federal government. In a
particular state, there are also specific committees and
subcommittees that handle selected topics. For example,
in South Carolina, the Medical, Military, Public, and
Municipal Affairs Committee for the House and the Med-
ical Committee of the Senate generally handle the topics
of concern to nursing and healthcare. But state structures
differ, and it is important to be aware of the differences and
to know the committees in which the issues of major con-
cern to nursing arise. Appointment to the committees is
often based on congressional seniority or priority. Members
often have special interests in an area. Because these mem-
bers represent their constituents, it is important to know
on which committees your congressperson serves and that
they have valid information, resources, and background to
address your concerns. Testimony, either written or in per-
son, provides valuable information to the committee mem-
ber, whether information from constituents, special interest
groups, experts, or other public officials.
And visit your own state legislature online.
How a Bill Becomes a Law
Consider a bill, for instance, that has been sponsored by
your legislator, a member of the House of Repre sentatives.
It has been sent to the applicable subcommittee or com-
mittee for review. After consideration by the full commit-
tee, several things may happen to this bill:
●It may be reported out of committee favorably and be
scheduled for debate by the full House.
●It may be reported out favorably, but with amend-
ments or “markups” to the bill.
●It may be reported out unfavorably or not acted upon
at all; thus, it is “killed” or “dies in committee.”
ONLINE CONSULT 
American Nurses Association at
http://nursingworld.org/MainMenu
Categories/Policy-Advocacy
U.S. Government Web Portal at
http://firstgov.gov
THOMAS, U.S. Congress on the Internet at
http://thomas.loc.gov/home/thomas.php

Generally, once the bill has been reported favorably
out of a House committee, it goes to the Rules Committee,
which schedules bills and determines (1) how much time
will be spent on debate, and (2) whether amendments will
be allowed. A written report is drafted, including a summary
of the bill, along with impact statements. Impact statements
are provided to project how the proposed legislation would
affect existing laws and present and future resources. Bills
are then placed on the calendar and scheduled for action.
After a bill is debated under the procedural rules of the
House, possibly amended, voted upon, and passed, it is sent
to the Senate, where it goes through the same procedure. If
the bill also passes the Senate without any changes, it is sent
to the president or governor for signature. If minor changes
were made in the Senate, it is referred back to the originat-
ing chamber (in this case the House of Representatives) 
for concurrence before submission to the executive branch.
If significant changes were made to the bill in the Senate,
the bill is sent to a conference committee, composed of 
representatives of both chambers, who reconcile differences
and prepare a conference report for approval by both cham-
bers. If it does not get approved, the bill dies. After the con-
ference report, the bill must be accepted or rejected, because
no further amendments can be made.
If the bill is approved in both houses, it goes to the
executive branch. If the president or governor signs the bill,
it becomes law, and Congress is notified. If the bill is ve-
toed, it is referred back to the House and Senate. A two-
thirds vote by both chambers is required to override the
veto. The bill may also become law if the president or gov-
ernor fails to veto or return the bill to Congress with ob-
jections within a specified time. See Figure 17.1 for a
description of the legislative process.
Once the bill is signed or passed, it becomes an act,
and is enacted into law. Laws are enforceable if they do not
violate the Constitution. Once a law is passed, it is as-
signed to the appropriate department of the executive
branch of government, where the process of developing
CHAPTER 17 The Politically Active Nurse: An Imperative
●
295
TABLE 17.3
Major Committees of the 114th U.S. Congress 
House
Standing 
Agriculture
committees
Appropriations*
(20)
Armed Services
Budget*
Education and Workforce
Energy & Commerce
Ethics 
Financial Services
Foreign Affairs
Homeland Security*
House Administration
Judiciary
Natural Resources
Oversight and Government Reform
Rules
Science, Space, and Technology
Small Business 
Transportation and Infrastructure
Veteran’s Affairs*
Ways and Means*
Select, special, &
other 
committees (2)
Intelligence
Special/Select event
Senate
Standing 
Agriculture, Nutrition, and 
committees (16)
Forestry
Appropriations*
Armed Services 
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
Budget*
Commerce, Science, and 
Transportation
Energy & Natural Resources
Environment & Public Works*
Finance*
Foreign Relations 
Health, Education, Labor, & 
Pensions*
Homeland Security and 
Governmental Affairs
Judiciary
Rules & Administration
Small Business & Entrepreneurship 
Veteran’s Affairs*
Select or special Aging*
committees (4)
Ethics
Indian Affairs*
Intelligence
*Frequently address health-related matters.
Joint or Bicameral Congressional 
Committees
Economic
Library
Printing
Taxation

regulations to interpret the law takes place. The depart-
ment studies the law and drafts the regulations for imple-
mentation. Administrative agencies, governed by the
executive branch, promulgate regulations or rules, which
serve the purpose of detailing and applying the laws. For
example, the Health Insurance Portability and Accounta-
bility Act (HIPAA) was enacted as Public Law 104–191
in 1996. The Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS) published a final Privacy Rule in December 2000
with a general compliance date of April 14, 2003, and a
compliance date of April 14, 2004, for small health plans.
All of this activity involved detailing regulations for appli-
cation of the law.
The legislative process can seem endless, especially
when the bill stays in committee, perhaps during a recess
or between legislative sessions. In addition, proposed reg-
ulations from the executive branch may require public
hearings for input prior to finalization and enforcement.
In the United States Congress, a legislative session spans a
two-year period, with the 114th Congressional session
running from January 1, 2015, through December 31,
2016. Variable legislative sessions occur in the different
states; however, special sessions may be called for special
circumstances.
Impact of Laws
Laws and regulations govern behavior and relationships
with others in society. Consider the impact of laws that
have been passed and their effect on nursing. When the
federal government implemented diagnosis-related
groups (DRGs) for Medicare reimbursement, patients
began to be discharged from hospitals “sicker and
quicker.” Although this law applied only to Medicare pa-
tients, it set a precedent that other insurance carriers fol-
lowed. In law, a precedent is a decision or verdict from
a prior case that becomes the principle to follow in future
cases. A precedent is more than an everyday custom to
follow. If the precedent is set in a superior court, like the
Supreme Court, it may become mandatory in lower
court decisions.
Awareness of laws and regulations governing healthcare
is essential in professional nursing practice so that nurses
can help to influence the making of policy and laws.
Nurses can and do play a significant role at several points
in the legislative process, whether through lobbying or
providing testimony or information to legislators and reg-
ulatory bodies (Box 17.1).
REGULATING NURSING
PRACTICE
Nursing practice and education are directly regulated by
law. Nurse practice acts are contained in state statute
(laws) and associated regulations that dictate practice pa-
rameters. As part of the statute, nursing education pro-
grams in different forms are regulated. For example, most
states require a new, beginning nursing program to re-
ceive approval from the board of nursing according to
specified standards before it can open. These standards
ensure that the organization, curriculum, faculty, and
296
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
  1.  Concerned party contacts legislator, bill drafted
  2.  Sponsors obtained, introduced to House and/or Senate
  3.  To committees for recommendation/amendments
  4.  Debate on floor
  5.  Vote and recommendation to other chamber
  6.  Consideration in a similar manner by the other chamber
  7.  Passage or to Conference Committee
  8.  Back to both houses for concurrence
  9.  If agreement by both chambers, to president or governor for signature
10.  If executive veto, back to chambers for potential override with a 2/3 vote of Congress or the legislature
Figure 17.1 The legislative process.
BOX 17.1
Nurses’ Involvement in the Legislative
Process
●Meeting with legislators, their aides or staﬀ to
inﬂuence the introduction of a bill as private
citizens or as members of a professional organization 
●Providing information to assist in drafting the bill
and gathering support for legislators or bill sponsors
on the proposed legislation
●Providing testimony in committee or subcommittee
hearings about their position on the bill
●Contacting legislators to support or not support 
proposed legislation, both in the home district and
the capitol
●Contacting either the president or the governor to
sign or veto the proposed legislation 
●Responding to requests for comments, either written
or verbal testimony, by regulatory agencies or 
committees
●Submission of an amicus curiae (friend of the court)
brief for consideration by the court

services are appropriate for preparation of students and
protection of the public. Nursing education is further reg-
ulated indirectly through the accrediting bodies that are
authorized by the Department of Education.
The state boards of nursing and their
associated practice acts define the scope of
practice; establish the requirements for licensure, 
entry into practice, continuing competency, 
and advanced practice; create and empower 
a board of nursing; and identify grounds 
for disciplinary action.
Nurse Practice Acts
Nurse practice acts are developed by each state to protect
the public health, safety, and welfare by regulating and
overseeing nursing practice. The various state boards of
nursing and their associated practice acts define the scope
of practice; establish the requirements for licensure, entry
into practice, continuing competency and advanced prac-
tice; create and empower a board of nursing; and identify
grounds for disciplinary action. An important component
in many practice acts is title protection. This is a part of
the law that maintains the use of the title nurse only for
the licensee authorized by the board. The term nurse is
used in some contexts outside of professional practice, and
more states are moving to protect the integrity and identity
of this title.
Nurse practice acts can be revised or completely elim-
inated through a single legislative action, so the prospect
of “opening the practice act” in the legislature can cause
great anxiety. Although state practice acts (statute and
regulations) are specific to the state, there is general con-
tent common to many state acts. For example, the Na-
tional Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN) has
a model act and model rules that illustrate standard con-
tents of the legislation and associated regulations for im-
plementation (Box 17.2). In addition, in 1998 a mutual
recognition model for interstate practice among the
“compact states” was introduced. This mutual recogni-
tion model requires further specific language to be incor-
porated into state law to allow a nurse to have one license
(in the state of residency) and to have practice privilieges
in other states that are members of the compact. The
nurse is required to practice in accordance with each
state’s specific practice law and regulations. There is also
a national initiative for consensus to assist states in align-
ing their APRN regulation with the major elements of the
Consensus Model for APRN Regulation within the four
roles (clinical nurse specialist, nurse practitioner, nurse
midwife, and nurse anesthetist) to include graduation
from an accredited graduate nursing program, advanced
certification, recognition of the four APRN roles, includ-
ing by title and license, independent practice, and inde-
pendent prescribing (NCSBN, 2014).
Appointments to a state board of nursing are often
made by the governor. The state board should be com-
posed of a variety of members who represent practice
throughout all areas of nursing. In four states, there are
separate boards for licensed practical nurses/licensed 
vocational nurses (LPNs/LVNs) and registered nurses
(RNs), but the boards are combined in the remaining ju-
risdictions. RN boards generally address both professional
nursing and advanced practice nurses (APRNs), although
one state currently has separate RN and APRN Boards.
APRN regulations may also be addressed in the respective
practice acts of other health professions such as the board
of medicine. In addition, boards of nursing may have ad-
visory committees or practice committees that research is-
sues for recommendations to the board on practice or
policy issues. Review your state’s practice act for the com-
position of members on the board or perhaps seek a seat
on the board. In many cases, serving on a board of nursing
is both a humbling and an enlightening experience, and
allows you to serve your state and your profession. 
Because changes proposed by a state board can lead to
laws and rules that have the same force as laws, it is im-
perative for nurses to remain aware of the activities of the
board that regulates practice within their state. The American
Nurses Association (ANA) provides recent updates to
practice acts and the status of proposed legislation on its
Web site under the section on policy and advocacy.
Trends in legislation are also tracked, for example, in the
areas of title protection and staffing levels. In addition,
some states issue advisory opinions; although such opin-
ions do not have the same impact as law, they do guide
acceptable standards of practice. Nurses are often unaware
that changes are even being proposed. Some states distrib-
ute the state nurses association newsletter to all registered
nurses, whether or not they hold membership in the ANA
or the state association. Many of the newsletter issues
(print or online) contain periodic informational alerts con-
cerning changes in or interpretations to the statute or ad-
visory opinions by the board. 
State boards and their respective members are con-
cerned about nurses’ current understanding of their re-
spective state law. To encourage and increase nurses’
knowledge about their respective practice acts, some states
award continuing education credits for specific courses. It
CHAPTER 17 The Politically Active Nurse: An Imperative
●
297
BOX 17.2
Nurse Practice Acts
General content for both statute and regulations:
●Title and purpose
●Deﬁnitions, scope, and standards of practice
●Board of nursing—authority and how it functions
●Application of other state statutes and the state’s 
administrative law act 
●Licensure
●Titles and abbreviations
●Nursing assistive personnel
●Approval of nursing education programs 
●Violations and penalties
●Discipline and proceedings
●Emergency relief for public protection
●Reporting requirements 
●Exemptions
●Revenue and fees
●Implementation of the statute and regulations
And if applicable to the particular state:
●Nurse licensure compact
●APRN scope of practice and APRN compact

is vital that nurses understand the content of their respec-
tive practice acts. This understanding must be ongoing,
beyond the point of original licensure or title recognition.
Put a bookmark in your computer’s Internet browser with
the Web site of your nursing board(s) to give yourself
quick information and links to related resources.
Additional State and Federal Laws
Affecting Nursing Practice
Laws have been passed on nursing practice issues, for exam-
ple, allowing nurses to be directly reimbursed by patients or
insurers. Legislation varies from state to state, but APRNs,
particularly nurse anesthetists, nurse practitioners, and nurse
midwives, are most commonly covered. The Bureau of
Labor Statistics (2014) reported that there were 151,400
nurse anesthetists, nurse midwives, and nurse practitioners
in practice in 2012, with more than 47,000 additional jobs
projected by 2022. And these figures do not include the
fourth APRN role of clinical nurse specialist. 
State laws that affect practice can be passed with the
support of nursing. Some states have passed laws to allow
registered nurses to pronounce death. Others are addressing
safe practice through staffing requirements, title protection,
tort reform, environmental safety, and prohibitions on
mandatory overtime. Still others are addressing delegation
to assistive personnel. Public protection is a concern at all
levels of government. In the area of advanced practice, for
example, states differ in level of supervision or collaboration
and prescriptive authority for advanced practice nurses.
Several states allow independent APRN practice with pro-
posals pending in other states. Nurses must be politically
astute and must continue to develop their internal political
efficacy and the external efficacy of the profession.
Also look for governmental affairs on Web sites of
nursing specialty organizations.
INFLUENCING LEGISLATION
As mentioned previously, the idea for a law may originate
from a concerned citizen or special interest group, a legis-
lator, a professional group, or the executive branch to ad-
dress a community problem or a public  policy issue. Many
laws originate from the legislature itself, which is composed
of individuals who are elected by constituents with specific
interests, needs, and concerns. Legislators’ knowledge and
recognition of particular needs and concerns come about
through influence. For instance, special interest groups rep-
resenting large numbers of the voting public can have a lot
of influence on legislators. Special interest groups have 
become more politically savvy at influencing the creation
of public policy, and more controls have emerged, as with
campaign financing reforms. Special interest groups influ-
ence legislators through lobbying activities, professional
lobbyists, professional organizations, political action com-
mittees, and grassroots efforts. Each of these groups repre-
sents the dollars and votes of a particular special interest
group, and each group uses expert communication and 
interpersonal skills to influence change.
Lobbying
Activities to influence legislators vary from formal to infor-
mal and often take the form of lobbying. Lobbying may
be defined as attempting to persuade a legislator or legisla-
tive aide of the merits of your viewpoint in order to influ-
ence legislation. Individuals may lobby through face-to-face
interviews, letter writing, telephone calls, faxes, e-mails, let-
ters to the editor, and testimony (verbal or written). Valu-
able clues on and guidelines for letter writing are provided
by professional associations that recognize the value of in-
dividual constituents’ contacting their elected legislators.
These professional organizations often provide special alerts
or suggestions to the members to assist with lobbying ac-
tivities. For example, some professional organizations pro-
vide an alert when members of Congress are on recess and
should be contacted in their home states. Other organiza-
tions may include lobbying tips on their Web sites, along
with background issues and talking points to assist in lob-
bying activities.
But there is definitely an art to getting your point
across. The bottom line is that numbers mean something
to the legislative aide or legislator, especially from con-
stituents. There are other considerations, however, such as
time. The impact of a well-composed, factual, meaningful,
and succinct letter or e-mail far outweighs the form letter
that has less impact or a letter that rambles on. Another
consideration is the form of the correspondence. Postal de-
lays or screenings cannot compete with the immediacy of
e-mail, for instance. For a personal appointment, be aware
of the congressional calendar, and do not be disappointed
if you meet with a legislative aide. The aide may be more
knowledgeable about your issue and can be persuaded to
communicate the information to the legislator.
The professional lobbyist is a person on the staff of a
professional association or hired consultant who has out-
standing skills in persuasion, in-depth knowledge of the or-
ganization, and an acute sense of the intricacies of the
political system. These professionals understand the legis-
lators and their political agendas. The professional lobbyist
is present at the appropriate time with the correct message,
especially in the case of the undecided legislator. The role
of the professional lobbyist is to  provide the facts and the
support base to persuade the legislator. The ANA has sev-
eral professional lobbyists working at the federal level. A
significant number of constituent state associations (CNAs)
and specialty professional organizations also hire profes-
sional lobbyists.
Lobbying is especially effective when there is an asso-
ciated strong grassroots effort that responds with mobi-
lization of a group to provide additional correspondence
and support on the position presented to the legislator or
legislative aide. This approach has been used effectively by
298
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
ONLINE CONSULT 
ANA at 
http://nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/
Policy-Advocacy
American Association of Colleges of Nursing: 
Government Affairs at
http://www.aacn.nche.edu/Government
/index.htm

many professional organizations to influence public policy.
Various nursing and other grassroots networks have been
established to lobby in support of the legislative goals and
objectives of the state nurses associations. There are spe-
cific channels of communication for response to a key
issue. Key contacts for each legislator or legislative district
must be active and ongoing.
Professional Organizations
Nurses have always had a great deal of potential power by
virtue of numbers, but have now begun to use their power
collectively. This is one important reason to join profes-
sional organizations. Only through united efforts will
nurses be seen as a powerful group and will their voices be
recognized in the policy arena. This has been demon-
strated continually by many vocal and powerful organiza-
tions readily visible on Capitol Hill, on surrounding streets
in Washington, DC, or in your state capitol, such as the
American Medical Asso ciation (AMA) and the American
Hospital Association (AHA). The ANA is also a visible
and vocal organization in Washington, monitoring legis-
lation and the initiatives of federal agencies, and presenting
testimony to Congress or congressional committees on be-
half of the nursing profession. And consider the number
of professional nursing organizations with headquarters
located in the Washington area (refer to the professional
organizations listed on the Intranet site).
The ANA and its constituent state members are also
associated with the Washington-area organizational affil-
iate members. The legislative or political arm of the ANA
is known as its department of governmental affairs. It ac-
tively advocates for legislation and works with administra-
tive agencies on regulations for implementation of laws
and health policy. The ANA regularly monitors the work
of more than a dozen federal agencies that affects health-
care policy. It monitors agencies like the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) and the Agency
for Health Research and Quality (AHRQ). The ANA De-
partment of Governmental Affairs also publishes legislative
and regulatory priorities and initiatives for each legislative
session. Along with these priorities are informational doc-
uments on the issues. For example, for the 113th Con-
gress, the ANA specified an advocacy agenda for nurses
that focused on APRN practice, safe staffing, workplace
health and safety, quality measures, patient safety and ad-
vocacy, mental health care, and the nursing shortage
(ANA, 2014). These are broad-based initiatives with well-
developed statements of the issue, background, and the
ANA position.
The ANA’s Department of Government Affairs also
contains the political action unit N-STAT, made up of
the grassroots lobbying network (Box 17.3) that functions
through the activities of congressional district coordina-
tors, Senate coordinators, and the ANA’s political action
committee (ANA-PAC).
Political Action Committees
As a result of campaign reform in the 1970s, restrictions
were placed on contributions made by individuals or 
organizations to a candidate for a federal office. This 
campaign financing reform also allowed for the creation
of political action committees (PACs), through which or-
ganizations could make openly reported contributions. Al-
though any organization can form a PAC, most PACs are
sponsored by corporations, labor groups, and special in-
terest groups who want their message heard and promoted.
It is a political reality that legislators are more likely to see
and listen to a group of people who have contributed
money to their campaign.
The ANA formed a PAC more than three decades ago
to create power and influence for the nursing profession.
Contributions to the ANA-PAC support candidates, cur-
rent legislators, and legislation aligned with the ANA leg-
islative agenda. It is bipartisan, supporting candidates of
both national parties. The PAC is focused on the public
office and the candidate for that office, whether incum-
bent or opponent. Endorsements and financial contribu-
tions are based on the candidates’ support for the ANA
legislative agenda and stance on health policy. In addition,
some state constituents of ANA have separate state-asso-
ciated PACs working on behalf of nursing issues in their
particular states and at the federal level. Other specialty
professional nursing organizations have PACs as well, rep-
resenting issues critical to their respective missions.
GAINING SKILL IN
POLITICAL EFFICACY
The initial step in developing political efficacy is under-
standing the process and having the willingness to be in-
volved. But even more basic is possessing an understanding
of people and policy needed for public health and welfare.
This understanding of people and their healthcare needs is
basic to nursing practice. The next prerequisite to political
efficacy is an understanding of the issues involved. It is vital
that nurses use their voices and individual power to em-
power nurses and nursing. As Abood (2007) observed, “as
nurses interact with patients and families, they are often
CHAPTER 17 The Politically Active Nurse: An Imperative
●
299
BOX 17.3
ANA Grassroots Political Action
ANA creates political action through grassroots eﬀorts
and successful lobbying. ANA’s N-STAT is an exam-
ple of this grassroots lobbying system. Established in
1993, N-STAT continues to grow, with more nurses
providing a rapid response on legislative and policy is-
sues. Information is provided on current topics as they
move through Congress. Then, when the time to speak
out on an issue will be most beneﬁcial, nurses are as-
sisted with electronic contact information and content
for contacting their senators and representatives.
Nurses can register online, receive periodic alerts,
and take an active step toward political eﬃcacy. 
Sign up today, or periodically refer to the ANA Web
site for particular national and state initiatives and 
legislative alerts at http://www.nursingworld.org 
(go to the Policy and Advocacy link or at http://
www.rnaction.org/site/PageServer?pagename=nstat_
take_action_home).

the first providers to see clearly when and how the health-
care system is not effectively meeting patient needs” (p. 1).
This is your imperative for action. Nurses, particularly with
their focus on health issues, can influence change in the
workplace and health policy, in their communities, in pro-
fessional organizations, and in government.
Workplace Issues
As illustrated with management in the organizational set-
ting, the workplace is a significant area for nurses to pro-
mote policy changes, particularly regarding workplace
advocacy and patient safety and advocacy. Nurses are
highly regarded by patients and the public. In addition,
they have the five general bases of power identified by
Mintzberg (1983): control of resources, control of a tech-
nical skill, control of a body of knowledge, exclusive rights
or privileges to impose choices (legal prerogatives), and ac-
cess to people who have and can be relied on for the other
four. To be influential, nurses must take an active role in
institutional decision making, either at the unit level or 
by volunteering to serve on various committees. These 
opportunities are available in many hospital settings, es-
pecially those organizations demonstrating structural em-
powerment as a component for Magnet Recognition
status. To  contribute to policy decisions, nurses must re-
main current on health policy issues and must provide fac-
tual information. This involvement with workplace issues
provides the basis for the improvements needed in the de-
livery of care and positive outcomes for both patients and
the profession.
Community or Civic Involvement
A prime responsibility for all citizens is to be part of the
electorate—to be registered and to vote in local, state, and
national elections. Nurses have traditionally been in-
volved in the community, whether serving on committees
like the local school or hospital board or helping out with
a local health fair. These activities constitute community
or civic involvement. In the community, nurses can iden-
tify potential health hazards that require the attention of
local officials or businesspersons, and can intervene in the
case of health risks or hazards. Nurses are adept at under-
standing community issues, and active involvement of
professional nurses in community or civic activities is
truly an imperative.
Professional Organizations
Active involvement in professional organizations  provides
both constant development and valuable information. As
illustrated with the governmental functions of the ANA,
professional organizations offer  policy analysis and up-
dates, and they can lead effective campaigns to influence
policy change. As already described, in their federal gov-
ernmental affairs and state initiatives, ANA (2014b) ad-
dresses many policy areas that the ANA and the other
professional organizations are committed to addressing.
Nurses should remain knowledgeable about the positions
of the  professional organizations on issues that are likely
to come before Congress. This awareness can assist with
needed action on health policies and legislation through
participation in grassroots efforts of the organization. 
It can also lead to service in elected and appointed posi-
tions or opportunities to provide testimony on behalf of
the organization.
Government
Be aware of who your legislators and other elected or ap-
pointed officials are, at local, state, and national levels. Keep
yourself informed on how they support the issues, especially
those related to health policy. Communicate with these of-
ficials. Nurses have the expertise in the care for patients and
they witness the impact of health policy on a daily basis.
Legislators want to hear the concerns of their nurse con-
stituents and will appreciate the information you provide
to help address the concerns of all their constituents. Often,
legislators’ only view of the healthcare arena is through the
care they or a family member receives and the views im-
parted to them by their legislative aides and constituents.
At times, this perspective can be narrow and very personal.
The issues being confronted by federal, state, and local 
legislators on health policy can have long-term and wide-
ranging effects on both the profession and care of patients.
Nurses are serving in growing numbers in important roles
to assist with the passage of health policy for the good of
both the public and the profession.
At the state level, nurses have successfully lobbied to
enact legislation that allows them to bill insurance com-
panies directly for the care they provide. Prescriptive au-
thority, interstate practice, amendments or revisions to
practice acts, and safe staffing requirements are current is-
sues in many state legislatures. To have legislation enacted,
individual nurses or a nursing organization can seek a
sponsor and cosponsors to introduce it. Once the legisla-
tion is introduced, nurses must lobby legislators to provide
information on how passage of the bill will benefit the 
legislator’s constituents. Nurses elected to leadership po-
sitions and appointed to serve on boards at the state gov-
ernment level are becoming more common, but there is a
great need to increase the numbers who are willing and
prepared to serve in these roles. Often it is through in-
volvement at the local level that nurses gain the experience
and confidence to move on to state positions. 
To effectively influence policy, nurses must establish
a relationship with legislators and their legislative aides
whenever possible. These officials are elected to serve—
and are concerned about the needs of their constituents.
They expect constituents to inform them of their con-
cerns. Watch the interactions that occur at your next
community or state function attended by a legislator. It
may not be an election year, but the legislator is present
because the particular function is of importance to a
group the legislator represents. A nurse’s offer to serve as
a personal resource is frequently welcomed by the legisla-
tor and his or her staff. This is particularly true at the local
and state levels, at which legislators may not have exten-
sive staff to assist with legislation involving health policy.
Nurses can also be valuable in providing testimony for
regulatory change. Practice and preparation are needed
for developing proficiency, effectiveness, and ease in these
activities, particularly in dealing with the media. Being
knowledgeable and articulate in both subject matter and
presentation is essential.
300
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

CHAPTER 17 The Politically Active Nurse: An Imperative
●
301
BOX 17.4
Tips for Talking to Legislators
●Before meeting with your legislator, get to know as much as possible about his or her background, special
interests or initiatives, voting record, committee assignments, and involvement with health policy issues.
●Prepare your position, including a list of talking points to assist you during the discussion.
●Investigate both sides of the issue but stay focused on the facts.
●Request a meeting of at least 15 to 30 minutes.
●Practice your presentation with a friend or colleague to gain comfort with the content and to anticipate questions
that may arise.
●If the legislator is not available, meet with the legislative aide or a staﬀ member who has a good knowledge of the
issues.
●Be on time, and be professional.
●Introduce yourself and thank the legislator or legislative aide for his or her time and interest.
●Be prepared to explain what you do as a nurse, your philosophy of care, and the impact of pending legislation on
healthcare and care delivery for the legislator’s constituents.
●Use concise and explicit examples from your practice to illustrate your position.
●Be prepared to oﬀer additional information or solutions, but stick to the facts.
●If the legislator or legislative aide indicates support for your position, ask what you can do to reach other
legislators or sponsors.
●Provide an opportunity to answer any questions and oﬀer any additional assistance on the circumstances of the
proposed legislation or regulation.
●Send a follow-up thank you note for the time spent, in which you restate your position.
●And you may even want to follow your interview with a well-worded letter on your position to the editor of the
local newspaper—and perhaps gain further support among other constituents.
BOX 17.5
Tips for Presenting Testimony
●Be prepared, with:
●A full, well-developed written statement and talking points.
●An understanding of the committee process and regulatory structure.
●An anticipation of any follow-up questions that may be asked of you.
●Be on time.
●Be conﬁdent in your abilities and knowledge base, and remain calm.
●Be ﬂexible; you may not have the time for your presentation that you were told you would.
●Recognize the members of the body (“Mr./Madam Chairperson and members of the _____ Committee”) and
thank them for allowing you the opportunity to address them.
●Introduce yourself and be respectful.
●Do not read your written testimony; ask to have it placed in the record.
●Use the talking points to present your case and focus on the facts.
●Try to use concise and explicit examples from your practice to illustrate your position.
●Do not go over your allocated time.
●Leave time at the end of your presentation for any questions from the members.
●Thank the committee for the opportunity to present your testimony at the end.
Nurses must be part of the process, whether pro viding
needed facts and background on the issues or serving in
an office. Buresh and Gordon (2006) have described this
as the voice of agency, a strong and authentic voice talking
about what you do as a nurse and being more visible and
vocal as individuals and as members of organizations 
(p. 25). It is being the “agent” for both nursing and the
consumer of nursing services. Nurses must increasingly be
involved in advocating beyond the hospital or healthcare
unit environment. We have unique insights and the
knowledge base to effect change and improve healthcare
and health policy. This is the political imperative: Be in-
formed, be involved, be active, continue to develop inter-
personal and political skills, and continue to understand
the evolving needs of people and the profession. As noted
by Dodd (2013), “be polite, be persistent, be persuasive,
and be polite” (p. 46). The issues for action with public
policy are further discussed in Chapter 19. However, act
now on current legislation and consider the information
provided in Box 17.4 on tips for communicating with
your legislator and Box 17.5 on tips for presenting testi-
mony before a committee or regulatory body.

302
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
The American Association of Critical Care Nurses (AACN) issued a practice alert on family presence during
CPR and invasive procedures.
You are the nurse manager in an emergency department (ED).  The vice president for patient care has
come to you with a problem. Last night, a city council member complained that one of his constituents called
him yesterday because she was not allowed to be with her spouse during CPR in the ED. Currently, the 
patient is in the intensive care unit (ICU) following a myocardial infarction in guarded condition. You are
aware of the practice alert and have been trying to establish a policy in the ED and ICU.  The vice president
for patient care has asked that you meet with the council member and his constituent on this issue.
Question: Consider your plan for meeting with the council member and his constituent.
Source: American Association of Critical-Care Nurses. (AACN). (2014). Family presence during CPR and invasive procedures. 
Retrieved from http://www.aacn.org/wd/practice/content/family-presence-practice-alert.pcms?menu=practice
K E Y  P O I N T S
●Internal political efficacy is personal competence or the “ability to understand and take part in political 
affairs,” and external political advocacy is the “ability to make the system respond to the citizenry” 
(Wilson & Dilulio, 2004, p. 93).
●Laws are mandates based on the Constitution, enacted by federal or state legislatures, and interpreted by
the courts. Administrative agencies, governed by the executive branch, promulgate regulations or rules,
which serve the purpose of detailing and applying the laws.
●In the United States, the enactment of a law begins with introduction of the bill by the sponsoring legisla-
tor to either the House or the Senate. Then, it is referred to committee for recommendations and
amendments.
●Common law is created by judicial decisions that form a precedent upon which future decisions are
based.
●Nurse practice acts are statutory law with associated administrative regulations developed by each state
to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. They define the scope of practice; establish requirements
for licensure, entry into practice, continuing competency and advanced practice; create and empower a
board of nursing to oversee licensees; and identify grounds for disciplinary action.
●Title protection is the part of the nursing practice act that protects and restricts the use of the term nurse
to the licensee authorized to practice by the board.
●Activities to influence legislators vary from formal to informal. Lobbying may be defined as attempting to
persuade a legislator or legislative aide of the merits of your viewpoint and to influence legislation.
●Lobbying is especially effective when there is an associated strong grassroots effort that provides addi-
tional correspondence and support on the issues.
●Special interest groups have become more politically savvy at influencing the creation of public policy, and
more controls have emerged, as with campaign financing reforms. One form of a special interest group is
the political action committee (PAC).
●Buresh and Gordon (2006) define a voice of agency as a strong and authentic voice talking about what
you do as a nurse and being more visible and vocal as individuals and as members of organizations 
(p. 25). Nurses can influence change in the workplace, the community, professional organizations, and
government. 

REFERENCES
Abood, S. (2007). Influencing health care in the legislative
arena. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 12(1). Retrieved
from http://nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/
ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/TableofContents/
Volume122007/No1Jan07/tpc32_216091.aspx
American Nurses Association. (2014a). American Nurses Associ-
ation Political Action Committee (ANA-PAC). Retrieved
from http://www.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories
/PoliticalPower/ANAPAC.aspx 
American Nurses Association. (2014b). Federal governmental af-
fairs. http://www.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories
/Policy-Advocacy/Federal 
American Nurses Association. (2014c). 113th Congress 
federal legislative agenda. Retrieved from http://www.
nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/Policy-Advocacy
/Federal/113th-Congress-Federal-Legislative-Agenda
Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2014). Nurse anesthetists, nurse 
midwives, and nurse practitioners. Retrieved from http://
www.bls.gov/ooh/healthcare/nurse-anesthetists-nurse
-midwives-and-nurse-practitioners.htm
Buresh, B., & Gordon, S. (2006). From silence to voice: What
nurses know and must communicate to the public (2nd ed.).
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Clinton, H. R. (2003). Living history. New York: Simon 
& Schuster.
Dodd, C. J. (2013). Passing legislation requires more than good
ideas and prayers. In C. L. Estes, S. A. Chapman, C. Dodd,
B. Hollister, & C. Harrington, (Eds.), Health policy: Crisis
and reform (pp. 39-54). Burlington, MA: Jones & Bartlett.
Leininger, M. (2002). Cultures and tribes of nursing, hospi-
tals, and the medical culture. In M. Leininger & M. R.
McFarland, Transcultural nursing: Concepts, theories, re-
search, and practice (3rd ed.) (pp. 181–204). New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Mason, D. J., Chaffee, M. W., & Leavitt, J. K. (2011). Policy and
politics in nursing and health care (6th ed.). Philadelphia, PA:
Elsevier/Saunders.
Milstead, J. A. (2013). Health policy and politics: A nurse’s guide
(4th ed.). Boston, MA: Jones & Bartlett.
Mintzberg, H. (1983). Power in and around organizations. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Wilson, J. Q., & Dilulio, J. J. (2004). American government: Insti-
tutions and policies (9th ed.). Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Estes, C. L., Chapman, S.A., Dodd, C., Hollister, B., & 
Harrington, C. (2013). Health policy: Crisis and reform.
Burlington, MA: Jones & Bartlett.
Federal Election Commission. (2014). Administering and 
enforcing federal campaign finance laws. Retrieved from
http://www.fec.gov 
Johnson, C. W. (2007). How our laws are made. Retrieved from
http://thomas.loc.gov/home/lawsmade.toc.html
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2003). 
Summary of the HIPAA Privacy Rule. Retrieved from http://
www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/understanding/summary/
White, P., Olsan, T. H., Bianchi, C., Glessner, T., & Mapstone,
P. (2010). Legislative: Searching for health policy informa-
tion in the Internet: An essential advocacy skill. Online Jour-
nal of Issues in Nursing, 15(2). Retrieved from http://www.
nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/ANAMarketplace
/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/Columns/Legislative/Health-Policy
-Information-on-the-Internet.aspx
ONLINE RESOURCES
American Association of Colleges of Nursing: Government Affairs
http://www.aacn.nche.edu/Government/index.htm
American Nurses Association
http://nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/Policy
-Advocacy/State
THOMAS, U.S. Congress on the Internet
http://thomas.loc.gov/home/thomas.php
U.S. Constitution
http://thomas.loc.gov/teachers/constitution.html
U.S. Government Web Portal
http://firstgov.gov
CHAPTER 17 The Politically Active Nurse: An Imperative
●
303
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Consider the campaign for consensus on the practice of APRNs at https://www.ncsbn.org/aprn.htm. This initiative in-
volves the changes in state laws (nursing practice acts). Discuss the processes that are required for changes in state laws.
2. Identify how you will demonstrate both internal and external political efficacy. Be prepared to participate in a 
discussion in class or online to be scheduled by your instructor.
3. Select a current issue of concern and develop an action plan to present your views to a legislator.
4. Review the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter, and discuss it in the context of the contents
of the chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.

Healthcare Reform 
and Global Issues 
304
●Sister Rosemary Donley
18
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Describe the global and domestic issues that affect healthcare policy, healthcare delivery, and nursing
education and practice.
2. Analyze three goals of the ACA that directly affect nursing education and practice.
3. Discuss how nurses’ active participation in policy formulation can strengthen the profession and patient
care outcomes.
Global Health
Health Policy
Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act (ACA)
Newly Insured Persons
Nursing Shortage
The 3 Ds: Workforce Diversity,
Health Disparities, and Social
Determinants of Health 
Clinical Nurse Leader (CNL)
Doctor of Nursing Practice (DNP)
Social Justice
Evidence-Based Practice
Cost-Benefit-Burden Ratios
Market Justice
www.Healthcare.gov
Health Disparities
“Nursing in its broadest sense may be defined as
an art and a science which involves the whole
patient—body, mind, and spirit; promotes his
spiritual, mental, and physical health by teaching
and by example; stresses health education and
health preservation, as well as ministration to the
sick; involves the care of the patients’
environment—social and spiritual as well as
physical; and gives health service to the family
and community as well as to the individual.”
Sr. M. Olivia Gowan, founding Dean, The Catholic University of America School of Nursing, June 1944
Key Terms

CHAPTER 18 Healthcare Reform and Global Issues      ●
305
GLOBAL HEALTH, NURSING,
AND THE NEW MILLENNIUM
Nursing, like all the health professions, faces exciting
challenges in the 21st century because the world is inter-
connected and many factors other than disease affect
global health. Demography, urbanization, migration, the
economy, war, and terrorism influence well-being and
human flourishing. What do students of nursing and
nurses need to know about these significant health indi-
cators? The American population is aging, becoming
more diverse and more mobile. These demographic
changes are not unique to the United States; they are the
faces and patterns of people around the world. For ex-
ample, Japan and many countries in Western Europe are
seeing an increase in the number of people older than 
65 years, whereas young people compose the populations
in Iraq, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Colombia, Gaza, and
Yemen, a phenomenon described as the youth bulge. Yet
even with this youth bulge, it is estimated that by 2050,
the global population older than 65 years will increase
from 6.9 percent in 2000 to 16.3 percent (Central Intel-
ligence Agency [CIA], 2001). This demographic picture
has implications for healthcare, for the economy, and for
world peace. In the future, the world’s population will
be less white and more urban. In 2015, for the first time
in history, more people will live in some city in the
world. Globally, people are also on the move. Internal
and external migration has been stimulated by war, nat-
ural disasters, unstable currencies, and lack of work. Low
fertility and the aging of local populations also stimulate
migration. Illegal immigration is more common than
legal entry into many countries; today one in every 
40 persons is an immigrant living somewhere in the
world (CIA, 2001). It is recognized that the economy
plays a major role in health status.
People in the United States are slowly recovering from
the crises in the housing and financial markets. The stock
market has rebounded, and there are fewer foreclosures
and public auctions of family homes. This stabilization is
reflected in the world’s economy, although experts say that
debt and unemployment are still too high and economic
growth is too low both in the United States and around
the world (Boccia, 2013). In the United States, unskilled,
blue-collar, and white-collar workers have lost jobs and
their benefits because the companies for which they
worked declared bankruptcy, contracted for work outside
the country, downsized, or went out of business. Long-
term unemployment has caused some American workers
to give up searching for jobs (Hollander, 2014). Some ob-
servers consider this phenomenon a response to the recent
economic recession; others say it is a structural problem
brought on by a mismatch between worker skills and job
demands (Mitchell, 2013). Although technological devel-
opment requires a more educated workforce, degrees no
longer assure employment in the job of one’s dreams after
graduation. In the United States, it may be necessary to
leave home to find work. There have been long and costly
wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. Everywhere in the world,
there is palpable fear of violence and terrorism. Worldwide
travel coupled with technological innovation and instant
communication via television, the Internet, and social
media blur the distance between countries and peoples.
The global nature of the workforce influences health; old
assumptions about the geography of disease lack validity
(CIA, 2001).
Communicable diseases once found only in develop-
ing countries are spread rapidly by air travel and immi-
gration. Chronic illnesses occur everywhere in the world.
The World Health Organization Kampala Declaration
and Agenda for Global Action (Global Health Workforce
Alliance, 2008), recognizing the worldwide effects of
HIV/AIDS, the burdens of chronic and communicable
diseases, accidents, and injuries, asserts that health issues
have delayed progress in meeting the Millennium Devel-
opment Goals (Global Health Workforce Alliance, 2008).
Any factor that influences health and human develop-
ment, taken alone, has the potential to alter health status
in a person or a community. Together, these influences
pose threats to global health and challenge nurses and
other health professionals to work collegially and cooper-
atively at the bedside and at policy tables around the
world. Preparing nurses to practice in the 21st century is
a sacred trust. Teaching students to become engaged in
the policy process is a primary responsibility of educators,
leaders in nursing, professional organizations, and prac-
ticing nurses.
NURSING AND HEALTH POLICY
Nurses want seats at the policy tables. Nursing’s efforts
to prepare health system advocates and policymakers are
bearing fruit. During the past 40 years, American nurses
have been educated about health policy and have become
interested and more engaged in policy decisions, espe-
cially those that affect their patients and their practices.
Schools of nursing teach courses in health policy and
arrange trips to lobby members of state or federal govern-
ments. Some schools of nursing offer semester-long in-
ternships with state legislators or members of Congress.
Professional and specialty nursing organizations monitor
federal and state legislation and regulations, provide in-
formation to legislators, give testimony about health and
nursing issues, lobby, make financial contributions to
candidates, join political action committees (PACs), par-
ticipate in get-out-the-vote campaigns, and educate their
own members and the public about nursing’s legislative
and policy agenda (Abood, 2007).
One example of a professional effort to influence
health policy is the Nurse in Washington Internship
(NIWI) program. NIWI brings leaders from professional
and specialty organizations to an immersion experience on
Capitol Hill. Prepared by briefings and discussions with
health policy experts, nurse leaders bring the perspectives
of their organizations and the views of their patients to
members of Congress (Nursing Organizations Alliance,
2014). It is also affirming that six nurses currently serve
in the Congress of the United States (American Nurses
Association, 2014). Not only have nurses been elected to
positions that determine policy, they have also been 
appointed to direct important work in federal and state
governments. Most notable is Mary Wakefield’s 2009 ap-
pointment as the Director of the Health Resources and
Services Administration (HRSA, 2014b).

Despite progress, however, organized nursing is per-
ceived to yield little influence on health policy. The valid-
ity of the decade-old observations of Mechanic and
Reinhard (2002) about the influence of American physi-
cians in policy literature and policy making prevails. That
nurses’ voices are not heard in American halls of power is
also conveyed by quips. One familiar saying is that al-
though nurses are underrepresented at policy tables, nurs-
ing is on the menu. It is too soon to tell whether major
changes in federal health priorities and the Patient Pro-
tection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) efforts to empha-
size prevention as well as treatment will shift the balance
of power. The irony and injustice of excluding nurses from
meaningful policy debates is astonishing because registered
nurses are the largest group of health professionals, now
numbering about 3.1 million (USDHHS, 2010a). Beyond
these impressive statistical data, the overwhelming major-
ity of registered nurses are on the ground, at the bedside,
and in the community. Anyone who has been ill, especially
patients treated in acute care hospitals, can provide testi-
mony that nurses positively influence their healthcare out-
comes (Aiken, Clarke, & Sloan, 2002; Aiken et al., 2014;
DeCuccio, 2014).
Unfortunately, these positive findings about nursing
are threatened by the nursing shortage and poor staffing
ratios. Studies, especially in acute care hospitals, report
that the quality of care varies across the country and the
world (Aiken et al., 2014; Kalish, Tshannen, Lee, &
Friese, 2011). These data also highlight the impact of in-
adequate staffing and the limited education of registered
nurses on patient care outcomes; these issues must be ad-
dressed not only in local institutions but also through na-
tional policy and political venues. All nurses need to
engage directly or indirectly in health policy.
American nurses are watching the implementation of
the ACA. They express concern about their ability to care
for the growing number of senior citizens and chronically
ill persons, their availability to work aggressively to pre-
vent illness as well as treat it, and their capacity to address
the healthcare needs of newly insured persons (Abrams,
Nuzum, Mika, & Lawlor, 2011; Benner, Sutphen,
Leonard, & Day, 2010; Smedley, Stith, & Nelson, 2003;
The Future of Nursing, 2010). At a micro level, nurses
are affected by the impact of the staffing crisis on safety
and patient expectations. Another recurring theme is the
lack of respect that nurses experience in the workplace
(Wong, 2012). Although advanced practice registered
nurses applaud the ACA’s recognition of their capabilities,
they are very aware of resistance to expanding their roles
in care management (Brassard & Smolenski, 2011). Some
medical groups continue to influence state legislators to
block expansion of nurse practice acts (The Future of
Nursing, 2010). 
Global issues such as war, terrorism, trade agreements,
the economy, and immigration have been added to nurs-
ing’s policy agenda. These complex and far-reaching is-
sues overshadow and compete for funding with the issues
that have dominated nursing’s policy agenda. Yet global
issues evoke new awareness and interest in intraprofes-
sional collaboration and reveal the force that world events
and global governments exert on health status and on
health professionals. Knowledge of health policy also calls
attention to the lack of diversity in the American nurse
workforce and healthcare team (Aiken et al., 2014). In
the 21st century, policy competence is increasingly iden-
tified as an essential behavior of professional nurses. 
Illustrative of this goal is the American Association of
Colleges of Nursing (AACN, 2004b) description of 
advanced practice:
Any form of nursing intervention that influences health
care outcomes for individuals or populations, including
the direct care of individual patients, management of
care for individuals and populations, administration 
of nursing and health care organizations, and the 
development and implementation of health policy. (p. 2)
How can nurses be savvy representatives of their pro-
fession and contribute meaningfully to policy debates?
This chapter examines nursing’s policy agenda, particu-
larly issues of workforce shortage and role transformation
and the changing delivery system. It also presents the im-
pact of the ACA on the uninsured, unsafe healthcare prac-
tices, and health disparities. If nurses are to be recognized
as citizens of the world, they must be grounded in how
health policies affect them, their practices, their patients,
and the health system.
THE NURSING SHORTAGE 
AND CHANGING WORKFORCE
Nursing is an exciting, meaningful, and socially relevant
profession. The U.S. Department of Labor (USDL,
2012) data indicate that nursing will remain the top oc-
cupation for job growth until 2020. Yet American nurs-
ing has failed to sustain a relevant image of professional
practice and career opportunities (Nurses for a Healthier
Tomorrow, n.d.). Consequently, stereotypes and myths
about nursing are passed on: nursing is too demanding,
too dangerous, and too undervalued. In the United
States, the nursing shortage represents a recurring para-
dox of failures and successes in recruitment and retention
(Donley et al., 2002). This suggests that factors other
than the value of the profession influence decisions to
become or remain a nurse. The shortage of nurses is de-
scribed by the International Council of Nurses (ICN) as
a global crisis (Oulton, 2006). Yet in the face of a world-
wide nursing shortage, the United States continues to re-
cruit nurses from other countries by promises of good
salaries and opportunities for them and their families, an
action that is observed, sometimes negatively, around the
world. One positive effort to stabilize the global nurse
force is the European Union’s plan to enhance graduate
education and research across Europe (Carney, 2005;
Chaguturu & Vallabhaneni, 2005; Davies, 2008). The
American nursing community has increased its enrol-
ment in 4-year programs and designed accelerated BSN
degree programs and bridge programs as RN to BSN,
RN to MSN, or BSN to PhD or DNP (AACN, 2010a).
It has also created new online and hybrid nursing pro-
grams. However, nursing has not successfully addressed
the faculty shortage, inadequate faculty salaries, and lim-
ited clinical space for additional students (AACN,
2010b, 2014c). Although the global demand for nurses
is fueled by the economy, aging populations, and urban-
ization, American nurses have new responsibilities, care
of newly insured persons (AACN, 2010b). Even the most
306
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

CHAPTER 18 Healthcare Reform and Global Issues      ●
307
optimistic observer does not expect nursing to meet its
manpower projections.
Recognizing that good will does not resolve projected
shortage, federal and state governments have allocated ad-
ditional funding to stimulate enrollment and to encourage
more nurses to go back to school (Juraschek, Zhang, 
Ranganathan, & Lin, 2011). The ACA also supports ex-
panding the nursing workforce by providing new funds
for program development and scholarships, low-interest
loans, and loan-forgiveness programs for graduate students
who prepare to be teachers or nurse practitioners (Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act [ACA], 2010). The
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA)
initiatives also emphasize programs that address the 
“3 Ds”: workforce diversity, health disparities, and social
determinants of health (White, Zangaro, Kepley, & 
Camacho, 2014). HRSA funds demonstration projects to
support nurse practitioners’ collaborative engagement in
primary care teams and in the development of more nurse-
managed clinics (Affordable Care Act bolters, 2010; HRSA,
2014a). The Veterans Administration has partnered with
the HRSA to improve the care of returning veterans and
also provide career opportunities for veterans. They are
funding schools of nursing to recruit, retain, and support
veterans in accelerated BSN programs (Bureau of Health
Professions, 2013). Recently there has been another call
for the Veterans Administration Health Services to form
new partnerships with schools of nursing and to develop
new Veterans Affairs Nursing Academies (U.S. Depart-
ment of Veterans Affairs, 2013). The federal government
provides scholarships and loans for students who agree to
work in underserved areas after graduation. These funds
also support the education of disadvantaged or minority
students and help educate more teachers of nursing and
advanced practice registered nurses, especially nurse prac-
titioners (AACN, 2014c; ACA, 2010). Other programs
offer loan forgiveness of up to 60% of the loan if new RN
or NP graduates work for a period of time (usually 2 years)
within the state or, in the case of federal grants, in some
critical shortage facility (NURSECORPS, 2014). States
have also joined the federal government in addressing the
nursing shortage. Maryland, Illinois, and Kansas have
awarded grants to schools of nursing to increase the nurse
workforce in their states. Some state legislatures in 
Massachusetts, Kansas, Connecticut, and Pennsylvania
have initiated special initiatives to encourage nurses to re-
turn to school and become teachers (AACN, 2006).
There is renewed private sector emphasis on the reten-
tion of practicing nurses. Nurse leaders are actively collab-
orating with the the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation,
the American Association of Retired Persons, and the
Johnson & Johnson Foundation to advance the public
image of nursing and to promote leadership and advanced
practice (The Future of Nursing, 2014). 
EVOLVING NURSING ROLES
Another response to the shortage of nurses is the creation
of new career pathways. Almost a decade ago, The American
Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN, 2004b) pro-
posed new roles: clinical nurse leader (CNL) and doctor 
of nursing practice (DNP). The CNL, prepared at the 
master’s level, is educated to assume clinical, managerial,
and leadership roles, particularly in hospitals. These students
are not educated for advanced practice registered nurse roles
as clinical specialist, nurse practitioner, midwife, or nurse
anesthetist. Rather, their preparation is directed toward 
improving the quality of patient care (AACN, 2011).
Although the CNL degree has evoked less attention
than the DNP, the AACN reports that 104 CLN pro-
grams exist in 38 states (AACN, 2014b).
The DNP program educates nurses who seek a practice
rather than a research-oriented degree, a DNP rather than
a PhD. The AACN envisions that by 2015, the DNP will
be the standard educational preparation for nurses in ad-
vanced practice roles. The 2014 AACN data show that
241 DNP programs of study are available in 49 states and
the District of Columbia (AACN, 2014a). Supporters of
practice doctorates argue that clinical care is increasingly
complex and that advanced practice registered nurses are
disenfranchised because they lack the education and the
credentials enjoyed by other health team practitioners:
physicians, pharmacists, physical therapists, and social
workers (AACN, 2014a). Opponents think that the new
doctoral degree will contribute to an already confusing
pattern of academic credentialing and weaken research-
oriented PhD degrees (Meleis & Dracup, 2005).
Although the DNP was proposed as an academic path-
way to advanced practice, faculty members now conceptu-
alize the DNP degree as preparation for advanced practice,
management of patients and health systems, policy devel-
opment, and clinical teaching. This conceptualization bet-
ter reflects the AACN description of advanced practice:
Any form of nursing intervention that influences health-
care outcomes for individuals or populations, including
the direct care of individual patients, management of
care for individuals and populations, administration of
nursing and healthcare organizations, and the develop-
ment and implementation of health policy. Preparation
at the practice doctorate level includes advanced prepara-
tion in nursing, based on nursing science, and is at the
highest level of nursing practice. (p. 3)
The American Medical Association (AMA) has been a
vocal opponent of the practice doctorate, a position 
expressed in 2006 by Resolution 211 (AMA, 2015). 
Organized medicine has argued that patients will confuse
the DNP with the doctor of medicine degree.
As noted, major campaigns encourage RNs to earn
baccalaureate degrees and remain competitive in the work-
force. Nursing promotes baccalaureate education with the
slogan, “80% by 2020” as it increases program offerings
and enrollment in traditional, hybrid, and online pro-
grams (The Future of Nursing, 2010). 
THE HEALTHCARE DELIVERY
SYSTEM: PRIVATIZATION,
MARKET JUSTICE, AND THE
BUSINESS OF HEALTHCARE
Privatization of Health Care 
In the United States, healthcare is more than human service.
It contributes significantly to the economic well-being 
of the country. America has developed a unique model of

private and public (government) collaboration around
healthcare delivery, the education of health professionals,
and the licensing and accrediting of health institutions. This
unique American model enables people whose care or edu-
cation is paid for by the government to receive healthcare
or education in the private sector. In the case of healthcare,
doctors and nurses, who are not employees of the govern-
ment, provide this care. Students of nursing earn degrees in
schools operated by state and county governments or by pri-
vate institutions, some of which are for-profit enterprises.
Federal government scholarships and loans are given to all
students in the private and public sector. This public-private
model is different from the way that other nations provide
or pay for health or education. Global health systems and
health education programs operate from a political philos-
ophy that supports governments’ responsibility to provide
and pay for healthcare and education of health professionals.
These different philosophies around healthcare delivery and
manpower development invite comparisons of cost and out-
comes, discussions that are informative, are provocative, and
produce evidence. For example, the United States spent
more than 17.7 percent of its gross domestic product
(GDP) on healthcare in 2011; American health spending
almost doubled the spending of countries such as France
and Sweden and was two and one half times greater than
the average spending of Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) countries in 2011
(OECD, 2013b). The worldwide recession caused many
countries to lessen or slow their spending on healthcare; the
2011 data show no immediate change in healthcare indica-
tors in these OECD countries (OECD, 2013a). Significant
public health indicators, especially mortality, the burden of
disease, and infant mortality, still show that U.S. outcomes
fall behind those of countries in Western Europe and
Canada that spend less money on healthcare (Rubenstein,
2013). These data embarrass and distress American public
health experts and policymakers.
Even with these findings, supporters of private sector
involvement in healthcare observe that the U.S. healthcare
system not only contributes to the economy but also is the
envy of the world. America’s innovative technology is ex-
ported to many countries; its medical and nursing schools
and hospitals are training sites for multinationals. The
United States is also a major developer of new drugs and
technologies; its biomedical researchers collaborate with
and contribute to scientific advancement throughout the
world. Closer to home, hospitals, colleges, and universities
are large employers in their communities, providing jobs
to workers with wide-ranging educational backgrounds
and skills. The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics reported
that health careers compose 12 of the 20 fastest-growing
occupations in the United States (USDL, 2012). Health
careers are sought after; places in nursing, medical, and
pharmacy schools are coveted; and jobs in the healthcare
sector remain stable even in periods of recession (Ten 
recession-proof jobs, 2014). Hospitals and universities are
also major purchasers of goods and contribute to the eco-
nomic and political development in their communities.
Influence of Business on Healthcare
The goal of the private health and educational sectors is to
make these enterprises financially viable, competitive, and
attractive to patients, doctors, insurers, students, donors,
and investors. However, both profit and nonprofit health
and education sectors find that a focus on business can tran-
scend or filter out other values. The influence of business
on healthcare is evident in the language of the health com-
munity. It is not uncommon for patients to be described as
consumers, market shares, or covered lives and for nursing
service to be labeled a product line. Some schools view their
students as customers. Writers label this transformation in
the conceptualization of contemporary nursing, medicine,
and healthcare as the commoditization of healthcare (Budetti,
2008, p. 93). This commoditization creates a market in
which any vendor can provide health services or education
and in which decisions about where to purchase services or
where to attend school are based on convenience, cost, and
response to successful marketing of programs. Nurses have
experienced the influence of business in their practices, lan-
guage, and education. Some nurses have learned or adapted
to the market model. Nurses have also joined unions or ad-
vocated through professional organizations for legislation to
mandate safer practices, such as establishing staffing ratios
in acute care hospitals (Buerhaus & Needleman, 2000; 
Wallis, 2013). Others practice what they believe is impor-
tant to patients and more reflective of caring behavior and
social justice (Donley, 2010). A positive impact of market
forces on American healthcare and professional education
is visible in evidence-based practice, insistence that out-
comes are more important than processes, and in renewed
emphasis on success in the NCLEX and advanced practice
certification examinations.
Social justice principles are also integrated into cost-
benefit-burden ratios (Shi & Singh, 2010). These prin-
ciples emphasize the importance of patients’ perceptions
and wishes about diagnostic testing and therapeutic in-
terventions. Social justice puts patients and their well-
being at the center of clinical decision making. Advocates
of both market and social justice want healthcare out-
comes to show demonstrable benefits to patients and
positive cost-benefit ratios to society. Both modes of
practice are concerned about the rising costs of education
and healthcare. The United States invests about 18 per-
cent of its GDP on healthcare and spends on average
$8,233 per person for healthcare each year (Kane, 2012).
As noted previously, this is twice what is spent in Euro-
pean countries. It is not surprising that one major goal
of the ACA is cost reduction. However, lowering health
costs will require major changes in payment and delivery
modes. Current payment incentives in both fee-for-
service and managed care methodologies encourage
overtreatment. Both the federal government and private
insurers are considering new payment methodologies
based on performance and outcomes rather than pay-
ment based on the number of diagnostic or treatment
modalities. Payment for performance and value relies on
evidence-based practice and rewards positive outcomes
of care. Malpractice claims also influence the cost of
healthcare by raising insurance premiums, threatening
professional reputations, and triggering more diagnostic
procedures and treatment. Defensive medicine is rare in
other countries because patients and families do not sue
their healthcare providers. On the delivery side, the ACA
encourages providers to be cost conscious in their use of
treatment sites. Preference is given to ambulatory or
308
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

CHAPTER 18 Healthcare Reform and Global Issues      ●
309
community settings. Providers are asked to watch and
wait rather than to intervene, to prevent illness, and to
avoid or minimize complications. 
As noted, the U.S. health system is characterized by
competition among and between physicians, nurses 
(especially advanced practice registered nurses), hospitals,
healthcare systems, and insurers. Today, pharmacies, 
supermarkets, and ambulatory clinics also compete for in-
surance contracts, healthcare professionals (especially
nurse practitioners), and the right to practice primary
care. Hospitals and physician groups have opened neigh-
borhood clinics and surgi-centers and urgi-centers in
shopping malls. The availability of diagnostic and infor-
mational technology, changes in reimbursement (which
will be accelerated after ACA is fully implemented), and
the pressure to limit admissions and lengths of stay in 
hospitals favor primary care settings. Hospitals have
downsized, merged, and closed. Kodner and Spreeuwen-
berg (2002) describe another delivery system, called an
integrated delivery system, that brings together diagnostic
and primary care services in women’s health, geriatric
care, or sports medicine. The medical home is another ef-
fort to assure continuity and cost-effective care for persons
with limited incomes, providing comprehensive care to
children, adults, and families (Fisher, 2008). Integrated
systems and medical homes bring together a range of ser -
vices under one operating network. In true marketplaces,
competition drives down prices and allows the most com-
petent and efficient institutions and providers to prosper
(Feldstein, 2011). Yet no one engaged in American-style
healthcare notices that healthcare is not the best example
of a competitive marketplace. Illness is the decision
maker; lack of information and uncertainty about insur-
ance benefits interfere with free market choices. It is dif-
ficult to assess the “best buy” in gallbladder surgery or to
select the most qualified and experienced surgeon, even
for well-informed and Internet-savvy patients and fami-
lies. Regulation, originally designed to ensure patient
safety, also restricts competition. For example, mandated
nurse-patient staffing ratios in California limit hospitals’
ability to market and use their nurse-to-patient ratios to
attract patients and nurses. Political influences inhibit
competition. As noted, medical societies oppose revisions
of state nurse practice acts when studies continue to
demonstrate the competence, cost-effectiveness, and pos-
itive outcomes of care given by nurse practitioners (ACA,
2010; Adams, 2001; Laurent et al., 2005). 
Market justice is the term used to name the individu-
alism, self-interest, and profit orientation of healthcare in
the United States. Market forces can overshadow concern
for the common good and blur public responsibility for
the underserved (Budetti, 2008). 
The Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act of 2010
The latest effort to transform healthcare delivery and re-
duce rising health costs became law in 2010. The ACA or
“Obama Care” is designed to make health insurance acces-
sible and affordable. Its entry in the marketplace was
slowed because software glitches delayed online enrollment.
Although the law has supporters and opponents, it will
be at least 5 to 10 years before anyone will know if the
ACA achieves its ambitious goals: reductions in the num-
ber of uninsured people; control over healthcare costs;
improved access to health services; more favorable health-
care outcomes; increased use of preventive health services;
and a more effective primary care workforce (Preventive
care under the Affordable Care Act, 2014). Significant
questions revolve around the real cost of implementing
the ACA. It is unusual that any large federal program con-
forms to it early budget projections; the affordability of
ACA will be discussed for many years. Members of Con-
gress and the public have expressed their unwillingness to
extend governmental investment in healthcare. They fear
that more governmental intervention will affect their in-
terests, diminish their insurance coverage, and increase
their insurance premiums and taxes. Americans are also
wary of a single-payer system, like that found in Canada,
or any insurance system that can be labeled socialized med-
icine. Yet people like and depend on Medicare, Medicaid,
the state Children’s Health Insurance Programs (CHIPs),
and the military and veterans healthcare systems. Whether
the ACA will achieve a place on the list of valued govern-
ment health programs is an open question. In the interim,
energy, money, and time have been dedicated to encour-
age people, especially the young and those who are un-
derinsured or uninsured, to go online and explore
www.healthcare.gov. This Web site brings users into a
healthcare exchange in which they can view and compare
benefits and costs of various insurance products in their
state. They can also sign up for the insurance program
that meets their healthcare needs and their budget. If they
cannot afford to purchase an insurance policy, govern-
ment subsidies are available to them (Healthcare.gov,
2013). Several options embedded in the ACA make en-
rollment attractive: Young adults can remain covered
under their parents’ health plans until they are 26 years
old; persons with preexisting conditions can obtain health
coverage and not be charged extraordinary rates; preven-
tive health services are part of each plan; and the poverty
index under Medicaid has been raised to 133 percent of
the poverty level (ACA, 2010). The least attractive pro-
vision of ACA mandates that uninsured individuals and
employers with more than 50 workers must purchase
health insurance or pay fines. When the enrollment period
ended on March 31, 2014, 7.5 million people had signed up
for health insurance. Even with this positive response, the Con-
gressional Budget Office estimates that by 2020, 30 million
nonelderly Americans will still be uninsured (Bier, 2013).
This group will include those who are in the United States
without proper documents and people who did not sign up
for programs for which they or their children are eligible.
Although healthcare reform is the cornerstone of the
Obama Administration, lack of insurance is only one bar-
rier to receiving healthcare. Persons with health insurance
face cultural, linguistic, informational, and bureaucratic
hurdles that limit their access to care. The Institute of
Medicine (IOM) 2004 report on being without insurance
describes the consequences of lack of access to healthcare
services. More than 30 million working-age people, one
in seven workers, received too little medical care; received
it too late; were sicker; died sooner; and received poorer
care even when hospitalized for trauma (Committee on
the Consequences of Uninsurance, 2004).

Health Disparities
Health disparities is a term that describes one consequence
of inadequate access to healthcare. The Surgeon General’s
Report, Healthy People 2020, highlights health disparities
associated with age and developmental states, quality and
safety, and preparedness for natural and manmade disas-
ters and terrorism (USDHHS, 2010b). The importance
of addressing global health is emphasized in this report by
naming infections associated with well-recognized illnesses
as health disparities: tuberculosis, malaria, HIV/AIDs, and
vaccine-preventable diseases. The Surgeon General’s list
also includes emergent infectious diseases, SARS, H1N1
virus, influenza virus, and foodborne illnesses (Healthy
People 2020, 2011; USDHHS, 2010b). 
Safety
Almost 15 years ago, a trilogy of studies by the IOM
alerted the public, Congress, and providers about the fre-
quency, seriousness, and cost of medical error. Failure to
protect sick people, especially those who are hospitalized,
imposes unnecessary burdens on individuals and costs 
to the entire health system. Medical error can be classified
as a health disparity. The first IOM study, To Err Is
Human: Building a Safer Health System (Kohn, Corrigan,
& Donaldson, 2000), addressed the importance of devel-
oping a culture of safety in contemporary healthcare sys-
tems. The second IOM study, Crossing the Quality Chasm:
A New Health System for the 21st Century (Committee on
Quality Health Care, 2001), presented recommendations
to reduce error and enhance quality. The third study in
the series, Patient Safety: Achieving a New Standard of Care
(Committee on Data Standards for Patient Safety, 2004),
endorsed the need for a national infrastructure on patient
safety information. The government, accreditors, and
health systems have directed dollars and written standards
to improve patient safety and decrease error, especially
medication and transcription errors (The Joint Commis-
sion, 2014). However, more than a decade after the IOM
published its last study, medical error continues to increase
the burden of illness and healthcare costs. 
310
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
Review the Medicaid CHIP enrollments in your state at State at www.Medicaid.gov. and  at http://www
.medicaid.gov/Medicaid-CHIP-Program-Information/By-State/By-State.html. 
Question: What is the current Medicaid enrollment in your state, and how has your state responded to the
ACA provision to increase eligibility for Medicaid?
Source: State Medicaid and CHIP policies for 2014. Medicaid.gov. Retrieved from  www.medicaid.gov and http://www.
medicaid.gov/Medicaid-CHIP-Program-Information/By-State/By-State.html.
K E Y  P O I N T S
●Healthcare in the United States is a partnership between the public and private sectors and is a model of
collaboration around health delivery, finance, and professional educators.
●American-style healthcare emphasizes expensive acute care rather than cheaper prevention or primary
care. 
●The influence of business is evident in the language and ethics of healthcare. Two positive influences 
from the business community are a focus on outcomes rather than processes and the value placed on
evidence-based practice.
●Some critics of the public/private American plan blame rising healthcare costs and the failures to achieve
good outcomes on the involvement of business in healthcare and the desire for efficiency and economic
gain above the care of patients.
●Hospitals have merged and formed systems to ensure economies of scale, access to capital for 
expansion, and acquisition of physician practices.
●The simplicity and availability of technology, changed reimbursement, and the pressure to lower 
healthcare costs encourage surgi-centers, urgi-centers, and community-based clinics. 
●Medicare, a federal health insurance program that serves the elderly and disabled people who receive
Supplemental Social Security, has four Parts (A, B, C, and D), each offering different benefits and financing
mechanisms. 
●Medicaid is a means-tested federal/state health program that pays for medical and long-term care for 
five indigent groups: pregnant women, adults in families with dependent children, children, persons with
disabilities, and the poor elderly. Under the ACA, Medicaid will be expanded.

CHAPTER 18 Healthcare Reform and Global Issues      ●
311
REFERENCES
Abood, S. (2007). Influencing health care in the legislative
arena. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 12(1):3. 
Abrams, M., Nuzum, S., Mika, S., & Lawlor, G. (2011, January).
Realizing health reform’s potential: How the Affordable Care Act
will strengthen primary care and benefit patients, providers and
payers. New York: Commonwealth Fund. Retrieved from
http://www.commonwealthfund.org/Publications/Issue
-Briefs/2011/Jan/Strengthen-Primary-Care.aspx
Adams, D. (2001, October 15). Maryland examines doctors’ in-
fluence. AMA MedEd Update. Affordable Care Act bolsters the
primary care workforce in medically underserved communities,
2010. Retrieved from http://www.businesswire.com/news
/home/20101122006098/en/Affordable-Care-Act-Bolsters
-Primary-Care-Workforce#.VUUiPflViko
Aiken, L. H., Clarke, S., & Sloane, D. (2002). Hospital
staffing, organization and quality of care: Cross national
findings. Nursing Outlook, 50(5), 187–194.
Aiken, L. H., Sloane, D. M., Bruyneel, L., Van den Heede, K.,
Griffiths, P., Busse, R., Diomidous, M., Kinunen, J., Kozka,
M., Lesaffre, E., McHugh, M. D., Moreno-Casbas, 
M. T., Rafferty, A. M., Schwendimann, R., Scott, P. A., 
Tishelman, C., van Achterberg, T., & Sermeus, W. (2014).
Nurse staffing and education and hospital mortality in nine 
European countries: A retrospective observational study. 
The Lancet, 383(9931), 1824–1830. doi:10.1016/
50140-6736(13)62631-8.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2004a).
Leading initiatives: CLN programs. Retrieved from http://
www.aacn.nche.edu/cnl/about/cnl-programs 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2004b).
Position statement on the practice doctorate in nursing. 
Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/publications/
position/DNP positiontatement.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2006).
State legislative initiatives to address the nursing shortage. Re-
trieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/aacn-publications/
issue-bulletin/state-legislative 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2010a).
New AACN data show that enrollment in baccalaureate nurs-
ing programs expands for the 10th consecutive year. Retrieved
K E Y  P O I N T S — c o n t ’ d
●CHIP is a federal health insurance program designed for children who live in working-class families above
the federal poverty level.
●The nursing shortage represents a failure in both recruitment and retention. The shortage of nurses,
nurse practitioners, and nurse educators prompted Congress to integrate provisions from the Nurse
Reinvestment Act into the ACA.
●Legislation to mandate staffing ratios has been introduced in the Congress and several states to ensure
that a sufficient number of nurses are available to care for patients.
●The AACN has promoted new educational pathways, the clinical nurse leader (CNL) and the doctor of
nursing practice (DNP), and has encouraged schools of nursing to build and bridge programs from RN to
BSN or MSN and from BSN to PhD or DNP.
●Uninsured or underinsured Americans have limited access to care and suffer greater health disparities.
●Competence in health policy is within the reach of each nurse and student of nursing.
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. A student, who is not a nursing major, asks you whether she should buy health insurance from the government’s
healthcare Web site or pay a fine that is less costly than the insurance premium. She is 24 years old and is healthy.
Everyone in her family is healthy.
• How would you advise the student?
• Give reasons for your advice, citing the benefits of the ACA.
2. What populations are most at risk for health disparities? Is your fellow student at risk?
3. How do health disparities affect access, outcomes, and cost?
4. Identify three factors associated with recruitment and retention in nursing.
5. Discuss two advantages and two disadvantages of new educational pathways for nurses.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.

from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/news/articles/2010/
bacc-growth 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2010b).
Nursing faculty shortage. Retrieved from http://www.aacn
.nche.edu/media-relations/Faculty ShortageFS.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2011).
CNL programs. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu
/cnl/about/cnl-programs
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2014a).
DNP fact sheet. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/
media-relations/fact-sheets/dnp 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN).
(2014b). Leading initiatives. Retrieved from http://www
.aacn.nche.edu/cnl/about/cnl-programs 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2014c).
Special survey on vacant faculty positions for academic year
2013–2014. Retrieved from www.aacn.nche.edu
American Medical Association (AMA). (2006). Need to expose and
counter nurse doctoral programs (NDP) misrepresentation. Reso-
lution 211(A-06). Retrieved from https://www.ama-assn.org
/ssl3/ecomm/PolicyFinderForm.pl?site=www.ama-assn
.org&uri=/resources/html/PolicyFinder/policyfiles/HnE
/H-35.972.HTM
American Nurses Association. (2014). Nurses currently serving in
Congress. Retrieved from http://www.nursingworld.org
/MainMenuCategories/Policy-Advocacy/
Benner, P., Sutphen, M., Leonard, V., & Day, L. (2010). 
Educating nurses: A call for radical transformation. San 
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Bier, J. P. (2013, June 4). CBO: Obamacare will leave 30 million
uninsured. Retrieved from http://cnsnews.com/news/article/
cbo-obamacare-will-leave-30-million-uninsured 
Boccia, R. (2013, February 12). How the United States’ high
debt will weaken the economy and hurt Americans. The Her-
itage Foundation. Retrieved from http://www.heritage.org
/research/reports/2013/02/how-the-united-states-high-debt
-will-weaken-the-economy-and-hurt-americans 
Brassard, A., & Smolenski, M. (2011, September). Remov-
ing barriers to advanced practice registered nurse care:
Hospital privileges. AARP Public Institute Insight on 
the Issues. Retrieved from http://www.aarp.org/health
/doctors-hospitals/info-10-2011/Removing-Barriers-to
-Advanced-Practice-Registered-Nurse-Care-Hospital
-Privileges.html
Budetti, P. (2008). Market justice and US health care. Journal
of the American Medical Association, 299(1), 92–94.
Buerhaus, P., & Needleman, J. (2000). Policy implications of
research on nurse staffing and quality of patient care. Policy,
Politics, & Nursing Practice, 1(1), 5–15.
Bureau of Health Professions (BHP). (2013). Helping veterans 
become nurses. Retrieved from http://bhpr.hrsa.gov/veterans
/nurses.html.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2012). Fastest growing occupations.
Occupational Outlook Handbook. Retrieved from http://
www.bls.gov/ooh/fastest-growing.htm
Carney, B. (2005, November–December). The ethics of re-
cruiting foreign nurses. Health Progress, 86(6), 31–35. 
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). (2001, July). Long term
global demographic trends: Reshaping the geopolitical landscape.
Retrieved from https://www.cia.gov/library/reports/general
-reports-1/Demo_Trends_For_Web.pdf
Chaguturu, S., & Vallabhaneni, S. (2005). Aiding and abetting:
Nursing crisis at home and abroad. New England Journal of
Medicine, 553, 1761–1763.
Committee on Data Standards for Patient Safety. (2004). 
Patient safety: Achieving a new standard of care. Washington,
DC: National Academies Press. 
Committee on Quality Health Care. (2001). Crossing the quality
chasm: A new health system for the 21st century. Washington,
DC: National Academies Press.
Committee on the Consequences of Uninsurance (CCU).
(2004). Insuring America’s health: Principles and recommen-
dations. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Davies, R. (2008). The Bologna process: The quiet revolution
in nursing higher education. Nurse Education Today, 28,
935–942.
DeCuccio, M. H. (2014, March). The relationship between 
patient safety culture and patient outcomes: A systematic
review. Journal of Patient Safety, 1–8. 
Donley, R. (2010). Nursing, social justice and the marketplace.
Health Progress, 91(5), 35–37.
Donley, R., Flaherty, M. J., Sarsfield, E., Taylor, L., Maloni,
H., & Flanagan, E. (2002). The nursing shortage: What
does the Nurse Reinvestment Act mean to you? Online
Journal of Issues in Nursing, 8(1), Manuscript 5. Retrieved
from http://nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories
/ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/TableofContents
/Volume82003/No1Jan2003/ArticlesPreviousTopics
/NurseReinvestmentAct.html
Feldstein, P. (2011). Health care economics (7th ed.). New York:
Delmar.
Fisher, E. B. (2008). Building a medical neighborhood for the
medical home. New England Journal of Medicine, 359,
1202–1205. 
Global Health Workforce Alliance, World Health Organiza-
tion. (2008). The Kampala Declaration and Agenda for
Global Action. Retrieved from http://www.who.int
/workforcealliance/knowledge/resources/kampala
_declaration/en/ 
Healthcare.gov. (2013). Retrieved from www.healthcare.gov
/families/
Healthy People 2020. (2011). Retrieved from http://
healthypeople.gov/2020/default.aspx
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA).
(2014a). Advanced nursing education.Retrieved from http://
bhpr.hrsa.gov/nursing/grants/ane.html
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA).
(2014b). Mary Wakefield biography. (2014). Retrieved 
April 3, 2014, from http://www.hrsa.gov/about/
organization/biowakefield.html 
Hollander, C. (2014, March 20). Study: Long-term unemployed,
if they get a job, more likely to leave than settle into labor
force. National Journal. Retrieved from http://www
.nationaljournal.com/economy/study-long-term-unemployed
-if-they-get-a-job-more-likely-to-leave-than-settle-into-labor
-force-20140320
Juraschek, S. P., Zhang, X., Ranganathan, V., & Lin, V. (2011,
November 19). United States registered nurse workforce 
report card and shortage forecast. American Journal of 
Medical Quality. doi: 10.1177/1062860611416634.
Kalisch, B. J., Tschannen, D., Lee, H., & Friese, C. R. (2011).
Hospital variation in missed nursing care. American Journal
of Medical Quality, 26(4), 291–299. 
Kane, J. (2012, October 22). Health costs: How the U.S. compares
with other countries. PBS NewsHour. Retrieved from
http://www.pbs.org/newshour/rundown/health-costs-how
-the-us-compares-with-other-countries/?utm_source=UCSF+
Center+for+Healthcare+Value+List&utm_campaign=7be2f6f4
312
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

CHAPTER 18 Healthcare Reform and Global Issues      ●
313
Shi, L., & Singh, D. (2010). Essentials of the U.S. health system
(2nd ed.). Sudbury, MA: Jones & Bartlett. 
Smedley, B. D., Stith, A. Y., & Nelson, A. R. (Eds.). (2003).
Unequal treatment: Confronting racial and ethnic disparities
in health care. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Ten recession-proof jobs. (2014). Retrieved from http://www
.salary.com/Articles/ArticleDetail.asp?part=par1098
The Future of Nursing. (2010). Leading change, advancing
health. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
The Future of Nursing. (2014). Campaign for action. Retrieved
from http://campaignforaction.org/
The Joint Commission. (2014). Infection control. Retrieved
from http://www.jointcommission.org/topics/patient
_safety.aspx
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2010a). Registered nurse population: Findings from the 2008
National Sample of Registered Nurses. Rockville, MD: Health
Resources and Services Administration, Bureau of Health
Professions, Division of Nursing.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2010b). Healthy People 2020. Retrieved from http://www
.healthypeople.gov
U.S. Department of Labor (USDL). (2012). Bureau of Labor
Statistics’ employment projections, 2010–2020. Retrieved
from http://www.bls.gov/news.release/ecopro.t06.htm
U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs (USDVA). (2013). VA
nursing academic partnerships. Retrieved from http://www
.va.gov/oaa/vanap/default.asp
Wallis, L. (2013, August). Nurse-patient staffing ratios. 
American Journal of Nursing, 113(8), 222. 
White, K. M., Zangaro, G., Kepley, H. O., & Camacho, A.
(2014). The Health Resources and Services Administration
Data Collection. Public Health Reports Supplement 2: Nurs-
ing in 3D: Workforce diversity, health disparities, social deter-
minants of health increase. Retrieved from http://www
.publichealthreports.org/issueopen.cfm?articleID=3082
Wong, M. (2012, July 11). 3 big problems facing nursing
today. Health Careers. Retrieved from www.healthcareers
.com/article/3-big-problems-facing-nursing-today/170629
ONLINE RESOURCES
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
www.hhs.gov/healthcare/rights
Medicaid and Children’s Health Insurance Program
http://www.medicaid.gov/Medicaid-CHIP-Program-
Information/By-State/By-State.html
American Association of Colleges of Nursing
http://www.aacn.nche.edu
Healthy People 2010 and Healthy People 2020
http://www.healthypeople.gov
9b-Center+for+Healthcare+Value+-+Aug+Update&utm_
medium=email
Kodner, D. L., & Spreeuwenberg, C. (2002). Integrated care:
Meaning, logic, applications and implications, a discussion
paper. International Journal of Integrated Care. Retrieved
from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC1480401
Kohn, L., Corrigan, J., & Donaldson, M. (Eds.). (2000). To err
is human: Building a safer health system. Washington, DC:
National Academies Press.
Laurent, M., Reeves, D., Hermans, R., Braspenning, J., Grol,
R., & Sibbald, B. (2004). Substitution of doctors by nurses
in primary care. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,
July 2005, Issue 3.
Mechanic, D., & Reinhard, S. C. (2002). Contributions of
nurses to health policy: Challenges and opportunities. 
Nursing and Health Policy Review, 1(1), 7–15. 
Meleis, A., & Dracup, K. (2005). The case against the DNP: 
History, timing, substance, and marginalization. Retrieved
from http://www.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories
/ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/TableofContents
/Volume102005/No3Sept05/tpc28_216026.html
Mitchell, J. (2013). Who are the long-term unemployed? The
Urban Institute. Retrieved from http://www.urban.org
/uploadedpdf/412885-who-are-the-long-term-unemployed.pdf
NURSECORPS. (2014). Loan Repayment program. Retrieved
from http://www.hrsa.gov/loanscholarships/repayment
/nursing/nursecorpsloanrepaymentfactsheet.pdf
Nurses for a Healthier Tomorrow. (n.d.). Campaign news. Re-
trieved from http://www.nursesource.org/campaign_news
.html
Nursing Organizations Alliance. (2014). Nurse in Washington
Internship (NIWI). Retrieved from http://www.nann.org
/advocacy/content/niwi.html 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OCED). (2013a). Health at a glance 2013. Retrieved 
from http://www.oecd.org/els/health-systems/Health-at-a
-Glance-2013.pdf
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OCED). (2013b). OCED Health Data 2013. How does the
United States compare? Retrieved from http://www.oecd.
org/unitedstates/Briefing-Note-USA-2014.pdf
Oulton, J. J. (2006). The global nursing shortage: An overview
of issues and actions. Policy Politics Nursing Practice, 7, 34S.
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 (ACA).
(2010). Retrieved from http://burgess.house.gov
/UploadedFiles/hr3590_health_care_law_2010.pdf
Preventive care under the Affordable Care Act/HealthCare (2014).
Retrieved from https://www.healthcare.gov/preventive-care
-benefits/ 
Rubenstein, G. (2013, January). New health rankings: Of 17
nations, U.S. is dead last. The Atlantic. Retrieved from
http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2013/01
/new-health-rankings-of-17-nations-us-is-dead-last/267045

Expanding the Vision
314
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Evaluate trends in professional practice.
2. Continue to evaluate her or his personal philosophy.
3. Envision personal competencies in professional nursing practice.
4. Develop personal strategic initiatives for future contributions to professional 
nursing practice.
Competencies
Collaboration
Continued Competence
Involvement
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
“Success comes to those who are 
too busy to be looking for it.”
Henry David Thoreau, 1817–1862
Key Terms
19

CHAPTER 19 Expanding the Vision     ●
315
We have seen nursing and healthcare change radically in
recent years. With restructuring of healthcare, nursing pro-
fessionals have responded with refinements, advance-
ments, and innovations. Nursing has moved from the
functional service mode of the mid-1900s to a cost-, 
community-, quality-, evidence-based–, and consumer-
focused orientation. It is no longer the nursing care plan for
the patient, but is now the collaborative care plan of the pa-
tient. And this care must be framed in the context of safety
and patient involvement in an environment with shortages
of healthcare providers in increasingly diverse settings.
To address the health of people, all health pro fessions
are now faced with the challenges of trans formation, in-
novation, and collaboration. We have opportunities and
challenges ahead. Collaboration must extend beyond the
structural walls of a single institution or the boundaries of
a community. In a global society, we can reach out to col-
leagues and patients physically or electronically. Shared
best practices are no longer restricted by geography. 
Evidence-based practices are a mandate limited only by
the needs of the patient population. Critical components
of professional practice continue to expand and be en-
hanced through technology. And we continually strive to
envision the challenges ahead. It is now time to expand
the vision and address these challenges.
HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS
IN THE 21ST CENTURY
Several initiatives have led to the changes in practice, in
the nursing profession, and throughout the health profes-
sions during the last decades that frame the opportunities
we face.
The Pew Health Professions
Commission
The Pew Charitable Trust Foundation established the
Pew Health Professions Commission, which worked
from 1989 to 1999 to address issues of healthcare re-
form and health policy across the professions. At that
time, the healthcare industry was in the midst of re-
designing services and roles and containing costs with
declining resources. The commission identified 21 spe-
cific competencies for health professionals for the year
2005. These competencies addressed ethics, critical
thinking and evidence-based practice, primary and pre-
ventative healthcare, access, diversity and health dispar-
ities,  consumer empowerment and outcomes, the use of
informatics and interdisciplinary practice, quality and
continuous improvement, leadership and public pol-
icy, and continued learning. Competencies are those
qualities that illustrate effectiveness and appropriateness
in our respective professional roles. In 1995, reports from
the commission produced strong reactions and responses
throughout the professional communities, with predic-
tions for redesign needed in education and healthcare
and for a rapid transformation in the health professions
workforce. The four r’s were redesign, re-regulate, right-
size, and restructure. The view of the healthcare system
presented by the commission was market-driven and 
integrated with more managed and primary care. In 
addition, this healthcare system and its professionals
would be more accountable to the public and responsive
to consumers. Recommendations directed at the profession
of nursing involved public accountability, recognition of
our assets, the need for clarity in our roles and functions,
and the need to meet the demands of the marketplace.
As a result of the findings of the commission and the as-
sociated reactions from different professional groups, O’Neil
(1998) identified strategic directions for nursing that in-
cluded addressing differentiated practice,  curricula changes,
core competencies, a commitment to research, the creation
of strategic partnerships, and enhanced leadership. Later that
year, however, the focus changed from the future competen-
cies of health professionals to a call for immediate attention
to patient safety.
The Institute of Medicine
Quality Chasm
As we have discussed previously, the health professions
came under fire with the release of reports from the Insti-
tute of Medicine (IOM) of the National Academies on the
high incidence of medical errors, changing the focus from
the future of healthcare to the current need to improve
safety for patients and healthcare consumers. The IOM is
a nonprofit organization designed to provide science-based
advice as a public service. Its reports, whether self-initiated
or as mandated from the U.S. Congress, are published
after rigorous research, careful deliberation from profes-
sionals from healthcare and other scientific and profes-
sional disciplines, and a peer review process (IOM, 2013,
p. 1). The 2001 report from the IOM, Crossing the Quality
Chasm, proposed rules for the health system in the 
21st century for quality healthcare that were the basis for
six overall aims—that care should be safe, effective, pa-
tient-centered, timely, efficient, and equitable (IOM,
2001). A further report after a Health Professions Educa-
tion Summit led to the identification of the five core com-
petencies for all health professionals:
●Provide patient-centered care.
●Work in interdisciplinary teams.
●Employ evidence-based practice.
●Apply quality improvement.
●Utilize informatics. (Greiner & Knebel, 2003)
Patient safety and effectiveness of outcomes became
major national objectives and directed additional atten-
tion to nursing. Research by the Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality (AHRQ) focused on expanding the
knowledge base on how the quality of the healthcare
workplace affects the quality of healthcare provided, es-
pecially in the areas of workload and working conditions,
effects of stress and fatigue, reducing adverse events, and
the organizational climate and culture. Patient outcomes
were now being investigated, along with nursing-sensitive
indicators and factors that promote safe and effective
practice.
In late 2003, nursing itself was the focus of the IOM
in their report, Keeping Patients Safe: Transforming the
Work Environment of Nurses. The IOM’s Committee on
the Work Environment and Patient Safety provided spe-
cific recommendations to both acute care and long-term

care organizations on issues of management practices,
workforce capability, work design, and the organizational
safety culture (Page, 2004, p. 3). The following risk fac-
tors were identified for patient safety in nursing work 
environments:
●More acutely ill patients
●Shorter hospital stays
●Redesigned work
●Frequent patient turnover
●High staff turnover
●Long work hours
●Rapid increases in new knowledge and technology
●Increased interruptions and demands on nurses’ time
(Page, 2004, pp. 37–45)
Although these facts were no surprise, their identifica-
tion as risk factors to patients was significant. Nurses have
been reporting these factors, but now they were included
in a major national report. This committee also docu-
mented the national shortages of both nurses and nursing
assistants. Recommendations to nursing leadership and
management on how to address the deficiencies in the
documented work environments called attention to the
following areas:
●Leadership, communication skills, collaborative 
decision making, and resources
●Emphasis on safety goals along with productivity and
financial goals
●Management practices promoting safety, trust, change,
engagement, and learning collaboratives
●External support for evidence-based management 
practices
In addition, at the staff level, the committee found
“strong evidence that nurse staffing levels, the knowledge
and skills level of nursing staff, and the extent to which
workers collaborate in sharing their knowledge and skills
affect patient outcomes and safety” (Page, 2004, p. 161).
This finding provides further support for the need to in-
corporate the five core competencies into professional
nursing practice on a consistent basis. Nurses consistently
strive to provide patient-centered care, but, for positive
patient outcomes, this must also be done in light of the
other core competencies, given the nature of the healthcare
environment. Evolving technologies, evidence-based col-
laborative practice, and continued competence are essen-
tial components for quality improvement in the delivery
of healthcare to consumers.
In subsequent years, the IOM investigated health dis-
parities, the role of the government (including Medicare),
rural health, healthcare reimbursement practices, and
mental health conditions among other quality improve-
ment initiatives, including the objectives for Healthy Peo-
ple 2020. Of particular note were two studies mandated
by the United States Congress, on insurance and reim-
bursements and preventing medication errors. In July
2006, the IOM report on Preventing Medication Errors
presented information available on the incidence of med-
ication errors in acute care settings, long-term care, and
in ambulatory care—including errors in the homes of
consumers—in an effort to develop an agenda for the na-
tion to reduce preventable errors and adverse drug events
and enhance medication safety. Although the incidence
rates were approximated based on the data, the report did
emphasize that these rates were most likely underesti-
mates, based on available and reportable data and the in-
cidence of adverse events. It was reported, however, that
at least 25 percent of all harmful adverse drug events are
preventable (Aspden, Wolcott, Bootman, & Cronenwett,
2006, p. 4). 
Based on the rules from the earlier Quality Chasm
Report in 2001, the IOM (Aspden et al., 2006) recom-
mended the transformation of the entire system to a 
patient-centered, integrated-use system with specific action
agendas to support consumer-provider partnership. The
seven recommendations provided by the IOM (Aspden 
et al., 2006) focused further on:
●Consumer empowerment for self-medication
 management
●Improvement and standardization of resources by 
governmental agencies
●Implementation of patient-information and  
decision-support technologies nationwide
●Improved labeling, packaging, and distribution, 
including studies on use of samples
●Establishment of standards for drug information
technologies, including design and alert systems
●Broad, federally funded research on safe and appropri-
ate medication use across settings, focused on error
prevention
●Use of legislation, regulation, accreditation, payment
mechanisms, and the media for adoption of practices,
technologies, and professional behaviors focused on
safety and error reduction
Collaborative efforts among professionals, governmen-
tal agencies, suppliers, educators, and regulators with the
consumer involved in the process were a mandate. The
IOM Committee on the Work Environment and Patient
Safety (Page, 2004) identified necessary patient safeguards in
the environment (Box 19.1). 
However, in a report 10 years later on these recom-
mendations (RWJF, 2014), the following areas were noted
316
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
BOX 19.1
Necessary Patient Safeguards in the
Work Environment
●Governing boards that focus on safety
●Leadership and evidence-based management 
structures and processes
●Eﬀective nursing leadership
●Adequate staﬃng
●Organizational support for ongoing learning and 
decision support
●Mechanisms that promote interdisciplinary
 collaboration
●Work design that promotes safety
●Organizational culture that continually strengthens
patient safety
Source: Page, A. (Ed.). (2004). Keeping patients safe: Transforming the work
environment of nurses. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.

with positive progress but also with recommendations for
further transformation in the workplace:
●Creating work environments that promote patient
safety
●Ensuring adequate nurse staffing
●Curbing unprofessional and disruptive behaviors
●Harnessing nurse leadership
●Fostering interprofessional collaboration (p. 2)
Evidence-based practice is the standard, with a focus
on safety, positive patient outcomes, and the used of
known and evolving technologies. Changes in the practice
environment have received serious attention, with the
focus on safety and patient outcomes.
A Call for Change and Leadership
by Nursing
In 2008, a two-year collaborative initiative between the IOM
and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (RWJF) started
looking at the nursing profession and the need for more than
change, but transformation. The report by the committee was
released in October 2010 with four key messages and eight
recommendations (Table 19.1). However, as voiced in one
of the follow-up briefings to the public, this was not to be a
report to sit on a shelf but rather a call to action.
The key messages focus on more consistency of ad-
vanced practice nurse (APRN) practice among the states
and licensing jurisdictions, the development of residency
programs across settings and practice areas, seamless and on-
going education for nurses, active nursing involvement in
redesign of the healthcare system, and better workforce data
systems. Their report also supported implementation of the
APRN Consensus Model (APRN Consensus Work Group &
the National Council of State Boards of Nursing APRN
Advisory Committee, 2008) and the National Council of
State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN) Nurse Licensure Compact
(NCSBN, 2014). The recommendations provide directives
to the federal and state governments, regulatory bodies, 
accrediting agencies, healthcare providers, funding agencies,
educational programs, and individual nurses. As stated by
the IOM (2011), “together, these groups have the power to
transform the healthcare system to provide seamless, afford-
able, quality care that is accessible to all, patient-centered,
and evidence-based and leads to improved health outcomes”
(p. S-13). These recommendations call for leadership, col-
laboration, and action.
The Professional Nursing Practice
Environment
Leadership, collaboration, and action in the practice envi-
ronment are essential for patient safety but also for the sat-
isfaction, involvement, and commitment of dedicated
healthcare professionals. One area that is receiving serious
consideration at the national and state levels is adequacy of
staffing. In addition, the American Nurses Association
(ANA) has been actively looking at the roles of both the
employer and the nurse to promote healthy work hours
and consider the effect of fatigue on safety for both patients
and nurses. The focus on productivity and appropriate
staffing has led to a renewed emphasis on quality outcomes.
Indicators that are nursing sensitive, such as infection rates,
patient satisfaction, and nursing hours per patient day, are
being studied in relation to staffing. As noted by Clark 
et al. (2005), we cannot simply tell staff to do more,
“rather, we need to create systems that support staff in their
CHAPTER 19 Expanding the Vision     ●
317
ONLINE CONSULT 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 
(AHRQ) at
http://www.ahrq.gov
Institute of Medicine (IOM) at
http://www.iom.edu
TABLE 19.1
IOM and RWJF Report on the Future of Nursing
Key Messages
Committee Recommendations
Source: Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2011). The future of nursing: Leading change, advancing health. Retrieved from http://www
.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=12956
1. Nurses should practice to the full extent of their
education.
2. Nurses should achieve higher levels of education
and training through an improved education 
system that promotes seamless academic 
progression.
3. Nurses should be full partners, with physicians
and other healthcare professionals, in redesigning
healthcare in the United States.
4. Effective workforce planning and policy-making
require better data collection and an improved
information infrastructure.
1. Remove scope of practice barriers.
2. Expand opportunities for nurses to lead and diffuse
 collaborative improvement efforts.
3. Implement nurse residency programs.
4. Increase the proportion of nurses with a baccalaureate
degree to 80 percent by 2020.
5. Double the nurses with a doctorate by 2020.
6. Ensure that nurses engage in lifelong learning.
7. Prepare and enable nurses to lead change to advance
health.
8. Build an infrastructure for the collection and analysis of 
interprofessional healthcare workforce data.

efforts and set them up for success” (p. 8). In addition to
staffing numbers, a body of research has evolved from
Linda Aiken and her associates and others on educational
preparation and patient complexity and nurse sensitive
measures. The complexity of the environment, the acuity
of the patients, and the distractions nurses face are serious
factors in contemporary healthcare settings. In ad dition
to current concerns on adequacy of staffing to meet the
patient acuity needs are the projections of nursing short-
ages in the future with deferred retirements taking place
along with an increased demand for nursing professionals.
In addition, in the 10-year follow-up report to Keeping
Patients Safe, ensuring adequate nurse staffing was one of
the areas identified for further transformation, and the re-
port stated that “staffing adequacy is a function of the
composition as well as the size of the nursing workforce
and concerted efforts are now underway to increase the
education level of nurses” (RWJF, 2014, p. 4). An in-
crease in baccalaureate-prepared nurses is further sup-
ported by the American Association of College of Nursing
(AACN, 2014a), which has documented “the unique
value that baccalaureate-prepared nurses bring to the
practice setting” (p. 1).
The American Association of Colleges of Nursing
(AACN) has identified selected characteristics of work en-
vironments that support professional nursing practice
(AACN, 2002):
●Magnet status
●Preceptorships and residencies
●Differentiated practice
●Interdisciplinary collaboration
Recognition as a Magnet hospital requires that applicant
healthcare organizations meet specific eligibility criteria, in-
cluding strong nursing leadership in line with national stan-
dards of practice. From the original model that identified
14 forces of magnetism, a revised model for the Magnet
Recognition Program® was introduced in 2008 and con-
tained the following five components:
●Transformational Leadership 
●Structural Empowerment 
●Exemplary Professional Practice
●New Knowledge, Innovation, and Improvements 
●Empirical Quality Results (ANCC, 2014)
These five components contain the 14 Forces of Mag-
netism and guide the self-assessment requirement for the
institution applying for Magnet recognition Retention
and appropriate staffing are characteristics of Magnet 
organizations. The Joint Commission (2013) identified
that its accreditation standards, the Baldrige quality stan-
dards, and the AACN Magnet Recognition Model com-
ponents contain many parallels that share the following
characteristics:
●Were developed using a consensus-building approach
●Are built on a set of core values and principles
●Use a framework of important functions that cross 
internal organizational structures
●Recognize organizations as systems
●Focus on continuous improvement in outcomes and
organization performance
●Do not prescribe specific structures
●Promote the use of organization self-assessment (p. 1)
Retention is enhanced when professionals have had an
opportunity to expand their knowledge base and skills
with a rapidly changing practice environment through
preceptorships for students and residencies for graduates.
The implementation of residency programs for new
nurses from prelicensure programs and advanced practice
programs, as well as when transitioning to a new clinical
practice area, was one of the recommendations from the
IOM (2011). Finkelman and Kenner (2012) describe ef-
fective residency programs with “graduated patient care
responsibilities, additional educational experiences and
competency development, professional socialization, and
support for the critical transition during the first post
graduation year” (pp. 72–73). Mentorship is also an im-
portant component to advance the skills of the neophyte
and of the seasoned clinician. Matching the knowledge
and skills of the professionals with the requirements of
the position is an ongoing consideration. This can be pro-
moted through mentorship programs and activities for
continuing education, competency, and differentiated
practice.
Differentiated nursing practice, the third charac teristic
identified by AACN in the supportive practice environ-
ment, is illustrated through advancement structures in the
organization based on experience, additional education,
certification, or other identified indicators of excellence
(AACN, 2002, pp. 6–7). Implementation of differentiated
practice has historically been difficult; the combination of
skills matched to the position requirements must be de-
lineated. As Nelson (2002) proposed more than a decade
ago, it is not feasible to try to differentiate practice along
current educational points of entry when the roles have
not been translated into the practice setting (p. 7). And
this remains the case, as clinical ladders are inconsistent
and diverse. However, the need for lifelong learning and
a seamless educational system have been highlighted by
the IOM (2011).
Interdisciplinary collaboration, illustrated through
teamwork, trust, shared responsibility, and respect, also
enhances patient outcomes. The AACN (2002) pro-
posed eight hallmarks of excellence in the professional
nursing practice environment. Consider how these hall-
marks for the practice environment (Table 19.2) also
address the core competencies for all health professionals
identified by the IOM. Note the focus on quality care
for patients, collaboration, competency, and leadership
throughout. Again, we see collaboration and leadership
in collaborative improvement efforts in healthcare set-
tings in the recent recommendations from the IOM
(2011).
COLLABORATION
Essential activities of contemporary practice include
strategic partnerships, leadership, and collaboration. As
stated by the AACN (2011), “in a redesigned health sys-
tem a greater emphasis will be placed on cooperation,
communication, and collaboration among all health pro-
fessionals in order to integrate care in teams and assure
that care is continuous and reliable” (p. 22). However,
collaboration and collegiality must both occur within the
profession and be interdisciplinary. The initial step in col-
laboration and collegiality is valuing our colleagues who
318
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

provide clinical nursing care, medical care, specialty care,
advanced clinical practice, education, administration, or
research. Collaboration and collegiality are both intradis-
ciplinary, within the discipline of nursing, and interdis-
ciplinary, among other healthcare professionals.
The healthcare team should be an ideal example
of collaboration, especially for effective communication
(see Chapter 6). Collaboration involves actively working
together to meet some identified goal, such as the pa-
tient’s treatment goals. Within the discipline, nurses from
each area of nursing would contribute to that goal—the
admission nurse or discharge planner, the student in a
clinical rotation, the operative nurse, the acute care nurse
practitioner, and other professional nurses providing care
to raise the patient’s level of well-being. However, as
noted by Weston (2006), this sense of teamwork may be
particularly challenging for the four different generations
of nurses in practice—veterans, baby boomers, generation
Xers, and millennials—with their different characteristics
and perspectives that can either enhance or traumatize the
practice environment. And the complexity increases with
the addition of clinicians from other healthcare disci-
plines. Collaboration must also extend beyond the disci-
ple of nursing for effective, efficient, and patient-centered
care. In times of limited staffing and growing responsi-
bilities, seeing the broader picture with collaboration is
necessary to ensure effective patient outcomes. As noted
by the IOM (2013), “healthcare delivery organizations
should develop organizational cultures that encourage
continuous improvement by incentivizing the incorpora-
tion of best practices, transparency, open communication,
staff empowerment, coordination, teamwork, and mutual
respect” (p. 6).
A cooperative spirit with collaboration will bring more
efficient achievement of goals and greater personal reward
for both colleagues and patients. Questions of authority
and responsibility arise with this cooperative or collabo-
rative spirit, such as who is the leader of the team and
who is responsible for ensuring quality patient outcomes.
This ownership of responsibility must be shared in a true
CHAPTER 19 Expanding the Vision     ●
319
TABLE 19.2
Hallmarks of Professional Practice and Core Competencies
Core Competencies for Health Professionals†
Hallmarks of the Professional 
Work in 
Employ 
Apply Quality 
Nursing Practice 
Provide Patient-
Interdisciplinary 
Evidence-Based 
Improvement
Environment*
Centered Care
Practice Teams
Practice 
Manifest a philosophy of clinical 
✓
✓
✓
✓
care emphasizing quality, safety, 
interdisciplinary collaboration, 
continuity of care, and 
professional accountability.
Recognize contributions of 
✓
✓
✓
✓
nurses’ knowledge and 
expertise to clinical care quality 
and patient outcomes.
Empower nurses’ participation 
✓
✓
✓
✓
in clinical decision making and 
organization of clinical care 
systems.
Promote executive-level 
✓
✓
✓
✓
nursing leadership.
Maintain clinical advancement 
✓
✓
✓
✓
programs based on education, 
certification, and advanced 
preparation.
Demonstrate professional 
✓
✓
✓
✓
development support for nurses.
Create collaborative relationships 
✓
✓
✓
✓
among members of the healthcare 
provider team. 
*Source: American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2002). Hallmarks of the professional nursing practice environment.
Washington, DC: Author.
†Source: Greiner, A. C., & Knebel, E. (Eds.). (2003). Health professions education: A bridge to quality. Washington, DC: Institute
of Medicine.

collaborative relationship rather than create “turf” issues
in a more competitive environment. The goal is the 
effectiveness of the patient outcomes with collaboration
as the means to reach the goal. Effective communication
and clinical skills, along with trust, leadership, and colle-
giality, are important attributes of the healthcare profes-
sional collaborating with other healthcare professionals.
Consider the lessons for collaboration described by 
Gardner (2005) that are listed in Box 19.2.
Suppose that you are on an acute care unit one morn-
ing when the pulmonologist arrives to see his patient
with COPD hospitalized with respiratory complications.
You know that the respiratory therapist is currently
working with the patient on a treatment. How will you
capitalize on this opportunity for interdisciplinary col-
laboration for home care since you know all parties in-
volved, the patient’s wife is present but concerned about
at-home compliance, and there is a need for good 
follow-up and discharge teaching? How can you get all
parties involved and create a win-win situation for all,
focused on the efficacy of treatment for this patient?
These skills are critical for the efficient use of scarce
human and physical resources in a consumer environ-
ment that must be focused on effectiveness of patient
outcomes and overall safety.
Although collaboration involves actively working to-
gether to meet some identified goal, collegiality is sharing
responsibility and authority to achieve a goal or prescribed
outcome. Power and responsibility for outcomes related
to patients’ health and well-being are invested in more
than one person. Mutual respect and collaboration are
important components of a collegial relationship. All col-
leagues contribute to the intended goals and are account-
able for the outcomes.
Collaboration is specified by the American Nurses As-
sociation as a standard of professional performance in its
document Nursing: Scope and Standards of Practice. Recall
that this document contains six standards of practice 
reflective of the nursing process and ten  standards of pro-
fessional performance as expected professional behaviors,
with objectives and measurement criteria for all of the
standards (ANA, 2010a). Collaboration is demonstrated
by virtue of partnerships with the healthcare consumer
along with other healthcare providers for positive patient
outcomes and includes effective communication, consul-
tation, group process, negotiation and conflict manage-
ment skills, documentation, referrals within and outside
the nursing discipline, and effective teamwork. Additional
measurement criteria have been added for the advanced
practice nurse and specialty nurse to accommodate the ad-
ditional expectations in their respective leadership roles in
interdisciplinary practice.
Nursing professionals are responsible for promoting col-
laboration and collegiality among the professions. As de-
scribed throughout this text, healthcare delivery systems are
becoming more and more integrated and interdisciplinary.
In our present multidisciplinary healthcare system, collabo-
ration must be effective among all members of the various
health professions and care disciplines. 
Almost 20 years ago, the President’s Advisory Com-
mission on Consumer Protection and Quality in the
Healthcare Industry (1998) reported that “the challenge
for industry leaders is to harness the tremendous talent,
energy, and commitment of the 10 million people who
have been drawn to work in the healthcare industry be-
cause of its strong sense of mission” (p. 197). Since then,
the IOM report Keeping Patients Safe has recommended
that healthcare organizations “should take action to sup-
port interdisciplinary collaboration by adopting such in-
terdisciplinary practice mechanisms as interdisciplinary
rounds, and by providing ongoing formal education and
training in interdisciplinary collaboration for all healthcare
professionals on a regularly scheduled, continuous basis”
(Page, 2004, p. 216). Then, in 2010, the IOM recom-
mendations for nursing went even further:
Private and public funders, healthcare organizations,
nursing education programs, and nursing associations
should expand opportunities for nurses to lead and man-
age collaborative efforts with physicians and other mem-
bers of the healthcare team to conduct research and to
redesign and improve practice environments and health-
care  systems. (IOM, 2011, p. S-9)
Following this recommendation from the IOM in the
Future of Nursing: Leading Change, Advancing Health has
been the call for educational revisions and enhanced inter-
professional education and collaboration. The American
Association of Colleges of Nursing and the American Or-
ganization of Nurse Executives (2012) developed guiding
principles for academic-practice relationships to include
nursing and other professions, corporations, governmental
entities, and foundations (p. 1). Mutual goals, shared vi-
sion, joint efforts, transparency, commitment, communi-
cation, and lifelong learning were common threads in the
eight principles. Thibault (2013) further identifies the fol-
lowing six areas for reform in the education of all health
professionals:
●Increased interprofessional education
●Clinical education that is longitudinal and community
based
320
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
BOX 19.2
Characteristics for Collaboration 
●Know yourself—your biases, values, and goals.
●Value and manage diversity.
●Develop constructive conﬂict resolution skills.
●Create win-win situations.
●Demonstrate clinical competence, cooperation, and
ﬂexibility.
●Allow time and practice for skills in collaboration
●Use all multidisciplinary opportunities for  building
partnerships.
●Appreciate that collaboration can occurspontaneously.
●Be reﬂective, seek feedback, and admit mistakes for
autonomy and unity.
●Understand that collaboration is not required in all
situations.
Source: Adapted from Gardner, D. B. (2005). Ten lessons in collabora-
tion. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing. Retrieved from http://www
.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/ANAMarketplace/ANAPe
riodicals/OJIN/TableofContents/Volume102005/No1Jan05/tpc26
_116008.html

●In addition to biological sciences, greater awareness of
systems, quality improvement, safety, economics, and
population health
●Competency-based education and ensuring lifelong
learning
●Greater incorporation of new educational technologies
including online and simulation experiences
●Faculty development for educational innovation 
(pp. 1929–1931)
Previously, the IOM also identified two necessary pre-
cursors to collaboration—individual clinical competence
and mutual trust and respect—and the following four
characteristics of collaboration:
●Shared understanding of goals and roles
●Effective communication
●Shared decision making
●Conflict management. (Page, 2004, pp. 212–213)
In addition to these characteristics is the necessary in-
gredient of continued competence to maintain safety and
quality care for the patient and effective interdisciplinary
practice.
COMPETENCE
The issue of competence is vital to all professionals. Al-
though not restricted to nursing, professional competence
has received greater attention after the reports from both
the Pew Health Professions Commission and the IOM.
Professional competence is of great concern to health pro-
fessionals, their regulatory bodies, and consumers. It is an
issue of definition, ownership, policy development, and
demonstration. Regulatory bodies are required to assure
the public of safe and competent professional practice by
the professionals they regulate. But definitions vary by
statute, and measurement issues are complex. Consider
two different ways in which competence can be measured:
by continuing practice and through continuing educa-
tion. But then the following question arises: Is the con-
tinuing practice safe and effective in meeting appropriate
patient outcomes using evidence-based practice? Or, in
the case of continuing education, are the programs or ses-
sions directed at the area of practice to improve and en-
hance practice or merely counting hours toward license
renewal without a focus on patients and responsible pro-
fessional practice? For registered nurses, some states or ju-
risdictions require continuing education in the nurses’
practice area, and some specify required content in addi-
tion to self-selected topical areas. Other states or jurisdic-
tions provide a selection of options that can be pursued
in a selected time frame. And still other states are silent
on the demonstration of competence in the renewal re-
quirement. In fact, measurement issues are further com-
plicated by the different levels of practice that must be
regulated—new graduate, continued practice, and ad-
vanced practice.
Entry into practice occurs through licensure on the basis
of performance on a psychometrically sound instrument,
the National Council Licensure Exam (NCLEX-RN®). Ad-
vanced practice is regulated differently but often through
advanced education and the certification process. But 
how should the regulators monitor continued professional
competence for the clinician not governed by specialty prac-
tice certification, and what about variable requirements 
for recertification? And consider the role of both the nurse
and the employer in monitoring continued professional
competence.
The issue of continued competence is not restricted to
state and federal regulatory bodies. As described in Nurs-
ing’s Social Policy Statement (ANA, 2010b), regulation of
practice also includes the following:
●Professional regulation, including a professional code
of ethics, standards of practice, educational and spe-
cialty certification requirements, and a defined scope
of practice
●Legal regulation, through statutory and regulatory 
requirements
●Institutional policies and procedures for safe,  effective,
and evidence-based practice
●Self-regulation, in terms of personal accountability and
demonstration of continued competence
Continued competence is an issue of both a profes-
sional responsibility within each of the core competencies
and one of patient safety. In 1996, the National Council
of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN) illustrated a collab-
orative model for continued competence that included the
individual nurse, the employer, the regulatory body, the
educator, and the consumer of nursing care (NCSBN,
2005a), but further work and understanding of best prac-
tices continues for a system that is reliable, valid, and fea-
sible. In some Canadian provinces and in other countries
like New Zealand, a portfolio system to document their
continued competence has been required of individual
nurses. This system requires critical reflection and assess-
ment of continued competence by the nurse with docu-
mentation of evidence in a portfolio, often including some
form of peer review in the process. The International
Council of Nurses (2006) encourages reflective practice
and believes that individual nurses are responsible and ac-
countable for their practice and for maintaining continued
competence but also identifies the following key stake-
holders as contributing to the continued competence of
the nurse:
●Public and patients 
●Government 
●Regulatory bodies
●The individual nurse
●The employer
●The education community
●National nursing associations (pp. 1–2)
Although continued competence is ultimately the pro-
fessional responsibility of the individual clinician, the pro-
fessional education level must be appropriate to the
defined scope of practice and professional standards, the
healthcare employer must ensure the com petence in the
practice setting, and the patients must be assured (and
should assure themselves) of safe and effective practice. As
noted by the NCSBN (2005b), “responsibility for inter-
preting and enforcing nursing scopes of practice, including
the determination of the appropriate education, training
and experience necessary to support a given scope of prac-
tice, rests solely with the boards of nursing” (p. 1). How-
ever, in the case of advanced practice with disparities of
CHAPTER 19 Expanding the Vision     ●
321

scope and supervision requirements among the states, the
IOM (2011) has recommended that “states with unduly
restrictive regulations should be urged to amend them to
allow advanced practice registered nurses to provide care
to patients in all circumstances in which they are qualified
to do so” (p. S-9). Still, there will be concerns raised as to
continued competence. 
The professional performance standard of education
of the Scope and Standards of Practice states that for con-
tinued competence, “the nurse attains knowledge and
competency that reflects current nursing practice”
(ANA, 2010a, p. 49). In addition, nurses are expected
to perform appropriate to the situation, setting, re-
sources, and the person, along with engagement in life-
long learning and ongoing assessment of competencies
(ANA, 2010b, p. 13). Ongoing educational activities
occur through continuing education (CE)—formal,
noncredit, and on-the-job. Interestingly, in research con-
ducted by the NCSBN, respondents “rated contribu-
tions of work experience, initial professional education,
and mentors above the contributions of CE in assisting
them to their current levels of ability” (Smith, 2003, 
p. 25). Concerning continued learning in the work en-
vironment, the IOM report Keeping Patients Safe recom-
mended that healthcare organizations should “dedicate
budgetary resources equal to a defined percentage of the
nursing payroll to support nursing staff in their ongoing
acquisition and maintenance of knowledge and skills”
(Page, 2004, p. 210). Further, the concept of a learning
environment is extended beyond its start in an educa-
tional setting to one that is encouraged in the practice
setting and that must address interdisciplinary practice.
But budgetary considerations have resulted in associated
cuts in funding education departments and programs in
some agencies. A learning environment in the practice
setting supports the core competencies and ongoing pro-
fessional competence. The individual professional must
determine, seek, request, and utilize resources to main-
tain his or her continued competence in the safe and ef-
fective performance of nursing practice activities. In
addition, the IOM (2011) recently recommended an 
increase in the proportion of nurses with both baccalau-
reate and doctoral degrees, along with a separate recom-
mendation on “lifelong learning to gain the competencies
needed to provide care for diverse populations across the
lifespan” (p. S-11).
Although continued competence is ultimately 
the professional responsibility of the individual 
clinician, the professional education level must be
appropriate to the defined scope of practice 
and professional standards, the healthcare
employer must ensure the competence in 
the practice setting, and the patient must be
assured of safe and effective practice.
Competent practice in the unique environment ad-
dresses the metaparadigm concepts of nursing: human be-
ings, health, environment, and nursing. The individual
nurse is responsible and accountable for the demonstration
of competent practice. However, assurance of this compe-
tence to the consumer is a shared responsibility. As stated
in their Position Statement on Professional Role Compe-
tence, the ANA (2008) has stated:
Assurance of competence is the shared responsibility of
the profession, individual nurses, professional organiza-
tions, credentialing and certification entities, regulatory
agencies, employers, and other key stakeholders. (p. 1)
The demonstration of competence requires skillful, ef-
fective, and evidence-based practice in both nursing and
interdisciplinary endeavors, with a view of the core com-
petencies and the challenges ahead.
Both professional and personal contributions are the
ingredients of your professional career. Skills, though,
which are the ingredients of professional nursing prac-
tice, require ongoing refinement. The International
Council of Nurses (ICN, 2007) states that “individual
nurses have a responsibility to plan and develop their ca-
reers through continuous self-assessment and goal set-
ting” (p. 1). This includes personal and professional
development to remain flexible, analytical, reflective, and
innovative. As noted by the ICN (2013), nurses need ap-
propriate ongoing education as well as lifelong learning
to practice competently within their scope of practice 
(p. 2). Your skills and abilities will be enhanced through
ongoing knowledge development for evidence-based
practice and by your views on practice, human beings,
the environment, health, and nursing.
TAKING THE LEAD
The recommendations and changes in the healthcare 
environment present all nurses with additional career 
opportunities and responsibilities, whether they are in
acute, ambulatory, home, or long-term care settings or
in a nontraditional setting as a clinician, case manager,
researcher, administrator, consultant, educator, advanced
practice nurse, or nurse entrepreneur.
The AACN (2008a) Essentials of Baccalaureate Educa-
tion for Professional Nursing Practice are designed to pre-
pare the generalist nurse with a broad preparation to
address many of these career opportunities. From a firm
foundation in liberal education, experiences throughout 
a baccalaureate nursing curriculum focus on patient-
centered care that addresses quality improvement, safety,
322
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
ONLINE CONSULT 
American Nurses Association (ANA) at
http://www.nursingworld.org
American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC)
http://www.nursecredentialing.org
/default.aspx
IOM at
http://iom.edu/Reports/2010/The-Future-of
-Nursing-Leading-Change-Advancing-Health
.aspx
International Council of Nurses at
http://www.icn.ch/publications/position
-statements/
NCSBN at
https://www.ncsbn.org/index.htm

ethical principles, leadership and management, and 
evidence-based practice within a complex and changing
healthcare system. Leadership development and a focus on
health promotion and disease prevention for individuals
and groups prepare the nurse for practice challenges. As
described by AACN (2008a), the baccalaureate-prepared
nurse understands and respects the variations of care, the
increased complexity, and the increased use of healthcare
resources inherent in caring for patients (AACN, 2008a).
Building on the baccalaturate, the AACN (2011) Essentials
of Master’s Education in Nursing provide graduates with an
advanced level of understanding of nursing and relevant
sciences, so that they can then integrate this knowledge
into practice in both direct and indirect care components
in our evolving healthcare systems (pp. 1–2). And even
further leadership in nursing science and practice is pro-
vided by nurses prepared at the doctoral level through cur-
riculum guides by the AACN (2006) Essentials of Doctoral
Education for Advanced Nursing Practice through programs
offering the practice (Doctor of Nursing Practice [DNP])
doctorate. There are two types of doctorates in nursing.
As described by AACN (2006), the research-focused doc-
torate (DNS, DSN, or DNSc) is designed to prepare nurse
scientists and scholars, whereas the practice-focused doc-
torate (DNP) places greater emphasis on practice that is
innovative and evidence-based, reflecting the application
of credible research findings (p.3).
The challenges in your future are dynamic and evolve
daily as we address the themes of safety, quality outcomes,
evolving technology, and interdisciplinary practice. Con-
sider the implications of the following challenges in the
workforce or in a specific delivery setting:
●A culture supportive of safe and quality patient outcomes
●Appropriate staffing patterns and skill mixes
●Appropriate delegation activities
●Training and supervision of unlicensed assistive 
personnel
●Competencies and continued knowledge development
of professionals
●Ongoing education and skill attainment and refinement
●Coordination of care across practice settings
●Changes in populations and healthcare needs
●Strategies to improve health and eliminate health 
disparities
●Cost containment
●Evidence-based interdisciplinary practice
●Consumer satisfaction
●Using information technologies and quality-based 
indicators
●Providing leadership on system change and redesign
The challenges in your future truly depend on you, your
practice environment, colleagues, and future initiatives.
Consider how individual colleagues and groups can chal-
lenge the status quo for positive change.
Nursing Education
The majority of baccalaureate and graduate programs
in nursing are guided by the three Essentials documents pub-
lished by AACN (2006, 2008a, 2010). Generalist prac-
tice occurs following baccalaureate program completion. 
Advanced generalist or specialty practice is the outcome of
graduate education in nursing. And then there is the oppor-
tunity for specialty practice as an advanced practice nurse
(APRN). Consider the APRN practice roles of nurse practi-
tioner, clinical nurse  specialist, nurse anesthetist, or nurse
midwife. As the knowledge base grows, evidence-based prac-
tice is guided by the specialty area. Nevertheless, while we
are experiencing an uneven shortage of nurses active in gen-
eralist staff practice settings, there have been predictions that
shortages will increase drastically as retirements in the current
workforce occur. Even more significant is the critical short-
age of nursing faculty. Although we have seen an increase in
the numbers of nurses prepared at the master’s and doctoral
levels, graduate education in the 1990s was directed at
APRN clinical practice in four areas: nurse practitioner, clin-
ical nurse specialist, nurse anesthetist, and nurse midwife.
Since the 1980s, education tracks in graduate programs
declined with nurses pursuing APRN roles, and the average
age of nursing faculty continues to rise. And impending re-
tirements of nurse educators looms to create an even greater
shortage of educators. The AACN (2011) recognizes the
preparation of clinical educators at the master’s level but has
endorsed the Carnegie Foundation Report recommending
the preparation of the clinical educator in both a clinical spe-
cialty and in principles of education, including curriculum
design and teaching and evaluation methods. “Consistent
with academy expectations, faculty with primary responsi-
bility for the oversight of courses in baccalaureate, master’s,
and doctoral nursing programs will have doctoral prepara-
tion [and] doctoral graduates who will be involved in an ac-
ademic role will have preparation in educational methods
and pedagogies” (AACN, 2008b, p. 1). The shortage of
nursing faculty has been documented. For several years,
AACN (2014b) has documented that faculty shortages are
limiting student capacity in nursing programs related to
budget constraints, an aging faculty, a limited pool of faculty,
and noncompetitive salaries compared with positions in
practice settings. So, in addition to an area of specialization
and clinical skill, skills in curriculum development and eval-
uation, teaching and learning, and interdisciplinary educa-
tion are required in the nurse educator role. Although the
AACN (2005) reported on the demographics, stressors, and
competing demands along with the changes in the student
population, it was observed that the “faculty shortage offers
nurse educators an unique opportunity to challenge past
norms and think collaboratively and nontraditionally to
meet the future” (p. 12). However, doctoral education is the
expected level of preparation for the full academic role and
preparation of nurse researchers and scientists. The IOM
(2011) has further recommended that the number of nurses
with doctoral degree be doubled by 2020 (p. S-11).
The overriding challenges ahead in professional practice
are ongoing professional development and involvement for
engagement in the delivery of patient-centered care with a
focus on safety, efficacy, and quality through the use of in-
formatics, and evidence-based practice and leadership in
the interdisciplinary practice setting. This involvement 
reflects the core competencies of health professionals and
advances practice, patient outcomes, and the profession.
INVOLVEMENT
When we think of involvement, we often think of our
function as advocates and healthcare providers for our
CHAPTER 19 Expanding the Vision     ●
323

patients. These functions represent one form of involve-
ment. Our professional involvement focuses on the indi-
vidual attributes of, needs of, and outcomes for our
patients, the consumers of nursing and healthcare. This
involvement, as individual professionals with the patients
and families who are the consumers of evidence-based,
quality nursing care, must address all core competencies.
Our involvement is also as members of the  healthcare
team. Collaboration and collegiality have been described
in relation to nursing and interdisci plinary practice. This
book also discussed the importance of group dynamics and
group skills, and the art of negotiation in leading and man-
aging. All of these functions relate to active involvement
with a defined group to attain specified goals for the con-
sumers of healthcare.
A third form of professional involvement is as a member
of the professional group. This form of involvement requires
time and commitment for advancement of the profession.
Professional contributions result from participation in pro-
fessional organizations, research, publications, theory eval-
uation, and promotion of the further development of the
profession. Personal contributions in professional practice
occur through your education, competency, ethical behav-
iors, use of theory and evidence-based interventions, and
communication, political efficacy, patient advocacy, and
leadership.
REVISITING YOUR
PHILOSOPHY OF NURSING
Now is the time to reflect on your personal contributions
to and philosophy of nursing. Nurses are talented, creative,
and visionary—when they allow themselves to be. They are
frequently viewed as leaders and risk takers as they advocate
for the perceived good of their patients. But what skills re-
quired of professionals do we need to refine? Step back and
think of the vital and basic skills needed to demonstrate our
professional competencies. These skills are what we contin-
ually strive to refine:
●Knowledge base
●Critical thinking skills
●Technical skills
●Interpersonal skills
●Articulation skills
●Leadership skills
●Policy and advocacy skills
Clinical practice requires these skills for provision of
patient-centered care, involvement in interdisci plinary
and evidence-based practice, and the use of informatics
and emerging technologies for quality improvement and
effective patient outcomes. These skills are enhanced
through the professional attributes of collaboration,
 collegiality, continued competence, and leadership in the
health promotion of society. Concern for the health of
people, whether individual patients, families, communi-
ties, or groups in their  environment, is the core of pro-
fessional nursing. Individuals like you are dedicated and
exemplify those characteristics of a professional described
here. Your philosophy of nursing will evolve and develop,
just as you do as a professional.
EMBRACING CHANGE
The recent focus on the health professions and the evident
shortages of professionals has had the beneficial effect of
opening up the discussion for needed changes in the
healthcare system and the professions. Discussions have
been held at national, state, and local meetings, and debate
and discussion on the issues continue in professional
newsletters and journals as well as online. And the calling
to action became even more resounding with the recent
IOM (2011) report calling for more leadership by nursing
in healthcare reform. Communication and critical think-
ing are taking place. The restraining and driving forces of
change are present. We see that practice and education can
no longer serve the needs of the consumers without
change. Interdisciplinary collaboration and practice are es-
sential. All professionals are shareholders in the process of
improving the health of the population.
Technology continues to expand our horizons and
challenge our practice. Improved equipment and tech-
nologies are developing at a rapid pace. Information is
available immediately. Colleagues readily communicate
at a distance using e-mail, instant messaging, listservs,
and news groups. Computer-adaptive testing for licen-
sure and certification is a given. Reengineering has be-
come a common occurrence in practice settings, as have
cost containment, measurement of patient outcomes, 
evidence-based practice, care coordination, and a focus
on consumer satisfaction.
The topics that you have embraced through this book
have presented you with some of the issues involved in
this time of rapid change in the profession and in prac-
tice. Facing the responsibilities inherent in professional
practice is a way of revisiting our present roles and con-
sidering how they meet the needs of our patients and
contribute to the future of our profession. The student
role provides the setting for analyzing information re-
lated to current practices. Theories that guide practice
continue to be tested and refined as appropriate to their
utility in practice, education, and research. Communi-
cation and critical thinking are vital components of this
activity as we operate as leaders, managers, and care
providers in organizations, communities, and globally.
We function as change agents, teachers, coordinators,
and group leaders in practice settings. Evidence-based
practices must be used in all situations, provision of di-
rect and indirect care, administration, and education.
Knowledge of research and the political process give us
direction, as change agents, for addressing policy changes
needed for a healthier society. The focus remains on
healthcare consumers, their safety, needs, and healthful
outcomes.
Current healthcare initiatives must be evaluated for ap-
plicability, acceptability, and appropriateness for meeting
the needs of the population, with due consideration given
to economic, linguistic, cultural, and quality indicators.
All of these issues are addressed within the ethical param-
eters of professional nursing practice.
The information presented here has been designed to
address the challenge of the book’s title, Advancing Your
Career: Concepts of Professional Nursing. We are all chal-
lenged to advance our professional practice.
324
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

CHAPTER 19 Expanding the Vision     ●
325
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
As your hospital is preparing for application for the Magnet Recognition Program®, you notice that one of the
five components of the Magnet Recognition Model is new knowledge, innovation, and improvements:
Magnet organizations have an ethical and professional responsibility to contribute to patient care, the or-
ganization, and the profession in terms of new knowledge, innovations, and improvements . . . [which] 
includes new models of care, application of existing evidence, new evidence, and visible contributions to
the science of nursing (ANCC, 2014).
Question: Considering your career development and career path, what contributions can be identified to
you or your unit to provide evidence of this component? What are your plans for the future?
Source: American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC). (2014). Magnet Recognition Program® Model. Retrieved from
http://nursecredentialing.org/Magnet/ProgramOverview/New-Magnet-Model
K E Y  P O I N T S
●Competencies are those qualities that illustrate effectiveness and appropriateness in our respective 
professional roles. The Health Professions Education Summit led to the identification of five core compe-
tencies for all health professionals:
●Provide patient-centered care.
●Work in interdisciplinary teams.
●Employ evidence-based practice.
●Apply quality improvement.
●Utilize informatics. (Greiner & Knebel, 2003)
●The IOM’s Committee on the Work Environment and Patient Safety identified the following necessary
patient safeguards in the practice environment (Page, 2004):
●Governing boards that focus on safety
●Effective nursing leadership
●Adequate staffing
●Organizational support for ongoing learning and decision support
●Mechanisms that promote interdisciplinary collaboration
●Work design that promotes safety
●Organizational culture that continually strengthens patient safety
●The IOM (2011) recommended transformation and leadership by nursing with the identification of four
key messages and eight recommendation directed at government, regulation, education, administration,
and practice including the statement that nurses should practice to the full extent of their education and
continue with the necessity for lifelong learning. 
●The AACN (2002) has proposed hallmarks of excellence in the professional nursing practice
environment based on selected characteristics of work environments that support professional nursing
practice.
●Collaboration involves actively working together to meet some identified goal, such as the patient’s treat-
ment goals, while collegiality is the sharing of responsibility and authority to achieve a goal or prescribed
outcome.
●Continued competence is of great concern to health professionals, their regulatory bodies, employers,
and consumers. As described in their Position Statement on Professional Role Competence the ANA
(2008) assurance of competence is the shared responsibility. 
Continued

326
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
K E Y  P O I N T S—cont’d
●A nurse’s involvement as a professional takes three forms:
●As an individual professional with patients, families, and communities who are the consumers of 
nursing care
●As a group member or leader of an interdisciplinary healthcare team
●As an active member of the professional group
●Professional contributions result from participation in professional organizations, research, publications,
theory evaluation, and promotion of the further development of the profession.
●Vital and basic skills needed and continually refined by professionals include expanding one’s knowledge
base, critical thinking, and technical, interpersonal, articulation, leadership, and policy and advocacy skills.
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Identify three additional challenges for improvements in the delivery of quality healthcare.
2. Design a nurse residency program for a new graduate with yourself in the role of the mentor. Now, design a resi-
dency program for yourself if you were changing practice area, for example from an acute care surgical unit to an
intensive care unit or hospice setting.
3. Describe your plans for two specific personal contributions to professional nursing practice that you will accom-
plish during the next 10 years.
4. Develop three personal goals to be met in your professional nursing practice during the next five years.
5. Think about the characteristics you would desire in a mentor to assist in the development of your career. List
these characteristics and describe how you would identify and request the assistance of a mentor. Be prepared
to participate in a class or online discussion to be scheduled by your instructor.
6. Review the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter, and discuss it in the context of the
contents of the chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.
REFERENCES
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2002).
Hallmarks of the professional nursing practice environment.
Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/publications/
white-papers/hallmarks-practice-environment
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2005).
Faculty shortages in baccalaureate and graduate nursing 
programs: Scope of the problem and strategies for expanding 
the supply. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu
/publications/white-papers/faculty-shortages
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2006).
The essentials of doctoral education for advanced nursing prac-
tice. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/DNP/pdf
/Essentials.pdf 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2008a).
The essentials of baccalaureate education for professional nurs-
ing practice. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu
/education/pdf/BaccEssentials08.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2008b).
Preferred vision for the professoriate in baccalaureate and grad-
uate nursing programs. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche
.edu/publications/position/preferred-vision
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2011).
The essentials of master’s education in nursing. Retrieved 
from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/education-resources
/MastersEssentials11.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2014a).
Fact sheet: The impact of education on nursing practice. 
Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/media-relations
/EdImpact.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2014b).
Fact sheet: Nursing faculty shortage. Retrieved from http://www
.aacn.nche.edu/media-relations/FacultyShortageFS.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN) and the
American Organization of Nurse Executives (AONE).
(2012). AACN-AONE Task Force on Academic-Practice
Partnerships: Guiding principles. Retrieved from

http://www.aacn.nche.edu/leading-initiatives/academic
-practice-partnerships/GuidingPrinciples.pdf 
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2008). Position statement:
Professional role competence. Retrieved from http://gm6
.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/Policy-Advocacy
/Positions-and-Resolutions/ANAPositionStatements
/Position-Statements-Alphabetically/Professional-Role
-Competence.html
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2010a). Nursing: Scope
and standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Spring, MD:
Nursesbooks.org. 
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2010b). Nursing’s 
social policy statement (2010 ed.). Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursesbooks.org
American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC). (2014). 
The Magnet recognition program® model. Retrieved from
http://nursecredentialing.org/Magnet/ProgramOverview
/New-Magnet-Model
APRN Consensus Work Group & the National Council of
State Boards of Nursing APRN Advisory Committee.
(2008). Consensus model for APRN regulation: Licensure, 
accreditation, certification & education. Retrieved from
https://www.ncsbn.org/Consensus_Model_for_APRN_
Regulation_July_2008.pdf
Aspden, P., Wolcott, J., Bootman, L., & Cronenwett, L. R.
(eds.). (2006). Preventing medication errors. Washington,
DC: National Academies Press. 
Clark, P. A., Davis, M., Drevs, K., Fuerbringer, P., Gloss, M.,
& Spite, D. (2005). The healthcare landscape. In P. A.
Clark and M. P. Malone, Making it right: Healthcare service
recovery tools, techniques, and best practices. Marblehead,
MA: HCPro.
Finkelman, A., & Kenner, C. (2012). Teaching IPM: Implica-
tions of the Institute of Medicine reports for nursing education
(3rd ed.). Silver Spring, MD: Nursesbooks.org.
Gardner, D. B. (2005). Ten lessons in collaboration. 
Online Journal of Issues in Nursing. Retrieved from http://
nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/ANAMarketplace
/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/TableofContents/Volume102005
/No1Jan05/tpc26_116008.aspx
Greiner, A. C., & Knebel, E. (Eds.). (2003). Health professions
education: A bridge to quality. Washington, DC: Institute of
Medicine.
Haas, S., Swan, B. A., & Haynes, T. (2013). Developing ambu-
latory care registered nurse competencies for care coordina-
tion and transition management. Nursing Economic$, 31(1),
43–49. 
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2001). Crossing the quality chasm:
A new health system for the 21st century. Retrieved from
http://www.iom.edu/Reports/2001/Crossing-the-Quality
-Chasm-A-New-Health-System-for-the-21st-Century.aspx
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2011). The future of nursing: Lead-
ing change, advancing health. Retrieved from http://www.nap
.edu/catalog/12956.html 
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2013). Informing the future: Crit-
ical issues in health (7th ed.). Retrieved from http://www
.iom.edu/About-IOM/~/media/Files/About%20the%
20IOM/ITF_seventh.pdf
International Council of Nurses. (2006). Position statement:
Continuing competence as a professional responsibility and
public right. Retrieved from http://www.icn.ch/images
/stories/documents/publications/position_statements
/B02_Continuing_Competence.pdf
International Council of Nurses. (2007). Position statement: Career
development in nursing. Retrieved from http://www.icn.ch
/images/stories/documents/publications/position_statements
/C02_Career_Development_Nsg.pdf 
International Council of Nurses. (2013). Position statement:
Scope of nursing practice. Retrieved from http://www.icn.ch
/images/stories/documents/publications/position
_statements/B07_Scope_Nsg_Practice.pdf 
Joint Commission. (2013). Comparison between Joint Commission
standards, Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award Criteria,
and Magnet Recognition Program components. Retrieved from
http://www.jointcommission.org/assets/1/6/Comparison
_Document2013.pdf 
National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN). (2005).
Meeting the ongoing challenge of continued competence. 2005 con-
tinued competence concept paper. Retrieved from https://www
.ncsbn.org/Continued_Comp_Paper_TestingServices.pdf
National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN). (2014).
Nurse Licensure Compact (NLC). Retrieved from https://www
.ncsbn.org/nlc.htm 
Nelson, M. A. (2002). Education for professional nursing prac-
tice: Looking backward into the future. Online Journal of 
Issues in Nursing (Manuscript 3), 7(3), 1–13. Retrieved
from http://nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/
ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/TableofContents
/Volume72002/No2May2002/EducationforProfessional
NursingPractice.html
O’Neil, E. (1998). Nursing in the next century. In E. O’Neil 
& J. Coffman (Eds.), Strategies for the future of nursing
(pp. 211–224). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Page, A. (ed.). (2004). Keeping patients safe: Transforming the
work environment of nurses. Washington, DC: National
Academies Press.
President’s Advisory Commission on Consumer Protection and
Quality in the Health Care Industry. (1998). Quality first:
Better health care for all Americans [Final report to the Presi-
dent of the United States]. Columbia, MD: Consumer Bill
of Rights.
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (RWJF). (2014). Ten years
after keeping patients safe: Have nurses’ work environments
been transformed? Charting Nursing's Future: Reports on
Policies That Can Transform Patient Care. Retrieved from
http://www.rwjf.org/content/dam/farm/reports/issue_briefs
/2014/rwjf411417
Smith, J. (2003). Report of findings: Exploring the value of con-
tinuing education mandates. Chicago, IL: National Council
of State Boards of Nursing.
Thibault, G.E. (2013). Reforming health professions education
will require culture change and closer ties between class-
room and practice. Health Affairs, 32, 1928–1932. doi:
10.1377/hlthaff.2013.0827
Weston, M. J. (2006). Integrating generational perspectives in
nursing. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing. Retrieved 
from http://nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories
/ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/TableofContents
/Volume112006/No2May06/tpc30_216074.html
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aiken, L. H., Clarke, S. P., Cheung, R. B., Sloane, D. M., &
Sibler, J. H. (2003). Education levels of hospital nurses and
surgical patient mortality. Journal of the American Medical
Association, 290, 1617–1623.
CHAPTER 19 Expanding the Vision     ●
327

Aiken, L. H., Clarke, S. P., Sloane, D. M., Lake, E. T., & 
Cheney, T. (2008). Effects of hospital care environment on 
patient mortality and nurse outcomes. Journal of Nursing
Administration, 38, 223–229.
Aiken, L. H., Sloane, D. M., Bruyneel, L., Van den Heede, K.,
Griffiths, P., Busse, R., . . . Sermeus, W. (2014). Nurse
staffing and education and hospital mortality in nine 
European countries: A retrospective observational study.
Lancet, 383, 1824–1830. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org
/10.1016./S0140-6736(13)62631-8 
Amer, K. S. (2013). Quality and safety for transformational 
nursing: Core competencies. Boston, MA: Pearson.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (1999).
Position statement on defining scholarship for the discipline 
of nursing. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/
Publications/positions/scholar.htm
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2004).
Position statement on the practice doctorate in nursing. 
Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/publications
/position/DNPpositionstatement.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2006).
AACN statement of support for clinical nurse specialists. 
Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/publications
/position/DNPpositionstatement.pdf
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses. (2005). AACN
standards for establishing and sustaining healthy work environ-
ments. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.org/WD/HWE/
Content/hwehome.content?menu=hwe
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2014). The national
database for nursing quality indicators (NDNQI). Retrieved
from http://www.nursingquality.org/
Benner, P., Stuphen, M., Leonard, V., & Day, L. (2009). 
Educating nurses: A call for radical transformation. 
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Corrigan, M. S., Donaldson, M. S., Kohn, L. T., Maguire,
S. K., & Pike, K. C. (2001). Crossing the quality chasm: 
A new health system for the 21st century. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press.
Donley, R. (2005). Challenges for nursing in the 21st  century.
Nursing Economics, 23, 312–318. 
Federal Trade Commission. (2014). Policy perspective: Competi-
tion and the regulation of advanced practice nurses. Retrieved
from http://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/reports
/policy-perspectives-competition-regulation-advanced
-practice-nurses/140307aprnpolicypaper.pdf 
Lamb, G. (Ed.). (2014). Care coordination. The game changer:
How nursing is revolutionizing quality care. Silver Spring,
MD: Nursebooks.org.
National Council of State Boards of Nursing. (2009). Changes in
healthcare professions’ scope of practice: Legislative considerations.
Retrieved from https://www.ncsbn.org/ScopeofPractice
_09.pdf 
National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN).
(2011). Fact sheet: Licensure of nurses and state boards 
of nursing. Retrieved from https://www.ncsbn.org/Fact
_Sheet_Licensure_of_Nurses_and_State_Boards_of
_Nursing.pdf
North Carolina Board of Nursing. (2014). Continued compe-
tence requirements. Retrieved from https://www.ncbon.com
/dcp/i/licensurelisting-renewalreinstatement-continuing
-competence-requirements
Nursing Council of New Zealand. (2014). Continuing compe-
tence. Retrieved from http://nursingcouncil.org.nz/Nurses
/Continuing-competence
O’Neil, E. H., & Pew Health Professions Commission. (1998).
Recreating health professions practice for a new century: 
Fourth report of the Pew Health Professions Commission. 
San Francisco: Pew Health Professions Commission.
Pew Health Professions Commission. (1995). Critical chal-
lenges: Revitalizing the health professions for the twenty-
first century. San Francisco: UCSF Center for the Health
Professions.
Registered Nurses Association of Northwest Territories and
Nunavat. (2003). Continuing competence (PDP). Retrieved
from http://www.rnantnu.ca/?page_id=28 
Safriet, B .J. (2002). Closing the gap between can and may 
in health care providers’ scopes of practice: A primer 
for policy makers. Yale Journal on Regulation, 19(2), 
301–334.
Texas Board of Nursing. (2013). Education: Continuing nursing
education and competency. Retrieved from http://www.bon
.texas.gov/education_continuing_education.asp
Virginia Board of Nursing. (2014). Regulations governing the
practice of nursing, 18 VAC 90-20-10 et seq. Retrieved
from https://www.dhp.virginia.gov/nursing/ 
Washington State Board of Nursing and Washington State
Nurses Association. (2010). Position paper: Continuing 
competence in nursing. Retrieved from http://www.wsna
.org/practice/publications/documents/pp.continuing
competence.pdf
Washington State Nurses Association. (2014). Continuing 
competency. Retrieved from http://www.wsna.org/Topics
/Continuing-Competency/
Weinberg, D. B., Cooney-Miner, D., & Perloff, J. N. (2012).
Analyzing the relationship between nursing education 
and patient outcomes. Journal of Nursing Regulation, 3(2),
4–10.
ONLINE RESOURCES
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) 
http://www.ahrq.gov
American Nurses Association (ANA) 
http://www.nursingworld.org
American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC)
http://www.nursecredentialing.org/default.aspx
Institute of Medicine
http://iom.edu
http://books.nap.edu/catalog/12956.html
International Council of Nurses
http://www.icn.ch/publications/position-statements/
National Council of State Boards of Nursing
https://www.ncsbn.org/index.htm
328
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

329
329
Professional Nursing
Organizations
Academy of Medical-Surgical Nurses (AMSN)
https://www.amsn.org/practice-resources
Academy of Spinal of Spinal Cord Injury 
Professionals, Inc. (ASCIP)
http://www.academyscipro.org/
Accreditation Commission for Education 
in Nursing (ACEN)
http://www.acenursing.org/
Air & Surface Transport Nurses Association
(ASTNA)
http://www.astna.org
American Academy of Ambulatory Care 
Nursing (AAACN)
http://www.aaacn.org 
American Academy of Nurse Practitioners
(AANP)
http://www.aanp.org
American Academy of Nursing (AAN)
http://www.aannet.org  
American Assembly for Men in Nursing
(AAMN)
http://www.aamn.org
American Association of Colleges of Nursing
(AACN)
http://www.aacn.nche.edu 
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses
(AACN)
http://www.aacn.org 
American Association for the History of 
Nursing (AAHN)
http://www.aahn.org  
American Association of Legal Nurse 
Consultants (AALNC)
http://www.aalnc.org 
American Association of Managed Care
Nurses (AAMCN)
http://www.aamcn.org 
American Association of Neuroscience Nurses
(AANN)
http://www.aann.org 
American Association of Nurse Anesthetists
(AANA)
http://www.aana.com 
American Association of Nurse Attorneys
(TAANA)
http://www.taana.org 
American Association of Occupational Health
Nurses (AAOHN)
http://www.aaohn.org 
American College of Healthcare Executives
(ACHE)
http://www.ache.org 
American College of Nurse-Midwives (ACNM)
http://www.midwife.org/ 
American Holistic Nurses Association (AHNA)
http://www.ahna.org 
American Medical Informatics Association
(AMIA)
http://www.amia.org
American Nephrology Nurses’ Association
(ANNA)
http://www.annanurse.org 
American Nurses Association (ANA)
http://www.nursingworld.org
American Nurses Credentialing Center
(ANCC)
http://www.nursecredentialing.org 
Certification Center
http://www.nursecredentialing.org/Certification
Magnet Recognition Program
http://www.nursecredentialing.org/Magnet
Pathway to Excellence Program
http://www.nursecredentialing.org/Pathway
A P P E N D I X
A

American Nurses Foundation (ANF)
http://www.anfonline.org
American Nursing Informatics Association
(ANIA)
https://www.ania-caring.org
American Organization of Nurse Executives
(AONE)
http://www.aone.org
American Psychiatric Nurses Association
(APNA)
http://www.apna.org 
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral
Nutrition (ASPEN)
http://www.nutritioncare.org
American Society of PeriAnesthesia Nurses
(ASPAN)
http://www.aspan.org 
American Thoracic Society (ATS): Nursing 
Assembly
http://www.thoracic.org/assemblies/nur/
index.php 
https://www.ania.org/
Association of Camp Nurses (ACN)
http://www.acn.org 
Association of Nurses in AIDS 
Care (ANAC)
http://www.nursesinaidscare.org
Association for Nursing Professional 
Development
http://www.anpd.org/
Association of periOperative Registered
Nurses (AORN) 
http://www.aorn.org 
Association of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology
Nurses (APHON)
http://www.aphon.org 
Association for Professionals in Infection 
Control and Epidemiology (APIC)
http://www.apic.org 
Association for Radiologic and Imaging 
Nursing (ARIN)
http://www.arinursing.org/
Association of Rehabilitation Nurses (ARN)
http://www.rehabnurse.org 
Commission on Collegiate Nursing 
Education (CCNE)
http://www.aacn.nche.edu/accreditation
Commission on Graduates of Foreign 
Nursing Schools (CGFNS)
http://www.cgfns.org 
Dermatology Nurses’ Association (DNA)
http://www.dnanurse.org
Developmental Disabilities Nurses
Association (DDNA)
http://www.ddna.org 
Emergency Nurses Association (ENA)
http://www.ena.org 
Gerontological Advanced Practice Nurses 
Association (GAPNA)
https://www.gapna.org
Health Ministries Association (HMA)
http://www.hmassoc.org 
Home Healthcare Nurses Association (HHNA)
http://www.hhna.org 
Hospice and Palliative Nurses Association
(HPNA)
http://hpna.advancingexpertcare.org/
Infusion Nurses Society (INS)
http://www.ins1.org 
International Association of Forensic Nurses
(IAFN)
http://www.iafn.org 
International Council of Nurses (ICN)
http://www.icn.ch 
International Nurses Society on Addictions
(INTNSA)
http://intnsa.org 
International Society of Nurses in Genetics
(ISONG)
http://www.isong.org 
International Society of Psychiatric-Mental
Health Nurses (ISPN)
http://www.ispn-psych.org  
International Transplant Nurses Society
(ITNS)
http://www.itns.org
National Association of Clinical Nurse 
Specialists (NACNS)
http://www.nacns.org 
National Association of Directors of Nursing
Administration in Long Term Care
(NADONA/LTC)
http://www.nadona.org 
National Association of Hispanic Nurses
(NAHN)
http://www.thehispanicnurses.org 
National Association of Neonatal Nurses
(NANN)
http://www.nann.org 
330
●
APPENDIX A  Professional Nursing Organizations

National Association of Nurse Massage 
Therapists (NANMT)
http://www.nanmt.org 
National Association of Orthopaedic Nurses
(NAON)
http://www.orthonurse.org 
National Association of Pediatric Nurse 
Practitioners (NAPNAP)
http://www.napnap.org 
National Association of School Nurses
(NASN)
http://www.nasn.org 
National Black Nurses Association (NBNA)
http://www.nbna.org
National Council of State Boards of Nursing
(NCSBN)
http://www.ncsbn.org 
National League for Nursing (NLN)
http://www.nln.org 
National Organization of Nurse Practitioner
Faculties (NONPF)
http://www.nonpf.com 
North American Nursing Diagnosis Association
International (NANDA-I)
http://www.nanda.org 
Nurses Organization of Veterans Affairs
(NOVA)
http://www.vanurse.org 
Nurse Practitioner Associates for Continuing
Education (NPACE)
http://www.npace.org 
Nurse Practitioners in Women’s Health
(NPWH)
http://www.npwh.org
Oncology Nursing Society (ONS)
http://www.ons.org 
Pediatric Endocrinology Nursing Society
(PENS)
http://www.pens.org
Philippine Nurses Association (PNA)
http://www.pna-ph.org 
Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association
(PCNA)
http://www.pcna.net 
Respiratory Nursing Society (RNS)
http://www.respiratorynursingsociety.org 
Sigma Theta Tau International (STTI)
http://www.nursingsociety.org 
Society of Gastroenterology Nurses and 
Associates (SGNA)
http://www.sgna.org 
Society of Trauma Nurses (STN)
http://www.traumanurses.org 
Society of Urologic Nurses and Associates
(SUNA)
http://www.suna.org 
Society for Vascular Nursing (SVN)
http://www.svnnet.org 
Transcultural Nursing Society (TCNS)
http://www.tcns.org 
Wound, Ostomy, and Continence Nurses 
Society (WOCN)
http://www.wocn.org
APPENDIX A Professional Nursing Organizations
●
331

Nursing Interventions
Classification (NIC) and
Nursing Outcomes
Classification (NOC) Systems
332
NURSING INTERVENTIONS
CLASSIFICATION (NIC)
Abuse Protection Support
Child
Domestic Partner
Elder
Religious
Acid-Base Management
Metabolic Acidosis
Metabolic Alkalosis
Respiratory Acidosis
Respiratory Alkalosis
Acid-Base Monitoring
Active Listening
Activity Therapy
Acupressure
Admission Care
Airway Insertion and Stabilization
Airway Management
Airway Suctioning
Allergy Management
Amnioinfusion
Amputation Care
Analgesic Administration
Intraspinal
Anaphylaxis Management
Anesthesia Administration
Anger Control Assistance
Animal-Assisted Therapy
Anticipatory Guidance
Anxiety Reduction
Area Restriction
Aromatherapy
Art Therapy
Artificial Airway Management
Aspiration Precautions
Assertiveness Training
Asthma Management
Attachment Promotion
Autogenic Training
Autotransfusion
Bathing
Bed Rest Care
Bedside Laboratory Testing
Behavior Management
Overactivity/Inattention
Self-Harm
Sexual
Behavior Modification
Social Skills
Bibliotherapy
Biofeedback
Bioterrorism Preparedness
Birthing
Bladder Irrigation
Bleeding Precautions
Bleeding Reduction
Antepartum Uterus
Gastrointestinal
Nasal
Postpartum Uterus
Wound
Blood Products Administration
Body Image Enhancement
Body Mechanics Promotion
Bottle Feeding
Bowel Incontinence Care
Encopresis
Bowel Irrigation
Bowel Management
Bowel Training
Breast Examination
Breastfeeding Assistance
Calming Technique
Capillary Blood Sample
Cardiac Care
Acute 
Rehabilitative
Cardiac Precautions
Caregiver Support
Case Management
Cast Care
Maintenance
Wet
Cerebral Edema Management
Cerebral Perfusion Promotion
Cesarean Section Care
Chemical Restraint
Chemotherapy Management
Chest Physiotherapy
Childbirth Preparation
Circulatory Care
Arterial Insufficiency
Mechanical Assist Device
Venous Insufficiency
Circulatory Precautions
Circumcision Care
A P P E N D I XB

Code Management
Cognitive Restructuring
Cognitive Stimulation
Communicable Disease Management
Communication Enhancement
Hearing Deficit
Speech Deficit
Vision Deficit
Community Disaster Preparedness
Community Health Development
Complex Relationship Building
Conflict Mediation
Constipation/Impaction Management
Consultation
Contact Lens Care
Controlled Substance Checking
Coping Enhancement
Cost Containment
Cough Enhancement
Counseling
Crisis Intervention
Critical Path Development
Culture Brokerage
Cutaneous Stimulation
Decision-Making Support
Defibrillator Management
External
Internal
Delegation
Delirium Management
Delusion Management 
Dementia Management
Bathing
Deposition/Testimony
Developmental Care
Developmental Enhancement
Adolescent
Child
Dialysis Access Maintenance
Diarrhea Management
Diet Staging
Discharge Planning
Distraction
Documentation
Dressing
Dying Care
Dysreflexia Management
Dysrhythmia Management 
Ear Care
Eating Disorders Management
Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT) Management
Electrolyte Management
Hypercalcemia
Hyperkalemia
Hypermagnesemia
Hypernatremia
Hyperphosphatemia
Electrolyte Monitoring
Electronic Fetal Monitoring
Antepartum
Intrapartum
Elopement Precautions
Embolus Care
Peripheral
Pulmonary
Embolus Precautions
Emergency Care
Emergency Cart Checking
Emotional Support
Endotracheal Extubation
Energy Management
Enteral Tube Feeding
Environmental Management
Attachment Process
Comfort
Community
Home Preparation
Safety
Violence Prevention
Worker Safety
Environmental Risk Protection
Examination Assistance
Exercise Promotion
Strength Training
Stretching
Exercise Therapy
Ambulation
Balance
Joint Mobility
Muscle Control
Eye Care
Fall Prevention
Family Integrity Promotion
Childbearing Family
Family Involvement Promotion
Family Mobilization
Family Planning
Contraception
Infertility
Unplanned Pregnancy
Family Presence Facilitation
Family Process Maintenance
Family Support
Family Therapy
Feeding
Fertility Preservation
Fever Treatment
Financial Resource Assistance
Fire-Setting Precautions
First Aid
Fiscal Resource Management
Flatulence Reduction
Fluid/Electrolyte Management
Fluid Management
Fluid Monitoring
Fluid Resuscitation
Foot Care
Forensic Data Collection
Forgiveness Facilitation
Gastrointestinal Intubation
Genetic Counseling
Grief Work Facilitation
Perinatal Death
Guided Imagery
APPENDIX B NIC and NOC Systems
●
333

Guilt Work Facilitation
Hair Care
Hallucination Management
Health Care Information Exchange
Health Education
Health Literacy Enhancement
Health Policy Monitoring
Health Screening
Health System Guidance
Heat/Cold Application
Heat Exposure Treatment
Hemodialysis Therapy
Hemodynamic Regulation
Hemofiltration Therapy
Hemorrhage Control
High-Risk Pregnancy Care
Home Maintenance Assistance
Hope Inspiration
Hormone Replacement Therapy
Humor
Hyperglycemia Management
Hypervolemia Management
Hypnosis
Hypoglycemia Management
Hypothermia Induction
Hypothermia Treatment
Hypovolemia Management
Immunization/Vaccination Management
Impulse Control Training
Incident Reporting
Incision Site Care
Infant Care
Infection Control
Intraoperative
Infection Protection
Insurance Authorization
Intracranial Pressure (ICP) Monitoring
Intrapartal Care
High-Risk Delivery
Intravenous (IV) Insertion
Intravenous (IV) Therapy
Invasive Hemodynamic Monitoring
Journaling
Kangaroo Care
Labor Induction
Labor Suppression
Laboratory Data Interpretation
Lactation Counseling
Lactation Suppression
Laser Precautions
Latex Precautions
Learning Facilitation
Learning Readiness Enhancement
Leech Therapy
Limit Setting
Lower Extremity Monitoring
Malignant Hyperthermia Precautions
Massage
Mechanical Ventilation Management
Invasive
Noninvasive
Mechanical Ventilator Weaning
Medication Administration
Ear
Enteral
Eye
Inhalation
Interpleural
Intradermal
Intramuscular
Intraosseous
Intraspinal
Intravenous
Nasal
Oral
Rectal
Skin
Subcutaneous
Vaginal
Ventricular Reservoir
Medication Management
Medication Prescribing
Medication Reconciliation
Medication Facilitation
Memory Training
Milieu Therapy
Mood Management
Multidisciplinary Care Conference
Music Therapy
Mutual Goal Setting
Nail Care
Nausea Management
Neurologic Monitoring
Newborn Care
Newborn Monitoring
Nonnutritive Sucking
Normalization Promotion
Nutrition Management
Nutrition Therapy
Nutritional Counseling 
Nutritional Monitoring
Oral Health Maintenance
Oral Health Promotion
Oral Health Restoration
Order Transcription
Organ Procurement
Ostomy Care
Oxygen Therapy
Pacemaker Management
Temporary
Permanent
Pain Management
Parent Education
Adolescent
Childrearing Family
Infant
Parenting Promotion
Pass Facilitation 
Patient Contracting
Patient-Controlled Analgesia (PCA) Assistance
Patient Rights Assistance
Peer Review
Pelvic Muscle Exercise
Perineal Care
334
●
APPENDIX B  NIC and NOC Systems

Peripheral Sensation Management
Peripherally Inserted Central (PIC) Catheter Care
Peritoneal Dialysis Therapy
Pessary Management
Phlebotomy
Arterial Blood Sample
Blood Unit Acquisition
Cannulated Vessel
Venous Blood Sample
Phototherapy
Mood/Sleep Regulation
Neonate
Physical Restraint
Physician Support
Pneumatic Tourniquet Precautions
Positioning
Intraoperative
Neurologic
Wheelchair 
Postanesthesia Care
Postmortem Care
Postpartal Care
Preceptor
Employee
Student
Preconception Counseling
Pregnancy Termination Care
Premenstrual Syndrome (PMS) Management
Prenatal Care
Preoperative Coordination
Preparatory Sensory Information 
Presence
Pressure Management
Pressure Ulcer Care
Pressure Ulcer Prevention
Product Evaluation
Program Development
Progressive Muscle Relaxation
Prompted Voiding
Prosthesis Care
Pruritus Management
Quality Monitoring
Radiation Therapy Management
Rape-Trauma Treatment
Reality Orientation
Recreation Therapy
Rectal Prolapse Management
Referral
Relaxation Therapy
Religious Addiction Prevention
Religious Ritual Enhancement
Relocation Stress Reduction
Reminiscence Therapy
Reproductive Technology Management
Research Data Collection
Resiliency Promotion
Respiratory Monitoring
Respite Care
Resuscitation
Fetus
Neonate
Risk Identification
Childbearing Family
Genetic
Role Enhancement
Seclusion
Security Enhancement
Sedation Management
Seizure Management
Seizure Precautions
Self-Awareness Enhancement
Self-Care Assistance
Bathing/Hygiene
Dressing/Grooming
Feeding
Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADL)
Toileting
Transfer
Self-Efficacy Enhancement
Self-Esteem Enhancement
Self-Hypnosis Facilitation
Self-Modification Assistance
Self-Responsibility Facilitation
Sexual Counseling
Shift Report
Shock Management
Cardiac
Vasogenic
Volume
Shock Prevention
Sibling Support
Skin Care
Donor Site
Graft Site
Topical Treatments
Skin Surveillance
Sleep Enhancement
Smoking Cessation Assistance
Social Marketing
Socialization Enhancement
Specimen Management
Spiritual Growth Facilitation 
Spiritual Support
Splinting
Sports Injury Prevention: Youth
Staff Development
Staff Supervision
Subarachnoid Hemorrhage Precautions
Substance Use Prevention
Substance Use Treatment
Alcohol Withdrawal
Drug Withdrawal
Overdose
Suicide Prevention
Supply Management
Support Group 
Support System Enhancement
Surgical Assistance
Surgical Precautions
Surgical Preparation
Surveillance
Community
APPENDIX B NIC and NOC Systems
●
335

Late Pregnancy
Remote Electronic
Safety
Sustenance Support
Suturing
Swallowing Therapy
Teaching
Disease Process
Foot Care
Group
Individual
Infant Nutrition 0–3 Months
Infant Nutrition 4–6 Months
Infant Nutrition 7–9 Months
Infant Nutrition 10–12 Months
Infant Safety 0–3 Months
Infant Safety 4–6 Months
Infant Safety 7–9 Months
Infant Safety 10–12 Months
Infant Stimulation 0–4 Months
Infant Stimulation 5–8 Months
Infant Stimulation 9–12 Months
Preoperative
Prescribed Activity/Exercise
Prescribed Diet
Prescribed Medication
Procedure/Treatment
Psychomotor Skill
Safe Sex
Sexuality
Toddler Nutrition 13–18 Months
Toddler Nutrition 19–24 Months
Toddler Nutrition 25–36 Months
Toddler Safety 13–18 Months
Toddler Safety 19–24 Months
Toddler Safety 25–36 Months
Toilet Training
Technology Management
Telephone Consultation
Telephone Follow-Up
Temperature Regulation
Intraoperative
Therapeutic Play
Therapeutic Touch
Therapy Group
Thrombolytic Therapy Management
Total Parenteral Nutrition (TPN) Administration
Touch
Traction/Immobilization Care
Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulation (TENS) 
Transfer
Transport
Interfacility
Intrafacility
Trauma Therapy: Child
Triage
Disaster
Emergency Center
Telephone
Truth Telling
Tube Care
Chest
Gastrointestinal
Umbilical Line
Urinary
Ventriculostomy/Lumbar Drain
Ultrasonography: Limited Obstetric
Unilateral Neglect Management
Urinary Bladder Training
Urinary Catheterization
Intermittent
Urinary Elimination Management
Urinary Habit Training
Urinary Incontinence Care
Enuresis
Urinary Retention Care
Validation Therapy
Values Clarification
Vehicle Safety Promotion
Venous Access Device (VAD) Maintenance
Ventilation Assistance
Visitation Facilitation
Vital Signs Monitoring
Vomiting Management
Weight Gain Assistance
Weight Management
Weight Reduction Assistance
Wound Care
Burns
Closed Drainage
Wound Irrigation
Nursing Specialty Core
Interventions Areas
Additions Nursing
Ambulatory Nursing
Anesthesia Nursing
Chemical Dependency Nursing
Child/Adolescent Psychiatric Nursing
College Health Nursing
Community Public Health Nursing
Correctional Nursing
Critical Care Nursing
Dermatology Nursing
Developmental Disability Nursing
Emergency Nursing
End-of-Life Care Nursing
Flight Nursing
Forensic Nursing
Gastroenterological Nursing
Genetics Nursing
Gerontological Nursing
Holistic Nursing
Infection Control/Epidemiological Nursing
Intravenous Nursing
Medical-Surgical Nursing
Midwifery Nursing
Neonatal Nursing
Nephrology Nursing
Neuroscience Nursing
Obstetric Nursing
Occupational Health Nursing
Oncology Nursing
Ophthalmic Nursing
Orthopedic Nursing
Otorhinolaryngology and Head/Neck Nursing
336
●
APPENDIX B  NIC and NOC Systems

Pain Management Nursing
Parish Nursing
Pediatric Nursing
Pediatric Oncology Nursing
Perioperative Nursing
Psychiatric/Mental Health Nursing
Radiological Nursing
Rehabilitation Nursing
School Nursing
Spinal Cord Injury Nursing
Urologic Nursing
Vascular Nursing
Women’s Health Nursing
Source: Bulechek, G. M., Butcher, H. K., Dochterman, 
J. M., & Wagner, C. (Eds.). (2013). Nursing Interventions
Classification (NIC) (6th ed.). St. Louis: Mosby Elsevier.
Reprinted with permission.
NURSING OUTCOMES
CLASSIFICATION (NOC) 
Abuse Cessation
Abuse Protection
Abuse Recovery
Emotional
Financial
Physical
Sexual
Abusive Behavior: Self-Restraint
Acceptance: Health Status
Activity Tolerance
Acute Confusion Level
Adaptation to Physical Disability
Adherence Behavior
Healthy Diet
Aggression Self-Control
Agitation Level
Alcohol Abuse Cessation Behavior
Allergic Response
Localized
Systemic
Ambulation
Wheelchair
Anxiety Level
Anxiety Self-Control
Appetite
Aspiration Prevention
Asthma Self-Management
Balance
Blood Coagulation
Blood Glucose Level
Blood Loss Severity
Blood Transfusion Reaction
Body Image
Body Mechanics Performance
Body Positioning: Self-Initiated
Bone Healing
Bowel Continence
Bowel Elimination
Breast Feeding Establishment
Infant
Maternal
Breastfeeding Maintenance
Breastfeeding Weaning
Burn Healing
Burn Recovery
Cardiac Disease Self-Management
Cardiac Pump Effectiveness
Cardiopulmonary Status
Caregiver Adaptation to Patient Institutionalization
Caregiver Emotional Health
Caregiver Home Care Readiness
Caregiver Lifestyle Disruption
Caregiver-Patient Relationship
Caregiver Performance
Direct Care
Indirect Care
Caregiver Physical Health
Caregiver Role Endurance
Caregiver Stressors
Caregiver Well-Being
Child Adaptation to Hospitalization
Child Development
1 Month
2 Months
4 Months
6 Months
12 Months
2 Years
3 Years
4 Years
5 Years
Middle Childhood
Adolescence
Circulation Status
Client Satisfaction
Access to Care Resources
Caring
Care Management
Communication
Continuity of Care
Cultural Needs Fulfillment
Functional Assistance
Pain Management
Physical Care
Physical Environment
Protection of Rights
Psychological Care
Safety
Symptom Control
Teaching
Technical Aspects of Care
Cognition
Cognitive Orientation
Comfort Status
Environment
Physical
Psychospiritual
Sociocultural
Comfortable Death
Communication
Expressive
Receptive
Community Competence
Community Disaster Readiness
APPENDIX B NIC and NOC Systems
●
337

Community Disaster Response
Community Health Status
Immunity
Community Risk Control
Chronic Disease
Communicable Disease
Lead Exposure
Violence
Community Violence Level
Compliance Behavior
Prescribed Diet
Prescribed Medication
Concentration
Coordinated Movement
Coping
Decision Making
Depression Level
Depression Self-Control
Development
Late Adulthood
Middle Adulthood
Young Adulthood
Diabetes Self-Management
Dignified Life Closure
Discharge Readiness
Independent Living
Supported Living
Discomfort Level
Distorted Thought Self-Control
Drug-Abuse Cessation Behavior
Electrolyte and Acid/Base Balance
Elopement Occurrence
Elopement Propensity Risk
Endurance
Energy Conservation
Fall Prevention Behavior
Falls Occurrence 
Family Coping
Family Functioning
Family Health Status
Family Integrity
Family Normalization
Family Participation in Professional Care
Family Resiliency 
Family Social Climate
Family Support During Treatment
Fatigue Level
Fear Level
Child
Fear Self-Control
Fetal Status
Antepartum
Intrapartum
Fluid Balance
Fluid Overload Severity
Gastrointestinal Function
Grief Resolution
Growth
Health Beliefs
Perceived Ability to Perform
Perceived Control
Perceived Resources
Perceived Threat
Health Orientation
Health Promoting Behavior
Health Seeking Behavior
Hearing Compensation Behavior
Heedfulness of Affected Side
Hemodialysis Access
Hope
Hydration
Hyperactivity Level
Identity
Immobility Consequences
Physiological
Psycho-Cognitive
Immune Hypersensitivity Response
Immune Status
Immunization Behavior
Impulse Self-Control
Infection Severity
Newborn
Information Processing
Joint Movement
Ankle
Elbow
Fingers
Hip
Knee
Neck
Passive
Shoulder
Spine
Wrist
Kidney Function
Knowledge
Arthritis Management
Asthma Management
Body Mechanics
Breastfeeding
Cancer Management
Cancer Threat Reduction
Cardiac Disease Management
Child Physical Safety
Conception Prevention
Congestive Heart Failure Management
Depression Management
Diabetes Management
Diet
Disease Process
Energy Conservation
Fall Prevention
Fertility Promotion
Health Behavior
Health Promotion
Health Resources
Hypertension Management
Illness Care
Infant Care
Infection Management
Labor and Delivery
Medication
Multiple Sclerosis Management
Ostomy Care
Pain Management
Parenting
338
●
APPENDIX B  NIC and NOC Systems

Personal Safety
Postpartum Maternal Health
Preconception Maternal Health
Pregnancy
Pregnancy and Postpartum Sexual Functioning
Prescribed Activity
Preterm Infant Care
Sexual Functioning
Substance Use Control
Treatment Procedure
Treatment Regimen
Weight Management
Leisure Participation
Loneliness Severity
Maternal Status
Antepartum
Intrapartum
Postpartum
Mechanical Ventilation Response: Adult
Mechanical Ventilation Weaning Response: Adult
Medication Response
Memory
Mobility
Mood Equilibrium
Motivation
Multiple Sclerosis: Self-Management
Nausea and Vomiting Control
Nausea and Vomiting: Disruptive Effects
Nausea and Vomiting Severity
Neglect Cessation
Neglect Recovery
Neurological Status
Autonomic
Central Motor Control
Consciousness
Cranial Sensory/Motor Function
Peripheral
Spinal Sensory/Motor Function
Newborn Adaptation
Nutritional Status
Biochemical Measures
Energy
Food and Fluid Intake
Nutrient Intake
Oral Hygiene
Ostomy Self-Care
Pain: Adverse Psychological Response
Pain Control
Pain: Disruptive Effects
Pain Level
Parent-Infant Attachment
Parenting
Adolescent Physical Safety
Early/Middle Childhood Physical Safety
Infant/Toddler Physical Safety
Parenting Performance
Parenting: Psychosocial Safety
Participation in Healthcare Decisions
Personal Autonomy
Personal Health Status
Personal Resiliency
Personal Safety Behavior
Personal Well-Being
Physical Aging
Physical Fitness
Physical Injury Severity
Physical Maturation
Female
Male
Play Participation
Postpartum Maternal Health Behavior
Post-Procedure Recovery
Prenatal Health Behavior
Pre-Procedure Readiness
Preterm Infant Organization
Psychomotor Energy
Psychosocial Adjustment: Life Change
Quality of Life
Respiratory Status
Airway Patency
Gas Exchange
Ventilation
Rest
Risk Control
Alcohol Use
Cancer
Cardiovascular Health
Drug Use
Hearing Impairment
Hyperthermia
Hypothermia
Infectious Process
Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STDs)
Sun Exposure
Tobacco Use
Unintended Pregnancy
Visual Impairment
Risk Detection
Role Performance
Safe Home Environment
Safe Wandering
Seizure Control
Self-Care Status
Self-Care
Activities of Daily Living (ADL)
Bathing
Dressing
Eating 
Hygiene
Instrumental Activities of Daily Living 
(IADL)
Non-Parenteral Medication
Oral Hygiene
Parenteral Medication
Toileting
Self-Direction of Care
Self-Esteem
Self-Mutilation Restraint
Sensory Function
Cutaneous
Hearing
Proprioception
Taste and Smell
Vision
APPENDIX B NIC and NOC Systems
●
339

Sexual Functioning
Sexual Identity
Skeletal Function 
Sleep
Smoking Cessation Behavior
Social Interaction Skills
Social Involvement
Social Support
Spiritual Health
Stress Level
Student Health Status
Substance Addiction Consequences
Substance Withdrawal Severity
Suffering Severity
Suicide Self-Restraint
Swallowing Status
Esophageal Phase
Oral Phase
Pharyngeal Phase 
Symptom Control
Symptom Severity
Perimenopause
Premenstrual Syndrome (PMS)
Systemic Toxin Clearance: Dialysis
Thermoregulation
Newborn
Tissue Integrity: Skin and Mucous Membranes
Tissue Perfusion
Abdominal Organs
Cardiac
Cellular
Cerebral
Peripheral
Pulmonary
Transfer Performance
Treatment Behavior: Illness or Injury
Urinary Continence
Urinary Elimination
Vision Compensation Behavior
Vital Signs
Weight: Body Mass
Weight Gain Behavior
Weight Loss Behavior
Weight Maintenance Behavior
Will to Live
Wound Healing
Primary Intention
Secondary Intention
Core Outcomes for Nursing
Specialty Areas
Air and Surface Transport 
Ambulatory Care
Anesthesia
Cardiac Rehabilitation
Chemical Dependency 
Community Health
Critical Care
Dermatology
Emergency Care
Gastroenterology
Genetics
Gerontology
Home Healthcare
Hospice and Palliative Care
Intravenous Therapy 
Medical-Surgical
Neonatology
Nephrology
Neuroscience
Nurse Practitioner
Oncology
Operating Room
Ophthalmology
Orthopaedics
Otorhinolaryngology and Head-Neck
Pain Management
Parish Nursing
Pediatrics
Pediatric Oncology
Perianesthesia
Postoperative Care 
Psychiatric-Mental Health 
Radiology 
Rehabilitation 
School Health
Spinal Cord Injury 
Urology
Vascular 
Women’s Health and Obstetrics
Source: Moorhead, S., Johnson, M., Maas, M. L., &
Swanson, E. (Eds.). (2013). Nursing Outcomes
Classification (NOC) (5th ed.). St. Louis: Mosby 
Elsevier. Reprinted with permission. 
340
●
APPENDIX B  NIC and NOC Systems
REFERENCES
Bulechek, G. M., Butcher, H. K., Dochterman, J. M., & 
Wagner, C. (eds.). (2013). Nursing Interventions Classifica-
tion (NIC ) (6th ed.). St. Louis: Mosby Elsevier.
Moorhead, S., Johnson, M., Maas, M. L., & Swanson, E.
(eds.). (2013). Nursing Outcomes Classification (NOC) 
(5th ed.). St. Louis: Mosby Elsevier.

A
Abilities, 12
ACA. See Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA)
Academic Center for Evidence-Based Practice (ACE) 
Star Model, 86, 86f
Acceptability, in readiness to learn, 147
Access to services
of aging adults, 243
as health indicator, 241
of minorities, 249
in rural populations, 250
Accommodation
in cognitive development, 26
in cognitive learning, 140, 145
Accountability measures, criteria for, 221–222
Accountable care organization (ACO), 281, 285, 285t
Accreditation, goals of, 221–222
Achievement subsystem, in Johnson’s Behavioral System 
Model, 35
Act deontology, 203
Act utilitarianism, 203
Action
in critical thinking, 116
in Johnson’s Behavioral System Model, 35
in King’s Conceptual System, 37
in Transtheoretical Approach, 187–189, 188t
Active listening, 104
Activities of daily life (ADLs), in healthy life, 243
Adaptation, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 42–44
Addiction, in colleagues, 208–209
Adhocracy. See Organic organizational structures
Adjourning stage, in group development, 130
Administrative costs, in healthcare costs, 279
Administrative health information systems, 261
Adult learning theories, 141–142
Advance directives, ethic decisions about, 205–206
Advanced practice nurses (APRNs), roles of, 11
Advice, 106, 106b, 131
Affective domain, 145, 149, 153
Affective learning, 12
Affirming personal becoming, in Parse’s Theory of 
Humanbecoming, 49
Affordable Care Act (ACA). See Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act (ACA)
Age groups, in Healthy People, 239, 241–242
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), 10, 86–87
Aggressive subsystem, in Johnson’s Behavioral System 
Model, 35
Aggressor role, 133
Aging
theories on, 244
types of, 244
Aging adults
abuse of, 247
characterizing, 244–246, 245b
increase in population, 242–247
major health problems of, 245–246
needs of, 246–247
Alternatives, in therapeutic communication, 105
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN), 5
characteristics of, 6, 7t
on cultural care competencies, 68, 69t
educational standards of, 5b
on holistic nursing, 67
on organizational culture, 172
on research, 79–80
on roles of nurses, 11
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses, on evidence-based
practice, 87
American Nurses Association (ANA)
characteristics of, 6, 7t
code of ethics of, 5, 6–8, 203–204, 206, 210
on delegation, 177
on essentials of professional nursing, 15
on genetics, 208
on Just Culture, 225
on research, 79, 82–83, 86
on safety, 226
taxonomies of, 265
American Nurses Association (ANA) standards
on collaboration, 10
on education, 322
ethics in, 204, 204b
on holistic nursing, 67
on nursing informatics, 269
on professional practice evaluation, 10
on resource utilization, 10
on specialties, 11
American Organization of Nurse Executives (AONE), 170–171
ANA. See American Nurses Association (ANA)
Analysis
in behavioral objectives, 148
in critical thinking, 116
in empirical research, 84
Andragogical model of learning, 141–142
Appearance, in nonverbal communication, 104
Applicability, in readiness to learn, 147
Application, in behavioral objectives, 148
Approval
in communication, 131
in empirical research, 84
APRNs (advanced practice nurses), roles of, 11
Assessment
in critical thinking, 120, 120b
in delegation, 177
in Health Patterning Practice Method, 42
in learning, 149–150
in negotiation, 175–176
in nursing informatics, 269
in teaching-learning process, 139
in unfreezing, 196–197
Assignments, preparing, 14–15
Assimilation
in cognitive development, 26
in cognitive learning, 140, 145
Attachment or affiliative subsystem, in Johnson’s Behavioral System
Model, 34
Attendance, in effective groups, 128
Attention, management of, 170
Attitudes, in critical thinking, 119
Auditory learning style, 14, 146
Authentic Leadership Approach, 169t
Authority
in King’s Conceptual System, 36
in nursing profession, 4
Autocratic leadership style, 130
Autonomy
definition of, 202
in professionalism, 8
Awareness
in critical thinking, 118
in negotiation, 176
B
Basic conditioning factors, in Orem’s Self-Care Framework, 40
Basic human rights
definition of, 202
in research, 81
341
INDEX
Note: Page numbers followed by an “f” indicate a figure, page numbers followed by a “b” indicate a box, and page numbers followed by a “t” indicate a
table.

Behavior(s)
in health promotion model, 62–64, 63f
in health-belief model, 62
modeling by leaders, 171
Behavior modification, 140
Behavioral objectives, in teaching, 147–149
Behavioral Systems model, 28–29, 34–36, 35b
Behaviorism
classical conditioning, 139–140
operant conditioning, 140
Belmont Report, 81
Belongingness, in hierarchy of needs, 24–25, 24f
Benchmarking, 222
Beneficence
definition of, 202
in research, 81
Benefit-burden ratios, 308
Bills, laws from, 293–296
Blaming, 131
Blocker role, 133
Body image, in King’s Conceptual System, 36
Body language, in nonverbal communication, 103
Boundary, in systems, 28, 28f
Briefs-Huddles-Debriefs, 109
Bureaucratic leadership, 169–170
Bureaucratic organizations, 160–161, 160f, 161f, 162f
Business, in healthcare, 308–309
C
Care, in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and
Universality, 45
Care systems, in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and
Universality, 45–46
Caregivers, for aging adults, 246
Caring, in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and
Universality, 45
Case management, in Continuous Quality 
Improvement, 231
Case management operations, in Professional-Technological Operations
of Nursing, 40–41, 40b
Case studies, for critical thinking, 120, 121b–122b
Cause-and-effect diagrams, in quality improvement, 227–228, 228f
CCNE (Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education), 4
Centralized organizational structures, 165
Change
definition of, 183
Diffusion of Innovations model of, 186–187
embracing, 324, 324
external sources of, 194–195
in families, 193–194
four quadrants of, 190, 190b
in groups, 193–194
Havelock’s theory of, 185–186
in individuals, 193–194
internal sources of, 194
Lewin’s theory of, 183–184, 184f
Lippitt’s seven stages of, 184–185, 184f
planned, 183
resistance to, 193
suggestions for, 196–198
theories of, 183–189, 191t
Transtheoretical Approach to, 187–189, 188t
Change agents
definition of, 183
in Diffusion of Innovations model, 187
in Four Quadrants of Change, 190
in Havelock’s theory of change, 186
in Lippitt’s model of change, 185
in moving, 191, 192t
in organizational change, 195–196
in refreezing, 191–193, 192t
in Transtheoretical Approach, 189
in unfreezing, 190–191, 192t
Change quotient, 197
Changing the subject, 106, 106b
Channel, in communication models, 98
Charitable era of healthcare, 215
Check sheets, 228, 229f
Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP), 282t, 283
Choice, in Johnson’s Behavioral System Model, 35
Chronic disease, in healthcare costs, 279
Chronic illness model, 64–66, 66t
Chronic Illness Trajectory Framework, 64–65
Chronicity, in aging adults, 245–246
Circular questions, 105
Circumstances, in delegation, 177
Civic involvement, 300
Clarity, in verbal communication, 101–102
Classical conditioning, 139–140
Client system, in Neuman’s Systems Model, 38–39, 39b
Clients, in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and
Universality, 46
Clinical care
formalized measures of, 215
as measure of quality, 215
Clinical health information systems, 261
Clinical nurse leaders (CNLs), roles of, 11, 307
Clinical protocols, in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and
Universality, 46–47
Close-ended questions, 105
Closure, in groups, 131–132
Code of ethics
of ANA, 5, 6–8
in nursing profession, 5, 203–204
Coding, for reimbursements, 283–284
Cognator coping subsystem, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 43
Cognitive development theory, 26
Cognitive domain, 145, 153
Cognitive learning, 12
Cognitive learning styles, 145–146
Cognitive learning theories, 140–141
Cognitive level, in readiness to learn, 146
Cognitive processes, in behavioral objectives, 148–149
Cognitive processes dimension, 148–149
Cohesiveness, in effective groups, 128, 131
Collaboration
communication in, 107
definition of, 107
encouraging, 171
in evidence-based practice, 90
in management theory, 167
in nursing environment, 318–321, 320b
in organizational culture, 173
in professionalism, 10
in public health, 252
Colleagues
communication with, 106–109
impaired/incompetent, 208–209
Collegiality, 320
Coming-to-be-present, in Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming, 49
Commanding, in nursing management, 168
Commoditization of healthcare, 308
Common-cause variation, 230
Communicable diseases, spread of, 305
Communication
barriers to, 105–106, 107
with colleagues, 106–109
definition of, 98
in delegation, 177
in effective groups, 128, 131
in Havelock’s theory of change, 185–186
improving, 106–109
in King’s Conceptual System, 36
by leaders, 171
metacommunication, 100–101
methods in organizations, 174
in negotiation, 175
nonverbal, 102–104
in organizational culture, 173
in organizational groups, 134–135
in professionalism, 9
as skill, 98
standardized nursing language in, 265–266
strategies for, 107–109
technology in, 98
342
●
Index

therapeutic, 104–106, 104b
verbal, 101–102
Communication models
components of, 98
health communication model, 99–100, 99f
source-message-channel-receiver (SMCR) model, 98–99
Communication systems, in organizational structure, 159
Community
leadership positions in, 9
in organizational culture, 174
Community involvement, 300
Community nursing, Healthy People and, 251–252
Community sanction, in nursing profession, 4
Compensatory life process, in Roy’s Adaptation 
Model, 43
Competence, in nursing, 321–322
Competencies
Institute of Medicine on, 315
in leadership, 170, 170b, 171
in nursing informatics, 260, 261b
Pew Health Professions Commission on, 315
for quality improvement, 217
in Synergy Model, 44
Compliance, in learning, 146
Compromised life process, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 43
Computer, as learning resource, 14
Computer applications, in health information management 
systems, 266–267
Computerized physician order entry (CPOE), 266
Concept, definition of, 21
Concept formation, in critical thinking, 119
Concept mapping, 114–115
Conceptual environment, in Levine’s Conservation 
Model, 38
Conceptual models
advantages of using, 52–53
Chronic Illness Trajectory Framework, 64–65
definition of, 20, 34
function of, 20–21, 34
Johnson’s Behavioral Systems Model, 28–29, 34–36, 35b
King’s Conceptual System, 36–37, 36b
Levine’s Conservation Model, 37–38, 38b
Neuman’s Systems Model, 38–39, 39b
of nursing, 34–44
Orem’s Self-Care Framework, 39–41, 40b
paradigms and, 3
risks of using, 53
Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human Beings, 42, 42b
Roy’s Adaptation Model, 42–44, 44b
selecting, 54
in structural hierarchy of contemporary nursing, 20–21, 20f
Synergy Model, 44
using, 54
Conceptual skills, of leaders, 170
Conceptual System, 36–37, 36b
Concrete operations stages of cognitive development, 26
Confidentiality
definition of, 202
in research, 81–82
Confirmation, in Diffusion of Innovations model, 187
Conflict Resolution Network, 131, 131b
Congressional committees, 294, 295t
Consciousness, in Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding
Consciousness, 47
Consensus taker role, 132, 133t
Conservation, Levine’s Conservation Model, 38, 38b
Conservation Model, 37–38, 38b
Construct, definition of, 21
Consultants, change agents as, 185
Consumer needs, in organizational change, 166
Contemplation, in Transtheoretical Approach, 
187–189, 188t
Contemporary nursing knowledge, structural hierarchy of, 
20–21, 20f
Contexts
in critical thinking, 118
in health communication model, 100
Contextual stimuli, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 42
Contingency Approach, 169t
Continued competence, 321
Continuing education, 11–13
in competence, 321
resources for, 14–15
time management in, 13–14
Continuous Quality Improvement (CQI), 222–224
Continuum of standardization for organizations, 160, 160f
Control, in King’s Conceptual System, 36
Control operations, in Professional-Technological Operations of
Nursing, 40b, 41
Controlling, in nursing management, 168
Conventional morality, moral development theory, 26, 27t
Coordinating, in nursing management, 168
Coordinators
change agents as, 185
in groups, 132, 132t
Coping, in King’s Conceptual System, 36
Core measures, standardization of, 216
Costs
of continuing education, 13
of healthcare, 280
CPOE (computerized physician order entry), 266
CPT (Current Procedural Terminology), 284
CQI. See Continuous Quality Improvement (CQI)
Created environment, in Neuman’s Systems Model, 39
Creation, in behavioral objectives, 148
Creative imagining, in Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming, 49
Creativity, in effective groups, 128
Crew Resource Management (CRM), 225
Critical analysis, 22–23
Critical care, conceptual model for, 44
Critical reflection, 22, 142–143
Critical thinking
definition of, 114, 116, 117t
descriptions of role of, 116–118, 117t
developing skills, 118–119
factors in, 115
measures of, 118
in nursing, 119–120, 120b, 121b–122b
Critiques, of research, 87–90, 87b
CRM (Crew Resource Management), 225
Cultural care
Culture Care Diversity and Universality, 69–70
Giger and Davidhizar Transcultural Assessment Model, 70
Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and 
Universality, 45, 73
models of, 69–71
nurse’s role in, 71–73
Purnell Model for Cultural Competence, 71, 72f
Spector’s Health Traditions Model, 70–71
Cultural competence, 68, 71, 72f
Cultural variations
in nonverbal communication, 102–103
in therapeutic communication, 105
Cultural-congruent nursing care, in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care
Diversity and Universality, 45–46
Culturally unique individual, 70
Culturalogical assessment, in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care
Diversity and Universality, 46
Culture
in health perceptions, 67–71
in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and Universality, 45
Culture Care Diversity and Universality, 69–70
Current Procedural Terminology (CPT), 284
CUS words, 109
Customers, in organizational change, 195
D
Data. See also Nursing informatics (NI)
analysis tools for, 228, 230f
in critical thinking, 119
definition of, 260–261
in empirical research, 84
in Healthy People, 242
in qualitative research, 85
in research critique, 88–89
Index     ●
343

tools for collecting, 228, 229f
transformation of, 260–261
Data sheets, 228, 229f
Database management, 267–268
Debrief, 109
Decentralized organizational structures, 165
Decision making
critical thinking in, 120
in Diffusion of Innovations model, 187
in effective groups, 128
ethical, 204–209
in King’s Conceptual System, 36
model for, 204–205
in organizational culture, 173
Decision trees, 115
Declaration of Helsinki, 80–81
Decoder, in communication models, 98
Defensive medicine, 308–309
Delegation, in nursing, 176–178, 177b
Deming’s principles for transformation, 217–219
Democratic leadership style, 130, 170
Deontology, 203
Dependency subsystem, in Johnson’s Behavioral System Model, 35
Descriptive statistics, in research critique, 88–89
Descriptive theories, 22
Determinants of health, 239
Developmental theories, 25–29, 27t
Developmental variable, in Neuman’s Systems Model, 38
Diagnoser role, 132, 133t
Diagnosis
in Adaptation Model Nursing Process, 43
critical thinking in, 120, 120b
in Nursing Process Format, 39
in teaching-learning process, 139
Diagnostic operations, in Professional-Technological Operations of
Nursing, 40b, 41
Diagnostic-related groups (DRGs), 280, 283–284
Diagram, in Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding
Consciousness, 48
Differentiated nursing practice, 318
Diffusion of Innovations model, 186–187
Direction, in delegation, 177
Disabilities
in aging adults, 245–246
in Healthy People, 239
Disagreer role, 132, 132t
Disturbance, in King’s Conceptual System, 37
Doctor of nursing practice (DNP), 307, 323
Domains
in behavioral objective development, 148
in teaching-learning process, 145
Dominator role, 133
DRGs (diagnostic-related groups), 280, 283–284, 281t
Drive, in Johnson’s Behavioral System Model, 35
Driving forces
in Lewin’s theory of change, 183, 184
in organizational change, 196
Drucker, Peter, 167
Drug dependency, in colleagues, 208–209
Durable power of attorney, 205–206
E
E-books, for nursing informatics, 260
Economic era of healthcare, 216
Education
in community sanction, 4–5, 5b
in competence, 321–322
continuing, 11–13
essential, 322–323
for holistic nursing, 67
nurse educators in, 323
nursing informatics careers in, 270–271
nursing informatics in, 259
in professional culture, 6
in professionalism, 8–9
research in, 79–80
Educational groups, focus of, 127
Effective groups, 127–128
Efficacy, in professional practice, 9
Efficiency
in management theory, 166
in professional practice, 9
Eight ages of man, 25–26, 26f
Elaborator role, 132, 132t
Elder abuse, 247
Electronic health record (EHR), 262–265
benefits of, 263b
meaningful use of, 262–263, 263b, 264t
purposes of, 263–264
Electronic prescribing, 266
Eliminative subsystem, in Johnson’s Behavioral System 
Model, 35
Embedded organizational structures, 165
Emerging populations, 70
Empirical research, 83–84, 85t
Empirical-rational change philosophies, 183, 193
Employers, in health insurance financing, 279
Employment, in United States, 305
Encoder, in communication models, 98
Encourager role, 132, 133t
Encouraging elaboration, in therapeutic communication, 105
Endurance, in negotiation, 176
Energizer role, 132, 132t
Energy, conservation of, 38
Energy fields, in Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human Beings, 42
Environment
in adult teaching and learning, 142
in change process, 193–194
collaboration in, 318–321, 320b
in communication models, 98
for effective groups, 127
in learning, 145
in Levine’s Conservation Model, 37–38, 38b
in metaparadigm of nursing, 3–4
in Neuman’s Systems Model, 39
nursing practice supported by, 318
in organizational change, 166, 194–195
in organizational culture, 172
in organizational structure, 159–160
in root cause analysis, 225–226
for studying, 14
in systems, 28, 28f
Environmental context, in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity
and Universality, 45
Environmental health, in professionalism, 10–11
Environmental quality, as health indicator, 241
Equifinality, in systems, 28
Equipment, in root cause analysis, 225–226
Esteem, in hierarchy of needs, 24f, 25
Ethical decisions, 204–209
Ethics
principles of, 202–203
in professionalism, 6–8
in research, 80–83, 81b
systems of, 203
Ethnicity, in health perceptions, 67–71
Ethnohistory, in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and
Universality, 45
Euthanasia, 206
Evaluation
in Adaptation Model Nursing Process, 43
in behavioral objectives, 148
critical thinking in, 120, 120b
in delegation, 177
as goal of accreditation, 221–222
in Health Patterning Practice Method, 42
in learning, 149
in nursing informatics, 269b
in organizational change, 195–196
in teaching-learning process, 139, 152–153
Evidence-based practice
barriers to, 90–91
computer applications in, 267
definition of, 79
electronic resources for, 259, 259b
evolution of, 86–87, 86f
importance of, 79
344
●
Index

incorporating research into, 89–90
market forces in, 308
in professionalism, 9
Examinations, 15
Executive branch, 292
Explanatory theories, 22
Expresser role, 132, 133t
External criticism, 22
External environment, in Neuman’s Systems Model, 39
Eye contact, in nonverbal communication, 103
F
Face-to-face discussions, in Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming, 49
Facial expressions, in nonverbal communication, 103–104
Fact finders, change agents as, 185
False reassurance, 105, 106b
Families
advance directives and, 206
of aging adults, 246
change in, 193–194
Fault-finding, in critical thinking, 118
Federal government, structure and function of, 292–293
Feedback
in communication models, 98
in delegation, 177
in systems, 28, 28f
Fee-for-service (FFS) plans, 280
Feelings, in critical thinking, 117–118, 119
Fidelity, definition of, 202
Field studies, 84
Field Theory, 183–184, 184f
Findings, in empirical research, 84
Fiscal responsibility, 286
Five-column format, critical thinking and, 114
Flat organizational structures, 161f, 165
Flexible line of defense, in Neuman’s Systems Model, 38–39
Flow charts, in quality improvement, 227, 227f
Focal stimuli, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 42
Focusing, in therapeutic communication, 105
Follower role, 132, 133t
Follow-up, in Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding 
Consciousness, 48
Formal goals, of organizations, 165
Formal groups
in professional culture, 5–6
structure of, 126
Formal nursing knowledge. See also Conceptual models; Nursing 
theory
advantages of, 52–53
components of, 34
risks of using, 53
Formal operations stages of cognitive development, 26
Formal organizational functions, 166
Forming stage, for groups, 129, 129t
Foundation health measures, 241
Four Quadrants of Change, 190, 190b
14 Points for Management, 217–219, 217b
Framework
Chronic Illness Trajectory Framework, 64–65
definition of, 20
selecting, 29–30
Full disclosure
definition of, 202
in research, 81
Functional group roles, 132–133, 132t, 133t
Functional health patterns, 66, 66b
Functional organizational structure, 162, 163f
Future, addressing, 197–198, 198b
Future study hypotheses, in qualitative research, 85
G
Gatekeeper role, 132, 133t
GDP (gross domestic product), 277
General system theory, 28–29, 28f
Generalist nurses, roles of, 11
Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act 
(GINA), 208
Genomics, ethical decisions about, 207–208
Gestalt theory, 140
Gestures, in nonverbal communication, 102–103
Giger and Davidhizar Transcultural Assessment Model, 70, 70b
Glimpsing the paradoxical, in Parse’s Theory of 
Humanbecoming, 49
Global health
definition of, 305
health disparities in, 310
Global issues, in health policy, 306
GNP (gross national product), 277
Goal(s)
in Adaptation Model Nursing Process, 43
communicating, 174
in effective groups, 128, 131
in Johnson’s Behavioral System Model, 35
in learning, 146
in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and 
Universality, 46
in Nursing Process Format, 39
of organizations, 158, 165–166
Goal achievement, in King’s Conceptual System, 37
Government
influencing, 300
structure and function of, 292–293
Grand theories, 22, 45–49
Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and Universality, 
45–47, 46b
Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding Consciousness, 
47–48, 47b
Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming, 48–49, 49b
selecting, 54
using, 54
Grassroots efforts, 298–299, 299b
Great Man Approach, 169t
Gross domestic product (GDP), 277
Gross national product (GNP), 277
Group(s)
change in, 193–194
characteristics of, 126–127
composition of, 126–127
definition of, 126
difficult people in, 134, 134b
effective, 127–128
evaluating effectiveness of, 128–129
ineffective, 128–129
leadership in, 127, 128, 130–132
in learning, 150–152, 151t
organizational, 134–135
orienting members of, 130
process teams as, 227
roles in, 127, 132–134, 132t, 133t
size of, 127
stages of development, 129–130, 129t
virtual meetings, 135
Group assignments, 15
Group focus, 127
Group identity mode, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 43
Group process, 126
basics of, 129–134
Group structure, 126
establishing, 130
Growth and development, in King’s Conceptual System, 36
H
Habit, critical thinking as, 118
Havelock’s theory of change, 185–186
HCM (health communication model), 99–100, 99f
Healing from Childhood Maltreatment, 52
Health
definition of, 59
in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and 
Universality, 45
in metaparadigm of nursing, 3–4
in research, 81–82
social determinants of, 248
theories of, 60–67
Health communication model (HCM), 99–100, 99f
Index     ●
345

Health disparities
addressing, 248–249
in global health, 310
in Healthy People, 239
in minorities, 247–249, 248b
nursing shortage and, 307
Health equity, 248, 286
Health indicators, 240, 240b
of aging adults, 245, 245b
in Healthy People, 240, 240b
Health information management systems
computer applications in, 266–267
electronic health record in, 262–265
electronic prescribing in, 266
goals of, 261
integration of, 261, 262b
nonintegrated, 261, 262f
overview of, 261–270
standardized nursing language in, 265–266
Health insurance
in healthcare economics, 279–280
under Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, 284–286, 285t
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), 
81–82, 203
Health maintenance organizations (HMOs), in Medicare, 282
Health Patterning Practice Method, 42, 42b
Health perceptions, cultural influences on, 67–71
Health policy, and nursing, 305–306. See also Laws
Health professional, in health communication model (HCM), 
99–100
Health promotion model, 62–64, 65t
Health promotion strategies, 59, 237–239, 238t, 240
Health protection strategies, 59, 237–239, 238t
Health Traditions Model, 70–71
Health-belief model, 61–62, 63f, 65t
Healthcare
business in, 308–309
privatization of, 307–308
Healthcare economics
cost in, 280
definition of, 277
expenditures per capita, 277–278, 277f, 278t
historical context for, 279–280
price, 280
reimbursement in, 280
trends in, 277–279
Healthcare organizations, nursing informatics careers in, 270
Healthcare proxies, 205–206
Healthy Communities
focus of, 237
objectives of, 239
Healthy People, 237–242, 240b
on aging adults, 242–247
community nursing and, 251–252
focus of, 237, 241–242
goals and objectives of, 237, 238t, 239, 241–242
on minority health, 247–249
priority areas of, 237–239, 238t
on rural health, 249–250
Helicy, in Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human Beings, 42
Henderson, Virginia, 15, 34
Heterogeneous groups, 126–127
Hierarchical order, in systems, 28
Hierarchical structure, of organizations, 158–160
Hierarchy of needs, 23–25, 24f, 146, 167
High-level wellness, 60–61, 61f
HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act), 
81–82, 203
Historical perspectives, on quality, 215–217
History
in organizational change, 195
in organizational culture, 173
HMOs (health maintenance organizations), in Medicare, 282
Holism, 66–67, 114
Holistic view, 68
Home health care, resources for, 10
Homogenous groups, 126–127
Hospitalizations, of aging adults, 243–244
Hostile role, 133
Huddle, 109
Human beings
in metaparadigm of nursing, 3–4
in root cause analysis, 225–226
Human genome, 207–208
Human nature, in management theories, 167
Human skills, of leaders, 170
Humanbecoming, in Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming, 48–49
Humanism, 141
Hygiene factors, in management theories, 167
Hypotheses
in empirical research, 83
in qualitative research, 85
in research critique, 88
I
“I PASS the BATON,” 108
ICD (International Classification of Diseases) codes, 284
ICN (International Council of Nurses), characteristics of, 6, 7t
ICNP (International Classification for Nursing Practice), 266
Ideologic goals, of organizations, 165
Illness, theories of, 60–67
Impaired/incompetent colleagues, 208–209
Implementation
critical thinking in, 120, 120b
in Diffusion of Innovations model, 187
in nursing informatics, 269
in teaching-learning process, 139
Income, of aging adults, 243
Independent learning activities, 267
Indicators for measurement, 229–230
Individual, change in, 193–194
Individual perceptions, in health-belief model, 62
Ineffective groups, 128–129
Infectious diseases, as health indicator, 241
Inferential statistics, in research critique, 88–89
Informal groups
in professional culture, 6
structure of, 126
Informal organizational functions, 166
Informal power, 175
Information giver role, 132, 132t
Information links, change agents as, 185
Information seeker role, 132, 132t
Informed consent
decisions about, 205
definition of, 202
Ingestive subsystem, in Johnson’s Behavioral System Model, 35
Initiator/contributor role, 132, 132t
Injury, as health indicator, 241
Innovation
definition of, 186
steps for, 196, 196b
Innovator subsystem control process, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 43
Input, in systems, 28, 28f
Institute for Healthcare Improvement, 226
Institute of Medicine (IOM)
on nursing, 315–316, 317t, 320, 322–325
on quality chasm, 315–317
reports on medical errors by, 10, 224, 315
Institutional arrangements, in organizational culture, 174
Institutional Review Board (IRB), 82
Instruments, in research critique, 88–89
Insurance companies, nursing informatics careers in, 271
Integrality, in Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human Beings, 42
Integrated delivery systems, 309
Integrated life process, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 43
Intelligences, 143, 143t
Interaction, in King’s Conceptual System, 36
Interaction-Transaction Process, in King’s Conceptual System, 
36–37, 36b
Interdependence mode, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 43
Interdisciplinary relationships, in organizational culture, 173
Internal criticism, 22
Internal environment, in Neuman’s Systems Model, 39
International Classification for Nursing Practice (ICNP), 266
International Classification of Diseases (ICD) codes, 284
International Council of Nurses (ICN), characteristics of, 6, 7t
346
●
Index

Interpersonal communication, 98
Interpersonal skills
in Havelock’s theory of change, 185–186
in negotiation, 175
Interpersonal systems
in King’s Conceptual System, 36
in organizational structure, 159
Interpersonal variables, in communication models, 98
Interpretation, in empirical research, 84
Intershift Report, 108
Intervention
in Adaptation Model Nursing Process, 43
in community nursing, 252
Intervention/action, 38
Interview, in Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding
Consciousness, 47
Intonation, in verbal communication, 101
Intraorganizational groups, 134
Involvement
in nursing profession, 323–324
resistance to change and, 193
IOM. See Institute of Medicine (IOM)
ISHAPED, 108
Issues
in critical thinking, 118
in nursing informatics, 269
J
Jargon, 106, 106b
Jewish Chronic Disease Hospital study, 81, 81b
Johnson’s Behavioral Systems model, 28–29, 34–36, 35b
Judgment, in King’s Conceptual System, 37
Judicial branch, 292–293
Juran Trilogy, 219–221, 220b
Just Culture, 225
Justice, definition of, 202
Just-in-time learning, 222–224
K
Kant, Immanuel, 203
Kinesics, in nonverbal communication, 103
Kinesthetic learning style, 14, 146
King’s Conceptual System, 36–37, 36b
King’s Theory of Goal Attainment, 73
Know-it-all role, 133
Knowledge
in behavioral objectives, 148–149
building, 12–13
in critical thinking, 117, 120
definition of, 12
in Diffusion of Innovations model, 187
from nursing informatics, 261
Knowledge base, as characteristic of profession, 3–4
Knowledge transformation, 86
Knowledge workers, managers as, 167
L
Laissez-faire leadership style, 130, 170
Language
in critical thinking, 118
in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and 
Universality, 45
in readiness to learn, 146
Laws
by congressional committee, 294, 295t
definition of, 293
impact of, 296
influencing, 298–299
on nursing practice, 298
statutory, 293–296
types of, 294t
Lay caregivers, 246
Leadership
challenges to, 171
and collaboration, 107
competencies in, 170, 170b, 171
definition of, 168
in electronic health record implementation, 265
in evidence-based practice, 91
in groups, 127, 128, 130–132
in nursing, 170–172
in organizational culture, 172–173
in organizational structure, 159, 165
in professionalism, 9
in quality, 221–222
styles of, 130, 169–170
theories of, 168–169, 169t
Leading health indicators, in Healthy People, 240, 240b
Leapfrog group, 226
Learning. See also Teaching; Teaching-learning process
categories of, 12
definition of, 12, 144
as empowerment, 12
environment in, 145
in King’s Conceptual System, 36
planning for, 149–150
readiness for, 146–147
resources for, 14–15
thriving in, 15
Learning organization, 222
Learning styles, 13–14
cognitive, 145–146
in teaching strategies, 150–151
Learning theories. See Teaching-learning process
Legislative branch, 292
Legislative process, 296b, 296f
Legitimate power, 175
Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and Universality, 45–47,
46b, 73
Lesson plans, 149
Letting Go stage of transition, 189, 189b
Levine’s Conservation Model, 37–38, 38b
Lewin, Kurt, 183–184
Librarians, as learning resources, 14–15
Licensing, 321
Life expectancy, 243t
Likelihood of action, in health-belief model, 62
Limited theories, 22
Lines of resistance, in Neuman’s Systems Model, 39
Lingering presence, in Parse’s Theory of 
Humanbecoming, 49
Literacy, in readiness to learn, 146
Literature
in empirical research, 83
in qualitative research, 84–85
in research critique, 88
Living wills, 205–206
Lobbying, 298–299
Local government, 293
Longevity, factors in, 246
Loudmouth role, 133
Love, in hierarchy of needs, 24–25, 24f
Low-income groups, in Healthy People, 239
M
Magico-religious view, 68
Magnet status, 318
Maintenance, in Transtheoretical Approach, 187–189, 188t
Malpractice, 308–309
Managed care
nursing informatics careers in, 271
payment for, 280
Management
definition of, 166
14 Points for Management, 217–219, 217b
in nursing, 168
in organizational culture, 173
in organizational structure, 159, 165
theories of, 166–168
Management by objectives (MBO), 167–168
Managers
roles of, 166–167
skills of, 168
Market forces, in healthcare, 308
Index     ●
347

Market justice, 309
Maslow’s theory of human motivation, 23–25, 24f, 146, 167
Matrix organizational structure, 163–165, 164f
Maturity, in critical thinking, 117
Meaning
management of, 170
in Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming, 48–49
in verbal communication, 101
Measurement programs, for quality improvement, 228–231
Medicaid, 282t, 283
Medical errors
miscommunication in, 106
prevalence of, 310
reports on, 10–11, 316
Medical home, 309
Medical savings account (MSA), 280–281
Medicare, 281–283, 281t
Member participation, in effective groups, 128
Membership, in effective groups, 127
Men’s Healing from Childhood Maltreatment, 52
Mental health, as health indicator, 240–241
Message, in communication models, 98
Metacommunication, 100–101
Metaparadigm
definition of, 3
in structural hierarchy of contemporary nursing, 20–21, 20f
Middle-range theories, 49–52, 50t–52t
definition of, 22, 49
Orlando’s Theory of the Deliberative Nursing Process, 49–50
Peplau’s Theory of Interpersonal Relations, 49
in structural hierarchy of contemporary nursing, 20–21, 20f
Transitions Theory, 52
Watson’s Theory of Human Caring, 49–50
Minimal risk, in research, 81
Minority health, 247–249
Mission
in community nursing, 252
in organizational culture, 173–174
of organizations, 165
Mixed organizational structures, 165
Model, definition of, 20
Model for Cultural Competence, 71, 72f
Modifying factors, in health-belief model, 62
Monitoring, as goal of accreditation, 221–222
Monopolizer role, 133
Moral development theory, 26–28, 27t
Motivation
Maslow’s theory of, 23–25, 24f, 146, 167
in readiness to learn, 146–147
Motivational management theories, 167
Moving
change agents in, 191, 192t
in Diffusion of Innovations model, 187
in Havelock’s theory of change, 186
in Lewin’s theory of change, 184
in Lippitt’s model of change, 185
in organizational change, 195–196
in Transtheoretical Approach, 189
MSA (medical savings account), 280–281
Multiple intelligences theory, 143, 143t, 146
Mutual goal setting, in King’s Conceptual System, 37
Mutual Recognition Compact, 268
Myers-Briggs Inventory, 14b, 145–146
N
NANDA-I taxonomy, 265
Narrative, in Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding Consciousness,
47–48
National Center for Nursing Research (NCNR), 80
National Council of State Boards of Nursing, 6, 7t
National Database of Nursing Quality Indicators (NDNQI), 
217, 268
National Hospital Quality Measures, 216, 217b
National Institute of Nursing Research (NINR), 80
National League for Nursing (NLN), characteristics of, 6, 7t
National Patient Safety Goals, 216
National Quality Forum (NQF), 226
NCNR (National Center for Nursing Research), 80
NDNQI (National Database of Nursing Quality Indicators), 217
Negotiation, in nursing, 175–176
Neuman’s Systems Model, 38–39, 39b
Neutral Zone stage of transition, 189, 189b
New Beginning stage of transition, 189, 189b
Newly insured persons, 306
Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding Consciousness, 47–48, 47b
Newtonian physics, 29
NI. See Nursing informatics (NI)
NIC (Nursing Interventions Classification), 265–266, 332–337
Nightingale, Florence, 79, 170
NINR (National Institute of Nursing Research), 80
NLN (National League for Nursing), characteristics of, 6, 7t
NMMDS (Nursing Management Minimum Data Set), 265–266
NOC (Nursing Outcomes Classification), 265–266, 337–340
Noncompliance, learning and, 146
Nonfunctional group roles, 133
Nonmaleficence, definition of, 202
Nonverbal communication, 102–104
Normal line of defense, in Neuman’s Systems Model, 39
Normative-reeducative change philosophies, 183, 193
Norming stage, in group development, 129–130
NQF (National Quality Forum), 226
Nurse educators, 323
Nurse in Washington Internship (NWI), 305
Nurse practice acts, 296–298, 297b
Nurse-patient relationship
authority in, 4
collaboration in, 10
Nursing
as boundary discipline, 115
changing workforce in, 306–307
characteristics of profession, 3–6
collaboration in, 318–321, 320b
competence in, 321–322
conceptual models of, 34–44
critical thinking in, 114–118, 119–120, 120b, 121b–122b
definition of, 34
delegation in, 176–178, 177b
evolving roles in, 307
future of, 317–318, 317t
global health and, 305
health policy and, 305–306
involvement in, 323–324
leadership in, 170–172
in metaparadigm of nursing, 3–4
negotiation in, 175–176
patient safety risk factors in, 316
philosophy of. see Philosophy of nursing
political influence of, 292, 298–299, 305–306
professionalism in, 6–11
in quality care, 215
staffing adequacy in, 317–318
Nursing agency, in Orem’s Self-Care Framework, 40
Nursing associations, practice standards of, 4
Nursing Diagnostic and Treatment Process, 35, 35b
Nursing informatics (NI)
careers in, 270–271
data transformation in, 260–261
definition of, 259
health information management systems in, 261–270
overview of, 259–260
as specialty, 268–270
Nursing Interventions Classification (NIC), 265–266, 332–337
Nursing management, 168
Nursing Management Minimum Data Set (NMMDS), 265–266
Nursing Outcomes Classification (NOC), 265–266, 337–340
Nursing Process Format, 39, 39b
Nursing shortage, 306–307
Nursing theory
advantages of using, 52–53
challenges to, 29
definition of, 45
function of, 45
grand theories, 45–49
impact on practice, 29–30
King’s Theory of Goal Attainment, 73
348
●
Index

Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and Universality, 
45–47, 46b
levels of, 21–22, 21b
middle-range, 49–52
Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding Consciousness, 
47–48, 47b
Orlando’s Theory of the Deliberative Nursing Process, 49–50
paradigm shift in, 29
Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming, 48–49, 49b
Peplau’s Theory of Interpersonal Relations, 49
risks of using, 53
selecting, 54
situation-specific, 52
Transitions Theory, 52
using, 54
Watson’s Theory of Human Caring, 49–50
Nurturance, in Johnson’s Behavioral System Model, 35
O
Obama Care. See Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA)
Object permanence, in cognitive development, 26
Open-ended questions, 105
Openness
in Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human Beings, 42
in systems, 28
Operant conditioning, 140
Operational definitions, in research critique, 88
Operational environment, in Levine’s Conservation Model, 37
Opinion giver/seeker role, 132, 132t
Option rights, 205–206
Orem’s Self-Care Framework, 39–41, 40b
Organ procurement/donation, ethical decisions about, 207
Organic organizational structures, 161–165
Organization(s)
change in, 194–198
characteristics of, 158
communication channels in, 174
definition of, 158
functions of, 165–166
goal of, 165–166
hierarchical structure of, 158–160
intricacies of, 158
in King’s Conceptual System, 36
mission of, 165
professional. see also Professional organizations
in quality, 221–222
suggestions for change, 196–198
as system, 158–160, 159t
Organizational culture, 172
Organizational groups, 134–135
Organizational structures, 160–165
bureaucratic, 160–161, 160f, 161f, 162f
definition of, 160
organic, 161–165
Organizing, in nursing management, 168
Orlando’s Theory of the Deliberative Nursing 
Process, 49–50
Outcome(s)
critical thinking about, 115
documenting, 271
formalized measures of, 215
in nursing informatics, 269
in Nursing Process Format, 39
professional focus on, 10–11
in Synergy Model, 44
in teaching-learning process, 139, 152–153
Outcome indicators, 229
Output, in systems, 28, 28f
P
PAC (political action committees), 299
Pacing
in critical thinking, 119–120
in verbal communication, 101–102
Pandimensionality, in Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human 
Beings, 42
Paradigm
definition of, 3
metaparadigm, 3
purposes of, 20
Pareto diagrams, 228, 230f
Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming, 48–49, 49b
Participation
in effective groups, 128
in organizational culture, 173
Pathological aging, 244
Patient(s)
collaboration with, 10
in community nursing, 252
evaluating as learners, 152–153
Patient characteristics
in health communication model, 99–100
in Synergy Model, 44
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), 278, 284–286, 285t,
306, 309
Patient safety
focus on, 237
in professionalism, 10–11
Patient system, in organizational change, 194
Pattern
in gestalt theory, 140
in Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding 
Consciousness, 47
in Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human Beings, 42
Pattern recognition, in Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding
Consciousness, 47–48
Payers, for healthcare, 280
Peer review, in professionalism, 10
Peplau’s Theory of Interpersonal Relations, 49
Perception, in King’s Conceptual System, 36, 37
Perceptual environment, in Levine’s Conservation Model, 37
Performing stage, in group development, 130
Persistent vegetative state, ethical decisions about, 206
Personal health information (PHI), in research, 81–82
Personal health traditions, 70–71
Personal integrity, conservation of, 38
Personal space, in King’s Conceptual System, 36
Personal systems, in King’s Conceptual System, 36
Personality development theory, 25–26, 26f
Persuasion, in Diffusion of Innovations model, 187
Pew Health Professions Commission, 315
Phenomenology, 60
Phenomenon of interest, in Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding
Consciousness, 47
Philosophies
in community nursing, 252
in structural hierarchy of contemporary nursing, 
20–21, 20f
Philosophy of nursing, 15–16, 324
Physical appearance, in nonverbal communication, 104
Physical health, of aging adults, 244–245
Physical mode, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 43
Physiologic needs, in hierarchy of needs, 24, 24f
Physiological mode, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 43
Physiological variable, in Neuman’s Systems 
Model, 38
Planned change
definition of, 183
seven stages of, 184–185, 184f
Planning
critical thinking in, 120, 120b
in delegation, 177
in nursing informatics, 269
in nursing management, 168
in teaching-learning process, 139
Point-of-service (POS) plans, 280
Political action committees (PAC), 299
Politics
efficacy in, 299–301, 301b
nurses in, 292, 298–299, 305–306
Population
aging of, 242–247
in empirical research, 83
in organizational change, 195
Index     ●
349

Population health, definition of, 237
Postconventional morality, moral development theory, 26, 27t
Power
bases of, 175
definition of, 175
in effective groups, 128
in King’s Conceptual System, 36
Power components, in Orem’s Self-Care Framework, 40
Power-coercive change philosophies, 193
PPS (prospective payment systems), 280
Practice indicators, 229–230
Practice standards. See also American Nurses Association (ANA)
standards
on collaboration, 10
community sanction and, 4
in education, 5
on holistic nursing, 67
Preceptorships, 318
Precontemplation, in Transtheoretical Approach, 187–189, 188t
Preconventional morality, moral development theory, 26, 27t
Preferred provider organization (PPO), 280
Pregroup phase, 127
Preoperational thought stages of cognitive development, 26
Prescription drugs, in healthcare costs, 279
Prescriptive operations, in Professional-Technological Operations of
Nursing, 40b, 41
Presentations, in teaching, 151, 152b
Preventative services, 237–239, 238t
Prevention
in health indicators, 240
levels of, 59–60
in Nursing Process Format, 39
Price, of healthcare, 280
Primary prevention
definition of, 59
in Nursing Process Format, 39
Principles, applying in critical thinking, 119
Priorities, in community nursing, 252
Privacy
definition of, 202
electronic health record and, 264–265
in research, 81–82
Privatization, of healthcare, 307–308
Probing, 106, 106b
Problem
in empirical research, 83
in nursing informatics, 269
in qualitative research, 84
in research critique, 88
Procedural technician role, 132, 132t
Process description tools, 227–228
Process indicators, 229
Process teams, in quality improvement, 226–227
Product organizational structure, 162–163, 163f
Productivity, in management theory, 166
Profession, characteristics of, 3–6
Professional culture, in nursing profession paradigm, 5–6
Professional development, in professional culture, 6
Professional groups, focus of, 127
Professional organizations
involvement in, 300
list of, 329–331
for nursing informatics, 269–270
political power of, 299
in professional culture, 6, 7t
Professional practice evaluation, in professionalism, 10
Professionalism
continuing education in, 11–13
involvement in, 323–324
in nursing, 6–11
philosophy of nursing in, 15–16
time management in, 13–14
Professional-Technological Operations of Nursing, 40–41, 40b
Progressive differentiation, in systems, 28
Proposition, definition of, 21
Prospective payment systems (PPS), 280
Protection, in Johnson’s Behavioral System Model, 35
Provider systems, in organizational change, 166
Proxemics, in nonverbal communication, 102
Psychological variable, in Neuman’s Systems Model, 38
Psychomotor domain, 145, 148–149, 153
Psychomotor learning, 12
Psychomotor skills demonstrations, 141, 153
Public health
community nursing in, 252
mission of, 237
Public-private model of healthcare, 307–308
Purnell Model for Cultural Competence, 71, 72f
Purpose
in effective groups, 127
in empirical research, 83
in qualitative research, 84
Q
QSEN (Quality and Safety Education for Nurses), 217
Qualitative research, 84–85, 85t
Quality
clinical care as measure of, 215
definition of, 215
evaluation in, 221–222
historical perspectives on, 215–217
monitoring in, 221–222
standardized measures of, 216
as strategy, 222
theoretical models for, 217–222
transformation model for, 217–219, 217b
Quality and Safety Education for Nurses (QSEN), 217
Quality assurance
characteristics of, 223t
transitioning to Continuous Quality Improvement, 222–223
Quality chasm, 315–317
Quality control, steps in, 220, 220b
Quality healthcare, rules for, 10, 11b
Quality improvement
characteristics of, 223t
competency for, 217
continuous, 222–224
data collection in, 228, 229f
measurement programs for, 228–231
process description tools for, 227–228
process teams in, 226–227
steps in, 220–221, 220b
Quality of practice, in professionalism, 9
Quality planning
as cost-effective, 216
steps in, 219–220, 220b
Quantum theory, 29
Questions, in therapeutic communication, 105
R
Race, in health perceptions, 67–71
Reaction, in King’s Conceptual System, 37
Readiness, in learning, 146–147
Receiver, in communication models, 98
Recognition seeker role, 133
Recommendations, in empirical research, 84
Recorder role, 132, 133t
Reflection
in active listening, 104, 105
in critical thinking, 118
in nursing practice, 115
Refreezing, 184
change agents in, 191–193, 192t
in Diffusion of Innovations model, 187
in Havelock’s theory of change, 186
in Lewin’s theory of change, 184
in Lippitt’s model of change, 185
in organizational change, 196
in Transtheoretical Approach, 189
Regionalization, in community hospitals, 166
Regulator coping subsystem, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 42
Regulatory agencies, in quality assurance, 231
Regulatory operations, in Professional-Technological Operations of
Nursing, 40b, 41
350
●
Index

Reimbursement
for healthcare, 280, 283–284
in rural healthcare, 251
Relationships
in health communication model, 99–100
in organizational culture, 173
Relevance, in verbal communication, 101–102
Research
approval for, 82
choosing method, 85–86
critiquing, 87–90, 87b
empirical, 83–84, 85t
ethical considerations in, 80–83, 81b
evolution of, 79–80
guidelines for, 82–83, 86
implementation of, 90
legal considerations in, 80–83
objective evaluation of, 87–90
process of, 83–86
in professionalism, 9
qualitative, 84–85, 85t
significance of, 80
subjective evaluation of, 89–90
theory in, 21b
Research design, in research critique, 88
Research reports, components of, 87–88, 87b
Residencies, 318
Residential arrangements, of aging adults, 244
Residual stimuli, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 42
Resonancy, in Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human 
Beings, 42
Resource utilization, in professionalism, 10
Resources
definition of, 14
for learning, 14–15
in organizational structure, 159
for process teams, 227
Respect, in collaboration, 107
Respite care, 246
Responsibility, delegation of, 176–178
Restatement, in active listening, 104, 105
Restraining forces
in Lewin’s theory of change, 183, 184
in organizational change, 196
Review, in continuing education, 13
RHCs (rural health clinics), 250–251
Rhythmicity, in Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming, 
48–49
Right, definition of, 202
Risk(s), in aging adults, 245–246
Risk management, 223, 223t
Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human Beings, 42, 42b
Role(s)
competing, 11–12, 12b
in cultural care, 71–73
definition of, 11
evolving, 307
functional, 132–133, 132t, 133t
of group leaders, 130–132
in groups, 127
in King’s Conceptual System, 36
nonfunctional, 133
Role function mode, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 43
Room arrangement, for effective groups, 127
Root cause analysis, 225–226
Roy’s Adaptation Model, 42–44, 44b
Rule deontology, 203
Rule utilitarianism, 203
Rural health, 249–250
Rural health clinics (RHCs), 250–251
S
Safety
culture of, 224–226
in hierarchy of needs, 24, 24f
initiatives for, 225–226
medical errors, 10–11, 106, 310
recommendations for, 224, 316–317, 316b
in research, 81–82
risk factors in nursing, 316
Sample
in empirical research, 83–84
in research critique, 88–89
SBAR (Situation-Background-Assessment-Recommendation), 107–108
Scapegoating, 131
Schema, in cognitive development, 26
Scientific view, 68
Secondary prevention
definition of, 59–60
in Nursing Process Format, 39
Self
in King’s Conceptual System, 36
management of, 170
Self-actualization, in hierarchy of needs, 24f, 25
Self-care, in Orem’s Self-Care Framework, 39
Self-care agency, in Orem’s Self-Care Framework, 40
Self-care deficit, in Orem’s Self-Care Framework, 40
Self-Care Framework, 39–41, 40b
Self-concept mode, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 43
Self-determination
definition of, 202
in research, 81
Self-efficacy
in mastery, 149
in social cognitive theory, 141
Self-regulation, in professionalism, 8, 10
Sensorimotor stages of cognitive development, 26, 27t
Sentinel events, 225, 225b
Sequencing, in critical thinking, 119–120
Set, in Johnson’s Behavioral System Model, 35
Sexual subsystem, in Johnson’s Behavioral System Model, 35
Sexually transmitted diseases, as health indicator, 240
Shared goals, of organizations, 165
Sigma Theta Tau, 6, 7t, 79, 80
Silence, in therapeutic communication, 105
Silent immersion, in Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming, 49
Situational Approach, 169t
Situation-Background-Assessment-Recommendation (SBAR), 107–108
Situation-specific theories, 52
Skills
building, 12–13
in critical thinking, 117
definition of, 12
of group leaders, 130–132, 131b
of leaders, 170
of managers, 168
mastery of, 149
in negotiation, 175–176
Skills and Abilities Approach, 169t
Skinner, B. F., 140
SMCR (source-message-channel-receiver) model, 98–99
SNOMED CT (Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine—Clinical
Terms), 265
Social cognitive theory, 141
Social comment, 106, 106b
Social determinants of health, 248, 307
Social integrity, conservation of, 38
Social justice, 308
Social systems
groups as, 126
in King’s Conceptual System, 36
Socialized medicine, 309
Societal needs, of aging adults, 246–247
Sociocultural variable, in Neuman’s Systems Model, 38
Software vendors, nursing informatics careers in, 270
Source, in communication models, 98
Source-message-channel-receiver (SMCR) model, 98–99
Special populations, in Healthy People, 239
Special-cause variation, 230
Specialists, change agents as, 185
Specialties
attributes of, 269b
nursing informatics as, 268–270
philosophies of nursing and, 15
practice standards for, 4
Index     ●
351

professional organizations for, 6
regionalization of, 166
roles in, 11
Spector’s Health Traditions Model, 70–71
Spiritual variable, in Neuman’s Systems Model, 38
Stabilizer subsystem control process, in Roy’s Adaptation 
Model, 43
Staffing, adequacy of, 317–318
Standard setter role, 132, 133t
Standardized nursing language, 265–266
Standards of care, 204
State boards, nurse practice under, 297–298
State government, 293
State lines, practicing across, 268
Statistics, in research critique, 88–89
Status, in King’s Conceptual System, 36
Statutory law, 293–296
Stereotyping, 106, 106b
Stimulation, in Johnson’s Behavioral System 
Model, 35
Stimuli assessment, in Adaptation Model Nursing 
Process, 43
Storming stage, in group development, 129–130
Stress, in King’s Conceptual System, 36
Structural integrity, conservation of, 38
Structure, of organizations, 158–160
Structure indicators, 229
Structured communication tools, 107–109
Study groups, 14
Subcultures, 69–70
Substance abuse, as health indicator, 240
Successful aging, 244
Summarizer role, 132, 132t
Supervision, in delegation, 177
Suppliers, in organizational change, 195
Support systems, in continuing education, 13
Surveillance, in delegation, 177
Surveys, in quality improvement, 228
Synergy Model, 44
System(s), organizations as, 158–160, 159t
System goals, of organizations, 166
Systematic theory, as characteristic of profession, 3–4
Systems Model, 38–39, 39b
Systems theory
in nursing theory, 28–29, 28f
organizations and, 159t
Systems vendors, nursing informatics careers in, 270
T
Tall organizational structures, 162f, 165
Task, in delegation, 177
Taxonomies, 265–266
Taylor, Frederick, 166
Teaching. See also Learning
behavioral objectives in, 147–149
definition of, 144
strategies and methods, 150–152, 151t, 152t
Teaching-learning process
adult learners, 141–142
domains in, 145
nursing process applied to, 139
principles of, 143–145
theories of, 139–143, 139b
TeamSTEPPS, 106–107
Technical skills, of leaders, 170
Technology
changes in, 324
in healthcare costs, 278–279
in organizational communication, 174
in organizational structure, 159
Telecommunication, in rural healthcare, 251
Telehealth, 268
Teleology, in systems, 28, 159
Tension reliever role, 132, 133t
Terminology
in health information management systems, 265
in qualitative research, 85
Tertiary prevention
definition of, 60
in Nursing Process Format, 39
Theoretical framework, in empirical research, 83
Theory. See also Teaching-learning process
analysis of, 22–23
classifying by scope, 22
components of, 21
critical reflection on, 22
definition of, 3, 20
describing, 22–23
evaluation of, 22–23
function of, 20–21
outside nursing, 23–29, 24f, 26f, 27t
in qualitative research, 85
in structural hierarchy of contemporary nursing, 
20–21, 20f
Theory of Culture Care Diversity and Universality, 
45–47, 46b, 73
Theory of Goal Attainment, 73
Theory of Health as Expanding Consciousness, 47–48, 47b
Theory of Human Caring, 49–50
Theory of human motivation, 23–25, 24f
Theory of Humanbecoming, 48–49, 49b
Theory of Interpersonal Relations, 49
Theory of the Deliberative Nursing Process, 49–50
Theory X, 167
Theory Y, 167
Theory Z, 167
Therapeutic communication, 104–106, 104b
Therapeutic groups, focus of, 127
Therapeutic self-care demand, in Orem’s Self-Care 
Framework, 40
3 Ds, 307
Time management, in learning, 13–14, 13b
Timeline
for continuing education, 12–13
in King’s Conceptual System, 36
Timing, in verbal communication, 101–102
Title protection, 297
Tobacco use, as health indicator, 240
Topical areas, of Healthy People, 241
Total quality management (TQM), 222
Touching, in nonverbal communication, 103
Trait Approach, 169t
Transaction
in health communication model, 100
in King’s Conceptual System, 36, 37
Transcendence, in Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming, 
48–49
Transcription, in Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding
Consciousness, 47
Transcultural Assessment Model, 70, 70b
Transformation theory, 142–143
Transformational Leadership Approach, 169t
Transitions, 189–190
Transitions Theory, 52
Translational research, 87
Transtheoretical Approach, 187–189, 188t
Triangulation, 85
Trophicognosis, 38, 38b
True presence, in Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming, 49
Trust, management of, 170
Trustworthiness, in negotiation, 176
Tuskegee syphilis study, 81, 81b
U
Understanding, in behavioral objectives, 148
Unfreezing
assessment in, 196–197
change agents in, 190–191, 192t
in Diffusion of Innovations model, 187
in Havelock’s theory of change, 186
in Lewin’s theory of change, 183–184
in Lippitt’s model of change, 184–185
in organizational change, 195
in Transtheoretical Approach, 189
352
●
Index

United States
economy of, 305
healthcare expenditures per capita in, 277–278, 277f, 278t
privatization of healthcare in, 307–309
Urbanized areas, 249–250
Usual aging, 244
Utilitarianism, 203
V
Values
communicating, 174
in critical thinking, 119
of organizations, 158
Variables
definition of, 21
in empirical research, 83
in research critique, 88–89
Variation, understanding, 230–231
Veracity, definition of, 202
Verbal communication, 101–102
Violence, as health indicator, 241
Vision
in negotiation, 176
sharing, 171
Visual learning style, 14, 146
Vocabulary, in verbal communication, 101
Voice of agency, 300
Voluntary mutual patterning, in Health Patterning Practice 
Method, 42
W
Watson’s Theory of Human Caring, 49–50
Welfare, in research, 81–82
Wellness, high-level, 60–61, 61f
Wholeness, in systems, 28
Willowbrook hepatitis study, 81, 81b
Work groups, focus of, 127
Work redesign, 231
Workforce, global nature of, 305
Workforce diversity, 307
Workplace, policy changes in, 300
Worldview
definition of, 20
in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and 
Universality, 45
Index     ●
353


Preface
The nursing profession has undergone major changes in
the past decades, and the pace of change seems to acceler-
ate daily. We are redefining practice and basing this prac-
tice on evidence of efficacy. We have moved from a
position of defending nursing as a profession to our cur-
rent pivotal role in healthcare. Focusing on human beings
in their respective environments with unique healthcare
needs that are addressed through nursing care is vitally im-
portant with our rapidly expanding knowledge base and
the dynamic changes continually occurring in healthcare.
In essence, our quest in our nursing roles is to expand
knowledge, become involved within the profession and in
interdisciplinary healthcare, utilize evidence-based practice
and expanding technologies, and broaden the vision of
professional practice.
This book is directed to the RN student returning to
school. The intent is to provide you, the practicing RN,
with professional concepts to advance your practice. These
concepts build on your prior nursing education, and their
application will greatly enhance your professional practice
and growth. The aim is to engage you intellectually in an
ongoing professional dialogue and journey with your
peers, colleagues, and instructors; broaden your profes-
sional development; and build on your pre-existing knowl-
edge and experiences. You are challenged to delve further
into professional education and conceptual practice. The
book is written for the adult learner with the characteristics
of self-direction, prior experiences, applicability to prac-
tice, and motivation to meet the challenge to expand his
or her knowledge base.
The sixth edition has been updated and is divided into
three sections. As with the previous editions, each chapter
contains chapter objectives, key terms, key points, chapter
exercises to assist in meeting each of the chapter objec-
tives, references, online references, and bibliographical
sources. Interactive exercises have been updated and are
provided on an Intranet site to truly engage the adult
learner progressing through the content. The Intranet site
also houses a clinical scenario bank, glossary of terms, 
important Internet links, discussion sections, and online
lessons in presentation graphics with interactive chal-
lenges and Web links.
In Section I, the professional bases for nursing  practice
are introduced. This discussion is the start of Advancing
Your Practice. Chapter 1 focuses on the characteristics of
nursing as a profession and as a unique professional disci-
pline. A focus on the core competencies for all healthcare
professionals challenges both professional and interdisci-
plinary practice. As a first step in your educational pursuit,
you are challenged to review your learner characteristics
to enhance your educational experience. Next, you focus
on your concept of the profession via an analysis of your
personal perspectives of professional nursing as a philoso-
phy statement.
From a view of professional practice, Section I contin-
ues with a focus on theory as the basis for practice in 
Chapter 2. Dr. Jacqueline Fawcett addresses how unique
nursing knowledge has evolved and been applied to individ-
uals, families, and groups in Chapter 3. A discussion of
health, illness, and holism in Chapter 4 delves further into
models of health and illness with a focus on cultural and
literacy considerations. Section I concludes with a review
of the research process and the necessity for the application
of evidence-based practice in Chapter 5. Use of known and
evolving knowledge replaces tradition as healthcare focuses
on guidelines and documented evidence for efficacy of care.
Section II examines selected critical abilities in profes-
sional nursing practice. The first of these critical components
addresses communication skills, as vital to professional prac-
tice and in constant need of refinement. The content is pre-
sented by Dr. Lynne Ornes in Chapter 6, with a discussion
of communication models, essential ingredients of effective
communication, nonverbal communication forms, and spe-
cific communication techniques, including communication
skills for interdisciplinary and interprofessional practice.
Along with effective communication, critical thinking is 
essential to professional nursing practice. In Chapter 7, 
Dr. Genevieve M. Bartol discusses aspects of critical thinking
in nursing, along with further development of critical think-
ing and analysis skills. Effective communication and critical
thinking are required in collaborative practice situations.
Chapter 8 focuses on working with groups, including the
characteristics and roles of groups and group leaders and the
skills needed for collaboration, coordination, negotiation,
and dealing with conflict and difficult people. The next crit-
ical component for professional practice is the teaching and
learning process. Included in Chapter 9 is a discussion of
learning theories and learning readiness, along with infor-
mation on writing behavioral objectives, teaching skills and
methods, and evaluating outcomes, while the Intranet lesson
focuses on helping patients locate reliable Web sources.
Leadership and management skills are essential in pro-
fessional practice, especially in organizational settings.
Chapter 10 looks at organizational characteristics and pre -
sents the skills needed for effectively managing and leading
in organizational settings, including a discussion of se-
lected theories and delegation principles. Organizations
continue to redefine themselves, so effectively dealing with
change is critical. Chapter 11 includes theories on change
and innovation, along with the characteristics of change
agents for change in individuals, families, groups, and or-
ganizations. Section II concludes with Chapter 12, which
examines ethical principles and making ethical decisions
focusing on informed consent, advanced directives, the
persistive vegetative state, organ procurement and dona-
tion, genomics, and impaired practice. 
Section III starts with a focus on quality and safety in
Chapter 13 and the national initiatives that have driven
this process. Theoretical models for quality are discussed,
along with strategies for continuous quality improvement,
safety, and efficacy in the healthcare environment. In
Chapter 14, the focus is on population health. The progress
v

of the Healthy People initiatives in the United States is pre-
sented, along with the current focus on social determinants
of health. Special populations that are highlighted include
the aging population, minorities, and those living in rural
areas. In Chapter 15, we look at one of the core competen-
cies for healthcare professionals, the use of informatics.
Health information systems in the clinical setting are dis-
cussed, along with the implementation of the electronic
health record. Informatics competencies for nurses, infor-
matics nurses, and informatics specialists are described in
this evolving specialty in the discipline. 
Quality care includes a focus on healthcare economics
and policy, as presented in Chapter 16. Policy and the as-
sociated costs are changing  dramatically as we focus on safe,
effective, and equitable care for individuals and groups.
Stemming from a focus on healthcare policy are the political
advocacy skills needed by the politically active nurse in
Chapter 17. These skills include both understanding the
legislative process and promoting policy improvements for
the health of individuals and groups.
We conclude with a look at the reality of the healthcare
issues addressed throughout the book and the challenges to
be addressed by nursing professionals in the future. In
Chapter 18, Sister Rosemary Donley addresses healthcare
reform and the issues debated in both legislative and pro-
fessional areas that have major implications for the health-
care of the nation and global communities, with initiatives
for the profession. The final chapter discusses challenges
for your professional future in terms of expanding your 
vision and planning for the future. Topics include a look
at the practice environment and the call for change, greater
collaboration, and demonstration of competence. You will
be challenged to take the lead and demonstrate involve-
ment in the profession for improved care and healthcare
initiatives that meet the needs of the population, consid-
ering economics, quality initiatives, and demonstration of
effective outcomes. 
This book is intended to advance your professional
practice and continued professional development through
further education. Your personal characteristics of self-
motivation, a thirst for information, and commitment to
your patients and the profession will be enhanced as you
develop a more conceptual and visionary approach to
professional nursing practice.
—Rose Kearney-Nunnery
vi
●
Preface

Contributors
Genevieve M. Bartol, RN, EdD 
Independent Mental Health Care Professional
Greensboro, North Carolina
Chapter 7 Contributor
Sister Rosemary Donley, PhD, APRN, BC,
FAAN
Professor, Jacques Laval Endowed Chair for 
Justice for Vulnerable Populations
Duquesne University
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Chapter 18 Contributor
Francoise Dunefsky, MS, RN, NEA-BC
President and CEO, Gateway Community 
Industries, Inc. 
Port Ewen, New York
Chapter 13 Contributor
Jacqueline Fawcett, PhD, FAAN
University of Massachusetts at Boston
Boston, Massachusetts
Chapter 3 Contributor
William A. Himmelsbach, MPH, FACHE
Health Care CEO (Retired) 
Okatie, South Carolina
Chapter 16 Contributor
Lynne Ornes, PhD, MS, RN
University of South Carolina Beaufort
Bluffton, South Carolina
Chapter 6 contributor
vii

Reviewers
Pier A. Broadnax, PhD, RN
University of the District of Columbia
Washington, District of Columbia
Dawn M. Goodolf, PhD, RN
Moravian College 
Bethlehem, Pennsylvania
Sandy Halford, MSN, RN
East Tennessee State University
Johnson City, Tennessee
April D. Matthia, PhD, RN, CNE
University of North Carolina Wilmington
Wilmington, North Carolina
Beth Norton, DNP, RN, CNE
Northwest Florida State College
Niceville, Florida
Jeanne Tucker, RN, MSN, HSAD, CHES
Patty Hanks Shelton School of Nursing
Abilene, Texas
ix

Acknowledgments
Numerous people have been a large part of this continuing
process. Friends and colleagues have more than tolerated
my preoccupation with the profession. My respect is ex-
tended to all of my professional colleagues across the coun-
try for the opportunities they provided for reflection,
discussion, and debate. I extend particular thanks to all of
the contributors, past and present, who have shared their
expertise and insights. Joanne DaCunha merits particular
credit for the completion of this project and all prior edi-
tions through her encouragement, assistance, and belief in
the potential for our profession. And the ongoing efforts
of Echo K. Gerhart from F.A. Davis have been invaluable.
My ongoing appreciation continues for my late husband,
Jimmie E. Nunnery, for his support and encouragement
with prior editions, and much sage advice from his political
background that contributed to the chapter on politics.
As a final note, I cannot describe the endless encour-
agement from my professional colleagues, friends, and
students, all of whom added to this challenge for the nurs-
ing profession to focus on change in the future. And to
all who give to the consumers of nursing care, my endless
and enduring respect.
—Rose Kearney-Nunnery
xi

Contents
SECTION I
PROFESSIONAL BASES FOR PRACTICE
1. Your Professional Identity  2
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
2. Theory as the Basis for Practice  19
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
3. Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing
Knowledge  33
Jacqueline Fawcett, PhD, FAAN
4. Health, Illness, and Holism  58
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
5. Evidence-Based Practice  78
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
SECTION II
CRITICAL ABILITIES IN PROFESSIONAL
NURSING PRACTICE
6. Effective Communication  97
Lynne Ornes, PhD, RN
7. Critical Thinking  113
Genevieve M. Bartol, RN, EdD
8. Working with Groups  125
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
9. The Teaching-Learning Process  138
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
10. Managing and Leading in the 
Organization  157
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
11. Change and Innovation  182
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
12. Professional Ethics  201
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
SECTION III
QUALITY CARE FOR INDIVIDUALS,
FAMILIES, AND GROUPS
13. Quality and Safety in Healthcare  214
Francoise Dunefsky, MS, RN, NEA-BC
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
14. Population Health  236
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
15. Informatics and Documenting 
Outcomes  258
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
16. Economics and Healthcare Policy  276
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
William Himmelsbach, MPH, FACHE
17. The Politically Active Nurse: 
An Imperative  291
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
18. Healthcare Reform and Global 
Issues  304
Sister Rosemary Donley, PhD, APRN, BC, FAAN
19. Expanding the Vision  314
Rose Kearney-Nunnery, PhD, RN
APPENDIX A
Professional Nursing Organizations  329
APPENDIX B
Nursing Interventions Classification (NIC) 
and Nursing Outcomes Classifications (NOC)
Systems  332
Index  341
xiii

Your Professional
Identity
2
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Relate the attributes of a profession to professional nursing practice.
2. Relate the core competencies for health professionals to professional nursing practice.
3. Describe the consumers of professional nursing practice.
4. Discuss responsibility and accountability in professional nursing practice.
5. Discuss the formal and informal educational expectations for professional nursing practice, including
essential curricular elements.
6. Consider personal learning attributes, including learning style, time management, and appropriate use
of resources.
7. Develop a personal philosophy of professional nursing.
Theory
Paradigm
Metaparadigm
Human Beings
Environment
Health
Nursing
Authority
Community Sanction
Code of Ethics
Professional Culture
Professional Development
Professional Organizations
Ethics
Educational Background
Core Competencies
Evidence-Based Practice and
Research
Quality of Practice
Communication
Leadership
Collaboration
Professional Practice 
Evaluation
Self-Regulation
Resource Utilization
Environmental Health
Roles
Learning
Knowledge
Skill
Ability
Learning Style
Resources
Philosophy
1
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
The past cannot be changed.
The future is yet in your power.
Mary Pickford, 1893–1979
Key Terms

As a registered nurse (RN) student pursuing an advanced
degree in nursing, you must reevaluate personal and 
collegial perspectives on what truly constitutes professional
practice. You are at a gateway for advancing your practice
and building a professional commitment. To advance in
your professional career, you must broaden and build on
your knowledge base. This involves Mezirow’s (1991,
2000) theory of adult development and education as trans-
formative learning. This theory proposes that the adult
learns in one of four ways: 
●By elaborating existing frames of reference
●By learning new frames of reference
●By transforming points of view 
●By transforming habits of mind (Mezirow, 2000, p. 19)
Building on your knowledge base and your personal
frame of reference, you will be adding and developing
new perspectives. This process promotes critical analysis
and will allow you as the adult learner to transform your
views in new ways, and create new ways of approaching
the world and professional practice. Learning occurs
through reflection and interpretation to understand per-
ceptions of the self and the world. This transformation
provides an ongoing process in both personal and pro-
fessional development.
From the professional standpoint, armed with techni-
cal skills and expertise in the practice setting, we chart a
course into the conceptual components that embody and
expand professional practice. As a start, consider the con-
cepts that characterize both a profession in general and
professional nursing practice specifically.
CHARACTERISTICS OF A
PROFESSION
Greenwood (1957) developed a classic work on profes-
sionalism in which he proposed five characteristics of a
profession:
●Systematic Theory and Knowledge Base
●Authority
●Community Sanction
●Code of Ethics
●Professional Culture
These attributes were then applied to the social work
discipline to defend its professional status, but they are
applicable to any profession, including professional
nursing practice.
Systematic Theory 
and Knowledge Base
Each profession is guided by systematic theory on which its
knowledge base is built. The skills of professional nurses
are not trial and error but are supported by a fund of knowl-
edge that has been organized into an internally consistent
system that is our theoretical basis for practice. This system
includes theoretical foundations unique to the profession as
well as those adapted from other scientific disciplines.
Kerlinger and Lee (2000) define a theory as “a set 
of interrelated constructs (concepts), definitions, and
propositions that present a systematic view of phenom-
ena by specifying relations among variables, with the 
purpose of explaining and predicting the phenomena”
(p. 11). This theory base is also referred to as the paradigm
used by professionals or the practitioners in a particular
scientific community.
Kuhn (1970) has provided us with the well- established
definition of a paradigm as “universally recognized scien-
tific achievements that, for a time, provide model problems
and solutions to a community of practitioners” (p. vii). The
paradigm consists of the beliefs and the belief system shared
by members of a particular scientific community. When
the paradigm is no longer useful in explaining, practicing,
and conducting research in that community, the paradigm
shifts and a new belief structure is promoted, adopted, and
used by its members.
The paradigm is merely the phenomenon of  concern
that guides nursing practice. In Chapter 3, Fawcett 
proposes that conceptual model and paradigm are inter-
changeable terms relative to the phenomena of nursing.
Various nursing paradigms or conceptual models are cur-
rently used in practice. The selection is based on the belief
structure of the particular nursing community—for ex-
ample, care of people who are chronically ill and need
major assistance with health needs versus the wellness ini-
tiatives applicable in occupational settings. The paradigm
is determined by the type of nursing, because it meets the
health needs of a particular group in a certain environ-
ment or setting.
The metaparadigm is the overall concern of  nursing
common to each nursing model, whether a  conceptual
model/paradigm or formal theory. Fawcett (1995, 2000,
2005) and Fawcett and DeSanto-Madeya (2013) have de-
scribed the following four requirements for a discipline’s
metaparadigm: identity, inclusiveness, neutrality, and in-
ternationality. First, the metaparadigm must provide an
identity for the profession that is distinctly different from
that of others. Second, the metaparadigm must address all
phenomena of interest to the profession in a manageable
and understandable manner. Third, the metaparadigm must
be neutral, so that all smaller practice paradigms can fit under
the umbrella metaparadigm. And, finally, the metapara-
digm must be “global in scope and substance” (Fawcett
and DeSanto-Madeya, 2013, p. 4) to represent the pro-
fession across national, social, cultural, and ethnic bound-
aries. With that in mind, the metaparadigm of professional
nursing incorporates four concepts:
●Human beings represent the individual, family, 
group, or community receiving care, each with 
unique characteristics.
●The environment comprises the physical, social, 
cultural, spiritual, and emotional climate or setting(s)
in which the person lives, works, plays, and interacts.
●Health is the focus for the particular type of nursing
and specific care provisions needed.
●Nursing is defined by its activities, goals, and services.
In any area of professional nursing practice, we can eval-
uate who the person is as the patient or recipient of nursing
care, where the person and the caregiver are seen and in-
fluenced by others, why the person needs professional nurs-
ing care, and how the professional nurse functions as a
CHAPTER 1 Your Professional Identity     ●
3

provider or manager of care. These concepts are present
whether the patient is the frail elder in an acute care setting,
the expanding family in a birthing center, or an employee
group in an occupational setting. Investigate these concepts
specific to your own practice setting for an initial view of
the systematic theory and knowledge base of your disci -
plinary paradigm. Look at how the “patient” is defined 
in the environmental context. And consider the health 
actions: Are they perceived as emerging, maintaining, 
enhancing, or perhaps palliative? Now, how do the nursing
actions address patients, in their environment, to meet the
concept of health? 
Authority
The next characteristic of a professional is authority, as
viewed by the patient. This authority occurs through 
education and experience, which give the professional
the knowledge and skills to make professional judgments.
The patient perceives the professional as having the
knowledge and expertise to assist the patient in meeting
some need. The professional is therefore viewed as an au-
thority in the area, and his or her judgments are trusted.
Authority is the basis for the competence the patient 
perceives and the patient-professional relationship.
In the nurse-patient relationship, the nurse is perceived
as the authority figure, whether providing a selected care
technique or filling an informational need. The compe-
tence and skill demonstrated justify the patient’s trust in
the professional nurse. Benner (1984) has described the
following five levels of competency in clinical nursing
practice: novice, advanced beginner, competent, profi-
cient, and expert (p. xvii). The higher the levels of com-
petence or expertise patients perceive in any profession,
the greater trust or authority they place in the practitioners
of that profession. Patients and their significant others who
see nurses as experts in providing needed healthcare view
the profession as having more authority in healthcare judg-
ments. On the basis of this perception of authority, society
grants the profession and its practitioners certain rights,
privileges, and responsibilities.
Community Sanction
Society grants each profession certain powers and obliga-
tions to practice the specific profession. Nursing’s Policy
Statement: The Essence of the Profession (American Nurses
Association [ANA], 2010a) attributes professional nurs-
ing’s authority to a social contract with the community.
The professional community is responsible for ensuring
safe and effective practice within the discipline. Profes-
sional and legal regulation of nursing practice as a com-
munity sanction occurs through statutes, rules and
regulations, definition of practice, and expectations for
practitioners. Powers for entry and continuity in the pro-
fession are granted through licensure and professional
practice parameters dictated in the state practice acts.
These laws define a specific practice and provide regulatory
powers at the state level for the board, licensing of profes-
sionals and protection of title (e.g., RN or APRN), general
practice standards, approvals for educational programs,
and disciplinary procedures.
Definition of practice and specific practice standards
are further specified within the professional community
through major nursing associations. The American
Nurses Association (ANA) has specified a variety of prac-
tice standards for the profession, both general and spe-
cific to certain practice areas. The ANA has prepared
several specialty standards documents jointly with the
particular specialty organization to reflect the expec -
tations for specialized professional practice. These stan-
dards, which signify the sanction by the community of
the nursing profession, are authoritative statements by
which nurses practicing within the role, population, and
specialty describe duties they are expected to competently
perform and may be used as evidence of the standard of
care governing the given context of nursing practice
(ANA, 2010b, p. 2).
The publication Nursing: Scope and Standards of 
Practice (ANA, 2010b), for example, prescribes stan-
dards of practice and standards of professional perfor -
mance. Standards of practice address safe and competent
practice in general or specialty practice and use of the
nursing process with the actions of assessment, diagno-
sis, outcome identification, planning, implementation,
and evaluation (ANA, 2010b). Standards of professional
performance are expected professional roles and behav-
iors, including ethics, education, evidence-based practice
and research, quality of practice, communication, lead-
ership, collaboration, professional practice evaluation,
resource utilization, and environmental health (ANA,
2010b).
Further standards of specialty practice are provided
through the certification process with specialized educa-
tion, testing, and ongoing learning requirements. Prac tice
standards and expectations have also been developed by
the applicable specialty organizations. Check the Web sites
listed in Appendix A for standards of practice expected in
selected specialty practice areas.
Another area in which the community grants a 
profession certain privileges on the basis of professional
knowledge and expertise is in the education process of
future clinicians and practitioners. Educational programs
are both approved at the individual state level, as by the
Board of Nursing, and accredited at the national level,
as by the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education
(CCNE). Development, implementation, and evaluation
of the organization, curriculum, faculty, students, grad-
uates, facilities, and program resources are important
considerations within the accreditation and reaccredita-
tion process. The job of establishing and evaluating these
standards falls to the professional accrediting groups.
Here again, the profession is granted the power by the
community and has the responsibility to provide the
community with practitioners who are appropriately 
educated for safe and effective practice.
4
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
ON LIN E CON SULT 
American Nurses Association at 
http://www.nursingworld.org 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing 
http://www.aacn.nche.edu

Educational programs are also guided by professional
nursing standards. The American Association of Col-
leges of Nursing (AACN) has specified educational stan-
dards for nursing programs at the baccalaureate,
master’s, and doctoral levels. These essential curricular
elements serve as core elements for the educational 
programs and delineate expected outcomes for the nurs-
ing programs by educational level (AACN, 2011, p. 3).
Consider the differences in the essentials for baccalau-
reate and master’s nursing education listed in Box 1.1.
Further information on and description of these 
expected curricular elements can be found on the AACN
website at http://www.aacn.nche.edu/education-resources/
essential-series. 
Confidentiality of patient information is one of the
most important professional privileges. Professional nurs-
ing enjoys this privilege and conscientiously guards the
confidentiality of patient information. As discussed in 
relation to ethical codes, confidentiality is a major consid-
eration in professional nursing practice.
Code of Ethics
A professional abides by a certain code of ethics app -
licable to the practice area. Developed within the
 profession, the code addresses general ethical practice is-
sues as well as professional personal and practice values,
and colleague relationships. The ANA’s Code of Ethics for
Nurses is the ethical standard for professional nursing
practice. It embodies both formal and informal ethical
codes. The Code is non-negotiable in any setting . . . .
[and expresses] the values, virtues, and obligations that
shape, guide, and inform nursing as a profession” (ANA,
2015, p. vii). The interpretative statements promote un-
derstanding for appropriate application of the code of
ethics in professional practice. Adherence to this specific
code may be regulated in your state’s practice act. To view
the ANA Code of Ethics with Interpretative Statements,
go online to http://nursingworld.org/codeofethics. How-
ever, there are other ethical codes, including the Inter-
national Council of Nurses (ICN) Code of Ethics for
Nurses (2012), which presents four elements associated
with nurses: people, practice, the profession, and cowork-
ers. In addition, for each of the elements, the roles of
practitioners and managers, educators and researchers,
and national nursing associations are  illustrated. Achiev-
ing professional status requires  ethical standards for ex-
pected behaviors with patients, colleagues, and other
professionals.
Professional Culture
The fifth characteristic of a profession is a professional cul-
ture. Greenwood (1957) described professional  culture as
the formal and informal groups represented in the profes-
sion. Formal groups refer to the organi zational systems in
which the professionals practice, the educational institutions
CHAPTER 1 Your Professional Identity     ●
5
BOX 1.1
The AACN Essentials for Collegiate Nursing Programs 
1.1 The AACN Essentials for Collegiate Nursing Education
The Essentials of Baccalaureate Education for Professional Nursing Practice (AACN, 2008)
I. Liberal Education for Baccalaureate Generalist Nursing Practice
II. Basic Organizational and Systems Leadership for Quality Care and Patient Safety 
III. Scholarship for Evidence-based Practice
IV. Information Management and Application of Patient Care Technology 
V. Healthcare Policy, Finance, and Regulatory Environments 
VI. Interprofessional Communication and Collaboration for Improving Patient Health Outcomes 
VII. Clinical Prevention and Population Health 
VIII. Professionalism and Professional Values
IX. Baccalaureate Generalist Nursing Practice
The Essentials of Master’s Education in Nursing (AACN, 2011) 
I. Background for Practice from Sciences and Humanities 
II. Organizational and Systems Leadership 
III. Quality Improvement and Safety 
IV. Translating and Integrating Scholarship into Practice
V. Informatics and Healthcare Technologies
VI. Health Policy and Advocacy
VII. Interprofessional Collaboration for Improving Patient and Population Health Outcomes
VIII. Clinical Prevention and Population Health for Improving Health
IX. Master’s-Level Nursing Practice
Source: Reprinted with permission from the American Association of Colleges of Nursing, Essentials Series, © 2011, 2008
(http://www.aacn.nche.edu/education-resources/essential-series).
ON LIN E CON SULT 
ANA Code of Ethics for Nurses with 
Interpretative Statements at 
http://www.nursingworld.org/codeofethics
ICN Code of Ethics for Nurses at 
http://www.icn.ch/icncode.pdf

that provide for basic and continued learning, and the 
professional associations. Informal groups are the collegial
settings that provide for collaboration, stimulation, and
sharing of mutual values. These informal groups exist within
each formal group, providing further professional, collegial
inclusiveness. These groups and the unique culture of 
nursing are reinforced in the Code of Ethics for Nurses.
Organizational systems in which professional nursing
is practiced are diverse and multidimensional. As you will
see in later chapters, hospital and home health agency set-
tings are complex parts of a larger system. Professional
nursing practice provides a unique culture with the values
and norms expected of its practitioners. Organizational
philosophies and mission statements provide information
on the expressed culture of these settings. Further expres-
sion of the professional culture is apparent in the behaviors
of professional nurses who practice in these settings.
Formal educational settings for professional nursing
practice occur in institutions of higher learning with liberal
and specialized learning requirements. In addition, values
and norms for continued learning and competency in
practice are transmitted as expectations for professional
practice. Beyond basic educational practice, professional
development is provided through continuing education
and specialty preparation and continual competency as a
professional.
Professional organizations or associations are a major
component of the culture of professional nursing practice,
but they vary in purpose or mission and membership. The
purpose of some professional organizations, such as the
ANA or the Canadian Nurses Association, is to represent
the profession on a national basis. Specialty groups, with
a more specific focus, promote education, skills, standards,
and perhaps certification opportunities for a particular seg-
ment of the profession—for example, the American Asso-
ciation of Critical-Care Nurses. Each organization has a
unique philosophy or mission directed at professional
nursing practice.
Professional organizations communicate values and
norms in official publications, position statements, and
specified practice standards. These organizations promote
professional parameters for clinical practice,  education, 
administration, and research. They provide educational
opportunities and foster expansion of the knowledge base
of individual professionals and the discipline in general.
Some organizations focus specifically on the science of 
the profession. Their purpose is to promote the scholarly
aspects of the profession and to build professional and
leadership skills through education, publications, and con-
ferences. A more global view of practice can be seen in
many professional organizations as they reach out to in-
fluence public policy. In addition, professional organiza-
tions often collaborate with each other on vital issues that
enhance the impact and the influence to the professional
and public communities.
Consider the organizations that represent profes-
sional nursing practice and education listed in Table 1.1.
The ANA and its state and territorial associations focus
mainly on the profession as an entity, with concern for
the health of society as well as the welfare of professional
nurses through standards, official position statements,
political action initiatives, and certification options for
specialty practice. Specific to an area of specialty prac-
tice, the American Association of Critical-Care Nurses,
with its worldwide membership, is the largest specialty
organization. Also more globally, the International
Council of Nurses (ICN) is composed of professional
associations from over 130 countries, including the
ANA. The American Association of Colleges of Nursing
focuses on collegiate education, serving member schools
with baccalaureate and higher-degree programs through
educational standards, programs, policies, research, 
accreditation, and legislative initiatives directed at high-
quality professional education. This organization has
published documents identifying educational essentials
important for the various nursing education programs.
The National League for Nursing (NLN) has individual
and agency membership for educational institutions 
and focuses on excellence in nursing education from
practical nursing to graduate education. The National
Council of State Boards of Nursing is composed of the
member regulatory boards for the 50 states, the District
of Columbia, and four U.S. territories as well as inter-
national regulatory bodies for nursing as associate mem-
bers. Sigma Theta Tau, the international honor society
for nursing, has a distinctly scientific focus. This organ-
ization promotes knowledge development through 
research, dissemination of scientific information, tech-
nology, education, interdisciplinary collaboration, and
adaptability for the improvement of the health of people
worldwide.
A comprehensive listing of professional organizations
and their Web site addresses is located in Appendix A and
on the Intranet site. In addition, useful links to additional
resources may be discovered within these sites. Just one
word of caution: Web site addresses change, as do physical
addresses. Try to update your Internet “favorites” listing
regularly with any changes and add new sites that you have
found useful.
PROFESSIONALISM IN
NURSING
We have viewed the profession of nursing according
to general attributes. However, consider the specific at-
tributes of the practice professionals specified as standards
for professional performance: ethics, education, evidence-
based practice and research, quality of practice, commu-
nication, leadership, collaboration, professional practice
evaluation, resource utilization, and environmental health
(ANA, 2010b). In subsequent chapters we will consider
specifics on legal and ethical issues, education, evidence-
based practice, quality of practice, communication, lead-
ership, and environ mental health. But, look further at the
following expectations of professional nurses that are
guideposts for your professional development.
Ethics
Adherence to a code of ethics is expected in any profession.
As discussed previously, the Code of Ethics for Nurses 
with Interpretative Statements (ANA, 2015) provides the
broad guidelines. It is the responsibility of the practicing
professional to know these guidelines and practice in 
6
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

CHAPTER 1 Your Professional Identity     ●
7
TABLE 1.1
Characteristics of Professional Organizations
Organization
Focus, Mission, and Membership
American Nurses Association
(ANA) and associated constituent
state associations and organizational
affiliate members
Founded 1897
http://www.nursing world.org
American Association of Colleges
of Nursing (AACN) 
Founded 1969
http://www.aacn.nche.edu
American Association of 
Critical-Care Nurses (AACN) 
Founded 1969
http://www.aacn.org
International Council of 
Nurses (ICN)
Founded 1899
http://www.icn.ch 
National Council of State Boards 
of Nursing (NCSBN)
Founded 1978 (previously a 
component of the ANA)
http://www.ncsbn.org
National League for Nursing (NLN)
and associated constituent leagues
Founded 1952
http://www.nln.org 
Sigma Theta Tau International
Honor Society of Nursing and
member chapters
Founded 1922
http://www.nursingsociety.org
Note: Reference citations in table are excerpts from online resources of the respective nursing organizations.
Focus: Professional nursing
Mission: “Nurses advancing our profession to improve health for all”
(ANA, 2014, p. 1).
Membership: Individual membership; professional nurses at the state level
obtain national membership.
Focus: Collegiate nursing education
Mission: The AACN “serves the public interest by setting standards, 
providing resources, and developing the leadership capacity of member
schools to advance nursing education, research, and practice” (AACN,
2014, p. 1).
Membership: Deans and directors of member schools with baccalaureate
and higher-degree nursing programs
Focus: Specialty care
Mission: “Patients and their families rely on nurses at the most vulnerable
times of their lives. Acute and critical care nurses rely on AACN for expert
knowledge and the influence to fulfill their promise to patients and their
families. AACN drives excellence because nothing less is acceptable”
(AACN, 2014, p. 1).
Membership: Individual membership
Focus: Nursing internationally
Mission: The ICN’s mission is “to represent nursing worldwide, advancing
the profession and influencing health policy” (ICN, 2013, p. 1).
Membership: National nurses’ associations representing nurses in more
than 130 countries
Focus: Nursing regulation and public protection
Mission: The NCSBN “provides education, service, and research through
collaborative leadership to promote evidence-based regulatory excellence
for patient safety and public protection” (NCSBN, 2014, p. 1).
Membership: All state boards of nursing in the 50 states, the District of 
Columbia, American Samoa, Guam, Northern Mariana Islands, and the 
Virgin Islands.
Focus: Nursing education and community health
Mission: The NLN “promotes excellence in nursing education to build a
strong and diverse nursing workforce” to advance the nation’s health
(NLN, 2013, p. 1).
Membership: Individuals, Schools of Nursing, Associate Agency membership
Focus: Nursing scholarship (international)
Mission: Sigma Theta Tau’s mission is “advancing world health and cele-
brating nursing excellence in scholarship, leadership, and service” (Sigma
Theta Tau, 2014, p. 1). 
Membership: Individuals are invited to membership in chartered chapters
with selection criteria as baccalaureate or higher-degree students, faculty
members, or community leaders.
accordance with the code. In 1993, Miller and associates re-
ported that most professional nurse respondents did not have
a copy of the ethical code, and many were unfamiliar with
the document (p. 293). This problem occurred with the
1985 Code of Ethics. The question then becomes, how many
nurses are aware of the 2001 revision and the current code
revised in 2015? To meet this criterion of professionalism,
nursing professionals need to demonstrate greater knowledge
and understanding of the official ethical code. Periodic 
review of the ethical provisions and their interpretative 

statements is an important responsibility for all professional
nurses. This is especially true when the roles of nurses or
patients change, but it is also important for nurses to 
appreciate fully their professional responsibilities, chal-
lenges, and talents when roles are stable.
Ethical considerations also involve personal and 
interpersonal actions, beyond those directly related to
the individual situation, as with autonomy and self-
 regulation. Autonomy means independent judgment and
self- governing within the scope of one’s practice, which
changes in response to people’s healthcare needs. As key
professionals in organizational settings, nurses make the
time and commitment to ensure that high-quality care
and standards are present and upheld. This involves 
critical analysis, communication, collaboration, and lead-
ership. Important concepts in this area are professional
responsibility and accountability. In the Code of Ethics for
Nurses, responsibility is defined as “an obligation to per-
form required professional activities at a level commen-
surate with one’s education and in compliance with
applicable laws and standards . . .” (ANA, 2015, p. 45)
whereas, accountability is being answerable to self and
others for one’s own choices, decisions and actions as
measured against a standard . . .” such as the Code (ANA,
2015, p. 41). Nurses are accountable to both themselves
and their patients for good clinical judgment and quality
care. However, as we will see in later chapters, accounta-
bility is also extended to the broader population as the
profession demonstrates involvement in social policy.
Educational Background
The educational background required for professional
practice is specified to ensure safe and effective practice.
In nursing, the basic education required for entry into
the profession varies, with differences among baccalau-
reate, associate degree, diploma education, and even
entry-level graduate programs. But within each type of
educational program, curricula and requirements are
guided by general standards, and, as stated in two of the
four key elements of the IOM (2011) Future of Nursing:
Advancing Health, Leading Change report, nurses should
practice to the full extent of their education and achieve
higher levels of education.
Although a school’s curriculum is developed by its fac-
ulty members, certain standards are required for an educa-
tional program. Nursing curricula must contain essential
content and hours as required by state boards of nursing,
higher education boards, professional associations, and 
national accrediting bodies. Consumers of nursing care can
be confused by the different educational routes leading to
the title of registered nurse. Numerous studies have re-
viewed the various health professions, their regulatory bod-
ies, educational program requirements, and workforce
needs with respect to the changing healthcare system. 
Consumer confusion and overlapping scopes of practice
are key issues that must be addressed. Ongoing clarification
of these areas among professionals and consumers of nurs-
ing will have a  beneficial effect on the view of nursing as a
profession and of individual nurses as true professionals.
However, some skills do cross professional boundaries and
are important considerations in collaborative practice.
A 2003 report from the Institute of Medicine follow-
ing a Health Professions Education Summit led to the
identification of five core competencies (Box 1.2) that are
required of all health professions to advance a vision for
the education of all health professionals “to deliver patient-
centered care as members of an interdisciplinary team, em-
phasizing evidence-based practice, quality improvement
approaches, and informatics” (Greiner & Knebel, 2003,
p. 45). To address these competencies in nursing educa-
tion programs, curricula must be constantly evaluated for
currency, content, and practice opportunities. For exam-
ple, most nurses will agree that providing patient-centered
care is a component of our nursing programs. However,
we need to assess carefully whether all programs foster 
interdisciplinary and evidence-based practice focused on
quality improvement and the use of informatics. 
Beyond the basic education, competent practice 
requires ongoing learning, continuing education, and
continued competency. These attributes are crucial to
safe, effective, and ethical professional practice. Ongoing
improvement and knowledge are the goals of continuing
education, which is required for relicensure in some
states and recertification in specialty areas. But continuing
education involves more than obtaining required credits,
in-service hours, and formal degrees. Remaining current
with ideas presented in the nursing and scientific literature
is an important component of continued competency as
a professional and to incorporate evidence-based informa-
tion into practice.
The Internet has made remaining current on issues of
concern to the profession more convenient. Yet, a word
of caution is in order: It is important to evaluate the source
of information and its validity. Consider whether the in-
formation is provided by an organization, an agency, or
an individual’s own Web site and personal perspective.
Identifying your own learning and developmental
needs is an expectation and a continual process for com-
petent professional practice. In essence, continuing edu-
cation for competency involves self-assessment, ongoing
learning, and self-evaluation. The focus is on discovery, as
in baccalaureate and graduate education. Ongoing learn-
ing means that your mind is challenged every day with
new ideas, building on a professional knowledge base and
skills. Opportunities for continuing education abound
through a variety of formal programs as well as through
professional journals and online resources. Many profes-
sional organizations have special online services for their
8
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
BOX 1.2
Core Competencies for Health 
Professionals
●Provide patient-centered care
●Work in interdisciplinary teams
●Employ evidence-based practice
●Apply quality improvement
●Utilize informatics
Source: Greiner, A. C., & Knebel, E. (eds.). (2003). Health professions
education: A bridge to quality. Washington, DC: Institute of 
Medicine (p. 48). Permission to reproduce material copyrighted 
by National Academies Press. 

members, such as reviews of current literature and care
products, bookstores, continuing education programs, 
e-mail lists, and online discussion forums. Publishers also
have online resources with special discounts, e-mail 
updates, associated Web sites, discussion groups, and 
interactive continuing education offerings. The ongoing
challenge is developing new knowledge, and it is the
responsi bility of the professional to maintain currency 
for the specific practice area and to document his or her
professional efforts and progress.
Evidence-Based Practice 
and Research
Nursing research is much more than leading or partici-
pating in a research study. We now look to the core
competency of evidence-based practice and research
to guide the way we practice. Greiner and Knebel
(2003) define evidence-based practice as the integration
of the best research with clinical expertise and the pa-
tient’s values for optimum care, as well as partici pation
in learning and research activities (pp. 45–46). As found
in the interpretative statements of the Code for Nurses,
“All nurses must participate in the advancement of the
profession through the knowledge development, evalu-
ation, dissemination, and application to practice” (ANA,
2015, p. 27).
Involvement in research—whether by using findings,
participating in an investigation, protecting human sub-
jects, or searching the literature for demonstrated innova-
tions in practice—is a characteristic of professionalism in
nursing. It adds to our knowledge base, enhances our prac-
tice, promotes improved outcomes for our patients and
fosters practice based on evidence of efficacy rather than
tradition or trial and error. Collaborating with others and
sharing new knowledge is critical in this process. We will
focus further on evidence-based practice and research in
Chapter 5.
Quality of Practice
The effectiveness of nursing care to address appropriate
and measurable patient outcomes is an expectation of the
professional nurse. In addition, recall that improvement
in the quality of practice is a core competency of all
health professionals. It is not just a matter of determining
whether a nursing intervention was appropriate and 
effectively addressed the healthcare need. Now, questions
are raised on further improvements that can be made
based on the evidence presented in the current case and
through documented evidence of practice effectiveness.
Quality improvement is the goal for making refinements
in practice that are based on efficacy and efficiency. 
Efficacy in meeting the patient outcomes is not sufficient
for professional practice. The activities must be acceptable
for the patient population in addressing our metapara-
digm concepts of human beings, health, environment,
and nursing. The patient is the focus, and efficiency is a
vital consideration to preserve resources, both personal
resources (such as energy of both the patient and the
nurse) and the material and physical healthcare resources
in the environment. So, the question becomes, how can
practice in the future be made safer and more effective?
This question can lead to innovative and changed prac-
tices for improved patient outcomes, considering human
needs, the environment, the concept of health, and care
techniques and technologies.
Communication
Effective communication has long been a focus and 
characteristic of professional nursing. In a subsequent
chapter, we will review this important content, as it is 
an area that needs constant reevaluation in different situ-
ations and with different individuals. And effective com-
munication skills are essential with patients as well as
nursing colleagues and other members of the healthcare
team. Consider communication as more than a verbal 
encounter with another individual, but rather an interac-
tion involving all the interpersonal and cultural facets.
Appropriate verbal messages must be communicated into
the plan of care, be documented appropriately, be shared
through a variety of channels and media, and lead to qual-
ity improvements for the care of patients. Dissent, debate,
conflict, and negotiation are natural outcomes and, again,
must focus on quality healthcare. And think further about
evolving technologies, as in the case of telehealth, with
patients and providers interacting at a distance. Effective
communication skills are in constant refinement for the
professional nurse who is on the front line managing and
leading the team for quality patient outcomes. We will
consider refinement of interpersonal and professional
communication skills in Chapter 6.
Leadership
Leadership is an expectation for the professional nurse,
both in the practice setting and in the profession. Nurses
must project a positive image and the vision and actions
needed for effective patient outcomes on a daily basis and
in an effective working environment. Managing care 
effectively and leading others in the process is more than
a job requirement but also a commitment to patients, 
colleagues, and the profession. And leadership extends 
beyond the care environment to involvement in the insti-
tution or agency, as with shared governance or committee
involvement, and in the profession at large.
Nurses also assume leadership positions in the com-
munity, through service activities using their unique
knowledge, skills, and abilities. Nurses are well equipped
and talented in this area because of their  orientation of
service to patients and society at large. Nurses frequently
lead health-promoting activities in their employment role,
their professional community, and among their families
and acquaintances. Consider how residents in a defined
community always seem to know who the nurses in the
area are and how frequently those nurses are approached
with questions or requests to become involved in projects
or serve on committees. Also consider how nurses reach
out to others with information on healthcare issues or
ideas to foster wellness in their communities. This vision
of the community also leads to involvement in healthcare
policy and changes needed for improved health status and
outcomes in the community.
CHAPTER 1 Your Professional Identity     ●
9

Collaboration
Each of the standards of professional performance 
requires collaboration in practice. The ANA Standard
of Performance on Collaboration includes the patient
and the patient’s significant others, and other healthcare
providers in the plan of care (ANA, 2010b). Professional
inter actions and behaviors should be ethical and patient-
 centered, based on the information and needs of the col-
leagues who influence patients and on the quality of
practice. These interactions require good communication
and leadership skills focused on effective practice and
quality outcomes. The healthcare team is focused on the
patient and promoting positive outcomes, which do not
occur in isolation by the efforts of one individual. This
professional performance standard requires that col-
leagues assist each other and include the patient in the
plan of care to promote long-term positive outcomes.
Trust, openness, knowledge, skills, various professional
abilities, and commitment are necessary parts of all in-
teractions toward this aim of safe and effective patient-
centered care.
Professional Practice Evaluation
The Scope and Standards of Practice (ANA, 2010b) specifies
practice competencies in this area as the application of cur-
rent “professional practice standards and guidelines, rele-
vant statutes, rules, and regulations” (p. 59). Professional
practice evaluation requires self-regulation by both the
professional and the profession that sets the standards. The
ANA’s Nursing’s Policy Statement: The Essence of the Profes-
sion (2010a) describes self-regulation as both personal 
accountability for the knowledge base for practice and 
participation in the peer review process (pp. 30–32). Pro-
fessional responsibility and accountability involve uphold-
ing quality standards as well as developing and critically
analyzing those standards and the outcomes. The regula-
tion of nursing practice includes both self-regulation be-
yond a limited job description and professional regulation
through the defined scope of practice, further education,
certification, and adherence to the code of ethics.
Professionals are responsible and answerable to patients
and their significant others for nursing care outcomes. And
performance feedback from patients as well as professional
colleagues should be included in a practice evaluation.
Nurses are actively involved in supervising, delegating, and
evaluating others. But reflection on professional perfor -
mance assists in practice improvement as an important
component of the peer review process, as part of an annual
performance evaluation. The peer review process is a time
for professional development for both the reviewer and the
person being evaluated. The process is a learning oppor-
tunity and much more than a checklist and narrative com-
ment provided on an annual basis.
Resource Utilization
Recall the concept of efficiency related to quality care. 
Innovative and changed practices for improved patient out-
comes must address human needs, the environment, the
concept of health, and care techniques and technologies.
Identification, procurement, and the judicious use of
healthcare resources are requirements of the  professional
role. The Scope and Standards of Prac tice (ANA, 2010b)
describes resource utilization as not only the appropriate
use of resources but also the assurance that nursing care
be “safe, effective, and financially responsible” (p. 60).
The focus continues to be on outcomes and the vital role
of the nurse in promoting successful outcomes. In the
healthcare  environment, the focus is on safety and obtain-
ing appropriate resources, supplies, and care provision.
How ever, understanding cost factors and patient concerns
and resources is essential. And think further than re-
sources in the healthcare environment, especially when
assisting the patient and family to prepare for care in the
home and community. Will they have sufficient resources
at home for safe healthcare practices? This includes the
knowledge for safety at home and the value for the treat-
ments needed, as well as the financial resources to obtain
needed medication or treatment. Think about the indi-
vidual with asthma and whether he or she will, in the long
term, have short-term rescue and controller medications,
the understanding for proper use and care, and the envi-
ronmental adjustments needed for successful manage-
ment of this chronic condition. The professional nurse is
concerned with safe and effective care beyond the treat-
ment facility with a focus on human beings, the environ-
ment, and health as part of effective nursing care for
positive outcomes.
Environmental Health
With nursing’s focus on the centrality of the environment
in individuals’ health and care, concerns over safety and
health risks require constant attention and vigilance.
Health professionals and consumers of healthcare were
alarmed by the release of reports from the Institute of
Medicine (IOM) of the National Academies on the high
incidence of medical errors. These reports started in 1998
and led to ongoing efforts for improving patient safety, in
both the hospital and community settings. The IOM is a
nonprofit organization designed to provide  science-based
advice as a public service. The 2001 report from the IOM,
Crossing the Quality Chasm, proposed ten rules for quality
healthcare in the 21st century (Box 1.3). The six overall
aims—that care should be safe, effective, patient-centered,
timely, efficient, and equitable—underlie these ten rules
(Corrigan et. al, 2001).
Patient safety and effectiveness of outcomes have 
become major national objectives and have directed 
additional attention to nursing, especially since the release
of the landmark IOM report in 2011 on the Future of
Nursing: Leading Change, Advancing Health. Research by
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)
continues to expand the knowledge base on how the qual-
ity of the healthcare workplace affects the quality of the
healthcare provided, especially in the areas of workload
and working conditions, effects of stress and fatigue, re-
duction of adverse events, and the organizational climate
and culture. Patient outcomes are viewed and investigated,
along with nursing-sensitive indicators and factors that
promote safe and effective practice.
Nurses play an essential role in their constant attention
to the environment and the factors that could place patients
10
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

at risk. These include product defects, risky or improper
medication practices, environmental artifacts like noise,
and any other potential hazards. Attention to the environ-
ment for care to be safe, effective, patient-centered, timely,
efficient, and equitable, and application of these ten rules,
are the means for promoting environmental health.
Fulfilling the characteristics described in standards of
professional performance is the challenge to you in your
educational pursuit and your daily practice in nursing.
Professionalism is an attribute in constant refinement. The
degree to which professionals demonstrate professionalism
in nursing is apparent in their professional practice and
how they define nursing. But, have you prepared all your
resources for this ongoing professional development?
RETURNING TO SCHOOL
This is a time to celebrate the talents you bring with you
to your continuing knowledge development. It is a time
for discovery, reflection, and professional development.
You have had many experiences in educational settings.
Unlike a child in school, the adult learner brings a wealth
of experiences to the learning environment. Experiences
of the adult learner may be varied, but they occurred in a
certain environment or context and have meaning to the
individual. To understand this meaning requires careful
examination of your situation. 
First, consider the reasons why you have returned to
school. You may think that the recognition for your work
or the pay differential on your career ladder is the reason.
These may be considerations, but you are embarking on a
journey of professional development that will further your
knowledge, skills, and abilities compared with a quick fix
to a limiting situation. You will be facing challenges of com-
peting roles and addressing priorities in time management.
Competing Roles
As an adult, you are already engaged in multiple roles.
Roles are organized behavioral patterns and expectations.
VandenBos (2013) defines a role as “a coherent set of be-
haviors expected of an individual in a specific position
within a group or social setting” (p. 503). Now consider the
multiple roles and positions in your unique circumstance.
You are probably employed as a registered nurse. 
The expectations for your work are written in the state
law for practice and in the job description at your place
of employment. There are also the less formal expec -
tations of your supervisors and colleagues at work. 
However, there are many role opportunities in profes-
sional nursing. The American Association of Colleges of
Nursing (AACN, 2008) has identified three primary
roles of the baccalaureate-prepared generalist nurse:
provider of care, designer/manager/coordinator of care,
and member of the profession. Clinical nurse leaders
(CNLs) also function as generalists in nursing practice
but are prepared at the master’s level in nursing. CNLs
practice in an advanced generalist role and are providers
and managers of care to individuals and cohorts of 
patients anywhere healthcare is delivered (AACN, 2014,
pp. 1–2). Advanced practice nurses (APRNs) are pre-
pared at the graduate level in nursing within one of 
four roles and function in a population foci specialty area
as a nurse practitioner, clinical nurse specialist, nurse
anesthetist, or nurse midwife. Nurses prepared at the
master’s or doctoral levels in nursing also function in 
role specialties or specialized advanced nursing positions
such as nursing education, administration, informatics,
research, public health, and policy analyst (ANA, 2010a).
The Scope and Standards of Practice (ANA, 2010c) 
describes the importance to the profession of these spe-
cialized advanced nursing positions for the continued ex-
pansion of those areas of nursing practice that intersect
with another body of knowledge but have a direct influ-
ence on nursing practice and support the care provided
to patients by other RNs (p. 18).
Your future practice will be in one of these multiple
roles of RN. However, your current situation has another
role: adult learner. And this new role of student will influ-
ence your current career and personal roles. For example,
how are your coworkers and supervisors reacting about
your return to school? Consider the apparent and hidden
behaviors, all of which have an impact on your progress.
Align yourself with positive influences and try not be
drawn into negativity.
Consider also your varied personal roles. You are also
a member of a family—whether it is an extended family
with intergenerational considerations, a single partnership,
a single-parent family, or even a social or religious group.
Your roles and responsibilities for caregiving occur by
virtue of your membership in this unique group. You 
may be a parent concerned about your child’s progress in
elementary school or your teenager’s involvement with a
particular social group in high school. You may be living
close to extended family members or be isolated by miles
or situations. These are all considerations of your unique
situation as an RN pursuing additional education.
You have now thought about both your family and
work-related roles and responsibilities. Now, what about
you? What are your deeply held wishes and desires—
personal, career-related, and family-inspired? This is
where competition and conflict can occur. Think about
CHAPTER 1 Your Professional Identity     ●
11
BOX 1.3
Rules for the 21st Century Health
System
●Care is based on continuous healing relationships.
●Care is customized according to patient needs and
values.
●The patient is the source of control.
●Knowledge is shared, and information ﬂows freely.
●Decision making is evidence-based.
●Safety is a system property.
●Transparency is necessary.
●Needs are anticipated.
●Waste is continuously decreased.
●Cooperation among clinicians is a priority.
Source: Corrigan, M.S., Donaldson, M.S., Kohn, L.Y., Maguire, S.K., 
& Pike, K.C. (2001). Crossing the quality chasm: A new health system
for the 21st century. Washington, DC: National Academy Press
(pp. 61–62). Permission to reproduce material copyrighted by 
National Academies Press.

the questions posed in Box 1.4 and add others that apply
to your personal situation. You made the right decision
to return to school. Now relax and prepare. Plan to
streamline your life (work, school, and family) and pre-
pare for dealing with your competing roles and responsi-
bilities. This situation is another form of multitasking—a
more complex one than encountered in daily practice.
You are advancing your career and professional practice
through additional learning and building on your knowl-
edge, skills, and abilities. 
Learning As Empowerment
Learning is the perception and assimilation of the informa-
tion presented to us in a variety of ways. Learning leads to
knowledge and encompasses the following characteristics:
●Perception of new information
●Reaction to the information
●Ability to recall or repeat the information 
●Understanding as rejection or acceptance of the 
information 
●Use of the information in a similar situation 
●Critical analysis of the information
●Incorporation of the information into the value 
system 
●Use of the information in various situations and 
combinations 
An increasing complexity emerges here as the learner
moves from receiving and recalling information through
understanding, application, analysis, and evaluation, to
the point of creating new applications. 
There are also three domains, or categories, of learning:
affective, cognitive, and psychomotor. The affective do-
main includes attitudes, feelings, and values—for example,
how you feel about returning to school. Your perception
and value of the positive effects on your life will influence
your progress. The cognitive domain involves knowledge
and thought processes within an individual’s intellectual
ability. This cognitive domain involves your understand-
ing of the information received about pathophysiology,
theory, and the other areas for knowledge acquisition. 
The psychomotor domain is probably the one you are
most comfortable with. This domain involves the process-
ing and demonstration of behaviors, as with the perfor -
mance of a skill like changing a dressing or starting an 
IV infusion.
Learning activities can be very different for the three
domains, but continued learning leads to empowerment.
Remember, to achieve a lasting change in observed be-
havior (psychomotor domain), the value of that change
(affective domain) and the intellectual capacity to under-
stand and process the information for behavioral changes
(cognitive domain) must first be present. What are some
of your individual learning needs?
Building Knowledge, Skills,
and Abilities
Your plan for professional practice should be tailored 
to your situation and learning needs, taking into account
your knowledge, skills, and abilities. Knowledge is the
accumulation of appropriate information through learn-
ing and experience. Skill is the ability to retrieve this
knowledge through mental and psychomotor activities
and apply it appropriately to a situation. Ability refers to
your competence and proficiency in the demonstration
of that knowledge and skill. Your personal plan needs to
address your knowledge, skills, and abilities for success in
your nursing program. Consider the particular factors in
your own situation.
First, look at your educational goals. Think about your
timeline for program completion and determine whether
adjustments may be needed to accommodate additional
time commitments. Given your personal timeline, con-
sider the factors that will promote your success. Consider
the time required for the program. If you are employed,
what adjustments to your schedule will need to be made?
Do you have to factor in travel for classes or library re-
search? Some nursing programs require a certain number
of courses arranged in a specific semester plan with classes,
labs or clinical, online activities, and library research. What
12
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
BOX 1.4
What Are Your Competing and Multiple Roles?
●Will your employer adjust your work schedule for you to attend class or use the library?
●How did your coworkers react (CNAs, LPNs, RN peers, supervisors, others) when they found out you were taking
this course?
●Have you taken the prerequisite courses, such as statistics, for the nursing program?
●What study materials do you have readily available?
●How are your computer skills?
●What expectations do your partner, family, or child(ren) have for your returning to school: high/low/none? Are
they supportive or unsupportive?
●What are your expectations? 
●What will you do to ensure you have the time needed for each of your roles?
●Do you have resources for childcare, if needed?
●If needed, did you apply for tuition assistance through your employer or at the college?
●Do you have any outstanding loans? Are they a worry?
●Do you have reliable transportation to get to work as well as to classes?
●Did taking this course seem like a good plan at the time but now you are having second thoughts? 
●Others?

is your computer access and how are your skills with pre -
sentation graphics and attaching files? Have you com-
pleted some of the prerequisite work? And what about
other courses required in the program—have you plotted
them into your timeline?
There may be areas in which you want to do some en-
hancement work. Consider your resources and materials
for review. Your program may offer review or tutorial re-
quirements to allow you to refresh certain content areas
or to learn about areas that were not known at the time of
your program, such as genetics and genomics competen-
cies. If review opportunities are available, take advantage
of them and take them seriously. Review and refreshment
opportunities can add to your supply of personal knowl-
edge, skills, and abilities.
Look further at your present job. Will the schedule
permit you to stay in that job, perhaps on a reduced sched-
ule, or will you need to find another job? How will your
peers at work react to you once you are really progressing
through the program? You may experience unanticipated
reactions, including hostility. 
Another consideration is unanticipated costs. You may
be evaluating the cost of tuition, books, and materials,
but what about additional travel to a clinical site, reduced
salary due to a reduced working schedule, and added costs
for childcare and perhaps prepared meals? Is your tuition
assistance available only after you have successfully com-
pleted a course? Are there delays that must be factored
into your plan? What other costs will be unique to your
situation? 
Now, consider your family and significant others.
What support systems are available, and what other ones
may be needed by you and your family members? You
need to differentiate educational commitments that are
required during a semester from family activities that can
become prominent during semester breaks. This may be
the opportunity to have a “family meeting” to discuss the
situation. Nurses often do not like to ask for help, but
perhaps family members can be enlisted to take on some
of the household chores. You may get to a point down
the road when your son or daughter scolds you, telling
you that you had better get your school work done before
you can play!
Your own health is also a consideration. Remember,
to effectively care for others, you must take good care of
yourself. All of this requires prioritization of needs, roles,
activities, and, especially, time management skills.
ADDRESSING TIME
MANAGEMENT
Now look at your time management skills. What do you
do well and what can be further developed? Identify your
“time wasters” and your “time enhancers.” Much reflec-
tion on your part will be involved in this activity—it is
not a one-size-fits-all situation. You are unique as is your
environment and the people around you. Someone once
asked me how I had the time to do a particular activity.
My first response was “I make the time.” Then I thought
about it and added, “I get up an hour earlier, and that
seems to work best.” It’s all about reflecting on the 
activity and planning ahead, as with a dressing change,
to set aside the time and have all the materials at hand.
Remember, no one has yet figured out how to add more
minutes to the day. So, within any given 24-hour period,
you must determine the most efficient use of time. Look
at the factors identified in Box 1.5. Depending on your
roles and unique situation, you will likely need to add
other factors for effective time management, whether at
work, at home, at school, in the library, or online. Be
honest and realistic, but do not get lost in the details. 
Your Learning Style
Learning styles and associated inventories have been dis-
cussed with varied research for over 50 years in an at-
tempt to improved teaching and learning outcomes. (See
Box 1.6.) The research and discussion continue as we
seek to understand better how individuals acquire mean-
ing and knowledge. Increasingly we are concerned with
the active involvement of the learner in the process. Your
learning style is simply the ways you best perceive,
think, organize, use, and retain knowledge. To under-
stand this concept, merely recall colleagues in the same
learning environment—those who take a lot notes, those
who just listen, and those who make notes or drawings
on what they interpret the message in the lecture to be.
Understanding differences in learning styles can help
teachers and learners make more informed decisions
CHAPTER 1 Your Professional Identity     ●
13
BOX 1.5
Factors to Consider for Efficient Time Management
Family
●Meals
●Homework
●Laundry
●Relationships
●Social obligations
Work
●Work schedule
●Hours and fatigue
●Coworkers and colleagues
●Practices to reﬁne
●Scope of practice
School/College
●Costs
●Transportation
●Learning needs 
●Course requirements
●Academic schedule and timeline
Personal
●Health and ﬁtness
●Hope and aspirations
●Spirituality
●Knowledge, skills, and abilities
●Individual needs

about which learning activities will be useful or produc-
tive to them as individuals and as members of learning
groups or communities.
Individuals with different learning styles vary in 
their preferences for how they absorb and assimilate 
information:
●visual learning (reading or watching) 
●auditory learning (listening or talking) 
●kinesthetic learning (doing or participating)
For example, some learners are highly visual in the way
they perceive information and derive meaning. For these
learners, a structured lecture with few visual aids is a less
desirable learning environment than one enhanced by vi-
sual aids. Others learn better through the written word,
by either reading or taking notes. Learners who are highly
auditory in their learning preference derive greater mean-
ing from just listening to the information. One of the ex-
ercises at the end of this chapter is the identification of
your particular learning style.
The learning environment for health professionals has
changed. The explosion of knowledge that con tinues on
a daily basis no longer allows for the  memorization of
discrete facts. Health professionals must understand the
underlying concepts, discover new information, reflect
on applications, and apply relevant knowledge to their
situation. Reflection and critical analysis are important
parts of this process. The learner is now active in the
process, no longer considering the teacher as the “sage
on the stage” but rather as the facilitator of learning. You,
as the learner, are the active one, seeing how information
fits with facts and perceptions. Recall that in Mezirow’s
(2000) view of transformative learning, adults learn by
elaborating existing frames of reference, learning new
frames of reference, transforming points of view, or
transforming habits of mind (p. 19). Building on your
knowledge base and your  personal frame of reference,
you will learn new perspectives. This process will further
allow you as the adult learner to transform your views,
and create new ways of approaching the world and nurs-
ing practice.
Learning occurs through reflection and interpre -
tation to understand perceptions of the self and the
world. But you also need to identify and organize your
resources.
GARNERING RESOURCES
Consider the resources that you will need to assist you as
a student. Perhaps the initial things that come to mind
are books, a stethoscope, a computer, and perhaps a car to
get to a class meeting or clinical site. Look beyond supplies
and reliable transportation. Resources are tools or means
of support. Consider those things and people that can help
you study, prepare assignments, succeed on examinations,
and thrive in your education. 
Studying
Once you understand your learning style, you can look to
the resources needed to capitalize on your assets. Remem-
ber, once you know your style, you will still be in a group
with individuals with varying styles, including the instruc-
tor. If you learn best through participation in discussions,
you may want to find a compatible study group. But a
word of caution: Study groups are not for everyone and
can be time wasters if the group is not focused, compati-
ble, and committed to ground rules of preparing on the
topic prior to the meeting. In addition, some individuals
are more solitary and need to think about something for a
while and work it out in their frame of reference before
being put on the spot in a discussion.
Your environment is another area you need to care-
fully consider, with regard to where you best think and
concentrate. Do you prefer a completely quiet environ-
ment or soft background music? Think about what helps
you to understand information and see relationships. 
Do you have a favorite place in the house, either a cozy
corner or a clean kitchen table after the children are in
bed? Maybe it is in a special chair with the cat in your
lap. Or perhaps it is at the library where additional 
resources are available without other distractions. Again,
you must determine your best environment to concen-
trate and be open to new  information.
Preparing Assignments
This is an area feared by many returning students, as they
face a blank piece of paper or computer screen. First, write
or type the expectation. It may help to see it isolated from
the distraction of other course expectations and grading
criteria. Make sure you have sufficient access to a reliable
computer for document preparation, sending and receiv-
ing e-mail, accessing the Internet, and preparing presen-
tation graphics. Competing with your spouse or children
for time online does not count! Locate the  dictionary tool
and make sure you have the spelling and grammar check-
ing tools activated to assist you in the composition process.
You will also need to become comfortable with the publi-
cation style required by your school or instructor. One
popular style is by the American Psychological Association
(2010), and you may be required to use this resource.
These basic tools and your development of skill in these
areas will facilitate your ease in making your case as you
address the requirements of an assignment, whether a case
study or a scholarly paper. 
Another valuable resource is a professional librarian,
especially one who can help you effectively search for
14
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
BOX 1.6
Myers-Briggs Inventory
The Myers-Briggs Inventory is used widely in education
and business applications. A classiﬁcation system of four
scales identiﬁes 16 personality types that can be further
classiﬁed for learning preferences:
●Introversion—Extroversion
●Sensing—Intuition
●Thinking—Feeling
●Judging—Perceptive
Source: Myers & Briggs Foundation. (2014). MBTI basics. Retrieved
from http://www.myersbriggs.org/my-mbti-personality-type/
mbti-basics/

materials, teach you how to access databases, and pro-
vide you with interlibrary loan materials. A librarian can
show you how to access the library remotely over the 
Internet to help with your time management and cut
down on travel to the library during certain hours. But
be sure use all your time management skills when
searching online to avoid getting distracted or lost in the
sea of information.
Sooner or later in your program of study you will have
a group assignment in which the group, not each individ-
ual, earns the grade. This type of activity can be accom-
plished in person or online and may be a wonderful team
experience—or a disaster with an uncooperative member.
Peer pressure is warranted; if that is not effective, consult
your instructor. Remember, teams are an important part
of collaborative practice and we need to continually refine
our skills in this area.
Taking Examinations
The thought of taking tests is one of the most threaten-
ing to the adult learner. Stress management techniques
such as deep breathing may help. Some of the most 
important considerations are adequate rest and being
confident in your preparation and understanding of
the content. Understanding the information is critical,
especially since test questions in nursing focus on critical
analysis and rarely involve the simple recall of isolated
facts. Beyond simple memorization of facts such as the
bones and muscles of the leg, more complexity is added
for application of this information to a patient situation.
And then grades are an issue, with the adult learner 
trying to do “the best” or else experience a personal sense
of failure. Remember, a grading scale is just that: a scale
that varies. There are certain acceptable numbers on
your bathroom scale, just as there should be acceptable
numbers or letters on a grading scale. There will be
times when you excel and others when you succeed 
but do not achieve an A—and that is acceptable. Give
yourself permission to be human and not always receive
the top grade in the course. Understanding, retention,
and application of knowledge are the more important
considerations.
Thriving
One of the most important actions you can take as you
pursue your nursing degree is to thrive on the acquisition
of your new knowledge, skills, and abilities. Lifelong learn-
ing is a component of professional nursing. From your
practice, armed with technical skills and experience in the
practice setting, we advance to critical analysis and clinical
judgment that embody professional practice. You have
taken the first step in your ongoing learning. Now, what
is your view of professional nursing?
YOUR PHILOSOPHY OF
NURSING
Virginia Henderson (1897–1996) was an outstanding
leader in nursing. Her classic definition of nursing 
embodied her view of the unique role of the professional
nurse as:
[a]ssisting the individual, sick or well, in the performance
of those activities contributing to health or its recovery 
(or to a peaceful death) that he would perform unaided if
he had the necessary strength, will, or knowledge. And to
do this in such a way as to help him gain independence as
rapidly as possible. (Henderson, 1966, p. 15)
This concrete definition was expanded and applied to
nursing practice, education, and research. Henderson’s
philosophy of nursing was one of caring, assisting, and
supporting the person. In her writings, she encouraged
every nurse to develop a personal concept of nursing—in
essence, a philosophy of nursing.
A philosophy of nursing presents a particular
 professional nurse’s belief system or worldview of nurs-
ing—the nurse’s personal definition of nursing. Recall that
the first component on the structural hierarchy of con-
temporary nursing knowledge was the metaparadigm,
followed by the influence of the belief system or philos-
ophy. Fawcett and DeSanto-Madeya (2013) describe the
function of a philosophy as communication of what the
members of a discipline believe to be true relative to the
phenomena of interest, how knowledge is developed, and
the values with regard to actions and practices (p. 8).
As discussed previously, the metaparadigm concept of
human beings relates to the people of concern for nursing.
Nurses in different settings define patients uniquely within
their practice—for example, as individuals versus families.
The nurse’s practice area and patient populations also in-
fluence the environment—for example, an intensive care
unit in an acute care setting or a rural healthcare clinic lo-
cated in a community school or modular building. The
concept of health also varies, being different for the pro-
fessional who provides care for trauma victims and the
nurse involved with health initiatives in an employee
group. Specific nursing roles, and the services provided,
influence the concept of nursing. In addition to the meta-
paradigm concepts in a personal philosophy of nursing,
certain other values and beliefs are generally apparent as
one’s beliefs about nursing are illustrated. 
Consider the following essential features of professional
nursing definitions identified in the ANA’s Nursing’s Policy
Statement: The Essence of the Profession (2010a):
●Provision of a caring relationship that facilitates health
and healing
●Attention to the range of human experiences and re-
sponses to health and illness within the physical and
social environments
●Integration of objective data with knowledge gained
from an appreciation of the patient or the group
●Application of scientific knowledge to the processes 
of diagnosis and treatment through the use of judg-
ment and critical thinking
●Advancement of professional nursing knowledge
through scholarly inquiry
●Influence on social and public policy to promote 
social justice
●Assurance of safe, quality, and evidence-based 
practice (p. 9)
CHAPTER 1 Your Professional Identity     ●
15

Along with these criteria are interwoven ethical principles,
standards of practice, and professional performance 
expectations. These are your values and beliefs.
At this point, you should critically analyze your be-
lief system and express your views of nursing. We all
have prior experiences that influence our thinking 
and actions. Try to place those aside and begin to craft
your philosophy of nursing. Using these definitions 
and criteria, develop your views into a personal philos-
ophy of nursing. Periodically reflect on your philosophy
to analyze how your professional practice is enhanced
in your ongoing quest for knowledge and expertise 
in your profession. This is your unique professional
identity.
16
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
K E Y  P O I N T S
●The following are characteristics of a profession: (1) systematic theory and knowledge base, (2) authority,
(3) community sanction, (4) an ethical code, and (5) a professional culture.
●Kerlinger and Lee (2000) define a theory as “a set of interrelated constructs (concepts), definitions, and
propositions that present a systematic view of phenomena by specifying relations among variables, with
the purpose of explaining and predicting the phenomena” (p. 11).
●A paradigm used by professionals in a scientific community consists of the beliefs and the belief system
shared by members of that particular community to explain phenomena, practice the profession, and
conduct research.
●The metaparadigm of nursing is the overall concern of nursing common to each nursing model, whether
a conceptual model/paradigm or formal theory, and it includes the concepts of human beings, environ-
ment, health, and nursing.
●The Code of Ethics for Nurses (ANA, 2015) is the ethical standard for professional nursing practice.
It identifies expected professional practice behaviors with patients, colleagues, and other professionals
within nine provisions with interpretative statements.
●Autonomy involves judgment and self-governing within one’s scope of practice. This self-governing re-
quires ongoing evaluation of both responsibility and accountability in professional practice. In the ANA’s
Code of Ethics for Nurses, responsibility is defined as “an obligation to perform required professional activities
at a level commensurate with one’s education and in compliance with applicable laws and standards . . .”
(ANA, 2015, p. 45) whereas, accountability is being answerable to self and others for one’s own choices,
decisions and actions as measured against a standard . . .” such as the Code (ANA, 2015, p. 41). 
●The ANA (2010b) Standards of Professional Performance are ethics, education, evidence-based practice
and research, quality of practice, communication, leadership, collaboration, professional practice evalua-
tion, resource utilization, and environmental health.
●The five competencies for health professionals are providing patient-centered care, working in interdisci-
plinary teams, employing evidence-based practice, applying quality improvement, and using informatics
(Greiner & Knebel, 2003).
●Roles are organized behavioral patterns and expectations.
●Learning is the perception and assimilation of the information presented to us in a variety 
of ways.
●Knowledge is the accumulation of the appropriate information through learning and experience. 
Skill is the ability to retrieve this knowledge through mental and psychomotor activities and apply 
it appropriately to the situation. Ability is your competence and proficiency in the demonstration 
of the knowledge and skill. 
●Learning style or preference is simply the ways you best perceive, think, organize, use, and retain 
knowledge.
●Resources are tools or means of support. 
●A personal philosophy of nursing presents the belief system or worldview of nursing for a particular pro-
fessional nurse. Incorporated into such a philosophy are definitions, values, and assumptions about the
metaparadigm concepts of human beings, environment, health, and nursing

REFERENCES
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2008). The 
essentials of baccalaureate education for professional nursing
practice. Washington, DC: Author.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2011). The es-
sentials of master’s education in nursing. Washington, DC:
Author.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2013). Compe-
tencies and curricular expectations for clinical nurse leader 
education and practice. Retrieved from http://www
.aacn.nche.edu/publications/white-papers/cnl 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2014). 
Mission. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/
about-aacn/mission-values 
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses. (2014). Mission. 
Retrieved from http://www.aacn.org/wd/memberships/
content/mission_vision_values_ethics.pcms?menu=aboutus
American Nurses Association. (2010a). Nursing’s policy state-
ment: The essence of the profession (2010 ed.). Silver Spring,
MD: Nursesbooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2010b). Nursing: Scope and 
standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursesbooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2014). About the ANA. Re-
trieved from http://nursingworld.org/FunctionalMenu
Categories/AboutANA
American Nurses Association. (2015). Code of ethics for 
nurses with interpretative statements. Silver Spring, MD:
Nursebooks.org.
Benner, P. (1984). From novice to expert: Excellence and power in
clinical nursing practice. Menlo Park, CA: Addison-Wesley.
Corrigan, M. S., Donaldson, M. S., Kohn, L. T., Maguire,
S. K., & Pike, K. C. (2001). Crossing the quality chasm: 
A new health system for the 21st century. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press. 
Fawcett, J. (1995). Analysis and evaluation of conceptual models
of nursing (3rd ed.). Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.
Fawcett, J. (2000). Analysis and evaluation of contemporary 
nursing knowledge: Nursing models and theories. 
Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.
Fawcett, J. (2005). Contemporary nursing knowledge: Analysis
and evaluation of nursing models and theories (2nd ed.).
Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.
Fawcett, J., & DeSanto-Madeya, S. (2013). Contemporary 
nursing knowledge: Analysis and evaluation of nursing models
and theories (3rd ed.). Philadelphia: F.A. Davis.
Greenwood, E. (1957). Attributes of a profession. Social Work,
2(3), 45–55.
Greiner, A. C., & Knebel, E. (Eds.). (2003). Health professions
education: A bridge to quality. Washington, DC: Institute of
Medicine.
Henderson, V. (1966). The nature of nursing: A definition 
and its implications for practice, education, and research. 
New York: Macmillan.
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2011). The future of nursing: 
Advancing health, leading change. Washington, DC: 
National Academies Press. Retrieved from http://www
.iom.edu/Reports/2010/The-Future-of-Nursing-Leading
-Change-Advancing-Health.aspx
International Council of Nurses (2012). The ICN code of ethics
for nurses. Retrieved from http://www.icn.ch/images/
stories/documents/about/icncode_english.pdf
International Council of Nurses. (2013). About ICN. Retrieved
from http://www.icn.ch/about-icn/icns-mission/
Kerlinger, F. N., & Lee, H. B. (2000). Foundations of behav-
ioral research (4th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth 
Thompson Learning.
Kuhn, T. S. (1970). The structure of scientific revolutions
(2nd ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mezirow, J. (1991). Transformative dimensions of adult learning.
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Mezirow, J. (2000). Learning to think like an adult: Core con-
cepts of transformation theory. In J. Mezirow and Associates,
Learning as transformation: Critical perspectives on a theory in
progress (pp. 3–33). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
CHAPTER 1 Your Professional Identity     ●
17
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Be prepared to participate in a discussion to be scheduled by your instructor on how you demonstrate the five
core competencies of health professionals.
2. Explain your views on professional responsibility and accountability.
3. Describe how you demonstrate and document your continued competency.
4. Reflect carefully and identify your reasons for continuing your nursing education.
5. Consider your responsibilities.
• Identify all your current roles. Which ones can be streamlined? 
• What resources can you classify as readily available, sometimes available, or in need of locating?
• What strategies can you identify for improved time management for your new role as a student?
6. Review the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter, and discuss it in the context of the contents
of the chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.

Miller, B. K., Adams, D., & Beck, L. (1993). A behavioral 
inventory for professionalism in nursing. Journal of 
Professional Nursing, 9, 290–295.
Myers & Briggs Foundation. (2014). MBTI basics. Retrieved
from http://www.myersbriggs.org/my-mbti-personality-type/
mbti-basics/
National Council of State Boards of Nursing. (2014). About
NCSBN: Mission and values. Retrieved from
https://www.ncsbn.org/182.htm 
National League for Nursing. (2013). Mission/goals/core 
values. Retrieved from http://www.nln.org/aboutnln/
ourmission.htm 
Sigma Theta Tau. (2014). STTI organizational fact sheet. 
Retrieved from http://www.nursingsociety.org/aboutus/
mission/Pages/factsheet.aspx 
VandenBos, G. R. (ed). (2013). APA dictionary of clinical 
psychology. Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY
American Nurses Association. (2009). Forensic nursing: 
Scope and standards of practice. Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2009). Nursing administration:
Scope and standards of practice. Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2009). Transplant nursing: 
Scope and standards of practice. Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursebooks.org. 
American Nurses Association. (2010). Gerontological 
Nursing: Scope and standards practice. Silver Spring, 
MD: Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2010). Nursing professional 
development: Scope and standards of practice. Silver Spring,
MD: Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2010). Position statement: 
The nurse’s role in ethics and human rights: Protecting and
promoting individual worth, dignity, and human rights in
practice settings. Retrieved from http://www.nursingworld
.org/ethicsrole 
American Nurses Association. (2011). School nursing: Scope 
and standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Spring, MD:
Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2012). Faith community nursing:
Scope and standards of practice. (2nd ed.). Silver Spring,
MD: Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2013). Addictions nursing: Scope
and standards of practice. Silver Spring, MD: Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2013). Corrections nursing: 
Scope and standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Spring, 
MD: Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2013). Holistic nursing: Scope
and standards of practice (2nd ed). Silver Spring, MD:
Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2013). Intellectual and develop-
mental disabilities nursing: Scope and standards of practice
(2nd ed.). Silver Spring, MD: Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2013). Neonatal nursing: Scope
and standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Spring, MD:
Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2013). Neuroscience nursing:
Scope and standards of practice. Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2013). Plastic surgery nursing:
Scope and standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Spring, 
MD: Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2013). Public health nursing:
Scope and standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Spring,
MD: Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2013). Radiology and imaging
nursing: Scope and standards of practice. Silver Spring,
MD: Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2013). Rheumatology nursing:
Scope and standards of practice. Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2014). Palliative nursing: 
Scope and standards of practice. Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2014). Psychiatric-mental health
nursing: Scope and standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver
Spring, MD: Nursebooks.org.
Kohn, L. T., Corrigan, M. S., & Donaldson, M. S. (1999). 
To err is human: Building a safer health system. Washington,
DC: National Academy Press.
O’Neil, E. H. (1998). Recreating health professional practice 
for a new century. San Francisco: Pew Health Professions
Commission.
Pew Health Professions Commission. (1995). Critical 
challenges: Revitalizing the health professions for the 
twenty-first century. San Francisco: USCF Center for 
the Health Professions.
ONLINE RESOURCES
American Association of Colleges of Nursing
http://www.aacn.nche.edu/
American Nurses Association
http://www.nursingworld.org
ANA Code of Ethics for Nurses
http://www.nursingworld.org/codeofethics
ICN Code of Ethics for Nurses
http://www.icn.ch/icncode.pdf
18
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

Theory as the
Basis for Practice
19
2
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
Theory
Model
Framework
Conceptual Model or Framework
Concept
Construct
Variable
Proposition
Theory Description and Evaluation
Hierarchy of Needs
Developmental Theories
General System Theory
Quantum Theory
“Theory and research are not solely 
the province of the academic, just as 
practice is not solely the field of the 
practitioner.”
(Glanz, Rimer, and Lewis 2002)
Key Terms
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Define key terms in theory development and utilization.
2. Discuss Maslow’s theory of motivation with the hierarchy of basic needs.
3. Describe the components of developmental theories and their application to individuals across the 
life span.
4. Describe the components and application of systems theory.
5. Discuss the impact of theory on practice.

One characteristic of a profession is that it is built on a
theoretical base. This base includes theoretical foundations
unique to the profession, as well as those borrowed or
adapted from other scientific disciplines. Chapter 1 dis-
cussed paradigms and the metaparadigm concepts of nurs-
ing. Recall that Kuhn (1970) described a paradigm as
“universally recognized scientific achievements that for a
time provide model problems and solutions to a commu-
nity of practitioners” (p. vii). When the paradigm is no
longer useful in explaining phenomena, practice, and re-
search in that particular scientific community, a paradigm
shift occurs, and a new structure evolves.
In 1957, Merton used a paradigm to analyze sociological
theory. He viewed the paradigm as a “field glass” to illumi-
nate and view concepts and interrelationships and to make
assumptions clear on the body of knowledge for analysis and
testing. Merton (1957) identified the purposes of a paradigm
as providing for the following:
1. Parsimonious arrangement of concepts and proposi-
tions showing interrelationships
2. A logical guide showing derivations and avoiding 
hidden assumptions and concepts
3. Culmination in theory development as a building
process
4. Systematic arrangement and cross-tabulation of 
concepts for analysis
5. Codiﬁcation of qualitative research methods 
(pp. 13–16)
From a cultural perspective, Leininger (2006) defined
worldview as “the way an individual or group looks out on
and understands their world about them as a value, stance,
picture, or perspective about life or the world” (p. 83). In
the professional culture of nursing, these are the values, at-
titudes, beliefs, and practices unique to the profession. Thus,
a scientific community has the tools to create and test a the-
ory for knowledge development and the use of this knowl-
edge in practice. The worldview furnishes the philosophical
assumptions that are considered “givens” by the theorist or
the scientific community. In nursing, this provides us with
the process: the metaparadigm concepts to various para-
digms, and the development of theories on which to base
research, practice, administration, and education.
TERMINOLOGY IN THEORY
AND DEVELOPMENT ANALYSIS
Professions such as nursing are based on unique theory.
Kerlinger and Lee (2000) defined a theory as “a set of in-
terrelated constructs (concepts), definitions, and proposi-
tions that present a systematic view of phenomena by
specifying relations among variables, with the purpose of
explaining and predicting the phenomena” (p. 11). This
definition provides us with the components and aims of a
theory, which must initially be described and then evalu-
ated for potential use in practice, education, and research
in a discipline. Some theorists, however, believe this defi-
nition is too narrow and excludes descriptive theories; de-
scriptive theories, which focus on factor naming, are
abundant in professional nursing and are often a first step
for further research and development.
Before moving to the components of a theory, we need
to address three similar terms frequently associated with the-
ory: model, framework, and conceptual model (or concep-
tual framework). A model is a graphic representation of
some phenomenon. It may be a mathematical model (such
as A + B = C) or a diagrammatic model that links words
with symbols and lines. A theoretical model provides a visual
description of a theory using limited narrative and display-
ing components and relationships symbolically. A frame-
work is another means of providing a structural view of the
concepts and relationships proposed in a theory. Again, use
of words and narrative is limited, but the structure of the
theory is presented as the framework and allows translation,
interpretation, and illumination of the narrative or text.
A conceptual model or framework is similar to a the-
ory in that it represents some phenomenon of interest and
contains concepts and propositions. However, with a con-
ceptual model or framework, the concepts and especially
the propositions are broader in scope, less defined, and
less specific to the phenomenon of concern. As Fawcett
and DeSanto-Madeya (2013) note, “the concepts of a
conceptual model are so abstract and general that they are
not directly observed in the real world, nor are they lim-
ited to any particular individual, group, situation, or
event” (p. 13).
A theory can evolve from a conceptual model or
framework as concepts are further defined, specified,
tested, and interrelated to represent some aspect of re-
ality. Fawcett (1995, 2000, 2005) and, subsequently, 
Fawcett and DeSanto-Madeya (2013) have described
the structural hierarchy of contemporary nursing knowl-
edge (Fig. 2.1) with its components, from the most 
abstract metaparadigm, influenced by different philoso-
phies, to conceptual models that further evolve into the-
ories and specific empirical indicators for testing. They
COMPONENTS
LEVEL OF ABSTRACTION
Metaparadigm
Philosophies1...n
Conceptual Models1...n
Empirical Indicators1...n
Most Concrete
Most Abstract
Theories1...n
Figure 2.1 The structural hierarchy of contemporary
nursing knowledge: Components and levels of abstraction.
(From Fawcett, J., and DeSanto-Madeya, S. (2013). Contempo-
rary nursing knowledge: Analysis and evaluation of nursing 
models and theories [3rd ed., p. 4]. Philadelphia: F. A. Davis,
with permission.)
20
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

CHAPTER 2 Theory as the Basis for Practice
●
21
further define the function of conceptual models “to
provide a framework to organize and visualize abstract
and general phenomena and relations between various
phenomena encompassed by the model” (Fawcett and
DeSanto-Madeya, 2013, p. 13). Then, the function of
a theory is “to narrow and more fully specify the phe-
nomena contained in a conceptual model” (Fawcett and
DeSanto-Madeya, 2013, p. 16). Concepts become less
abstract, and the population of interest is identified.
This increase in specificity is evident in the examples
proposed by Alligood (2014c), who, on the basis of 
Fawcett’s structural hierarchy of nursing knowledge,
correlated examples in theoretical structures by different
nursing theorists as follows:
●Metaparadigm: Person, environment, health, and
nursing
●Philosophies: Nightingale, Watson, Benner
●Conceptual Models: King, Levine, Neuman, Orem,
Rogers, Roy, Johnson
●Theories: Leininger, Newman, Parse, Pender, Meleis,
Husted and Husted, Boykin and Schoenhofer
●Middle-Range Theories: Mercer, Mishel, Wiener and
Dodd, Kolcaba, Swanson, Beck, Rutland and Moore
As more is known about the phenomenon, this knowledge
can be used in specific, meaningful patient applications.
As knowledge about some phenomena increases, a the-
ory is proposed to address the phenomena or reality within
the discipline. The components of a theory are the con-
structs (concepts), with their specific definitions, and the
propositions that describe or link those constructs (con-
cepts). At the simplest level, a concept is a view or idea
that we hold about something. It can be something highly
concrete, such as a pencil, or something highly abstract,
such as quality. The more concrete the concept, the easier
it is understood and consistently used. For instance, we
are comfortable envisioning a pencil and can easily de-
scribe it to others. This ability to describe something 
directly in the concrete world shares the “concept.” But
the concept of quality is more abstract, and ensuring that
all individual definitions are the same is difficult, often 
requiring indirect measures.
We strive to define a concept in operational terms—
that is, how we view a specific entity and how it can be
measured so that others know exactly what we mean. To
meet the criteria of a theory, we need to define the con-
cepts. Consider the concept of a pencil. We think of a
pencil as a writing implement. This is the theoretical or
conceptual definition of a pencil we read in a dictionary.
But what do we truly mean by pencil? It is a yellow-
painted, wooden-covered graphite instrument that we
use to make marks on a paper. Does it have an eraser?
Does a mechanical pencil fit into this definition? An op-
erational definition narrows the definition to precisely
what we view and how it can be measured for use in prac-
tice or research as a measurable, empirical indicator. In
addition, concepts are broadened to constructs, such as
with quality or identity, which can be multidimensional
and difficult—if not impossible—to break down into
component parts.
A construct is a more complex idea package of some
phenomenon that contains many factors but cannot be
truly isolated or confined to a more concrete concept. The
construct of identity, for example, contains many pieces,
such as personal perception, role expec tations, and status.
However, we must still provide an operational definition
of a construct by specifying certain elements it contains (as
indirect measures), such as self-image, ideal image, group
image, role expectations, and status. The same multidimen-
sionality occurs when we assess the quality of healthcare.
In research, we often see the term variables, referring
to some concept in the theory under study. A variable is
a concept that can change and that contains a set of values
that can be measured in a practice or research situation.
For example, a client’s cholesterol reading is a variable.
The concept of blood cholesterol has been operationally
defined within certain parameters, and the level of the
reading is the value for the variable.
Whether concepts, constructs, or a combination of the
two are included in a specific theory, they are the building
blocks of the theory. Definitions are provided to help us
understand the nature and characteristics of each block in
the construction. We then need to relate these building
blocks to each other. Describing and stating the relation-
ships between or among the constructs (or concepts) pro-
vides the propositions of a theory. Also called relational
statements, propositions show how the concepts are
linked in the theory and how they relate to one another
and to the total theoretical structure. They define how the
structure is held together. In nursing theory, propositions
refer to how the individual is characterized with specific
abilities, knowledge, values, and traits and how these 
factors interrelate with the characteristics of health, the en-
vironment, and nursing.
Research is a means of supporting the concepts and
relationships proposed in a theory. It provides support-
ive evidence and suggests further study and possible
gaps or revisions needed in the theoretical structure. We
can see this in the next chapters, which cover refine-
ment of nursing and other health models, such as the
health-belief model revision. Research can be qualita-
tive and inductive, for generating theory, or more quan-
titative, for deductively testing hypotheses as theoretical
propositions.
As stated previously, Kerlinger and Lee (2000) defined
the aims or purpose of theory as describing or explaining
some phenomena of interest. In nursing, theory is further
differentiated into levels that describe, explain, predict,
and control. Dickoff and James (1968) developed a classic
position paper proposing four levels of nursing theory
(Box 2.1). All levels may be present as a practice theory
BOX 2.1
Dickoff and James (1968): Four Levels
of Nursing Theory
1. Factor-isolating (naming) theories
2. Factor-relating (situation-depicting) theories
3. Situation-relating (predictive or promoting/
inhibiting theories)
4. Situation-producing (prescriptive) theories
Dickoff, J., & James, P. (1968). A theory of theories: A position paper.
Nursing Research, 17, 197–203.

evolves (factor-isolating and then factor-relating), is sub-
jected to further research, and is refined, becoming predic-
tive and prescriptive. In application, testing, and refinement,
a theory is a continuum as long as the content meets the 
intent of the discipline and metaparadigm.
In addition, theories are classified according to their
scope as grand, middle-range, or limited in scope or prac-
tice. This is the breadth of coverage of some phenomena.
General system theory is an example of a grand theory, or
one with a broad scope. This theory, discussed later in the
chapter, has been used in development, testing, and appli-
cation in many scientific disciplines.
Merton (1957) was the first theorist to suggest “theo-
ries of the middle range: theories intermediate to the
minor working hypotheses evolved in abundance during
the day-by-day routines of research, and the all inclusive
speculations comprising a master conceptual scheme from
which it is hoped to derive a very large number of empir-
ically observed uniformities of . . . behavior” (pp. 5–6). As
you will see in the next chapter, middle-range theories are
narrower in scope, with a limited view of a phenomenon,
and contain concepts and propositions that are measurable
and can be empirically tested. Some of our traditional
nursing theories meet the characteristics of a middle-range
theory, as described in Chapter 3. Other middle-range the-
ories include the developmental theories reviewed later in
this chapter. Although these theories address psychosocial,
cognitive, and moral development, they apply across dis-
ciplines as continual, incremental knowledge and skills de-
veloped by individuals. More limited nursing practice
theories are evolving as hypotheses derived from middle-
range theories are tested, clarified, and made specific to
certain practice areas or types of patients. Chapter 4 shows
examples of limited nursing practice models that are being
tested and refined into theoretical frameworks, including
Pender’s health promotion model. Even more narrow in
scope are practice theories, which focus on measurable
variables and propositions that are based on empirical re-
search and now may be refined further, perhaps to a spe-
cific population or group of individuals with a common
characteristic.
You can also enter “middle-range nursing theory” in
your Internet search engine to locate additional sources of
information from a variety of nursing programs.
THEORY DESCRIPTION 
AND EVALUATION
To understand theories for use and application in prac-
tice, we use certain criteria to describe and evaluate them.
Theory development is both an inductive and a deduc-
tive process. An inductive process is used to generate con-
cepts and make inferences by stating interrelationships
(propositions) within a framework to view phenomena.
From observations of phenomena, we can name concepts
and enumerate proposed relationships. Once the theory
is generated, it is applied, in whole or in part, for testing
as a deductive process. For nursing theory description
and evaluation, we consider the following three sets of
criteria proposed by nursing scholars Chinn and Kramer,
Barnum, and Fawcett.
Chinn and Kramer (2011) differentiate between  theory
description and critical reflection of empiric  theory. The
theory is described by answering questions in the following
areas: purpose, concepts, definitions, relationships and
structure, and assumptions. This process provides an un-
derstanding of the components and aims of the theory.
Once the theory has been described, five issues are addressed
in critical reflection:
●Clarity and consistency in presentation
●Simplicity and meaningfulness of relationships
●Generality or scope
●Accessibility as potential for use with empirically 
identifiable phenomena
●Significance as leading to the values in practice, educa-
tion, and research (Chinn & Kramer, 2011, p. 205).
This differentiation allows us to discriminate between un-
derstanding the theoretical structure and evaluating the
theory’s soundness and usefulness in practice, education,
or research. Alligood (2014c) refers to these five areas for
theory analysis as clarity, simplicity, generality, accessibility,
and importance (p. 9).
Barnum (1998) proposes two categories of theory: de-
scriptive theory and explanatory theory. Descriptive theory
is a factor-naming and factor-relating theory developed ini-
tially to characterize some phenomena. Explanatory theory
brings us to the situation-relating and situation-producing
levels of theory, looking at the “how,” the “why,” and the
interrelationships in the theory (Barnum, 1998). Theory
description is delineated as theory interpretation, with
questions addressing the following areas:
●Major elements of the theory and their definitions
●Relationships among the elements
●Differentiation between descriptive and explanatory
theory
●How the theory addresses, defines, and differentiates
nursing
●The focus on the patient, nurse, action, or relationship
●Unique language used and defined by the theorist
(Barnum, 1990, 1994, 1998)
For critical analysis, internal criticism and external crit-
icism are differentiated. Internal criticism is used to evalu-
ate how the theory components fit together: the clarity,
consistency, adequacy, logical development, and, some-
times, level of theory development (Barnum, 1998). Ex-
ternal criticism deals with real-world issues such as reality
convergence, usefulness, significance, and discrimination
from other healthcare disciplines (Barnum, 1998). This
process allows us to discriminate between understanding
the theoretical structure (internal criticism) and evaluating
the soundness and usefulness of the theory for application
in practice, education, or research (external criticism).
Fawcett and DeSanto-Madeya (2013) have proposed
criteria for theory analysis and evaluation that have under-
gone several revisions. They further differentiate between
22
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
O N L I NE  C ONSULT  
Nursing Theories at 
http://nursingtheories.info/

CHAPTER 2 Theory as the Basis for Practice
●
23
analysis and evaluation of nursing conceptual models and
theories. Recall that conceptual models are more abstract
than theories. As described by Fawcett and DeSanto-
Madeya (2013) a theory is more concrete and more specific,
and is restricted to a more limited range of phenomena,
than a conceptual model, with the purpose of middle-range
theories to describe, explain, or predict concrete and specific
phenomena (p. 20).
Analysis refers to the description of the theory. Fawcett
and DeSanto-Madeya (2013) have described an analysis 
as “a nonjudgmental examination” of the nursing model,
while an evaluation requires judgments to be made about
the extent to which a nursing model satisfies certain criteria 
(p. 442). Theory analysis is followed by theory evaluation,
which requires thoughtful interpretation of the theory. 
Fawcett and DeSanto-Madeya (2013) have identified a series
of questions for analysis and evaluation of nursing theories
appropriate to their level of abstraction as compared with
conceptual models. In this revision, Fawcett and DeSanto-
Madeya (2013) have proposed steps in a framework for the
analysis and the evaluation of the theory, as follows:
Application of this framework for theory analysis and
evaluation will be evident in Chapter 3, which deals with
specific grand and middle-range nursing theories. Each of
these sets of criteria involves a careful identification of the
components and evaluation components for determina-
tion of applicability to nursing practice. 
THEORIES FROM OUTSIDE 
OF NURSING
Nursing and other healthcare disciplines have long used a
variety of theories to guide practice. Some are discipline-
specific, such as the nursing theories reviewed in Chapter 3.
For example, Fawcett and DeSanto-Madeya (2013) dif-
ferentiate between theories developed unique to nursing
(Newman, Orlando, Parse, Peplau, and Watson) and
models borrowed from other disciplines (stress, coping,
and self-efficacy) (p. 17). Early nursing theories were de-
scribed by Barnum (1990) as follows:
As an applied science, much of nursing’s theory is
“borrowed” from other disciplines. Every discipline has
similar boundary ambiguities, where the inquiry and
answers in one field overlap those in another. . . . 
Nursing’s uniqueness in this respect does not lie in
boundary overlap but in the number of boundary 
overlaps with which it must contend. A high number of
overlaps occur in the discipline of nursing because it
often attempts to deal holistically with a phenomenon
(man) that has previously been dealt with in compart-
mentalized ways by other disciplines. (p. 218)
But, nursing theory has come a long way since that time.
In her description of the development of nursing theory
from the Curriculum Era in the early 20th century,
through the Research and Graduate Education Eras in
the middle 20th century, and the Theory Era in the latter
part of the 20th century, into the 21st century and the
Era of Theory Utilization, Alligood (2014a)—described
the process resulting in theory is not just to know but to
use (p. 8) with the growth of the discipline (p. 9). As pro-
posed by Fawcett (2014), nurses must embrace nursing
knowledge in the form of explicit nursing conceptual
models and theories; indeed, “the use of discipline-
specific nursing knowlege to guide nursing practice is the
hallmark of professional nursing” (p. 427). Recall the
metaparadigm concepts. Borrowed theories may address
human beings, health, and the environment, but what of
nursing? With collaborative practice, however, these the-
ories provide a common ground and the opportunity for
the application and sharing of middle-range theories. They
also enable us to understand human nature, motivation,
and development. But, as noted by Chinn and Kramer
(2011), always consider specific factors that influence a
nursing situation (p. 40).
Several classic theories have been applied in nursing to
view the person, family, community, and group. We use
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs to view human beings and
basic human needs. Developmental theories have been ap-
plied across the human life span as we seek to understand
the complexity of human behavior. In looking at the per-
son or group, we have applied systems theory to understand
the interaction of human beings with their environment.
The following section briefly describes selected theories that
are applied in certain areas and have been used in the evo-
lution of nursing models more specific to our metaparadigm
concepts.
Maslow’s Theory of Human
Motivation and Hierarchy of 
Basic Needs
A theory widely used in many disciplines is Maslow’s the-
ory of human motivation. In his original 1954 book, 
Motivation and Personality, Maslow described how his work
emerged. The book begins by presenting Maslow’s philos-
ophy as an approach to science. Human values are
prevalent in the philosophy, and Maslow’s worldview is
described as holistic, functional, dynamic, and purposive.
In his 1970 revised edition, Maslow  reinforced his world-
views and described his theory as holistic-dynamic. He sup-
ported his original 16 propositions on motivation, on
which his theory was based (see Chapter 9, on motivation
in the teaching-learning process). This is a grand theory
that views the complexity of human behavior, especially in
relation to motivation of behavior. The theory of motiva-
tion is based on clinical and experimental data from psy-
chology, psychiatry, education, and philosophy. It does not
Theory Analysis
Theory Evaluation
Step 1: Model Origins
Step 1: Explication of origins
Step 2: Unique Focus 
Step 2: Comprehensiveness of content
Step 3: Content
Step 3: Logical congruence
Step 4: Generation of theory
Step 5: Legitimacy (social utility, 
congruence, and significance)
Step 6: Contributions to nursing knowledge 
and the discipline

address specific nursing concerns except as they relate to
human behavior with environmental influences.
Maslow’s theory includes a hierarchical structure for
human needs. This hierarchy of needs can be visualized
as a pyramid (Fig. 2.2). At the base of the pyramid are the
physiologic drives. Higher needs progress upward as safety,
love and belonging, esteem, and self-actualization needs.
Maslow (1954, 1970) described this as a “hierarchy of pre-
potency” to explain that the individual concentrates on
the physiologic drives. The physiologic drives are consid-
ered the most powerful, but as physiologic needs are sat-
isfied, the individual focuses on emerging higher needs.
This is the general structure for the hierarchy.
Individual differences are provided for in this theory.
Some individuals have altered placement of needs in the
hierarchy. Maslow (1970) described differences among in-
dividuals in placement of some of the higher needs such
as a reversal of esteem and love/belonging needs. In addi-
tion, individuals may have different levels of need satisfac-
tion. For example, one person might meet the physiologic
drives at a 75 percent level, whereas another person’s level
for satisfaction is 85 percent. Individual differences also
apply to the emergence of higher needs. Maslow (1970)
regarded this as a gradual process; one person’s safety needs
may begin to emerge when his or her physiologic needs
are being met at 25 percent, whereas another person may
not begin to satisfy his or her safety needs until 30 percent
of his or her physiologic needs are met. Levels of satisfac-
tion and emergence of higher needs therefore occur at dif-
ferent points in different people, as do pain thresholds in
different people.
Looking again at the theoretical hierarchy, we see at
the bottom level of the pyramid the physiologic drives, in-
cluding the need to maintain homeostasis and the needs of
satisfying hunger and thirst, sleep and rest, activity and ex-
ercise, sexual gratification and sensory pleasure, and maternal
responses (Maslow, 1970). Meeting the physiologic hunger
drive is very different from meeting one’s nutritional require-
ments or treating anxiety or depression with a chocolate bar.
When the individual is truly hungry or thirsty, not merely
satisfying an appetite for food or drink, all energies and
thoughts are directed to satisfying that drive for food or
water. Consider the physiologic need of an individual with
a chemical dependency. The person will focus all efforts on
attaining the drug or addictive substance at the required level
of satisfaction—while ignoring other needs, including the
physiologic need for food or the next level of safety needs.
When the physiologic drives and needs are relatively satisfied,
higher-level needs emerge.
Safety needs are the next level of the hierarchy. Safety,
both physical and emotional, must be achieved. Threats
to a person’s safety can become all-consuming. Think of
an isolated person in an inner-city apartment whose fear
for his safety motivates him to place bars on his windows
and multiple chains and dead-bolt locks on his door. This
person fears for his physical safety from a threat, real or
imagined, of bodily harm. This is the main concern, not
whether access is impeded in the case of a fire or accident.
He places all focus on the quest for freedom from per-
ceived danger.
Perceived safety can also be related to health, as with the
fear of the patient with chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
ease (COPD) to be near anyone who is coughing or sneez-
ing. This person’s safety need is to avoid a respiratory
infection that could lead to pneumonia or even diminished
oxygenation in an already compromised respiratory sys-
tem. Even if the other person in the room is experiencing
symptoms of a seasonal allergy, the individual with COPD
seeks immediate escape from that environment because of
the perceived danger of infection. Maslow (1954, 1970)
also viewed safety needs more broadly in the need for the
familiar and spiritual, religious, or philosophical meaning
in life. He describes the use of rituals and ceremonial be-
haviors in children and individuals with psychological dis-
orders as examples of focusing on safety needs.
Once the person satisfies safety needs, the focus turns
to the need for love and belonging. Inclusion and affection
are important needs, as contrasted with the isolated sex
24
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
SELF-
ACTUALIZATION
Meeting one's
full potential
ESTEEM
Feeling competent,
strong self-worth
LOVE and BELONGINGNESS
Feeling worthy of affection and
social support
SAFETY
Feeling free from danger and risk,
secure in one's own environment
PHYSIOLOGIC
Adequate oxygen, food, and water
Figure 2.2 Maslow’s hierarchy of human needs.

CHAPTER 2 Theory as the Basis for Practice
●
25
act, which is a physiologic drive. Maslow (1970) described
the normal person as having a hunger and striving for af-
fectionate relations and a place in a group, as opposed to the
maladjusted person (pp. 43–44). Love and affection are
manifested in many ways and are individually defined.
Satisfying the need for belonging and love brings us to
the next level, esteem needs. Esteem needs involve a sense
of dignity, worth, and usefulness in life. Maslow (1970) de-
scribed two sets of esteem needs: (1) the sense of self-worth,
including perceptions of strength, achievement, compe-
tence, and confidence, and (2) the esteem of others, includ-
ing perceptions of deserved respect, status, recognition,
importance, and dignity (p. 45). Satisfying the sense of self-
worth and respect allows the next, and highest, level of basic
needs to emerge.
The need for self-actualization, at the top of the pyramid,
is the desire for self-fulfillment. This is the sense of being
able to do all that a person can to answer the “why” of his or
her existence. Maslow (1970) defined self-actualization as
“the full use and exploitation of talents, capacities, potential-
ities, etc., such [that] people seem to be fulfilling themselves
and . . . developing to the full stature of which they are ca-
pable” (p. 150). Originally, Maslow (1954) proposed that
self-actualized people include both older people and college
students and children. But when he further examined the
concept of self-actualization, he separated psychological
health from self-actualization, which he limited to older 
people whose human potentialities have been realized and
actualized (Maslow, 1970).
Maslow then developed support for his theory of basic
needs and human actions using case studies and other re-
search. Through observation of people, he proposed specific
phenomena that are determined by basic gratification of
cognitive-affective, cognitive, character traits, interpersonal,
and miscellaneous needs. He cited characteristics of people
in relation to the hierarchy. For example, the following char-
acteristics of self-actualized people emerged from Maslow’s
(1970) research and analysis of historical figures, public 
people, selected college students, and children:
1. More eﬃcient and comfortable perceptions of reality
2. Acceptance of self, others, and nature
3. Spontaneity, simplicity, and naturalness in thoughts
and behaviors
4. Problem-centered rather than ego-centered
5. Desire for detachment, solitude, and privacy
6. Autonomy with independence of culture and 
environment
7. Continued freshness of appreciation
8. Mystic and oceanic feelings with limitless horizons
9. Genuine desire to help people
10. Deeper and more profound interpersonal 
relationships
11. Democratic character structure
12. Strong ethical sense that discriminates means/ends
and good/evil
13. Philosophical and unhostile sense of humor
14. Creativeness
15. Resistance to enculturation with an inner 
detachment (pp. 203–228).
Maslow created further hypotheses for testing. He de-
scribed cases that diverged from his theory, such as the
martyr who ignores survival needs for a principle. He
called for further research, hypothesizing that satisfying
basic needs earlier in life allows the individual to weather
deprivation easier in later life (Maslow, 1954, p. 99).
Maslow’s work continued until his death in 1970. His hi-
erarchy of needs has endured, and its applications have
been extended in healthcare, education, industry, and
marketing to understand people and their motivators.
Needs related to individual, environmental, and health
concerns are applicable to the nursing discipline. However,
this theory is still a grand theory and does not address the
specific domain of nursing.
Developmental Theories
A group of theories widely used in healthcare and educa-
tion are the developmental theories. Some of these 
middle-range theories address personality (Erikson), cog-
nitive (Piaget), and moral (Kohlberg) development using
a life-span perspective. This perspective is based on pro-
gression and complexity in motor, personal-social, cogni-
tive, or moral behavior. A brief review of each of the
theories demonstrates how the theorist moved from a phi-
losophy or worldview to identify concepts, propositions,
and a model or theory based on observations, existing 
research, or case study presen tations. Common to the 
developmental theories are predictable steps or stages
through which the individual progresses during the life
cycle. This is a building process. These theories are based
largely on research through observation or case studies.
Subsequent applications and research have been guided by
the use of these theories to explain more specific phenom-
ena or to test hypotheses.
Personality Development
Erikson’s (1963) eight ages of man represents a theory of
psychosocial personality development in which the indi-
vidual proceeds through critical periods in a step-by-step
or epigenetic process (Fig. 2.3). This theory has been and
continues to be used widely in healthcare and psychology.
In offering the theory, Erikson presented his philosophy
and case studies with Freudian and neo-Freudian applica-
tions. Each stage has positive and negative aspects that are
defined and described. The basic goal is for the individual
to develop a favorable ratio of the positive aspects for a
healthy ego. Erikson (1963) further described basic virtues
and essential strengths for each of his “ages” or stages of de-
velopment. These strengths and basic virtues define the
positive aspects of ego development required in each stage.
Proposi tions are developed for each of the stages. This the-
ory is supported mainly by case study, with suggestions and
encouragement of further hypotheses for research and test-
ing. Erikson’s theory has been used widely in nursing to
foster positive ego development and empowerment in in-
dividuals. Although this theory does not specifically address
ON LIN E CON SULT 
Learn more about Maslow and his work at 
http://www.maslow.com

the domain of nursing, common concerns include human
beings, the environment, and psychosocial health.
Havighurst was another theorist who focused on per-
sonality development as developmental tasks and educa-
tion. His theory from the mid-20th century included
principles of cognitive and moral development in which
the individual proceeded through six stages, accomplishing
critical tasks. Havighurst (1972) described his philosophy,
including the origins of the concept, and proposed a
method for analyzing individual developmental tasks based
on his defining criteria as well as biological, psychological,
and cultural bases. He also provided educational implica-
tions for each of the developmental periods. Although de-
scriptions of the tasks represent some gender bias and
cultural limitations in our current global society, the bio-
logical and psychological bases are applicable. The tasks
represent major milestones in biological, psychological,
emotional, and cognitive functioning or development that
individuals must negotiate as they progress through life. As
with Erikson’s theory of personality development, concerns
about the human being, the environment, and health pro-
motion are apparent in Havighurst’s life-span perspective.
The age-specific tasks represent activities of daily living dur-
ing specific life stages, along with cognitive development.
Cognitive Development
Piaget’s theory of cognitive development focuses on the
development of the intellect. Piaget was truly an example
of a self-actualized person. He described himself as a 
naturalist and biologist by training, without formal train-
ing in psychology (Flavell, 1963, p. vii). Moving from the
publication of his first monograph on birds at the age
of 10, he detailed the development of the intellect in chil-
dren through observations. His techniques were some-
times criticized by the scientific community, but his theory
has since been accepted and used in practice and research
by many students and professionals. Piaget’s theory looks
at innate and environmental influences on the develop-
ment of the intellect. This theory has four major periods
of cognitive development: sensorimotor, preoperational
thought, concrete operations, and formal operations
(Table 2.1).
Within his theory, Piaget provided us with the con-
cepts of schema, object permanence, assimilation, and 
accommodation. Schema are patterns of thought or behav-
ior that evolve into more complexity as more information
is obtained through assimilation and accommodation. 
Object permanence, the knowledge that something still 
exists when it is out of sight, develops when the child is
between 9 and 10 months of age. Assimilation is the ac-
quisition and incorporation of new information into the
individual’s existing cognitive and behavioral structures.
Accommodation is the change in the individual’s cognitive
and behavioral patterns based on the new information ac-
quired. Piaget’s theory has been translated and applied
worldwide and across disciplines. His work continued
until his death in 1980, and further research and theory is
still evolving from his contributions.
Piaget’s work concentrated on cognitive development in
children, including views on moral development. As such,
it is more limited but has provided major insight into work-
ing with children. Applications are seen in health teaching,
especially in chronic or terminal illness situations. But with
these limitations on cognitive development for some envi-
ronmental influences, it can address only a portion of the
domain of concern to nursing.
Moral Development
Kohlberg’s theory of moral development was an  outgrowth
of Piaget’s work on moral development in children.
Kohlberg’s extensive work on moral development (Kohlberg,
1984; Kohlberg et al., 1987) is based on research with chil-
dren who were given scenarios to describe reactions and
make judgments. He initially studied boys 10 to 16 years 
old from Chicago, later adding research with children of 
both genders and different backgrounds. Kohlberg’s theory
(Table 2.2) consists of six stages grouped into three major
levels: preconventional, conventional, and postconventional
(Kohlberg, 1984).
Kohlberg’s theory confers major insight into moral 
development. He provided the theoretical structure, 
supportive research, and applications in educational prac-
tice. The individual progresses through the levels and
stages, not as a natural process, but through intellectual
stimulation with a central focus on moral justice. This re-
quires thinking about moral problems and issues. Further
research and practices have been based on this theory and
are ongoing. Consider the usefulness of this theory when
26
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
8.
7.
6.
5.
4.
3.
2.
1.
AGES
STRENGTHS & VIRTUES
DEVELOPMENTAL STAGE
Renunciation & Wisdom
Production & Care
Affiliation & Love
Devotion & Fidelity
Method & Competence
Direction & Purpose
Self-control & Will Power
Drive & Hope
Older Adulthood
Middle Adulthood
Young Adulthood
Adolescence
School Age
Preschool
Toddler
Infancy
 
Ego Integrity Vs. Despair
 
Generativity Vs. Stagnation
 
Intimacy Vs. Isolation
 
Identity Vs. Role Confusion
 
Industry Vs. Inferiority
 
Initiative Vs. Guilt
 Autonomy Vs. Shame & Doubt
Trust Vs. Mistrust
Figure 2.3 Erikson’s (1963) eight ages of man.
O N L I NE  C ONSULT  
Learn more about psychosocial development 
and Erikson’s Eight Ages (or Stages) at 
http://www. childdevelopmentinfo.com/
development/erickson.shtml

CHAPTER 2 Theory as the Basis for Practice
●
27
you are working with a child or adolescent whose parent
was recently diagnosed with a terminal illness.
As with Piagetian theory, Kohlberg’s theory is limited
to a specific area of development. The focus is on human
beings, such as the child, with ramifications for adult life.
Environmental (e.g., social and cultural) factors provide
insight for social and psychological health. The limitation
to moral development addresses only a portion of the do-
main of concern to nursing.
Many developmental models are used and applied in
nursing. Examine the conceptual models and theories pre-
sented in Chapter 3 for their application of developmen-
tal concepts. Several nursing theories have a decidedly
developmental focus, whether as a main component, as
TABLE 2.1
Piaget’s Theory of Cognitive Development
Period of Cognitive
Development
Age
Stage Description
Sensorimotor Stages
Reflexive
Birth–1 month
Use of primitive reflexes, such as sucking and rooting
Primary circular reactions
1–4 months
Repeating an event for the result, such as thumb in mouth
Secondary circular reactions
4–10 months
Combining events for a result, such as kicking mobile 
over crib
Coordination of secondary 
10–12 months
Creating a behavior for some result, such as standing
schema
in crib to reach mobile
Tertiary circular reactions
12–18 months
Looking for similar results from varying behaviors, such as 
shaking crib and jumping to observe movements of mobile
Representational thought begins
18–24 months
Symbolic representation in thought such as hanging 
objects to create mobile
Preoperational
2–7 years
Making overgeneralizations, such as all cats are named 
Tiger; egocentric
Focuses only on one concrete attribute
Magical thought and symbolic play present
Concrete operations
7–11 years
Logical and reversible thought appears; conservation of 
matter and numbers
Formal operations
After 11 years
Theoretical and hypothetical thinking now possible; 
higher-order mathematics and reasoning
TABLE 2.2
Kohlberg’s Theory of Moral Development (Kohlberg, 1981; Kohlberg 
and Lickona, 1990)
Level
Stage
Stage Description
Level I: Preconventional 
1. Heteronomous morality
Egocentric and applies a fixed set of rules from 
morality
authorities, e.g., parents
2. Individualism, purpose, 
Sees that different individuals have different rules, 
and exchange
e.g., parents and teachers
Level II: Conventional 
3. Interpersonal expectations, 
Motives of other person now emerge when 
morality
relationships, and conformity
considering right and wrong; use of the Golden Rule
4. Social system and conscience
The good of society as a whole now emerges 
Level III: Postconventional 
5. Social contract and individual 
Believes in upholding laws and legal contracts 
morality
rights
6. Universal ethical principles
Principles of justice and human rights as an 
ethical system

in Watson’s theory, or with specific  concepts included,
defined, and built on, as in King’s model.
A life span, developmental, or life processes focus has
major relevance for nursing, because we view human be-
ings in the context of environment and effects on health
status. The interrelationships with health and nursing are
complex and must be specified for their applicability to
the domain of nursing.
Systems Theory
Perhaps the most widely used theory in multiple disci-
plines is systems theory. Systems have been in existence
for ages, but in the late 1930s, Bertalanffy introduced sys-
tems theory to represent an aspect of reality. Thus, gen-
eral system theory was incorporated in the paradigms of
many scientific communities. This is a grand theory that
is wide in scope, and that has generated numerous theo-
ries in many disciplines. Bertalanffy (1968) explained the
wide applicability in many scientific communities as the
various disciplines became concerned with “wholeness”—
that is, not just focusing on isolated parts, but dealing
with the interrelationships among them and between the
parts and the whole. A system generally contains the fol-
lowing basic components: input, output, boundary, en-
vironment, and feedback. Figure 2.4 illustrates a basic
view of a simple system.
The initial step in understanding and applying systems
theory is to view the grand theory. Bertalanffy (1968) de-
fined a system as a complex of interacting elements and
proposed that every living organism is essentially an open
system. The general system theory applies the following
principles to human and organizational systems:
1. Wholeness: This indicates that the whole is more than
merely the sum of its parts. To understand the whole,
one must understand the components and their inter-
actions with each other and the environment.
2. Hierarchical order: Some form of hierarchy exists in
the system’s components, structure, and functions.
3. Exchange of information and matter (openness): In an
open system, there is an exchange and ﬂow of infor-
mation and matter with the environment through
some boundary that surrounds the system. Inputs
come through the boundary from the environment,
are transformed through system processes (through-
puts), and are sent as outputs through the boundary
back into the environment. This exchange of informa-
tion and matter is goal-oriented, whether to maintain
the steady state or to fulﬁll the functions of the sys-
tem. An important component of this process is feed-
back from the environment.
4. Progressive differentiation: Diﬀerentiation within the
system leads to self-organization. Applying the laws 
of thermodynamics, entropy is a measure of order or
organization in the system in the process of seeking
equilibrium or some ﬁnal goal. In an open system, en-
tropy is decreased or negative, allowing for diﬀerentia-
tion and self-organization.
5. Equifinality: In open systems, the ﬁnal state can be
reached from diﬀerent initial conditions and in diﬀer-
ent ways. Initial conditions do not necessarily deter-
mine the ﬁnal state or outcome of the system.
6. Teleology: Behavior in the system is directed toward
some purpose or goal, as a human characteristic.
Environmental influences are a major consideration in
health care. Systems theory provides a useful framework
with which to visualize some phenomenon (the system),
focusing on the components, structure, and functions as
the internal environment (throughputs), and influenced
by (inputs and feedback) and influencing (outputs) the
environment. It is important to analyze the system care-
fully for all component parts, structures, and functions.
Recall that the basis for general system theory is that “the
whole is greater than the sum of the parts.” This brings us
to the need for a precise analysis of interrelationships
among components and between the parts and the entire
system. In addition, an open  system has permeable bound-
aries receiving input and feedback from the environment.
Problems occur when environmental factors are unknown,
unclear, or ignored. Consider the broad health-service sys-
tem. Since the Institute of Medicine began issuing a series
of reports in 1998, we have been greatly concerned about
safety in healthcare. Systems issues have been a major
focus, but moving from a culture of blaming individual
practitioners, the challenge became one of improving com-
ponents in the system, input, feedback, and outputs. In
addition, the broader healthcare environment and societal
influences are included and visualized as crossing the sys-
tem boundaries of an individual hospital setting.
In nursing, systems theory and various applications have
been used to explain organizations, nursing and healthcare
delivery, and groups of people. Several  nursing models are
based on systems theory. Johnson’s Behavioral Systems con-
ceptual model views the person as a behavioral system and
nursing as an external force. It exemplifies how a grand the-
ory (general system theory) from another scientific commu-
nity provided a basis for developing the conceptual model
of nursing (Johnson’s Behavioral Systems). Specificity to the
metaparadigm concepts and interrelationships unique to
nursing have provided the basis for the nursing conceptual
framework. Further delineation of concepts and proposi-
tions leads to more specific nursing theory. Neuman’s
28
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
Environment
Input
Output
Environment
Environment
System
Feedback
Figure 2.4 General systems model:
A simple, open system.

CHAPTER 2 Theory as the Basis for Practice
●
29
The language and concepts of quantum theory ex-
tend beyond the atom as we look at issues of holism, du-
ality, uncertainty, causality, and probabilities in daily
life and practice. Recognition and understanding of the
paradigm shift are essential for the health sciences as we
seek new knowledge and improvements in patient-care
outcomes.
THE IMPACT OF THEORY 
ON PRACTICE
Alligood (2014a) proposes that professional nursing
practice requires a systematic approach that is focused on
the patient, and the theoretical works provide the per-
spectives of the patient (pp. 9–10). We use theory every 
day in our personal and professional lives, from learning
the basic principles of asepsis in hygiene and standard
precautions, to understanding the complex communica-
tion channels of the organizational system in which we
practice.
Theory, practice, and research are interrelated and
interdependent. We need theory to guide practice pre-
dictably and effectively. We need research to support the
significance and usefulness of the theory, because the
dynamic nature of our metaparadigm concepts of
human beings, environment, health, and nursing makes
theories tentative and subject to refinement and revi-
sion. Professional practice provides the questions for
study based on problems and phenomena relevant to the
discipline. Again, recall that nursing is a profession and
a scientific community. We practice using principles
provided by our metaparadigm and theoretical bases.
This furnishes us with the tools for critical thinking,
provision of care, education, administration, research,
and interdisciplinary collaboration. We have a paradigm
that provides the models for problems and solutions in
our knowledge base and practice community in line
with Kuhn’s (1970) descriptions of a paradigm. Our
paradigms and theories are designed to address problems
and solutions in practice; otherwise we need to shift to
a new structure with different theories and paradigms
to explain our concerns for people, environments,
health, and nursing.
The theory on which we base practice must be com-
patible with and must correspond to the phenomena of
professional nursing practice. To ensure that the goals of
theory and practice are consistent, Alligood (2014b) has
recommended the following considerations for selecting a
framework for practice:
1. Evaluate your values and beliefs held true about 
nursing.
2. Establish your philosophy statement of beliefs on the
metaparadigm concepts.
3. Evaluate deﬁnitions of the metaparadigm concepts in
selected models.
4. Select two to three frameworks that are consistent
with your beliefs.
5. Look at the assumptions of the models.
6. Apply the models to your practice area to see if they
work in the practice setting.
Healthcare model, Roy’s Adaptation model, and King’s
conceptual framework and Theory of Goal Attainment are
examples of nursing conceptual models and theories based
on systems models. Other nursing models use various com-
ponents of general systems theory. Further applications of
systems theory are evident in subsequent sections on man-
agement and leadership in organizations and change.
THEORETICAL CHALLENGES
AND A PARADIGM SHIFT
Galbraith (1984) identified conventional wisdom as the
structure of ideas that is based on acceptability, and to
the people as their reality as they see and articulate it 
(p. 16). These ideas, which people generally consider as
“truths,” can be obstacles to new theories and to the de-
velopment of new knowledge. Conventional wisdom
may be that the current paradigm is on the brink of
change. We must be open to new theories with new
technology. Knowledge expansion can proceed at a
much greater rate, as we have now seen with quantum
physics or quantum mechanics.
For years, Newtonian physics provided the conven-
tional wisdom of the three laws of motion: (1) inertia (ob-
jects in motion tend to stay in motion, and objects at rest
tend to stay at rest unless there is interference from an
outside force), (2) net force (the force on an object is
mathematically equal to its mass times acceleration), and
(3) reciprocal actions (for every action there is an equal
and opposite reaction). 
Based on the work of Galileo and others, Newton’s the-
ories from the 17th century prevailed until the 20th century
with the addition of Einstein’s theory of relativity and the
discovery of quantum theory. As Nobel Laureate Robert
Laughlin (2005) points out, although applicable to the
macroscopic world, Newton’s laws are incorrect at the
atomic scale (p. 31). How we  formerly pictured an atom,
as a Newtonian-like solar system, is outdated and incorrect.
Researchers and theorists have moved from classical physics
to the era of the quantum.
We hear a good deal about the “quantum” nature of
our world and universe. But it is all evolving as we de-
velop new insight into the makeup of matter and how
particles behave. A quantum is merely an energy bundle
at the atomic and subatomic level—neutrons, protons,
and electrons. The measurement of the quantum requires
high-level mathematical computations looking at statis-
tical probabilities of matter and waves. Hence, the dis-
coveries from classic mechanics to quantum mechanics
have occurred in areas of physics, chemistry, computers,
and biology. This has provided the basis for certain trans-
formations in healthcare, such as the introduction of the
laser and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Biotech-
nology and advances in physical science will continue
with our quest for discovery and knowledge. Laughlin
(2005) notes, however, that we have experienced a para-
digm shift, moving from a reductionist view of science to
one of emergence, and that, “as in all other human activ-
ities, it is necessary in science to take stock now and then
and reevaluate what one deeply understands and what one
does not” (p. 13). 

K E Y  P O I N T S
●Kerlinger and Lee (2000) define a theory as “a set of interrelated constructs (concepts), definitions, and
propositions that present a systematic view of phenomena by specifying relations among variables, with
the purpose of explaining and predicting the phenomena” (p. 11).
●A model is a graphic representation of some phenomena. A theoretical model provides a visual descrip-
tion of the theory using limited narrative and displaying components and relationships symbolically. A
framework is another means of providing a structural view of the concepts and relationships proposed 
in a theory. 
●A concept is a view or idea we hold about something, ranging from something highly concrete to
something highly abstract. A construct is a more complex idea package of some phenomena. Defini-
tions of concepts and constructs are theoretical or conceptual. An operational definition states 
precisely what we view as phenomena and how they can be measured as variables in a practice 
or research situation.
●Propositions in a theory are the descriptions and relationships among the constructs (or concepts)
that propose how the concepts are linked and relate to each other and to the total theoretical 
structure.
●Dickoff and James (1968) developed a classic position paper proposing four levels of nursing theory: 
factor-isolating, factor-relating, situation-relating, and situation-producing theories.
●Theories are classified as grand, middle-range, or practice on the basis of their scope or breadth of 
coverage of phenomena.
●Theory description is a careful, nonjudgmental analysis of the component parts of a theory—its assump-
tions, concepts, definitions, propositions, context, and scope.
●Theory evaluation requires thoughtful interpretation relative to the clarity, significance, consistency, 
empirical support, and usefulness in explaining a phenomenon of concern.
●Maslow’s theory of human motivation proposes a hierarchical structure for basic human needs.
●Developmental theories are widely used in nursing and other healthcare disciplines and include Erikson’s
(1963) eight ages of psychosocial development, Piaget’s theory of cognitive development, and Kohlberg’s
theory of moral development.
●A system generally contains the following basic component parts: input, output, boundary, environ-
ment, and feedback. Bertalanffy’s (1968) general system theory is a grand theory applied to many 
disciplines.
●Quantum theory, based on quantum physics, uses statistical probabilities for the actions of atomic and
subatomic matter and waves and has provided some of the basis for advances in technology.
●Theory, practice, and research are interrelated and interdependent. When we are selecting a theory 
on which to base practice, the theory must be compatible with and correspond to the phenomena of
professional nursing practice.
30
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
be in a constant state of evaluation to ensure that the
model of practice is current and based on nursing science.
In the next chapter, conceptual models and theories
unique to nursing are discussed. These models guide
practice in our highly complex profession. Implementing
models for practice, whether unique to nursing or adapted,
is a necessary but arduous and time-consuming task. The
process is worth the effort to ensure quality care for re-
cipients, but it requires many of the skills addressed in
subsequent chapters.
7. Compare the frameworks, looking at patient focus,
nursing action, and outcomes.
8. Review the literature on applications of the selected
models to practice.
9. Select the best framework appropriate to your practice
and implement it. (p. 57)
But recall that conventional wisdom can be an obsta-
cle to the discovery of new knowledge. Practice  models
are subject to change as new information is discovered
and as patient needs change. The paradigm concepts must

CHAPTER 2 Theory as the Basis for Practice
●
31
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Consider the following statement by Barnum (1990) describing early nursing theories: “A high number of [bound-
ary] overlaps occur in the discipline of nursing because it often attempts to deal holistically with a phenomenon
(man) that has previously been dealt with in compartmentalized ways by other disciplines” (p. 218). What does
she mean by “holistically”? How do you think other disciplines may deal with the human being in a compartmen-
talized way?
2. Identify individuals who you think are self-actualized, and explain why.
3. Identify a theory used in your practice setting. Identify the concepts (constructs), how the component concepts
are defined, the propositions that link the concepts, and the aims of the theory.
4. Describe how theory is used in your practice setting, and propose how it could be used further.
5. Review the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter, and discuss it in the context of the contents
of the chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.
Fawcett, J. (2005). Contemporary nursing knowledge: Analysis
and evaluation of nursing models and theories (2nd ed.).
Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Fawcett, J. (2014). Nursing philosophies, models, and theories:
A focus on the future. In A. M. Tomey & M. R. Alligood
(Eds.), Nursing theory: Utilization and application (5th ed.,
pp. 425–441). St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
Fawcett, J., & DeSanto-Madeya, S. (2013). Contemporary
nursing knowledge: Analysis and evaluation of nursing models
and theories (3rd ed.). Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Flavell, J. H. (1963). The developmental psychology of Jean 
Piaget. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Galbraith, J. K. (1984). The affluent society. Boston, MA:
Houghton Mifflin.
Glanz, K., Rimer, B. K., & Lewis, F. M. (Eds.). (2002). Health
behavior and health education: Theory, research, and practice
(3rd ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Havighurst, R. J. (1972). Developmental tasks and education
(3rd ed.). New York: David McKay.
Kerlinger, F. N., & Lee, H. B. (2000). Foundations of 
behavioral research (4th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth 
Thompson Learning.
Kohlberg, L. (1984). Essays in moral development: Vol. II. The
psychology of moral development. San Francisco, CA: 
Harper & Row.
Kohlberg, L., DeVries, R., Fein, G., Hart, D., Mayer, R., Noam,
G., Snarey, J., & Wertsch, J. (1987). Child psychology 
and childhood education: A cognitive-developmental view. 
New York: Longman.
Kohlberg, L., & Lickona, T. (1990). Moral discussion and the
class meeting. In R. DeVries & L. Kohlberg (Eds.), Con-
structivist early education: Overview and comparison with
other programs. Washington, DC: National Association for
the Education of Young Children.
Kuhn, T. S. (1970). The structure of scientific revolutions
(2nd ed.). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
REFERENCES
Alligood, M. R. (2014a). The nature of knowledge needed 
for nursing practice. In M. R. Alligood, Nursing theory: 
Utilization and application (5th ed., pp. 1–12). St. Louis,
MO: Elsevier Mosby.
Alligood, M. R. (2014b). Philosophies, models, and theories:
Critical thinking structures. In M. R. Alligood (Ed.), 
Nursing theory: Utilization and application (5th ed., 
pp. 40–62). St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Mosby.
Alligood, M. R. (2014c). Introduction to nursing theory: Its
history, significance, and analysis. In M. R. Alligood (Ed.),
Nursing theorists and their work (8th ed., pp. 2–13). 
St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Mosby. 
Barnum, B. J. S. (1990). Nursing theory: Analysis, application,
evaluation (3rd ed.). Glenview, IL: Scott Foresman/Little,
Brown Higher Education.
Barnum, B. J. S. (1994). Nursing theory: Analysis, appli cation,
evaluation (4th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: J. B. Lippincott.
Barnum, B. S. (1998). Nursing theory: Analysis, application, 
evaluation (5th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams 
& Wilkins.
Bertalanffy, L. V. (1968). General system theory: Foundations, 
development, applications. New York: George Braziller.
Chinn, P. L., & Kramer, M. K. (2011). Integrated knowledge
development in nursing (8th ed.). St. Louis, MO: Elsevier 
Mosby.
Dickoff, J., & James, P. (1968). A theory of theories: A  position
paper. Nursing Research, 17, 197–203.
Erikson, E. H. (1963). Childhood and society (2nd ed.).
New York: W. W. Norton.
Fawcett, J. (1995). Analysis and evaluation of conceptual models
of nursing (3rd ed.). Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Fawcett, J. (2000). Analysis and evaluation of contemporary nurs-
ing knowledge: Nursing models and theories. Philadelphia,
PA: F. A. Davis.

Hardy, M. E. (1974). Theories: Components, development,
evaluation. Nursing Research, 23, 100–107.
Power, F. C., Higgins, A., & Kohlberg, L. (1989). Lawrence
Kohlberg’s approach to moral education. New York: 
Columbia University.
Singer, D. G., & Revenson, T. A. (1998). A Piaget primer: 
How a child thinks (Rev. ed.). Madison, CT: International
Universities Press.
ONLINE RESOURCES
Books by A. H. Maslow 
http://www.maslow.com
Jean Piaget Society 
http://www.piaget.org 
Nursing Theories 
http://www.nurses.info/nursing_theory.htm
Laughlin, R. B. (2005). A different universe: Reinventing physics
from the bottom down. New York: Basic Books.
Leininger, M. M. (2006). The culture care theory. In 
M. Leininger & M. R. McFarland (Eds.), Culture care 
diversity and universality: A worldwide nursing theory
(2nd ed., pp. 1–41). Boston, MA: Jones and Bartlett.
Maslow, A. H. (1954). Motivation and personality.
New York: Harper & Brothers.
Maslow, A. H. (1970). Motivation and personality (2nd ed.).
New York: Harper & Row.
Merton, R. K. (1957). Social theory and social structure
(Rev. ed.). Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Fawcett, J. (2011). Thoughts about nursing science and 
nursing sciencing on the event of the 25th anniversary of
Nursing Science Quarterly. Nursing Science Quarterly, 25,
111–113.
32
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

Evolution and Use of
Formal Nursing
Knowledge
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Describe the meaning of formal nursing knowledge as the basis for professional nursing practice.
2. Identify the definitions and different functions of conceptual models and theories.
3. Discuss the advantages of using explicit conceptual models of nursing and nursing theories to guide
professional nursing practice.
4. Apply a conceptual model of nursing or nursing theory to a particular practice situation.
Formal Nursing Knowledge
Nursing Knowledge
Conceptual Models of Nursing
Johnson’s Behavioral System Model
King’s Conceptual System
Levine’s Conservation Model
Neuman’s Systems Model
Orem’s Self-Care Framework
Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human
Beings
Roy’s Adaptation Model
Synergy Model
Grand Theories of Nursing
Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care
Diversity and Universality
Newman’s Theory of Health as
Expanding Consciousness
Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming
Middle-Range Nursing Theories
Peplau’s Theory of Interpersonal
Relations
Watson’s Theory of Human Caring 
Orlando’s Theory of the
Deliberative Nursing Process
Transitions Theory
Situation-Specific Nursing Theories
33
3
●Jacqueline Fawcett
The survival of the profession and discipline of
nursing depends on nurses’ understanding,
acceptance, further development, and use of
nursing discipline-specific knowledge, including
nursing conceptual models and theories.
Key Terms

34
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
This chapter presents a discussion of the evolution of nurs-
ing knowledge—as it has been formalized—in conceptual
models of nursing and nursing theories as well as a discus-
sion of how that knowledge has influenced professional
nursing practice.
FORMAL NURSING
KNOWLEDGE 
Conceptual models of nursing and nursing theories rep-
resent formal nursing knowledge. That knowledge was
organized by several nurse scholars who devoted a great
deal of time to observing people’s experiences of wellness
and illness, thinking about what is important to nurses
and the profession of nursing in those experiences, and
then testing their thoughts by conducting nursing re-
search. Nursing knowledge continues to evolve as nurse
researchers and practicing nurses use conceptual models
and theories to guide their research and practice and then
report the results at conferences and in publications. Con-
sequently, all nurses can contribute to the evolution of
nursing knowledge.
Nursing Defined
Nightingale’s (1859) book, Notes on Nursing: What It 
Is, and What It Is Not, contains the first ideas that can be
considered formal nursing knowledge. According to
Nightingale, nursing ought to signify the proper use of
fresh air, light, warmth, cleanliness, quiet, and the proper
selection and administration of diet—all at the least ex-
pense of vital power to the patient; that is, she maintained
that the purpose of nursing was to put the patient in the
best condition for nature to act on him or her. 
More than 100 years later, Henderson continued the
evolution of formal nursing knowledge when she pub-
lished a definition of nursing. “The unique function of the
nurse,” Henderson (1966) maintained, “is to assist the in-
dividual, sick or well, to perform those activities contribut-
ing to health or its recovery (or to peaceful death) that he
[or she] would perform unaided if he [or she] had the nec-
essary strength, will, or knowledge. And to do so in such
a way as to help him [or her] gain independence as rapidly
as possible” (p. 15). Although the intervening years were
filled with many ideas about nursing, most of those ideas
were, unfortunately, not presented as formal conceptual
models and theories.
CONCEPTUAL MODELS
For our purposes, the terms conceptual model, conceptual
framework, conceptual system, and paradigm have the same
definition and functions and may be used interchangeably.
Definition
A conceptual model is defined as a set of relatively abstract
and general concepts that address the phenomena of central
interest to a discipline, the statements that broadly describe
those concepts, and the statements that assert relatively ab-
stract and general relations between two or more of the
concepts (Fawcett & DeSanto-Madeya, 2013).
Each conceptual model presents a particular perspec-
tive about the phenomena of interest to a particular disci-
pline, such as nursing. Conceptual models of nursing
present diverse perspectives of human beings—including
individuals, families and other groups, and communities—
who are participants in nursing; the environment of the
nursing participant and the environment in which nursing
practice occurs; the health condition of the nursing par-
ticipant; and the definition and goals of nursing as well as
the practice methodology—typically referred to as the
nursing process—used to assess, label, plan, intervene, and
evaluate.
Functions
One function of any conceptual model is to provide a dis-
tinctive frame of reference, or “a horizon of expectations”
(Popper, 1965, p. 47). Another function of each concep-
tual model is to identify a particular “philosophical 
and pragmatic orientation to the service nurses provide 
patients—a service which only nurses can provide—a ser -
vice which provides a dimension to total care different
from that provided by any other health professional”
(Johnson, 1987, p. 195). Conceptual models of nursing
provide explicit orientations not only for nurses but also
for the general public. Johnson (1987) explained, “Con-
ceptual models specify for nurses and society the mission
and boundaries of the profession. They clarify the realm
of nursing responsibility and accountability, and they
allow the practitioner and/or the profession to document
services and outcomes” (pp. 196–197).
Conceptual Models of Nursing
Currently, the works of several nurse scholars are recog-
nized as broad conceptual models of nursing that can be
used in many different practice situations. Among the best
known of those conceptual models are Johnson’s (1990)
Behavioral System Model, King’s (2006) Conceptual 
System, Levine’s (1991) Conservation Model, Neuman’s 
Systems Model (Neuman & Fawcett, 2011), Orem’s
(2001) Self-Care Framework, Rogers’ (1990) Science of
Unitary Human Beings, and Roy’s (2009) Adaptation
Model. An overview of each of these nursing models is
presented in the following section, along with the impli-
cations of each one for professional nursing practice.
Dorothy Johnson’s Behavioral 
System Model
Johnson’s Behavioral System Model focuses on the per-
son as a behavioral system, made up of all the patterned,
repetitive, and purposeful elements of behavior that char-
acterize life. Seven subsystems carry out specialized tasks
or functions needed to maintain the integrity of the whole
behavioral system and to manage its relationship to the
environment. The subsystems and their functions are as
follows:
1. Attachment or aﬃliative: The security—in terms of 
social inclusion, intimacy, and formation and mainte-
nance of social bonds—that the individual needs for
survival.

CHAPTER 3 Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing Knowledge     ●
35
2. Dependency: The succoring behavior that calls for a re-
sponse of nurturance as well as approval, attention or
recognition, and physical assistance.
3. Ingestive: Appetite satisfaction—when, how, what, how
much, and under what conditions the individual eats—
all of which are governed by social and psychological
considerations as well as biological requirements for
food and ﬂuids.
4. Eliminative: Elimination—when, how, and under
what conditions the individual eliminates wastes.
5. Sexual: Procreation and gratiﬁcation, with regard to
behaviors dependent on the individual’s biological sex
and gender role identity, including but not limited to
courting and mating.
6. Aggressive: Protection and preservation of self and 
society.
7. Achievement: Mastery or control of some aspect of self
or environment, with regard to intellectual, physical,
creative, mechanical, social, and caretaking (of 
children, partner, home) skills.
The structure of each subsystem involves four elements:
1. Drive or goal: The motivation for behavior.
2. Set: The individual’s predisposition to act in certain
ways to fulﬁll the function of the subsystem.
3. Choice: The individual’s total behavioral repertoire for
fulﬁlling subsystem functions, which encompasses the
scope of action alternatives from which the person can
choose.
4. Action: The individual’s actual behavior in a situation.
Action is the only structural element that can be ob-
served directly; all other elements must be inferred
from the individual’s actual behavior and from the
consequences of that behavior.
The three functional requirements listed below are needed
by each subsystem to fulfill its functions:
1. Protection from noxious inﬂuences with which the 
system cannot cope
2. Nurturance through the input of appropriate supplies
from the environment
3. Stimulation to enhance growth and prevent 
stagnation
Implications for Nursing Practice
Nursing practice is directed toward the restoration, main-
tenance, or attainment of behavioral system balance and
dynamic stability at the highest possible level for the indi-
vidual. Johnson’s practice methodology, which is called
the Nursing Diagnostic and Treatment Process, encom-
passes the four steps listed in Box 3.1. Each step is dis-
cussed in detail below.
Determination of the Existence of a Problem
The nurse obtains the following:
●Past and present family and individual behavioral sys-
tem histories through interviews, structured and un-
structured observations, and objective methodologies
●Data about the nature of behavioral system function-
ing in terms of the efficiency and effectiveness with
which the patient’s goals are obtained
●Information to determine the degree to which the 
behavior is purposeful, orderly, and predictable
●Information on the condition of the subsystem struc-
tural components to draw inferences about (1) drive
strength, direction, and value; (2) the solidity and
specificity of the set; (3) the range of behavior patterns
available to the patient; and (4) the usual behavior in a
given situation
The patient’s behavior is compared with the following in-
dices for behavioral system balance and stability, as well as
the reorganization and integration of the subsystems:
●The behavior achieves the consequences sought.
●The behavior reveals the patient’s effective use of
motor, expressive, or social skills.
●The behavior is purposeful—actions are goal directed,
reveal a plan, cease at an identifiable point, and are
economical in sequence.
●The behavior is orderly—actions are methodical and
systematic, build sequentially toward a goal, and form
a recognizable pattern.
●The behavior is predictable—actions are repetitive
under particular circumstances.
●The amount of energy expended to achieve desired
goals is acceptable.
●The behavior reflects appropriate choices—actions are
compatible with survival imperatives and the social 
situation.
●The behavior satisfies the patient sufficiently.
Diagnostic Classification of a Problem
A problem might occur in two areas: 
●Internal subsystem problems: Functional requirements
are not met, inconsistency or disharmony among the
structural components of subsystems is evident, and/or
the behavior is inappropriate in the ambient culture.
●Intersystem problems: The entire behavioral system is
dominated by one or two subsystems, or a conflict ex-
ists between two or more subsystems.
Management of Nursing Problems
The general goals of action are to restore, maintain, or 
attain the patient’s behavioral system balance and stability
and to help the patient achieve an optimum level of 
balance and functioning when this goal is possible and 
desired. The nurse determines what nursing is to accom-
plish on behalf of the behavioral system by determining
who makes the judgment regarding the acceptable level of
behavioral system balance and stability. Nursing actions
may occur in three areas:
●Temporary external regulatory or control mechanisms, 
by setting limits for behavior by either permissive or
inhibitory means, inhibiting ineffective behavioral 
BOX 3.1
Johnson’s Behavioral System Model:
Diagnostic and Treatment Process
●Determination of the Existence of a Problem
●Diagnostic Classiﬁcation of a Problem
●Management of Nursing Problems
●Evaluation of Behavioral System Balance and 
Stability

responses, helping the patient acquire new responses,
and reinforcing appropriate behaviors
●Repair of damaged structural components, by reducing
drive strength by changing attitudes, redirecting goals
by changing attitudes, altering the set by instruction or
counseling, and adding choices by teaching new skills
●Fulfillment of functional requirements of subsystems, by
protecting the patient from overwhelming noxious in-
fluences, supplying adequate nurturance, and provid-
ing stimulation to enhance growth and inhibit
stagnation
The nurse negotiates the treatment modality with the 
patient by establishing a contract with the patient and
helping him or her to understand the meaning of the nurs-
ing diagnosis and the proposed treatment.
Evaluation of Behavioral System Balance 
and Stability
The nurse compares the patient’s behavior after treatment
with indices of behavioral system balance and stability.
Imogene King’s Conceptual System
King’s Conceptual System focuses on the continuing abil-
ity of individuals to meet their basic needs so that they may
function in their socially defined roles. This conceptual
model also concentrates on individuals’ interactions within
three open, dynamic, interacting systems—the personal
system, the interpersonal system, and the social system.
Personal Systems
Personal systems are individuals who are regarded as 
rational, sentient, social beings. Concepts related to the
personal system are as follows:
●Perception: A process of organizing, interpreting, and
transforming information from sense data and mem-
ory that gives meaning to one’s experience, represents
one’s image of reality, and influences one’s behavior
●Self: A composite of thoughts and feelings that consti-
tute a person’s awareness of individual existence, of
who and what he or she is
●Growth and development: Cellular, molecular, and be-
havioral changes in human beings that are a function
of genetic endowment, meaningful and satisfying expe-
riences, and an environment conducive to helping 
individuals move toward maturity
●Body image: A person’s perceptions of his or her body
●Time: The duration between the occurrence of one
event and the occurrence of another event
●Personal space: The physical area, or territory, that ex-
ists in all directions as perceived by each individual
●Learning: Gaining knowledge
Interpersonal Systems
Interpersonal systems are defined as two or more individ-
uals interacting in a given situation. The concepts associ-
ated with this system are as follows:
●Interaction: The act of two or more persons in mutual
presence; a sequence of verbal and nonverbal behaviors
that are goal directed
●Communication: The vehicle by which human rela-
tions are developed and maintained; encompasses 
intrapersonal, interpersonal, verbal, and nonverbal
communications
●Transaction: A process of interaction in which human
beings communicate with the environment to achieve
goals that are valued
●Role: A set of behaviors expected of a person occupying
a position in a social system
●Stress: A dynamic state whereby a human being inter-
acts with the environment to maintain balance for
growth, development, and performance, which in-
volves an exchange of energy and information between
the person and the environment for regulation and
control of stressors
●Coping: A way of dealing with stress
Social Systems
Social systems are organized boundary systems of social
roles, behaviors, and practices developed to maintain val-
ues, and the mechanisms to regulate these practices and
rules. The concepts related to social systems are as follows:
●Organization: Composed of human beings with pre-
scribed roles and positions who use resources to ac-
complish personal and organizational goals
●Authority: A transactional process characterized by 
active, reciprocal relations in which members’ values,
backgrounds, and perceptions play a role in defining,
validating, and accepting the authority of individuals
within an organization
●Power: The process whereby one or more persons 
influence other persons in a situation
●Status: The position of an individual in a group or a
group in relation to other groups in an organization
●Decision making: A dynamic and systematic process by
which a goal-directed choice of perceived alternatives is
made and acted on by individuals or groups to answer
a question and attain a goal
●Control: Being in charge
Implications for Nursing Practice
Nursing practice is directed toward helping individuals
maintain their health so that they can function in their
roles. King’s practice methodology, which is the essence of
her Theory of Goal Attainment, is called the Interaction-
Transaction Process. The process encompasses the 10 steps
listed in Box 3.2. Each step is discussed in detail below.
36
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
BOX 3.2
King’s Conceptual System Practice
Methodology: Interaction-
Transaction Process
●Perception
●Judgment
●Action
●Reaction
●Disturbance
●Mutual Goal Setting
●Exploration of Means to Achieve Goals
●Agreement on Means to Achieve Goals
●Transaction
●Attainment of Goals

CHAPTER 3 Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing Knowledge     ●
37
Perception
Perception is the first step in the assessment phase of the
interaction-transaction process. The nurse and the patient
meet in some nursing situation and perceive each other.
The accuracy of the perception depends on verifying the
nurse’s inferences with the patient. The nurse can use the
Goal-Oriented Nursing Record (GONR) to record both
sets of perceptions.
Judgment
Judgment is the second step in the assessment phase of the
interaction-transaction process. The nurse and the patient
make mental judgments about the other, which the nurse
can record on the GONR.
Action
Action is the third step in the assessment phase of the 
interaction-transaction process. Action is a sequence of be-
haviors of interacting persons, including recognition of the
situation, activities related to the situation, and motivation
to exert some control over the events to achieve goals. The
nurse and the patient take some mental action, which the
nurse can record on the GONR.
Reaction
Reaction is the fourth step in the assessment phase of the
interaction-transaction process. The nurse and the patient
mentally react to each one’s perceptions of the other. The
nurse can use the GONR to record these mental reactions.
Disturbance
Disturbance is the diagnosis phase of the interaction-
transaction process. The nurse and the patient communi-
cate and interact, and the nurse identifies the patient’s con-
cerns, problems, and disturbances in health. The nurse
then conducts a nursing history to determine the patient’s
activities of daily living, using the Criterion-Referenced
Measure of Goal Attainment Tool (CRMGAT); roles; 
environmental stressors; perceptions; and values, learning
needs, and goals. The nurse records these data from the
nursing history on the GONR.
The nurse also records the medical history and physical
examination data, results of laboratory tests and x-ray ex-
amination, information gathered from other health pro-
fessionals and the patient’s family members, and any
diagnoses on the GONR.
Mutual Goal Setting
Mutual goal setting is the first step in the planning phase
of the interaction-transaction process. The nurse and 
the patient interact purposefully to set mutually agreed-
on goals. If the patient cannot verbally participate in
goal setting, the nurse interacts with family members 
instead.
Mutual goal setting is based on the nurse’s assessment
of the patient’s concerns, problems, and disturbances in
health; the nurse’s and patient’s perceptions of the inter-
ference; and the nurse’s sharing of information with the
patient and his or her family to help the patient attain the
goals identified. Mutual goal setting includes considera-
tion of the ethical aspects of the situation, including the
following:
●Helping the patient and family to sort out the values
inherent in the situation and encouraging them to
think through their own value system and the conse-
quences of action they decide to take in the situation
●Helping the patient and family to make decisions that
take their value system into consideration by providing
information that contributes to their decision, by em-
phasizing their reality as they have expressed it, and by
not making decisions for them
●Becoming skillful in identifying options in every nurs-
ing situation and exploring those options with the 
patient and family
●Identifying those elements in the situation that can be
changed and controlled and those that cannot, and
concentrating energy and efforts on control and change
●Being especially sensitive to the ethical issues that may
arise when considering the right to life, the right to
die, and the right to information required for informed
choice
The nurse records the mutually set goals on the GONR.
Exploration of Means to Achieve Goals
Exploration is the second step in the planning phase of the
interaction-transaction process. The nurse and the patient
interact purposefully to explore the means to achieve the
mutually set goals.
Agreement on Means to Achieve Goals
Agreement is the third step in the planning phase of the
interaction-transaction process. The nurse and the patient
interact purposefully to agree on the means to achieve the
mutually set goals. The nurse records the nursing orders
with regard to the means to achieve goals on the GONR.
Transaction
Transaction is the implementation phase of the interaction-
transaction process. Transaction refers to what is valued
in the interaction. The nurse and the patient carry out
the measures agreed on to achieve the mutually set goals.
The nurse can use the GONR flow sheet and progress
notes to record the implementation of measures used to
achieve goals.
Attainment of Goals
Attainment of goals is the evaluation phase of the 
interaction-transaction process. The nurse and the patient
identify the outcome of the interaction-transaction
process. The outcome is expressed in terms of the patient’s
state of health or ability to function in social roles. The
nurse and the patient make a decision with regard to
whether the goal was attained and, if necessary, deter-
mine why the goal was not attained. The nurse can use
the CRMGAT to record the outcome and the GONR
to record the discharge summary.
Myra Levine’s Conservation Model
Levine’s Conservation Model focuses on conservation of
the person’s wholeness. Adaptation is the process by which
people maintain their wholeness or integrity as they re-
spond to environmental challenges and become congruent
with the environment. There are three sources of environ-
mental challenges:
1. Perceptual environment: That part of the environ-
ment to which individuals respond with their sense
organs
2. Operational environment: Those aspects of the environ-
ment that are not directly perceived, such as radiation,
odorless and colorless pollutants, and microorganisms

3. Conceptual environment: The environment of lan-
guage, ideas, symbols, concepts, and invention
Individuals respond to the environment by means of four
integrated processes that constitute the organismic response:
1. Flight-or-ﬂight mechanism
2. Inﬂammatory-immune response
3. Stress response
4. Perceptual awareness, which includes the basic orient-
ing, haptic, auditory, visual, and taste-smell systems
Implications for Nursing Practice
Nursing practice is directed toward promoting wholeness
for all people, well or sick. Patients are partners or partic-
ipants in nursing care and are temporarily dependent on
the nurse. The nurse’s goal is to end the dependence as
quickly as possible. Levine’s practice methodology is Nursing
Process as Conservation, which is defined as “keeping to-
gether.” The three steps of the process are listed in Box 3.3.
Each step is discussed in detail below.
Trophicognosis
Trophicognosis is the formulation of a nursing care judg-
ment arrived at by the scientific method. The nurse ob-
serves and collects data that will influence nursing practice,
using appropriate assessment to establish an objective and
scientific rationale for nursing practice. The nurse under-
stands the basis for the prescribed medical regimen, in-
cluding the medical diagnosis, the medical history, and the
laboratory and x-ray examination reports, with specific 
reference to areas influencing the nursing care plan.
Assessment skills are directed at four conservation 
principles:
1. Conservation of energy determines the ability to per-
form necessary activities without producing excessive
fatigue. Relevant observations include vital signs, the
patient’s general condition, the patient’s behavior, the
patient’s tolerance of nursing activities required by his
or her condition, and allowable activity for the patient
based on his or her energy resources.
2. Conservation of structural integrity determines physical
functioning. Relevant observations include status of
any pathophysiological processes, status of healing
processes, and eﬀects of surgical procedures.
3. Conservation of personal integrity determines moral
and ethical values and life experiences. Relevant ob-
servations include the patient’s life story, interest in
participating in decision making, and identifying
sense of self.
4. Conservation of social integrity takes the patient’s family
members, friends, and conceptual environment into 
account. Relevant observations include identiﬁcation of
the patient’s signiﬁcant others, participation in work-
place and/or school activities, religion, and cultural and 
ethnic history.
The basis for implementation of the nursing care plan
includes principles of nursing science and adaptation of
nursing techniques to the unique cluster of needs demon-
strated in the individual patient. The nurse identifies the
provocative facts—that is, the data that provoke attention
on the basis of knowledge of the situation—to provide the
basis for a hypothesis, or trophicognosis. Observations are
then recorded and transmitted.
Intervention/Action
Intervention/action is a test of the hypothesis. The nurs-
ing care plan is implemented and evaluated within the
structure of administrative policy, availability of equip-
ment, and established standards of nursing. The general
types of nursing intervention required are therapeutic
nursing intervention, which influences adaptation favor-
ably, or toward renewed social well-being, and support-
ive nursing interventions, which cannot alter the course
of the adaptation and can only maintain the status 
quo or fail to halt a downward course. Nursing inter-
ventions are structured according to the four conserva-
tion principles:
●Conservation of energy through an adequate deposit of
energy resource and regulation of the expenditure of
energy
●Conservation of structural integrity through mainte-
nance or restoration of the structure of the body
●Conservation of personal integrity through maintenance
or restoration of the patient’s sense of identity, self-
worth, and acknowledgment of uniqueness
●Conservation of social integrity through acknowledging
the patient as a social being
Evaluation of Intervention/Action
The nurse’s evaluation of the effects of the intervention/
action is used to revise the trophicognosis as necessary. An
indicator of the success of nursing interventions is the 
patient’s organismic response.
Betty Neuman’s Systems Model
Neuman’s Systems Model focuses on the wellness of the
patient system in relation to environmental stress and re-
actions to stress. The patient system, which can be an in-
dividual, a family or other group, or a community, is a
composite of five interrelated variables:
1. Physiological: Bodily structure and function
2. Psychological: Mental processes and relationships
3. Sociocultural: Social and cultural functions
4. Developmental: Developmental processes of life
5. Spiritual: Aspects of spirituality on a continuum from
complete unawareness or denial to a consciously 
developed, high level of spiritual understanding
The patient system is depicted as a central core, which is a
basic structure of survival factors common to the species,
surrounded by three types of metaphorical concentric rings:
1. Flexible line of defense: The outermost ring is a protec-
tive buﬀer for the patient’s normal or stable state that
38
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
BOX 3.3
Levine’s Conservation Model Practice
Methodology: Nursing Process 
as Conservation
●Trophicognosis
●Intervention/Action
●Evaluation of Intervention/Action

CHAPTER 3 Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing Knowledge     ●
39
prevents invasion of stressors and keeps the patient sys-
tem free from stressor reactions or symptomatology.
2. Normal line of defense: This lies between the ﬂexible line
of defense and the lines of resistance and represents 
the patient system’s normal or usual wellness state.
3. Lines of resistance: The innermost concentric rings are
involuntarily activated when a stressor invades the
normal line of defense. They attempt to stabilize the
patient system and foster a return to the normal line
of defense. If these rings are eﬀective, the system can
reconstitute; if they are ineﬀective, death may ensue.
The environment encompasses all internal and external
factors or influences surrounding the patient system. The
internal environment is all forces or interactive influences
internal to or contained solely within the boundaries of
the defined patient system; this is the source of intraper-
sonal stressors. The external environment is all forces or 
interaction influences external to or existing outside the
defined patient system; this is the source of interpersonal
and extrapersonal stressors. The created environment is sub-
consciously developed by the patient as a symbolic expres-
sion of system wholeness and supersedes and encompasses
the internal and external environments; it functions as a
subjective safety mechanism that may block the true reality
of the environment and the health experience.
Implications for Nursing Practice
Nursing practice is directed toward facilitating optimal
wellness through retention, attainment, or maintenance
of client system stability. The nurse uses the Neuman Sys-
tems Model Assessment and Intervention Tool, the 
Systems Model Nursing Diagnosis Taxonomy, and any
other relevant clinical tools to guide collection of data and
facilitate documentation of nursing diagnoses, nursing
goals, and nursing outcomes. The three steps of Neuman’s
practice methodology, which is called the Nursing Process
Format, are listed in Box 3.4. Each step is discussed in
detail here.
Nursing Diagnosis
The nurse establishes the database, which involves simul-
taneous consideration of the dynamic interactions of phys-
iological, psychological, sociocultural, developmental, and
spiritual variables. The nurse identifies the patient/patient
system’s perceptions and his or her own perceptions, in-
cluding basic structure factors and energy resources; flexible
and normal lines of defense, lines of resistance, degree of
potential or actual reaction, and potential for reconstitution
following a reaction; and the internal and external environ-
mental stressors that threaten the stability of the patient/
patient system. The nurse then compares his or her own
perceptions with the patient/patient system’s perceptions.
A comprehensive nursing diagnosis is presented that en-
compasses the patient/patient system’s general condition
or circumstances, including identification of actual or 
potential variances from wellness and available resources.
Nursing Goals
The nurse prioritizes goals by considering the patient/
patient system’s wellness level, the meaning of the experi-
ence to the patient/patient system, system stability needs,
and total available resources. Outcome goals and interven-
tions are proposed that will facilitate the highest possible
level of patient/patient system stability or wellness, main-
tain the normal line of defense, and retain the flexible line
of defense. Desired prescriptive change or outcome goals
are developed to correct variances from wellness with the
patient/patient system, taking patient/patient system needs
and resources into account. Specific preventions, presented
as intervention modalities, are negotiated with the patient/
patient system.
Nursing Outcomes
The nurse implements nursing interventions through the
use of one or more of the three “prevention as interven-
tion” modalities:
1. Primary prevention: Nursing actions to retain system 
stability are implemented through such measures as pre-
venting stressor invasion, providing resources to retain
or strengthen existing patient/patient system strengths,
and supporting positive coping and functioning.
2. Secondary prevention: Nursing actions to attain system
stability are implemented through such measures as
protecting the patient/patient system’s basic structure,
mobilizing and optimizing the patient/patient system’s
internal and external resources to attain stability and
energy conservation, and facilitating purposeful 
manipulation of stressors and reactions to stressors.
3. Tertiary prevention: Nursing actions to maintain system
stability are implemented through such measures as 
attaining and maintaining the highest possible level of
patient/patient system wellness and stability during re-
constitution; educating, reeducating, and/or reorienting
the patient/patient system as needed; and supporting
the patient/patient system toward appropriate goals.
The nurse evaluates the outcome goals by confirming
(with the patient/patient system) their attainment and 
reformulating goals as necessary. The nurse and patient/
patient system set intermediate and long-range goals for
subsequent nursing action.
Dorothea Orem’s Self-Care Framework
Orem’s Self-Care Framework focuses on patients’ delib-
erate actions to meet their own and dependent others’
therapeutic self-care demands. The model also focuses on
nurses’ deliberate actions to implement nursing systems
designed to assist individuals and multiperson units who
have limitations in their abilities to provide continuing
and therapeutic self-care or care of dependent others. The
concepts of Orem’s conceptual model are as follows:
Self-Care
Self-care is behavior directed by individuals to themselves
or their environments to regulate factors that affect their
own development and functioning in the interests of life,
health, or well-being.
BOX 3.4
Neuman’s Systems Model Practice
Methodology: Nursing Process Format
●Nursing Diagnosis
●Nursing Goals
●Nursing Outcomes

Self-Care Agency
A self-care agency is the complex capability of maturing
and mature individuals to determine the presence and
characteristics of specific requirements for regulating their
own functioning and development, make judgments and
decisions about what to do, and perform care measures to
meet specific self-care requisites.
Power Components
A person’s ability to perform self-care is influenced by 
10 power components:
1. Ability to maintain attention and exercise requisite
vigilance with respect to self as self-care agent and in-
ternal and external conditions and factors signiﬁcant
for self-care
2. Controlled use of available physical energy that is suf-
ﬁcient for the initiation and continuation of self-care
operations
3. Ability to control the position of the body and its
parts in the execution of the movements required for
the initiation and completion of self-care operations
4. Ability to reason within a self-care frame of reference
5. Motivation (i.e., goal orientations for self-care that
are in accord with its characteristics and its meaning
for life, health, and well-being)
6. Ability to make decisions about self-care and to op-
erationalize these decisions
7. Ability to acquire technical knowledge about self-
care from authoritative sources, to retain it, and to
operationalize it
8. A repertoire of cognitive, perceptual, manipulative,
communication, and interpersonal skills adapted to
the performance of self-care operations
9. Ability to order discrete self-care actions or action
systems into relationships with prior and subsequent
actions toward the ﬁnal achievement of regulatory
goals of self-care
10. Ability to consistently perform self-care operations,
integrating them with relevant aspects of personal,
family, and community living
Basic Conditioning Factors
The person’s ability to perform self-care also is influenced
by 10 internal and external factors called basic condition-
ing factors:
1. Age
2. Gender
3. Developmental state
4. Health state
5. Sociocultural orientation
6. Healthcare system factors, such as medical diagnostic
and treatment modalities
7. Family system factors
8. Patterns of living, including regular activities
9. Environmental factors
10. Resource availability and adequacy
Therapeutic Self-Care Demand
Therapeutic self-care demand is the action demand on 
individuals to meet three types of self-care requisites:
1. Universal self-care requisites: Actions that need to be
performed to maintain life processes, the integrity of
human structure and function, and general 
well-being
2. Developmental self-care requisites: Actions that need to
be performed in relation to human developmental
processes, conditions, and events and in relation to
events that may adversely aﬀect development
3. Health deviation self-care requisites: Actions that need
to be performed in relation to genetic and constitu-
tional defects, human structural and functional devia-
tions and their eﬀects, and medical diagnostic and
treatment measures prescribed or performed by
physicians
Self-Care Deficit
The self-care deficit is the relationship of inadequacy be-
tween self-care agency and the therapeutic self-care de-
mand. A self-care deficit occurs when the therapeutic
self-care demand exceeds self-care agency. 
Nursing Agency
Nursing agency is a complex property or attribute that en-
ables nurses to know and help others to know their ther-
apeutic self-care demands, to meet their therapeutic
self-care demands, and to regulate the exercise or develop-
ment of their self-care agency. A nursing system is a series
of coordinated deliberate practical actions performed by
nurses and patients directed toward meeting the patient’s
therapeutic self-care demand and protecting and regulat-
ing the exercise or development of the patient’s self-care
agency.
Implications for Nursing Practice
Nursing practice is directed toward helping people meet
their own and their dependent others’ therapeutic self-care
demands. Orem’s practice methodology, which is called
Professional-Technological Operations of Nursing Prac-
tice, involves the seven steps listed in Box 3.5. A detailed
discussion of the operations is given below.
Case Management Operations
The nurse uses a case management approach to direct
each of the nursing diagnostic, prescriptive, regulatory,
and control operations. The nurse also maintains an
overview of the interrelationships between the social, in-
terpersonal, and professional-technological systems of
nursing. Finally, the nurse uses the nursing history and
other appropriate tools for collection of information,
40
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
BOX 3.5
Orem’s Practice Methodology: 
Professional-Technological Operations
of Nursing Practice
●Case Management Operations
●Diagnostic Operations
●Prescriptive Operations
●Regulatory Operations: Design of Nursing Systems
for Performance of Regulatory Operations
●Regulatory Operations: Planning for Regulatory
Operations
●Regulatory Operations: Production of Regulatory
Care
●Control Operations

CHAPTER 3 Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing Knowledge     ●
41
documentation of information, and measurement of the
quality of nursing.
Diagnostic Operations
The nurse identifies the unit of service for nursing prac-
tice as an individual, an individual member of a multiper-
son unit, or a multiperson unit. The nurse determines why
the individual needs nursing and collects demographic
data about the patient and information about the nature
and boundaries of the patient’s healthcare situation and
nursing’s jurisdiction within those boundaries.
Prescriptive Operations
In collaboration with the patient or family, the nurse
identifies all care measures needed to meet the entire
therapeutic self-care demand. In addition, the nurse spec-
ifies the roles to be played by the nurse(s), patient, and
dependent-care agent(s) in meeting the therapeutic 
self-care demand and in regulating the patient’s exercise
or development or self-care agency or dependent-care
agency.
Regulatory Operations: Design of Nursing Systems
for Performance of Regulatory Operations
The nurse designs a nursing system, a series of coordinated
deliberate practical actions performed by the nurse and the
patient. The actions are directed toward meeting the pa-
tient’s therapeutic self-care demand and protecting and
regulating the exercise or development of the patient’s self-
care agency or dependent-care agency. The selection of the
appropriate nursing system depends on who can or should
perform self-care actions:
●The wholly compensatory nursing system is selected when
the patient cannot or should not perform any self-care
actions, and thus the nurse must perform them.
●The partly compensatory nursing system is selected when
the patient can perform some, but not all, self-care 
actions.
●The supportive-educative nursing system is selected
when the patient can and should perform all self-care
actions.
Each nursing system is implemented using one or more of
the following methods of helping:
●Acting for or doing for the patient
●Providing a developmental environment
●Supporting the patient psychologically
●Guiding the patient
●Teaching the patient
Regulatory Operations: Planning for 
Regulatory Operations
The nurse specifies what is needed to produce the nursing
system(s) selected for the patient, including the following
elements:
●The time during which the nursing system will be 
produced
●The place where the nursing system will be produced
●The environmental conditions necessary for the pro-
duction of the nursing system, as well as the equip-
ment and supplies required
●The number and qualifications of nurses and other
healthcare providers necessary to produce the nursing
system and to evaluate its effects
●The organization and timing of tasks to be performed
●The designation of who (nurse or patient) is to 
perform the tasks
Regulatory Operations: Production of 
Regulatory Care
Nursing systems are produced by means of the actions
of nurses and patients during nurse-patient encounters;
the nurse produces and manages the designated nursing
system(s) and method(s) of helping for as long as the pa-
tient’s self-care deficit or dependent-care deficit exists.
●The nurse performs and regulates the self-care or 
dependent-care tasks for patients or assists patients
with their performance of self-care or dependent-
care tasks.
●The nurse coordinates self-care or dependent-care task
performance so that a unified system of care is pro-
duced and coordinated with other components of
healthcare.
●The nurse helps patients, their families, and others
bring about systems of daily living for patients that
support the accomplishment of self-care or dependent
care and are, at the same time, satisfying in relation to
patients’ interests, talents, and goals.
●The nurse guides, directs, and supports patients 
in their exercise of, or in the withholding of the 
exercise of, their self-care agency or dependent-
care agency.
●The nurse stimulates patients’ interests in self-care or
dependent care by raising questions and promoting
discussions of care problems and issues when condi-
tions permit.
●The nurse is available to patients at times when ques-
tions are likely to arise.
●The nurse supports and guides patients in learning ac-
tivities and provides cues for learning as well as in-
structional sessions.
●The nurse supports and guides patients as they experi-
ence illness or disability and the effects of medical care
measures and as they experience the need to engage in
new measures of self-care or change their ways of
meeting ongoing self-care requisites.
Control Operations
The nurse performs control operations concurrently 
or separately from the production of regulatory care.
The nurse makes observations and evaluates the nursing
system to determine whether the following goals are
being met:
●The nursing system that was designed is actually 
produced.
●There is a fit between the current prescription 
for nursing and the nursing system that is being 
produced.
●Regulation of the patient’s functioning is 
being achieved through performance of care 
measures to meet the patient’s therapeutic self-
care demand.
●Exercise of the patient’s self-care agency or dependent-
care agency is being properly regulated.
●Developmental change is in process and is adequate.
●The patient is adjusting to any decline in 
powers to engage in self-care or dependent care.

Martha Rogers’ Science of Unitary
Human Beings
Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human Beings focuses on
unitary, irreducible human beings and their environments.
The four basic concepts are as follows:
1. Energy fields are irreducible, indivisible, pandimen-
sional unitary human beings and environments that
are identified by pattern and manifesting character-
istics that are specific to the whole and that cannot
be predicted from knowledge of the parts. Human
and environmental energy fields are integral with
each other.
2. Openness is a characteristic of human and environ-
mental energy ﬁelds; energy ﬁelds are continuously
and completely open.
3. Pattern refers to the distinguishing characteristic of an
energy ﬁeld. Pattern is perceived as a single wave that
gives identity to the ﬁeld. Each human ﬁeld pattern is
unique and is integral with its own unique environ-
mental ﬁeld pattern. Pattern is an abstraction that
cannot be seen; what is seen or experienced are mani-
festations of ﬁeld patterns. Manifestations of pattern
include perceptions, expressions, and experiences. 
4. Pandimensionality is a nonlinear domain without 
spatial or temporal attributes.
The three principles of homeodynamics, which describe
the nature of human and environmental energy fields, are
as follows:
1. Resonancy asserts that human and environmental ﬁelds
are identiﬁed by wave patterns that manifest continu-
ous change from lower to higher frequencies.
2. Helicy asserts that human and environmental ﬁeld pat-
terns are continuous, innovative, and unpredictable
and are characterized by increasing diversity.
3. Integrality emphasizes the continuous mutual human
ﬁeld and environmental ﬁeld process.
Implications for Nursing Practice
Nursing practice is directed toward promoting the health
and well-being of all persons, wherever they are. The three
steps of Rogers’ practice methodology, which is called the
Health Patterning Practice Method, are listed in Box 3.6.
Each step is discussed in detail below.
Pattern Manifestation Knowing and Appreciation—
Assessment
●Assessment refers to the continuous process of appre-
hending and identifying manifestations of the human
energy field and environmental energy field patterns
that relate to current health events, including percep-
tions, expressions, and experiences.
●The nurse uses one or more research instruments or
clinical tools based on the Science of Unitary Human
Beings to guide application and documentation of the
practice methodology.
●The nurse acts with pandimensional authenticity—
that is, with a demeanor of genuineness, trustworthi-
ness, and knowledgeable caring.
●The nurse focuses on the patient as a unified whole, a
unitary human being.
Voluntary Mutual Patterning
●Voluntary mutual patterning is the continuous process
whereby the nurse, with the patient, patterns the envi-
ronmental energy field to promote harmony related to
the health events.
●The nurse facilitates the patient’s actualization of 
potentials for health and well-being. The nurse 
has no investment in the patient’s changing in a 
particular way.
●The nurse does not attempt to change anyone to 
conform to arbitrary health ideals. Rather, the nurse
enhances the patient’s efforts to actualize health 
potentials from the patient’s point of view.
Pattern Manifestation Knowing and Appreciation—
Evaluation
●The nurse evaluates voluntary mutual patterning by
means of pattern manifestation knowing.
●Additional pattern information is monitored and col-
lected as it unfolds during voluntary mutual patterning.
●The nurse considers the pattern information within
the context of continually emerging health patterning
goals affirmed by the patient.
Callista Roy’s Adaptation Model
Roy’s Adaptation Model focuses on the responses of the
human adaptive system, which can be an individual or a
group, to a constantly changing environment. Adaptation
is the central feature of the model. Problems in adaptation
arise when the adaptive system is unable to cope with or
respond to constantly changing stimuli from the internal
and external environments in a manner that maintains the
integrity of the system. 
Environmental stimuli are categorized as follows:
●Focal: The stimuli most immediately confronting the
person.
●Contextual: The contributing factors in the situation.
●Residual: Other unknown factors that may influence
the situation. When the factors making up residual
stimuli become known, they are considered focal or
contextual stimuli.
Adaptation occurs through innate or acquired coping
mechanisms used to respond to changing environmental
stimuli:
●The regulator coping subsystem ( for individuals) receives
input from the external environment and from
changes in the individual’s internal state and processes
the changes through neural-chemical-endocrine chan-
nels to produce responses.
42
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
BOX 3.6
Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human 
Beings Practice Methodology: The
Health Patterning Practice Method
●Pattern Manifestation Knowing and Appreciation—
Assessment
●Voluntary Mutual Patterning
●Pattern Manifestation Knowing and Appreciation—
Evaluation

CHAPTER 3 Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing Knowledge     ●
43
●The cognator coping subsystem (for individuals) also re-
ceives input from external and internal stimuli that in-
volve psychological, social, physical, and physiological
factors, including regulator subsystem outputs. These
stimuli are then processed through cognitive/emotive
pathways, including perceptual/information process-
ing, learning, judgment, and emotion.
●The stabilizer subsystem control process (for groups) in-
volves the established structures, values, and daily activ-
ities used by a group to accomplish its primary purpose
and contribute to common purposes of society.
●The innovator subsystem control process (for humans in
groups) involves the structures and processes necessary
for change and growth in human social systems.
Responses take place in four modes of adaptation for 
individuals and groups:
1. Physiological/physical mode
• Physiological mode (for individuals) is concerned with
basic needs requisite to maintaining the physical and
physiologic integrity of the individual human system.
It encompasses oxygenation; nutrition; elimination;
activity and rest; protection; senses; fluid, electrolyte,
and acid-base balance; neurologic function; and 
endocrine function. The basic underlying need is
physiologic integrity.
• Physical mode (for groups) pertains to the manner in
which the collective human adaptive system mani-
fests adaptation relative to basic operating resources,
including participants, physical facilities, and fiscal
resources. The basic underlying need is resource ade-
quacy, or wholeness achieved by adapting to change
in physical resource needs.
2. Self-concept/group identity mode
• Self-concept mode (for individuals) addresses the
composite of beliefs and feelings that a person holds
about himself or herself at a given time. The basic
underlying need is psychic and spiritual integrity,
the need to know who one is so that one can be or
exist with a sense of unity, meaning, and purposeful-
ness in the universe. The physical self refers to the 
individual’s appraisal of his or her own physical
being, including physical attributes, functioning, sex-
uality, health and illness states, and appearance. It in-
cludes the components of body sensation and body
image. The personal self refers to the individual’s ap-
praisal of his or her own characteristics, expectations,
values, and worth, including self-consistency, self-
ideal, and the moral-ethical-spiritual self.
• Group identity mode (for groups) addresses shared 
relations, goals, and values, which create a social 
milieu and culture, a group self-image, and co-
responsibility for goal achievement. Identity in-
tegrity is the underlying need, which implies the
honesty, soundness, and completeness of the group
members’ identification with the group and involves
the process of sharing identity and goals. This mode
encompasses interpersonal relationships, group self-
image, social milieu, and group culture.
3. Role function mode (for individuals and groups) focuses
on the roles that the individual occupies in society.
The basic underlying need is social integrity—the
need to know who one is in relation to others so that
one can act. For the group, this mode focuses on the
action components associated with group infrastruc-
ture that are designed to contribute to the accomplish-
ment of the group’s mission or the tasks or functions
associated with the group. The basic underlying need
is role clarity—the need to understand and commit to
fulﬁll expected tasks—so that the group can achieve
common goals.
4. Interdependence mode (for individuals and groups) 
focuses on the basic underlying need of relational in-
tegrity, deﬁned as the feeling of security in nurturing
relationships. For the individual, the mode focuses on
interactions related to the giving and receiving of love,
respect, and value and encompasses aﬀectional ade-
quacy, developmental adequacy, resource adequacy,
signiﬁcant others, and support systems. For the group,
it pertains to the social context in which the group 
operates, including both private and public contacts
within the group and with those outside the group,
and encompasses aﬀectional adequacy, developmental
adequacy, resource adequacy, context, infrastructure,
and resources.
The four modes are interrelated. Responses in any one
mode may have an effect on or act as a stimulus in one or
all of the other modes. Responses in each mode are judged
as either adaptive or ineffective. A judgment of “adaptive
responses” indicates promotion of the goals of the human
adaptive system, including survival, growth, reproduction,
mastery, and person-environment transformation. A judg-
ment of “ineffective responses” does not contribute to the
goals of the human adaptive system.
Adaptation level is determined by the total effect of
focal, contextual, and residual stimuli on the modes of
adaptation. The three levels of adaptation are as follows: 
1. Integrated life process: Level of adaptation at which the
structures and functions of a life process are working
as a whole to meet human needs
2. Compensatory life process: Level of adaptation at which
the cognator and regulator [or stabilizer and innova-
tor] have been activated by a challenge to the inte-
grated life processes
3. Compromised life process: Level of adaptation resulting
from inadequate integrated and compensatory life
processes; an adaptation problem 
Implications for Nursing Practice
Nursing practice is directed toward promoting adaptation
in each of the four response modes, thereby contributing
to the person’s health, quality of life, and dying with dig-
nity. Roy’s practice methodology is the Adaptation Model
Nursing Process, which encompasses the six steps listed in
Box 3.7. Each step is discussed in detail below.
Assessment of Behavior
The nurse systematically gathers data about the behavior
of the human adaptive system and judges the current state
of adaptation in each adaptive mode. The nurse uses one
or more of Roy’s Adaptation Model–based research instru-
ments or clinical tools to guide application and documen-
tation of the practice methodology.

Assessment of Stimuli
The nurse recognizes that stimuli must be amenable to in-
dependent nurse functions. Consequently, factors such as
medical diagnoses and medical treatments are not consid-
ered stimuli because those factors cannot be independently
managed by nurses. The nurse identifies the internal and
external focal and contextual stimuli that are influencing
the behaviors of particular interest, in the order of priority
established at the end of the Assessment of Behavior com-
ponent of Roy’s Adaptation Model Nursing Process.
Nursing Diagnosis
The nurse uses a process of judgment to make a statement
conveying the adaptation status of the human adaptive sys-
tem of interest. The nursing diagnosis is a statement that
identifies the behaviors of interest together with the most
relevant influencing stimuli. The nurse uses one of the fol-
lowing three approaches to state the nursing diagnosis:
1. The nurse states the behaviors within each adaptive
mode and with their most relevant inﬂuencing 
stimuli.
2. The nurse uses a summary label for behaviors in each
adaptive mode with relevant stimuli.
3. The nurse uses a label that summarizes a behavioral
pattern across adaptive modes that is aﬀected by the
same stimuli.
The nurse may link Roy’s Adaptation Model–based nurs-
ing diagnosis with a relevant diagnosis from the taxonomy
of the North American Nursing Diagnosis Association
(NANDA).
Goal Setting
The nurse articulates a clear goal statement, identifying
the specific short-term and long-term behavioral outcomes
in response to nursing provided to the human adaptive
system. The goal statement designates each behavior of in-
terest, the way in which the behavior will change, and the
time frame for attainment of the goal. Goals may be stated
for ineffective behaviors that are to be changed to adaptive
behaviors and also for adaptive behaviors that should be
maintained or enhanced.
Intervention
Nursing intervention is the management of stimuli. The
nurse selects and implements nursing approaches that have
a high probability of changing stimuli or strengthening
adaptive processes. The nurse may alter, increase, decrease,
remove, or maintain stimuli.
Evaluation
The nurse judges the effectiveness of nursing interventions
in relation to the behaviors of the human adaptive system.
The nurse systematically reassesses observable and nonob-
servable behaviors for each aspect of the four adaptive modes.
Other Nursing Conceptual Models
Most conceptual models are applicable to many, if not
all, nursing specialities. However, some nurses prefer 
to use conceptual models that were developed for a par-
ticular area of nursing specialty practice. For example,
the Synergy Model (Hardin & Kaplow, 2005) was de-
veloped by members of the American Association of
Critical-Care Nurses to guide practice with hospitalized
critically ill patients. Noteworthy is that this conceptual
model is now used in several other clinical settings 
with several other patient populations. Practice guided
by the Synergy Model focuses attention on the match
between eight characteristics of patients and eight com-
petencies of nurses. According to the model, when nurse
competencies are a good match with patient character-
istics, the likelihood of attaining optimal outcomes is
increased. Each patient characteristic and each nurse
competency may be rated on a scale of 1 to 5, with 1 =
lowest level and 5 = highest level (http://www.aacn.
org/wd/certifications/content/synmodel.pcms?menu=
certification). (http://www.aacn.org/wd/certifications
/content/synmodel.pcms?pid=1&&menu=).
The eight patient characteristics are as follows:
1. Resiliency
2. Vulnerability
3. Stability
4. Complexity
5. Resource availability
6. Participation in care
7. Participation in decision making
8. Predictability
The eight nurse competencies are as follows: 
1. Clinical judgment
2. Advocacy
3. Caring practices
4. Collaboration
5. Systems thinking
6. Response to diversity
7. Clinical inquiry
8. Facilitation of learning
Three categories of outcomes are relevant: those experi-
enced by patients and families, those that occur as the 
result of nursing care, and those that occur within the
healthcare system. 
1. Patient and family outcomes: Functional and behav-
ioral changes, trust, satisfaction, comfort, and quality
of life. 
2. Nursing care outcomes: Physiological changes, presence
or absence of complications, and extent to which care
or treatment objectives were attained. 
3. System outcomes: Readmission rate, length of stay, and
cost utilization per case.
44
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
BOX 3.7
Roy’s Adaptation Model Practice
Methodology: The Nursing Process
●Assessment of Behavior
●Assessment of Stimuli
●Nursing Diagnosis
●Goal Setting
●Intervention
●Evaluation
ONLINE C ONSULT
North American Nursing Diagnosis Association
(NANDA) at 
http://www.nanda.org

CHAPTER 3 Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing Knowledge     ●
45
NURSING THEORIES
For our purposes, the terms theory, theoretical framework,
theoretical model, and theoretical rationale have the same
definition and may be used interchangeably.
Definition
A nursing theory is defined as one or more relatively con-
crete and specific concepts that are derived from a concep-
tual model, the statements that describe those concepts, and
the statements that assert relatively concrete and specific 
relations between two or more concepts (Fawcett & DeSanto-
Madeya, 2013). Each theory presents a unique perspective
about a particular phenomenon, such as a nursing partici-
pant, the environment, health, or a step of the nursing
process or practice methodology.
Function
The function of a nursing theory is to provide considerable
specificity in the description, explanation, or prediction of
some phenomenon.
Nursing Grand Theories
Theories vary in scope—that is, they vary in the relative
level of concreteness and specificity of their concepts and
statements. Theories that are broadest in scope are called
grand theories. These theories are made up of rather ab-
stract and general concepts and statements that cannot be
generated or tested empirically. Indeed, grand theories are
developed through thoughtful and insightful appraisal of
existing ideas or creative intellectual leaps beyond existing
knowledge. Examples of grand theories of nursing are
Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and Univer-
sality (Leininger & McFarland, 2006), Newman’s (1994)
Theory of Health as Expanding Consciousness, and
Parse’s (1998) Theory of Humanbecoming. Some nurses
prefer to use a nursing grand theory rather than a concep-
tual model to guide their practice. An overview of each
grand theory, along with implications for practice, is pre-
sented below. The less abstract nature of grand theories
compared with conceptual models is illustrated by Parse’s
(1998) theory, which was derived in part from Rogers’
(1970, 1990) conceptual model. Rogers’ conceptual
model is a frame of reference for all of nursing, whereas
Parse’s theory limits the domain of interest to the unitary
human’s experience of becoming.
Madeleine Leininger’s Theory of Culture
Care Diversity and Universality
Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and Uni-
versality focuses on the discovery of human care diversities
and universalities and ways to provide culturally congruent
care to people. The concepts of this grand theory are as
follows:
●Care: Abstract and concrete phenomena related to as-
sisting, supporting, or enabling experiences or behaviors
toward or for others with evident or anticipated needs
to ameliorate or improve a human condition or lifeway
●Caring: The actions and activities directed toward as-
sisting, supporting, or enabling another individual or
group with evident or anticipated needs to amelio-
rate or improve a human condition or lifeway or to
face death
●Culture: The learned, shared, and transmitted values,
beliefs, norms, and lifeways of a particular group that
guide thinking, decisions, and actions in patterned
ways; encompasses several cultural and social structure
dimensions: technological factors, religious and philo-
sophical factors, kinship and social factors, political
and legal factors, economic factors, educational and
cultural values, and lifeways
●Language: Word usages, symbols, and meanings 
about care
●Ethnohistory: Past facts, events, instances, and experi-
ences of individuals, groups, cultures, and institutions
that are primarily people centered (ethno) and that de-
scribe, explain, and interpret human lifeways within
particular cultural contexts and over short or long peri-
ods of time
●Environmental context: The totality of an event, situa-
tion, or particular experience that gives meaning to
human expressions, interpretations, and social interac-
tions in particular physical, ecological, sociopolitical,
and/or cultural settings
●Health: A state of well-being that is culturally defined,
valued, and practiced and that reflects the ability of in-
dividuals (or groups) to perform their daily role activi-
ties in culturally expressed, beneficial, and patterned
lifeways
●Worldview: The way people tend to look out on the
world or their universe to form a picture of or a value
stance about their life or the world around them
●Cultural care: The subjectively and objectively trans-
mitted values, beliefs, and patterned lifeways that as-
sist, support, or enable another individual or group to
maintain their well-being and health, to improve their
human condition and lifeway, and to deal with illness,
handicaps, or death; the two dimensions of cultural
care are:
1. Cultural care diversity: The variabilities and/or diﬀer-
ences in meanings, patterns, values, lifeways, or sym-
bols of care within or between collectivities that are
related to assistive, supportive, or enabling human
care expressions
2. Cultural care universality: The common, similar, or
dominant uniform care meanings, patterns, values,
lifeways, or symbols that are manifest among many
cultures and reﬂect assistive, supportive, facilitative,
or enabling ways to help people
●Care systems: The values, norms, and structural features
of an organization designed for serving people’s health
needs, concerns, or conditions; the two types of care
systems are as follows:
1. Generic lay care systems: Traditional or local indige-
nous healthcare or cure practices that have special
meanings and uses to heal or assist people, which
are generally offered in familiar home or commu-
nity environmental contexts with their local 
practitioners
2. Professional healthcare systems: Professional care or
cure services oﬀered by diverse health personnel who

have been prepared through formal professional pro-
grams of study in special educational institutions
●Cultural-congruent nursing care: Cognitively based as-
sistive, supportive, facilitative, or enabling acts or deci-
sions that are tailor-made to fit with individual, group,
or institutional cultural values, beliefs, and lifeways in
order to provide or support meaningful, beneficial,
and satisfying healthcare or well-being services; the
three modes of cultural-congruent nursing care are as
follows:
1. Cultural care preservation or maintenance: Assistive,
supportive, facilitative, or enabling professional ac-
tions and decisions that help people of a particular
culture retain and/or preserve relevant care values so
that they can maintain their well-being, recover
from illness, or face handicaps and/or death
2. Cultural care accommodation or negotiation: Assistive,
supportive, facilitative, or enabling creative profes-
sional actions and decisions that help people of a
designated culture adapt to, or negotiate with, others
for a beneﬁcial or satisfying health outcome with
professional care providers
3. Cultural care repatterning or restructuring: Assistive,
supportive, facilitative, or enabling professional 
actions and decisions that help patients reorder,
change, or greatly modify their lifeways for a new, 
diﬀerent, and beneﬁcial healthcare pattern while re-
specting the patients’ cultural values and beliefs and
still providing a beneﬁcial or healthier lifeway than be-
fore the changes were coestablished with the patients.
Implications for Nursing Practice
Nursing practice is directed toward improving and pro-
viding culturally congruent care to people. The compo-
nents of the practice methodology for the Theory of
Culture Care Diversity and Universality are shown in 
Box 3.8. Each component is discussed in detail here.
Goals of Nursing Practice
The goals of nursing practice are to provide culturally con-
gruent care that will be beneficial to, fit with, and be useful
to the patient, family, or culture group healthy lifeways,
and to offer a different kind of nursing care service to peo-
ple of diverse or similar cultures.
Patients
●Individuals
●Families
●Subcultures
●Groups
●Communities
●Institutions
Culturalogical Assessment
The nurse maintains a holistic or total view of the patient’s
world by using the Sunrise Enabler to guide assessment of
cultural beliefs, values, and lifeways, which are identified
by assessing the seven cultural and social structure dimen-
sions that make up the patient’s worldview: technological; 
religious and philosophical; kinship and social; cultural values,
beliefs, and lifeways; political and legal;, economic; and 
educational factors. In most cases, more than one session
with the patient is required to cover all components of the
Sunrise Enabler. The first session in a hospital or clinic lasts
approximately 20 minutes; subsequent sessions may be
longer. The nurse begins by clarifying and explaining the
focus of the assessment to the patient, which is the patient’s
internal (emic) world, not the nurse’s outsider (etic) world.
The nurse knows his or her own culture and subculture
and particular variabilities, strengths, and assets. The nurse
must also discover and remain aware of his or her own cul-
tural beliefs, values, lifeways, biases, attitudes, and preju-
dices to avoid cultural blindness. The nurse must be aware
that the patient may belong to a subculture or special
group that maintains its own values and beliefs that differ
from the values and beliefs of the dominant culture. The
nurse gives attention to patient gender differences, com-
munication modes, special language terms, interpersonal
relationships, and use of space and foods.
The nurse shows a genuine interest in the patient and
learns from and maintains respect for the patient. The
nurse asks open-ended questions and maintains the role
of an active listener, learner, and reflector. The nurse
shares professional knowledge only if the patient asks
about such knowledge.
The nurse begins the assessment with questions such
as the following:
●“What would you like to share with me today about
your experiences or beliefs to help you keep well?” or
“Please tell me what is important to you and about
your lifestyle.”
●“Are there some special ideas or ways you would like
nurses to care for you?”
●“From whom do you usually receive care?”
●“What aspects of your care do you want to change?”
Nursing Judgments, Decisions, and Actions
Nursing practice requires the co-participation of nurses and
patients working together to identify, plan, implement, and
evaluate the appropriate mode(s) of cultural-congruent
nursing care. Nursing decisions and actions encompass the
following:
●Assisting
●Supporting
●Facilitating
●Enabling
Together, the nurse and the patient select one or more
modes of cultural-congruent nursing care:
●Cultural care preservation or maintenance
●Cultural care accommodation or negotiation
●Cultural care repatterning or restructuring
Clinical Protocols
Specific nursing practices or clinical protocols are derived
from the findings of research guided by the Theory of
46
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
BOX 3.8
Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care 
Diversity and Universality Practice
Methodology
●Goals of Nursing Practice
●Patients
●Culturalogical Assessment
●Nursing Judgments, Decisions, and Actions
●Clinical Protocols

CHAPTER 3 Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing Knowledge     ●
47
Culture Care Diversity and Universality. The research
findings are used to develop protocols for cultural-
congruent care that blends with the particular cultural
values, beliefs, and lifeways of the patient and is assessed
to be beneficial, satisfying, and meaningful to the patient.
Margaret Newman’s Theory of Health as
Expanding Consciousness
Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding Conscious-
ness emphasizes the idea that every person in every situa-
tion, no matter how disordered and hopeless the situation
may seem, is part of the universal process of expanding
consciousness. The concepts of the theory are conscious-
ness and pattern.
Consciousness
Consciousness is the informational capacity of human 
beings—that is, the ability of humans to interact with their
environments. Consciousness encompasses interconnected
cognitive and affective awareness; physiochemical main-
tenance, including the nervous and endocrine systems;
growth processes; the immune system; and the genetic
code. Consciousness can be seen in the quantity and qual-
ity of the interaction between human beings and their en-
vironments. The process of life moves toward higher levels
of consciousness. Sometimes this process is smooth, pleas-
ant, and harmonious; other times it is difficult and dishar-
monious, as in disease.
Pattern
Pattern is information that depicts the whole; it is relat-
edness. People are identified by their pattern. The evolu-
tion of expanding consciousness is seen in the pattern of
movement-space-time. Pattern is manifested as exchang-
ing, communicating, relating, valuing, choosing, moving,
perceiving, feeling, and knowing. Pattern encompasses
three dimensions:
1. Movement-space-time: Movement is an essential
property of matter, a means of communicating, 
the means whereby one perceives reality and be-
comes aware of self, and the natural condition 
of life. Space encompasses personal space, inner
space, and life space as dimensions of space 
relevant to the individual; and territoriality, shared
space, and distancing as dimensions relevant to 
the family. Time can be both subjective (the
amount of time perceived to be passing) and 
objective (clock time).
2. Rhythm: Basic to movement, rhythm is an integrating
experience.
3. Diversity: Seen in the parts
Implications for Nursing Practice
Nursing practice is directed toward facilitating pattern
recognition by connecting with the patient in an authentic
way and assisting him or her to discover new rules for a
higher level of organization or consciousness. The com-
ponents of Newman’s research/practice methodology,
which is called the Research as Praxis Protocol, are listed
in Box 3.9. Each component is discussed in detail here.
Phenomenon of Interest
The phenomenon of interest is the process of expanding
consciousness.
The Interview
The meeting of the nurse and the study participant/
patient occurs when there is a mutual attraction through
congruent patterns—that is, an interpenetration of the 
two fields. The nurse and the study participant/patient
enter into a partnership with the mutual goal of partici-
pating in an authentic relationship, trusting that in the
process of its unfolding, both will emerge at a higher level
of consciousness.
First, the nurse explains the study. The study participant/
patient agrees to continue with the study and agrees to 
have the interview recorded. The initial interview lasts 
45 to 60 minutes. The nurse begins with a simple, open-
ended statement, such as, “Tell me about the most mean-
ingful people and events in your life.” This question may
be modified to fit the focus of the study. The nurse con-
tinues the interview in a nondirectional manner, although
direct questions may be used occasionally. Examples of ad-
ditional questions are, “Tell me what it has been like living
with [a particular medical diagnosis, clinical condition, or
life circumstance],” “What is meaningful to you?” and
“What do you think about what we have been talking
about?” The nurse may prompt the study participant/
patient to bring to mind something from childhood that
stands out in memory, if he or she needs help in thinking
of something considered important.
The nurse acts as an active listener and clarifies and re-
flects as necessary. The nurse is fully present in the mo-
ment, is sensitive to intuitive hunches about what to say
or ask, and waits for insight into the meaning of the pat-
tern. The nurse is free to disclose aspects of himself or her-
self that are deemed appropriate.
Transcription
The nurse listens carefully to and transcribes the audio
recording of the interview soon after the interview is com-
pleted. The nurse is sensitive to the relevance of the data
and may omit comments made by the study participant/
patient that do not directly relate to his or her life pattern,
with a reference to the time during the interview that such
comments occurred, in case those comments seem impor-
tant later.
Development of the Narrative: Pattern Recognition
The nurse selects the statements deemed most important to
the study participant/patient and rearranges the key segments
BOX 3.9
Newman’s Health as Expanding 
Consciousness Practice Methodology:
Research as Praxis Protocol
●Phenomenon of Interest
●The Interview
●Transcription
●Development of the Narrative: Pattern Recognition
●Diagram: Pattern Recognition
●Follow-up: Pattern Recognition
●Application of the Theory of Health as Expanding
Consciousness

of the data in chronological order to highlight the most sig-
nificant events and persons. Natural breaks where a pattern
shift occurs are noted and form the basis of the sequential
patterns. The nurse will recognize the pattern of the whole,
made up of segments of the study participant/patient’s 
relationships over time.
Diagram: Pattern Recognition
The nurse then transmutes the narrative into a simple 
diagram of the sequential pattern configurations.
Follow-up: Pattern Recognition
The nurse conducts a second interview with the study 
participant/patient to share the diagram or other visual
portrayal of the pattern. The nurse does not interpret the 
diagram but rather uses it simply to illustrate the study
participant/patient’s story in graphic form, which tends to
accentuate the contrasts and repetitions in relationships
over time.
The mutual viewing of the graphic form is an oppor-
tunity for the study participant/patient to confirm and
clarify or revise the story being portrayed. It is also an
opportunity for the nurse to clarify any aspect of the
story about which he or she has any doubt.
The nature of the pattern of person-environment in-
teraction will begin to emerge in terms of energy flow—
for example, blocked, diffuse, disorganized, repetitive, or
whatever descriptors and metaphors come to mind to 
describe the pattern. The study participant/patient may 
express signs that pattern recognition is occurring (or has
already occurred in the interval following the first inter-
view) as the nurse and study participant/patient reflect 
together on the study participant/patient’s life pattern.
If no signs of pattern recognition occur, the nurse and
study participant/patient may want to proceed with addi-
tional reflections in subsequent interviews until no further
insight is reached. Sometimes, no signs of pattern recog-
nition emerge, and if so, that characterizes the pattern for
that person. It is not to be forced.
Application of the Theory of Health as Expanding
Consciousness
After the interviews are completed, the nurse undertakes
more intense analysis of the data in light of the Theory of
Health as Expanding Consciousness. The nurse evaluates
the nature of the sequential patterns of interaction in terms
of quality and complexity and interprets the patterns ac-
cording to the study participant/patient’s position on
Young’s spectrum of consciousness. The sequential patterns
represent presentational construing or relationships. Any
similarities of pattern among a group of study participants/
patients having a similar experience may be designated by
themes and stated in propositional form.
Rosemarie Parse’s Theory 
of Humanbecoming
Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming focuses on human
experiences of participation with the universe in the 
co-creation of health. The concepts of the theory are as
follows:
●Humanbecoming: A unitary construct referring to the
human being’s living health
●Meaning: The linguistic and imagined content of
something and the interpretation that one gives to
something
• Imaging: Reflective-prereflective coming to know the
explicit-tacit-all-at-once
• Valuing: Confirming-not confirming cherished 
beliefs in light of a personal worldview
• Languaging: Signifying valued images through 
speaking-being silent and moving-being still
●Rhythmicity: The cadent, paradoxical patterning of the
human-universe mutual process
• Revealing-concealing: Disclosing-not disclosing all-
at-once
• Enabling-limiting: Living the opportunities-
restrictions present in all choosings all-at-once
• Connecting-separating: Being with and apart from
others, ideas, objects, and situations all at once
●Transcendence: Reaching beyond with possibles—
the hopes and dreams envisioned in multidimen-
sional experiences and powering the originating of
transforming
• Powering: The pushing-resisting process of affirming-
not affirming being in light of nonbeing
• Originating: Inventing new ways of conforming-
nonconforming in the certainty/uncertainty of living
• Transforming: Shifting the view of the familiar-
unfamiliar, the changing of change in co-constituting
anew in a deliberate way
The three major principles of the theory of humanbecoming
are as follows:
1. Structuring meaning is the imaging and valuing of lan-
guaging and means that humans construct what is real
for them from choices made at many realms of the
universe. 
2. Configuring rhythmical patterns of relating is the 
revealing-concealing and enabling-limiting of 
connecting-separating and means that humans live
in rhythm with the universe co-constituting patterns 
of relating. 
3. Co-transcending with possibles is the powering and
originating of transforming and means that humans
forge unique paths with shifting perspectives as a dif-
ferent light is cast on the familiar. 
Implications for Nursing Practice
Nursing practice is directed toward respecting quality of
life as perceived by the person and the family. Part I of
Parse’s Practice Methodology is summarized in Box 3.10.
Each aspect of Part II of Parse’s Practice Methodology is
outlined below.
Part II of Parse’s Practice Methodology
Contexts for Nursing
●Nurse-person situations
●Nurse-group situations
●Participants: Children, adults
●Locations: Homes, shelters, healthcare centers, parish
halls, all departments of hospitals and clinics, rehabili-
tation centers, offices, other milieus where nurses in-
teract with people
48
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

CHAPTER 3 Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing Knowledge     ●
49
Goal of the Discipline of Nursing
The goal of nursing is to enhance the quality of life from
the person’s, family’s, and community’s perspectives.
Goal of the Humanbecoming Nurse
The goal of the humanbecoming nurse is to be truly pres-
ent with people as they enhance the quality of their lives.
True Presence
True presence refers to a special way of “being with” in
which the nurse is attentive to moment-to-moment
changes in meaning as he or she bears witness to the per-
son’s or group’s own living of value priorities.
●Coming-to-be-present: True presence begins in the 
coming-to-be-present moments of preparation and 
attention—an all-at-once gentling down and lifting
up. True presence begins in the coming-to-be-present
moments of preparation and attention. Preparation in-
volves an emptying to be available to bear witness to
the other or others and being flexible, not fixed but
gracefully present from one’s center, as well as dwelling
with the universe at the moment, considering the at-
tentive presence about to be. Attention involves focus-
ing on the moment at hand for immersion.
●Face-to-face discussions: The nurse and the person en-
gage in dialogue, and the nurse tries to understand the
person’s perspective by initiating discussions. Conversa-
tion may be through discussion in general or through
interpretations of stories, films, drawings, photographs,
music, metaphors, poetry, rhythmical movements, and
other expressions. The nurse really listens to the person,
without interrupting. The nurse may seek clarification
of the person’s comments. The nurse tries to under-
stand the person’s perspective by initiating discussions
using questions such as: How are you doing? How are
things going? How was your day (or night)? What is
life like for you? What is most important to you at this
time? What do you need most right now? The nurse
may seek clarification through such statements as: Tell
me more about that. What does . . . mean for you?
What is it like for you to live with . . . ? What do you
see yourself doing? What can you do to get help? What
might help you to go on? What do you hope happens?
●Silent immersion: Silent immersion is a process of the
quiet that does not refrain from sending and receiving
messages, a chosen way of becoming in the human-
universe process lived in the rhythm of speaking-being
silent, moving-being still as valued images incarnate mean-
ing. Silent immersion is true presence without words.
●Lingering presence: Lingering presence refers to recall-
ing a moment after an immediate engagement—a 
reflective-prereflective “abiding with” attended to
through glimpses of the other person, idea, object, or
situation.
Ways of Changing Health Patterns in True Presence
●Creative imagining: Picturing—by seeing, hearing, and
feeling—what a situation might be like if lived in a dif-
ferent way
●Affirming personal becoming: Uncovering preferred per-
sonal health patterns by critically thinking about how
or who one is
●Glimpsing the paradoxical: Changing one’s view of a
situation by recognizing incongruities in that situation
Middle-Range Theories
Middle-range theories are narrower in scope than grand
theories, encompassing a smaller number of concepts and
a limited aspect of the real world. Middle-range theories
are, therefore, made up of concepts that are empirically
measurable and statements that are empirically testable.
Indeed, the product of any nursing study can be consid-
ered a middle-range theory that constitutes the evidence
for nursing practice (Fawcett & Garity, 2009). Middle-
range theories may describe a concept, explain the relation
between two or more concepts, or predict the effects of
one or more concepts that are interventions on one or
more other concepts that are outcomes.
Examples of widely used middle-range nursing theo-
ries are Peplau’s (1952, 1992) Theory of Interpersonal
Relations, Watson’s (2006) Theory of Human Caring,
and Orlando’s (1961) Theory of the Deliberative Nurs-
ing Process. Peplau’s middle-range descriptive nursing
theory focuses on the phases of the interpersonal process
that occur when an ill person and a nurse come together
to resolve a health difficulty. Watson’s middle-range ex-
planatory nursing theory focuses on the human compo-
nent of caring and the moment-to-moment encounters
between the one who is caring and the one who is being
cared for, especially the caring activities performed by
nurses as they interact with others. Her theory asserts a
relation between clinical caritas processes (nursing inter-
ventions) and a transpersonal caring relationship between
BOX 3.10
Parse’s Practice Methodology: Part I
Theory of Humanbecoming
1. Structuring meaning 
2. Conﬁguring rhythmical 
patterns of relating
3. Co-transcending with 
possibles
Practice Methodology 
Dimension
Illuminating meaning: Explicat-
ing what was, is, and will be
Synchronizing rhythms: Dwelling
with the pitch, yaw, and roll of
the human universe process
Mobilizing transcendence: 
Moving beyond the meaning
moment with what is not-yet
Practice Methodology Principle
Process (Empirical Activity)
Explicating: Making clear what
is appearing now through 
languaging
Dwelling with: Immersing with
the ﬂow of connecting-separating
Moving beyond: Propelling with
envisioned possibles of 
transforming

nurse and patient. Orlando’s middle-range predictive
nursing theory focuses on an interpersonal process be-
tween people. Her theory asserts that the outcome of use
of the deliberative nursing process is identification of the
patient’s immediate need for help.
More than 80 middle-range theories have been directly
derived from the seven nursing conceptual models discussed
50
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
TABLE 3.1
Explicit Middle-Range Theories Derived from Selected Conceptual Models
of Nursing
Conceptual Model
Middle-Range Theory
Johnson’s Behavioral System Model
King’s Conceptual System
Levine’s Conservation Model
Neuman’s Systems Model
Theory of a Restorative Subsystem
Theory of Sustenal Imperatives
Theory of Asynchronous Development
Theory of Basic Empathy, Self-Awareness, and Learning Styles 
Theory of Decision Making
Theory of Departmental Power [retitled Theory of Group Power]
Theory of Families, Children, and Chronic Illness
Theory of Family Health [retitled Family Health Theory]
Theory of Goal Attainment 
Theory of Health and Social Support
Theory of Social Support and Health of Older Adults
Theory of Intrapersonal Perceptual Awareness 
Theory of Health Perception
Theory of Interaction Enhancement
Theory of Nursing Administration
Theory of Nursing Empathy
Theory of Organizational Health 
Theory of Personal System Empathy
Theory of Transaction Process
Theory of Integration
Theory of Quality of Life of Stroke Survivors
Theory of Patient Satisfaction with Nursing Care
Theory of Social and Interpersonal Influences on Health
Theory of Health Promotion for Preterm Infants
Theory of Redundancy
Theory of Therapeutic Intention
Codependency-Overeating Model
Theory of Adolescent Vulnerability
Theory of Caregiver Role Strain
Theory of Infant Exposure to Environmental Tobacco Smoke
Theory of Maternal Student Role Stress 
Theory of Moderation of Stress Levels in Women in Multiple Roles 
Theory of Optimal Patient System Stability
Theory of Prevention as Intervention
earlier in this chapter (Table 3.1). Many other middle-range
nursing theories and middle-range theories from other dis-
ciplines are used by nurses (see, for example, Alligood &
Tomey, 2010; Peterson & Bredow, 2004; Smith & Liehr,
2014; Ziegler, 2005) but are not explicitly derived from any
nursing conceptual model or a conceptual model from any
other discipline.

CHAPTER 3 Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing Knowledge     ●
51
Continued
TABLE 3.1
Explicit Middle-Range Theories Derived from Selected Conceptual Models
of Nursing—cont’d
Conceptual Model
Middle-Range Theory
Orem’s Self-Care Framework
Rogers’ Science of Unitary 
Human Beings
Roy’s Adaptation Model
Theory of Well-Being
Theory of Well-Being for Fatigue in Diabetics
A Theory of Palliative Care Nursing Self-Competence
Theory of Dependent Care
Theory of Diabetes Self-Care Management
Theory of Taking Care of Oneself in a High-Risk Environment
Theory of Testicular Self-Examination
White’s Theory of Spirituality and Spiritual Self-Care
Theory of Aging
Theory of Aging as Emerging Brilliance
Theory of the Art of Professional Nursing 
Theory of Creativity, Actualization, and Empathy
Theory of Energetic Patterning
Theory of Diversity of Human Field Pattern
Theory of Enfolding Health as Wholeness and Harmony
Theory of Enlightenment 
Theory of Healthiness
Theory of Human Field Motion 
Theory of Intentionality
Theory of Kaleidoscoping in Life’s Turbulence 
Theory of Participation
Theory of Pattern
Theory of Perceived Dissonance
Theory of Power as Knowing Participation in Change
Theory of Self-Transcendence
Theory of Sentience Evolution 
Theories of Spirituality
Parrett and Biley Negotiating Uncertainty Theory
Theory of Adaptation during Childbearing
Theory of Adaptation to Chronic Pain
Theory of Adapting to Diabetes
Theory of Adapting to Chronic Health Conditions
Theory of the Adapting Family
Theory of Adapting to Life Events
Theory of Adapting to Loss
Theory of Caregiver Stress
Theory of Chronic Pain
Theory of Coping
Theory of Holistic Clinical Education
Theory of Psychosocial Adaptation to Termination of Pregnancy for Fetal
Anomaly
Theory of Sexuality Adaptation

52
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
TABLE 3.1
Explicit Middle-Range Theories Derived from Selected Conceptual Models
of Nursing—cont’d
Conceptual Model
Middle-Range Theory
Source: Adapted from Fawcett, J., (2009). Evaluating research for evidence-based nursing practice.
Philadelphia: F. A. Davis. Adapted from Fawcett, J., & Garity, J. (2009). Evaluating research for 
evidence-based nursing practice. Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Theory of Successful Aging
Theory of Urine Control
Theory of the Physiological Mode
Theory of Self-Concept Mode
Theory of Role Function Mode
Theory of Interdependence Mode
Nursing Model of Cognitive Processing
Theory of Facilitated Sensemaking
Transitions Theory has become more widely known
during the past few years (Meleis, 2010). This middle-range
theory focuses people’s experiences during developmental,
wellness-illness, situational, and organizations transitions. 
Situation-Specific Theories
Situation-specific theories are even more specific and 
concrete than middle-range theories. As Meleis (2012) ex-
plained, situation-specific theories “are closer [than con-
ceptual models, grand theories, and middle-range theories]
to the clinical realities of caring for patients, as well as re-
flective of variations in the contexts and situations of pop-
ulations” (p. 419). More specifically, situation-specific
theories focus on a particular population of people who
are experiencing a specific health condition. 
Situation-Specific Nursing Theories
Development of situation-specific nursing theories may
be guided by a conceptual model of nursing. For example,
the situation-specific theory of Men’s Healing from Child-
hood Maltreatment was constructed by viewing findings
of a study of men’s perceptions of their experiences of
abuse and neglect during childhood within the context 
of Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human Beings (Willis, 
DeSanto-Madeya, & Fawcett, 2015). 
Development of nursing situation-specific theories also
may be guided by a middle-range theory. For example, Im
(2014) used Transitions Theory (Meleis, 2010) to guide
development of her situation-specific theories of Cau-
casian Cancer Patients’ Pain Experience, Asian American
Cancer Patients’ Pain Experience, and Asian Immigrant
Women’s Menopausal Symptom Experience in the
United States. Hanna (2012) used Transitions Theory to
guide development of her situation-specific theory of
Emerging Adults’ Experience of Type 1 Diabetes.
ADVANTAGES OF USING
FORMAL NURSING
KNOWLEDGE
Recognition of nursing as a profession bestows a certain sta-
tus on nurses. The status conferred by being a member of a
profession, rather than having an occupation or a trade, car-
ries with it the responsibility to use formal nursing knowl-
edge. Anderson (1995) explained that, as members of a
profession, nurses “must ensure that we have a solid scholarly
and scientific foundation upon which to base our practice”
(p. 247). Conceptual models of nursing and nursing theories
are that foundation; they provide explicit frames of reference
for professional nursing practice by delineating the scope of
nursing practice. Furthermore, conceptual models of nursing
and nursing theories (1) specify innovative goals for nursing
practice, (2) introduce ideas that are designed to improve
practice (Lindsay, 1990), and (3) enhance the quality of peo-
ple’s lives by facilitating the identification of relevant infor-
mation, reducing the fragmentation of healthcare, and
improving the coordination of all aspects of healthcare
(Chalmers, as cited in Chalmers et al., 1990).
More specifically, the use of formal nursing knowledge
to guide nursing practice “represents nursing’s unique con-
tribution to the health-care system” (Parse, 1995, p. 128).
It is the hallmark of professional nursing practice. As
Chalmers pointed out, “Nursing models [and theories]
have provided what many would argue is a much needed
alternative knowledge base from which nurses can practice
in an informed way. An alternative, that is, to the medical
model which for so many years has dominated many as-
pects of health care” (Chalmers et al., 1990, p. 34).
Formal nursing knowledge also provides an alternative
to the institutional model of practice, in which “the most
salient values [are] efficiency, standardized care, rules, and
regulations” (Rogers, 1989, p. 113). The institutional model,
moreover, typically upholds, reinforces, and supports the

CHAPTER 3 Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing Knowledge     ●
53
medical model (Grossman & Hooton, 1993). Thus, the use
of conceptual models of nursing and nursing theories moves
the practice of nursing away from that driven by a medical
or institutional model and, therefore, fosters autonomy from
medicine and a coherent purpose of practice (Bélanger,
1991; Bridges, 1991; Ingram, 1991; Parse, 1995).
The major practical advantage of using a conceptual
model of nursing is the identification of a comprehensive
nursing process format or practice methodology that en-
compasses particular parameters for assessment, labels for
problems, a strategy for planning nursing interventions, 
a typology of nursing interventions, and criteria for eval-
uation of the outcomes of nursing practice. The major
practical advantage a nursing theory provides is greater
specificity in one or more phases of the nursing process.
Middle-range theories may be linked with conceptual
models or grand theories, with the proviso that logical con-
gruence is evident. For example, Orlando’s (1961) Theory
of the Deliberative Nursing Process tells the nurse exactly
how to identify the patient’s immediate need for help. 
Orlando’s theory can be used very effectively in combina-
tion with Roy’s (2009) Adaptation Model and other con-
ceptual models of nursing.
It should be obvious by now that formal nursing
knowledge identifies the distinctive nursing territory
within the vast arena of multidisciplinary healthcare (Feeg,
1989). In addition, the use of formal nursing knowledge
“help[s] nurses better communicate what they do” (Neff,
1991, p. 534) and why they do it. The importance of com-
municating what nursing is and what nurses do was un-
derscored by Feeg (1989), who identified three reasons for
implementing conceptual model-based or theory-based
nursing practice that are as relevant today as they were in
the 1980s. The three reasons are as follows:
1. In this time of information saturation and rapid change,
we know it is not valuable to focus on every detail and,
therefore, we need [conceptual models and theories] to
help guide our judgments in new situations.
2. In this time of technologic overdrive, we need a 
holistic orientation to remind us of our caring 
perspective.
3. In this time of professional territoriality, it has become
even more important to understand our identity in
nursing and operationalize our practice from a [formal
nursing] knowledge base. (p. 450)
The number of nurses throughout the world who recog-
nize the advantages of using formal nursing knowledge
is rapidly increasing, which is very important as the
healthcare reforms that are occurring in many countries
emphasize the expanded role of nursing in providing 
primary and specialized care. Use of formal nursing
knowledge enables nurses to engage in “thinking nurs-
ing” (Allison & Renpenning, 1999), rather than just
doing tasks and carrying out physicians’ orders (Le Storti
et al., 1999). Nurses are able to think nursing and talk
nursing because the conceptual models and theories that
constitute formal nursing knowledge provide a distinc-
tive nursing language. The lack of a nursing language in
the past—and in the present when conceptual models of
nursing and nursing theories are not used—“has been a
handicap in nurses’ communications about nursing to
the public as well as to persons with whom they work in
the health field” (Orem, 1997, p. 29). Thus, the content
of each conceptual model of nursing and nursing theory,
which is stated in a distinctive vocabulary, should not be
considered jargon. Rather, the terminology used by the
author of each conceptual model or theory should be rec-
ognized as the result of considerable thought about how
to convey the meaning of that particular perspective to
others (Biley, 1990). “The attention to language,” Watson
(1997) maintained, “is especially critical to an evolving
[profession], in that during this postmodern era, one’s
survival depends on having language; writers in this area
remind us ’if you do not have your own language you
don’t exist’” (p. 50). Elaborating, Akinsanya (1989) 
explained, “Every science has its own peculiar terms, con-
cepts, and principles which are essential for the develop-
ment of its knowledge base. In nursing, as in other
sciences, an understanding of these is a prerequisite to a
critical examination of their contribution to the develop-
ment of knowledge and its application to practice” (p. ii).
Indeed, the differences in the vocabularies of the various
conceptual models and theories are the same as the dif-
ferences in the vocabularies of diverse medical specialties,
such as obstetrics, gynecology, cardiology, neurology,
psychiatry, and geriatrics.
Thinking nursing within the context of formal nurs-
ing knowledge helps nurses to “clarify their thinking on
their role, especially at a time when the roles of many
health professionals are becoming blurred” (Nightingale,
1993, p. 2). 
Risks and Rewards of Using Formal 
Nursing Knowledge
Johnson (1990) noted that although individual nurses and
nursing departments take risks when the decision is made
to implement conceptual model- or theory-based nursing
practice, the rewards far outweigh the risks. She stated:
To openly use a nursing model [or theory] is risk-
taking behavior for the individual nurse. For a nurs-
ing department to adopt one of these models [or theo-
ries] for unit or institution use is risk-taking behavior
of an even higher order. The reward for such risk-
taking for the individual practitioner lies in the great
satisfaction gained from being able to specify explicit
concrete nursing goals in the care of patients and from
documenting the actual achievement of the desired
outcomes. The reward for the nursing department is
having a rational, cohesive, and comprehensive basis
for the development of standards of nursing practice,
for the evaluation of practitioners, and for the docu-
mentation of the contribution of nursing to patient
welfare. (Johnson, 1990, p. 32)
Accumulating anecdotal and empirical evidence indi-
cates that additional rewards of using formal nursing
knowledge to guide nursing practice include reduced staff
nurse turnover, more rapid movement from novice to ex-
pert nurse, greater patient and family satisfaction with
nursing, increased nurse job satisfaction, and considerable
cost savings (Fawcett & DeSanto-Madeya, 2013). Fur-
thermore, as the use of formal nursing knowledge grows,
both nurses and participants in nursing are empowered. 

SELECTING A CONCEPTUAL
MODEL OR NURSING GRAND
THEORY FOR PROFESSIONAL
NURSING PRACTICE
Although formal nursing knowledge is made up of many
conceptual models and theories, using more than one con-
ceptual model or grand theory at the same time will create
much confusion. Therefore, each nurse should select just
one as a guide for professional practice. The following six
steps can help you select an appropriate conceptual model
of nursing or nursing grand theory:
1. Identify your own beliefs and values related to the
phenomena of interest to all nurses. State your beliefs
about the participants in nursing, the relevant envi-
ronment, health, and the goals of professional nursing
practice.
2. Identify the patient population with which you would
like to work. The population may be based on a spe-
ciﬁc medical diagnosis, such as cancer or renal failure;
an age group, such as children or the older adults; a
type of illness, such as an acute crisis or chronic ill-
ness; or a particular symptom, such as chest pain or an
elevated temperature.
3. Systematically analyze and evaluate the content of sev-
eral conceptual models of nursing and nursing grand
theories. Review the summaries of the conceptual
models and grand theories presented in the chapter as
well as the primary-source material for each concep-
tual model and grand theory. This review will provide
a ﬁrm foundation for your selection of the conceptual
model or grand theory.
4. Compare your own beliefs and values with the philo-
sophical claims undergirding the selected conceptual
model or grand theory.
5. Identify the conceptual models and nursing grand
theories that are appropriate guides for nursing 
with the patient population in which you are 
interested.
6. Choose the conceptual model or grand theory that
most closely matches your beliefs and values and 
the patient population with which you want to
work. Then use the model or theory to guide your
practice with several nursing participants so that 
you can determine its utility. If you find that the
conceptual model or grand theory you have chosen
is not useful, select another model or theory and test
its utility.
USING CONCEPTUAL MODELS
OR GRAND THEORIES TO
GUIDE PROFESSIONAL
NURSING PRACTICE
Research findings indicate that nurses feel vulnerable and 
experience a great deal of stress when they attempt to
achieve professional aspirations within a rapidly changing,
medically dominated, bureaucratic healthcare delivery sys-
tem (Graham, 1994). As a structure for critical thinking
within a distinctively nursing context, formal nursing knowl-
edge provides the intellectual skills and points to the practical
skills that nurses need to survive at a time when cost con-
tainment through reduction of professional nursing staff is
the modus operandi of managed care and the administrators
of healthcare delivery systems, including hospitals, home
healthcare agencies, and health maintenance organizations.
As a novice user of a conceptual model of nursing or
nursing grand theory, you should not become discouraged
if your initial experiences with the model or theory seem
forced or awkward. Adopting an explicit nursing model
or theory does require using a new vocabulary and a new
way of thinking about nursing situations. Repeatedly using
the conceptual model or grand theory should, however,
lead to more systematic and organized applications. Bron-
catello’s (1980) words, written more than 30 years ago,
continue to provide the encouragement needed to start
using a conceptual model of nursing or nursing theory to
guide professional nursing practice:
The nurse’s consistent use of any model [or theory] for the
interpretation of observable [patient] data is most defi-
nitely not an easy task. Much like the development of
any habitual behavior, it initially requires thought, dis-
cipline, and the gradual evolvement of a mind-set of
what is important to observe within the guidelines of the
model [or theory]. As is true of most habits, however, it
makes decision making less complicated. (p. 23)
Using formal nursing knowledge allows the nursing pro-
fession to be clear about its mission in the constantly chang-
ing healthcare arena. Now, perhaps more than ever before,
it is crucial that nurses explicate what they know and why
they do what they do. In other words, it is crucial that all
nurses communicate distinctive nursing knowledge and ex-
plain how that knowledge governs the actions performed
on behalf of or in conjunction with people who require
nursing. Thus, it is incumbent on all nurses to use formal
nursing knowledge. Only if they do so can nurses continue
to claim a place on the multidisciplinary healthcare team.
54
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
K E Y  P O I N T S
●Conceptual models of nursing present diverse perspectives of the participant in nursing, who can be an
individual, a family, or a community; the environment of the nursing participant and the environment in
which professional nursing practice occurs; the participant’s health state; and the definition and goals of
nursing as well as nursing actions or interventions.

CHAPTER 3 Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing Knowledge     ●
55
K E Y  P O I N T S — cont’d
●The most practical function of a conceptual model is its delineation of goals for nursing practice and a
practice methodology (that is, a nursing process) that encompasses parameters for assessment, labels for
problems, a strategy for planning nursing interventions, a typology of nursing interventions, and criteria for
evaluation of the outcomes of nursing practice. A conceptual model of nursing provides a structure for
documentation of all aspects of the nursing process, from patient assessment to evaluation of outcomes. A
conceptual model also helps identify standards of nursing practice and criteria for quality assurance reviews.
Nursing grand theories can be used in place of conceptual models and, therefore, have the same functions.
●The function of nursing middle-range theories and situation-specific theories is to provide considerable
specificity in the description, explanation, or prediction of some phenomenon. Theories are more con-
crete and specific than conceptual models. A conceptual model is an abstract and general system of con-
cepts and statements, whereas a theory deals with one or more relatively concrete and specific concepts
and statements. In addition, conceptual models are general guides that must be specified further by 
relevant and logically congruent theories before action can occur.
●Conceptual models of nursing and nursing grand theories, middle-range theories, and situation-specific
theories move the professional practice of nursing away from that driven by a medical or institutional
model and, therefore, foster autonomy from medicine and a coherent purpose for professional nursing
practice.
●Six steps are used to select a conceptual model or nursing grand theory to guide professional nursing
practice: (1) state your philosophy of nursing, in the form of beliefs and values about human beings who
are nursing participants, the environment, health (including wellness and illness), and nursing goals; 
(2) identify the particular patient population with which you wish to practice; (3) thoroughly analyze and
evaluate several conceptual models of nursing and nursing grand theories; (4) compare the philosophical
claims on which each conceptual model and nursing grand theory is based with your own philosophy of
nursing; (5) determine which conceptual models or nursing grand theories are appropriate for use with
the patient population you are interested in; and (6) select the one conceptual model or nursing grand
theory that most closely matches your philosophy of nursing and the patient population of interest.
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. List two ways in which a conceptual model differs from a grand theory, a middle-range theory, and a situation-
specific theory.
2. Many people select nursing as a career because they enjoy “taking care of” other people. Orem’s conceptual
model of nursing focuses on individuals with limited abilities to provide continuing self-care or care of dependent
others. Describe the difference between “taking care of people” as a general term and professional nursing prac-
tice directed toward helping people meet their own and their dependent others’ therapeutic self-care demands.
3. Describe the focus of Neuman’s systems model in relation to chronically ill patients and their families as they 
struggle to respond to stressors associated with periodic changes in the patients’ health status. For example, what
level(s) of prevention interventions are needed as chronically ill patients’ health status changes?
4. Some nurses at a nursing home describe a particular resident as a “difficult patient.” How does use of Orlando’s
theory of the deliberative nursing practice influence the way you think about and interact with patients who are
regarded as “difficult”? 
5. Explain how Roy’s adaptation model provides guidelines for patient-centered and family-centered nursing care.
6. Patient-centered care requires that nurses understand and acknowledge culturally diverse patients’ health-related
beliefs, values, and lifeways. What types of health-related beliefs, values, and lifeways can be identified by applying
the practice methodology of Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and Universality?
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.

REFERENCES
Portions of this chapter were adapted from Fawcett, J., &
DeSanto-Madeya, S. (2013). Contemporary nursing
knowledge: Analysis and evaluation of nursing models and
theories (3rd ed.). Philadelphia: F. A. Davis; and Fawcett, J.
(2013). Appendix N-1: Conceptual models and theories 
of nursing. In D. Venes (Ed.), Taber’s cyclopedic medical
dictionary (22nd ed., pp. 2629–2660). Philadelphia: 
F. A. Davis, with permission.
Akinsanya, J. A. (1989). Introduction. Recent Advances in Nursing,
24, i–ii.
Alligood, M. R., & Tomey, A. M. (2010). Nursing theorists and
their work (7th ed.). St. Louis, MO: Mosby Elsevier.
Allison, S. E., & Renpenning, K. (1999). Nursing administration
in the 21st century. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Anderson, C. A. (1995). Scholarship: How important is it?
Nursing Outlook, 43, 247–248.
Bélanger, P. (1991). Nursing models: A major step towards
professional autonomy. AARN Newsletter, 48(8), 13.
Biley, F. (1990). Wordly wise. Nursing (London), 4(24), 37.
Bridges, J. (1991). Working with doctors: Distinct from medicine.
Nursing Times, 87(27), 42–43.
Broncatello, K. F. (1980). Auger in action: Application of the
model. Advances in Nursing Science, 2(2), 13–23.
Chalmers, H., Kershaw, B., Melia, K., & Kendrich, M. (1990).
Nursing models: Enhancing or inhibiting practice? Nursing
Standard, 5(11), 34–40.
Fawcett, J., & DeSanto-Madeya, S. (2013). Contemporary nurs-
ing knowledge: Analysis and evaluation of nursing models and
theories (3rd ed.). Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Fawcett, J., & Garity, J. (2009). Evaluating research for evidence-
based nursing practice. Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis. 
Feeg, V. (1989). From the editor: Is theory application merely
an intellectual exercise? Pediatric Nursing, 15, 450.
Graham, I. (1994). How do registered nurses think and experi-
ence nursing? A phenomenological investigation. Journal of
Clinical Nursing, 3, 235–242.
Grossman, M., & Hooton, M. (1993). The significance of the
relationship between a discipline and its practice. Journal of
Advanced Nursing, 18, 866–872.
Hanna, K. M. (2012). A framework for the youth with type 1
diabetes during the emerging adulthood transition. Nursing
Outlook, 60, 401–410.
Hardin, S. R., & Kaplow, R. (2005). Synergy for clinical excel-
lence: The AACN synergy model for patient care. Boston, MA:
Jones and Bartlett.
Henderson, V. (1966). The nature of nursing. A definition and its
implications for practice, research, and education. New York,
NY: Macmillan.
Im, E.-O. (2014). Theory of transitions. In M. J. Smith & 
P. R. Liehr (Eds.), Middle-range theory for nursing (3rd ed.,
pp. 253–276. New York, NY: Springer.
Ingram, R. (1991). Why does nursing need theory? Journal of
Advanced Nursing, 16, 350–353.
Johnson, D. E. (1987). Evaluating conceptual models for use in
critical care nursing practice [Guest editorial]. Dimensions of
Critical Care Nursing, 6, 195–197.
Johnson, D. E. (1990). The behavioral system model for nurs-
ing. In M. E. Parker (Ed.), Nursing theories in practice (pp.
23–32). New York, NY: National League for Nursing.
King, I. M. (2006). Part One: Imogene M. King’s theory of goal
attainment. In M. E. Parker, Nursing theories and nursing 
practice (2nd ed., pp. 235–243). Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Leininger, M. M., & McFarland, M. R. (2006). Culture care 
diversity and universality: A worldwide nursing theory
(2nd ed.). Boston, MA: Jones and Bartlett.
Le Storti, L. J., Cullen, P. A., Hanzlik, E. M., Michiels, J. M., Piano,
L. A., Ryan, P. L., & Johnson, W. (1999). Creative 
thinking in nursing education: Preparing for tomorrow’s
challenges. Nursing Outlook, 47, 62–66.
Levine, M. E. (1991). The conservation principles: A model for
health. In K. M. Schaefer & J. B. Pond (Eds.), Levine’s con-
servation model: A framework for nursing practice (pp. 1–11).
Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Lindsay, B. (1990). The gap between theory and practice. 
Nursing Standard, 5(4), 34–35.
Meleis, A. I. (2010). Transitions theory: Middle-range and 
situation-specific theories in nursing research and practice.
New York, NY: Springer.
Meleis, A. I. (2012). Theoretical nursing: Development and
progress (5th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer
Health/Lippincott Williams and Wilkins.
Neff, M. (1991). President’s message: The future of our profes-
sion from the eyes of today. American Nephrology Nurses 
Association Journal, 18, 534.
Neuman, B., & Fawcett, J. (2011). The Neuman systems model
(5th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Newman, M. A. (1994). Health as expanding consciousness
(2nd ed.). New York, NY: National League for Nursing Press.
Nightingale, F. (1859). Notes on nursing: What it is, and what it
is not. London: Harrison and Sons. [Commemorative 
edition printed 1992, Philadelphia, PA: J. B. Lippincott]
Nightingale, K. (1993). Editorial. British Journal of Theatre
Nursing, 3(5), 2.
Orem, D. E. (1997). Views of human beings specific to 
nursing. Nursing Science Quarterly, 10, 26–31.
Orem, D. E. (2001). Nursing: Concepts of practice (6th ed.). 
St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
Orlando, I. J. (1961). The dynamic nurse-patient relationship:
Function, process and principles. New York: G. P. Putnam’s
Sons. [Reprinted 1990, New York: National League for
Nursing]
Parse, R. R. (1995). Commentary. Parse’s theory of humanbe-
coming: An alternative guide to nursing practice for pedi-
atric oncology nurses. Journal of Pediatric Oncology Nursing,
12, 128.
Parse, R. R. (1998). The humanbecoming school of thought: A
perspective for nurses and other health professionals. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Peplau, H. E. (1952). Interpersonal relations in nursing. 
New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons. [Reprinted 1991, 
New York, NY: Springer]
Peplau, H. E. (1992). Interpersonal relations: A theoretical
framework for application in nursing practice. Nursing 
Science Quarterly, 5, 13–18.
Peterson, S. J., & Bredow, T. S. (2004). Middle-range theories:
Application to nursing research. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.
Popper, K. R. (1965). Conjectures and refutations: The growth of
scientific knowledge. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Rogers, M. E. (1970). An introduction to the theoretical basis of
nursing. Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Rogers, M. E. (1989). Creating a climate for the implementa-
tion of a nursing conceptual framework. Journal of 
Continuing Education in Nursing, 20, 112–116.
Rogers, M. E. (1990). Nursing: Science of unitary, irreducible,
human beings: Update 1990. In E. A. M. Barrett (Ed.), 
56
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

CHAPTER 3 Evolution and Use of Formal Nursing Knowledge     ●
57
Visions of Rogers’ science-based nursing (pp. 5–11). 
New York, NY: National League for Nursing.
Roy, C. (2009). The Roy adaptation model (3rd ed.). Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
Smith, M. J., & Liehr, P. R. (Eds.). (2014). Middle range theory
for nursing (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Springer.
Watson, J. (1997). The theory of human caring: Retrospective
and prospective. Nursing Science Quarterly, 10, 49–52.
Watson, J. (2006). Part One: Jean Watson’s theory of human
caring. In M. E. Parker, Nursing theories and nursing practice
(2nd ed., pp. 295–302). Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Willis, D. G., DeSanto-Madeya, S., & Fawcett, J. (2015).
Moving beyond dwelling in suffering: A situation-specific
theory of men’s healing from childhood maltreatment.
Nursing Science Quarterly, 28, 57–63. 
Ziegler, S. M. (Ed.). (2005). Theory-directed nursing practice
(2nd ed.). New York, NY: Springer.

Health, Illness, 
and Holism
58
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Differentiate among the various health and illness models for applicability to professional nursing
practice.
2. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the various models.
3. Apply a health belief or health promotion model to a given nursing care situation.
4. Examine the application of holism in professional practice.
5. Select a model for cultural competence and apply it to a patient population from a culture other 
than yours.
Health
Health Promotion
Health Protection
Preventive Services
Primary Prevention
Secondary Prevention
Tertiary Prevention
High-level Wellness
Health Belief Model
Health Promotion Model
Chronic Illness Trajectory
Framework
Functional Health Patterns
Holistic Nursing
Cultural Competence
4
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
“I can enter your world, as one who invites 
your growth or as a strangler of your 
possibilities, a prophet of stasis.”
Sidney M. Jourard (1971)
Key Terms

Health is a condition we seek, promote, and hope to
maintain. Health is more than the absence of illness or 
infirmity. A multidimensional construct of health is de-
termined by the individual’s worldview and philosophical
assumptions. Consider the four metaparadigm concepts
of nursing and the fact that health is specified in the 
nursing theory that guides our practice. Health as a part
of the metaparadigm is interrelated with the concepts of
human beings, environment, and nursing. Considering
your particular view of the world and your concept of
health, we can now approach ways of promoting health
using a sample of different models. However, consider that
your patient population may have a different worldview.
The selection of model is, again, determined by one’s
worldview and theoretical guide.
In Chapter 3, health is illustrated within individual
theoretical structures. For example, compare the defini-
tions of health provided by King, Roy, and Leininger.
King (1981) defines health as “dynamic life experiences
of a human being, which implies continuous adjustment
to stressors in the internal and external environment
through optimum use of one’s resources to achieve max-
imum potential for daily living” (p. 5). Here we have the
focus on human beings. Roy defines health as a state and
process of being and becoming integrated and whole
with a focus on the mutuality between human beings and
the environmental (Andrews & Roy, 1991, p. 21).
Leininger (2002b) defines health as “a state of well-being
or restorative state that is culturally constituted, defined,
valued, and practiced by individuals or groups that 
enables them to function in their daily lives” (p. 84).
Care, rather than health, is considered the central con-
cept. It refers to the secondary concepts of nursing—
health, curing, and well-being, and especially culture care
(Leininger & McFarland, 2006, p. 3).
In other nursing theories and models, the concept of
health may not be well defined but is interpreted, as in
Rogers’s theory, as a “value term defined by the culture
or individual” (Gunther, 2010, p. 246). Or, in Parse’s
(1981) theory, health is a process of becoming (p. 159).
Still, health or well-being is represented in each frame-
work on which practice is based. Before delving into the
theories of health and illness—in the context of health
promotion and illness prevention—and cultural percep-
tions of health, it is first important to understand the dif-
ferent levels and types of health promotion and illness
prevention activities.
LEVELS OF PREVENTION
When considering health promotion activities, we fre-
quently refer to illness and disability prevention. Over
twenty years ago, national health promotion and disease
prevention activities were developed under the auspices
of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
(USDHHS) and published as Healthy People 2000. 
Interestingly, the publication distinguished between
health promotion and health protection strategies, with
an individual versus a community focus:
Health promotion strategies are those related to individ-
ual lifestyle—personal choices made in a social context—
that can have a powerful influence over one’s health
prospects. These include physical activity and fitness, 
nutrition, tobacco, alcohol and other drugs, family plan-
ning, mental health and mental disorders and violent
and abusive behavior. . . . Health protection strategies
are those related to environmental or regulatory measures
that confer protection on large population groups. These
strategies address issues such as unintentional injuries, 
occupational safety and health, environmental health,
food and drug safety, and oral health. Preventive 
services include counseling, screening, immunization, 
or chemoprophylactic interventions for individuals in
clinical settings. (USDHHS, PHS, 1992, pp. 6–7)
These preventive activities and services address the
three levels of prevention: primary, secondary, and terti-
ary. Health promotion activities are both protective and
preventive, but they require consumers actively involved
in all levels of prevention. And this focus on health pro-
motion and health protection strategies became an im-
portant component of Healthy People 2020 (USDHHS,
2010) with the national goals for high quality and years
of healthy life, health equity, healthy environments, and
healthy development and behaviors across the lifespan.
See Chapter 14 for more on population health.
Primary Prevention
Primary prevention refers to healthy actions taken to
avoid illness or disease. Examples are healthy nutrition,
smoking cessation, exercise programs, parenting classes,
community awareness programs, and mental health 
programs and activities. The individual lifestyle health
promotion strategies recommended in Healthy People are
becoming more popular and prevalent as people take 
responsibility for their own health. Health columns appear
frequently in publications. We have also seen a growing
number of health food and holistic health stores, “healthy”
fast food options, Web sites, and educational programs for
the general public. But consumers can still have difficulty
acquiring sufficient information on a selected topic before
they become frustrated.
Secondary Prevention
Secondary prevention involves screening for early detec-
tion and treatment of health problems. With secondary
prevention, the individual is seeking healthcare not for a
specific problem but, rather, for early detection of a po-
tential problem to mobilize resources and reduce its inten-
sity or severity if the problem is identified. Secondary
prevention usually involves use of some procedure or
measurement tool in addition to the health history and
physical assessment. Examples of secondary prevention are
screening procedures used by healthcare consumers or
healthcare professionals for physiological, developmental,
CHAPTER 4 Health, Illness, and Holism     ●
59
O N L I NE  C ONSULT  
Nursing Theories at 
http://www.nurses.info/nursing_theory.htm

or environmental problems. Physiological procedures 
include screening for hypertension or specific forms of
cancer. Mental health screening procedures range from
simple tests for orientation to more elaborate instruments
such as mental status questionnaires for aging patients.
In young children, examples of secondary prevention 
activities are use of growth charts to assess growth along
established percentiles and developmental screening 
tests to detect problems in the areas of personal-social
skills, motor activities, and language. Note the difference 
between using parenting classes as primary prevention
for developmental stimulation and screening for devel-
opmental problems as secondary prevention. Environ-
mental screening procedures include testing air and water
quality and home safety assessments. If a problem is de-
tected, a referral is made for a differential diagnosis and
institution of early treatment.
Tertiary Prevention
Tertiary prevention occurs during the rehabilitative
phase of an illness to prevent complications or further
disability. The individual has already entered the health-
care system and is recovering from or learning to cope
with a health deficit. Tertiary prevention builds on this
care to prevent further deficits. Examples of tertiary pre-
vention are counseling and teaching after recovery from
a cardiovascular event, an accident or injury, an abusive
situation, or any other physical, psychosocial, mental, or
environmental disruption from usual health and func-
tioning. Support from self-help groups is a large compo-
nent of tertiary prevention. An example of tertiary
prevention is family counseling after identification of a
child in an abusive situation.
Professional nursing practice involves not only health
promotion but also all three levels of preventive activities.
Because the health of individuals, families, communities,
and groups is a major concern in nursing, professional skill
and expertise in the area of prevention activities are pre-
sumed in practice, education, research, and administrative
functions.
THEORIES OF HEALTH 
AND ILLNESS
Aside from the conceptual or theoretical frameworks, dif-
ferent nursing models are available to guide assessment of
health factors and promote and preserve health. Interest-
ingly, Benner and Wrubel (1989) described five theories
of health as (1) an ideal, (2) the ability to fulfill social
roles, (3) a commodity, (4) a human potential, and (5) a
sense of coherence. Health is more than an ideal. We
strive for the person, family, community, or group to
reach a positive state of well-being. Defining health as the
ability to perform one’s role is limiting and fails to meet
our holistic concern for human beings. As Benner and
Wrubel (1989) observe, “this view focuses on doing
rather than being and ignores the person’s sense of fulfill-
ment and well-being” (p. 151). Health as a commodity
implies that it can be bought, sold, traded, and withheld.
This view fails to meet the intent of a caring professional
practice discipline. Health as a commodity is described as
a “medicalized view,” promising instant cures without per-
sonal involvement (Benner & Wrubel, 1989, pp. 151–153).
Health defined as a human potential is consistent with
the beliefs of nursing and many other healthcare disci-
plines and is the basis of the first three health models pre-
sented here. Health as a human potential includes
physical, mental, and spiritual health. Benner and Wrubel
(1989) describe the limitation of this model in health pro-
motion activities in that, although all people have the po-
tential for health, they are continually pursuing increasing
levels of health but not attaining health as a state or con-
dition (pp. 156–157). This definition depends on whether
health is viewed as a defined goal or a dynamic state that
we continue to strive toward. Dunn’s (1973) high-level
wellness model, the health belief model, and Pender’s
(1996) health promotion model are consistent with health
viewed as human potential.
The fifth view of health takes a phenomenological 
approach. Phenomenology is the lived experience of the
individual, from his or her unique perspective. This view
focuses on one’s lived experience rather than on an opin-
ion derived from another person’s observations of the 
experience. Benner and Wrubel’s (1989) approach to
health as a mind-body-spirit integration in a state of 
becoming is an example of health as a sense of coherence.
A focus on the person’s belonging to a sociocultural
group makes this integration unique. Benner and Wrubel
define the term well-being as a better indication of health
with challenges and involvement in the following defi-
nition: “Well-being is defined as congruence between
one’s possibilities and one’s actual practices and lived
meanings and is based on caring and feeling cared for”
(Benner & Wrubel, 1989, p. 160).
In this view, a model must be based on a qualitative
approach to address individuals’ well-being, because it 
depends on the lived experience of those persons in their
context. As Benner and Wrubel (1989) state, “health as
well-being comes when one engages in sound self-care,
cares, and feels cared for—when one trusts the self, the
body, and others. Breakdown occurs when that trust is
broken. Well-being can be restored” (p. 165). Newman’s
(2008) theory of health as the expansion of consciousness
(p. 5) is applicable to this view. The chronic illness trajec-
tory framework is also consistent with the view of health
as coherence, as are holistic health practices focused on the
interrelatedness of mind, body, and spirit.
Model of High-Level Wellness
Dunn developed his model of high-level wellness starting
with the 1947 definition of health from the World Health
Organization that emphasized physical, mental, and social
well-being. He stressed that well-being includes the posi-
tive, dynamic, and unique integration of mind, body, and
spirit of the individual within his or her environment, in-
cluding work, family, community, and society. Dunn
(1973) defined high-level wellness for an individual as “an
integrated method of functioning which is oriented to-
ward maximizing the potential of which the individual is
capable [and] requires that the individual maintain a con-
tinuum of balance and purposeful direction within the 
environment where he is functioning” (pp. 4–5).
60
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

Dunn regarded high-level wellness as an ongoing chal-
lenge to the highest level possible—the individual’s max-
imum potential. Meeting basic needs and striving for
higher needs were components of his view of individual
health and well-being. Dunn (1973) viewed high-level
wellness as “an open-ended and ever-expanding tomorrow
with its challenge to live at full potential” (p. 223). He also
considered high-level wellness, with similar components,
for the family, community, environment, and society.
Dunn’s beliefs about high-level wellness evolved into a
health grid (Fig. 4.1) that demonstrates a person or group
at some point along a health continuum or horizontal axis,
from death at the left side to peak wellness at the right. The
person or group was further influenced by the environment
(the vertical axis), from a very favorable environment at the
top to a very unfavorable environment at the bottom. This
grid illustrates the person or group in context, within one
of the four quadrants ranging from poor health to pro-
tected poor health, high-level wellness, and emergent 
high-level wellness. The high-level wellness model provides
an explanation of the person-environment relationship in
health but gives no direction as to movement among quad-
rants, and it also compartmentalizes wellness.
The model could be used effectively to address health
equity for the patient who is currently in an unfavorable
environment (poorly accepted health services related to a
language barrier) to a favorable envi ronment where we
strive to promote more culturally relevant, understandable,
and acceptable services and healthcare.
Health Belief Model
The health belief model is a tool for looking at both health
promotion and actions directed at maintaining or restor-
ing health. Originally, the model was based on the follow-
ing hypothesis:
Persons will not seek preventative care or health screen-
ing unless they possess minimal levels of relevant health
motivation and knowledge, view themselves as poten-
tially vulnerable and the condition as threatening, are
convinced of the efficacy of intervention, and see few dif-
ficulties in undertaking the recommended action (Becker 
et al., 1977, p. 29).
The health belief model was designed as an organiz-
ing framework to advance health promotion activities
CHAPTER 4 Health, Illness, and Holism     ●
61
VERY FAVORABLE ENVIRONMENT
ENVIRONMENTAL
VERY UNFAVORABLE ENVIRONMENT
PROTECTED POOR HEALTH
(in favorable environment,
i.e., through social and
cultural institutions)
POOR HEALTH
(in unfavorable
environment)
HIGH-LEVEL WELLNESS
(in favorable environment)
EMERGENT
HIGH-LEVEL WELLNESS
(in favorable environment)
PEAK
WELLNESS
DEATH
AXIS
HEALTH
AXIS
Figure 4.1 Dunn’s high-level wellness.  (From U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Public
Health Service, National Office of Vital Statistics.)

by targeting interventions on certain individual vari-
ables. The three major concepts in the model were in-
dividual perceptions, modifying factors, and likelihood
of action. Individual perceptions involve how the person
considers the risk of susceptibility or the severity of the
illness—in other words, how likely he or she believes it
is that the disease or condition could happen to him or
her. Modifying factors are a set of demographic, so-
ciopsychological cues to action from family, friends,
professionals, or the media relative to the perceived
threat of the disease. Sociopsychological variables in-
clude personality, interpersonal influences, and socio -
economic status. The modifying factors, along with
individual perceptions, lead to the likelihood of action
in the direction of health. The concept of motivation is
central to this model (Becker et al., 1977, p. 31).
An extensive review of research on variables in the
health belief model led to a subsequent revision. The
model was expanded from a diagram of health belief con-
cepts and their interrelationships to a full explanation of
and prediction about health-related behaviors. The three
major concepts were (1) readiness to undertake recom-
mended compliance behavior, (2) modifying and en-
abling factors, and (3) compliant behaviors. On the basis
of research, readiness to undertake recommended com-
pliance behavior broadened individual perceptions from
perception of susceptibility and severity to perceptions
of motivations, values for threat reduction, and subjec-
tive risk/benefit considerations that the compliant behav-
iors would be safe and effective. Modifying factors were
expanded to more inclusive modifying and enabling fac-
tors on the basis of research findings. A reciprocal rela-
tionship between readiness and modifying/enabling
factors also became more apparent in the revised model.
The outcome in the revised model was the likelihood of
compliant behaviors with preventive recommendations
or prescribed regimens.
The original version of the health belief model focused
on health promotion or preventive behaviors. Since its in-
ception, the model has been widely used in research and
practice. In addition to use in understanding utilization
of healthcare services and health promotion behaviors, the
model has guided research in patient compliance to
healthcare. An extensive body of research on patient com-
pliance for the revised model demonstrated applicability
in a wide range of healthcare situations. Insights for use
of the model in practice and education were offered. Con-
cerning patient education, Becker and associates (1977)
recommended that healthcare providers understand the
following principles:
1. Behavior is motivated.
2. Certain beliefs seem central to a person’s decision to act.
3. Not all persons possess these beliefs and motives to
equal degrees.
4. Intellectual information, although necessary, is often
not suﬃcient to stimulate needed beliefs.
5. Health providers need to view the importance of 
patient education and accept substantial responsibility
in this activity. (p. 42)
These principles are consistent with the discipline of
professional nursing practice and are routinely incorporated
into plans for care and health teaching. Consideration of
the belief systems of the individual, family, or group is 
essential in assessing a patient and choosing interventions.
The extent of detail and inclusion of this information is 
the challenge to the nurse, whose health-teaching role is an
integral component of professional practice.
As a part of the health history, readiness, as a motiva-
tion in health behaviors, is easily included in the inter-
view. The patient’s “subjective estimates” of the potential
to reduce the threat and care options are less commonly
included in the assessment, depending on the profes-
sional’s impressions of time restraints and knowledge of
the patient or even on cultural or interpersonal differences
between the professional and the patient. In a nursing
health assessment, we frequently acquire demographic 
information and some structural information that pro-
vides insight into modifying and enabling factors. The
challenge is to acquire the additional structural informa-
tion, such as cost and accessibility, and to seek informa-
tion from the patient about quality, satisfaction, and
social pressures for additional knowledge of attitudinal,
interaction, and enabling factors. This information can
be used to increase compliant behaviors.
Nevertheless, the model has limitations. First, the lan-
guage is directed to physician-patient relationships, quite
possibly a product of the roles and functions of other
healthcare providers in 1977. More recently, the health
belief model has been used in further research consistent
with views of nursing. Ongoing research and applications
of health behavior have been demonstrated at the level
of the individual, dyad, group, organization, and com-
munity (Glanz, Rimer, & Lewis, 2002). Second, as 
Pender (1987, 1996; Pender, Murdaugh, & Parsons,
2002, 2011) indicates, the health belief model is directed
at preventive services or health protection behaviors in
the context of a provider-consumer relationship rather
than individual health promotion behaviors. To be em-
powered consumers in today’s healthcare system, indi-
viduals must take personal responsibility for their own
health long before they seek care from a health profes-
sional. This concept is now beginning to be addressed in
the health belief model, especially in applications related
to health education.
Health Promotion Model
Pender’s health promotion model, an outgrowth of the
health belief model, is based on research and  information
on health and health-protecting behaviors. It is primarily
a nursing model and has been revised with evolving
knowledge. In the health promotion model, health pro-
motion is motivated by the desire to increase the level of
wellness and actualization of an individual or an aggregate
group (Pender, 1996, p. 7). Pender describes the health
promotion model as a “competence- or approach-oriented
model with applicability across the life span for motivating
overall healthy lifestyles” (Pender et al., 2006, p. 48). A
further holistic focus is apparent in the revisions of the
health promotion model; to include considerations of the
family, the community, the nation, and the world (Pender
et al., 2011, p. 31). Health is defined as “the realization
of human potential through goal-directed behavior, 
62
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

competent self-care, and satisfying relationships with 
others, while adapting to maintain structural integrity 
and harmony with the social and physical environments”
(Pender et al., 2011, p. 22). She points out that unlike the
health belief model “the health promotion model does not
include ‚’fear’ or ’threat’ as a source of motivation for the
health behavior” (Pender et al., 2011, p. 44).
Structurally, the model had been designed as a
schematic representation similar to the original health be-
lief model. After extensive research, however, the model
was revised, and significant variables were reorganized
(Fig. 4.2). The knowledge obtained through research led
to the later addition of three new variables in the health
promotion model: activity-related affect, commitment to
a plan of action, and immediate competing demands and
preferences.
The revised health promotion model contains two prin-
cipal components that interact for participation in health-
promoting behaviors: (1) individual char acteristics and
experiences and (2) behavior-specific cognitions and affect.
Individual characteristics and experiences are similar to the
individual perceptions in the health belief model, in that
they involve looking at health through past experiences
(prior related behavior) and personal factors. Pender points
out that “research indicates that often the best predictor of
behavior is the frequency of the same or a similar behavior
in the past” (Pender et al., 2011, p. 45). Personal factors
include biologic variables (age, gender, body mass, etc.),
psychological variables (such as self-esteem, self-motivation,
perceived health status), and sociocultural variables (race,
ethnicity, acculturation, education, socioeconomic  status)
(Pender et al., 2011, p. 46).
CHAPTER 4 Health, Illness, and Holism     ●
63
INDIVIDUAL
CHARACTERISTICS
AND EXPERIENCES
Prior
related
behavior
Perceived
benefits
of action
Immediate competing
demands
(low control)
and preferences
(high control)
Health-
promoting
behavior
Commitment
to a
plan of action
Perceived
barriers
to action
Perceived
self-efficacy
Activity-related
affect
Interpersonal
influences
(family, peers,
providers); norms,
support, models
Situational
influences:
Options
Demand characteristics
Aesthetics
Personal
factors:
Biological
Psychological
Sociocultural
BEHAVIOR-SPECIFIC
COGNITIONS
AND AFFECT
BEHAVIORAL
OUTCOME
Figure 4.2 Pender’s health belief model.  (Pender, N. J., Murdaugh, C. L., and Parsons, M. A. [2011]. Health
promotion in nursing practice [6th ed.]. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education, Inc., p. 45. Reprinted by 
permission of Pearson Education, Inc.)

On the basis of research evidence, these biological, psy-
chological, and sociocultural personal factors were in-
cluded in the model as further predictors of individual
health perceptions and behaviors. For example, consider
the health-seeking behaviors demonstrated by patients of
different socioeconomic groups, family backgrounds, and
experiences in the healthcare system. A later section of this
chapter addresses cultural differences in health beliefs that
also influence health-seeking behaviors.
The behavior-specific cognitions and affect are similar
to the health belief model’s modifying or enabling factors
but relate more to the nomenclature of nursing. As Pender
has indicated, this category of variables is of “major 
motivational significance” and provides the critical “core,”
because they are subject to modification based on interven-
tions (Pender et al., 2011, p. 46). These behavior-specific
cognitions and affects include perceived benefits, perceived
barriers, perceived self-efficacy, activity-related affect (sub-
jective feelings), interpersonal influences, and situational
influences. Interpersonal and situational influences are
identified as having both direct and indirect effects on
health promotion behaviors. Consider the older adult walk-
ing through a shopping mall and noticing a free hyperten-
sion screening clinic. Indirect situational influences to
obtain a screening test may include the perceived cama-
raderie of people in the clinic compared with a tedious wait
for an office appointment. The direct influence is the avail-
ability of the screening during this older adult’s routine 
exercise program at the mall.
The variables of perceived benefits, perceived barriers,
self-efficacy, interpersonal influences, and situational in-
fluences have been supported in research studies as predic-
tors of health promotion behaviors (Pender, 1996; Pender
et al., 2002, 2006, 2011). Activity-related affect, a variable
added in the revised health promotion model, addresses
the individual’s subjective feelings related to the health
promotion behavior. Although research studies have sup-
ported constructs in the model, Pender et al. (2011) have
observed that inadequate testing of the entire model is pos-
sibly related to the complexity and the large number of
concepts (p. 50).
Behavioral outcome, the third component of the
model, includes actions toward the healthy behavior.
These actions lead to the attainment of a positive health
outcome. Two variables (immediate competing demands
and preferences, and commitment to a plan of action)
were added to the revised health promotion model to 
explain further the behavioral outcome of the health-
promoting behavior. Pender describes the commitment
to the plan of action with two distinct cognitive
processes: “[a] commitment to carry out a specific action
at a given time and place and with specified persons 
or alone, irrespective of competing preferences . . . and
(2) identification of definitive strategies for eliciting, car-
rying out, and reinforcing the behavior” (Pender et al.,
2011, p. 49).
The health-promoting behavior can be affected by the
immediate competing demands and preferences the indi-
vidual perceives. These are viewed as alternate behaviors.
Competing demands are behaviors over which the person
has little control because of environmental factors, like fam-
ily commitments. Competing preferences are behaviors
with powerful reinforcing properties—such as a sudden
urge for a particular food—over which the person has 
a high level of control (Pender et al., 2011, p. 50). This
component is greatly influenced by nursing interventions
related to values clarification, encouragement, and rein-
forcement of healthy behaviors.
In the earlier version of the health promotion model,
Pender (1987) described the model as a flexible organizing
framework, subject to revision after further testing. This
was followed by the identification of theoretical basis from
both the Expectancy-Value Theory and the Social Cogni-
tive Theory with the specification of first seven assump-
tions (Pender, 1996) and then 15 theoretical propositions
(Pender et. al., 2002). Research has been ongoing for test-
ing of the model. With the empirical support of variables,
the revised model has greater potential to predict and in-
tervene for health promotion activities. Health promotion
settings are the social environment in which we live, work,
and play, such as family, school, workplace, healthcare
agencies, and the community at large. Ongoing research
studies have focused on a variety of populations to target
health promotion activities.
Comparison of the Two Models
Table 4.1 compares the health belief model and the health
promotion model. Both models propose that the health
professional must understand how the person perceives the
world and that the person makes personal decisions
through identified readiness or individual characteristics
and experiences. The modifying factors or behavior-specific
cognitions and affect are the social, situational, and envi-
ronmental influences related to the person’s conception of
healthy behavior. Both models include demographic vari-
ables, because research supports the importance of differ-
ences. For example, the choice between surgery and
irradiation is very different for a 28-year-old patient and
an 88-year-old patient, in terms not only of physiological
differences but also of past experiences. Attention to these
differences turns the focus of healthcare consumers to their
specific outcomes and increases chances of success in the
health promotion activity.
Chronic Illness Model
Although the health belief model has been used in research
and practice settings with patients who have chronic ill-
nesses, Corbin and Strauss’s chronic illness model is spe-
cific to chronicity. Despite its focus on chronic illness, it
is still a health promotion model. As Corbin and Strauss
(1992a) have stated:
The focus of care in chronicity is not on cure but first of
all on the prevention of chronic conditions, then on find-
ing ways to help the ill manage and live with their illness
should these occur. Interventions are aimed at fostering
the prevention of, living with, and shaping the course of
chronic illnesses, especially those requiring technologically
complex management, while promoting and maintain-
ing quality of life. (p. 20)
The chronic illness trajectory framework (Corbin &
Strauss, 1992a) was developed as a substantive theory for
64
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

application to individuals with a broad range of chronic
conditions. Benner and Wrubel’s (1989) concept of
health as coherence applies to this model. Corbin and
Strauss (1992a) describe the development of the frame-
work as based on 30 years of qualitative, grounded theory
research. The original framework was developed with the
following concepts: key problems, basic strategies, orga-
nizational or family arrangements, and consequences
(Strauss & Glaser, 1975; Strauss et al., 1984). It evolved
into a nursing theory through its use and research base,
but the developers maintain that it potentially applies to
all healthcare disciplines. The framework was based on
the following assumptions:
1. The course of chronic conditions varies and changes
over time.
2. The course of a chronic condition can be shaped and
managed.
3. The technology involved is complex and can poten-
tially create side eﬀects.
4. The illness and technology pose potential conse-
quences for the individual’s physical well-being, 
biographical fulﬁllment (identify over time), and 
performance of daily activities.
5. Biographical needs and performance of daily activities
can aﬀect illness management choices and the course
of the illness.
6. The course of illness is not inevitably downward.
7. Chronic illnesses do not necessarily end in death.
(Corbin & Strauss, 1992a, p. 10; 1992b, p. 97)
Corbin and Strauss (1992a) described the framework
as a conceptual model organized under the central concept
of trajectory. This central concept was proposed to indicate
the management of the evolving course of the chronic con-
dition, as “shaped” by the person, family members, and
healthcare providers. Corbin (1998) subsequently updated
the model with “a greater emphasis on health promotion
and illness prevention,” along with simplified language,
greater emphasis on the role of nurses, and global health
considerations (p. 33). Refer to Table 4.2. The revision
provided nine, rather than eight, phases for a trajectory
with a focus on quality of life. In the acute phase, the illness
is treated with a goal of returning to normal activities.
However, in a life-threatening situation, the goal of man-
agement is to remove the threat, with everyday activities
suspended until the crisis has past, but the downward phase
is focused on adaptation to disability (Corbin, 1998, p. 36).
However, if the patient returns to the stable phase, normal
activities of daily living will take place in the home and
community environment. Corbin (1998) describes the im-
plementation of the model as the problem-solving ap-
proach, similar to the steps of the nursing process, as data
gathering, problem prioritizing and goal setting, developing
the plan of action, implementing the plan, and following
up with any needed changes in the plan.
This model focuses on the person to illustrate the man-
agement of an evolving course of a chronic condition and
the individual experiences that are influenced by that 
individual, the family, and healthcare providers. The ulti-
mate goals are health promotion and disability prevention,
but with the recognition of the incidence of increasing
chronic illness. It takes us a step farther than the health
belief model because this model is more grounded in the
individual’s unique, personal history and patterns of life.
Individuals with various chronic illnesses have been stud-
ied in many countries around the world using grounded
theory and the Chronic Illness Trajectory Framework. The
framework has also been used in research on dementia in
family members and considerations on placement that was
funded by the National Institute of Nursing Research
CHAPTER 4 Health, Illness, and Holism     ●
65
TABLE 4.1
Comparing the Health Belief Model and the Health Promotion Model
Model
Individual Characteristics
Mediating Factors
Outcomes
Health Belief 
Model 
(Becker et al., 
1977)
Pender’s 
Health 
Promotion 
Model 
(Pender, 
Murdaugh, 
& Parsons, 
2011)
Readiness for recommended behavior: 
Motivations, including general health 
concerns, willingness and compliance 
behaviors, positive health attitudes 
Value of illness threat reduction, including
subjective estimates and past experiences
Probability that compliant behavior will 
reduce threat (subjectively)
Individual characteristics and experiences:
Prior related behavior
Personal factors
Biological
Psychological
Sociocultural
Modifying/enabling 
factors:
Demographic
Structural
Attitudes
Interaction
Enabling
Behavior-specific 
cognitions and affect:
Perceived benefits
Perceived barriers
Perceived self-efficacy
Activity-related affect
Interpersonal 
influences
Situational influences
Compliant behaviors:
Likelihood of compli-
ance with preventive
health recommenda-
tions and prescribed
regimens
Behavioral outcomes:
Commitment to a plan
of action
Immediate competing
demands and 
preferences
Health promoting 
behaviors

(NINR). This model has also been used to study adher-
ence to treatment over time in patients with congestive
heart failure (Granger, Moser, Harrell, Sandelowski, &
Ekman, 2007). Additional chronic illness models have
evolved (Curry, Walker, Moore, & Hogstel, 2010;
McEvoy & Barnes, 2007; Weinert, Cudney, & Spring,
2008) as we focus on the growing population of patients
with chronic illnesses. The model has also been adapted
for application to cancer survivorship patients (Klimmek
& Wenzel, 2012). The use of grounded theory as an in-
ductive approach to understanding the individual’s expe-
rience with chronic illness and all the associated contextual
factors is predominant in these research studies. For ex-
ample, the chronic illness experience is distinctively dif-
ferent for an elderly, frail Anglo-American woman living
alone in an urban high-rise apartment than for the African
American elder with a physical disability living with her
grandson in a rural farm area or for the Asian American
elder in a multigenerational environment. The difference
involves more than the issue of compliance; it focuses on
quality. This model is extremely relevant to nursing care
as we experience the rising numbers of chronic illnesses
managed in contemporary practice and the growing pop-
ulation of aging adults who are living longer while dealing
with a chronic illness. In addition, the importance of cultural
relevance, the beliefs and values of individuals, families,
communities, and groups, and environmental factors are
major considerations in holistic healthcare.
All of these models require a thoughtful and thorough
nursing assessment. Valid data are needed for their ap-
plication. As part of the nursing assessment, the applica-
tion of Gordon’s (2008) functional health patterns could
assist in this application (Box 4.1). Nursing assessment 
of each of these areas provides valuable data for applica-
tion of a health or illness model to address health and 
illness focused on human potential or a sense of coher-
ence and holism. In addition, this assessment data and
identification of functional health patterns provide the
basis of the nursing process and identification of nursing
diagnoses.
Holism
Holism is a term frequently used in nursing and other
health professions as we focus on human beings in their
environment. As simply stated by Antigoni and Dimitrios
(2009), holistic nursing is “healing the whole person” 
66
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
TABLE 4.2
The Chronic Illness Trajectory Framework (Corbin, 1998) 
Trajectory phases
Pretrajectory
    
Trajectory onset
    
Stable
    
Unstable
    
Acute
    
Crisis
    
Comeback
    
Downward
    
Dying 
Trajectory, defined
The illness/condition course and actions taken to shape or control the course
(Corbin, 1998, p. 35)
Trajectory, overall goal
“To keep populations free of chronic conditions, and when chronic 
conditions strike, to assist those affected to control symptoms, prevent 
complications, and maintain stability . . . [for] quality and quantity to life” (Corbin,
1998, p. 37)
Management strategies
Technology used, resources, past experience, motivation, setting of care,
lifestyle/beliefs, interactions/relationships, service providers, chronic condition 
and physiological involvement, symptoms, political and economic trends
Approach to care
Holistic, individualized, flexible with consideration of the cultural setting and
changes in trajectory phases, and applicable to the care setting
BOX 4.1
Functional Health Patterns
Gordon (2008) has identiﬁed 11 functional health
patterns for inclusion in the nursing assessment and
diagnosis process:
●Health perception and health management
●Nutrition and metabolic
●Elimination
●Activity and exercise
●Sleep and rest
●Cognitive and perceptual
●Self-perception and self-concept
●Role and relationship
●Sexuality and reproductive
●Coping and stress tolerance
●Values and beliefs

(p. 150). In her review of the philosophy and theory of
holism, Erickson (2007) points out that although the
concept of holism has been present for many centuries,
the word holism is a product of the 20th century applica-
tion in nursing in the 1970s when “central to each holistic
nurse’s philosophy were the beliefs that the whole is
greater than the sum of the parts, the patient’s world view
guides practitioners in understanding the whole, and the
nurse is instrumental in helping people to heal and
grow”(p. 145). Recall that “wholeness” is one of the prin-
ciples in systems theory and also included in many nurs-
ing models. More recently, Zborowsky and Kreitzer
(2009) applied systems theory to their model designed at
three overlapping circles for people, process, and place,
with the common center that was created and entitled the
optimum healing environment (OHE). In fact, they pro-
pose that the OHE is “created when people, place, and
care processes converge at a particular time and within a
particular culture” (Zborowsky & Kreitzer, 2009, p. 187).
And, as Ray (2010) points out, “the holistic science of
nursing has provided nursing with understanding of the
complexity of human relationships and the complexity of
the meaning of the integral relationship of the human and
environment” (p. 138). 
The American Holistic Nurses Association (AHNA)
and the American Nurses Association (ANA) (2013) have
identified the Holistic Nursing: Scope and Standards of
Practice guided by principles for the concepts of person,
health/healing, practice, nursing roles, self-reflection, and
self-care. As with the general Scope and Standards of 
Practice (ANA, 2010), holistic nursing is described with
six standards of practice in line with the steps of the 
nursing process and standards of professional perform-
ance focused on quality, education, practice evaluation,
collegiality, collaboration, ethics, research, resource uti-
lization, and leadership. Holistic nursing is described as
“focus[ing] on protecting, promoting, and optimizing
health and wellness; assisting healing; preventing illness
and injury; alleviating suffering; supporting people to find
peace, comfort, harmony, and balance through the diag-
nosis and treatment of human response; and advocacy in
the care of individuals, families, communities, popula-
tions, and the planet” (AHNA & ANA, 2013, p. 1). The
focus is on the whole person in their unique context. An-
drews (2008b) describes the holistic paradigm as seeking
“to maintain a sense of balance or harmony between 
humans and the larger universe [with] explanations for
health and disease based not so much on external agents
as on imbalance or disharmony among the human, 
geophysical, and metaphysical forces of the universe” 
(p. 69). As illustrated in Chapter 3, several nursing mod-
els are consistent with this model of practice. The patient
is the focus, with the goal of returning to a state of har-
mony or balance, and care may include both conventional
treatment as well a traditional and complementary and
alternative therapies (CAM).
While holistic nursing practice is a specialty practice
with its unique scope and standards identified by the pro-
fession, components of holism are evident in all nursing
practice areas. The American Association of Colleges of
Nursing (AACN, 2006, 2008b) in its Essentials documents
for both baccalaureate and graduate education, includes
the expectation for holistic practice. At the undergraduate
level, the first assumption is that “the baccalaureate gen-
eralist graduate is prepared to practice from a holistic, car-
ing framework” (AACN, 2008b, p. 8), and the direct
practice of the advanced practice nurse is characterized by
the use of a holistic perspective (AACN, 2006, p. 18).
As stated in the Holistic Nursing: Scope and Standards
of Practice (AHNA & ANA, 2013), “holistic nursing is a
world view—a way of ’being’ in the world and not just a
modality—holistic nurses can practice in any setting, 
anywhere, and with individuals throughout the life span”
(p. 22). The holistic caring process is aligned with the steps
of the nursing process but, as with any specialty practice,
requires specialty knowledge, skills, and abilities. In addi-
tion, as in the ANA (2010) Nursing: Scope and Standards
of Practice, holistic practice competencies are delineated
for the RN and the nurse with graduate-level preparation.
All professional nursing practice requires a holistic per-
spective. As stated in the ANA (2010) Nursing: Scope and
Standards of Practice, “the nursing needs of human beings
are identified from a holistic perspective and are met
within the context of a culturally sensitive, caring inter-
personal environment” (p. 18). This holistic perspective
includes the physical, emotional, social, and spiritual needs
of the individual and the family. And the spiritual dimen-
sion includes feelings, thoughts, experiences, and behaviors
in a search for meaning, not necessarily synonymous with
religion (AHNA & ANA, 2013, p. 91). The need for ho-
listic nursing practice is important for the patient, family,
and nurse whether the situation involves routine, emer-
gency, or palliative care, the care is applicable to individual
preferences and culture. 
CULTURAL INFLUENCE ON
HEALTH PERCEPTIONS
Over the past 30 years, national initiatives in Healthy Peo-
ple 2000, 2010, and 2020, have targeted selected groups
of at-risk populations requiring special health promotion
strategies. These reports illustrated significant health
problems in some minority groups, but more impor-
tantly, they emphasized individuals within subgroups. As
originally reported in Healthy People 2000, individual dif-
ferences, beyond racial group, socioeconomic status, and
educational level, affect health status and access to health-
care. These reports pointed out that “our healthcare pro-
grams are characterized by unacceptable disparities linked
to membership in certain racial and ethnic groups” 
(USDHHS, PHS, 1992, p. 31). Since that time, studies
and outreach efforts have investigated racial, cultural, 
environmental, social, and linguistic issues. As an exam-
ple, the Commonwealth Foundation conducted a field
study, reporting that “minorities have  difficulty getting
appropriate, timely, high-quality care because of lan-
guage barriers and that they may have different perspec-
tives on health, medical care, and expectations about
diagnosis and treatment” (Betancourt et al., 2002, p. 3).
Further research into managed care, education, and gov-
ernment illustrated “a clear link between cultural com-
petence, improving quality, and eliminating racial and
ethnic disparities in health care” (Betancourt et al., 2005,
p. 1). Pender et al. (2011) describe designing culturally
CHAPTER 4 Health, Illness, and Holism     ●
67

competent health promotion programs and identify 
specific demographic, cultural, and health system factors
to assess in vulnerable populations (p. 293). The issue
then goes beyond access to the need for the provision 
of acceptable healthcare to address the issue of health 
equity.
These reports began to highlight the need for a con-
certed effort to understand and embrace diversity in our
daily personal and professional lives. But much is implied
within the construct of “diversity.” When people speak of
ethnicity and race, they generally refer to a group, tribe,
or nation of people united by some common characteris-
tics, whether biological, environmental, or social. In the
United States, we tend to classify people into five ethnic
groups: African Americans, Asian Americans and Pacific
Islanders, Hispanic Americans, Native Americans, and
white Americans. But this tendency does little to help us
understand the health beliefs, practices, needs, or diversity
represented within each of these population classifications.
It may, in fact, encourage us to impose stereotypical judg-
ments on persons within these groups.
This point leads us to the concept of culture as a way
of life and the increasing focus on cultural competence.
Purnell (2013) describes competence in healthcare as
“having the knowledge, skills, and abilities to deliver care
congruent with the patient’s cultural beliefs and practices”
(p. 7). Purnell (2013) further states that increasing one’s
consciousness of cultural diversity improves the possibil-
ities for healthcare practitioners to provide culturally
competent care (p. 7). 
Our cultural inheritance has a powerful influence on
our health beliefs, both conscious and unconscious. We
bring into our personal and professional lives the influ-
ences from our ancestors, family, peers, and colleagues.
We are affected by history, genetics, social customs, reli-
gion, language, politics, law, economics, education, and
many other factors. We mutually influence and are in-
fluenced by others because of these endowments. When
we talk about cultural diversity, we mean more than an
inherited background. “Culture” implies social, familial,
religious, national, and professional characteristics that
affect the way we think and act; it is a combination of
all these things.
Research demonstrating individual differences and per-
ceptions provided valuable data for the revision of the
health belief model. Educational, ethnic, and social class
differences were identified for careful assessment of patient
beliefs and perceptions (Becker et al., 1977). These data
are significant whether one is dealing with individual 
patients or families with a specific healthcare deficit or a
larger population group with informational needs for
health promotion activities. 
But it is important to consider the characteristics of
both the patient and the health professional. The values for
cultural diversity and culturally sensitive care are clearly il-
lustrated in position statements of our nursing organiza-
tions. In addition, AACN (2008a, 2009) has identified
core cultural competences for nurses prepared at both the
baccalaureate and graduate levels (see Table 4.3). As An-
drews (2008b) indicates, however, healthcare professionals
“must have positive experiences with members of other 
cultures and learn to value genuinely the contributions all
cultures make to our multicultural society” (p. 9).
One’s health beliefs are the result of cultural in -
heritance, education, reasoned opinions, and, often, un-
founded impressions. The proportion of each of these
factors is individually determined. Andrews (2008a) de-
scribes three worldviews for cultural influence on health-
care: (1) magico-religious, (2) scientific, and (3) holistic.
The three different views show us how individuals differ
in their beliefs in the supernatural, the scientific commu-
nity, or the holistic mind-body-spirit interrelationship.
It is worth noting that the traditional healthcare system
operates from the scientific worldview, which diverges
from that of many cultures and their subgroups. 
The magico-religious view of health and healing focuses
on the supernatural. It can include ancient rites and rituals,
reliance on prayer and the will of a supreme being, pil-
grimages, spiritual healing, and the like. The scientific view
is the dominant one for the healthcare system, with 
reliance on allopathic medicine, biomedical treatments,
and a focus on a cure for illness and disease. As noted by
Spector (2013), the allopathic  philosophy is predicated on
a dualistic view of body and mind and adherence to sci-
entific and technological norms of the system for acute
care, chronic care, rehabilitation, psychiatric/mental
health, and community/public health—and is a culture
onto itself (pp. 108–109). The holistic paradigm sees health
as a balance of the physical, mental, and spiritual whole
and includes both alternative and complementary thera-
pies (e.g., aromatherapy or massage) and ethnocultural
practices (e.g., herbs or voodoo) used to treat the person
rather than the disease (Spector, 2013). The holistic aim
is for a sense of harmony and treatment to correct an im-
balance. Significant differences can exist in health beliefs
and roles between the patient with a healthcare need and
the healthcare provider, considered the “expert.”
In our healthcare system, we generally view the roles
of healthcare providers and those of consumers in tradi-
tional ways. We consider the disease or illness, including
all the pathophysiology and treatment modalities. We are
aware of healthcare and health promotion services in both
the hospital and community setting. We usually present
them through our words and behaviors as norms to which
patients must adhere. Otherwise, they are termed “bad 
patients,” “noncompliant,” or even “problem cases.” For
example, the healthcare community carefully conducts,
evaluates, and uses research to identify biological, chemi-
cal, structural, and physical factors to treat, manage, or
cure a disease. Faced with patients whose belief system 
68
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
O N L I NE  C ONSULT  
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality at 
http://www.ahrq.gov
The Commonwealth Fund at 
http://www.cmwf.org
Healthy People at
http://www.healthypeople.gov
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services at
http://www.hhs.gov

includes the “hot/cold” theory of disease causation and
treatment—which holds that imbalance of the four body
humors of yellow and black bile, phlegm, and blood re-
sulting in a “hot” infectious condition must be treated
with appropriate foods or herbs—we may ignore or 
patronize the patient. Many scientific minds reject this
theory, creating conflict and failure to provide healthcare.
As Benner and Wrubel (1989) observe, “changes in
lifestyles and health habits work best when they are inte-
grated into the person’s own cultural patterns and tradi-
tions [for] it is hard to sustain new patterns if they go
against the grain of one’s normal social patterns” (p. 155). 
Models of Cultural Care and
Competence in Practice
The movement for culturally competent care is an imper-
ative for practice in the health professions. Although many
models have been designed to assist practitioners, the fol-
lowing selected models are useful in nursing practice. To
explore additional models of culturally competent care, see
the Bibliography at the end of this chapter.
Culture Care Diversity and Universality
Madeleine Leininger proposed a transcultural nursing the-
ory with the central focus on care, especially the concept
of culture care. Leininger’s (1970) early definition of 
culture referred to a way of “life belonging” to a designated
group, through accumulated traditions, customs, and the
ways the group solves problems that are learned and trans-
mitted systematically, largely through socialization prac-
tices that are reinforced through social and cultural
institutions (pp. 48–49). Within her culture care theory,
Leininger (2002c) defined culture as “patterned lifeways,
values, beliefs, norms, symbols, and practices of individu-
als, groups, or institutions that are learned, shared, and
usually transmitted intergenerationally over time” (p. 83).
Taking this one step further as a health belief, Leininger
(2002c) defined cultural care as “the synthesized and cul-
turally constituted assistive, supportive, and facilitative 
caring acts toward self or others focused on evident or an-
ticipated needs for the patient’s health or well-being or to
face disabilities, death or other human conditions” (p. 83).
To this end, she states that “the purpose of theory of 
Culture Care was to discover, document, know and ex-
plain the interdependence of care and culture phenomena
with differences and similarities between and among 
cultures” (Leininger & McFarland, 2006, p. 4).
On the basis of in-depth qualitative research,
Leininger has identified dominant cultural values and
culture care meanings and action modes for many differ-
ent American subculture groups, showing differences
with the Anglo-American healthcare value structure. She
defines subcultures as “small or large groups living in a
dominant culture that retain certain values and beliefs
that are different from the dominant culture” (Leininger,
2002a, p. 122). The Anglo-American cultural values 
include individualism, independence and freedom, com-
petition and achievement, materialism, technology, in-
stant time and actions, youth and beauty, equal rights
CHAPTER 4 Health, Illness, and Holism     ●
69
TABLE 4.3
AACN’s (2008a, 2009) Identification of Cultural Care Competencies 
for Nurses by Educational Preparation
Baccalaureate Prepared Nurses
Master’s and Doctorally Prepared Nurses
Apply knowledge of social and cultural 
factors that affect nursing and healthcare 
across multiple contexts.
Use relevant data sources and best 
evidence in providing culturally 
competent care.
Promote achievement of safe and 
quality outcomes of care for diverse 
populations.
Advocate for social justice, including 
commitment to the health of vulnerable 
populations and the elimination of 
health disparities.
Participate in continuous cultural 
competence development.
Sources: American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2008). Cultural competency in baccalaureate nursing education. Retrieved
from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/education/pdf/competency.pdf; American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2009). Estab-
lishing a culturally competent master’s and doctorally prepared nursing workforce. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/
Education/pdf/CulturalComp.pdf
Prioritize the social and cultural factors that affect health in 
designing and delivering care across multiple contexts.
Construct socially and empirically derived cultural knowledge of 
people and populations to guide practice and research.
Assume leadership in developing, implementing, and evaluating 
culturally competent nursing and other healthcare services.
Transform systems to address social justice and health disparities.
Provide leadership to educators and members of the healthcare or 
research team in learning, applying, and evaluating continuous cultural
competence development.
Conduct culturally competent scholarship that can be utilized in 
practice.

(gender), leisure time, scientific facts and numbers, and
a sense of generosity in time of crisis; action modes in-
clude stress alleviation, personalized acts, self-reliance,
and health instruction. These characteristics are consis-
tent with the prevailing culture of the practitioners and
organizations that make up the healthcare system. In her
book Culture Care Diversity and Universality: A Theory
of Nursing, Leininger lists information on a sample of
some American subgroups (Leininger, 1991a, p. 355).
She has identified further special groups as subgroups,
such as the homeless, drug users, homosexual individuals,
the deaf, those infected with HIV, and nurses. Valencia-
Go (2006) supports the identification of these subgroups
as emerging populations in healthcare to include ethnic
minorities, the homeless, and those afflicted with 
AIDS (p. 24).
Difficulties arise when significant values are un-
known, in conflict, or poorly understood. The patient’s
cultural values can be quite different from those of the
healthcare provider. As Leininger (1991a) details in her
book, of the 15 sample subgroups presented, 10 share
none of the dominant characteristics of healthcare sys-
tems and Anglo-American patients, and few character-
istics are shared by the remaining subgroups. In
addition, consider the importance of religious or domi-
nant spiritual influence in all but three of the cultural
subgroups she described. Knowledge of the dominant
values can assist in providing health promotion or health
maintenance information, activities, and programs. 
An example can be seen with the increasing importance
of the use of faith communities in health promotion 
activities. Leininger (1994) stresses that nurses as pri-
mary, secondary, and tertiary care providers, through
their close and continuous contact with culturally di-
verse patients, must move from unicultural personal and
professional knowledge to provide meaningful culturally
based nursing care (p. 255). Time, openness, and 
a growing understanding are critical components of 
a clinician’s development of higher levels of cultural
competence.
The Giger and Davidhizar
Transcultural Assessment Model
Another nursing model directed at the importance of
culture and care focuses on the assessment process. Giger
and Davidhizar have identified a variety of cultural be-
havior patterns relevant to health assessment that have
an influence on the delivery of care. They define culture
as “a patterned behavioral response that develops over
time as a result of imprinting the mind through social
and religious structures and intellectual and artistic
manifestations” (Giger & Davidhizar, 2008, p. 2). Their
assessment model has been used in a variety of research
and clinical practice settings and includes the concepts
listed in Box 4.2. Cultures of origin, subcultures, and
acculturalization are important considerations in this 
assessment model.
Notice that in this assessment model, the focus is on
the culturally unique individual. The initial area for assess-
ment is on individual characteristics, including the indi-
vidual’s definition of culture. The next assessment areas
include specifics on communication patterns and use of
space, which reveal cultural differences but also have a 
profound influence on interactions and acceptability of 
information sharing. Social organization is designed to ob-
tain information on current health status as well as family,
work, social, political and religious affiliations, practices,
and  preferences. Assessment of time consideration also
looks at cultural patterns, practices, and preferences. En-
vironmental control focuses on the individual’s perception
of locus of control (internal versus external as with the
magico-religious paradigm), values and supernatural in-
fluences, and their description of their environment and
their concept of health. The area of biological variations
includes a complete physical examination with particular
attention to cultural/sociocultural, physical, metabolic,
and genetic variations. The nursing assessment focuses 
on clinical judgment of the individual and summarizes 
the assessment data for incorporation into the plan of care.
Although identified in their assessment model as nursing
assessment, applications have been extended to other
health professions. As reported by Giger and Davidhizar
(2008), application of the model in diverse settings is pro-
ducing a means for clinical understanding and application
of culturally competent care across disciplines (p. 16).
Spector’s Health Traditions
Model
Spector (2013) views a person as a unique cultural being,
having personal health traditions and being affected by
cultural phenomena. Her model for the individual is an
oval with the outer band containing the concepts of com-
munication, space, time, biological variations, environ-
mental control and social organization, and with the
middle band containing the concepts of culture, religion,
and ethnicity. At the center of the model is the person as
a unique being with personal health traditions. Using the
concept of holistic health, health traditions are explored
as a model for these unique individuals, as what people
do in order to maintain, protect, and restore health from
the perspective of their traditions (Spector, 2013, p. 92).
This Health Traditions model is designed as a matrix with
health maintenance, protection, and restoration on the
vertical axis, which interrelate with three holistic concepts
(physical, mental, and spiritual) on the horizontal axis.
70
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
BOX 4.2
Patterns for Assessment in the Giger 
& Davidhizar (2008) Transcultural 
Assessment Model
Culturally unique individual factors
●Communication 
●Space
●Social orientation
●Time
●Environmental control
●Biologic variations
●Nursing assessment
Source: J. N. Giger & R. E. Davidhizar (2008). Transcultural Nursing: 
Assessment and Intervention (5th ed.). Philadelphia: Mosby.

Health maintenance concepts involve basic physical,
mental, and spiritual needs. Health protection includes
special foods, activities, customs, and religious practices
or rituals. Restoration activities include holistic remedies
for the body, mind, and spirit. Culture, heritage, and
health traditions are important foci for this view of cul-
ture and the development of cultural awareness. Spector
(2013) provides a heritage assessment tool to understand
a person’s traditional health and illness beliefs and prac-
tices, and to determine appropriate community care 
resources (pp. 376–378).
The Purnell Model for 
Cultural Competence
Purnell (2013) describes the need for self-awareness in
cultural competence as a deliberative and emotional
process of getting to know yourself (personality, values,
beliefs, standards, ethics, etc.) and the impact of these
factors when interacting with others different from
yourself (p. 45). The Purnell model is an organizing
framework, designed as a wheel with four rims repre-
senting the society, community, family, and the person,
and spokes as 12 wedges representing interconnected
cultural constructs or domains, to the unknown dark
core at the center (Fig. 4.3). Purnell provides assessment
questions for each of the 12 domains of culture, address-
ing the concepts under the various and interrelated do-
mains. Purnell (2013) further describes the jagged line
at the bottom of the model under the wheel representing
“the concept of cultural consciousness,” from left to
right, as the unconsciously incompetent to the uncon-
sciously competent practitioner (pp. 16–17). The devel-
opment of cultural competence is implicit, as noted in
one of 20 assumptions upon which the model is based:
“to be effective, health care must reflect the unique un-
derstanding of the values, beliefs, attitudes, lifeways, and
worldview of diverse populations and individual accul-
turation patterns” (Purnell, 2013, p. 15).
Purnell’s model emphasizes human beings, health, and
the environment; however, the model is not restricted to
nursing and is applicable across disciplines. Information
provided in the model is designed to understand holisti-
cally human beings with health issues within the various
broad constructs. 
What each of the models seems to have in common is
a directive to actively seek to understand the uniqueness
of human beings in their context, as cultural competence.
And in doing this, care for individuals, families, and
groups will result in more positive outcomes. They also
point to the fact, however, that individuals within a se-
lected culture are very different. As we seek to understand
different cultures and heritages, we must still focus on
human beings. Consider the results of a research study to
validate an instrument used with hospitalized patients on
advance directives. The researchers found that the instru-
ment was valid, in both the English and Spanish versions.
But differences were also found in the preferences, in that
the Hispanic adult participants had less knowledge of ad-
vance directives and a higher preference for life-support
interventions. Froman and Owen (2003) were able to sup-
port the validity of the instrument but did recommend
further study to address the “great diversity among 
Hispanic regions and culture” (p. 36). 
Further, consider the following variables for culturally
competent care:
●Time with patients to become accepted and gain an
understanding of their belief system
●Differences in belief systems among generations and
geographic origin
●Past experiences and current situation
●Religious influences
●Familial influences
●Understanding of advance directives
●Acceptance of the healthcare services, systems, and
practitioners
●Linguistic issues
Other individual values may not be initially apparent or
may grow more dominant. Complementary and alterna-
tive medicine (CAM) and healthcare practices, such as
acupuncture, imagery, and herbal medicines, are being
used as people become dissatisfied with the biomedical
view and move to holistic care. These practices may differ
from an individual’s inherited cultural background but
may be adopted or become more dominant. In addition,
they may be used along with (complementary) or instead
of (alternative) conventional medicine, and their use may
or may not be reported by the patient to the healthcare
provider. Spector (2013) reports the rapidly growing use
of homeopathic healthcare choices as alternative or com-
plementary (e.g., aromatherapy, biofeedback, hypnother-
apy, massage) and ethnocultural or traditional (e.g.,
herbs and holistic healing practices and rituals). And the
research and body of knowledge on many of these prac-
tices is growing. A review of current literature reveals 
a wide range of research studies reporting on the use 
of CAM in a variety of patient populations, from chil-
dren, to normal childbearing families, to patients with
medical diagnoses including breast and prostate cancer.
The increase in use and acceptance of CAM points to the
need for a comprehensive cultural assessment with 
the patient and may require of the clinician great open-
ness, sensitivity, and time. 
THE NURSE’S ROLE
Nurses have a primary responsibility in health promotion,
health maintenance, and prevention activities; in fact,
such activities represent the essence of professional nurs-
ing practice. The focus of nursing is on the health of the
CHAPTER 4 Health, Illness, and Holism     ●
71
ON LIN E CON SULT 
Office of Minority Health & Health Disparities
(OMHD) at
http://www.cdc.gov/diversity/faqs/diversity.htm
National Center for Complementary and 
Alternative Medicine at
http://nccam.nih.gov
Transcultural Nursing at
http://www.culturediversity.org/ index.html

72
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
Community
Person
Person
Person
Person
Person
Person
Person
Person
Person
Person
Person
Family
Family
Family
Family
Family
Family
Family
Family
Family
Family
Family
Family
Global Society
Global Society
Global Society
Global Society
Community
Community
Community
Person
Unconsciously
incompetent
Consciously
incompetent
Consciously
competent
Unconsciously
competent
Overview/heritage
Origins
Residence
Topography
Economics
Politics
Education
Occupation
Nutrition
Meaning of food
Common foods
Rituals
Deficiencies
Limitations
Health promotion
Communication
Dominant language
Dialects
Contextual use
Volume/tone
Spatial distancing
Eye contact
Facial expressions
Greetings
Temporality
Time
Names
Touch
Pregnancy
Fertility practices
Views toward pregnancy
Pregnancy beliefs
Birthing
Postpartum
Family roles and
organization
Head of household
Gender roles
Goals & priorities
Developmental tasks
Roles of aged
Extended family
Social status
Alternative
lifestyles
Death rituals
Death rituals
Bereavement
Workforce issues
Acculturation
Autonomy
Language barriers
Spirituality
Religious
practices
Use of prayer
Meaning of life
Individual strength
Spirituality & health
Health-care
practitioners
Perceptions of practitioners
Folk practitioners
Gender & health care
High-risk
behaviors
Tobacco
Alcohol
Recreational drugs
Physical activity
Safety
Health-care practices
Focus on health care
Traditional practices
Magicoreligious religious
beliefs 
Responsibilty for health
Transplantation
Rehablilitation/
chronicity
Self-medication
Pain/sick role
Mental health
Barriers
Biocultural
ecology
Biological variations
Skin color
Heredity
Genetics
Ecology
Drug metabolism
Primary characteristics of culture: age, generation, nationality, race, color, gender, religion
Secondary characteristics of culture: educational status, socioeconomic status, occupation, military status, 
political beliefs, urban versus rural residence, enclave identity, marital status, parental status, physical character-
istics, sexual orientation, gender issues, and reason for migration (sojourner, immigrant, undocumented status)
Unconsciously incompetent: not being aware that one is lacking knowledge about another culture
Consciously incompetent: being aware that one is lacking knowledge about another culture
Consciously competent: learning about the client’s culture, verifying generalizations about the client’s culture, 
and providing culturally specific interventions
Unconsciously competent: automatically providing culturally congruent care to clients of diverse cultures
The Purnell Model for Cultural Competence
Figure 4.3 The Purnell Model for Cultural Competence.  Source: Purnell, L. (2013). Transcultural health
care: A culturally competent approach (4th ed.). Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.

individual, family, community, and societal group.
Health promotion roles are guided within the theoretical
framework on which nursing practice is based, including
how you, as the professional, view the human beings, the
concept of health, the environment, and the practice of
nursing as well as your accord with a model’s definitions
and relationships. This is the purpose of the middle-range
theories discussed in Chapter 3, from which you can move
to a practice model that is applicable to your specific func-
tion or practice setting. Before you decide on the best
framework to guide your own professional practice, con-
sider the following two examples.
Example 1
Suppose your practice is guided by King’s Theory of Goal
Attainment. In this theory, nursing is defined as “a process
of human interactions between nurse and patient whereby
each perceives the other and the situation, and through
communications, they set goals, explore the means to
achieve them, agree to the means, [and] their actions in-
dicate movement toward goal achievement” (King, 1987,
p. 113). Health promotion, health maintenance, and pre-
vention activities are all implied in this definition of health
as adjustment to stressors in the system environments and
use of resources. Health is viewed as a potential and the
goal of the process.
Specific assessment and intervention activities must 
address the theory’s theoretical concepts and propositions.
Selected health and illness models can be used to guide
practice. Personal perceptions of the patient are important
components of the Health Belief Model, Pender’s Health
Promotion Model, and the Chronic Illness Trajectory
Framework. If your practice setting is a clinic with a large
population that needs health promotion strategies address-
ing individual lifestyles and the preventive services identi-
fied in Healthy People 2020, you may find the health belief
model or Pender’s Health Promotion Model quite useful
with your patients. These same models can address health
maintenance as secondary and tertiary prevention. On the
other hand, if your practice setting is a hospice or you work
primarily with patients with cancer and their families, you
may find the chronic illness trajectory framework more use-
ful for guiding your practice and use of the nursing process.
Example 2
If your practice is guided by Leininger’s Culture Care
Diversity and Universality model, three modes of cul-
tural care guide your nursing judgment, decisions, and
actions: preservation and maintenance, accommodation
and negotiation, and repatterning or restructuring
(Leininger, 1991b, 2002c; Leininger & McFarland,
2006). In Leininger’s concept of culturally congruent
nursing care, these modes all focus on health promotion,
health maintenance, and prevention activities within the
context of the individual cultural belief system. Leininger
defines culturally congruent nursing care as the specific
use of “culturally based care, knowledge, acts and deci-
sions in sensitive and knowledgeable ways to appropri-
ately and meaningfully fit the cultural values, beliefs, and
lifeways of human beings for their health and wellbeing,
or to prevent illness, disabilities, or death” (Leininger 
& McFarland, 2006, p. 15). The practice models and as-
sessment tools you select must be culturally sensitive and
must include individual focus on each of the assessment
factors in the Sunrise Enabler, which is used to depict
the dimensions of her theory visually (Leininger, 1991b,
2002c; Leininger & McFarland, 2006).
Selecting a health model involves a deliberate and re-
flective process that takes into account your views, the the-
ory that guides your professional practice, and the unique
characteristics of the people and envi ronment in which
you work. You may practice under several similar models,
depending on a changeable environment or consumer
group interactions.
CHAPTER 4 Health, Illness, and Holism     ●
73
K E Y  P O I N T S
●Health promotion and health protection strategies relate to individual lifestyle and environmental
influences on health status and health prospects. Preventive activities and services address three areas of
prevention. Primary prevention consists of healthy actions taken to avoid illness or disease. Secondary
prevention involves screening for early detection and treatment of health problems. Tertiary prevention
during the rehabilitative phase of an illness prevents complications and further disability.
●Health is more than the absence of illness, disease, or infirmity. A concept of health is determined by
one’s worldview and philosophical assumptions.
●Benner and Wrubel (1989) describe five theories of health as (1) an ideal, (2) the ability to fulfill social
roles, (3) a commodity, (4) a human potential, and (5) a sense of coherence.
●Dunn’s (1973) high-level wellness emphasizes well-being, including the positive, dynamic, and unique
integration of the mind, body, and spirit of the individual functioning within the environment and at the
maximum potential.
●The health belief model (Becker et al., 1977) was designed as an organizing framework to advance
health promotion activities by targeting interventions to certain individual variables. Three major
concepts explain and predict health-related behaviors: (1) readiness to undertake recommended
compliance behavior, (2) modifying and enabling factors, and (3) compliant behaviors.
Continued

74
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
K E Y  P O I N T S—cont’d
●Pender’s health promotion model is a schematic representation with three components for health-
promoting behaviors. Individual characteristics and experiences include prior related behavior and
personal factors (biologic, psychological, and sociocultural factors). Behavior-specific cognitions and affect
include perceived benefits, perceived barriers, perceived self-efficacy, activity-related affect interpersonal
influences, and situational influences. The behavioral outcome is attainment of a positive health outcome
through commitment to the plan of action and competing demands and preferences.
●The chronic illness trajectory framework (Corbin & Strauss, 1992a) is a conceptual model organized
under the main concept of trajectory for managing an evolving course of a chronic condition.
●Gordon’s (2008) 11 functional health patterns can be used as a valuable tool in the nursing assessment
and diagnosis process and in the application of models to address health and illness focused on human
potential or a sense of coherence.
●Holistic nursing is described as “focus[ing] on protecting, promoting, and optimizing health and
wellness; assisting healing; preventing illness and injury; alleviating suffering; supporting people to find
peace, comfort, harmony, and balance through the diagnosis and treatment of human response; 
and advocacy in the care of individuals, families, communities, populations, and the planet” (AHNA 
& ANA, 2013, p. 1).
●Culture involves a combination of social, familial, religious, national, and professional characteristics
that affect the way we think, act, and interact with others. Differences among groups and subgroups
produce diversity that can lead from uniculturalism to appreciation of a multicultural environment and
healthcare behaviors.
●Leininger defines culturally congruent nursing care as “culturally based care, knowledge, acts and
decisions in sensitive and knowledgeable ways to appropriately and meaningfully fit the cultural values,
beliefs, and lifeways of human beings for their health and wellbeing, or to prevent illness, disabilities, or
death” (Leininger & McFarland, 2006, p. 15). 
●The Giger and Davidhizar Transcultural Assessment Model (2008), directed at the importance of 
culture and care focuses on the assessment process and patterns of culturally unique individual factors,
communication, space, social orientation, time, environmental control, biological variations, and nursing
assessment. 
●Using the same concepts of communication, space, time, biological variations, and social orientation,
Spector (2013) views a person as a unique cultural being with personal health traditions and considers
how he or she is affected by cultural phenomena.
●The Purnell Model for Cultural Competence (2013) is an organizing framework, designed as a wheel
with four rims representing the society, community, family, and the person, and spokes as 12 wedges
representing cultural constructs, to the unknown dark core at the center. 
●Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) and healthcare practices are being tried as people
become dissatisfied with the biomedical view and move to holistic care. 
●Nursing focuses on the health of the individual, family, community, and societal group. Health promotion
roles are guided by the theoretical framework on which practice is based.
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Select a definition provided for health from the nursing theories presented in Chapter 3. Discuss which of the
five models of health they fit into, and suggest health promotion models for each.
2. Use Pender’s health promotion model to plan a health promotion campaign for one of the following situations:
• Immunization program in an urban apartment complex with a high density of families with young children
• Home safety program at a senior citizens’ center
• Wellness program for employees in a manufacturing company

CHAPTER 4 Health, Illness, and Holism     ●
75
3. Recall a patient with a chronic illness for whom you have provided nursing care in the past. Retrospectively apply
the chronic illness trajectory framework to the patient experiences that you were able to observe.
4. Think of an example from your experience of a patient from a different culture with different perceptions of
health, illness, or treatment from your own. How did you or could you alter your approach to the patient?
5. Review the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter, and discuss it in the context of the
contents of the chapter.
Interactive Exercises 
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.
REFERENCES
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2006).
The essentials of doctoral education for advanced nursing 
practice. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/
DNP/pdf/Essentials.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2008a).
Cultural competency in baccalaureate nursing education. Re-
trieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/ leading-initiatives/
education-resources/competency.pdf 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2008b).
The essentials of baccalaureate education for professional nurs-
ing practice. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/
Education/pdf/BaccEssentials08.pdf 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2009).
Establishing a culturally competent master’s and doctorally pre-
pared nursing workforce. Retrieved, from http://www.aacn
.nche.edu/education-resources/CulturalComp.pdf 
American Holistic Nurses Association (AHNA) & American
Nurses Association (ANA). (2013). Holistic nursing: Scope
and standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Springs, MD:
Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2010). Nursing: Scope
and standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Springs, MD:
Nursebooks.org.
Andrews, H., & Roy, C. (1991). Essentials of the Roy Adaptation
Model. Norwalk, CT: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Andrews, M. M. (2008a). The influence of cultural and health
belief systems on health care practices. In M. M. Andrews &
J. S. Boyle, Transcultural Concepts in Nursing Care (5th ed.,
pp. 66–81). Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.
Andrews, M. M. (2008b). Theoretical foundations of transcul-
tural nursing. In M. M. Andrews & J. S. Boyle, Transcultural
Concepts in Nursing Care (5th ed., pp. 3–14). Philadelphia,
PA: Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Antigoni, F., & Dimitrios, T. (2009). Nurses’ attitudes 
towards complementary therapies. Health Science Journal, 
3, 149–157.
Becker, M. H., Haefner, D. P., Kasl, S. V., Kirscht, J. P.,
Maiman, L. A., & Rosenstock, I. M. (1977). Selected
psychosocial models and correlates of individual health-
related behaviors. Medical Care, 15(5, Supplement), 
27–46.
Benner, P., & Wrubel, J. (1989). The primacy of caring: 
Stress and coping in health and illness. Menlo Park, CA:
Addison-Wesley.
Betancourt, J. R., Green, A. R., & Carrillo, J. E. (2002). 
Cultural competence in health care: Emerging frameworks 
and practical approaches (Publication No. 576). New York:
The Commonwealth Fund.
Betancourt, J. R., Green, A. R., Carrillo, J. E., & Park, E. R.
(2005). Cultural competence and health care disparities:
Key perspectives and trends. (Publication No. 821). 
New York: The Commonwealth Fund.
Bucher, D. (2008). Cultural competence: scholarly nature of
clinical practice of nursing. Clinical Scholars Review, 1(2),
110–113.
Corbin, J. M. (1998). The Corbin and Strauss chronic illness
trajectory model: An update. Scholarly Inquiry for Nursing
Practice: An International Journal, 12, 33–41.
Corbin, J. M., & Strauss, A. (1992a). A nursing model for
chronic illness management based upon the trajectory 
framework. In P. Woog (Ed.), The chronic illness trajectory
framework: The Corbin and Strauss nursing model (pp. 9–28).
New York: Springer.
Corbin, J. M., & Strauss, A. (1992b). Commentary. In
P. Woog (Ed.), The chronic illness trajectory framework: The
Corbin and Strauss nursing model (pp. 97–102). New York:
Springer.
Curry, L. C., Walker, C., Moore, P., & Hogstel, M. (2010). 
Validating a model of chronic illness and family caregiving.
Journal of Theory Construction & Testing, 14(1), 10–16.
Dunn, H. L. (1973). High-level wellness. Arlington, VA:
Beatty.
Erickson, H. L. (2007). Philosophy and theory of holism. 
Nursing Clinics of North America, 42, 139–163.
Froman, R. D., & Owen, S. V. (2003). Validation of the 
Spanish life support preference questionnaire (LSPQ). 
Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 35(1), 33–36.
Giger, J. N., & Davidhizar, R. E. (2008). Transcultural  nursing:
Assessment and intervention (5th ed.). St. Louis, MO: Mosby
Elsevier.
Glanz, K., Rimer, B. K., & Lewis, F. M. (Eds.) (2002). Health
behavior and health education: Theory, research, and practice
(3rd. ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Gordon, M. (2008). Assess notes: Assessment and diagnostic rea-
soning. Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Granger, B. B., Moser, D., Harrell, J., Sandelowski, M., &
Ekman, I. (2007). Progress in cardiovascular nursing, 22(3),
152–158.
Gunther, M. E. (2010). Martha E. Rogers: Unitary human 
beings. In M. R. Alligood & A. M. Tomey (Eds.), Nursing
theorists and their work (7th ed., pp. 242–264). St. Louis,
MO: Mosby/Elsevier.
Jourard, S. M. (1971). The transparent self. New York: Litton
Educational.

King, I. M. (1981). A theory for nursing: Systems, concepts,
process. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
King, I. M. (1987). King’s theory of goal attainment. In R. R.
Parse (Ed.), Nursing science: Major paradigms, theories, and
critiques (pp. 107–113). Philadelphia, PA: W. B. Saunders.
Klimmek, R., & Wenzel, J. (2012). Adaptation of the 
Illness Trajectory Framework to describe the work of
transitional cancer survivorship. Oncology Nursing 
Forum, 39, E499–510.
Leininger, M. (1970). Nursing and anthropology: Two worlds to
blend. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Leininger, M. (2002a). Culture care assessments for congruent
competency practices. In M. Leininger & M. R. McFarland,
Transcultural nursing: Concepts, theories, research, and practice
(3rd ed., pp. 117–143). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Leininger, M. (2002b). Cultures and tribes of nursing, 
hospitals, and the medical culture. In M. Leininger & 
M. R. McFarland, Transcultural nursing: Concepts, 
theories, research, and practice (3rd ed., pp. 181–204). 
New York: McGraw- Hill.
Leininger, M. (2002c). The theory of culture care and 
ethnonursing research method. In M. Leininger & 
M. R. McFarland, Transcultural nursing: Concepts, 
theories, research, and practice (3rd ed., pp. 71–98). 
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Leininger, M. M. (1991a). Selected culture care findings of 
diverse cultures using culture care theory and ethnometh-
ods. In M. M. Leininger (Ed.), Culture care diversity and
universality: A theory of nursing (Pub. No. 15–2402, 
pp. 345–371). New York: National League for Nursing.
Leininger, M. M. (1991b). The theory of culture care 
diversity and universality. In M. M. Leininger (Ed.), 
Culture care diversity and universality: A theory of nursing
(Pub. No. 15–2402, pp. 5–68). New York: National
League for Nursing.
Leininger, M. M. (1994). Transcultural nursing education: 
A worldwide imperative. Nursing and Health Care, 15,
254–257.
Leininger, M. M., & McFarland, M. R. (2006). Culture 
care diversity and universality: A worldwide nursing theory
(2nd ed.). Boston, MA: Jones and Bartlett.
McEvoy, P., & Barnes, P. (2007). Using the chronic care
model to tackle depression among older adults who have
long-term physical conditions. Journal of Psychiatric and
Mental Health Nursing, 14, 233–238.
Newman, M. A. (2008). Transforming presence: The difference
that nursing makes. Philadelphia, PA: F.A. Davis.
Parse, R. R. (1981). Man-living-health: A theory of nursing. 
New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Pender, N. J. (1987). Health promotion in nursing practice
(2nd ed.). Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange.
Pender, N. J. (1996). Health promotion in nursing practice
(3rd ed.). Stamford, CT: Appleton & Lange.
Pender, N. J., Murdaugh, C. L., and Parsons, M. A. (2002).
Health promotion in nursing practice (4th ed.). Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Pender, N. J., Murdaugh, C. L., and Parsons, M. A. (2006).
Health promotion in nursing practice (5th ed.). Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Pender, N. J., Murdaugh, C. L., and Parsons, M. A. (2011).
Health promotion in nursing practice (6th ed.). Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Purnell, L. (2013). Transcultural health care: A culturally 
competent approach (4th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: F.A. Davis. 
Ray, M. A. (2010). Transcultural caring dynamics in nursing and
health care. Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Spector, R. E. (2013). Cultural diversity in health and  illness
(8th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
Strauss, A. L., Corbin, J., Fagerhaugh, S., Glaser, B. G.,
Maines, D., Suczek, B., & Wiener, C. L. (1984). Chronic
illness and the quality of life (2nd ed.). St. Louis, MO: C. V.
Mosby.
Strauss, A. L., & Glaser, B. G. (1975). Chronic illness and the
quality of life. St. Louis, MO: C. V. Mosby.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2010). Healthy People 2020. Retrieved from http://www
.healthypeople.gov/2020/about/default.aspx
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public
Health Service (USDHHS, PHS). (1992). Healthy People
2000: Summary Report. Boston, MA: Jones & Bartlett.
Valencia-Go, G. (2006). Emerging populations and health. In
C. L. Edlman & C. L. Mandle (Eds.), Health promotion
throughout the lifespan (6th ed., pp. 23–49). St. Louis, MO:
Mosby. 
Weinert, C., Cudney, S., & Spring, A. (2008). Evolution of
a conceptual model for adaptation to chronic illness. 
Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 40, 364–372.
Zborowsky, T, & Kreitzer, M. J. (2009). People, place, and
process: The role of place in creating optimal healing 
environments. Creative Nursing, 15, 186–190. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Burton, C. R. (2000). Rethinking stroke rehabilitation: The
Corbin and Strauss chronic illness trajectory framework.
Journal of Advanced Nursing, 32, 595–602.
Campinha-Bacote, J. (2003). The process of cultural competence
in the delivery of healthcare services: A culturally competent
model of care (4th. ed.). Cincinnati, OH: Transcultural
C.A.R.E. Associates. 
Erickson, H. L., Erickson, M. E., Campbell, J. A., Brekke, M. E.,
Sandor, M. K. (2012). Validation of holistic nursing com-
petencies: Role-delineation study, 2012. Journal of Holistic
Nursing, 31, 291–302. 
Fontaine, K. L. (2011). Complementary and alternative therapies
for nursing practice (3rd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall.
Halcomb, E., & Davidson, P. (2005). Using the illness
 trajectory framework to describe recovery from traumatic
injury. Contemporary Nurse: A Journal for the Australian
Nursing Profession, 19(1–2), 232–241.
Lubkin, I. M., & Larsen, P. D. (1998). Chronic illness: Impact
and interventions (4th ed.). Sudbury, MA: Jones and
Bartlett. 
Purnell, L. (2005). The Purnell model for cultural competence.
Journal of Multicultural Nursing & Health, 11(2), 7–15.
ONLINE RESOURCES
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
http://www.ahrq.gov
The Commonwealth Fund at
http://www.cmwf.org
76
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

Healthy People
http://www.healthypeople.gov
Office of Minority Health & Health Disparities
http://www.cdc.gov/minorityhealth/OMHHE.html
National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine
http://nccam.nih.gov
National Center for Cultural Competence
http://nccc.georgetown.edu/index.html
Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion
http://odphp.osophs.dhhs.gov
Transcultural C.A.R.E. Associates
http://www.transculturalcare.net
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services
http://www.hhs.gov
CHAPTER 4 Health, Illness, and Holism     ●
77

Evidence-Based Practice
78
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Explain the importance of evidence-based practice for the profession of nursing.
2. Define basic terminology used in research for application of findings in practice.
3. Describe legal and ethical considerations applicable to research with human subjects.
4. Describe different ways to participate in nursing research.
5. Analyze barriers to evidence-based practice.
6. Prepare a basic critique of a published research study.
7. Plan for the inclusion of consistent evidence-based care in the practice setting.
Evidence-Based Practice
Research
Ethical Codes
Basic Human Rights
Minimal Risk
Empirical Research
Qualitative Research
Knowledge Transformation
Translational Research
Critique
Research Problem
Literature Review
Hypotheses
Research Design
Operational Definition
Variables
Sampling
Data Collection Procedures
Instruments
Descriptive Statistics 
Inferential Statistics
5
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
“We may search for information, but once gained 
how does it become wisdom?”
Rose Kearney-Nunnery
Key Terms

Theory guides practice, but current knowledge and practice
must be based on evidence of efficacy rather than intuition,
tradition, or past practice. Out of a national concern for
safety initiatives in 1999 and a focus on systems issues in
2001, the national call came for changes in the education
and competencies of health professionals in all disciplines in
2003. The result was the identification of the five core com-
petencies for health professionals identified in Chapter 1.
The importance of employing evidence-based practice (EBP)
was described as follows:
The committee feels that it is critical for interdisciplinary
health teams and each of the disciplines to be able to tap
this evidence base effectively at the point of patient care,
determining whether an intervention, such as a preven-
tive service, diagnostic test, or therapy, can be expected to
produce better outcomes than alternatives—including
the alternative of doing nothing. (Greiner & Knebel,
2003, p. 56)
Sigma Theta Tau (2005), the International Honor 
Society of Nursing, defines the use of evidence-based prac-
tice as “an integration of the best evidence available, nursing
expertise, and the values and preferences of the individuals,
families, and communities who are selected” (p. 1). This
does not sound unique to our view of nursing and quality
healthcare. The question becomes Are we consistently using
the best evidence available to guide care to patients? And
the next questions are: Do we have the best evidence avail-
able? Where is the information? And, are we applying 
appropriate knowledge in clinical situations? 
An actual paradigm shift has occurred with the
call for evidence-based practice. Traditional practices are
not appropriate unless supported by current evidence of
efficacy and appropriateness for the patient. As will be
discussed in subsequent chapters, Magnet Recognition
also supports the use of evidence-based practice for en-
hanced outcomes for both patients and nurses (Ameri can
Nurses Credentialing Center [ANCC], 2014):
A robust quality program with clinical decisions based on
solid evidence translates into better patient outcomes. (p. 1)
Research supports our knowledge base and answers ques-
tions of clinical concern. It provides sound information
on which to base practice, as evidence-based nursing prac-
tice. Porter-O’Grady (2006) describes  evidence-based
practice as requiring “a degree of flexibility and fluidity
based on firm scientific and clinical evidence validating
appropriate and sustainable clinical practice” (p. 3). Evi-
dence can come from a number of sources, but we need
both seekers and users of the information in practice to 
develop and enhance knowledge. Clinicians in the practice
setting have the questions. These questions must be re-
fined and studied so that nurse researchers can find solu-
tions to healthcare practice problems. And we need further
validation from the consumer as to the appropriateness of
the intervention. This is truly evidence-based practice.
THE EVOLUTION OF
NURSING RESEARCH
Research has been defined as a “systematic, controlled,
empirical, amoral, public, and critical investigation of
natural phenomena guided by theory and hypotheses
about the presumed relations among such phenomena”
(Kerlinger & Lee, 2000, p. 14). Given this definition,
research is still viewed by some as an academic exercise.
But it is much more in nursing. The purposes of research
are to describe, explain, predict, and control phenomena
and to provide information for future use in practice 
or for expansion of the knowledge base. Specific to the
discipline, the National Institute of Nursing Research
(NINR, 2012) defines nursing research as the develop-
ment of knowledge to (1) build the scientific foundation
for clinical practice, (2) prevent disease and disability,
(3) manage and eliminate symptoms caused by illness,
and (4) enhance end-of-life and palliative care (p. 1).
Nursing research began with Florence Nightingale and
her identification of environmental influences on health
and illness. In her classic Notes on Nursing: What It Is, 
and What It Is Not (1859), Nightingale identified factors
that influence health and wellness, supporting them with
observational accounts, statistics, and deductive reasoning.
Following her landmark efforts, non-nurse researchers per-
formed limited research on nurses and nursing education.
Then, in the mid-20th century, graduate nursing programs
began to proliferate, as did nurses’ involvement in research
studies, often on nurses and delivery of nursing services.
The introduction of the journal Nursing Research in 1952
provided a specific channel for disseminating research find-
ings to other nurses.
During the second half of the 20th century, the
 number of graduate and baccalaureate nursing programs
grew. Content on research became prevalent in baccalau-
reate nursing curricula during the 1970s and early 1980s.
Graduate student enrollments increased with the growth
in doctoral programs in the 1980s. Research findings were
used to develop and refine  conceptual and theoretical
models. More nurses were now doing research, and 
the American Nurses Association (ANA) Cabinet on
Nursing Research identified research expectations by level
of education in 1981. The primary focus of research
changed during this time from educational programs and
methods to the focus of nursing: people as patients, con-
sumers, and members of society. Support has grown for 
research as we see the needs to investigate the domain of
nursing, test theories and interventions, and demonstrate
efficacy and efficiency of nursing actions and patient out-
comes. And now, with our emphasis on evidence-based
practice, we need more than isolated studies. We depend
on an evolving body of knowledge of efficacy for positive
patient outcomes.
Nursing research was supported in a position statement
of the American Association of Colleges of Nursing
(AACN) that has gone through revisions as our body of
knowledge has developed—as have our professionals with
additional knowledge and education with the develop-
ment of the generalist nurse prepared at master’s level and
the nurse with a practice doctorate. AACN has identified
research expectations and competencies of graduates from
baccalaureate through postdoctoral programs, moving
from evaluation and utilization of research to generating
new knowledge with advanced preparation (AACN,
2006a, p. 5). This progression has implications for the
baccalaureate- prepared nurse in the identification of 
CHAPTER 5 Evidence-Based Practice     ●
79

research problems, the support of ongoing research, the
use of applicable findings in practice, and the expansion
of the knowledge base following preparation at the grad-
uate level. For example, at the baccalaureate level, AACN
(2008) describes the scholarship needed for  evidence-based
practice as “grounded in the translation of current evi-
dence into one’s practice” (p. 4). Nursing programs are re-
quired to have content and practice in place in the
baccalaureate curriculum with demonstration of these out-
comes in students and graduates. And baccalaureate grad-
uates are expected to demonstrate further evolution and
skill in professional practice. In comparison, for the prac-
tice doctorate, AACN (2006b) illustrates additional skill
where “the scholarship of application expands the realm
of knowledge beyond mere discovery and . . . through its
position where the sciences, human caring, and human
needs meet and new understandings emerge” (p. 11).
The Growing Significance 
of Nursing Research
The establishment of the National Center for Nursing Re-
search (NCNR) as part of the National Institutes of
Health (NIH) in April 1986, under the Health Research
Extension Act of 1985 (PL99–158), demonstrated the im-
portance of research for and by the profession. In 1993,
the National Institute of Nursing Research (NINR) was
established, a change from the former divisional and center
status, with fiscal year appropriations from Congress grow-
ing, thus further demonstrating the importance of gener-
ating knowledge in nursing. An important component of
the mission of the NINR is to “promote and improve the
health of individuals, families, communities, and popula-
tions [through] . . . clinical and basic research and research
training on health and illness across the lifespan to build
the scientific foundation for clinical practice, prevent dis-
ease and disability, manage and eliminate symptoms
caused by illness, and improve palliative and end-of-life
care” (NINR, 2013, p. 1). Extramural research programs
for the NINR concern promoting health and preventing
disease, improving quality of life, and addressing health
disparities, end-of-life issues, and quality care. Research
proposals are highly competitive at NINR, as with other
areas of NIH. Research proposals are reviewed by a panel
of experts and scored according to the consistency with
the mission of NINR and the merit of the research  project.
During the initial phase of NINR initiatives, research 
priorities were specified for investigations. In 2004, the
NINR issued research opportunities to focus on chronic
illnesses or conditions, behavioral changes and interven-
tions, and response to compelling health concerns. Impor-
tant information is evolving with results presented to
Congress and other audiences. Reports on these projects
are available and are making a difference, as are the con-
tinued federal appropriations that are committed to the
NINR. Scientific topics continue to be identified as areas
of research emphasis and ongoing interests.
A vital issue is the need for reliable and valid research
on questions of clinical concern for decision making and
change in practice. In nursing, research must be directed
at interventions over which nursing has control so that
the knowledge developed can lead to needed change. This
direction at nursing practice issues is also relevant in collab-
orative projects that address multiple disciplines. This focus
on practice is the essence of evidence-based practice.
For some time, Sigma Theta Tau has recognized the
importance of generating and using research. The pur-
poses of this honor society include encouraging scholarly
and creative work. This purpose is applicable to both the
conduct and utilization of research for evidence-based
practice. Scholarship involves discovery, integration, 
application, and teaching. Utilizing and communicating
research in nursing practice projects and conferences
have been foci of Sigma Theta Tau International. The
organization also supports research investigations that
generate nursing knowledge through competitive extra-
mural grants for researchers, as does the American Nurses
Foundation. Nurses have a major responsibility to iden-
tify research problems, support ongoing research, and use
applicable findings in practice, along with continuing to
learn in this area of scholarly nursing practice.
LEGAL AND ETHICAL
CONSIDERATIONS IN
RESEARCH
An essential responsibility in professional nursing practice
is protecting the rights of research subjects. The rights of
people in research have been of great concern to ethicists,
legislators, and professionals, leading to ethical codes and
guidelines for the protection of research subjects. History
has provided much of the impetus for our professional
codes and federal regu lations. During World War II, ex-
periments noted for the unethical treatment of subjects
included the Nazi medical experiments and the Japanese
concentration camp experiments on human subjects. 
As a result, international ethical codes evolved. In 1949,
the Nuremberg Code set standards for involving human
subjects in research, with guidelines for consent, protec-
tions, risks and benefits, and qualifications of researchers.
For example, true informed and voluntary consent 
became an essential requirement. The Declaration of
Helsinki (1990), formalized in 1964 and revised in 1975
and 1989, provided guidelines on therapeutic and non-
therapeutic research, along with the requirements for 
80
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
ON LIN E CON SULT 
American Nurses Foundation: Nursing Grant 
Scholars at 
http://anfonline.org/Doc-Vault/Programs/
NursingResearchGrant
Federal Opportunities for Research Funding at 
http://www.grants.gov
National Institute of Nursing Research at 
http://ninr.nih.gov
Sigma Theta Tau International: Research Grant 
Opportunities at 
http://www.nursingsociety.org/Research/Pages/
default.aspx

disclosing the risks and potential benefits of the research
and obtaining written consent for participation from 
research subjects.
Safety, Health, and Welfare
In the United States, the Tuskegee syphilis study, the
Jewish Chronic Disease Hospital study, and the Willow-
brook hepatitis study are further examples of unethical
treatment of research subjects (Box 5.1). In the quest
for knowledge, researchers failed to consider the basic
human rights of their subjects, especially the right of 
informed consent and considerations for vulnerable
populations. Federal regulations evolved from the 
original guidelines of the former Department of Health,
Education, and Welfare, culminating in the National
Research Act in 1974. This law specified the composi-
tion and authority of institutional review boards (IRBs).
IRBs are now mandated as oversight bodies to ensure
protection of research subjects, especially for research
projects seeking federal funding.
The Belmont Report was the outcome of a National
Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of 
Biomedical and Behavioral Research assembled by the 
National Research Act. This commission was charged 
with identifying principles and developing guidelines. The
report specified boundaries between practice and research.
Basic ethical principles were reinforced, highlighting 
respect for persons and defining the principles of benefi-
cence (doing no harm, with maximum benefits and mini-
mal risks) and justice (fairness relative to one’s share, need,
effort, contribution, and merit). Specific applications 
that resulted from the Belmont Report (1979) were 
(1) guidelines on informed consent, including provision
of information and ensuring comprehension and volun-
tariness, (2) assessment of risks and benefits, and (3) se-
lection of subjects. The Belmont Report provided the basis
for federal laws.
All activities involving humans as subjects must pro-
vide for the safety, health, and welfare of every individual.
Subjects do not abdicate rights with their participation in
a research study. Four basic human rights must be en-
sured for research subjects. These principles speak to eth-
ical considerations and human rights:
1. Beneﬁcence (“Do no harm”)
2. Full disclosure
3. Self-determination
4. Privacy and conﬁdentiality
The “do no harm” concept includes careful consideration
of the risk-benefit ratio with any research project. One
must keep in mind that minimal risk requires that 
“the probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort 
anticipated in the research are not greater in and of them-
selves than those ordinarily encountered in daily life or
during the performance of routine physical or psycholog-
ical examinations or tests” (Protection of Human Subjects,
45 CFR 46, §46.102 [i], 2009). Full disclosure of infor-
mation and self-determination by potential subjects are
necessary conditions for informed consent. In addition,
subjects’ rights to privacy and confidentiality must be en-
sured throughout the process. As protections for these four
rights, the guidelines must be considered by researchers
and their respective IRBs (Box 5.2).
The issue of privacy of personal health information
(PHI) was the focus of the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996. PHI is “individually
identifiable health information transmitted by electronic
CHAPTER 5 Evidence-Based Practice     ●
81
BOX 5.1
Examples of Unethical Use of 
Vulnerable Populations in Research 
1932–1972  Tuskegee, Alabama
Longitudinal clinical study by the Public Health 
Service of untreated syphilis in sharecroppers, mostly
African Americans, who did not receive full disclosure,
did not give informed consent, and received deceptive
and ineﬀective treatments.
1963  Brooklyn, New York
In a short-term study, debilitated patients at the Jewish
Chronic Disease Hospital, who did not have cancer,
were injected with live cancer cells to study their re-
sponse. This study also had partial federal funding with
subjects who were indigent and did not receive full
disclosure or informed consent.
1963–1966  Staten Island, New York
At Willowbrook State School, a school for the mentally
retarded (intellectually disabled), healthy children were
intentionally injected with the hepatitis virus to study
the disease and treatment process. Parents did not re-
ceive full disclosure, and needless to say, subjects were
harmed.
BOX 5.2
General Principles/Ethical Guidelines
for Research on Human Subjects
●Risks to the subjects are minimized.
●Risks are reasonable in relation to anticipated bene-
ﬁts to subjects.
●Selection of subjects is equitable.
●Informed consent is sought from each pros pective
subject or the legally authorized  representative.
●Informed consent is appropriately documented.
●The research plan makes adequate provision for
monitoring the data collected to ensure the safety 
of subjects.
●Adequate provisions exist to protect the privacy of
subjects and maintain the conﬁdentiality of data.
●Additional safeguards are in place to protect the rights
and welfare for subjects who are vulnerable—e.g.,
children, prisoners, pregnant women, mentally 
disabled persons, or economically or educationally 
disadvantaged persons—because these subjects are
vulnerable to coercion or undue inﬂuence.
Source: Title 45 Code of Federal Regulations Part 46 (45 CFR 46),
§46.111 at http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/humansubjects/guidance/
45cfr46.html

media, maintained in electronic mediator transmitted or
maintained in any other form or medium” (USDHHS,
2004, p. 6). The Act’s Privacy Rule  establishes:
[M]inimum federal standards for protecting the privacy
of individually identifiable health information. The Rule
confers certain rights on individuals, including rights to
access and amend their health information and to obtain
a record of when and why their PHI has been shared
with others for certain purposes. (USDHHS, 2004, p. 6)
For researchers, informed consent is a necessary process.
HIPAA’s privacy provisions require further language in the
consent process, with required elements for access to and
use of PHI. A privacy authorization may be incorporated
into the consent form or maintained as a separate docu-
ment. De-identifying PHI before revealing it to others re-
quires the removal of specific data identifiers that could link
the individual to his or her PHI. The privacy rules do allow,
however, for the use of selected categories of PHI, as a “lim-
ited data set” that may be used or disclosed for purposes of
research, public health, or healthcare operations without ob-
taining either an individual’s authorization or a waiver for
its use and disclosure, with the removal of 16 data identifiers
and a data use agreement (USDHHS, 2004, p. 19). 
As with other areas of nursing practice, legal and ethical
considerations are deliberated with any research activity.
These issues occur in the planning, implementation, analysis,
and reporting stages for a research endeavor. In the proposal
or planning stage of any research study, the researcher must
consider the rights of the subjects and the ethical nature of
the study. When a researcher defines the problem and pur-
pose of the research, the significance of the problem for the
body of knowledge and the ethical issues associated with the
proposed investigation are vital considerations.
The Institutional Review 
Board (IRB)
Once the basic research plan is developed, an IRB must
review and approve the start of the study. Strict federal
guidelines for review by an IRB must be adhered to, espe-
cially in agencies seeking funding for research. Human
subjects’ rights of full disclosure, self-determination 
(informed consent), privacy and confidentiality, and safety
must be ensured. The research proposal, with statements
of the problem and purpose or significance, literature sup-
port, theory and definitions, specific research questions or
hypotheses, design, sampling plans, and data collection
and analysis methods must be approved by the IRB for
use with human subjects. The researcher submits a pro-
posal to an IRB for approval to proceed to the next steps
of subject selection and data collection. During this stage
of implementing the research project, the investigator
must adhere to the procedures specified for data collection
and analysis. The IRB performs evaluations throughout
the project to ensure that subjects are not placed at risk
and that the integrity and confidentiality of the data are
maintained during collection, analysis, and dissemination
of the findings.
ANA Guidelines
In addition to basic ethical principles and federal, state,
local, and institutional regulations, in 1985 the ANA
specified human rights guidelines for nurses in research.
Ten years later, and with the consideration of societal
and professional practice changes that had occurred,
new guidelines based on nine principles were published
(Silva, 1995, p. 2). These principles addressed benefi-
cence, full disclosure, self-determination, privacy and
confidentiality, and the skills of the researcher.
Each of the nine principles charged the investigator
with specific responsibilities. Explanatory commentary
and specific research guidelines were presented for each of
the nine principles. For example, with the protection of
subjects against harm, vulnerable groups were discussed,
such as pregnant women, children, persons with HIV or
AIDS, and the elderly. All of the principles required that
professionals in a practice setting be aware of any ongoing
research and its associated risks to both subjects and 
participants. And nurses have both the right and the re-
sponsibility to participate in research. Participation of
nurses should be evident; for example, they should func-
tion as members of research teams and IRBs. Nurses also
can actively participate by giving support and assistance
to others involved in research for the advancement of
knowledge and enhancement of professional practice
within the discipline and among the various healthcare
disciplines. The process of research with human subjects
must be diligent and must benefit subjects and participants
82
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
O N L I NE  C ONSULT  
National Institutes of Health: Regulations and 
Ethical Guidelines, including the Belmont Report
(http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/humansubjects/
guidance/belmont.html), the Declaration of 
Helsinki (http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/archive/irb/
irb_appendices.htm#j6), and the Nuremberg 
Code at 
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/archive/irb/irb_
appendices.htm#j5
Compensating for Research Injuries: The Ethical
and Legal Implications of Programs to Redress 
Injured Subjects, Volume 1, a report by the 
President’s Commission for the Study of 
Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical 
and Behavioral Research, Washington, DC, 
June 1982, at 
http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/radiation/dir/
mstreet/commeet/meet16/brief16/tab_b/
br16b1a.txt
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses.
(2013). Ethical foundations for critical care nursing
research at 
http://www.aacn.org/wd/practice/docs/
research/ethical-foundations-critical-care-
nursing-research.pdf
ON LIN E CON SULT 
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services:
Health Information Privacy at 
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/hipaa/

through the acquisition and use of new knowledge. Con-
sult the government and your institutional Web sites for
information on protections for human subjects in 
research.
PROCESSES OF NURSING
RESEARCH
The actual research process is generally thought of as the
scientific method. This can be misleading, however,
when one considers the different types of research. To
understand the basics of nursing research, first think
about the scientific method as a systematic process for
answering a question or testing a hypothesis. One prob-
lem emerges: this is done more easily in a controlled 
laboratory setting, with variables such as chemicals, than
in a natural setting in which the variables involve people,
well or ill, who need nursing interventions. With this in
mind, it is easier to begin with empirical research using
quantitative methods.
The Empirical Method
First, consider the steps of research. Empirical research is
based on the strict rules of the scientific method and on the
philosophical perspective of positivism. With this perspec-
tive, the focus is on an observable, measurable, and pre-
dictable world. It is guided by a controlled set of steps that
one goes through to make an observation or test a hypoth-
esis. It is a deductive and linear method consisting of the
following steps:
1. Identiﬁcation of the problem
2. Statement of the purpose
3. Review of the literature
4. Description of the theoretical framework
5. Deﬁnition of terms
6. Statement of the hypothesis(es)
7. Selection of the research design, population, and
sample
8. IRB approval
9. Data collection
10. Data analysis and interpretation
11. Presentation of ﬁndings and recommendations
Using this empirical approach, the researcher may 
return to a prior step in the planning stage—for example,
to refine the problem after a review of the literature—but
will still go through all successive steps in a systematic and
controlled manner to maintain the integrity of the process.
Once the plans for the study are finalized, strict research
protocols are adhered to with quantitative methods to 
reduce threats to the validity of the study. Although some
of the steps may be combined, nurse researchers using
quantitative methods engage in the same process to de-
scribe, explain, predict, and control phenomena of con-
cern to nursing. The following is a review of the empirical
research process.
In the initial step of problem identification, the re-
searchers specify what they are interested in studying. This
is the “what” that will be done as the study progresses. For
example, a specific nursing intervention is compared with
a traditional nursing intervention for a selected group of
patients. Next, researchers specify the reason they are in-
terested in this problem, or the purpose of the research. 
At this time, the significance of the problem for the body
of knowledge and ethical issues associated with the 
proposed investigation are considerations. This is “why”
the researchers want to investigate the new intervention—
for example, to effectively improve the health awareness
or healthy behaviors of the patient group.
The researchers next search the literature to discover
what is known on the topics: the interventions, the patient
group, cultural factors, useful theoretical bases (e.g., self-
care), and what problems have been studied in the area.
This provides context and the current information known
on the topic. This is a time-intensive process that requires
absorbing a great deal of information for the planning
stage of the project. Researchers perform literature
searches, followed by careful critique and assimilation of
the information. Next, researchers specify the theoretical
framework, or philosophical orientation that will guide 
the research. For example, the study may be guided by 
one of the middle-range or practice theories discussed in
Chapter 3. Definitions of terms and variables specific to the
study emerge from the theoretical framework, as do specific
research questions that will be addressed or the hypotheses
(predictions) the study will test.
So far we have the basic idea for the investigation, but
the researchers must select a design or plan for the study
that is appropriate for the problem in light of the theo-
retical framework. For example, when studying the effi-
cacy of an intervention with two groups of patients, the
researcher may use an experimental control group design.
However, true experiments require manipulation of 
the independent variable, control of other variables, and
random assignment to study groups. Often we see quasi-
experimental designs in nursing—for example, the use of
a nonequivalent control group—because of the nature of
the intervention.
Once the appropriate design has been selected, the 
researchers must define the population—those individ-
uals or groups to whom the findings will be applicable
or generalizable. Researchers know that not all of the
people to whom the research applies can be studied, 
so they must study a select group of the population; this
is known as a sample. The researchers’ decision about
the type and the size of the sample is based on the 
research design, theoretical framework, research pur-
pose, and research problem. It all relates back in a linear
CHAPTER 5 Evidence-Based Practice     ●
83
O N L I NE  C ONSULT  
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) at 
http://www.ahrq.gov/
National Institutes of Health at 
http://www.nih.gov/ 
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services at 
http://www.hhs.gov
Office for Human Research Protections 
(OHRP) at 
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/

manner, but the goals in sampling are to limit bias and
statistical error and for the sample to be representative
of the population.
The researchers now have the basic plan for their in-
vestigations, but no one has been studied yet. The rights
of human subjects must be considered and protected. At
this point the researcher submits a proposal to an IRB for
approval or exemption to proceed to the next step of data
collection. Once IRB approval has been secured, the re-
searcher is ready to begin collecting data.
Plans for data collection and analysis have already been
made in the research proposal and are strictly adhered to.
Researchers must follow the proposed design when data
are collected; for example, they cannot decide to replace
interviews that were planned with a questionnaire. Data
must be collected in an orderly and systematic manner and
must be recorded before analysis and decision making
begin.
Measurement issues are of prime concern. The type of
data collected and the measurement instruments are,
again, determined before the study is started, on the basis
of the research problem, literature review, theoretical basis,
research questions or hypotheses, research design, and
sampling method. Issues of reliability (consistency of
measurement) and validity (proper measurement of the
variable of interest) are considered by the researcher from
prior methodological studies, use in similar research, or a
pilot study as a small-scale version or a formal trial de-
signed to resolve any methodological issues. Measurements
may be self-reported, in writing, by the subjects in the
sample (via tests, questionnaires, diaries, etc.) or may re-
quire recording or note taking by researchers in personal
or telephone interviews.
Measurements can also be observations of behavior
(ability to perform a skill, such as a dressing change), re-
sponses by subjects on a scale (such as a Likert scale or a
scale for pain perception from 0 to 10), physiological
measures (such as blood pressure, electrocardiogram, elec-
troencephalogram, or oxygen saturation), review of
records, or other types of methods. Research protocols are
strictly adhered to: the identical detailed process is used
with each research subject. Scripts are used to read instruc-
tions to subjects to ensure that each subject has been given
the same information for the data collection process.
Once all subjects have been investigated and all data
collected, the researcher moves into the analysis stage. The
analysis provides information to answer the research ques-
tions or support or refute the hypotheses. The analysis
stage seems to be the most threatening to the research
novice. Keep in mind that the research depends on a good
analysis of the data so that reliable, valid information is
made available on the topic. The most important decisions
for this stage were made before the study was started, with
the selection of the correct statistical tests. In addition,
computers or statisticians can easily perform calculations.
Try to see this stage as one of discovery and understanding
how the data provide answers to the research questions or
hypotheses. The findings are reported objectively for each
research question or hypothesis. 
The results of the descriptive statistics (such as
 frequencies, means, standard deviations, correlations) are
reported to characterize the sample. Appropriate inferen-
tial statistics are used to generalize to the population (such
as t-test, analysis of variance, correlations, and multivariate
analysis), according to the type of measurement scale, the
sample size, and the assumption of a normal distribution.
From the point of reporting the statistics, the researcher
then interprets the meaning and implications relative to
the stated research questions or hypotheses. Recommen-
dations for use of the findings and further research are then
presented in the research report.
Presenting the findings and recommendations to oth-
ers is the final responsibility of the researcher as part of
the particular study. The findings can be disseminated
locally, regionally, nationally, and/or globally through
presentations or publications. It is vital that the infor-
mation be shared with others. If the findings are impor-
tant and point to a need for change, practicing nurses
have the opportunity and responsibility to implement
the information as appropriate to their practice settings.
Additional research may also be needed. If the findings
were not significant or were indifferent, then further re-
search is needed, perhaps involving further specification
of the problem, better measurement instruments, or a
different environment or sample. If the research findings
were negative, the new intervention was less effective
than current ones. Still more research may be needed 
if there were problems with reliability and validity. For
example, if a safety issue emerged during the research, a
subject would have been withdrawn from the study or
the study halted. Still, it is necessary for others to know
about this in order to make use of the information or
avoid problem areas.
Qualitative Research
The research process using qualitative research methods
is somewhat different. Qualitative research is used 
to generate theory to explore, describe, and illuminate
phenomena. The basis of qualitative research focuses 
on the meaning and interpretation of experiences to 
understand some phenomena. Types of research classi-
fied as qualitative include ethnography, field studies,
grounded theory, historical research, analytic induction,
and phenomenology.
Major data collection methods are naturalistic
 observation (hence the term field studies) and on-site in-
terviewing. Some researchers describe the data that emerge
from this research as “information rich,” because the re-
searcher begins a study with a need to understand from
the perspective of people in the environment. The re-
searcher is not limiting the data collection to a few vari-
ables. Rather, he or she is trying to have the people in their
environment describe the phenomena; the researcher then
classifies concepts, identifies themes, and generates theory.
This is why some also see qualitative research as a “human-
istic” form of research that investigates people and their
unique experiences.
In qualitative research, the linear steps of the process
are not the procedure. The researcher must still complete
the initial process of developing the project, with identi-
fication of a problem or a little-understood area or phe-
nomena, and the statement of purpose as an inquiry for
“discovery” of the phenomena. The review of the litera-
ture looks at what is known, which is often tangential,
because little may be known before the research uncovers
84
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

the phenomena. The theory will evolve from this re-
search, rather than be driven by it, as are the terminology
and future study hypotheses that use quantitative methods
for theory testing. The process of IRB approval is still re-
quired prior to data collection, for the protection of
human subjects.
Qualitative methods have different inquiry forms and
processes. Data collection and analysis are driven by the par-
ticular qualitative method, as with an ethnography to de-
scribe the phenomena from the perspective of the subjects.
Reliability and validity issues can be difficult with this
form of research, and investigators frequently use triangu-
lation of data to provide valid results. Triangulation in-
volves the use of multiple data sources, complementary
investigations, or theoretical perspectives to improve the
data’s validity. Dissemina tion of the findings through 
presentations and publi cation is the final step in the process,
along with identification of future areas for inquiry.
Choice of Research Method
Whether quantitative or qualitative research methods are
selected depends on the phenomena of interest and the
purpose of the research. For example, one researcher may
use qualitative methods to investigate the health beliefs of
a particular cultural group, while another researcher would
use quantitative methods to test a new intervention de-
signed to enhance the functional independence of older
adults with a limitation in mobility. Comparisons of 
qualitative research to the empirical research process are 
illustrated in Table 5.1. Regardless of the methods selected
to address the need for information on the problem, the
CHAPTER 5 Evidence-Based Practice     ●
85
TABLE 5.1
Empirical and Qualitative Research Methods
Empirical Research
Qualitative Research
Identification of the 
problem
Statement of the 
purpose
Review of the literature
Description of the 
theoretical framework
Definition of terms
Statement of the 
hypothesis(es)
Selection of the research 
design, population, and 
sample
Approval of institutional 
review board 
Data collection 
Data analysis and 
interpretation
Presentation of findings 
and recommendations
Identify little understood area or 
phenomena.
Specify the inquiry for discovery of the
phenomena.
Using tangential subjects, demonstrate
why little is known about the phenomena.
Theory will evolve from the research.
Terminology will emerge from the 
findings.
Develop broad questions to be asked that
will lead to others during the research as
discovery. 
Select a qualitative method and a group
to seek their descriptions of their human
experience. Propose methods to access
the group.
Submit and obtain approval of research
proposal.
Gain entry to the group, propose broad
questions, receive information, and seek
meaning. Further questions emerge as 
the study progresses and are pursued in
search of meaning and understanding. For
example, use grounded theory to see the
data falling into differing categories.
Create meaning and themes from infor-
mation in transcripts and documents that
evolve into different areas and emerge
into a theoretical framework.
Propose a theoretical framework to pur-
sue further investigation of the categories
of meaning discovered, thus adding to our
theoretical bases described in Chapter 3.
Narrowly specify what is to be studied.
Specify the reason the problem is of 
interest.
Discover what is already known about
the problem.
Select and apply a theory or model.
Define terms and variables to be studied,
consistent with the theoretical model.
Specify questions or hypotheses to be
tested, consistent with the theoretical
model.
Select specific design and study instru-
ments. Specify population of interest.
Identify group and number of research
subjects (sample).
Submit and obtain approval of research
proposal.
Strictly adhere to research protocol, con-
trols, and steps specified with the study’s
measurement instruments; for example,
the experimental group of subjects has
one intervention while the control group
received the usual treatment or interven-
tion. Systematically record data.
Apply the statistical tests on the study
variables specified in the research pro-
posal and draw conclusions from these
tests.
Report the statistics on the questions or
hypotheses as findings. Draw conclu-
sions based on the findings and propose
applications and further investigation.

research must respect the individual or group in the quest
for knowledge.
THE ROAD TO EVIDENCE-
BASED PRACTICE
We have a responsibility to base nursing practice on 
current knowledge. This responsibility highlights an 
accountability issue for the profession and focuses the
direction of nursing research on issues for improved 
patient outcomes and effective care in a time when re-
sources are stretched beyond limits. We have evolved
from the landmark work for research-based nursing
practice that began in the 1970s. Between 1971 and
1975, the federally funded Western Interstate Commis-
sion for Higher Education (WICHE) project focused on
both the conduct of research projects and the utilization
of research findings, to support collaborative research
endeavors followed by a focus on using research findings
in practice (Lindeman & Krueger, 1977). Between 1975
and 1981, a second federally funded project, Conduct
and Utilization of Research in Nursing (CURN), 
focused on use in the hospital setting of the knowledge
from research already available. Finding the information
and the applicability to the practice  setting were the
skills of concern. This led to the  development of guide-
lines and specific protocols for research-based nursing
interventions and educational media to help nurses base
their practice and inter ventions with patients on re-
search evidence. Since the 1970s, many professional
journals are now dedicated to publishing research find-
ings, and other journals include special columns or re-
search features. Professional conferences, both general
and specialty, provide research presentations as special
and concurrent offerings. A focus on research and 
evidence-based practice has also emerged in certification
examinations.
In 1981, the ANA Cabinet for Nursing Research 
developed guidelines for involvement in research based on
level of nursing education, as mentioned earlier in the
chapter. Subsequently, professional nursing organizations
have delineated expectations for nurses’ involvement in 
research according to level of educational preparation. In
these guidelines, the graduate with doctoral or postdoc-
toral preparation is seen as providing leadership on inves-
tigating phenomena, applying theory, and developing
methods to generate knowledge for the discipline. With
an expertise in specialty practice, the nurse with graduate
preparation in nursing is the facilitator for using research
findings and conducting investigations. Baccalaureate
nursing graduates are research consumers and are respon-
sible for identifying researchable problems and findings
from prior research on which to base practice. 
Nevertheless, there have been problems with dissem-
inating findings and applying them in practice. National
practice guidelines have been available since the 1990s,
but studies have shown they have not been incorporated
consistently in practice. However, improvements are
apparent with our current focus on evidence-based
practice.
Evidence-based practice is fundamental to contem-
porary nursing, providing a firm foundation for nursing
interventions and quality improvement in healthcare.
EBP has been identified as one of the core competencies
for health professionals in all disciplines.
To address this core competency, the Academic Center
for Evidence-Based Practice (ACE) led the way with a
project to establish a national consensus on essential com-
petences for EBP for use in education and practice
(Stevens, 2005, p. 1). Competencies by educational level
(undergraduate, 20; masters, 32; and docoral, 31) were
identified based on the five stages of the ACE Star Model
of knowledge transformation (Fig. 5.1). In 2008, 10 ad-
ditional competencies were identified to address Associate
Degree Nursing preparation and the need for evidence-
based practice at the different educational levels (Stevens,
2009). Knowledge transformation is defined as “the con-
version of research findings from primary research results,
through a series of stages and forms, to impact on health
outcomes by way of EB care” (Stevens, 2009, p. 28). As
new knowledge is transformed through the five stages—
discovery, evidence summary, translation, integration, and
evaluation—the outcome is quality improvement of care
(Stevens, 2009, pp. 28–30). Discovery is primary research,
whereas the evidence summary is the available body of
knowledge. As noted by Stevens (2009), the rigorous evi-
dence summary step has moved professional practice from
the old paradigm of research utilization to evidence-based
care (p. 29).
When systematic reviews of research are available,
more is known about the body of knowledge and the 
evidence is stronger for clinical application, based on the
unique needs of the patient population. The Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) has provided
guidance in this area for comparative effectiveness reviews
across the health professions. The AHRQ (2014) Effec-
tive Health Care Program funds individual researchers,
research centers, and academic organizations to produce
effectiveness and comparative effectiveness research to 
improve the quality, safety, efficiency, and effectiveness
of healthcare through three primary products: research 
86
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
ACE Star Model fo Knowledge Transformation
Discovery
Evaluation
Integration
Summary
Translation
1
3
4
2
5
Figure 5.1 ACE Star Model of Knowledge Transforma-
tion.  Source: Copyrighted material (Stevens, 2012). Repro-
duced with expressed permission. Stevens, K. R. (2012). ACE
Star Model of EBP: Knowledge Transformation. Academic
Center for Evidence-Based Practice. The University of Texas
Health Science Center San Antonio.

reviews (comparative effectiveness reviews and technical
briefs), original research reports, and research sum-
maries (p. 1).
Evaluating the effectiveness has led to the development
of rating scales by some organizations to assist practition-
ers. In 2009, the American Association of Critical-Care
Nurses revised their rating scales for their practice alerts
for nurses to support their practice (Armola et al., 2009,
pp. 407–408). Since that time, the American Association
of Critical-Care Nurses has added additional evidence-
based research resources to their Web site for practicing
nurses, including a toolkit and practice protocols. How-
ever, individual changes in practice do not guide a practice
across a profession or professions, hence the focus on dis-
semination and utilization of current information. This
new research utilization effort is called translational re-
search (or translation science) and is the drive to get the
best evidence into practice. Titler (2010) has differentiated
between translational research and evidence-based practice
(EBP) as follows: “EBP is the process of integrating evi-
dence into healthcare delivery, whereas translation science
is the study of how to promote adoption of evidence in
healthcare” (p. 36). However, the stages of translational
research are described by Grady (2010) as “work in two
directions: to continuously develop and reevaluate an in-
tervention across diverse settings and populations and to
proactively integrate data from real-world settings into the
inception, design, and development of new basic and ap-
plied research studies (pp. 164–165).
All of this points to the need for the nurse, both
within the discipline and with interdisciplinary colleagues,
to seek out the best available information for care of the pa-
tient. Fawcett and Garity (2009) identify three valuable
questions about information for evidence-based nursing
practice:
●Where is the information?
●What is the information?
●How good is the information? (p. 20)
In the ACE Star Model, Stevens (2009) describes the
process with evidence summary as the synthesis of the
primary research and the body of knowledge leading to
translation into practice guidelines and then integrated
in practice and evaluation of outcomes (pp. 28–30).
Proficiency in critiquing or evaluating research or the
evidence summaries is central to the ability to translate
and integrate the evidence in professional practice.
When the body of knowledge is evolving and when 
evidence summaries and systematic reviews are not yet
available, individual research studies may provide insight
to improvements in care. However, a word of caution is
in order: A single study provides information but not com-
pelling evidence unless supported by a body of reseach.
But to evaluate the study, a thoughtful critique of the 
research is required.
SKILLS FOR A THOUGHTFUL
CRITIQUE
Consider both the objective process of critiquing a re-
search study and the subjective process of evaluating its
application to practice. An objective analysis looks at the
content available to the reader. This analysis is required
to have the information for making a judgment as to
whether the information is applicable to your practice
area and setting.
Objective Evaluation
A research critique is an objective analysis of a  published
research report. The reader must critically consider all
components of the report—problem,  purpose, supporting
literature, theoretical framework, definitions, study ques-
tions or hypotheses, design,  population and sample, data
collection methods and procedures, analysis, and interpre-
tation of findings (Box 5.3). Evidence summaries will have
done this across studies for an understanding of the knowl-
edge on a specific area. As practice for understanding the
process and terminology, consider an individual research
report you have found in the literature. The ultimate goal
of a research critique is to evaluate applicability of appro-
priate scientific findings to one’s own professional practice
and knowledge base.
A thoughtful critique is based on critical thinking skills
used to address the steps of the research process. When
publishing research reports, researchers must provide the
essential information gained from the study within the
given space. This can create a challenge for the reader at-
tempting to glean the vital information for a critique. A
published research report is frequently organized into the
following sections: abstract, introduction, review of liter-
ature, theoretical framework, methods, results, discussion,
and references. 
Preliminary information provides valuable informa-
tion for the reader. First, the title of the study should
clearly reflect the problem area and attract the reader’s in-
terest. Information provided about the researcher includes
CHAPTER 5 Evidence-Based Practice     ●
87
O N L I NE  C ONSULT  
Academic Center for Evidence-Based Practice at 
http://www.acestar.uthscsa.edu
BOX 5.3
Areas to Address in a Thoughtful 
Critique*
Areas to address while doing a thoughtful critique of a
research study as a component of evidenced-based
practice include:
●Title and abstract
●Introduction, problem, and purpose
●Literature review
●Theoretical framework
●Research questions or hypotheses
●Methods: design, ethics, sampling, data collection
●Results and analysis
●Discussion and recommendations
And now, are the ﬁndings applicable to use in your
practice?
*Further information on the areas to address in a research critique is
provided on the Intranet site.

background and qualifications in the practice area and for
conducting the research study. The abstract briefly 
reviews the problem, purpose, methodology, findings, and
conclusions, summarizing the content and also capturing
the reader’s attention.
Next comes the introduction to the research report. The
opening paragraphs outline the background of the problem,
including its purpose and significance to nursing and 
the care of patients. The research problem is the central
question that the research has been designed to answer. It
is the “what” that is being done in the study to describe, ex-
plain, predict, or control some phenomenon of concern to
nursing. The research problem contains the major variables
and the popu lation of concern to the researcher. The author
may also identify specific research aims in this introductory
section.
Next, a literature review pertinent to the research
problem is provided. The literature review is a report and
comparison of all pertinent prior investigations on the
topic, variables of interest, theoretical models, and meth-
ods used. Unlike the library research done for a paper, a
research literature review concentrates on primary refer-
ences. A primary source is the actual report of an investi-
gation or development of an instrument or theory written
by the researcher or theorist. Using the primary source
eliminates the chance of error in interpretation that could
occur through analyses by others or loss of the context of
the original work.
The literature review should provide a critical appraisal
and synthesis of what is already known on the topic. Thus,
the literature review supports the study and how the 
investigation proposes to contribute to the existing body
of nursing knowledge. A review of literature may be con-
ducted electronically with the availability of online data-
bases, resources, and articles. Caution is recommended 
on the use of research reports found in chat rooms, on per-
sonal Web pages, or other sources that have not been sub-
jected to a thoughtful peer review process before being
accepted for publication.
The theoretical framework may be described in a sep-
arate section or may be included with the literature re-
view. As discussed in Chapters 2 and 3, a theoretical
framework or model is the way the researcher views
the concepts and their interrelationships; it may be de-
scribed in words or displayed symbolically. This under-
lying view drives the research in describing, explaining,
predicting, or controlling the phenomena, as in the case
of empirical research studies.
At this point, the researcher may present specific ques-
tions to address in the study or hypotheses to be tested.
Specific research questions must flow from, and relate back
to, the main research problem or purpose. Hypotheses
are predictions about the variables that the investigation
is testing with a subject group. Hypotheses may be null
(statistical), predicting no relationship; conversely, the re-
searcher may state research (alternative) hypotheses that
do predict a difference and, in some cases, the direction of
the difference (increase, decrease, greater, less). Both null
and research hypotheses can be either simple (stating a pre-
diction between two variables) or complex (stating a dif-
ference between more than two variables). Hypothesis
testing uses inferential statistics, inferring from the sample
to make generalizations about the population. Both research
questions and hypotheses must be consistent with the
framework that provides the theoretical guidance for the in-
vestigation. The variables to be investigated should be read-
ily apparent in the stated research questions or hypotheses.
The next major section in a published research report
describes the methodology. This section contains infor-
mation on the research design, research subjects (including
ethical considerations and sampling), and data collection
and procedures used. The research design is the overall
blueprint for the study. The design specifies the setting
for the study, the subjects (sample group), the experimen-
tal or nonexperimental treatment or grouping methods,
the data collection methods, and procedures or protocol.
The research design is selected to address the variables of
concern to answer the research questions or test the 
hypotheses. Study designs may be experimental or non-
experimental. Qualitative research studies are also useful
in aiding the understanding of a phenomenon that is 
relevant to your practice area.
Experimental designs are classified as true experi-
ments, quasi-experiments, and pre-experiments, with
varying degrees of control, manipulation, and random-
ization. Nonexperimental study designs may be used to
answer the research questions with less human subject
involvement or intervention; such designs are ex post
facto, correlational, survey, case study, needs assessment,
secondary analysis, and evaluation studies. Additional de-
signs you may see in the literature are methodo logical
(studies on research tools or instruments) and meta-
analysis, which uses many previous studies to determine
the overall effect. The design must “fit” the research
problem, purpose, and theoretical framework. You may
refer to a nursing research text for more information on
these various designs.
The researcher provides definitions for all major vari-
ables included in the study. Both theoretical and opera-
tional definitions may be provided in the introduction or
the review of the literature. Theoretical, or in some cases
conceptual, definitions are the general description of a
term—that is, the term as defined in a specific theoretical
framework or the dictionary. Researchers must provide
operational definitions of the major variables of interest,
especially when quantitative research methods are used.
An operational definition is the description specific to
the use of the variable in the study. It is precisely what the
researchers are looking at and how they are measuring it.
For example, consider the term stethoscope. Every nurse
knows it is an acoustical instrument used to measure heart
rate apically or blood pressure peripherally. But the type
of stethoscope must be specified in the operational defini-
tion, for example, bell-diaphragm combination, electronic,
or pediatric. The specification ensures controls in quanti-
tative methods, describing exactly what the researcher used
and enabling others to reproduce the study results given a
similar set of circumstances or apply the findings to a spe-
cific practice setting.
Generally, the researcher provides operational defini-
tions of the study variables in the section on methodol-
ogy. Variables are concepts and constructs defined and
manipulated, controlled, or measured in a research study.
Independent variables are variables manipulated by the
88
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

researcher, such as the cause, treatment, or difference be-
tween the groups (for example, the type of dressing used).
Dependent variables are the outcome variables that the
researcher is measuring and analyzing. The researcher
wishes to see whether or not the change in the indepen -
dent variable (type of dressing) caused a difference in the
dependent variable (healing time or bacterial colony
count). Uncontrolled or confounding variables (such as
nutritional status) must also be considered because they
can have extraneous and unwanted effects on the depen -
dent variable (healing time). The researcher often attempts
to control the extraneous effects by selecting a population
or study procedures that meet specific criteria, to reduce
the chance of occurrence of the unwanted influences. In
the methods section, special attention is given to the de-
scriptions of the subjects. Ultimately, this allows the read-
ers to determine the applicability of results to practice
with their specific patient group. Ethical considerations
specific to the sample should also be described.
Sampling is the use of a subset (sample) of the popula-
tion as a feasible group to study, ultimately generalizing the
findings to the population. The population is the total
group to which the researcher wishes the results of the re-
search to be generalized. For example, not all cardiac 
patients in a rehabilitation program can be interviewed in
person. Yet the researcher would like the study results to
be applicable to all patients similar to the subjects inter-
viewed in the study, so that the information will add to the
body of nursing knowledge. Samples may be selected 
by probability (based on  statistical chance of selection) or
they may be nonprobability samples. Types of probability 
samples are random, systematic, stratified, and cluster.
Nonprobability samples include convenience, purposive,
snowball, quota, and expert samples. Each type of sample
has advantages and disadvantages that must be considered.
At this point, look for the sample size. Smaller sample sizes
are associated with qualitative methods. On the other hand,
minimum sample sizes are necessary with some statistical
procedures in quantitative methods and analysis.
Specific research methods are described as data col-
lection procedures. Data are the measures or responses
obtained from the subjects in the study. Analyzed data
become information. Research methods may be quanti-
tative or qualitative. Quantitative methods focus on nu-
merical data that can be obtained from subjects using any
one or a combination of measurement instruments.
Qualitative methods focus on information gathered from
individuals and groups, often in their natural environ-
ment, to explore their unique qualities in depth and gen-
erate theory on a little-known topic or construct. The
different research methods can use similar or different
instruments to obtain or measure data.
Instruments are the measurement tools for collecting
data. They include paper-and-pencil instruments (such
as questionnaires, diaries, or scales), biophysiological in-
struments (such as a stethoscope, sphygmomanometer,
pulse oximeter, electrocardiograph, or electroencephalo-
graph), interview guides, videotapes and audiotapes, and
others, depending on the specific investigation and vari-
ables. Important considerations for use of any instru-
ment, including an observer as data collector, are the
reliability and validity of the measurement. Researchers
report the reliability and validity tests before they discuss
the findings of their study.
Instrument reliability describes whether the instrument
provides consistent measurement. The reliable instrument
measures the variable consistently over time. The need for
instrument reliability is apparent in examples of a calibrated
scale that dependably provides a reading of the patient’s
weight or the test that consistently estimates the patient’s
stress level. The types of instrument reliability that are re-
ported in studies are test-retest (stability of the measure
over time), internal consistency or alpha (statistical measure
on items or parts of a test), equivalent forms of tests, and
interrater (equivalence among data collectors).
Instrument validity considers whether the instrument
measures what it is intended to measure, such as body 
surface area and not weight. Types of instrument validity
include content, construct, and criterion-related. A panel
of experts may assess the content validity of an instrument,
ensuring that it adequately addresses the variable or area of
interest. Construct validity is described with prior research
on the instrument and may be reported as findings from a
factor analysis or other statistical test. Criterion-related 
validity is important when the variable cannot be measured
directly, such as family and visitor contacts, cards and gifts,
and discussions (as another  criterion) to discover social sup-
port for a study on the psychosocial stress of the hospital-
ized patient.
Once the data collection methods have been described,
the researcher describes methods used to analyze the data
and reports the results in the findings or results section.
Methods for analysis of the data are based on the specified
research methods and the type of data involved. For nu-
merical data, statistics are used in the analysis of quantita-
tive research methods. Des criptive statistics are used to
summarize and describe data through graphic displays of
the information (percentages and frequency counts), mea -
sures of central tendency (means, medians, modes), and
measures of dispersion (ranges, variances, and standard de-
viations). Inferential statistics are used to test hypotheses,
make predictions, and infer from the sample (statistic) to
the population (parameter). Depending on the variables,
data, and sample size and distribution, inferential statistics
used include nonparametric tests (chi square, Spearman
rho, median test) and parametric tests (t-test, analysis of
variance [ANOVA], Pearson r correlation coefficient). The
results are reported for each research question or hypoth-
esis in an objective manner.
Finally, the researcher presents his or her interpretation
of the results in a discussion section. Conclusions should
be consistent with the theoretical framework used to guide
the study. The discussion also includes the researcher’s
identification of limitations and recommendations for
using the findings in practice, teaching, administration,
and further research.
Guidelines to assist with a thoughtful critique of a re-
search study are available on the Intranet site.
Subjective Evaluation: Incorporating
Evidence-Based Practice
At this point, the reader must determine the applicability
of the results to the individual practice area. A research 
CHAPTER 5 Evidence-Based Practice     ●
89

critique is an objective assessment of the information 
presented in the report against some criterion, such as the
critique questions. The subjective evaluation for use of 
the findings in one’s own practice area is made after the
objective critique of the value of the study’s process and
results. If the critique is positive, you must decide whether
the results are applicable in your practice area. If so, con-
sider what other information is known on the topic. Re-
member, it is a professional responsibility to implement
information found to be beneficial to patients, rather than
to continue to practice on the basis of tradition.
Reading professional journals and keeping abreast of
current knowledge are essential in contemporary nursing
practice. Acquiring critique skills is integral for good clinical
decisions. Access to quality journals and the depth of read-
ing must also be considered. Look carefully at the profes-
sional journals to which you subscribe and the journals that
are available at your work site or online. Do they contain
research reports? If so, are you reading research studies and
systematic reviews as well as the narrative and practice 
articles? Consider different levels of reading, from skimming
the information to a careful analysis of the content or a 
comparison with other literature to synthesize the informa-
tion known on the topic. At what level are you reading? 
Critiquing a research article is at the level of analytic reading
rather than merely looking for articles of interest to your
practice area. Make time, on a consistent basis, to look for
and evaluate research in the professional literature.
As a valuable resource for the implementation of 
evidence-based practice, alternative sources beyond tradi-
tional research articles are available to assist the clinician.
These sources provide an integration of findings, as trans-
lational science on a specific research topic through sources
such as published meta-analyses, systematic reviews, prac-
tice guidelines, online reviews, and Internet searches. As
noted by Stevens (2009), systematic reviews have been
greatly advanced and produce new knowledge. Since they
combine findings from all studies, identify bias and limit
chance effects, and increase reliability and replication of the
results (p. 28).
As mentioned previously, national clinical guidelines
have been available since the 1990s. The National Guide-
line Clearinghouse provides archives of current practice
guidelines that have been reviewed, revised, or deleted
within the past five years, organized by health conditions
and national organizations. The AHRQ also provides useful
information for clinicians on current research and quality
measures for application in evidence-based practice. The
Cochrane Collaboration also provides evidence-based
practice information from leading international and inter-
disciplinary sources.
Once you have obtained the information from the pro-
fessional literature or resources, the issue is implementation
and sharing. Are you sharing the information with col-
leagues? This can be done informally among your col-
leagues or formally presented at a unit conference. Having
access to “user-friendly” databases or a library is essential
for acquiring information on a clinical issue. Investigate
what is available in your environment. Attending “brown
bag lunches” and participating in a journal club focused on
research studies are ways of making this activity more en-
joyable and rewarding.
Obtaining new information is the intended aim of at-
tending a clinical conference, regardless of whether you need
continuing education units for relicensure or recertification.
Quality of programs and significance of the topics to your
practice area must be considered for evidence-based practice.
Selecting EBP concurrent sessions is a good way to hear 
current research information. Attendance at an interdisci-
plinary grand rounds in an institution committed to research
is also a valuable experience. Research questions specific to
nursing or interdisciplinary collaboration may become avail-
able. Your work setting may have a nursing or interdisci -
plinary research committee. Participating on a research
committee can be a challenging and rewarding experience.
Nurses can collaborate on different stages of the research
process. In addition, the practice problems specific to your
setting can emerge, be developed, and be investigated when
professionals start the discussion and raise the issues. It can
be an extremely stimulating and enjoyable experience.
ELIMINATING BARRIERS TO
EVIDENCE-BASED NURSING
PRACTICE
Barriers to evidence-based nursing practice should be di-
minished or removed. Such barriers are a real and perceived
lack of educational preparation, administrative support, re-
sources, and time. In this time of diminishing resources, the
use of the most reliable and accurate information is crucial.
Trial-and-error strategies as the basis for a patient interven-
tion waste valuable resources and are unconscionable if there
is contrary evidence. We need an increasing sense of pro-
fessional commitment to practice based on evidence of 
effective outcomes for our patients.
Negative attitudes toward research or researchers must
be replaced with greater collaboration among clinicians, re-
searchers, administrators, and educators. And this needs to
take place among professionals within the discipline and
among disciplines. Inclusion of the patient is also a con-
sideration. The patient or significant others may have spent
a great deal of time searching for information as “solutions”
to the current healthcare problem. Some of the information
gleaned from Internet searches or discussions with others
may have merit, while other information may be inappro-
priate or inaccurate. The important consideration is in-
volvement of colleagues and patients in the quest for
evidence-based practice.
Clinicians have firsthand awareness of problem areas
but must be assisted in accessing the current knowledge
base, looking at problems in the domain of nursing that
address the need for improved patient outcomes, having
90
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
O N L I NE  C ONSULT  
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ) at http://www.ahrq.gov/ 
The Cochrane Collaboration at 
http://www.cochrane.org/
National Guideline Clearinghouse at 
http://www.guideline.gov/ 

the professional commitment to go the extra mile and take
time to get involved with research activities, basing their
nursing interventions on the current evidence of efficacy,
and receiving some form of recognition for their efforts.
In addition, these clinicians can be a rich source for iden-
tification of areas for change.
The support and encouragement of the chief nurse 
administrator or executive are a must to ensure that the
organizational climate, resources, and philosophy of prac-
tice are present in the practice setting. Moving to evidence-
based practice will not be an easy transition without a
dynamic person spearheading the process. Clinicians must
keep an open mind and make a professional commitment
to identify problems and search the current knowledge
base for information. Researchers must collaborate with
clinicians to address nursing questions and avoid speaking
or talking in “researchese,” thus providing clear practice
implications in publications and presentations. Educators
must also assist in the development of critique and EBP
skills.
Commitment must be made to the ongoing nature of
building knowledge and basing practice on evidence of 
efficacy. Our knowledge base has been evolving since the
time of Nightingale and before. It will continue to evolve
because of the nature of the information and our focus on
people in a dynamic environment. The profession needs
more extensive research that is generalizable to and sup-
portive of nursing as a major player in healthcare issues.
We need more replications to add reliability and validity
to instruments and information for translational research.
And the need for interprofessional research is critical when
scopes of practice are close or overlap to better address 
improved patient outcomes. Constant updating and modi-
fication of any protocol is needed as more information 
becomes available. Gaining critique skills and learning the
language of EBP are components of this process.
CHAPTER 5 Evidence-Based Practice     ●
91
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
Brown (2014) has identified the following considerations for evaluating the clinical significance of a clinical
guideline:
●Importance of expected health benefits
●Likelihood of health benefits
●Side effects and risks
●Practicality and acceptability to patients (p. 325)
Suppose you have selected an AHRQ EBP guideline with the systematic review of the literature and 
suggested guidelines and tools for implementation that are appropriate for your setting. 
Question: How will you use this information and include an evaluation process to promote quality 
improvement?
Source: Brown, S. J. (2014). Evidence-based nursing: The research practice connection (3rd ed.). Boston, MA: Jones and Bartlett. 
K E Y  P O I N T S
●Evidence-based practice, a core competency for health professionals, is defined as the use of clinical 
expertise and interventions that are based on evidence of efficacy for patient outcomes and the 
preferences of the patients served.
●Research is a process for generating scientific knowledge and utilizing the knowledge on which to base
practice. Using evidence of efficacy for practice is a vital professional attribute and a responsibility.
●Nursing research began with Florence Nightingale and has become vital to both professionals and con-
sumers in investigating the domain of nursing, testing theories and interventions, and demonstrating the
efficacy and efficiency of nursing actions.
●Ethical considerations in research must include the four basic human rights:
●Beneficence (“Do no harm”)
●Full disclosure
●Self-determination
●Privacy and confidentiality
Continued

92
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice
K E Y  P O I N T S—cont’d
●A professional nurse should be an active consumer of nursing research, promoting use of current and
valid scientific knowledge and identifying the questions to be addressed in further research. Professional
accountability demands that one read the literature, attend educational sessions, use critique skills, 
participate in investigations, and apply and promote evidence-based interventions.
●Empirical research is based on the strict rules of the scientific method, with the following steps:
●Identification of the problem
●Statement of the purpose
●Review of the literature
●Description of the theoretical framework
●Definition of terms
●Statement of hypothesis(es)
●Selection of the research design, population, and sample
●Approval by the IRB
●Collection of data
●Analysis and interpretation of data
●Presentation of findings and recommendations
●Knowledge transformation is defined as “the conversion of research findings from primary research 
results, through a series of stages and forms, to impact on health outcomes by way of EB care” 
(Stevens, 2009, p. 28). 
●Grady (2010) describes translational research “to continuously develop and reevaluate an intervention
across diverse settings and populations and to proactively integrate data from real-world settings into 
the inception, design, and development of new basic and applied research studies” (pp. 164–165).
●A critique is an objective analysis of a research report. The reader must critically consider all components
of the report. 
●A research problem is the main issue or central question that the researcher addresses in the investiga-
tion. Specific research questions or hypotheses flow from the main research problem.
●The literature review is a report and comparison of all pertinent prior investigations on the topic, 
variables of interest, theoretical models, and methods used. 
●Variables are concepts and constructs defined and manipulated, controlled, or measured in a research
study. Independent variables are manipulated by the researcher.
●Hypotheses are predictions about the variables that the researcher is testing with a subject group. 
●The research design is the overall blueprint and methods for the study.
●Research methods may be quantitative or qualitative. Quantitative methods focus on numerical data
that can be obtained from subjects through any one or a combination of measurement instruments.
Qualitative methods focus on information gathered from individuals and groups, often in their natural
environment, to explore in depth their unique qualities and generate theory on a little-known topic 
or construct.
●Sampling is the use of a subset (sample) of the population as a feasible group to study and ultimately 
generalize findings to the population.
●Instruments are the measurement tools for collecting data. Important considerations for use of any 
instrument are the reliability and validity of the measurement.
●Statistics are used in analyzing quantitative research methods. Descriptive statistics are used to summarize
and describe data. Inferential statistics are used to test hypotheses, make predictions, and infer from the
sample to the population.

CHAPTER 5 Evidence-Based Practice     ●
93
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Describe activities present in your practice setting that demonstrate the use of evidence-based practice.
2. Develop a plan to encourage or promote evidence-based practice in your nursing practice environment. Select
a clinical protocol or problem. Use the following six phases of the research utilization process to organize your
plan: (1) identification of clinical problems and access to research bases, (2) evaluation of the knowledge and
the potential for application in the organization, along with policy and cost determinants, (3) planning for imple-
mentation and evaluation of the innovation, (4) clinical trial and evaluation, (5) decisions to adopt, modify, or
reject innovations on the basis of evaluation, and (6) if the innovations are adopted, planning for their extension
to other units (Horsley et al., 1978). Describe who will be involved in the process and how the new practice or
protocol will be implemented. Finally, identify evaluation criteria.
3. Identify practice issues that can be developed into a nursing research problem for investigation.
4. Find the requirements for the IRB at your college or institution. Be prepared to participate in a discussion of the
requirements for the preparation of a research proposal for consideration by the IRB.
5. Look further at PHI and current privacy issues. Be prepared to participate in a discussion as scheduled by your 
instructor.
6. Review the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter and discuss it in the context of the contents
of the chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.
REFERENCES
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). (2014).
What is the Effective Health Care Program? Retrieved from
http://www.effectivehealthcare.ahrq.gov/index.cfm/
what-is-the-effective-health-care-program1/ 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2006a).
Essentials of doctoral education for advanced nursing practice.
Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/DNP/pdf/
Essentials.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN).
(2006b). Position statement on nursing research. Retrieved
from http://www.aacn.browsermedia.com/publications/
position/nursing-research 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2008).
The essentials of baccalaureate education for professional nurs-
ing practice. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/
Education/pdf/BaccEssentials08.pdf
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses. (2010). Practice
alert: Family presence during resuscitative and invasive proce-
dures. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.org/wd/practice/
content/family-presence-practice-alert.pcms?menu=practice
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses. (2013). Ethical
foundations for critical care nursing research. Retrieved 
from http://www.aacn.org/wd/practice/docs/research/
ethical-foundations-critical-care-nursing-research.pdf
American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC). (2014). Practice
standards. Retrieved from http://www.nursecredentialing
.org/Pathway/AboutPathway/PathwayPracticeStandards
Belmont Report. (1979). Ethical principles and guidelines for
the protection of human subjects of research, 79 Fed. Reg.
12065.
Brown, S. J. (2014). Evidence-based nursing: The research 
practice connection (3rd ed.). Boston, MA: Jones and Bartlett.
Declaration of Helsinki. (1990). Recommendations guiding
physicians in biomedical research involving human subjects.
Bulletin of Pan American Health Organization, 24(4), 
606–609.
Fawcett, J., & Garity, J. (2009). Evaluating research for evidence-
based nursing practice. Philadelphia, PA: F.A. Davis.
Greiner, A. C., & Knebel, E. (Eds.). (2003). Health professions
education: A bridge to quality. Washington, DC: Institute 
of Medicine.
Grady, P. A. (2010). Translational research and nursing science.
Nursing Outlook, 58, 164–166.
Horsley, J. A., Crane, J., & Bingle, J. D. (1978). Research 
utilization as an organizational process. Journal of Nursing
Administration, 8(7), 4–6.
Kerlinger, F. N., & Lee, H. B. (2000). Foundations of
 behavioral research (4th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth
Thompson Learning.
Lindeman, C. A., & Krueger, J. C. (1977). Increasing the qual-
ity, quantity, and use of nursing research. Nursing Outlook,
25, 450–454.
National Institute of Nursing Research (NINR). (2012). 
FAQ: General information. What is nursing research? 
Retrieved from http://www.ninr.nih.gov/site-structure/
faq#.Uu6k1WeYbmQ

National Institute of Nursing Research (NINR). (2013). Mission
and strategic plan. Retrieved from http://www.ninr.nih.gov/
aboutninr/ninr-mission-and-strategic-plan#.Uu2wi2eYbmI 
Nightingale, F. (1859). Notes on nursing: What it is, and what 
it is not. London, UK: Harrison and Sons. (Commemorative 
edition printed 1992, Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott.)
Porter-O’Grady, T. (2006). A new age for practice: Creating
the framework for evidence. In K. Mallock & T. Porter-
O’Grady (Eds.), Introduction to evidence-based practice
(pp. 1–29). Boston, MA: Jones and Bartlett.
Protection of Human Subjects, 45 CFR 46 (2009). Title
45 Code of Federal Regulations Part 46 (45 CFR 46),
§46.102, 110. Retrieved from http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/
humansubjects/guidance/45cfr46.html 
Sigma Theta Tau. (2005). Evidence-based nursing position 
statement. Retrieved from http://www.nursingsociety.org/
aboutus/PositionPapers/Pages/EBN_positionpaper.aspx
Silva, M. (1995). Ethical guidelines in the conduct, dissemination,
and implementation of nursing research. Washington, DC:
American Nurses Association.
Stevens, K. R. (2005). Essential competencies for evidence-based
practice in nursing. San Antonio, TX: Academic Center for
Evidence-Based Practice.
Stevens, K. R. (2009). Essential competencies for evidence-based
practice in nursing (2nd ed.). San Antonio, TX: Academic
Center for Evidence-Based Practice.
Titler, M. G., (2010). Translation science and context. Research
and Theory for Nursing Practice: An International Journal,
24, 35–55.
U.S. President’s Commission for the Study of Ethical Problems
in Medicine and Behavioral Research. (1982). Compensating
for research injuries: The ethical and legal implications of 
programs to redress injured subjects (Vol. 1). Retrieved from
http://www2.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/radiation/dir/mstreet/
commeet/meet16/brief16/tab_b/br16b1a.txt
United States Department of Health & Human Services 
(USDHHS). (2004). Protecting personal health infor mation
in research: Understanding the HIPAA privacy rule
(NIH Pub. No. 03–5388). Retrieved from http://
privacyruleandresearch.nih.gov/pr_02.asp
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Academic Center for Evidence-Based Practice, UTHSCSA
(2012). Welcome to ACE. Retrieved from http://
www.acestar.uthscsa.edu/
American Nurses Association. (1997). Position statement: Educa-
tion for participation in nursing research (retired). Retrieved
from members only archive, http://nursingworld.org/
MainMenuCategories/HealthcareandPolicyIssues/
ANAPositionStatements/Archives/rseducat14484.aspx 
American Nurses Association. (1985). Human rights guidelines
for nurses in clinical and other research (Pub. No. D-46 3M
9/87R). Kansas City, MO: American Nurses Association.
American Nurses Association Commission on Nursing Research.
(1981). Guidelines for the investigative function of nurses.
Kansas City, MO: American Nurses Association.
Crane, J. (1985). Research utilization: Theoretical perspectives.
Western Journal of Nursing Research, 7, 261–268.
Munhall, P. (2011). Nursing research: A qualitative  perspective
(5th ed.). Boston, MA: Jones and Bartlett. 
Munhall, P. L., & Chenail, R. (2008). Qualitative research 
proposals and reports: A guide (3rd ed.). Boston: Jones and
Bartlett.
Long, L. E., Burkett, K., & McGee, S. (2010). Promotion of
safe outcomes: Incorporating evidence into policies and 
procedures. Nursing Clinics of North America, 44, 57–70.
Peterson, S. J., & Bredow, T. S. (2012). Middle range  theories:
Application to nursing research (3rd ed.). Philadelphia, PA: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Walsh, N. (2010). Dissemination of evidence into practice:
Opportunities and threats. Primary Health Care, 20(3), 
26–30.
ONLINE RESOURCES
Academic Center for Evidence-Based Practice (ACE)
http://www.acestar.uthscsa.edu
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)
http://www.ahrq.gov/ 
The Cochrane Collaboration
http://www.cochrane.org/ 
Federal Guidelines for the Protection of Human Subjects
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/humansubjects/guidance/
45cfr46.html 
Federal Opportunities for Research Funding
http://www.grants.gov 
National Institute of Nursing Research
http://ninr.nih.gov
National Institutes of Health
http://www.nih.gov/ 
Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP)
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/ 
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services: Health
Information Privacy
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/hipaa/
Sigma Theta Tau International: Research Grant Opportunities
http://www.nursingsociety.org/Research/Grants/Pages/
grantsbydate.aspx
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services
http://www.hhs.gov
94
●
SECTION I Professional Bases for Practice

96
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
selected theories and delegation principles. Organizations continue to redefine themselves,
and effectively dealing with change is critical. Chapter 11 includes theories on change and
innovation, along with the characteristics of agents for change in individuals, families, groups,
and organizations.
Section II concludes with Chapter 12, on professional ethics, by focusing on informed
consent, advanced directives, the persistive vegetative state, organ procurement and donation,
genomics, and impaired practice.

Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Describe and understand the various communication models.
2. Explain the various forms of communication, such as verbal and nonverbal communication.
3. Evaluate the use of therapeutic communication in the healthcare setting.
4. Differentiate between ways the nurse receives information from the patient.
5. Discuss the various types of barriers to communication.
6. Identify past life experiences that influence communication skills.
7. Describe how structured communication tools can be used to reduce errors in the healthcare system.
8. Evaluate his or her current communication skills with patients and colleagues and propose refinements
as a part of advancing his or her career in nursing.
Communication
Communication Models
Source
Encoder
Message
Channel
Decoder
Environment
Receiver
Relationships
Transactions
Contexts
Metacommunication
Verbal Communication
Nonverbal Communication
Proxemics
Cultural Variations
Kinesics
Facial Expressions
Physical Appearance
Therapeutic Communication
Active Listening
Collaboration
SBAR
97
“A wise old owl sat on an oak; the more he saw
the less he spoke; the less he spoke the more he
heard; why aren’t we like that wise old bird?” 
Charles M. Shulz 
Key Terms
Effective
Communication
●Lynne Ornes
6

Communication is a comprehensive and complex process.
The word communication is similar to words like love, health,
and freedom; intuitively, each of us thinks that we know
what it means, but in reality people base their definitions on
their own life experiences, cultures, and surroundings. For
the nurse, communication is an essential element not only
in the relationship with the patient but also in working 
effectively with the interdisciplinary health team. The process
of interactions between humans can be verbal or nonverbal,
written or unwritten, planned or spontaneous. It is therefore
essential for communication to be defined within the context
of nursing. Communication consists of “all the cognitive, 
affective, and behavioral responses used to convey a message
to another person” (Watson, 1979, p. 33). Within this con-
text there is no such thing as “no communication” between
individuals. All behavior, whether verbal or nonverbal, has
both a meaning and a message value.
Effective communication within the nurse-patient rela-
tionship is not necessarily a natural process; it is a learned
skill. Clear and appropriate communication is essential for
providing effective nursing care and presents a unique chal-
lenge to nurses today. Society is composed of many different
cultures using many different languages. “U.S. census data
show that between 1990 and 2000, the percentage of 
Americans (older than age five) speaking a language other
than English at home rose from 13.8 percent to 17.8 percent”
(Ku & Flores, 2005, p. 435). For example, in the aftermath
of the September 2001 terrorist attack in New York, one of
the biggest challenges faced by the Red Cross workers was
communicating with individuals who spoke so many dif-
ferent languages. When a nurse is giving care to a patient,
the nurse’s message must be understandable to the patient
and vice versa. Nurses must be aware not only of what they
are saying in their words but also of what their body lan-
guage is saying to their patients and to other members of
the interdisciplinary health team.
The 21st century poses an additional challenge to nurses
in communicating via technology. Nurses use many differ-
ent types of communication in their care of patients—in
person, the written word, telephone, fax, and e-mail. Find-
ing effective ways to overcome communication barriers, 
discussed later in this chapter, gives nurses the opportunity
to bridge culture gaps within their community and provide
care to a larger number of individuals. This chapter will
cover various techniques of communication and offer tools
to assist you in your professional relationships with others.
COMMUNICATION MODELS
An overview of basic communication models is presented
first to help you understand the complex process of com-
munication in the healthcare setting. Later, various com-
munication models that are useful in health communication
are described.
Basic Components
Whether or not sources of communication are effective de-
pends on a combination of factors (Berlo, 1960). All types
of communication require the following components:
●Source: The individual who decides what message is to
be sent
●Encoder: The person who interprets the message
●Message: The content
●Channel: The medium or way chosen to convey the
message
●Receiver: The one who receives the message
●Decoder: The one who interprets the message sent
Additional factors have been added to the basic com-
ponents, including the following:
●Feedback: The message the receiver returns to the
source
●Interpersonal variables: Factors that influence 
communication
●Environment: The setting for source-receiver 
interaction
In intrapersonal communication, the source and the
encoder are the same person. The message is then com-
municated by either verbal or nonverbal language. The
message may be sent to any or all of a person’s five senses.
The receiver is also the decoder. According to Berlo
(1960), in effective communication, the receiver is the
most important component in the communication
process. If the source does not reach the receiver with the
intended message, the source might just as well have
talked to himself or herself. Feedback is confirmation that
the message was received by the receiver and been under-
stood. Examples of interpersonal variables are culture,
gender, and age. The environment refers to the setting in
which the communication takes place. Is it private? Are
there distractions, such as music or talking from others,
which is interfering?
In written communication, the reader receiver is most
important. In spoken communication, the listener receiver
is most important. When the source chooses a “code” for
a message, he or she must choose one that is familiar to
the receiver. An example of poor communication in the
healthcare setting is when a nurse gives information to a
patient using a code that consists of the jargon or terms
known only within the profession. The patient can receive
the information but does not have the knowledge to 
decode the message.
Human communication is a two-person process in 
which both individuals influence and are influenced 
by each other.
Source-Message-Channel-Receiver
Model
David Berlo (1960), a professor at Michigan State Uni-
versity, developed the source-message-channel-receiver
(SMCR) model of the communication process (Fig. 6.1).
This paradigm emphasizes the importance of a thorough
understanding of human behavior as a prerequisite to
communication analysis. The SMCR model represents a
communication process that occurs as a source formulates
messages based on the source’s communication skills, 
attitudes, knowledge, and sociocultural system. These
messages, which have unique elements, structure, content,
treatment, and codes, are then transmitted along channels.
Channels are the various senses, such as seeing, hearing,
touching, smelling, and tasting. The receiver interprets
98
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

messages on the basis of his or her own communication
skills, attitudes, knowledge, and sociocultural system.
The strength of the SMCR model is that it demon-
strates the complex process of communication and shows
that communication is not a static event. It incorporates
the sociocultural context of both sender and receiver as 
a critical component in the communication process. 
However, the model lacks the important component of
feedback (Berlo, 1960). The next model includes this 
factor in its concepts.
Health Communication Model
Northouse and Northouse (1998) constructed the health
communication model (HCM) (Fig. 6.2), which specif-
ically applies to transactions between participants in
healthcare about health-related issues. The primary
focus of the HCM is on the communication that occurs
within the various kinds of relationships in healthcare
settings. This model also takes a broader systems view
of communication and emphasizes the way in which a
series of factors can affect the interactions in the health-
care setting. Three major factors illustrate the health
communication process: relationships, transactions, and
contexts.
Relationships
From a systems perspective, the HCM illustrates four
major types of relationships that exist in the healthcare
setting:
●Professional-professional
●Professional-client/patient
●Professional–significant other
●Client/patient–significant other
When an individual is involved in health communi-
cation, he or she is involved in one of these types of rela-
tionships. In this model, the term health professional refers
to any individual who has the education, training, and
CHAPTER 6 Effective Communication     ●
99
Figure 6.1 Source-message-channel-receiver (SMCR) model of communication.  (From Berlo, D. K.
[1960]. The process of communication: An introduction to the theory and practice [p. 7]. New York: Holt, Rinehart 
& Winston, with permission.)
Health
Professional
Communication Variables
Health
Transactions
Lifespan
Communication Variables
Health Care
Contexts
Client
Health
Professional
Significant
Others
Figure 6.2 Health communication
model.  (From Northouse, P. G., &
Northouse, L. L. [1998]. Health
communication strategies for the health
professional (3rd ed.) [p. 16]. Norwalk,
CT: Appleton & Lange, with 
permission.)

experience to provide health services to others. Health
professionals include a wide range of individuals such as
nurses, health administrators, social workers, physicians,
and occupational and physical therapists (Northouse &
Northouse, 1998). Each of these professionals brings
unique characteristics and beliefs to healthcare settings
that affect the way he or she interacts with the patient
and with the other members of the interdisciplinary
healthcare team.
Patients are the people who are the focus of the health-
care services being provided. The term patient also encom-
passes the characteristics, values, and beliefs that these
individuals bring to the healthcare setting. Just as the per-
sonal characteristics of the nurse and other professionals
influence their interactions, the characteristics of patients
influence their interactions with others. Within the social
network of the patient, the patient’s significant others in-
clude family members and friends who have been found
to be essential in supporting patients as they maneuver
through the healthcare system. Significant others are all of
the people who are significant in patients’ lives but are not
health professionals.
The patient’s self-esteem, emotional stability, and sense of
identity will define how the patient relates to the health-
care professionals as well as those significant individuals
in his or her life.
Northouse and Northouse (1998) realized that, too
often, health professionals overlook the important role
played by family members and other significant individu-
als in enhancing the health of the person. Their model 
includes this aspect because as patients live longer with
chronic health problems, significant others assume an even
more central role as patient advocates and are more in-
volved in the direct care of the patient. This concept is also
true when the nurse is visiting the patient in the home.
The dynamics within the family and the support of the
significant others around the patient can help the patient
realize the full potential of a healthy lifestyle.
Transactions
Transactions, the second major factor in the HCM, are
the health-related interactions between the nurse or other
health professional, the patient, and the patient’s signifi-
cant others. These transactions about health can include
both verbal and nonverbal communication behaviors,
which are equally important and are most effective when
they are compatible with each other. Northouse and 
Northouse (1998) represent these health transactions with
a circle from which an unending spiral emerges, signifying
that communication is not static but is an interactive
process that occurs at various points in a person’s life. This
continuous feedback allows the message to be changed in
accordance with the situation.
Contexts
Contexts, the third major factor in the model, is defined
as the settings where the health communication takes
place and includes the properties of these settings. At one
level, context can refer to the healthcare setting, such as a
hospital room or the patient’s home. For example, if the
professional is communicating with the patient in an am-
bulatory clinic, there may be many distractions and in-
fringements of privacy. Each particular healthcare setting
affects the dynamics of the transactions that take place.
At another level, however, healthcare contexts can refer
to the number of participants within the particular
healthcare setting. Communication can take place in a
one-to-one situation or in small groups. The number of
participants present influences the overall interactions in
the setting.
The health communication model is based on the as-
sumption that communication is ongoing and dynamic.
It is transactional, in that each participant affects the other
participants, and it has both a content and relationship
dimension that are inextricably bound together in the in-
teractions. It is a model that incorporates the thoughts,
feelings, attitudes, and current roles of the participants
and demonstrates that all of these things can affect the 
accuracy of the communication.
FORMS OF COMMUNICATION
In order to share information, people express messages in
a complex composite of both verbal (spoken or written)
and nonverbal behaviors. Individuals express themselves
through language, gestures, voice inflection, facial expres-
sions, and use of space. Within the nurse-patient relation-
ship, information exchanged between two individuals
must be interpreted not only by the nurse but also by the
patient. The healthcare provider should be aware of styles
of communication and should have observational skills
that enhance the encounter.
Metacommunication
Metacommunication is a broad term used to “describe all
of the factors that influence how the message is perceived”
(Arnold & Boggs, 2011, p. 163) and has long been recog-
nized as being of enormous value in the nurse-patient ther-
apeutic relationship. Metacommunication includes all of
the things taken into account when the receiver is inter-
preting a message, such as the role of the communicator,
the nonverbal messages sent, and the context in which the
communication is taking place. These messages may be
hidden within verbal messages or conveyed by nonverbal
expressions or gestures. An example is the “play fighting”
observed in children and animals. Bateson noted that for
an organism to “play” at fighting, it must be able to both
appear that it is fighting and simultaneously appear not to
be actually fighting but merely simulating the act of fight-
ing (Mitchell, 1991).
In the nurse-patient relationship, metacommunication
conveys messages about how to interpret both verbal and
nonverbal communication clues. For example, a nurse can
convey a message of caring by saying to the patient,
“That’s important. Let’s talk about it.” If the nurse sits in
a chair and uses nonverbal cues such as maintaining eye
contact, smiling, having a relaxed posture, and listening
intently, the verbal and nonverbal messages are congruent.
If the same verbal message is delivered while the nurse
fidgets and looks at the clock, the nurse may provide a
100
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

nonverbal message that he or she does not have time or is
not willing to listen. Metacommunication is the message
conveyed when both verbal and nonverbal communica-
tion are perceived together.
Nurses must make sure that their verbal and nonverbal
messages to the patient are consistent and congruent in
order to be sure that the patient interprets the messages
clearly. Suppose you walk into a room and ask a patient
whether he is in pain and he answers no, but you observe
that he is thrashing in bed, clutching his incision, and has
deep grimaces on his face. How would you interpret this
behavior? A nurse who is skilled in communication would
realize that the verbal answer and the nonverbal cues are
inconsistent and would clarify the situation. If the nurse
points out the incongruent form of communication that
he or she observed, the patient may admit that he is in
pain (Arnold & Boggs, 2011).
Metacommunication is the message conveyed when 
both verbal and nonverbal communication are perceived
together.
Verbal Communication
Verbal communication takes place when people use words
to share experiences with others. Without the use of spo-
ken language, individuals are severely limited in their
means of sharing with others what they are feeling. The
choice of words that a person uses is based on language,
educational background, age, race, and socioeconomic
background, as well as on the situation in which the com-
munication takes place.
According to the individual’s background and experi-
ence, interpretation of words may also vary. One cannot
assume that words have the same meaning to everyone
who hears them. “Language is useful only to the extent
that it actually reflects the experience it is designed to por-
tray” (Arnold & Boggs, 2011, p. 164). If a person speaks
a different native language, consider the difficulty that per-
son will have expressing his or her thoughts in English.
This could also apply to a small child or an Alzheimer’s
patient.
Keep in mind that the intended meaning of the mes-
sage may be represented in the emphasis placed on a par-
ticular word. The pitch and tone of a word can suggest
mood and can either support or contradict the content of
the verbal message. When the patient is explaining some-
thing to the nurse, the nurse must consider that certain
phrases and words may have entirely different meanings
for the patient and the nurse.
Potter and Perry (2013) state that the six most impor-
tant aspects of verbal communication are (1) vocabulary,
(2) denotative and connotative meanings, (3) intonation,
(4) pacing, (5) clarity and brevity, and (6) timing and 
relevance.
Vocabulary
Vocabulary consists of the words or phrases that a person
chooses and uses to communicate a message. Communi-
cation is unsuccessful if the receiver cannot translate or
understand the sender’s words and phrases. Nurses work
with individuals of various ages, developmental stages,
cultures, and educational backgrounds, as well as individ-
uals who have physical problems that distort their com-
munication skills.
Nurses must be very aware of their use of nursing or
medical jargon. Consider the nurse who is instructing a
patient before an operation. If the nurse says, “You are to
be NPO after midnight and you are to void prior to the
pre-op injection,” what will the patient be able to deci-
pher from this instruction? At the same time, the nurse
must not “talk down” to or patronize the patient. The
nurse must respect the patient and understand the best
way to provide the information in a manner that can be
understood readily.
Meaning
A single word may have several different meanings. The
denotative meaning is the meaning that is shared by indi-
viduals who use a common language. The word football
may be understood by all individuals who speak English
but denotes a different meaning to individuals of different
countries. The word code denotes a cardiac arrest to mem-
bers of the healthcare profession but has different mean-
ings outside the health community. The connotative
meaning is the interpretation or the way one’s feelings,
thoughts, experiences, or ideas about a word influence the
meaning of the word. When a family is told that their
loved one is in “serious condition,” they may interpret that
phrase to mean that their loved one is near death. To the
nurse, however, the term may merely describe the nature
of the illness. Nurses should be extremely cautious to use
words and phrases that will not be misinterpreted, espe-
cially when explaining a patient’s condition.
When a nurse is giving instructions to a patient, the
nurse must use terms and phrases that the patient un-
derstands. The best way to ensure that the patient has
understood the instructions is have the patient repeat the
instructions to the nurse. At that time, any questions
can be answered, and the nurse can be assured that the
patient has the correct information.
Intonation
Intonation is the cadence and tone of the spoken word.
The intonation of words in a message can readily change
the meaning. Take the phrase “He is.” If spoken one way
it can be a sentence, but with a different tone it can be a
question. Emphasizing the “he” or the “is” also changes
the meaning of the phrase. Tone of voice can dramatically
affect a message’s meaning, and emotions directly influ-
ence tone of voice. Emotions such as anger, enthusiasm,
and concern may be gleaned from the tone of voice that
one uses. Nurses must be aware of this fact to avoid send-
ing an unintended message. The nurse must also realize
that the patient’s intonation may reflect the patient’s emo-
tional state, even if the patient’s words do not.
Pacing
Pacing is the speed and rate of the spoken word. Commu-
nication is more successful when words are spoken at an
appropriate speed or pace. Talking too rapidly or too
CHAPTER 6 Effective Communication     ●
101

slowly may express an inadvertent message. When com-
municating important information to a patient, the nurse
must speak slowly and clearly and must pause at appro-
priate points to give emphasis. This approach allows the
patient time to absorb the message and to understand it
more clearly. Pacing is optimum if the nurse thinks out
the message before delivering it.
The nurse should also be aware of the pace of the pa-
tient’s spoken word. The speech may be slow and slurred
if the patient has some type of neurologic problem or is
under the influence of drugs or alcohol. The patient who
is scared and nervous may speak very rapidly. Cultural
variables may also influence the pace of the words; a per-
son from the southern part of the United States may speak
more slowly than someone from the Northeast. It is im-
portant for the nurse to be aware of these differences and
be able to interpret the meanings of a person’s pace of
speaking.
Clarity, Timing, and Relevance
The nurse should use words and phrases that express an
idea simply and directly. Using examples tends to make a
message clearer. Timing and relevance are likewise critical
in communication. The patient must be ready to hear
what the nurse has to say. If a patient is distracted by pain,
the nurse must realize that it is not the right time to give
detailed instructions. Often the best time to communicate
is when the patient has expressed interest in a particular
topic. Choosing this timing tends to make the patient
more attentive.
Nurses should also demonstrate credibility, which is
defined as a sense of trustworthiness, sincerity, reliability,
and integrity. The nurse must be dependable and believ-
able. If the patient asks the nurse a question that the nurse
does not know the answer to, it is much better for the
nurse to say, “I do not know the answer to that but I will
find out for you” than to give erroneous information.
When a nurse establishes credibility in a nurse-patient 
relationship, the communication is more reliable and can
have more substantial meaning for both the patient and
the nurse.
Nonverbal Communication
Nonverbal communication is communication without
words; it includes messages that are created through body
motions, facial expressions, the use of space and sounds,
and the use of touch. Birdwhistell (1970) studied the area
of body movement and suggested that 65 to 70 percent of
the social meaning of an interaction is transmitted by non-
verbal communication. Although nonverbal communica-
tion does not include language, it can be either vocal or
nonvocal. For example, if a patient is moaning in pain, she
is giving a nonverbal cue that the nurse should ask more
questions about her condition.
Nonverbal communication can be intentional or un-
intentional. If a nurse is giving important information to
a patient, the nurse should intentionally have a serious 
facial expression. A patient who is giving the nurse infor-
mation in an apparently relaxed and gleeful manner but
whose face shows expressions of fear and uncertainty
demonstrates unintentional nonverbal communication. A
prime example of nonverbal communication is Holly
Hunter’s role in the 1993 movie The Piano. For the entire
length of the movie, she does not speak one word, yet 
her nonverbal communication in the role is so effective
that it earned her an Oscar for the best actress perfor -
mance. Monitoring subtle nonverbal communication
clues accounts for the vast majority of communication be-
tween individuals.
Most Americans are only dimly aware of their use of
nonverbal language, although they use it every day. We
are constantly communicating our real feelings in nonver-
bal ways (Hall, 1959). Arnold and Boggs (2011) categorize
four areas in which nonverbal behaviors are used: (1) prox-
emics; (2) cultural variations; (3) kinesics, which includes
body language and facial expression; and (4) appearance.
Proxemics
Proxemics refers to how individuals use and interpret
space in the communication process. Some areas of prox-
emics address questions of territoriality, personal space,
and distance relevant to the healthcare setting. Each cul-
ture has expectations for appropriate distance, depending
on the context of communication. Personal space, or one’s
own territory, is important because it gives one a sense of
identity, security, and control. A person may feel threat-
ened or simply irritated when his or her personal space is
invaded.
When people enter the healthcare setting, they are 
required to give up much of their privacy and personal
space. They are required to give personal and intimate in-
formation to strangers and may undergo procedures that
further compromise their sense of privacy and personal
space. Although nurses and other health professionals
may not be able to eliminate these problems of personal
space, the healthcare professional should respect the 
patient’s territory, belongings, and right to privacy. The
patient should be given as much control over the situation
as possible. For example, the patient should be allowed
to decide whether the door to the room is left open or
closed and where personal items are placed. The patient’s
body should be exposed as little as possible to minimize
the discomfort involved with procedures that invade his
or her privacy.
Cultural Variations
Cultural variations are learned subconsciously through
the observations of behavior of significant individuals 
in the patient’s culture. Communication patterns vary
in different cultures, even for such conventional social
behaviors as smiling, a handshake, and direct eye con-
tact. For many Hispanic individuals, smiling and shak-
ing hands are considered an integral part of sincere
interaction and trust, whereas an Asian individual might
perceive this behavior to be inappropriate (Galanti,
2014).
Sometimes a nonverbal gesture—a body movement
usually with the hand—is totally acceptable in one culture
and truly offensive in another one. For example, a nurse
may mean to signal to a Brazilian patient that things went
well by making an “OK” circle with the thumb and index
102
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

finger; in Brazil, however, this movement is considered an
obscene gesture (Arnold & Boggs, 2011).
Cultural taboos can inhibit nonverbal behaviors. Dif-
ferent cultures have different rules about eye contact. In
many Western cultures, looking directly into another
person’s eyes is interpreted as being interested and atten-
tive. The use of eye contact is one of the most culturally
variable nonverbal behaviors, however. Although most
nurses have been taught to look directly at the patient
when speaking, individuals from other cultures may at-
tribute other culturally based meanings to this behavior.
Asian, Native American, Middle Eastern, and Hmong
patients may consider eye contact impolite or antagonis-
tic, and they may divert their own eyes when talking to
a nurse or physician. In some cultures, showing respect
to the nurse dictates that the patient should cast the eyes
downward. Navajo patients believe that making direct
eye contact is disrespectful and harmful to the spirits of
both parties (Galanti, 2014).
In some cultures, touching—coming into physical
contact with another person—is one of the most powerful
means of nonverbal communication, but the nurse must
give careful consideration to issues surrounding touch.
Touch can take a variety of forms and can convey a range
of meanings, but it is a powerful tool in healthcare when
it communicates caring and respect. Touch can ease a 
patient’s sense of isolation and can make procedures seem
less invasive. Care must be taken, however, to understand
individual cultural customs about touching, which can
vary dramatically. For example, the cultures of Muslim
and Orthodox Jewish men dictate that they do not touch
women outside their families. Such men may be very un-
comfortable even shaking the hand of a female healthcare
provider (Arnold & Boggs, 2011).
Unfortunately, there is no precise formula to deter-
mine when or when not to touch a patient, and no uni-
versal meaning can be given to a touch. In order for
patients to perceive touch positively in a therapeutic rela-
tionship, Northouse and Northouse (1998) suggest that
nurses use the following guidelines:
●Use a form of touch that is appropriate to the particu-
lar situation. There are many types of touch that can
be used in various ways. The nurse should use touch
that is fitting to the situation. For example, if a woman
has just been told distressing information (e.g., that
her child is diagnosed with leukemia), she may re-
spond positively to the nurse’s hand being placed on
her arm. However, this type of touch may not be ther-
apeutic or well received by a male adolescent who has
just been told that he has diabetes and who is in the
process of venting anger. It is better to let him get the
anger out than to try to console him.
●Do not use a touch gesture that imposes more intimacy
on a patient than he or she desires. To some people,
certain gestures may imply a level of intimacy or degree
of closeness. When the touch suggests a degree of 
closeness that is not equally shared or agreed on by
both parties, distress may occur. The patient may be 
offended if his or her personal space is violated.
●Observe the patient’s response to the touch. Assess-
ment of a touch is especially important in the initial
meeting with a patient, when the nurse does not know
how the patient will respond. The nurse should ob-
serve the patient’s nonverbal behaviors. For example, 
if the patient pulls away or displays a tense facial ex-
pression, he or she may be having a negative reaction
or response to the touch. On the other hand, if a 
patient appears relaxed and more comforted after the
touch, it is likely that he or she is receiving the touch
positively.
●In healthcare situations in which both the nurse and
the patient are comfortable with touch and the use of
touch is assessed for therapeutic effect, touch can be a
very valuable mode of human communication.
Kinesics
Kinesics, commonly referred to as body language, is an
important component of nonverbal communication
(Arnold & Boggs, 2011). Kinesics is also defined as in-
volving the conscious or subconscious body positioning
and actions of the individual giving the message. Some
dimensions of kinesics are posturing and gait, gestures,
and facial expressions. Body stance can convey a message
about the nurse or the patient. If the patient is in a
slumped, head-down position, the nurse may assess that
the patient may have low self-esteem, whereas an erect
posture and decisive movements may suggest confidence
and self-control. Rapid, diffuse, or agitated body move-
ments may indicate anxiety.
Facial Expressions
Facial expressions, the various movements in the face, pro-
vide emotional undertone and feeling whether or not they
are accompanied by verbal communication. Throughout
life, individuals respond to the expressive qualities of an-
other face, often without realizing it. Mehrabian (1981),
in studying the impact of words, vocalization, and facial
expressions, noted that the power of the facial expression
supporting the verbal content far outweighs the impact of
the actual words.
Facial expression is important in conveying a message;
it either reinforces or changes the verbal message that the
listener hears. When the verbal message is inconsistent or
different from the individual’s facial expression, the non-
verbal expressions assume more prominence and meaning
and are generally perceived as more trustworthy and mean-
ingful than the spoken word (Mehrabian, 1981).
The face is the most expressive part of the body,
adding obvious and subtle cues to the real focus of the
message. Common facial expressions are surprise, sadness,
anger, happiness and joy, disgust and contempt, and fear
(Arnold & Boggs, 2011). A patient’s facial expression
should be part of the nursing assessment. For example, if
a patient frowns after receiving information, he or she
may be experiencing confusion or anger. The nurse can
intervene by saying, “I see that you are frowning. Is some-
thing wrong?” The question would encourage the patient
to clarify his or her response.
In the healthcare profession, it is very important for
the nurse’s facial expression to be congruent with the 
verbal message given to the patient. When a nurse walks
into a patient’s hospital room, the patient will “search” the
CHAPTER 6 Effective Communication     ●
103

nurse’s face for clues before the nurse can even speak. For
example, if the patient asks the nurse, “Do I have cancer?”
the slightest change in the nurse’s facial features can reveal
the nurse’s answer. Although it is difficult to control all
facial expressions, the nurse should try to avoid showing
overt shock, revulsion, dismay, and other distressing reac-
tions in the patient’s presence. If the nurse comes into a
patient’s room with an expression of anger, stress, or dis-
gust, the patient and his family may perceive the nurse to
be uncaring.
Appearance
The nurse’s physical appearance, including dress, groom-
ing, posture, gestures, and ease of movements, makes an
important impact on the patient and conveys the nurse’s
attitudes about himself or herself and others. Studies have
shown that spoken words account for only 7 percent of
the message. Tattoos and body art, although very popular
these days, can be frightening and offensive to some 
patients (Cardillo, 2009; Rizk & Bofinger, 2008).
The business world has been aware of the “dress 
for success” rule and has noted the role clothes play in
projecting the image of the serious professional. Nursing
is no different; the patient reacts to the way a nurse is
dressed. In the past, nurses wore white uniforms and caps
in designs that represented their various schools of nurs-
ing. In today’s healthcare environment there is no stan-
dard uniform for the professional nurse—a fact that does
tend to confuse the layperson. What nurses wear is usu-
ally determined by the area of the hospital in which they
work or the role they have in the community. Mangum,
Garrison, Lind, Thackeray, and Wyatt (1991) surveyed
patients, nurses, and administrators to determine
whether or not different styles of nursing uniforms are
associated with the professional image of nursing. In
their summary, they noted that the nurse is judged 
primarily by what is worn and presented at the bedside.
The nurse should make a conscious effort to dress in a
professional way.
Therapeutic Communication
Therapeutic communication, a term coined by Ruesch
(1961), is defined as a purposeful form of communication
between the health professional and the patient that allows
them to reach health-related goals through participation
in a focused relationship. “Therapeutic communication
differs from ordinary communication in that the intention
of one or more of the participants is clearly directed at
bringing about a change in the system and manner 
of communication” (Ruesch, 1961, p. 460). This type 
of communication differs from a social communication
because there is a specific purpose or planned direction to
the communication. The nurse uses therapeutic commu-
nication to promote a psychological setting that allows
positive change, growth, and healing for the patient. As
the professional caregiver, the nurse comes to know the
patient as an individual who has unique health needs, 
responses, and patterns of living. With this knowledge, the
nurse uses a goal-directed approach when communicating
with the patient.
Therapeutic communication can take place in a vari-
ety of clinical settings, ranging from the acute care system
to nursing homes. As healthcare delivery moves to a com-
munity focus, therapeutic communication can take place
in nontraditional healthcare settings such as patients’
homes, schools, and ambulatory care settings. Therapeu-
tic conversations in healthcare settings are designed to
help patients maintain healthy habits, learn about their
illness, and learn ways of coping. The communication is
goal oriented and patient centered, has rules and bound-
aries, and uses individualized strategies (Arnold & Boggs,
2011).
Therapeutic Communication Techniques
A number of techniques are used in therapeutic commu-
nication (Box 6.1). Nurses should familiarize themselves
with and make it a habit to use these techniques both in
and outside of therapeutic situations.
Active Listening
Effective therapeutic communication between the nurse
and patient begins with active listening (Bush, 2001). 
Listening actively means that the listener is communicat-
ing interest and attention to the patient. The goal of active
listening is to comprehend and understand fully what the
other person is trying to communicate.
Two important techniques used by the nurse in active
listening are restatement and reflection (Craven &
Hirnle, 2009). Restatement takes place when the nurse
listens carefully to the patient and then restates some or
all of the content back to the patient to ensure that the
nurse has the correct understanding of what the patient
has said. When the content is restated, the patient has
the opportunity to hear what he or she has said and
therefore gains an understanding of how the nurse has
perceived what he or she has communicated. The nurse
listens to the patient for both content and emotions 
expressed through nonverbal facial expression, body 
posture, and emotional status.
Reflection is the process of identifying the main emo-
tional themes in the conversation and directing them back
to the patient (Box 6.2). The nurse listens for the under-
lying feeling that the patient is conveying and then shares
this with the patient in a nonjudgmental, open manner.
This process allows the patient to explore his or her own
ideas and gives the patient a clearer understanding of the
feelings being experienced.
104
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
BOX 6.1
Therapeutic Communication 
Techniques
●Active listening
●Restatement
●Reﬂection
●Asking appropriate questions
●Focusing
●Encouraging elaboration
●Looking at alternatives
●Use of silence

Questions
Questions are an important part of all phases of therapeu-
tic communication because they allow the nurse to obtain
information from the patient. The nurse needs to ask per-
tinent questions, but not to the point that the patient feels
that he or she is being interrogated.
Arnold and Boggs (2011) suggest that questions can
be divided into three categories: open ended, close ended,
and circular. Open-ended questions are stated in such a
way that the patient is able to elaborate beyond a simple
yes or no answer. This gives the patient a way to “tell a
story.” Think of such a question as an essay question on a
test. It gives the patient a chance to express thoughts about
a problem or health need. Open-ended questions often
begin with words like “How,” “Why,” and “Can you de-
scribe.” Examples of open-ended questions are, “What
brought you to the hospital?” and “Can you tell me about
your being diagnosed with diabetes?” These questions are
general, rather than specific, and are open to the patient’s
interpretation.
Closed-ended questions require specific answers and
limit a patient’s response. These types of questions are best
used in emergency situations, and it may take more of
them to get the desired response. In this situation the nurse
wants to obtain information quickly, and the patient’s
emotional reactions are secondary. Examples of closed-
ended questions are, “When did the pain start?” and “How
long has it been since you saw the doctor?”
Circular questions focus on the impact of the illness or
injury and how it will affect the family and significant oth-
ers. Circular questions differ from open-ended questions
because the nurse is intentionally asking specific questions
to elicit responses from the patient or a family member.
The nurse uses circular questions as a type of family inter-
viewing strategy. The nurse can use the information that
the family or others provide as a basis for additional ques-
tions about the patient or other family members. For 
example, the nurse asks family members about the care of
a terminally ill patient (the mother) in their home. From
the family’s response, the nurse may receive multidimen-
sional information about the family that could not be
learned by asking specific questions. This approach pro-
vides a basis for open discussion of the patient and the
family’s circumstances.
Other Therapeutic Communication Techniques
Other techniques the nurse may use in therapeutic com-
munication are focusing, encouraging elaboration, and
looking at alternatives. Focusing means asking goal-
directed questions that help keep the patient focused on
the subject at hand. The nurse is also conveying that he
or she is helping the patient discuss the main areas of
concern. The nurse can also encourage elaboration. This
technique allows the patient to describe the concerns or
problems under discussion in a more detailed manner.
The nurse can look attentively at the patient and use
short responses such as “I see” and “Go on” to allow the
patient to continue to explore feelings. Looking at alter-
natives allows the nurse to help the patient increase the
patient’s perceived choices. This technique should not
be used until the patient has a clear understanding of the
current situation. Sometimes the patient has to deal with
emotions such as anger and denial before alternatives
come into play.
Probably one of the most difficult techniques the
nurse must learn is the use of silence, that period when
no words are being spoken between the nurse and the
patient. For Americans in particular, it takes experience
to become comfortable with pauses in the conversation.
Most people have a natural tendency to try to fill up the
empty spaces with words. By contrast, many Native
Americans consider silence essential to understanding
and respecting what the nurse has said. In traditional
Chinese and Japanese cultures, silence may mean that
the speaker wants the listener to consider the importance
of the content before continuing. British and Arab peo-
ple may use silence as a sign of respect for the individ-
ual’s privacy, whereas French, Spanish, and Russian
individuals may consider silence a sign of agreement.
Among some African Americans, silence is used to re-
spond to what is perceived as an inappropriate statement
(Andrews & Boyle, 1999).
In therapeutic relations, silent moments give the nurse
and the patient time to observe each other, digest what
messages have been communicated, and think of things to
say. Silence can be used deliberately and thoughtfully and
can be a powerful listening tool. On the other hand, long
silences may be very uncomfortable. By pausing briefly 
before continuing a conversation with a patient, the nurse
gives the patient a chance to reflect and come up with
questions of his or her own.
Barriers to Communication
In the therapeutic communication setting, the nurse must
be aware of certain responses that may lower the patient’s
self-esteem and limit full disclosure of patient information.
Among the responses that tend to block or present barriers
to communication (Box 6.3) are the following:
●Giving false reassurance is the use of clichés or com-
forting phrases in order to attempt to reassure the pa-
tient. These types of responses invalidate the patient’s
feelings or fears. Expressions such as “Everything will
be okay” and “Don’t worry” send a message to the 
patient that the nurse is not interested in the patient’s
true feelings.
CHAPTER 6 Effective Communication     ●
105
BOX 6.2
Reflection and Restatement
Patient: I don’t want to eat anything today. I can’t
even begin to think about food.
Nurse: You don’t want to eat, and you can’t think
about food. (Restatement)
Patient: All I can think about is what the doctor will
tell me about the biopsy. (Patient is wringing her
hands and almost crying.)
Nurse: The news about the biopsy result is worrying
you and makes you unable to eat. (Reﬂection)
Patient: Yes, I’m very nervous that it will mean 
that I have to have more surgery. I’m really 
frightened.

●Offering advice is telling the patient what to do or
making a decision for the patient. The nurse should
avoid offering personal opinions to the patient. Avoid
phrases such as “should do” or “ought to do.” These
types of responses tend to center the interaction on 
the nurse’s needs and perspective rather than on the
patient’s. If a patient asks a nurse for specific advice,
the nurse can use a reflective statement and explore 
the various choices the patient has in that situation.
●Probing is asking questions out of curiosity rather than
for information needed to assist the patient. Many 
of these questions begin with the word “Why.” These
types of questions from the nurse tend to put the 
patient in a defensive mode and also violate the 
patient’s privacy.
●Stereotyping is the process of attributing characteris-
tics to a group of people as though all people in 
that group possess those features. Stereotyping
groups patients in a category and does not value 
or recognize their individuality. Stereotypes lead the
nurse to make false conclusions about the patient,
and if they are based on strong emotions, stereotypes
can be identified as prejudices. It is important for
the nurse to convey acceptance of the patient as a
unique individual.
●Providing social comment refers to the use of 
polite, superficial comments that do not focus on
what the patient is feeling or trying to express to 
the nurse. The nurse can use social comments at the
beginning of an interaction to make a connection
with the patient. However, the nurse should focus
on a therapeutic interaction with the patient when
talking about issues or concerns that affect the 
patient’s health. Socialization is inappropriate when
a more serious approach to the patient’s situation 
is suitable.
●Changing the subject when the patient is trying to
communicate about another topic is rude and shows 
a lack of sensitivity. Changing the subject tends to
block communication; the patient may withhold 
information about important issues and fail to express
his or her feelings openly. If the nurse does have to
change the subject, the reason for this change should
be given to the patient.
●Using jargon—medical terminology that is used
among nurses and other health professionals—when
addressing the patient can cause confusion and 
anxiety. It may also be frightening to some patients.
Nurses should try to use common terms with which
the patient is familiar. If nurses need to use jargon,
they should make sure that they carefully explain 
what the terms mean.
COMMUNICATION WITH
COLLEAGUES
Healthcare is provided in a complex environment and
requires a team approach to deliver effective, safe, and
quality care to patients. In 2010, Congress passed 
and President Obama signed into law comprehensive
healthcare legislation. This legislation represents the
greatest change in healthcare since the 1965 creation of
the Medicare and Medicaid programs and is expected to
provide insurance coverage for an additional 32 million
uninsured Americans (Institute of Medicine, 2010). The
nursing profession will be asked to increase teamwork
and collaboration with other disciplines to enhance
safety, quality, and efficiency of the healthcare system
(Buerhaus et al., 2012).
Nurses must communicate effectively with a diverse
group of professionals and unlicensed personnel in caring
for patients. When members of the healthcare team com-
municate ineffectively with one another, delivery of
healthcare to the patient suffers. Nearly 70 percent of all
medical errors are a direct result of communication break-
down and are avoidable (Greenberg et al., 2007). Effective
communication has been shown to influence patient
safety. This finding has prompted several healthcare or-
ganizations, including the Institute of Medicine and the
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), to
call for improvement in communication skills among
healthcare workers, and they have provided strategies to-
ward that end. Furthermore, The Joint Commission has
included in its 2015 National Patient Safety Goals for
Hospitals a goal to “improve the staff communication”
(http://www.jointcommission.org/assets/1/6/2015_HAP_
NPSG_ER.pdf).
Given that communication is a part of everyday
work and an important requirement of patient safety,
organizations must recognize the value of teamwork and
work toward improving communication within the
team. In a team approach, each person recognizes the
boundaries of each discipline and values the contribu-
tion that every person makes. Methods of teamwork
must be adapted in the workplace to create an environ-
ment in which all levels of staff work together and 
respect each other’s opinions.
To achieve this atmosphere, team training can be pro-
vided. The U.S. Department of Defense, with assistance
from the AHRQ, developed a program known as Team-
STEPPS (http://teamstepps.ahrq.gov/), which stands for
Team Strategies and Tools to Enhance Performance and
Patient Safety. TeamSTEPPS is an evidence-based model
that gives instruction to healthcare professionals on how
to improve communication and teamwork skills. The goal
is to improve patient safety. Communication is an impor-
tant principle in this model. Because nurses are the man-
agers of patient care and are with the patient in healthcare
settings 24/7, they obtain a great amount of information
that must be communicated to other healthcare providers.
Nurses realize how important it is to communicate in a
clear fashion by thinking about the information that needs
106
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
BOX 6.3
Communication Barriers
●Giving false reassurance
●Oﬀering advice
●Probing
●Stereotyping
●Providing social comment
●Changing the subject
●Using jargon

to be shared and using a communication technique that
other individuals will be able to hear and accept.
Professional Collaboration
To work effectively in a team, nurses must understand
the concept of professional collaboration in the context
of today’s workplace. The Quality and Safety Education
for Nurses (QSEN) Institute defines teamwork and 
collaboration as the ability to “function effectively with
nursing and interprofessional teams, fostering open
communication, mutual respect, and shared decision-
making to achieve quality patient care” (http://qsen.org/
competencies/graduate-ksas/#teamwork_collaboration).
Collaboration is a complex process that requires indi-
viduals to be willing to share information about the 
patient from their own area of expertise. Each discipline
that cares for the patient has its own knowledge, skills,
and clinical experiences. Respect for each other’s knowl-
edge, skills, background, and clinical decision-making is
the backbone of a positive collaborative arrangement. It
is also important to find the common ground between
disciplines because there may be differing patterns of
communication (Grover, 2005). Individuals caring for
the patient bring unique contributions from the various
disciplines. Consider the following observation:
Collaboration is significantly more complex than 
simply working in close proximity to one another. It
implies a bond, a joining together, a union, and a de-
gree of caring about one another and the relationship.
A collaborative relationship is not merely the sum of 
its parts, but it is a synergistic alliance that maximizes
the contributions of each participant resulting in action
that is greater than the sum of individual works.
(Evans, 1994, p. 23)
Therefore, the challenge is to make the most of each
encounter and interaction so that the best knowledge and
ability of each team member are recognized and valued.
In addition to communication, other characteristics of
collaboration include accountability and mutual respect.
Each person must be accountable for his or her actions
and accept the results of his or her decisions or actions.
However, in the interest of the care of the patient, no
profession stands alone, and the use of good collaborative
skills is essential (Lindeke & Sieckert, 2006). Collabora-
tion allows the nurse to identify the contributions of 
the other disciplines and permits the integration of 
this information into the healthcare plan for the patient.
One study showed that as many as 85 to 95 percent of
healthcare workers do not feel able to speak up when
they see mistakes being made in patient care (Maxfield,
Grenny, McMillan, Patterson, & Switzler, 2005).
Nurses must make a concerted effort to have a col-
laborative relationship with team members, not just to
work in cooperation with them (Silva & Ludwick,
2002). They must value the other team members’ sug-
gestions and different perspectives. Using insights from
other disciplines and healthcare workers also helps 
enhance problem-solving skills. Collaboration with
other members of the healthcare team is essential for
the nursing profession to provide excellent healthcare
to all patients.
Workplace collaboration can be reflected on every level
of healthcare and is required to achieve cost-effectiveness,
quality improvement, and efficiency. Improving patient
care and creating gratifying work roles are added benefits.
Barriers to Communication 
with Colleagues
The many barriers to effective communication among
colleagues in healthcare include lack of time to commu-
nicate properly; stressful work environments of high 
patient acuity and staffing shortages; gender, genera-
tional, education, or cultural differences; and communi-
cation styles (e.g., nurses may give a more narrative
description of a patient’s condition, whereas physicians
may be more action oriented and want the problem to
be stated so that action can be taken) (Boaro, Fancott,
Baker, Velji, & Andreoli, 2010; Flicek, 2012; Nadzam,
2009). In addition, advances in technology have increased
the ways in which messages are delivered, including
text pagers, cell phones, and patient inbox messaging,
which can add to the complexity of communicating 
effectively (Flicek, 2012). 
Mutual respect is of utmost importance among all mem-
bers of the healthcare team and must be valued by each in-
dividual. In addition, all hierarchy must be eliminated
because a healthcare system that is hierarchal in nature does
not encourage collaborative practice. Hierarchy is also a 
barrier to communication. For example, some old-school
male physicians may still think that the nurse (traditionally
a position dominated by women) should be subservient and
have no contribution on a professional level.
In collaboration there is no implied supervision; it is a
two-way exchange of information. The relationship be-
tween individuals who are collaborating is nonhierarchical.
The power is shared and is based on the knowledge and
expertise that each individual brings to the setting, not on
role or title (Henneman, Lee, & Cohen, 1995). When
there is true collaboration in the workplace, the responsi-
bility for the patient is shared; the professionalism of all is
strengthened when each member of the group has partic-
ipated and has obtained success. The unique perspective
that each profession brings to a situation tends to result in
creative and practical solutions, and in turn, the patient’s
well-being is of utmost importance. To practice effective
communication in the workplace setting, each individual
must be willing to participate equally.
Strategies to Increase
Communication in Teamwork
Structured Communication Tools
The use of structured communication tools can help or-
ganize information, decrease hierarchy, and eliminate dif-
ferences in communication style. Standardized tools
provide strategies to improve the quality of communica-
tion between team members and prevent medical errors
(Boaro et al., 2010). Several tools are available. The SBAR
(Situation-Background-Assessment-Recommendation)
system is a format used to structure and standardize com-
munication between healthcare workers, especially during
CHAPTER 6 Effective Communication     ●
107

critical situations. Noncritical situation handoff and 
intershift reporting tools include the formats of “I 
PASS the BATON,” developed by TeamSTEPPS, and
ISHAPED, developed by the Institute for Healthcare
Improvement (IHI).
SBAR
The SBAR format provides a framework for communica-
tion between members of the healthcare team about a pa-
tient’s condition. It is particularly useful for reporting
changes in a patient’s status. Other common uses of SBAR
include “handoffs,” or changes of services. An example of
a handoff occurs when a patient is being transferred from
the emergency department and admitted to a bed on the
inpatient unit.
SBAR is easy to remember and useful for framing
any conversation, especially critical ones, requiring a
clinician’s immediate attention and action. It allows
users to organize information in a focused way to set 
expectations for what will be communicated and how it
will be communicated between members of the team,
which is essential for developing teamwork and fostering
a culture of patient safety. Nurses should organize fac-
tual data when presenting information to other team
members. The following is a breakdown for each SBAR
element:
●Situation: What is going on with the patient?
Mrs. Adams called me to her room to say that she feels
dizzy and her heart is racing.
●Background: What is the clinical background or 
context?
Mrs. Adams is a 72-year-old diabetic patient who has a
history of hypertension.
●Assessment: What do I think the problem is?
I think the problem is very likely related to Mrs. Adams’
heart and cardiovascular system.
●Recommendation: What would I do to correct it?
I think you should come to the unit to see Mrs. Adams to
examine her. We can also perform an electrocardiogram.
Intershift Report
Handoffs and intershift reports occur two to three times a
day or more. Intershift report is a face-to-face handoff be-
tween the oncoming and off-going nurses. Ineffective
handoffs have been identified as a barrier to patient safety
and quality by providing the potential for miscommuni-
cation, patient harm, and neglect (Thomas & Donahue-
Porter, 2012). Use of structured communication tools
assists healthcare workers to give complete and accurate
information.
“I PASS the BATON”
“I PASS the BATON” is a tool that was developed for the
TeamSTEPPS program to standardize communication in
patient care handoffs (Rawlings, 2011). It also can remind
clinicians of the key information and factors to include
during their medical handoffs. This tool promotes a cul-
ture that encourages staff to clarify, question, and confirm
information communicated about the patient. The com-
ponents of “I PASS the BATON” are as follows:
●Introduction
Introduce yourself and your role/job to the patient.
●Patient
Name, identifiers, age, sex, location
●Assessment
Presenting chief complaint, vital signs, and symptoms
and diagnosis
●Situation
Current status and circumstances, including code 
status, level of (un)certainty, recent changes, response
to treatment
●Safety Concerns
Critical laboratory values and reports, socioeconomic
factors, allergies, alerts (e.g., falls, isolation)
●THE
●Background
Comorbidities, previous episodes, current medications,
family history
●Actions
What actions were taken or are required, and brief 
rationale
●Timing
Level of urgency and explicit timing, prioritization of
actions
●Ownership
Who is responsible (nurse/doctor/team), including 
patient/family responsibilities
●Next
What will happen next; any anticipated changes; what
is the plan, including any contingency plans
Further explanation of this tool can be found online at
http://www.ahrq.gov/professionals/education/curriculum-
tools/teamstepps/instructor/fundamentals/index.html.
ISHAPED
The ISHAPED tool was developed by the INOVA
Health Systems in Falls Church, Virginia, with help from
the Picker Institute, for use during a handoff or intershift
report. The IHI chose the Picker Institute to develop sys-
tems to promote patient-centered and family-centered
healthcare. This tool is to be used at the bedside so that
the patient is involved in the report. Again, it assists
healthcare workers to communicate key information
while giving the opportunity for the receiver to clarify,
question, and confirm information. ISHAPED is an
acronym similar to SBAR. Its components are Introduc-
tion, Story, History, Assessment, Plan, Error Prevention,
and Dialogue.
The ISHAPED tool can be adapted to any clinical 
setting or system. The process should include the follow-
ing steps:
1. The handoﬀ happens at the bedside: S, H, A compo-
nents occur outside of the room; I, P, E, D components
occur in the room.
2. Clinical judgment and common sense are used to de-
termine whether a bedside component is inappropriate
for a particular patient.
3. The written ISHAPED handoﬀ template is completed
by the oﬀ-going nurse and given to the oncoming
nurse.
Additional information and tools are available at
http://www.ihi.org/resources/Pages/Tools/ISHAPEDPatient
CenteredNurseShiftChangeBedsideReport.aspx.
108
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

Other Techniques
The TeamSTEPPS approach teaches other strategies
that promote teamwork and thereby increase patient
safety. A technique using CUS words presents a method
in which a team member can resolve conflict, advocate
for patients, and give mutual support. Techniques of
face-to-face gathering of the team for a review of the
plan before the event, problem solving during the event,
or process improvement after the event are strategies
that can promote every team member being on the 
same page.
CUS Words
CUS words were developed in the TeamSTEPPS program
to provide another framework for conflict resolution, 
advocacy, and mutual support. CUS words are signal words,
similar to “danger,” “warning,” and “caution.” Using CUS
words, nurses can signal the need to stop, address real or
potential risks, and avoid patient safety events. CUS words
are C = I am concerned, U = I am uncomfortable, and 
S = there is a safety issue. They catch the listener’s atten-
tion. When CUS words are spoken, the team member or
members will understand clearly not only the issue 
but also the magnitude of the issue. The process of this
technique is as follows:
●First, state your concern.
●Then state why you are uncomfortable.
●If the conflict is not resolved, state that there is a 
safety issue. Discuss in what way the concern is related
to safety. If the safety issue is not acknowledged, a 
supervisor should be notified.
Briefs-Huddles-Debriefs
Under the construct of Leadership, the TeamSTEPPS 
program outlines three techniques used to promote team-
work. These are the brief, huddle, and debrief.
Brief is defined as a short planning session before 
the beginning of an event (AHRQ, 2012). The
“briefing” can be used to discuss who is on the
team, assign roles and responsibilities, establish 
expectations, and review the plan. If there is a
“checklist,” as with some procedures or in the 
operating room, these can also be completed at 
this time.
Huddle is deﬁned as an informal, unplanned team meet-
ing. There can be several reasons that a team would
use a huddle, including reinforcing a plan already in
place for the treatment of a patient, refocusing team
members to the plan of care, providing updated in-
formation requiring adjustment of the plan, and as-
sessing the need to change plans. Huddles also aﬀord
team leaders an opportunity to informally monitor
patient and unit-level situations that occur (AHRQ,
2012).
Debrief is deﬁned as a feedback or informal information
exchange session that occurs shortly after an event
(AHRQ, 2012). It is designed to improve team per-
formance and eﬀectiveness, focusing on what went
well, what did not go well, and what can be done in
the future to improve performance.
Nurses will be increasingly challenged to become
skilled team players as the delivery of care becomes more
complex. With various team members coming from dif-
ferent perspectives, effective communication is essential
to positive patient outcomes and will result in creative
and practical solutions (Pagana, 2011). Take the time
and effort to learn from others’ perspectives and to en-
courage new team members to share their experiences.
Basic therapeutic techniques of communication are es-
sential; nurses must be aware of the variables of gender,
hierarchy, and collegiality and have basic mutual respect
for each member of the health team. Nurses should con-
tinue to demonstrate that the nursing profession is
unique and that nurses bring a different perspective to
the patient’s care. The attitudes and skills associated
with collaborative relationships can be learned if all par-
ties are willing to participate.
CHAPTER 6 Effective Communication     ●
109
ON LIN E CON SULT 
The American Communication Journal at 
http://www.acjournal.org/
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
Kalisch, Lee, and Rochman describe nursing teams on acute care patient units, noting that a higher level of
teamwork and perceptions of adequate staffing lead to greater job satisfaction with current position and occu-
pation. Teamwork and perceptions of adequate staffing were reported as the major contributors to job satis-
faction on acute care units (p. 945).
Question: How will you use this information as a nurse or nurse-manager to improve communication and
collaboration on your unit?
Source: Kalisch, B. J., Lee, H., & Rochman, M. (2010). Nursing staff teamwork and job satisfaction. Journal of Nursing 
Management, 18, 938–947.

110
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
K E Y  P O I N T S
●Effective communication within the nurse-patient relationship is a learned skill and is essential for provid-
ing effective nursing care.
●Communication models illustrate the complex process of communication with the basic components: the
source/encoder, the message, the medium, and the receiver/decoder.
●The health communications model uses a broad systems view of communication and emphasizes the
way in which a series of factors (relationships, transactions, and contexts) can affect interactions in the
healthcare setting.
●When people share information, they express messages in a complex composite of both verbal (spoken
or written) and nonverbal behaviors. Individuals express themselves through language, gestures, voice 
inflection, facial expressions, and use of space.
●Metacommunication is a broad term used to “describe all of the factors that influence how the message
is perceived” (Arnold & Boggs, 2011, p. 163).
●Oral communication is the use of words by people to think about ideas, to share experiences with 
others, and to validate the perceptions of the world.
●Potter and Perry (2013) state that the six most important aspects of verbal communication are 
(1) vocabulary, (2) denotative and connotative meaning, (3) intonation, (4) pacing, (5) clarity and
brevity, and (6) timing and relevance.
●Nonverbal communication is communication without words and includes messages that are created
through body motions, facial expressions, use of space and sounds, and use of touch. Arnold and Boggs
(2011) categorize areas in which nonverbal behaviors are used: touch, proxemics, nonverbal body clues,
facial expression, and clothing.
●For patients to perceive touch in a positive therapeutic relationship, Northouse and Northouse (1998)
suggest that nurses use the following guidelines: use touch that is appropriate to the particular situation,
do not use a touch that imposes more intimacy on a patient than he or she desires, and observe the 
patient’s response to the touch.
●Therapeutic communication is a purposeful form of communication that serves as a point of contact 
between the health professional and the patient and allows them to reach health-related goals through
participation in a focused relationship. Techniques include active listening, restatement, reflection, focus-
ing, encouraging elaboration, looking at alternatives, use of silence, and use of appropriate questions.
●Barriers to communication are certain responses that may lower the patient’s self-esteem, limit full 
disclosure of patient information, and block communication. These barriers include giving false reassur-
ance, giving advice, probing, stereotyping, providing social comment, changing the subject, and using 
jargon.
●Collaboration in the workplace depends on working in cooperation with other members of the health-
care team. The power is shared and is based on the knowledge and expertise that each member brings
to the setting; mutual respect is of utmost importance for successful communication.
●Several tools have been developed for teams to enhance and improve their communication, including 
the SBAR, ISHAPED, and CUS words for critical communication and handoffs and briefings, huddles, and
debriefings techniques for short team discussions.
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Contrast various communication models for use in the hospital versus the home setting.
2. Explain how nonverbal communication may be more “powerful” than spoken words.
3. Describe a collaborative relationship that you have experienced in your work setting.

CHAPTER 6 Effective Communication     ●
111
4. Read Coeling and Cukr’s (2000) article “Communication Styles That Promote Perceptions of Collaboration, 
Quality, and Nurse Satisfaction” in the Journal of Nursing Care Quality 14(2), 63–74. Form a study group and 
discuss the various aspects of this evidence-based practice study. How does this affect your workplace issues?
What new techniques could you introduce in your workplace?
5. Review the Chapter Thought on the first page of the chapter and discuss it in the context of the contents of the
chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.
REFERENCES
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). (2012).
TeamSTEPPS instructor guide. Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality, Rockville, MD: AHRQ. Retrieved
from http://www.ahrq.gov/professionals/education/
curriculum-tools/teamstepps/instructor/index.html
Andrews, M., & Boyle, J. (1999). Transcultural concepts in 
nursing care (3rd ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott.
Arnold, E., & Boggs, K. (2011). Interpersonal relationships: 
Professional communication skills for nurses (6th ed.).
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders/Elsevier.
Berlo, D. K. (1960). The process of communication: An introduc-
tion to theory and practice. New York: Holt, Rinehart &
Winston.
Birdwhistell, R. L. (1970). Kinesics and context. Philadelphia,
PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Boaro, N., Fancott, C., Baker, R., Velji, K., & Andreoli, A.
(2010). Using SBAR to improve communication in inter-
professional rehabilitation teams. Journal of Interprofessional
Care, 24(1), 111–114.
Buerhaus, P. I., DesRoches, C., Applebaum, S., Hess, R., 
Norman, L. D., & Donelan, K. (2012). Are nurses ready
for health care reform? A decade of survey research. 
Nursing Economic$, 30(6), 318–329.
Bush, K. (2001). Do you really listen to patients? RN 2001,
64(3), 35–37.
Cardillo, D. (2009). Projecting your professionalism. NSNA
Imprint, 30–31. Retrieved from www.nurse.com
Craven, R., & Hirnle, C. (2009). Fundamentals of nursing:
Human health and function (6th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: 
Lippincott-Raven.
Evans, J. (1994). The role of the nurse manager in creating an
environment for collaborative practice. Holistic Nursing
Practice, 8, 22–31.
Flicek, C. L. (2012). Communication: A dynamic between
nurses and physicians, MedSurg Nursing, 21(6), 
385–387.
Greenberg, C. C., Regenbogen, S. E., Studdert, D. M., 
Lipsitz, S. R., Rogers, S. O., Zinner, M. J., & Gawande, A. A.
(2007). Patterns of communication breakdowns resulting in
injury to surgical patients. Journal of the American College of
Surgeons, 204, 533–540.
Grover, S. (2005). Shaping effective communication skills and
therapeutic relationships at work. American Association of
Occupational Health Nurses Journal, 53(4), 177–187.
Hall, E. T. (1959). The silent language. Garden City, NY: 
Doubleday & Company.
Henneman, E. A., Lee, J. L., & Cohen, J. I. (1995). Collabora-
tion: A concept analysis. Journal of Advanced Nursing,
21(1), 103–109.
Institute of Medicine. (2010). The future of nursing: Leading
change, advancing health. Retrieved from http://www.iom.edu/
Reports/2010/The-Future-of-Nursing-Leading-Change-
Advancing-Health.aspx 
Kalisch, B. J., Lee, H., & Rochman, M. (2010). Nursing 
staff teamwork and job satisfaction. Journal of Nursing
Management, 18, 938–947.
Ku, L., & Flores, G. (2005). Pay now or pay later: Providing
interpreter services in health care. Health Affairs, 24(2),
435–444.
Lindeke, L., & Sieckert, A. (2005). Nurse-physician workplace
collaboration. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing. Retrieved
from http://www.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/
ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/TableofContents/
Volume102005/No1Jan05/tpc26_416011.html
Mangum, S., Garrison, C., Lind, A., Thackeray, R., & Wyatt,
M. (1991). Perceptions of nurses’ uniforms. Image: The
Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 23(2), 127–130.
Maxfield, D., Grenny, J., McMillan, R., Patterson, K., &
Switzer, A. (2005). Silence kills: The seven crucial conversa-
tions for healthcare. Vital Smarts, E45. Retrieved from
http://www.aacn.org/WD/practice/docs/publicpolicy/
silencekills.pdf
Mehrabian, A. (1981). Silent messages (2nd ed.). Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth Publishing.
Mitchell, R. W. (1991). Bateson’s concept of metacommunica-
tion in play. New Ideas in Psychology, 9(1), 73–87.
Nadzam, D. (2009). Nurses’ role in communication and patient
safety. Journal of Nursing Care Quality, 24(3), 184–188.
Northouse, P. G., & Northouse, L. L. (1998). Health 
communication strategies for health professionals (3rd ed.).
Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange.
Pagana, K. (2011). The nurse’s communication advantage.
Indianapolis, IN: Sigma Theta Tau International.
Potter, A., & Perry, G. (2013). Fundamentals of nursing
(8th ed.). St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
Rawlings, T. (2011). Passing the baton to standardize handoffs.
OR Nurse, 5(4), 48.
Rizk, K., & Bofinger, R. (2008). Florence Nightingale versus
Dennis Rodman: Evaluating professional image in the 
modern world. Annual Review of Nursing Education, 6,
189–204.
Ruesch, J. (1961). Therapeutic communication. New York: 
W. W. Norton.

Silva, M., & Ludwick, R. (2002). Ethics Column. Ethical ground-
ing for entry into practice: Respect, collaboration, and 
accountability. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing. Retrieved
from http://www.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/
ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/Columns/Ethics/
GroundingforEntryintoPractice.html
Thomas, L., & Donohoe-Porter, P. (2012). Blending evidence
and innovation: Improving intershift handoffs in a multi-
hospital setting. Journal of Nursing Care Quality, 27(2),
116–124. doi: 10.1097/ngc.obolse318241obsb
Watson, J. (1979). Nursing: The philosophy and science of caring.
Boston, MA: Little, Brown.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Brown, G. (1995). Understanding barriers to basing nursing
practice upon research: A communication model approach.
Journal of Advanced Nursing, 21, 154–157.
Buttaro, T. (2008). Primary care: A collaborative practice
(3rd ed.). St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
Leininger, M., & McFarland, M. (2002). Transcultural nursing:
Concepts, theories, research and practice (3rd ed.). New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Lindberg, J., Hunter, M., & Kruszewski, A. (1983). Introduction
to person-centered nursing. Philadelphia, PA: J. B. Lippincott.
Peplau, H. (1952). Interpersonal relations in nursing. New York:
G. P. Putnam’s Sons.
Peplau, H. (1960). Talking with patients. American Journal of
Nursing, 60, 964–966.
Riley, J. (2008). Communication in nursing (6th ed.). St. Louis,
MO: Mosby Elsevier.
Salle, A. (1999). Effective communication. In B. Cherry & 
S. Jacob (Eds.), Contemporary nursing issues, trends, and
management (pp. 378–402). St. Louis, Mo: Mosby.
Stapleton, S. (1998). Team-building: Making collaborative
practice work. Journal of Nurse-Midwifery, 43(1), 12–18.
United States Census Bureau. 2007-2011 American Community
Survey, Table B16001.
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
(2008). Indiana income limits [Data file]. Retrieved from
http://www.huduser.org/Datasets/IL/IL08/in_fy2008.pdf
ONLINE RESOURCES
The American Communication Journal
http://www.acjournal.org
Institute for Healthcare Improvement
http://www.ihi.org/Pages/default.aspx
The TeamSTEPPS program, available free of charge from the
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)
http://www.ahrq.gov/teamstepps
The Quality and Safety Education for Nurses (QSEN) Institute
http://qsen.org/
112
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Explain what the term critical thinking means.
2. Describe some important characteristics of the critical thinking process.
3. Discuss the relationships between the nursing process and critical thinking.
4. Apply the components of critical analysis to a given nursing practice situation.
5. Analyze problem-solving skills needed in nursing practice case studies.
Critical Thinking
Reflective Thinking
Reactive Thinking
Problem Identification
Data Collection
Hypothesis Testing
Moral Reasoning
Induction
Deduction
Assumption Identification
Concept Formation
Interpretation of Data
Application of Principles
Interpretation of Feelings, Attitudes,
and Values
113
“The whole science is nothing more than 
a refinement of everyday thinking.”
Albert Einstein, Physics and Reality (1936)
Key Terms
Critical Thinking
●Genevieve M. Bartol
7

The National League for Nursing mandates that schools
of nursing demonstrate that critical thinking is taught
and measured for accreditation. Thinking is quite sim-
ply the action of the mind to produce thought. How,
then, does the adjective “critical” modify the word
“thinking”? Etymologically, critical is derived from 
two Greek roots: kriticos (discerning judgment) and 
kriterion (standards). Critical also has several connota-
tions. Critical, for example, can also be understood as
an inclination to find fault, as an essential element, or
as a careful analysis of a problem. There is even plenty
of discussion in the literature that the term critical think-
ing should be renamed. Nevertheless, however the term
is defined or described, there is general agreement that
critical thinking is a core skill that is essential for nursing
practice (Robert & Peterson, 2013, p. 85).
The concept of critical thinking dates back at least to
Socrates in ancient Greece. Dewey (1910, 1933) prompted
educators to pay attention to how we think and to teach
students how to think. Glaser’s (1941) and Black’s (1952)
writings represent efforts to integrate critical thinking into
education (cited in Cassel & Congleton, 1993). Paul
(1990) reviewed the efforts to teach reasoning in the 1930s
and the 1960s. McPeck (1990) pointed out that before
1980, few schools were concerned with teaching critical
thinking, and even fewer theoretical analyses of the concept
existed. According to McPeck (1990), he had to search 
disparate sources to find any sustained published discus-
sions of critical thinking (p. 1) when he researched the topic
in 1979–1980. In 1990, Facione and Facione (1996) 
gathered a panel of 48 educators and scholars, including
leading figures in critical thinking theory, to work toward
a consensus on the role of critical thinking in educational
assessment and instruction.
Facione and Facione (1996) reported that the expert
researchers and theoreticians described critical thinking 
as the purposeful, self-regulatory judgment that results in
interpretation, analysis, evaluation, and inference, as well
as the explanation of the evidential, conceptual, method-
ological, criteriological, or contextual considerations on
which that judgment was based (p. 129). Rubenfeld and
Scheffer (2010) used a Delphi process to arrive at a con-
sensus statement and the components of critical thinking.
They determined that critical thinking is “an essential
component of professional accountability and quality
nursing care” (p. 32). They also identified 10 critical
thinking habits of mind and seven critical thinking skills.
As you read this chapter, you will see that despite this
statement, the literature is replete with definitions and de-
scriptions of critical thinking. The proliferation of journal
articles, monographs, essays, conference papers, and books
devoted to exploring critical thinking in nursing testifies
to the current interest but also suggests that a closer look
at the term is warranted. We generally recognize that the
professional practice situations that nurses encounter daily
are characteristically complex, rapidly changeable, ambigu-
ous, particular, and rife with conflict. We increasingly ac-
cept the fact that patients are dynamic systems within an
energy field that includes family, workplace, environment,
culture, and life history. We know that nurses base their
practice decisions on a broad pool of knowledge derived
from a variety of disciplines. The scope and standards of
holistic nursing practice define critical thinking as “an 
active, purposeful, organized cognitive process involving
creativity, reflection, problems solving, both rational and
intuitive judgment, an attitude of inquiry, and a philo-
sophical orientation toward thinking about thinking”
(Mariano, 2013, p. 59). 
With the holistic nursing practice definition in mind,
we will expand on and detail the context and role of crit-
ical thinking in nursing.
CRITICAL THINKING IN
NURSING
Nurses have been long taught to use the nursing process
to guide their practice. The nursing process provides 
a structure for using knowledge and thinking to provide
holistic care for individuals, families, groups, and com-
munities. The process can be used with all theoretical 
frameworks and patients in all settings. Although its com-
ponents may be expressed in slightly different ways, the
nursing process is basically a problem-solving method that
has served nurses well by helping them use empathic and
intellectual processes with scientific knowledge to assess,
diagnose, plan, implement, and evaluate nursing care and
patient outcomes. When used appropriately, the nursing
process involves critical thinking. For example, a nurse ob-
serves that a patient who underwent surgery 2 days ago
has suddenly become agitated. The nurse will consider sev-
eral possible reasons for the agitation. He or she will speak
with the patient, note anything that occurred before the
onset of agitation, and gather assessment data, such as vital
signs and signs of bleeding at the surgical site. The nurse
will then determine what intervention is needed and eval-
uate whether the chosen intervention is effective. Using
the nursing process in this manner requires active engage-
ment and cannot just be a matter of filling in the columns.
Rather, the person using the process must be able to rec-
ognize relationships, connections, and patterns that pro-
mote continuous bidirectional movement and openness
to new possibilities. 
New scientific understandings of living systems show
that our former mechanistic view of the world is inade-
quate (Bartol & Courts, 2013). Human beings are com-
plex, highly integrative systems that are embedded in and
supporting other systems. Schuster (2002) noted that the
commonly used five-column format in nursing care plans
was not promoting critical thinking (p. vii). Care plans
using this format were lengthy to write, time consuming,
and too often simply copied from a book. Furthermore,
the column format seemed to promote linear thinking and
failed to address the patterns and connections essential to
providing holistic nursing care. 
Schuster (2002) proposed using a diagrammatic teach-
ing and learning strategy to enable students and faculty to
visualize the interrelationships among medical diagnoses,
nursing diagnoses, assessment data, and treatments. In a
three-step process, the major medical diagnoses and the
problems that resulted from those diagnoses were identi-
fied (step 1), the data were organized into a hierarchy of
subordinate concepts (step 2), and the meaningful associ-
ations among concepts were indicated with lines and the
114
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

nursing diagnoses selected (step 3). Schuster called this
strategy concept mapping and suggested that it promoted
critical thinking. This visual map serves as a personal
pocket guide to patient care that can be revised as needed
throughout the day. The development of this process il-
lustrates the use of critical thinking to promote critical
thinking in students of nursing. 
The increasing diversity and complexity of nursing
practice and the exponential growth of knowledge require
nurses who can think critically. Nurses must master the
reasoning skills needed to process growing volumes of in-
formation. When nurses assess patients, the data they
gather need to be organized into meaningful patterns. Re-
sponses to treatment and care need to be evaluated con-
tinuously to determine whether the nursing diagnosis was
appropriate and the intended outcome achieved. In the
patient situation described previously, the patient may
have injured himself when he bumped into the corner of
the bedside table while trying to get to the bathroom with-
out assistance and is bleeding internally from injury to his
spleen. Even one additional piece of information related
to the patient may change the whole configuration and re-
quire a redefinition of the problem. In nursing, situations
change so rapidly that reliance on conventional methods,
procedure manuals, or traditions to guide judgments
about the appropriate nursing action required is insuffi-
cient. Although decision trees may serve as reminders for
the nurse, they cannot be relied on without using critical
thinking. Although the nursing diagnoses categorized by
major functional health patterns serve as useful tools and
aid in communication with coworkers in planning and im-
plementing nursing care, they are not sufficient. Not even
evidence-based practice relieves us of the need for critical
thinking. Individual differences must always be consid-
ered. Taleb (2010) argues that we must always be alert to
the highly improbable and that as we draw on evidence-
based practices for a particular condition, we need to keep
in mind the problem of the “circularity of statistics” 
(p. 269). To illustrate further: At one time it was believed
that all swans were white. The single sighting of a black
swan invalidated that general statement and points to the
fragility of our knowledge. There may well be an outlier,
and we need to remain open to surprise (Taleb, 2010, 
p. xvii). Furthermore, the writings of Malcom Gladwell
serve to remind us to be alert to how we make judgments
(Gladwell, 2005) and how our judgments can change with
a change in perspective (Gladwell, 2013). The question
always remains whether you have enough data to justify
confidence in your decision. Remember, as noted previ-
ously, that an additional piece of data may change the
whole configuration. We need to always keep in mind our
limitations. Furthermore, Gladwell (2005) cautions us
that we must understand that we all have not one mind
but two, and while our conscious mind may be blocked
at one point, our unconscious mind is busy scanning the
situation, sifting through possibilities, and processing every
conceivable clue (p. 71). Sometimes the direction in which
a situation turns is due to factors not directly related to
the present problem and completely out of our scope of
awareness (Gladwell, 2009, pp. 101–125, 208–292). Al-
though we cannot wait to act until all the data are in, we
need to remain open to correction.
Johns (2013) offers a practical guide to developing 
reflective nursing practice. He explores the value of using
structured models of reflection to help the nurse center on
the context of care and to promote a caring relationship
with patients. The nurse is guided to pay attention to what
is unfolding and hence to use reflection as a continual
process of assessment or awareness of the shifting and pat-
terns of the patient’s experience (p. 213). In what ways has
your nursing intervention altered the present state? Has
the analgesia you administered made a difference? Or has
your lack of presence and concern about another patient
tempered the effectiveness of the analgesia you adminis-
tered? According to Johns, the nurse should use narrative
to critically assess his or her own practice.
Then again, Taleb (2013) warns us to be alert to the
narrative fallacy in which we become so focused on a single
outcome that we fail to imagine other possible outcomes.
Quite simply, a critical thinker needs to be able to tolerate
ambiguity and remain open to surprises.
By now you realize that critical thinking requires 
attention to many factors. Complex legal, ethical, organi-
zational, and professional factors are involved in seemingly
simple decisions. For example, nurses consider ethical fac-
tors (e.g., keeping patient information confidential) and
scheduling factors (e.g., when to admit visitors) when they
decide not to admit visitors to a unit between 10 a.m. and
12 noon because patients are participating in a support
group in the commons room. Visitors passing by the com-
mons room may compromise patient confidentiality.
Nurses make inferences, differentiate facts from opin-
ions, evaluate the credibility of the sources of information,
and make decisions, all skills that require critical thinking.
Because each of these skills can be learned, at least to some
extent, an individual can enhance his or her potential to
become an effective critical thinker. We develop critical
thinking skills through attention and practice. Even
though our skills increase, at no time can we rest assured
that we have finished learning and are thus incapable of
making the wrong decision (Gladwell, 2009, p. 291;
Nance, 2008, pp. 11–24).
Nursing is sometimes described as a boundary disci-
pline because it draws heavily on knowledge from the sci-
ences and humanities. Using information from one subject
to shed light on another subject requires critical thinking
skills. Nursing is concerned with human beings—highly
complex integrative, yet open systems—whose care re-
quires a holistic orientation that attends to cyclic processes
and patterns in networks of relationships and not just signs
and symptoms. Consequently, nursing curriculums gen-
erally include courses from the liberal arts as well as from
the sciences. Readers Theater has served to help nurses and
physicians heighten awareness of and develop compassion
for patients and their families and thus enlarge their per-
spective (Savitt, 1969). According to oral tradition, it is
believed that legislators in early Greece were required to
attend the theater for those very purposes.
Conceptually, it may be argued that general critical
thinking abilities enhance the ability to make good clinical
judgments. Nurses can apply theoretical knowledge to a
specific clinical situation, thereby enhancing clinical judg-
ment and decision-making skills. The ability to apply
learning from a broad range of disciplines enables nurses
CHAPTER 7 Critical Thinking     ●
115

to expand and modify existing knowledge to accommo-
date new situations as well as simplify or speed up the task
of learning and performing in new situations. For exam-
ple, orthopedic nurses use critical thinking when applying
knowledge of physics (principles related to levers, ful-
crums, and balance in positioning and moving patients),
biology (characteristics of a bone in the early stages of 
healing), and psychology (ways of helping patients manage
the anxiety related to increasing mobilization) when safely
transferring a patient recovering from a serious car acci-
dent. Because educational programs cannot provide 
students with all of the clinical experiences and all of the
information they need to handle every future nursing 
situation they will encounter, students must learn to be
critical thinkers.
Critical thinking includes analyzing and evaluating the
soundness of the written information and expressed opin-
ions we encounter. We cannot assume that because the
information is published it is valid. We need to identify
the strengths and weaknesses in the author’s argument
and the evidence that is presented. We need to examine
any assumptions that the author may have made. We
need to consider the patient’s context as well as our own
for those times when a convenient shortcut is needed
(Gladwell, 2002, p. 257).
Definitions
What is critical thinking? Some nursing educators would
argue that it is really the same as the nursing process
(Jones & Brown, 1993; Kintgen-Andrews, 1991; White,
Beardslee, Peters, & Supples, 1990; Woods, 1993). 
Others insist that although the nursing process requires
critical thinking, critical thinking is much more. It is
generally maintained, however, that critical thinking is
a valuable skill or set of skills capable of being learned
and enhanced (Facione & Facione, 2000; Robert & 
Peterson, 2013; Rubenfeld & Scheffer, 2010; Schuster,
2002; Wilkinson, 2001).
Still, critical thinking is often considered a special, even
rare, skill. Although the characteristics of critical thinking
match those of sound clinical judgments, a review of 
the nursing literature indicates that there is no general
agreement about what critical thinking is. Definitions
abound in the nursing literature; Table 7.1 gives a sam-
pling. The definitions have common elements. Critical
thinking is viewed as engaging in a purposeful cognitive
activity directed toward establishing a belief or map of ac-
tion. Each definition speaks to the need for a person to
process and evaluate information actively, to validate 
existing knowledge, and to create new knowledge. Each
echoes Dewey’s (1933) urging to use reflective thinking
of the kind that turns a subject over in the mind and gives
it serious and consecutive consideration (p. 3). All are 
consistent with Dewey’s definition of reflective thinking
as active, persistent, and careful consideration of any belief
or supposed form of knowledge in the light of the grounds
that support it and the further conclusions to which 
it tends (Dewey, 1933, p. 9). All suggest using a thought
chain (Dewey, 1993, p. 4) that aims at drawing conclu-
sions. Critical thinking is a process that is engaged in not
for itself, but rather for the purpose of providing quality
patient care. A thought chain refers simply to the process
of moving methodically from one thought to another
while remaining open to multiple possibilities. Quite sim-
ply, one considers, reflects, decides, and yet remains open
to changes, always keeping in mind that one additional
piece of data can change the whole configuration and send
the process in a new direction.
Different elements are also evident in the definitions
and descriptions offered in the nursing literature. Some
seem to equate critical thinking with reactive thinking
(Kataoka-Yahiro & Saylor, 1994; Kintgen-Andrews,
1991). Reactive thinking implies a response to what is,
and not to what may yet be. Most view critical thinking
as a focused, rational analysis of existing knowledge with
very specific steps (Bandman & Bandman, 1994; Kataoka-
Yahiro & Saylor, 1994; Kintgen-Andrews, 1991). One
refers to creating new knowledge (Case, 1994), whereas
another implies that only existing knowledge is uncovered
(Bandman & Bandman, 1995). Jones and Brown (1993)
examine alternative views on critical thinking, arguing that
it is both a philosophical orientation toward thinking and
a cognitive process characterized by reasoned judgment
and reflective thinking (p. 72). 
The discussion about critical thinking continues. The
many definitions and descriptions suggest that consensus
on the role of critical thinking in nursing has not been
reached (Paul & Elder, 2008; Robert & Peterson, 2013;
Mariano, 2013). 
Descriptions
The following statements gleaned from the literature
and the author’s own thinking are an attempt to provide
a fuller description of the role of critical thinking in
nursing.
●Critical thinking is directed toward taking action. 
Although it is often associated with scientific reason-
ing, which includes problem identification, data 
collection, and hypothesis testing, it is not limited to
that activity. Critical thinking also includes the affec-
tive processes of moral reasoning and development of 
values to guide decisions and actions.
●Critical thinking presumes a disposition toward
thinking analytically. Uncritical acceptance of all
data is antithetical to critical thinking. An attitude
that welcomes intellectual skepticism and honesty 
is essential. Separating or breaking the whole into
parts to uncover the nature, function, and relation-
ships is helpful as long as one maintains a sense of
the whole.
●Critical thinking embraces thinking about how we
think. We need to monitor our approach to the prob-
lem and our reasoning process. An error in reasoning
may be as serious a barrier to finding a solution as a
116
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
O N L I NE  C ONSULT  
Refer to the Interactive Exercises from Chapter 5,
on a thoughtful critique of research for evidence-
based practice, for questions that may help you
critically analyze what you read.

miscalculation in determining a proper drug dose. 
We should critique the process as well as the proposed
solution. Bandman and Bandman (1994) identify 
fallacies or errors in thinking that one should identify,
expose, and resist. To illustrate: A nurse reports that 
all the laboratory tests for a patient came back negative
and implies, therefore, that the patient’s symptoms
must be “all in her head.” The fallacy of the appeal to
ignorance consists in arguing that the absence of proof
against a diagnosis establishes proof that the patient’s
symptoms are imaginary.
●Critical thinking assumes maturity. Psychology re-
minds us that our thinking styles evolve as we grow
and develop. We think concretely before we think
abstractly. The ability to think abstractly is requisite
to critical thinking. We accept many beliefs as chil-
dren simply because an adult told us they were true.
Only as we grow do we question and examine those
beliefs. We need to reach the place where we have
confidence in our reasoning abilities.
●Critical thinking requires knowledge. A broad educa-
tional foundation and a healthy intellectual curiosity
are prerequisites. A solid educational foundation needs
to be informed by common sense and experience as
well as knowledge of one’s own biases and limitations
(Alfaro-Lefevre, 2013). Zealousness in seeking knowl-
edge and understanding through careful observation
and deliberate questioning with openness to possibili-
ties is essential (Rubenfeld & Scheffer, 2010).
●Critical thinking requires skills. We need to know 
how to gather and evaluate data. We need to distin-
guish facts from opinions and probe the assumptions
behind a line of reasoning. We need to know how to
draw inferences from facts and observations, evaluating
them as tenable or not. Precision is important. Know-
ing a fact is insufficient; we need to know how that
fact was obtained and from where it was derived. We
need to identify what data are missing. Throughout
the process, we need to suspend judgment until all the
evidence is weighed, even as the situation requires ten-
tative action. There are many ways to view a problem.
The way we view a situation influences our proposed
solutions.
●Critical thinking, however, is more than a set of
skills. Syllogistic thinking, inductive and deductive
reasoning, analysis, and synthesis are used, but other
styles of thinking are also needed. According to Lon-
ergan (1977), imagination is the highest function of
the intellect and precedes all other thinking activities.
Certainly, critical thinking uses imagination. Using 
a metaphor such as a computer or a holograph to 
describe a function of the brain, for example, can
provide additional insight into the process. Critical
thinking is creative. We reach original solutions by
drawing from past experiences and making creative
applications to new situations.
●Critical thinking includes feelings because they are 
inseparable from all thinking and behavior. Feelings
CHAPTER 7 Critical Thinking     ●
117
TABLE 7.1
Definitions and Descriptions of Critical Thinking
Definition 
“The rational examination of ideas, inferences, assumptions, principles, 
arguments, conclusions, issues, statements, beliefs and actions” (p. 5).
“Reflective and reasonable thinking about nursing problems without a single 
solution and is focused on deciding what to believe and do” (p. 352).
“A process and cognitive skill that functions in identifying and defining problems 
and opportunities for improvement; generating, examining and evaluating 
options; reaching conclusions and decisions, and creating and using criteria to 
evaluate decisions” (p. 101).
“Reasonable and reflective thinking that is focused on deciding what to believe 
or do” (p. 152).
“A process that encompasses a holistic perspective of the entire person—
composed of skills, abilities, beliefs, attitudes, goals, emotions, and experiences. 
In addition, critical thinking involves the ability to view the situation from a 
holistic perspective” (p. 377).
“Critical thinking is the process of purposeful, self-regulatory judgment. This 
process gives reasoned consideration to evidence, contexts, conceptualization, 
methods and criteria” (ERIC Document Reproduction No. ED 315).
“Critical thinking is an active, purposeful, organized cognitive process, involving 
creativity, reflection, problem-solving, both rational and intuitive judgment, an 
attitude of inquiry, and a philosophical orientation toward thinking about 
thinking” (p. 59).
Source, Date
Bandman & Bandman, 1994
Kataoka-Yahiro & Saylor, 1994
Case, 1994
Kintgen-Andrews, 1991
Thurmond, 2001
Facione, 1990
Mariano, 2013

cannot be eliminated or viewed as an inconvenience
that complicates the activity of critical thinking, but
rather are an integral part of all we do. Our feelings
can alert us to possibilities and lead us to creative solu-
tions (Bartol, 1986; Lonergan, 1977). To illustrate: A
busy staff nurse realized that she could not take time to
listen to an elderly patient who began to tell her about
his career as a pilot beginning in the 1940s. He was de-
scribing in detail the early planes he piloted. Anxious
to meet the needs of her other patients, she told the
patient that she had to take care of her other patients,
but that she knew someone who would very much 
like to hear what he had to say. With his permission
she called her teenage son who aspired to become a
pilot and handed the patient the phone. The patient
and her son talked for almost 2 hours to the benefit 
of both.
●Critical thinking frequently involves finding fault.
Questions, disagreements, and even arguments may 
be included in the process. Critical thinking always
challenges the status quo. Seeking the truth even if the
consequences are contrary to one’s assumptions and
beliefs is essential.
●Critical thinking considers the complexity and ambi-
guity of issues. At the same time, critical thinking seeks
to identify the essential elements and exclude whatever
is irrelevant to the matter being considered. Valid con-
clusions cannot be drawn or appropriate action taken
unless one knows what is to be considered.
●Critical thinking is a contextual activity. We must be
aware of our own context and how it influences our
thinking. Our social environment, past and present,
may bias our thinking, and we must be aware of how
this occurs and deal with it appropriately. We do not
think in a vacuum.
●Critical thinking is inseparable from language because
it is applied to language and expressed through lan-
guage (Smith, 1990). Attention should be directed to
the meaning of words. Words often acquire connota-
tive meanings that over time may differ radically from
their original meanings.
●Critical thinking is not always a self-conscious activity.
We may not be aware when we are engaging in critical
thinking, or even alert to its absence. Moreover, we
often unconsciously work on problems and reach 
solutions without knowing precisely how we arrived 
at them until we reflect on the process. Intuition is 
frequently an invaluable guide in highly stressful situa-
tions. Gladwell (2005) notes that whenever we are
faced with making a decision quickly and under stress,
we make the decision unconsciously (p. 12).
●Critical thinking is not an esoteric activity. It is some-
thing everyone does to some degree at least some of 
the time. Written guidelines, decision trees, algorithms,
and critical pathways formalize the critical thinking
process but cannot contain it wholly. Thinking criti-
cally is not just a solitary activity. We expose our beliefs
and actions, and the thinking that helped us arrive at
those beliefs and actions, to the scrutiny of others. We
invite this criticism in different ways—for example, 
by sharing with colleagues in a discussion or writing a
report. We often need others to help us see our errors.
●Critical thinking is a habit that improves with proper
use and withers with disuse. In the beginning, we use
structure to guide our practice. As we gain proficiency,
structure diminishes, but we must continue practicing
to improve or even maintain our ability to think criti-
cally. Following established protocols in a crisis situa-
tion may be helpful but can interfere with recognizing
new data.
●Critical thinking includes reflection or contemplation—
that is, giving serious thought to a situation with the
clear knowledge that even one small additional piece of
data may change the whole configuration.
All of these characteristics of critical thinking are present
during the process of critical thinking. We may be more
conscious of one particular characteristic at a specific point
during the process, but the others remain in the back-
ground, influencing the outcome. The habit of critical
thinking includes drawing from one’s unconscious mind
(Gladwell, 2005, p. 12).
Measures of Critical Thinking
How do you know if you are thinking critically? Evalua-
tion takes into account the purpose for which the infor-
mation is gathered, and then a suitable technique is
chosen. Many paper-and-pencil objective tests have been
designed to measure generic competency in critical think-
ing, but not specifically in nursing. The Watson-Glaser
Critical Thinking Appraisal (W-GCTA), the California
Critical Thinking Inventory, and the Cornell Critical
Thinking Tests Levels X and Z are the most widely known
and used (Norris & Ennis, 1989). The central aspects of
critical thinking—induction, deduction, and assumption
identification—are included in all three, but only the 
California Critical Thinking Inventory (Facione, Facione,
& Sanchez, 2000) attempts to measure the disposition 
toward critical thinking. These tests, however, are limited
and are used mostly for research and not primarily to
measure achievement. Probably the best way to increase
your critical thinking ability is to critique how you are
thinking and to practice critical thinking. Rubenfeld and
Scheffer (2010) offer a critical thinking inventory that may
help you examine and hone your critical thinking skills
(pp. 211–214).
DEVELOPING CRITICAL
THINKING SKILLS
Critical thinking skills can be developed. Nursing is a prac-
tice discipline. A body of knowledge is gained from classes
and study and applied in the clinical setting. Information
drawn from personal experience in the clinical setting in-
forms this body of knowledge. None of the knowledge in
either setting is obtained automatically. Information must
be cultivated, organized, and conscientiously arranged by
using critical thinking.
Raingruber and Haffer (2001) suggest four strategies
that nurses can use to develop critical thinking skills. First,
nurses can reflect on accounts of other nurses’ clinical ex-
periences. The narratives may be in the form of oral or
written accounts and may include anything from a simple
118
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

story of a clinical event to a detailed case study. Such 
activities enable you to reach across time and space to
broaden your base of knowledge before you encounter
those experiences in your clinical practice. 
Second, nurses can develop critical thinking skills by
applying Brookfield’s (1995) three critical thinking
processes:
●Securing contextual awareness and determining what
needs to be observed and considered
●Exploring and imagining alternatives
●Questioning, analyzing, and reflecting on the rationale
for decisions
Third, use mind maps as a visual learning tool. As-
sociations that play a major role in nearly every mental
function help you to identify the key elements in a sit-
uation and prompt you to generate solutions. For exam-
ple, you anticipate an assignment in a clinical setting in
which you have not previously worked. You are experi-
encing some anxiety before the assignment. You recall
being in a similar situation in the past and take steps to
reduce your anxiety. You may call a friend for support,
review appropriate material in a nursing text, imagine
several scenarios that you may encounter during the as-
signment, and visualize successfully providing quality
care to your patients. Briefly, you would rehearse caring
for your patients in your mind in anticipation of pro-
viding actual care.
Fourth, you can keep a journal of your clinical experi-
ences, noting your concerns about how you coped with
particular situations and your reflections about what you
could do to improve the care you delivered. Opportunities
to reflect in writing help to clarify meanings and promote
increased understanding. Examining your reasoning and
actions in writing reinforces learning and enables you to
draw on knowledge gleaned from such an activity in future
clinical situations. Even examining a brief process record-
ing of the verbal exchange you had with a patient can help
you gain insight into your style of communication and
what you can do to improve.
Critical thinking can also be enhanced through the
arts. In their psychiatric mental health textbook, Frisch
and Frisch (2011) use literary excerpts, movie clips, and
classic art pieces to stimulate critical thinking and self-
exploration. In doing so, the authors encourage the readers
to enter the patient’s world to understand the process and
effects of psychiatric disturbances on an individual’s over-
all health and functioning.
Readers are encouraged to examine how their own per-
sonal views and feelings influence their delivery of care.
THE NURSING PROCESS 
AND CRITICAL THINKING
Nurses can also develop a meaningful concept of infor-
mation and material needed to practice nursing by using
logical steps of the nursing process. Taba (cited in
Maleck, 1986) identifies four teaching phases necessary
for developing critical thinking. The first three phases—
concept formation, interpretation of data, and applica-
tion of principles—focus on the cognitive domain. The
fourth phase speaks to the affective domain and entails
interpretation of feelings, attitudes, and values.
1. Concept formation. Conception formation is similar
to the nursing process. First, the nurse needs to iden-
tify known data, determine common characteristics,
and prioritize data. 
2. Interpretation of data. Next, nurses are encouraged 
to diﬀerentiate between pieces of information they
gathered, determine cause-and-eﬀect relationships
among the information, if any, and draw tentative
conclusions.
These first two logical phases or steps in thinking prepare
nurses for the third phase.
3. Application of principles. Nurses analyze the nature of
the problem or situation. It is important to note that
nurses do not ask the analytic “why” questions until
this application phase. The premature use of why
questions produces deductive conclusions rather than
inductive alternatives. The question “Why does an 
infection cause an elevated temperature?” tends to 
lead to a rote response culled from classroom lectures
or the textbook. Conversely, a thought-producing
question such as “What factors related to an elevated
temperature suggest infection?” encourages nurses to
sift and combine cognitive knowledge to understand
an important clinical concept. Only after deﬁning 
the problem are nurses able to isolate the relationship
among the data. After these relationships are estab-
lished, nurses can apply factual information to predict
an outcome based on cognitive principles. This ap-
proach is not unlike the nursing process. However,
avoiding “why” questions and asking about “what 
factors” help the nurse avoid the trapdoor of drawing
premature conclusions.
4. Interpretation of feelings, attitudes, and values. The
fourth phase involves principles of interpersonal
problem solving and analysis of values. This activity,
although less concrete than the other three phases, is
imperative for determining the nature of attitudes
and perceptions developed through one’s life experi-
ences. For example, a nurse’s concern about a rising
temperature in a patient taking haloperidol (Haldol)
may be provoked by a past experience with a patient
who was taking the drug and developed neuroleptic
malignant syndrome. At this point, the nurse needs
to gather additional data to confirm or rule out the
possibility that the rising temperature is a sign of
malignant hyperthermia in the present patient, and
not leap to a premature conclusion. Additionally, the
nurse must be open to other possible explanations
for the elevated temperature. Appropriate action is
then taken, including gathering additional data when
indicated. Once again, this approach helps prevent
the common pitfall associated with using the nursing
process: drawing conclusions based on a formula that
does not allow for different possibilities. In other
words, it avoids the trap of fitting the patient into
the textbook model.
These phases have been described in terms of steps, but
they can occur almost simultaneously. Sequencing and
CHAPTER 7 Critical Thinking     ●
119

pacing questions are essential in critical thinking. Sequenc-
ing questions is important because the processes of
thought evolve from the simple to the complex. Clinical
instruction should follow a carefully sequenced set of ex-
periences and questions. As mentioned earlier, asking
“why” questions prematurely would only bring premature
closure. The principle of pacing allows nurses to match
questions to their levels of readiness and cognitive ability.
To accommodate pacing, nurses must pursue each ques-
tion long enough to permit a variety of responses. In this
way, they become active participants in the thinking
process, and not simply vessels for facts.
A closer look at the nursing process shows that follow-
ing it appropriately involves critical thinking. The five
steps of the nursing process are as follows:
1. Assessment
2. Diagnosis
3. Planning
4. Implementation
5. Evaluation 
This process provides a framework for identifying and
treating patient problems. The nursing process is an on-
going and interactive cycle that results in dynamic nurs-
ing care for all patients. Assessment is the foundation of
the process and leads to the identification of both nursing
diagnoses and collaborative problems. Nursing diagnosis
provides the primary focus for developing patient-
specific individualization of patient goals. The planning
process allows for individualization of patient goals and
nursing care within the context of managed care guide-
lines. Implementation involves providing nursing actions
to treat each diagnosis. Ongoing evaluation determines
the degree of success in achieving the patient goals and
the continued relevance of each nursing diagnosis and
collaborative problem.
The implementation of the nursing process requires
complex clinical and diagnostic knowledge and applica-
tion of critical thinking skills (Box 7.1). One should be
able to think outside the box rather than simply apply for-
mulas gleaned from textbook information. Textbook in-
formation is often based on the mythical average and can
serve only as a general guide; individuals are much more
varied. Learning and applying these skills are a continuing
challenge for the nurse and require much practice. If the
nurse uses the diagnostic reasoning process appropriately,
the result will more likely be effective nursing interven-
tions leading to desirable patient outcomes.
Nurses must be critical thinkers because of the nature
of the discipline and their work. Nurses are frequently
confronted with problem situations; critical thinking en-
ables them to make sound decisions. During the course of
a workday, nurses are required to make decisions of many
kinds. These decisions often determine the health of pa-
tients and even their very survival, so it is essential that the
decisions be sound. Critical thinking skills are needed to
assess information and plan decisions. Nurses need good
judgment, for example, to decide what they can manage
and what should be referred to another healthcare
provider. Nurses deal with rapidly changing situations in
stressful environments. Treatments and medications are
modified frequently in response to a patient condition.
Routine behaviors are often inadequate to deal with the
complex circumstances. Familiarity with the routine for
giving medications, for example, does not necessarily help
you intervene appropriately with a patient who is afraid
of injections. When unexpected complications arise, crit-
ical thinking ability helps nurses recognize important cues,
respond quickly, and adapt interventions to meet specific
needs.
Nurses use knowledge from other subjects and fields.
Using insight from one subject to shed light on another
subject requires critical thinking skills. Because nurses
deal holistically with human responses, they must draw
meaningful information from other subject areas to un-
derstand the meaning of patient data and plan effective
interventions. Nurses need knowledge from neurophys-
iology, social sciences, psychology, and nutrition, for 
example, to assist patients effectively who are severely
depressed.
Case studies offer us excellent opportunities to use
critical thinking. The case study presented in Box 7.2
contains data about Mr. Jones, a patient admitted to the
same-day surgery unit for repair of a right inguinal hernia.
To determine the appropriate care for Mr. Jones, the
nurse should organize her thoughts and actions as illus-
trated. The nurse must use critical thinking in determin-
ing appropriate data collection, assessment, nursing
diagnoses, and interventions for the care of the patient
and his family. Clearly, critical thinking is used in every
step of the nursing process as nurses collect, cluster, and
analyze data and formulate nursing diagnoses. Critical
thinking enables the nurse to provide high-quality care
that is appropriate, individualized, creative, sensitive, and
comprehensive.
120
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
BOX 7.1
Critical Thinking with the Nursing
Process
Assessment
●List the signiﬁcant assessment ﬁndings: objective
and subjective.
●Cluster the signiﬁcant assessment data by functional
health patterns.
●What general problem does the patient have?
●Develop data clusters for each of the general problems
identiﬁed.
Nursing Diagnosis
●From the clustered data, develop at least two diag-
nostic hypotheses using accepted nursing diagnosis
labels.
●Evaluate each of the diagnostic hypotheses by 
writing and comparing the deﬁnitions and applica-
ble deﬁning characteristics of each diagnosis.
●Write complete nursing diagnosis statements, by 
priority.
Planning
●Plan appropriate nursing interventions.
Implementation
●Implement appropriate nursing interventions.
Evaluation
●Evaluate the outcomes.

CHAPTER 7 Critical Thinking     ●
121
BOX 7.2
Case Study Mr. Jones
Health History and Range of Symptoms
Mr. Jones is a 45-year-old married man, employed as a supervisor with Parrish Construction Company. He is
brought by his wife to the same-day surgery unit for a presurgery assessment the day before his scheduled surgery.
His breath smells of alcohol.
Chief Concern
“I need to get this surgery over with. We have a big job to do at work, and it will be my butt if it is not completed
on schedule. I plan to cut down on my drinking. I know I drink too much sometimes, but it’s because of the pain
from this thing.” (Patient points to area of hernia.)
History of Present Illness
Mr. Jones was sent by the nurse from the construction company to the surgeon, Dr. Judge. Mr. Jones had experi-
enced periodic pain and swelling in his right groin area for at least 5 years and several times has seen the employee
health physician, who told him he had a right inguinal hernia that should be repaired. He admits to experiencing 
decreased appetite and insomnia for the past 10 days.
Social and Family History
Mr. Jones’s father died of cirrhosis at the age of 52 years. His mother is 80 years old and has a history of diabetes.
Mr. Jones is the youngest of six children. One brother died at birth, another died at age 6 years of a tumor, and a
third brother was a heavy drinker. Two sisters are alive and well.
Mr. Jones has been married to his second wife for 9 years; they have no children. His second wife has three boys,
aged 12, 14, and 16 years, who live with her ﬁrst husband and have no contact with Mr. and Mrs. Jones.
Mr. Jones has ﬁve children by his ﬁrst marriage; all are alive and well, living with his ﬁrst wife. He pays $50 a
week for child support for each child. The children visit him every other weekend.
There is no family history of tuberculosis, hypertension, epilepsy, or emotional illness.
Review of Systems
General: No current change in weight and usually feels good, except when the hernia acts up.
Skin: No symptoms.
Eyes: He wears glasses for reading.
Ears: No symptoms.
Nose: No symptoms.
Mouth and Throat: Experiences recurrent episodes of hoarseness. Denies dysphagia.
Neck: No symptoms.
Respiratory System: Denies pain, dyspnea, palpitations, syncope, or edema.
Gastrointestinal System: Reports eating only three “good meals” during the past 10 days. Appetite is good when not
drinking. Denies food intolerance, emesis, jaundice, ﬂatulence, diarrhea, constipation, or melena.
Genitourinary System: No symptoms.
Neurological: See “History” and “Interview with Signiﬁcant Other.”
Physical Examination
Mr. Jones is a 45-year-old white man with a dark complexion and a ruddy face who appears chronically ill. He is mildly
intoxicated and appears anxious. Weight is 136 pounds; height is 5 feet, 10 inches; temperature is 98.8ºF; pulse is 
92 beats/minute; regular respirations are 20 breaths/minute and not labored; and blood pressure is 160/90 mm Hg.
Skin: Well hydrated and without lesions.
Head: Normocephalic.
Eyes: PERRLA. Vision corrected with glasses. Visual acuity decreased to 3 mm print at 18 inches on the left and 
4 mm print at 18 inches on the right. Extraocular movements full; no nystagmus is noted. Visual ﬁelds are 
intact as tested per confrontation. Conjunctivae are slightly injected. Sclerae clear. Lenses are without opacities 
bilaterally. Funduscopic examination reveals the discs normally cupped and no vascular changes bilaterally.
Ears: External ears symmetrical, without lesions. Otic canal is clear. Tympanic membrane pearly gray bilaterally.
Hearing is within normal limits per watch tick at 6 inches.
Mouth and Throat: Lips, tongue, and buccal mucosa are pink and moist. Teeth are brown, crooked. Gingivae are 
atrophic. No inﬂammation of posterior nasopharynx.
Nose: Nasal septum in the midline. Nares are patent bilaterally. Sinuses not tender.
Neck: Full mobility and no signiﬁcant lymphadenopathy. Thyroid not enlarged, without nodules.
Chest: Bony thorax is without deformity or tenderness. Respiratory movement is full, and diaphragmatic excursion is
adequate bilaterally. Lungs are clear to percussion and auscultation.
Cardiovascular: The PMI is in the ﬁfth intercostal space of the LMCL. NSR without murmurs or gallops.
Abdomen: Abdomen is soft and ﬂat. Bowel sounds are heard in four quadrants. Liver is descended 5 cm below the
costal margin. No splenomegaly, tenderness, or mass. Surgical scar present in right lower quadrant.
Genitourinary: Normal male genitalia. No hernia palpated.
Rectal: Internal and external hemorrhoids noted at 5- and 7-o’clock positions. Normal sphincter tone. Anal canal
free of tenderness. Prostate is in the midline, ﬁrm without nodules, not enlarged.
Continued

122
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
BOX 7.2
Case Study Mr. Jones—cont’d
Extremities and Back: Muscular development symmetrical. Normal in appearance, color, and temperature. Peripheral
pulses palpable and symmetrical. Free of varicosities and edema.
Neurological: Speech is slurred, sensorium somewhat cloudy. Cranial nerves II through XII are intact as tested per
gross screen. Moderately tremulous. Biceps, triceps, brachioradialis, patella, and Achilles reﬂexes are symmetrical
but brisk. Babinski’s reﬂexes are down bilaterally.
Significant Laboratory Findings
Blood alcohol level: 0.29 U/L; Stool guaiac: negative; ECG: sinus tachycardia, otherwise WNL; Chest x-ray: no active
chest disease; Coulter-S: Hgb 16.0 g/dL (H), HCT 48.2% (H), MCV 101 m3 (H); CL 92 mEq/L (L); Uric acid 
8.04 mg/dL (H), SGOT 90 U/L (H); Liver panel: GGT 66 IU/L (H); Urine: bacteria 21, WBC 8–12.
Interview with Significant Other
According to Mrs. Jones, Mr. Jones works out of town from Monday morning to Thursday evening. When he returns
home, he begins to drink. He does not drink during the workweek. Mrs. Jones related the following incidents of the
past 10 days, which occurred when her husband was intoxicated: ran all of the children out of the home into the 
rain, scuﬄed with brother-in-law, and brandished a shotgun after an argument. Mrs. Jones reports that she left her
husband in June but returned to him about 4 weeks ago. She has never attended Al-Anon but has reviewed informa-
tion from the Alcoholism Information Center. This is the second marriage for Mrs. Jones; her ﬁrst husband and her
father were alcoholics.
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
Use of critical thinking in nursing involves careful and effective assessment skills. One of the National Guideline
Clearinghouse (2013) guidelines calls for a comprehensive health assessment for adults and children with sus-
pected social anxiety disorders. Social anxiety disorders are defined as: “persistent fear of or anxiety about one
or more social or performance situations that is out of proportion to the actual threat posed by the situation”
(NGC, 2013, p. 1). Following this, intervention and practices are recommended. 
Question: How will you use your critical thinking skills in conceptual care mapping for this individual?
Source: National Guideline Clearinghouse. (2013). Social anxiety disorder: Recognition, assessment and treatment. Retrieved from
http://www.guideline.gov/content.aspx?id=46234&search=detailed+health+assessment
K E Y  P O I N T S
●Critical thinking has been defined and described by many scholars. It is multifaceted and involves a combi-
nation of logical, rhetorical, and philosophical skills and attitudes that promote the ability to determine
what we should believe and do.
●Critical thinking is essential for professional nursing practice. The need for critical thinking in nursing has
greatly increased with the diversity and complexity of nursing practice. Reflective thinking is the “active,
persistent, and careful consideration of any belief or supposed form of knowledge in the light of the
grounds that support it and the further conclusions to which it tends” (Dewey, 1933, p. 9). 
●Reactive thinking implies a response to what is, and not to what may yet be. 
●Critical thinking is often associated with scientific reasoning, which includes problem identification, data
collection, and hypothesis testing, but it is not limited to these activities. 
●The central aspects of critical thinking are induction, deduction, and assumption identification. 
●Concept formation is similar to the nursing process. First, the nurse needs to identify known data, 
determine common characteristics, and prioritize data. 
●Interpretation of data occurs when nurses differentiate between pieces of information, determine 
cause-and-effect relationships among variables, and extract meaning from what they have observed.
●Application of principles occurs when nurses analyze the nature of the problem or situation and apply
factual information to predict an outcome based on cognitive principles.
●Interpretation of feelings, attitudes, and values requires interpersonal problem solving and analysis of values.

CHAPTER 7 Critical Thinking     ●
123
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Give an example from your clinical practice for five of the descriptive statements of critical thinking. 
2. Select a nursing issue, such as an open visiting policy in the surgical intensive care unit or family presence during a
code, and engage in a debate with a peer.
3. Select a problem at your place of work. Explore a solution to the problem with the help of a peer with whom 
you work. Analyze the problem-solving process you used to address the problem.
4. Review the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter and discuss it (online or in class) in the 
context of the contents of the chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.
REFERENCES
Alfaro-LeFevre, R. (2013). Critical thinking, clinical reasoning,
and clinical judgment: A practical approach (5th ed.). 
St Louis, MO: Saunders/Elsevier. 
Bandman, E. L., & Bandman, B. (1994). Critical thinking in
nursing (2nd ed.). Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange.
Bartol, G. M. (1986). Using the humanities in nursing 
education. Nurse Educator, 11(1), 21–23.
Bartol, G. M., & Courts, N. F. (2013). The psychophysiology
of bodymind healing. In B. M. Dossey, L. Keegan, & 
C. E. Guzzeta (Eds.), Holistic nursing: A handbook for 
practice (6th ed., pp. 705–720). Sudbury, MA: Jones &
Bartlett. 
Brookfield, S. (1995). Becoming a critically reflective teacher. 
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Case, B. (1994). Walking around the elephant: A critical think-
ing strategy for decision making. Journal of Continuing 
Education in Nursing, 25(3), 101–109.
Cassel, J. F., & Congleton, R. J. (1993). Critical thinking: An
annotated bibliography. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press.
Dewey, J. (1910). How we think. Boston, MA: D. C. Heath & Co.
Dewey, J. (1933). How we think. New York: D. C. Heath & Co.
Facione, N. C., & Facione, P. A. (1996). Externalizing the 
critical thinking in knowledge development and clinical
judgment. Nursing Outlook, 44, 129–136.
Facione, N. C., & Facione, P. A. (2000). Critical thinking 
assessment in nursing education programs: An aggregate data
analysis. Millbrae, CA: Academic Press.
Facione, N. C., Facione, P. A., & Sanchez, C. A. (2000) Test
manual: The California critical thinking skills test. Millbrae,
CA: California Academic Press.
Facione, P. (Project director). (1990). Critical thinking: A state-
ment of expert consensus for purposes of educational assess-
ment and instruction. The Delphi Report: Research findings
and recommendations prepared for the American Philosophical
Association (ERIC Doc. No. ED 315 423). Washington,
DC: ERIC.
Frisch, N. C., & Frisch, L. E. (2011). Psychiatric mental health
nursing (4th ed.). Clifton Park, NY: Delmar.
Gladwell, M. (2002). The tipping point: How little things can
make a big difference. New York: Little, Brown & Co.
Gladwell, M. (2005). Blink: The power of thinking without
thinking. New York: Little, Brown & Co.
Gladwell, M. (2009). What the dog saw and other adventures.
New York: Little, Brown & Co.
Gladwell, M. (2013). David and Goliath: Underdogs, misfits,
and the art of battling giants. New York: Little Brown & Co.
Johns, C. (2013). Becoming a reflective practitioner (4th ed.).
Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell Publishing.
Jones, S. A., & Brown, L. N. (1993). Alternative views on
defining critical thinking through the nursing process. 
Holistic Nursing Practice, 7(3), 71–76.
Kataoka-Yahiro, M., & Saylor, C. (1994). A critical thinking
model for nursing judgment. Journal of Nursing Education,
33(8), 351–356.
Kintgen-Andrews, J. (1991). Critical thinking and nursing 
education: Perplexities and insights. Journal of Nursing 
Education, 30, 152–157.
Lonergan, B. (1977). Insight: A study of human understanding.
New York: Harper & Row.
Maleck, C. J. (1986). A model for teaching critical thinking.
Nurse Educator, 11(6), 20–23.
Mariano, C. (2013). Holistic nursing scope and standards of
practice. In B. M. Dossey, L. Keegan, & C. E. Guzzeta
(Eds.), Holistic nursing: A handbook for practice (6th ed., 
p. 59). Sudbury, MA: Jones & Bartlett.
McPeck, J. E. (1990). Teaching critical thinking. New York:
Routledge.
Nance, J. J. (2008). Why hospitals should fly: The ultimate 
flight plan to patient safety and quality care. Bozeman, MT:
Second River Healthcare Press.
National Guideline Clearinghouse. (2013). Social anxiety disor-
der: Recognition, assessment and treatment. Retrieved from
http://www.guideline.gov/content.aspx?id=46234&search=
detailed+health+assessment
Norris, S. P., & Ennis, R. H. (1989). Evaluating critical 
thinking. Pacific Grove, CA: Midwest Press.
Paul, R. W. (1990). Critical thinking: Fundamental for a free
society. Educational Leadership, 41, 44.
Paul, R., & Elder, L. (2008). The miniature guide to critical
thinking: Concepts and tools. Tomales, CA: Foundation
for Critical Thinking Press.
Raingruber, B., & Haffer, A. (2001). Using your head to land on
your feet: A beginning nurse’s guide to critical thinking.
Philadelphia, PA: F.A. Davis.

Robert, R. R., & Peterson, S. (2013). Critical thinking at the
bedside: Providing safe passage to patients. MEDSURG
Nursing, 22(2), 85–118.
Rubenfeld, M. G., & Scheffer, B. K. (2010). Critical thinking
tactics for nurses (2nd ed.). Sudbury, MA: Jones & Bartlett.
Savitt, T. (1969). Readers Theater. Iowa City, IA: University of
Iowa Press.
Schuster, P. M. (2002). Concept mapping. A critical-thinking 
approach to care planning. Philadelphia, PA: F.A. Davis.
Smith, F. (1990). To think. New York: Teachers College Press.
Taleb, N. N. (2010). The black swan: The impact of the highly
improbable. New York: Random House.
Thurmond, V. A. (2001). The holism in critical thinking: A 
concept analysis. Journal of Holistic Nursing, 19(4), 375–389.
White, N. E., Beardslee, N. Q., Peters, D., & Supples, J. M.
(1990). Promoting critical thinking skills. Nurse Educator,
15(5), 16–19.
Wilkinson, J. M. (2001). Nursing process and critical thinking.
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Woods, J. H. (1993). Affective learning: One door to critical
thinking. Holistic Nursing Practice, 7(3), 64–70. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Adams, B. L. (1999). Nursing education for critical thinking:
An integrative review. Journal of Nursing Education, 38(3),
111–119.
Alfaro-Lefevre, R., & Juall, L. (2005). The nursing process 
made easy: Concept mapping and care planning for students.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Banfield, V., Fagan, B., & Jones, C. (2012). Charting a new
course in knowledge: Creating life-long critical core
thinkers. Dynamics 23(1), 24–28.
Barnet, S., & Bedau, H. (2004). Critical thinking, reading &
writing: A brief guide to argument. New York: Bedford/
St. Martins.
Beckie, T. M., Lowry, L. W., & Barnett, S. (2001). Assessing
critical thinking in baccalaureate nursing students: A longi-
tudinal study. Holistic Nursing Practice, 15(3), 18–26.
Bitner, N. P., & Tobin, E. (1998). Critical thinking: Strategies
for clinical practice. Journal for Nurses in Staff Development,
14, 267–272.
Bradley, H. E., & Taylor, L. A. (2013). The American health
care paradox: Why spending more is getting us less. New York:
Public Affairs.
Browne, M. N., & Keeley, S. M. (2003). Asking the right ques-
tions: A guide to critical thinking. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Person Education.
Chafres, J. (2005). Thinking critically. Boston, MA: Houghton 
Mifflin.
DeYoung, S. (2003). Teaching strategies for nurse educators.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Gerdeman, J. L., Lux, K., & Jackie, J. Using concept mapping
to build clinical judgment skills. Nursing Education in 
Practice, 13(2013), 11–17.
Gladwell, M. (2008). Outliers: The story of success. New York,
NY: Little, Brown & Co.
Green, C. J. (2000). Critical thinking in nursing: Case studies
across the curriculum. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Locsin, R. C. (2001). The dilemma of decision-making: 
Processing thinking critical to nursing. Holistic Nursing
Practice, 15(3), 1–3.
Nance, J. J., & Bartholomew, K. M. (2012). Charting the
course. Bozeman, MT: Second River Healthcare Press.
Nosich, G. M. (2004). Learning to think things through. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Patterson, B. J. (2013). Facilitating clinical reasoning in 
the skills laboratory: Reasoning model versus nursing
process-based kills checklist. Nursing Education Perspectives,
34(4), 265–267.
Porter, K. A. (1930). The jilting of Granny Weatherall. In
Flowering Judas and other stories (pp. 80–89). New York:
Harcourt, Brace.
Rew, L., & Barrow, E. M. (2007). State of the science: Intu-
ition in nursing, a generation of studying the phenomenon. 
Advanced Nursing Science, 30(1): E15–25.
Zori, S., & Morrison, B. (2009). Critical thinking in nurse 
managers. Nursing Economics, 27(2), 75–80.
ONLINE RESOURCES
Prince George’s Community College
http://academic.pg.cc.md.us/~wpeirce/MCCCTR/
The Critical Thinking Community
http://www.criticalthinking.org/
124
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Explain the techniques for effective communication in group settings.
2. Evaluate personal communication patterns used with patients and colleagues in a group.
3. Describe different types of groups, including their characteristics and roles of group members.
4. Differentiate between effective and ineffective groups and the characteristics of an effective group
leader.
5. Evaluate communication patterns in a group for effective functioning in meeting the group’s 
common goals.
Group
Group Process
Group Structure
Group Composition
Group Roles
Group Focus
Professional Groups
Work Groups
Educational Groups
Therapeutic Groups
Effective Groups
Goal Attainment
Member Participation
Cohesiveness
Decision Making
Communication Patterns
Attendance
Creativity
Power
Ineffective Groups
Stages of Group Development
Functional Task Roles
Functional Group-Building 
Roles
Nonfunctional Group Roles
Organizational Group
Virtual Meetings
125
“We communicate in many ways, especially when 
working with others toward a common goal.”
Rose Kearney-Nunnery
Key Terms
Working with Groups
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
8

Communication—verbal, nonverbal, and written—is
integral to working with individuals and groups.
DeWine, Gibson, and Smith (2000) identify four con-
texts or environments in which communication takes
place: interpersonal, group, organizational, and mass
communication. Nurses must be skilled in each of these
areas, from the interpersonal situation with a patient or
colleague, to small consumer or colleague groups, to
larger organizational settings, and, finally, to mass com-
munications with the public.
The concepts of effective group process are important
components in professional nursing practice and require
understanding of the types of groups, their composition
and functions, and the roles played by the members. As
nurses, we need to develop skills to use as both leaders and
members of various work and professional groups, as well
as to apply group process to intervene therapeutically with
patients. Working effectively with groups also addresses
the American Nurses Association (2010) Standards of 
Professional Performance concerning communication and
collaboration, both with patients and other healthcare
providers. Examining the group’s characteristics and eval-
uating the group’s effectiveness provide the knowledge and
skills needed to accomplish these goals. Note that under-
standing groups is an initial step in addressing the core
competency of working in interdisciplinary teams.
GROUPS
A group consists of three or more individuals with some
commonality, such as shared goals or interests. Living 
in society, we are members of many groups—family,
work, professional, and social. Each type of group has a
specific goal and membership. As nurses, we are involved
as participants in work groups and interact with groups
of individuals in their healthcare activities. We may 
also participate in therapy or support groups. We use the
principles of group process in all of these activities and in
assisting our patients. Some of these groups are structured
loosely, with minimal rules, whereas others have clearly
defined roles and limits. It is essential for the nurse to un-
derstand group processes to communicate, collaborate,
and function effectively in the group as both an individual
and a professional.
Group Process
Group process is the dynamic interplay of interactions
within groups of humans. Interplay includes what is said
and done in groups, as well as how members interact
with one another and the group leader. A group is actu-
ally a social system. Recall from Chapter 2 that systems
theory is concerned with holism as opposed to the iso-
lated parts. The basic components of a system are the
input, output, boundary, environment, and feedback. A
group, as a social system, is composed of people with
their unique characteristics and communication styles
but focused on the group goals as the output from the
system. And as Berlo (1960) pointed out in his classic
work on communication, “a knowledge of the composi-
tion and workings of a social system is useful in making
predictions about how members of that system will 
behave in a given communication situation” (p. 135).
This is particularly applicable to professional practice
with the nurses’ focus on the importance of working with
groups in a variety of practice settings—patient, family,
self-help, self-awareness, peer, and task groups.
Group Characteristics
Groups can be classified according to structure, composi-
tion, roles, and focus. A particular group often fits more
than one classification, especially in terms of its roles. For
example, the initial purpose of developing a cancer support
group might have been to provide the members with a
sense of sharing and support. But this type of group often
fills many other functions, such as education regarding
medications, traditional and nontraditional treatment pro-
grams, and healthcare providers; information sharing
about benefits, wills, and finances; and strategy sharing on
coping with symptoms and managing daily life.
Group Structure
Groups may be differentiated by group structure, such as
whether a group is formal or informal. Formal groups are
highly structured, with functions specified in job descrip-
tions, contracts, policies, and procedures. Formal groups
associated with nursing are the entire nursing staff and the
professional standards committee. Each of these groups
has particular requirements for membership and specific
rules, procedures, and standards of practice. A professional
group can also be viewed as a formal group, with require-
ments for membership, rules that govern meetings, and
specific member expectations. An advantage of structured
groups is their clear understanding of roles and expecta-
tions. This same benefit may become a disadvantage if 
the group is not open to changing to meet the needs of
the members. The leaders of more structured groups tend
to have greater power. By contrast, informal groups are
more loosely structured, at times disbanding or reconven-
ing according to the needs of the membership. Examples
of informal groups are special interest groups and support
groups. Informal groups benefit from some degree of 
flexibility in roles, expectations, and leadership.
Composition of Groups
Groups can also be differentiated by the unique composi-
tion of the membership. Group composition may be 
homogeneous or heterogeneous, depending on the char-
acteristics of the members. Members of homogenous
groups are similar in some aspect, such as all adolescent
male patients or female nurses employed in the intensive
care units. A benefit of working with a homogeneous
group is the sense of shared connection that the members
typically feel from the beginning. This sense may be ex-
pressed as “He has the same problem” or “She thinks the
same way I do.” Heterogeneous groups consist of a mix of
individuals, such as patients with various diagnoses or ages,
or a work group of both nurses and physicians working
with patients in a cardiac intensive care unit. This type of
group has a wider range of diversity and therefore usually
a greater variety of opinions, beliefs, and needs.
126
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

Facilitating a sense of connection among members is a
key challenge for the heterogeneous group. With a hetero-
geneous group, however, group members have the advan-
tage of learning from many different perspectives.
Roles for Members of the Group
A third way to classify groups is in terms of the leader and
participant group roles. Some groups are led by a profes-
sional who is responsible for instituting the rules, establish-
ing the structure, and determining the membership. There
are clear expectations for the leader and the participants.
An example is an outpatient recovery group, in which a
cardiac rehabilitation counselor leads the group, initiates
themes for discussion, and often sets criteria for member
participation. Other groups have informal leadership as
well as rules for members. Peer support groups are an 
example of this type. Traditionally, the leadership may be
shared by members, who are usually working on a common
issue. Members are free to attend or not, depending on
their own needs and schedules. At times, the group may
become engulfed in struggles for leadership, which can
compromise the group’s effectiveness.
Group Focus
Groups may also be classified according to their focus or
approach. The group focus can be work-related, educa-
tional, therapeutic, or professional. Professional organiza-
tions or nursing groups were described in Chapter 1, along
with their unique missions and membership requirements.
These professional groups are generally formal and are di-
rected at professional issues and at the objectives stated in
their mission statements. Work groups are task oriented,
focused on a particular work-related activity, as with a
nursing department budget committee and the task of 
allocating resources. Professional nursing organizations
may also have work groups focused on special projects 
assigned by the leadership of the organization.
Many of us are members of a variety of work groups.
Nurses on a particular unit constitute one group, whereas
the nursing department as a whole is another functioning
work group. Committees that meet monthly are probably
commonly viewed as work groups. They may be convened
ad hoc (as needed), or they may be more or less a perma-
nent standing group, such as the governance committee,
the safety committee, or the quality assurance committee.
The membership changes over time, and the structure
varies in level of formality. If the group is focusing on one
specific issue or task, members may be expected to fulfill
assigned roles. At other times there may be a more infor-
mal, shifting assignment of roles, as occurs in monthly staff
meetings on a care unit. Attendance varies, depending on
schedule, patient load, and the issues involved.
Educational groups have a teaching focus, whether
members are teaching patients about medications, treat-
ments, parenting skills, or a variety of health promotion
activities, or educating their colleagues in areas of expertise.
This type of group may actually convene only for an indi-
vidual session, if held in a clinic or institutional setting, or
it may have a series of sessions. An example is a stress 
reduction class for patients diagnosed with hypertension,
which is scheduled on a weekly basis in a clinic or out -
patient department. Membership and attendance vary de-
pending on educational needs and appointment schedules.
Although the group leader is a professional, the structure
is typically less formal and is directed at the learning needs
of the audience. Teaching and learning principles, dis-
cussed in Chapter 9, are important considerations, along
with the group process.
Therapeutic groups vary in nature, depending on the
specific treatment or patient needs. This group is led by 
a professional and is a formally structured group that typ-
ically specifies when members can join and when they can
leave the group. Examples of these groups are cognitive
therapy groups for depressed patients, behavioral therapy
groups for anger management, and therapeutic activity
groups, such as a music therapy group for patients who
have suffered cerebral vascular events. The group leader has
special training in the different therapeutic approaches
used. Advanced practice nurses (APRNs) can lead groups
in specific therapies as defined in practice standards and as
recognized by their state practice act.
Effective Groups
Effective groups have an identified purpose or need 
for the group and a commitment to the process. Once the
decision is made to form a new group, several issues are
involved in setting up or structuring the group. Arnold
(2011) terms this the pregroup phase, in which the 
following activities occur:
●Alignment of purpose and membership
●Determination of appropriate group size
●Creation of the appropriate environment
The first consideration is the purpose for forming the
group. This purpose must be clearly stated for specification
of the membership. Once the intended membership is 
determined, members can be recruited and goals set for
the group. The size of the membership must be appropri-
ate to addressing the group goals effectively. As noted by
Robert, Evans, Honemann, and Balch (2004) in their
guidelines on parliamentary procedure, once a group
reaches 12 to 15 people, meetings become more formal
and controlled (p. 4). In order to effect change, a profes-
sional group must be larger than a work group. A work or
therapeutic group becomes less effective when it grows too
large, becoming more heterogeneous and unable to focus
on the task or treatment aims. For some groups, the leader
also spends time interviewing potential members before
the initial meeting. This step serves as an orientation to
the group as well as a way to determine whether the indi-
vidual will “fit in.”
The room arrangement is another important factor for
creating the appropriate environment. When the room is
being set up, the goals of the group and interactions
needed among members should be considered. A large
conference table and chairs may be needed for a work
group, whereas placing chairs in a circle to allow individ-
uals to make eye contact without the barrier of a table is
imperative in many therapeutic groups. Neither of these
arrangements may be feasible or essential in an educa-
tional group.
CHAPTER 8 Working with Groups     ●
127

Other factors to consider in creating an effective group
include the following:
●The best meeting place and time for meetings
●Fees, dues, or cost factors
●Frequency and length of meetings
●Documentation needed for third-party payers or 
sponsoring organizations
An effective group will also determine whether there
will be a single leader or co-leaders. Those in favor of 
two-leader groups cite the enhanced ability to examine
dynamics, provide feedback, and manage absences of the
leader. Those against this style look at the possibility of
problems arising between these two individuals in terms
of power, equality, and accountability, with the potential
for splitting of the group, creating factions, and ineffective-
ness. The co-leaders need to understand their role, work
closely together, and consistently focus on the purpose 
of the group. The goal is to form a strong, viable group.
Before initiating a group, a nurse should consider all of
these concerns.
Evaluating Effectiveness
of Groups
Effective groups are those that work toward the stated
goals and whose members derive a sense of belonging and
acceptance. How these outcomes can be accomplished 
requires a closer look at behaviors, strategies, and goals. In
addition, organizations and third-party payers may deter-
mine their own criteria of effectiveness. General factors to
consider in determining effectiveness of any group are
identified in Box 8.1.
Goal attainment is the initial and most important
criterion in determining the effectiveness of any group.
It is an evaluation of whether the intended task or goal
was accomplished, especially in a work group. In a pro-
fessional association, goal attainment is focused on the
activities related to the organization’s mission and strate-
gic initiatives. In a therapeutic group, goal attainment
relates to the focus of the group, such as gaining insight,
awareness, or skills.
Member participation is another important criterion
for assessing the effectiveness of a group. Consider whether
all members are included in the discussion and what roles
they are playing as group members. On the other hand,
think about a situation in which an autocratic leader limits
the members’ ability to participate in the group discussions.
In an effective group, there is evidence of belonging, cama-
raderie, and acceptance. But participation does not imply
that all members should be in agreement on all issues.
“Group think” is the phenomenon by which all members
are in constant agreement, which can limit creativity and
lead to stagnation.
Cohesiveness among the group members indicates that
they are working together toward the group’s common
purpose or goal. If all members are not focused on the pur-
pose, the original goal for which the group was formed
will be difficult to attain, and conflict may arise. To
achieve cohesiveness, the group members must be refo-
cused on the original intent for the group, with the leader
and members supporting one another in their actions and
demonstrating agreement on the common goal.
In an effective group, decision making must occur at
the group level, with all members being involved in deci-
sions rather than unilateral actions being taken by the
leader or a disruptive member. A democratic leader and
involved, cohesive members directed toward the common
goal usually signify effective group functioning as they 
actively work toward that goal.
The communication patterns among the members
provide valuable information on whether there is a com-
mon focus, respect, and decision making. Evaluate how
the group’s decisions are made. The group leader should
facilitate effective communication patterns, thus allowing
all members to be heard and involved in the group process.
In some situations, the leader may ask each member if they
have something further to add to the discussion. In an 
effective group, members are actively involved in a mutual
communication process.
Attendance is regular and active in an effective group.
Members are punctual and involved, energetically focused
on the task or purpose of the group. When a group meet-
ing is arranged in advance, members in an effective group
honor their commitments to the meeting rather than
making excuses for not attending or demonstrating rou-
tine tardiness.
A high level of creativity among the members is an-
other sign of an effective group. The group members are
spontaneously generating novel ideas for solutions on the
common problem. Brainstorming sessions are focused on
the goals, and communication is encouraged, with all ideas
and contributions from members considered.
Typically, the leadership style in more effective groups
is described as democratic, and the interactions among the
members are interdependent and collaborative. Power
is distributed on the basis of the common purpose and
abilities of the members to achieve their goal in an effective
group. Power struggles disrupt group process, with mem-
bers focusing inwardly rather than working collaboratively
on the group’s goals.
Ineffective groups have low levels of productivity.
These groups contain much unrest and stagnation, and
members feel that they do not belong or that it is not safe
for them to share their thoughts, ideas, and feelings. The
group members demonstrate an uncaring attitude toward
one another, have little spontaneous involvement, or are
reluctant participants. The members do not appear to trust
one another, seem unwilling to take risks and, in work
groups, rarely volunteer for or willingly accept assignments.
128
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
BOX 8.1
Factors to Consider in Evaluating 
Effectiveness of Groups
●Goal attainment
●Member participation
●Cohesiveness
●Decision making
●Communication patterns
●Attendance
●Creativity
●Power

The attendance may be uneven, with a high rate of
dropouts and tardiness. The leadership style in less effective
groups is often described as autocratic or laissez-faire, and
the group interactions as independent and competitive.
THE BASICS OF GROUP
PROCESSES
Skills in group process are tailored to the developmental
stage of the group, and require effective leadership and
participation by the members.
The Stages of Group Development
Understanding the expected stages of group development
and how to facilitate groups during these stages is essential
to nursing practice, whether the nurse is a group member
or a leader. As with the developmental stages of individu-
als, groups go through predictable stages. In his classic
work, Tuckman (1965) identified five stages of group 
development: forming, storming, norming, performing,
and mourning or termination. Yalom and Leszcz (2005)
further describe the storming stage as one of conflict that
arises in the group. Arnold (2011) has further clarified the
stage of termination as one of adjournment that is more
applicable to the professional or work group. An effective
group leader must be aware of these stages and must mo-
tivate members and modify approaches accordingly.
We can use the traditional stages of the nurse-patient
relationship (initial, working, and termination), with the
addition of the conflict and norming stages before the
working phase, to understand the process of group 
development better. The stages of group development,
along with expected goals and examples of appropriate
nursing approaches, are illustrated in Table 8.1. Now,
let us consider the five stages of group development: 
initial or forming, conflict or storming, norming, work-
ing or performing, and termination or adjourning.
Forming
In the initial or forming stage, the group is being formed.
The members are becoming acquainted with one another,
the group, and the purpose and outcomes. Arnold (2011)
identifies the major group tasks during this forming stage
as establishing the group contract, developing trust, and
identification. The leader focuses on orienting the mem-
bers and determining the structure in terms of time, 
duration, and frequency of meetings, as well as the goals
for the group. Special educational resources may also be
provided in order that all group members have a similar
basis before the work of the group begins. Cohesiveness
of the group is enhanced by clearly stated goals and group
norms. Work groups require an introduction, identifica-
tion of goals and expectations, and orientation to the
structure. Patient groups also require this introduction and
orientation information, but issues of confidentiality and
personal disclosure are important considerations in the
forming stage. Another factor to consider is whether mem-
bers can join or leave at different times or whether all
members must begin and terminate together.
Storming and Norming
The next phase is the conflict or storming stage. This is
the time when members become more comfortable with
the group but may be ambivalent about the need for the
group and its intended goals. This ambivalence can 
be demonstrated by “testing” the authority of the leader
CHAPTER 8 Working with Groups     ●
129
TABLE 8.1
Group Stages, Expected Goals, and Nursing Techniques
Stage
Expected Goals
Nursing Techniques
Initial/forming
Sense of trust
Making introductions
Structuring group
Defining parameters and goals
Encouraging the sense of group
Conflict/storming
Sense of commitment
Encouraging verbalizations
Allowing interactions and role development
Handling confrontations and setting limits
Norming
Sense of purpose
Setting limits, rules, and expectations
Encouraging group cohesion
Working/performing
Sense of hope
Facilitating discussion
Identifying themes and progress
Refocusing as needed
Identifying processes
Termination/adjourning
Sense of accomplishment
Summarizing and evaluating goals
Facilitating transfer of knowledge and skills
Supporting closure

through questioning, skipping sessions, or coming late.
These issues must be dealt with openly and clearly so that
the group can settle into its work. This becomes the 
time of norming, with the identification of standards and
expectations of behavior. Some level of discomfort or con-
flict is often expressed overtly or covertly, until the group
becomes functional. All groups need this time to set norms
such as roles, rules, and structure.
Performing
The working or performance stage involves exactly that—
performance of the work of the group. In this stage, the
leader becomes less involved in running the group. The
members themselves decide what to discuss and how to 
address the goals and, to some degree, manage the group
themselves. Cohesiveness and creativity should be apparent
and encouraged. The leader’s role is one of facilitator to 
refocus and clarify as needed, handle problems and conflicts
if they arise, and identify the process as it develops. In this
process, members may avoid issues or tasks and engage in
disruptive reactions and behaviors. By bringing problems
and conflict out into the open, the participants can examine
these issues and make changes. Some groups establish dates
for each stage; others depend on the tasks and type of group.
Adjourning
Termination or adjourning is the formal ending of the
group. How long this stage lasts depends on the purpose
of the group and its duration. As in the orientation stage,
the group leader assumes an active role at this stage. The
goals are to assist the members in expressing what has been
accomplished and preparing for closure. This can be an
emotional stage, with some members striving for continual
closeness in some therapeutic groups or the continued 
camaraderie that is not experienced in the work setting.
On the other hand, some work-group members are 
relieved at having accomplished the intended goals.
The Role of the Group Leader
Role theory is applicable to groups in terms of both leader
and member roles. Recall that a group is a social system. As
such, the leader and the members will assume selected roles
based on expectations, gender, and learning. Roles are 
simply behaviors and expectations in a specific situation. In
the case of the group, the roles of the leader and members
reflect the group’s identified structure, composition, focus,
and associated expected roles. The role of the leader can set
the expectations for the group as the social system.
Leadership is an essential consideration for the viability
of many groups. One consideration is whether the leader has
been selected externally or determined internally through
group consensus. This appointment status may affect both
the leader and member behaviors within the group. Other
factors that may influence the particular leadership style
adopted by an individual are the person’s personality and
skills, the purpose of the group, and the characteristics of the
group and the participants or members.
Traditional group leadership styles have been described
as democratic, autocratic, or laissez-faire. Group leaders
often use a combination of styles or modify their style de-
pending on the group membership or the topic being dis-
cussed. With a democratic leadership style, the leader
shares the authority and decision-making tasks with mem-
bers. A democratic leader seeks greater participation by
and feedback from group members. One of the benefits
of this style is that it typically produces a greater sense of
satisfaction among members. On the other hand, the need
to have consensus or agreement may impede the progress
of the group by monopolizing the discussion.
An autocratic leadership style is one in which the leader
makes all pertinent decisions, informs members of the
rules, and structures the sessions. This style can facilitate
the group effectiveness and goal achievement because the
expectations have been clearly delineated and actions con-
trolled. At the same time, it may limit group interaction
and lead some members to feel that they are disenfran-
chised and that their opinions are not valued.
The laissez-faire leadership style is unstructured, allow-
ing members a great deal of freedom and the ability to
come and go at will. This style might also involve a change
of leader from session to session, which can be effective
with a highly functional, goal-directed population but will
not work well with poorly focused or unmotivated groups.
Regardless of the leadership style, characteristics of an
effective group leader include the ability to understand the
dynamics of the group, listen attentively, focus on the
goals, and facilitate the progress of the group. Again, effec-
tive communication and interpersonal skills are vital attrib-
utes of an effective leader. The maintenance of group
morale is a major role of the group leader.
Leadership Tasks and Skills
Consider the leadership tasks and skills necessary to manage
a group successfully by analyzing the group’s purpose,
structure, member participation, communication, and goal
attainment. One of the first tasks for the group leader is to
establish a structure that will promote an effective working
relationship. The leader is also responsible for securing a
meeting place, deciding the length and frequency of meet-
ings, and determining the goals for the group. These goals
must be clearly communicated to the members so that they
can assume their roles. At times, goal determination may
be delayed to allow members to participate in goal devel-
opment. The leader must also physically set up the room
or ensure that effective arrangements have been made. As
discussed earlier, the arrangement of the physical environ-
ment is crucial in some groups.
Another critical task for the group leader at this point
is to orient the members to the group and its expectations
and to allot sufficient time for the group to form before
initiating work. The leader can accomplish this by ensur-
ing that the interactions among the members during the
initial period of forming remain on a superficial level while
the members become acquainted. The stages of forming,
storming, and norming may be much briefer in a work
group, but the leader must ensure that there is some time
for the members to settle in. This may be accomplished
in one meeting, but some allowance for introductions and
getting to know one another is important, regardless of
the group’s focus.
130
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

Leadership skills are essential to facilitate the group in
its deliberation and discussion for decision making. En-
suring participation by all members, avoiding premature
closure on the topic, and recognizing the recurring themes
are important activities for an effective group leader. The
leader can set the tone for the level of communication,
whether superficial or personal, as well as set limits on 
appropriate and unacceptable communication styles. The
leader uses techniques such as restatement, reflection, clar-
ification, collaboration, and problem-solving while always
attempting to promote open communication among the
members. Another useful technique for the leader is role
modeling for the group members on how to provide con-
structive feedback. In this way, the group leader is actually
teaching the members effective communication skills.
Attaining group cohesiveness is another skill of the suc-
cessful group leader. Coming together as a group and 
focusing on the common goal or purpose are reinforced by
the effective group leader. This cooperative and cohesive
group esprit de corps can occur and endure when the group
leader provides the positive, supportive, and encouraging
lead or model for the group. Conflict can arise in any type
of group and must be managed. The best resolution entails
a “win-win” situation with a solution satisfying to both
sides. Conflict is a challenge for the group leader to direct
the members in creative problem-solving for both effective
and satisfying group process. Nurses commonly face con-
flict situations in work-group settings and need to keep in
mind the four functional problems that Turniansky and
Hare (1998) identified—meaning, resources, integration,
and goal attainment—as well as the four “must” activities
to address these problems with groups in organizations:
●An overall meaning of the activity that sets both a 
direction and boundaries for the group
●Resources adequate for the task
●Integration in the form of role differentiation and level
of morale for the group members to work together
●Enough coordination of the resources and the 
integration functions to provide for goal attainment.
(Turniansky & Hare, 1998, p. 111)
The Conflict Resolution Network (CRN, 2014) also
identifies 12 skills useful in a conflict situation (Box 8.2).
The CRN is an international organization based in 
Australia whose purpose is to research, develop, teach, and
implement the theory and practice of conflict resolution
through a national and international network. Other
techniques to use when dealing with difficult people are
discussed later in this chapter.
Leaders should avoid using the following ineffective
communication techniques: giving advice, giving approval,
blaming, and scapegoating. Giving advice and blaming are
considered nontherapeutic. Consider that a scapegoat is
taking the blame—especially the blame for others. Group
leaders must be vigilant not to scapegoat a member or allow
other group members to do so, especially a disruptive 
member. The leader needs to recognize these dynamics and 
intervene appropriately, creating a safe, open, and produc-
tive environment for the group. Giving approval is, perhaps
surprisingly, not helpful. Giving approval can interfere with
the group process and goal accomplishment by focusing on
one individual, which may be interpreted as favoritism.
Rather than express approval for an individual’s efforts or
successes, the leader can reflect back the accomplishment
to the person or other members, allowing them to express
their feelings. The leader can use the group format as a
means of teaching effective communication skills, such as
how to listen, give and receive feedback, and express feel-
ings or opinions.
Goal accomplishment has already been identified as a
benchmark of success for groups. Giving assignments,
such as recording the group’s discussion or trying out a
particular suggestion from the group, is one helpful mea -
sure. The use of assignments communicates the belief that
members are capable and that change involves work on
the part of group members. In a work group, members
are given specific areas to work on or research, with the
expectation that the group will reconvene to put these
pieces together. Ultimately, the leader is responsible for
ensuring that activities in the group remain focused on
the common goals that were set for the group.
Another leadership activity is facilitating closure. To
provide for group closure, the leader must summarize
progress at the end of each session as well as at the official
termination of the group. This summarization can be in
the form of a debriefing for evaluation of the group’s ac-
complishments, soliciting group feedback. If the members
enter and leave the group at various points, the leader may
choose to summarize at the start of each session to orient
CHAPTER 8 Working with Groups     ●
131
BOX 8.2
The Conflict Resolution Network’s 
12 Useful Skills
The Conﬂict Resolution Network recommends the
following 12 skills for dealing with conﬂict situations:
●The win-win approach
●Creative response
●Empathy
●Appropriate assertiveness
●Co-operative power
●Managing emotions
●Willingness to resolve
●Mapping the conﬂict
●Developing options
●Negotiation
●Mediation
●Broadening perspectives
Go to CRN’s Web site at http://www.crnhq.org/
twelveskills.html for strategies to address these 12 skills
and additional resources and training materials.
O N L I NE  C ONSULT  
Visit the CRN at 
http://www.crnhq.org
Identify possible conflict situations in your next
work or group session.
Which techniques would you use for effective 
resolution?

newer and continuing members to current status, goals, and
tasks. This approach is also highly effective in educational
groups as it serves to reorient learners to prior content. 
Regardless of the focus of the group, periodic summaries
and closure can be essential for the successful functioning
of both the group and its members. Group members need
an opportunity to acknowledge their accomplishments and
be involved in the evaluation of the group process.
Roles of Group Members
Group members demonstrate a variety of roles during
particular meetings. These roles may be either functional
or nonfunctional for the group process. They may remain
similar or constant over the life of the group, or individ-
uals may alter their role from meeting to meeting. It is
vital for nurses to recognize the roles assumed in groups
and to intervene purposefully when necessary. Consider
the last unit meeting you attended. Who led the group?
Did anyone stall or disrupt the discussion? Were the top-
ics discussed major issues for the unit or “pet peeves” of
one individual? Did all members participate in the dis-
cussion? How could you, if you had been the group
leader, have changed this meeting?
Functional Group Roles
Functional group roles facilitate the group process and
determine the ultimate effectiveness of the group, especially
in accomplishing a task or attaining a goal. In any type 
of group, members may play both functional and nonfunc-
tional roles for various periods. For the effectiveness of 
the group process, the goal is for members to demonstrate
predominantly functional group roles. For nursing work
groups, Tappen (2001) differentiated between functional
task roles (Table 8.2), which contribute to completion of
the task, and functional group-building roles (Table 8.3),
which support development and meet relational needs.
Think about what you have observed in a group meeting.
Observe these roles in any work-group setting, such as
a committee or unit meeting. Many functional task and
group-building roles are demonstrated by the group
leader. The leader may start out as the information giver
and standard setter during the forming stage, but then
function as an information seeker, gatekeeper, and encour-
ager as the group process evolves in the working stage. The
leader may also demonstrate the functional roles of coor-
dinator, energizer, summarizer, and consensus taker to 
facilitate group process and attainment of the group goals.
Other group members will also serve in these functional
roles as they become more active and progress toward the
achievement of the group’s goals. Observe who acts as 
the procedural technician, helping the leader organize the
group and supplying needed equipment and materials. 
Examine who appears to be the more passive follower in
the group, who cracks jokes as the tension reliever, and
who records the actions and progress of the group.
Although these roles have been discussed mainly for the
work setting, they also apply to professional, educational,
and therapeutic group settings. In a professional group, 
observe the leadership roles shared by the officers, proce-
dural technician roles performed by the aides or room
monitors, and the standard setter role taken by the parlia-
mentarian. In an educational group, consider the specific
132
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
TABLE 8.2
Functional Task Roles
Initiator/contributor
Makes suggestions and proposes new ideas, methods, or problem-solving approaches
Information giver
Offers pertinent information from personal knowledge appropriate to the group topic 
or task
Information seeker
Requests information or suggestions from other members appropriate to the group 
topic or task
Opinion giver/seeker
Offers or requests views, judgments, or feelings about the topic or suggestions under 
consideration by the group
Provides the opportunity for values clarification by the group members
Disagreer
Identifies errors in statements made or proposes a different viewpoint
Coordinator
Suggests relationships between the different suggestions or comments made by the 
group members
Elaborator
Elaborates or expands on suggestions already made
Energizer
Stimulates the group into action toward the goals either by introducing certain issues 
or topics or by behavior
Summarizer
Summarizes suggestions, actions, and accomplishments that have occurred in the group
Procedural technician
Provides the technical tasks needed for the group functions, such as arrangement of 
the group, including media, equipment, and work supplies
Recorder
Takes notes to record the progress, suggestions, and decisions of the group
Source: Adapted from Tappen, R. M. (2001). Nursing leadership and management: Concepts and practice (4th ed.). Philadelphia,
PA: F. A. Davis.

content and the size of the audience. Observe the roles
taken by the teacher or facilitator, the people who are seated
close to the teacher, the people in the back of the room,
and the people who are asking most of the questions or
cracking jokes. In a therapeutic group, observe the partic-
ular role of the leader and how he or she facilitates sharing
of the members’ feelings and beliefs. Observe the members
who verbalize supportive comments versus those who dis-
agree or give further information about similar feelings.
Nonfunctional Group Roles
At times, group members demonstrate nonfunctional roles
when they interrupt the group process. An example is the
individual who provides negative comments on whatever
other group members propose. Nonfunctional group 
roles generally are disruptive to group-building, task 
accomplishment, and progress toward goal attainment. A
group can actually be mobilized to act in response to the
unacceptable actions of one member, however, such as
speaking up to the individual who repeatedly comes late
and then insists on being updated on what already oc-
curred. Tappen (2001) identified the following nonfunc-
tional roles: dominator, monopolizer, blocker, aggressor,
recognition seeker, zipper-mouth, and playboy. Smith
(2001) listed similar disruptive roles in a meeting as 
latecomers/early leavers, silent/shy persons, whisperers/side
conversationalists, and talk-a-lots, including loudmouths,
know-it-alls, and hostiles.
●The dominator or know-it-all controls conversations,
determines what will be discussed, and may attempt to
control or intimidate other members. The dominator
is focused on his or her own needs. An example of the
dominator in a work group is a unit coordinator at a
quality assurance meeting who suggests that the group
focus on the number of requests for schedule changes.
An example in a therapeutic group is a patient who
opens the group by describing her plans with her 
family for the upcoming holidays rather than address-
ing the group leader’s question on the assigned activity
from last week.
●The monopolizer or loudmouth seeks attention and 
demands that the group focus on him or her. He or 
she may repeatedly interrupt others and perceive his or
her issues and problems as the most important. A work-
group example is the nurse who goes on and on about
how he always has to work overtime. In a therapeutic
group, an example is a patient who repeatedly interrupts
and insists the group listen to her problem.
●The blocker interrupts the discussion, often focusing
on another topic or personal concerns. The blocker
can do this overtly or through side conversations,
which can be highly disruptive to the group.
●The aggressor or hostile attacks during the discussion,
making comments that may or may not be relevant to
it. Often this individual is focused inwardly on personal
needs and demands to be heard, regardless of relevance
to the discussion. This member criticizes other group
members because they do not have the same insights or
experiences from his or her perspective. This individual
is readily identified in professional, work, educational,
and therapeutic groups by his or her hostile comments.
Signs of discomfort or counterattacks may be apparent
among other group members.
●The recognition seeker consistently attempts to draw the
group’s attention to his or her personal beliefs, values,
and concerns. This individual has a need to stand out
among the group members and be heard, respected,
and perhaps admired. This member sometimes sounds
like the leader but is usually working on personal is-
sues. In a work-group example, this is the nurse who
declares, “It’s not all shifts that are short-staffed. Mine
is the one that’s always short-staffed with temps, but I
am able to orient them successfully after all.”
●The zipper-mouth in either a work or a therapeutic
group is the silent individual who sits quietly, feeling
unlucky to be in the group or even present in the situ-
ation. This is not the shy member, who is tracking the
meeting content and perhaps needs more time in the
group to develop trust, reflection, and opportunity.
●The playboy is the joker in the group and does not take
the group seriously. Unfortunately, we have all experi-
enced these individuals in a group setting and can 
easily recognize the disruption they make in the group
process. These individuals may also be consistently 
late without notice or may frequently leave early.
CHAPTER 8 Working with Groups     ●
133
TABLE 8.3
Functional Group-Building Roles
Encourager
Accepts and praises contributions 
of the group and other group 
members
Standard setter
Reinforces the standards or 
processes for effective group 
functioning
Gatekeeper
Ensures that all members have 
contributed to the discussion and 
that the group is not being 
monopolized by the views of 
more verbal members
Consensus taker
Seeks the weight of group 
sentiments or consensus on the 
issues
Diagnoser
Identifies barriers or blocks to 
group progress that are occurring
Expresser
Restates or identifies and 
expresses the feelings of the 
group
Tension reliever
Uses humor and mediation when 
group tensions rise and interfere 
with the group process and 
accomplishment of tasks
Follower
Consents to whatever is proposed 
by others in the group. 
Demonstrates no active participation 
without great encouragement
Source: Adapted from Tappen, R. M. (2001). Nursing leadership 
and management: Concepts and practice (4th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: 
F. A. Davis.

Dealing with Difficult People
The group setting is no different from routine interpersonal
interactions. You have probably encountered people who
are difficult to work with. Whether a leader or a group
member, you will inevitably encounter challenging person-
alities in the group setting. One of the most effective means
of dealing with a difficult member is when the leader, as
well as the members, address behaviors destructive to the
group process. Awareness of your own reactions, observa-
tion of the group behaviors and interactions, and problem-
solving are the steps toward effective group process, which
can make all the difference between stagnation or dissolu-
tion, and meeting group goals.
As with interpersonal communication skills, there are
effective ways to deal with difficult and disruptive group
members. Consider the suggestions in Box 8.3. The skill-
ful and effective group leader or member can use a variety
of these techniques, depending on the group structure,
composition, roles, focus, and situational factors. In 
addition, part of the ground rules can be that any group
member may request a break or 10-minute recess. If
group members do not ask but look uncomfortable, the
leader may ask the group if a break is needed, and this
can diffuse a stressful meeting and create a time-out when
a situation is getting out of control. Having this as one of
the ground rules empowers any member of the group to
intervene in a conflict situation. Effective communication
techniques and interpersonal skills are critical to success
in group process, whether a small working group or a
larger organizational setting.
ORGANIZATIONAL GROUPS
Communication issues among the larger organizational
group and less tangible groups are also worth exploring.
Interorganizational Versus
Intraorganizational Groups
Interorganizational groups are those that occur between
systems or organizations. Communication is a vital activ-
ity to reach out to these other groups or systems. Interor-
ganizational groups may consist of the hospital and the
community mental health center, the home health
agency, or the various subgroups of a health department.
Outpatient hospital groups and inpatient unit groups also
fit this category. These groups are often highly structured,
with functions specified in job descriptions, policies, and
procedures.
Nurses are involved with and provide leadership for
effective functioning between or among systems in in-
terorganizational groups. Communication and interper-
sonal skills are valuable attributes of professional nurses
in this process. Along with these skills, a full awareness of
each system or organization and its interrelationships is
needed. This awareness involves an understanding of each
organization’s goals and values, hierarchial structure, lead-
ership and management, interpersonal and communica-
tion systems, resources and technology, boundaries, and
external environments, as illustrated in Chapter 10. In
addition, consider the environment in which the different
organizations or systems exist. Nursing involvement in
interorganizational groups is growing as the complexity
of health care and professional practice expands among
different systems.
Collaboration among organizational groups is vital
for the patient and for effective use of resources.
Intraorganizational groups are those that exist within a
single, overall system or organization. The nursing, house-
keeping, and physical therapy departments are intraorgani-
zational groups within a hospital system. These groups are
somewhat similar in terms of their structure, with specified
roles, policies, and procedures. It is imperative for nurses to
learn how to interact and negotiate effectively with these 
intraorganizational groups. An example is how to obtain
needed supplies and services from the housekeeping depart-
ment. Accomplishing this task often depends on the ability
of members of each department to collaborate with the 
others. Activity for patients is a major consideration and 
incentive to work effectively together. For example, the 
patient is the focus for physical therapy and nursing depart-
ments. A physical therapist has certain scheduling needs
based on individual patient progress. The nurse manager
has different needs in scheduling staff for treatments, which
may be predetermined by patient census, staffing, and care
needs. Collaboration in this process is vital for the patient
and effective use of resources.
Communication in Organizational
Groups
In addition to the verbal and nonverbal interpersonal com-
munication techniques, additional methods of communi-
cation are routinely used in large groups and organizations.
The information we compile and the method we use to
transmit it vary. Considering the purpose of communica-
tion in an organization is indispensable. Whether we are
involved in health teaching or the transmission of physio-
logical findings, the method and receiver of the informa-
tion are important. Clear, concise, and timely transmission
of information is necessary for an effective process. The
time frame and ongoing evaluation are also factors in the
initial communication phase as well as in the feedback
phase of the process.
134
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
BOX 8.3
Communication Techniques in a Group
When Dealing with Difficult Members
●Make observations and acknowledge contributions.
●Use the communication techniques of reﬂection and
restatement.
●Refocus the discussion if it is getting oﬀ track.
●Set limits and adhere to the ground rules agreed
upon by the group.
●Focus on potential solutions raised.
●Provide constructive feedback, not corrective feed-
back, which should be done privately.
●Promote balanced participation from members.
●Assign functional group roles to members displaying
nonfunctional behaviors.
●Plan ahead and anticipate for the next group session.

Specifically, information can be sent or received by tele-
phone, fax, e-mail, or texting, depending on the sender’s
and receiver’s access to and skill with the available technol-
ogy. A classic problem in some organizational settings is fear
of technology among some people. Another problem is
overuse. Consider the use of e-mail in organizations. The
intent is to deliver information efficiently and rapidly to
other individuals or groups of individuals in the sender’s
network while reducing paper and administrative costs. But
some people avoid this form of communication, whereas
others regularly check for messages, and still others “reply
to all” or copy (or blind copy) multiple recipients, creating
great volumes of unnecessary messages. If the information
is not sent correctly or received appropriately, the message
is not communicated and the process is ineffective.
Personal skills in verbal and written communication
must be developed continually and refined through specific
techniques or technologies. For example, keep in mind that
e-mail can be forwarded easily to others, thus communi-
cating with a larger group. The original sender’s message
will be evaluated by others on the appropriateness of con-
tent, format, and presentation (including grammar and 
appearance). Evaluating the appropriate channels or perti-
nent audiences and preparing the information in the cor-
rect format are vital for effective communication in the
organizational setting. And careful proofreading should 
always take place, remembering that spell-checkers may miss
errors—for example, there versus their and heal versus heel.
In essence, organizational communication can be
thought of as being similar to the rights of administering
medications. In organizational communications, these
rights are as follows:
1. Information or content
2. Communication channel
3. Format, including use of correct grammar, terms, and
language
4. Level of understanding
5. Technology
6. Follow-up
It is a professional responsibility to transmit a correct,
credible, properly delivered message. The appropriate
communication channel must be selected, using the ap-
propriate chain of command to convey the message. The
correct format is essential for decision making. One must
decide whether to use an interdepartmental memorandum
or a formal letter. The nature of the message dictates the
format or type of communication. Correct grammar, ter-
minology, and language are essential to present a profes-
sional image. Knowing the level of understanding of your
intended audience is vital so that they can process the in-
formation. This means using the appropriate reading level
and vocabulary. And finally, selecting the appropriate
technology is important. Without the appropriate tech-
nology, recipients may not even receive your message. And
follow-up is a necessary consideration for efficacy.
Virtual Group Meetings
Groups are traditionally viewed as necessitating face-to-
face meetings. This situation has changed. Technology
now allows groups to meet electronically, whether in real
time or asynchronously. Electronic communications have
provided the means for virtual meetings, by which people
connect with others not in the same physical environment.
Virtual meetings can be used by work, educational, ther-
apeutic, or professional groups. The group is still focused
with a common goal, and members interact with some
leadership to organize and maintain the group. Ideas can
be exchanged, experiences and information shared, and a
common concern discussed. Teleconferencing or Web
conferencing may be used alone or along with computer
conferencing software that allows sharing of documents
and visual presentations. Nursing groups now have Web
sites and provide opportunities for students and profes-
sionals in groups to “discuss” core issues. Patients can 
interact with other patients and professionals via e-mail,
chat rooms, and scheduled Internet meetings.
Virtual groups meet the same characteristics as face-
to-face groups, in terms of group structure (formal or infor-
mal), composition (membership), roles (leader as facilitator
and participants), and focus (work-related, educational,
therapeutic, or professional). The virtual group experiences
the same five stages of group development—initial, conflict,
norming, working, and termination. The same set of eval-
uation criteria can be used to assess effectiveness of the 
virtual group. The role of the leader is more intense as a 
facilitator in the group process. The leader must employ a
variety of group-building roles, time and distance being
major considerations.
Like those of distance learning, the advantages of virtual
meetings are savings in time and travel and, perhaps, the
opportunity for involvement in which the travel distance
would have been prohibitive. Because these groups do not
meet face-to-face, preparation time and follow-up are more
intensive to allow all group members to have equivalent in-
formation and participation opportunities.
Disadvantages of virtual meetings include the need for
all members to have access to similar technologies and the
individual’s comfort level with their application. Analyzing
the functional and nonfunctional roles of the members as
virtual participants can be a bit challenging without the
face-to-face assessment of interactions. The functional role
of a participant can be identified in the text or content
communicated, for example as information giver/seeker
or elaborator. The nonfunctional members—dominator,
monopolizer, blocker, aggressor, and recognition seeker—
may appear to have a smaller impact (after all, members
can delete their messages), but the leader must still address
the underlying issues. And the issue of “talk-over” must
be addressed in teleconference situations when several 
people want to contribute at the same time. The leader is
challenged to have individuals identify themselves prior to
providing commentary and share the discussion time on
a conference call. 
Any group—whether virtual or traditional, organiza-
tional, work, professional, educational, or therapeutic—
demands the use of skills in observation, interpersonal
communication, and group process that are essential char-
acteristics of the involved professional nurse. These skills
are tailored to the developmental stage of the group and
the unique characteristics of its individual members. Pro-
fessional nurses function as both members and leaders of
such groups, and constant attention to these skills allows
them to be integral components of effective groups in the
profession and throughout the healthcare delivery system.
CHAPTER 8 Working with Groups     ●
135

136
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
The American Association of Critical-Care Nurses (AACN) issued a practice alert on assessing pain in the 
critically ill adult. In addition to listing expected practice and the supporting evidence, they provide the following
recommendations:
1. Obtain the patient’s self-report of pain using validated pain assessment tools.
2. Perform a pain assessment for patients who are unable to self-report using a validated pain scale.
3. Avoid referring primarily to vital signs for pain assessment.
4. Consider proxy reporting by family members or caregivers who know the patient and can identify behavior
indicative of pain. (AACN, 2013, p. 2)
Question: Consider the group process skills you will need for the three groups: (1) nursing staff education, 
(2) interdisciplinary work group, and (3) family and friends.
Source: American Association of Critical-Care Nurses (AACN). (2013). Practice alert: Assessing pain in the critically ill adult.
Retrieved from http://www.aacn.org/wd/practice/content/practicealerts/assessing-pain-critically-ill-adult.pcms?menu=practice
K E Y  P O I N T S
●A group consists of three or more individuals with some commonality, such as shared goals or interests.
Groups to consider in professional nursing practice include professional, work, educational, family, and
therapeutic groups, each with specific goals and membership.
●Group process is described as the dynamic interplay of interactions within and between groups of humans.
●Groups are classified according to structure (formal or informal), composition, group roles, and focus
(professional, work, educational, and therapeutic).
●The composition of a group may be homogeneous, with the group members sharing similar characteristics,
or heterogeneous, with a mix of individuals.
●The issues to be addressed in establishing a group are the need and objectives for change and basic 
setup activities, including specifying and aligning the group purpose with the intended membership and
determining the appropriate environment and group size.
●Effective groups are able to accomplish their goals in a manner that allows all members to participate,
whereas ineffective groups become fragmented or dysfunctional.
●Group leaders structure the sessions to promote communication and participation by all members.
●Conflict situations can arise in any type of group, and conflict resolution is a process that requires 
problem-solving for effective group process.
●Groups go through predictable developmental stages: forming, storming, norming, working, and 
adjourning. The leader modifies his or her approach according to the group’s current stage.
●Traditional group leadership styles are democratic, autocratic, and laissez-faire. Group leaders often use a
combination of styles or modify their styles, depending on the group membership or topic being discussed.
●Functional group roles facilitate the group process and the ultimate effectiveness of the group. They 
include both functional task roles and functional group-building roles. Nonfunctional group roles are 
disruptive of group-building, task accomplishment, and progress toward goal attainment.
●Organizational groups may be interorganizational or intraorganizational, depending on whether they exist
between organizational systems or within an organization.
●Even though technology has provided the opportunity for virtual groups, group process skills are still 
applicable at a distance in real time or asynchronously.

CHAPTER 8 Working with Groups     ●
137
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Identify at least three groups of which you are a member. Consider the membership, goals, leader, composition,
and focus of each group. What are the similarities and differences? Contrast the leadership styles and skills in the
three groups.
2. Be prepared to debate the advantages and disadvantages of heterogeneous and homogeneous groups in an online
or class discussion.
3. Observe the members of the next departmental committee or nursing study group you attend.
• Determine whether the group leader is the designated leader or a member who has assumed this role. If the
leader was designated, who made the designation (external or internal designation)? Describe any effect this
designation has had on the group function.
• Describe the roles other members have assumed. Are the group roles different from these individuals’ interac-
tions in other settings?
• Evaluate whether the members appear satisfied with the group’s outcomes.
• Evaluate whether this group or committee meets the characteristics of an effective group.
4. Review the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter and discuss it in the context of the contents
of this chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the exercises provided for this chapter.
REFERENCES
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses. (2013). Practice
alert: Assessing pain in the critically ill adult. Retrieved from
http://www.aacn.org/wd/practice/content/practicealerts/
assessing-pain-critically-ill-adult.pcms?menu=practice
American Nurses Association. (2010). Nursing: Scope and 
standards of practice (2nd ed.).  Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursesbooks.org.
Arnold, E. (2011). Communicating in groups. In E. Arnold &
K. Boggs (Eds.), Interpersonal relationships: Professional 
communication skills for nurses (6th ed., pp. 222–245).
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders/Elsevier.
Berlo, D. K. (1960). The process of communication: An introduc-
tion to theory and practice. New York: Holt, Rinehart, &
Winston.
Conflict Resolution Network. (2014). Conflict resolution skills.
Retrieved from http://www.crnhq.org/pages.php?pID=59
DeWine, S., Gibson, M. K., & Smith, M. J. (2000). Exploring
human communication. Los Angeles, CA: Roxbury.
Robert, H. M., Evans, W. J., Honemann, D. H., & Balch, T. J.
(2004). Robert’s Rules of Order newly revised in brief. 
Cambridge, MA: DeCapo.
Smith, T. E. (2001). Meeting management. Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Prentice Hall.
Tappen, R. M. (2001). Nursing leadership and management: Con-
cepts and practice (4th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Tuckman, B. (1965). Developmental sequence in small groups.
Psychological Bulletin, 63, 384–387.
Turniansky, B., & Hare, A. P. (1998). Individuals in groups and
organizations. London, UK: Sage.
Yalom, I., & Leszcz, M. (2005). Theory and practice of group
psychotherapy (5th ed.). New York: Basic Books.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Barnard, S. (2001). Running an effective meeting. In 
S. Barnard, P. J. Casella, C. Coffin, T. Hughes, 
J. W. Hurst, J. S. Rasey, D. Redding, R. J. Robillard, 
D. St James, & S. C. Ullery, Writing, speaking, and commu-
nication skills for health care professionals (pp. 293–304).
New Haven, CT: Yale University.
Berne, E. (1963). The structure and dynamics of organizations
and groups. New York: Grove Press.
Galanes, G. J., Adams, K., & Brilhart, J. K. (2007). Effective
group discussion (12th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Lundin, W., & Lundin, K. (1995). Working with difficult 
people. New York: American Management Association.
Merton, R. K. (1957). Social learning theory and social structure.
New York: Free Press.
ONLINE RESOURCES
Social-Role Theory
http://changingminds.org/explanations/theories/
social_role.htm
The Conflict Resolution Network (CRN)
http://www.crnhq.org
MeetingWizard.org
http://www.meetingwizard.org/meetings/effective-
meetings.cfm
Mindtools.com
http://www.mindtools.com/index.html

The Teaching-Learning
Process
138
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Discuss the components of teaching and learning.
2. Examine differences in the ways people learn.
3. Describe methods to assess learning readiness and motivation.
4. Propose different teaching methods for a variety of learning needs.
5. Devise a plan for patient education that contains behavioral objectives, a content outline with
appropriate teaching methods, and methods for evaluating learner outcomes.
Behaviorist Perspective
Classical Conditioning
Operant Conditioning
Gestalt Theory
Cognitive Theories
Social Cognitive Theory
Humanism
Andragogy
Transformative Learning
Multiple Intelligences
Teaching
Learning
Affective Domain
Cognitive Domain
Psychomotor Domain
Learning Environment
Cognitive Learning Styles
Readiness
Motivation
Behavioral Objectives
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
“To achieve a lasting change in observed behavior, 
the value of that change and the intellectual 
capacity to understand and process the 
information must first be present.”
Rose Kearney-Nunnery
Key Terms
9

Teaching and learning are integral parts of contemporary
nursing practice. Patient teaching has long been an expected
nursing role. As a process, teaching and learning are much
more than sharing and accepting information. There are
many components to consider in order for teaching and
learning to be effective.
NURSING PROCESS APPLIED
TO THE TEACHING-LEARNING
PROCESS
Consider the steps in the nursing process: assessment, 
diagnosis, outcome identification and planning, imple-
mentation, and evaluation. These same steps are applicable
to the teaching and learning process.
Assessment and Diagnosis
Think about both the teacher and the learner. They 
represent more than simply the provider and receiver of 
information. Communication—verbal, nonverbal, and
written—is a vital component in the teaching and learning
process. It is a mutual process in which critical thinking
is essential for both teacher and learner. Both teacher and
learner obtain information, use reasoning skills, make
analyses based on the data, and then move to decision
making or problem-solving on the learning need or the
acceptability of the problem or the information. The
learner learns from the teacher, but the teacher also gains
awareness and skill from each interaction with learners. In
the assessment stage, there is essential information we
need to know for an effective teaching-learning process.
Some of the following questions arise:
●What are the attributes of each individual teacher and
learner?
●Are there literacy, bilingual, or information processing
issues to be addressed?
●What are the learning needs of the learner?
●How does the learner learn best?
●What is the readiness for and motivation to learn?
●What changes in behavior or attitude are perceived as
being needed by both the teacher and the learner?
●What individual characteristics will enhance or inhibit
learning?
●What is the teacher’s teaching style?
●What is the cognitive style of the learner?
●What environmental factors will enhance or inhibit
learning?
●What activities and resources will enhance learning?
●How can both the teacher and the learner evaluate the
effectiveness of the learning process?
Assessing for a learning deficit or teaching need incor-
porates many factors. Notice that the concentration of
the assessment is on the process of teaching and learn-
ing, not on specific content to be included in a presen-
tation of information. Determining content is a discrete
task performed later in the process, on the basis of the
specific attributes and needs of the people and environ-
ment. Using this assessment information can lead to a
diagnosis about the learner’s particular teaching need.
Outcome Identification, Planning,
and Implementation
Next, developing behavioral objectives with specific out-
comes gives direction for a teaching plan and evaluation
of the learning. Teaching strategies, methods, and re-
sources to meet the diagnosed learning need, with specific
content, must then be identified. The next step is planning
for activities in the process, followed by implementation
of the plan.
Evaluation
The outcomes of the teaching-learning process are eval-
uated. The evaluation component focuses on how the
learner met the objectives and the specific outcome be-
haviors from the experience. Outcome objectives should
be assessed by both the learner and the teacher. Evalua-
tion is focused on the behavioral objectives specified for
the learner earlier in the process. Although the nursing
process provides a frame of reference for patient teaching,
teaching and learning theories provide direction in the
process.
TEACHING AND LEARNING
THEORIES
Educators have studied learning theories for many years
to understand and improve on the teaching-learning
process. There are several schools of learning theories.
Major examples of these theories applicable to professional
nursing practice are behaviorism, gestalt, social cognitive
theory, humanism, andragogy, transformative learning,
and multiple intelligences (Box 9.1).
Behaviorism: Classical Conditioning
In introductory psychology courses, classic stimulus-
response conditioning and operant conditioning are taught,
providing a behaviorist perspective on learning. Ivan
Pavlov’s pioneering research with dogs led to our under-
standing of classical conditioning, in which the reflexive
responses in behavior result from some stimulus. In classical
conditioning, we saw that the pairing of food (the uncon-
ditioned stimulus) with the sound of a bell as a neutral
(conditioned) stimulus led to salivation in dogs as an un-
conditioned response—first as an unconditioned response
CHAPTER 9 The Teaching-Learning Process     ●
139
BOX 9.1
Selected Theories of Learning
●Classical conditioning
●Operant conditioning
●Gestalt theory
●Cognitive development
●Social cognitive theory
●Humanism
●Andragogy
●Transformative learning 
●Multiple intelligences

for the sight of the food, and ultimately as a conditioned
stimulus with the sound of a bell alone. Using classical con-
ditioning with infants, John Watson provided further 
insight on learning with his focus on the environment and
emotional responses. Watson was a true behaviorist, look-
ing at the development of the emotions of fear, love, and
rage through classical conditioning and desensitization in
his research with children.
Use of classical conditioning in nursing practice is lim-
ited. One situation may be in teaching patients to inter-
vene as needed in response to physiological or emotional
cues, auras, or triggers before an allergic, metabolic, or
neural response. The individual with diabetes, a severe 
allergy, or epilepsy can be taught to perceive and make the
association with early signs or symptoms that could lead
to a larger physiological reaction. Classical conditioning is
useful for early intervention to circumvent the reaction
chain. Reflexes are important in this scenario to ensure
that the individual is in a safe environment and has the 
resources for prompt treatment. Another example is the
use of distraction, focusing, and breathing in certain reflex-
ive situations—for patients in labor, in pain, or experienc-
ing fear, for example.
Behaviorism: Operant Conditioning
Operant conditioning provides further clues to learning,
with a focus on purposive behaviors and the role of rein-
forcement. In Thorndike’s Law of Effect, reinforcement
of a behavior is more likely to lead to repetition of that be-
havior. B. F. Skinner’s research with rats and reinforce-
ment for learned behaviors provided much additional
information. In operant conditioning, the behavior is 
affected by the consequences (reinforcement), but the
process is not trial and error (Skinner, 2010, p. 1). This
theory introduced positive and negative reinforcers and 
reinforcement schedules to learning. The work of Skinner
led to behavior modification programs and programmed
instruction with shaping, reinforcement, and generalization
of behavior.
Behavior modification programs are widely used in
healthcare and education. They have been used effectively
in certain nursing situations, such as nutritional programs
that require a lifelong change in behavior. In such situa-
tions, old patterns are broken, stimuli are introduced to
effect positive outcomes, responses are generalized to spe-
cific dietary items, positive and negative reinforcements
are applied, and behavior is shaped over time. Another use
for behavioral techniques is with adult patients with 
urinary incontinence. One method of treatment includes
bladder retraining with the components of education,
scheduled voiding, and positive reinforcement.
Behaviorism focuses on observation and measurement
of actions in response to some association or condition-
ing. Rigorous use of the scientific process in the labora-
tory setting was a major factor in this perspective.
Dissatisfaction with the emphasis on conditioning and
reinforcement led to the evolution of other perspectives,
including gestalt theory, cognitive theories, social learning
theory, and humanism. In these later perspectives, we see
an increased focus on the human intellect and human
emotions.
Gestalt Theory
Gestalt theory focuses on meaning and thought, holding
that learning occurs through perception. In German,
gestalt refers to the perception of a whole form rather than
its component parts. More than 100 laws on this perspec-
tive evolved with the identification of major principles
concerning the way we perceive objects related to organi-
zation, proximity, similarity, direction, simplicity, back-
ground, and closure. Gestalt theorists view learning as
based on perception of and completion of patterns. Pat-
terns are perceived and reorganized by the person. In terms
of learning, this perspective focuses on how the learner per-
ceives the information and the unique environment. Kurt
Lewin’s field theory provided a major influence in this per-
spective with the emphasis on the importance of the envi-
ronmental field. The perception of this environmental
field by the person influences how that person, as a system,
responds within the larger environmental system.
The classic principle in the gestalt perspective is that
the whole is not merely the sum of the parts. This princi-
ple is consistent with the holistic view of human beings in
professional nursing practice. Consider the importance we
place on understanding how the person views the infor-
mation to be learned. This focus on the person involves
teaching materials that are used in addition to perceptual
values. Further consider the learning environment and the
importance we place on patient teaching in an unrushed,
private, and comfortable setting when teaching (or pro-
moting change for) specific health practices, as opposed 
to the hectic clinic environment where the person is dis-
tracted by children playing in the waiting room or verbal-
izations of discomfort expressed by others in the room. As
another example, consider the patient in same-day surgery
and the importance of preoperative teaching and the in-
clusion of significant others rather than the presentation
of information when the patient is experiencing the effects
from sedation and concerns over surgical outcomes.
Cognitive Theories
Cognitive theories of learning focus on the intellect
and the development of knowledge. Recall the example of
Piaget’s theory of cognitive development from Chapter 2.
Schemas were seen as patterns of thought or behavior that
become more complex with the addition of more infor-
mation. Assimilation is the acquisition of this information
and incorporation into the individual’s existing cognitive
and behavioral structures. Accommodation is the change in
the individual’s cognitive and behavioral patterns based
on the new information acquired. This acquisition of in-
formation is learning with the comprehension of concepts,
memory, and analysis.
There are many different cognitive theories, mostly fo-
cusing on information processing. In nursing practice, use
of cognitive theory is readily apparent with our focus on
the level of cognitive development and acquisition of
healthcare knowledge. We use principles of cognitive de-
velopment to tailor a teaching plan to the patient’s level
of development, whether the patient is an elderly diabetic
or a child with asthma. We are also concerned about the
way learners process information, so that we can tailor our
140
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

teaching strategies to suit their learning styles. In addition,
the use of behavioral objectives with patients provides a
focus for developing cognitive skills, moving from recall
of knowledge to understanding, application, analysis, eval-
uation, and creation, as we will see later in the revised tax-
onomy table (Anderson et al., 2001) that stemmed from
the classic work of Bloom’s (1956) taxonomy.
Social Cognitive Theory
Cognitive learning through observation and imitation was
the basis of Bandura’s early theory known as the Social
Learning Theory. Through the research of Bandura 
and his associates, aggressive and socialization behaviors
of children were documented after observation of both
symbolic and actual models. An important aspect of 
Bandura’s work is the modeling of behavior with television
and the effect of visualizing vicarious reinforcement and
punishment for behavior. A humanistic, rather than mech-
anistic, orientation is apparent in this theoretical focus.
Bandura (1977) explained the emphasis of vicarious, sym-
bolic, and self-regulatory processes on how humans learn
and influence their own destiny. Building on this broader
focus on the person, behaviors, and the environment with
the concept of self-regulation, Bandura proposed the 
expansion to the Social Cognitive Theory in the 1980s.
Since that time, Bandura has incorporated self-efficacy, a
theory important to patients in the healthcare setting as
well as in normal activities. Self-efficacy is demonstrating
a belief in your own competencies to produce a desired
outcome. “Efficacy beliefs influence how people think,
feel, motivate themselves, and act” (Bandura, 1995, 
p. 2). Bandura (1995) further identifies four sources
of efficacy beliefs: mastery experiences, vicarious experi-
ences, social persuasion, and physiological and emotional
states (pp. 3–5). Efficacy can have a powerful effect as 
individuals take ownership of their individual learning
needs. As Bandura (2007) proposes, social cognitive theory
highlights distinctly human attributes (p. vii).
Nursing applications of the social cognitive theory 
are prevalent in the development of psychomotor skills in
patients, such as self-administration of medications, pro-
cedures, and treatments. We often demonstrate skills to
patients and expect them to return the demonstration. We
provide positive reinforcement in the coaching function
during the process, by making comments such as, “That’s
good,” “That’s the way,” and “What a nice job.” We pro-
mote healthful practices with encouragement and the hope
for positive results as reinforcement for the new behavior.
We show patients videos on a procedure in which they see
modeling and reinforcement through a case scenario.
These nursing behaviors focus on the individual in the 
environment as a thinking, feeling, and reacting being.
Further, the concept of self-efficacy has long been used in
nursing research and practice as we strive for the patient’s
independence and positive healthcare outcomes. The iden-
tified sources of efficacy are consistent with nursing prac-
tice with a greater focus on the individual as we promote
mastery of skills, use of vicarious experiences in teaching,
social persuasion in health promotion activities, and con-
sistently integrate the physiological and emotional states
of patients in their plan of care.
Humanism
Humanism has provided a major perspective on learning
and one that has led to revision of older models. In this
perspective, the focus is totally on the person. Abraham
Maslow and Carl Rogers were major influences on this
learning theory. As Maslow (1971) stated:
[T]he humanistic goal . . . is ultimately the “self actual-
ization” of a person, the becoming fully human, the 
development of the fullest height that the human species
can stand up to or that the particular individual can
come to. In a less technical way, it is helping the person
to become the best that he is able to become. (p. 169)
The full range of human experiences is considered, 
as personally experienced and interpreted. Maslow’s 
humanistic focus included motivation as a vital concern.
Humanism is the basis of Carl Rogers’s person-centered
counseling. As described by his daughter, Rogers “above
all, valued the worth and dignity of the individual 
and trusted their capacity for self-direction if given the
proper environment” (Rogers & Freiberg, 1994, p. iii).
Personal growth and autonomy are key to the humanistic
perspective.
The humanistic perspective is consistent with the con-
cepts of professional nursing. We focus on the person and
assist in empowering him or her for health (whether an
emerging state or to a higher level) and advocating for
their active involvement in the health promotion process.
The environment should be considered in terms of the
person and his or her unique environmental setting and
culture. Self-direction and insight into personal beliefs,
attitudes, lifestyle, and behaviors are fundamental to the
learning process. Culture, literacy, and learning or infor-
mation processing deficits are also vital considerations
with this perspective. As viewed in the health models in
Chapter 4, cultural perspectives as a way of life must be
included in any useful and humanistic teaching-learning
plan. In addition, for effective teaching and learning to
occur, deficits in learning or information acquisition or
processing are humanistic factors that must be discovered,
along with an understanding of adaptive patterns. Most
consumers of nursing care are adults: parents, couples, in-
dividual adult or aging patients, families, community
groups, and even professional peers with unique learning
needs and characteristics.
Adult Learning Theories
Learning in adults requires the teacher to make adjust-
ments to meet the different characteristics of learners.
Adult learners differ from children in that they have past
experiences, good and bad, with both teaching and
learning.
Malcolm S. Knowles, who was a major force in adult
learning in the United States, focused on andragogy. The
term andragogical model was borrowed from European ed-
ucation (Knowles, 1990; Knowles et al., 1985). Expanding
the traditional pedagogical learning models used with chil-
dren to incorporate learning characteristics and needs of
adults, this developmental model proposes that the accu-
mulated life experiences of adults give them different
CHAPTER 9 The Teaching-Learning Process     ●
141

teaching and learning needs from younger learners. In the
pedagogical model, learners are generally dependent or
passive, have few prior experiences to build on, and have
external pressures from parents and others to learn some-
thing (Knowles et al., 1985, pp. 8–9). Adult learners are
self-directing, have experiences that have shaped their
identity, have experienced life events or a learning need
that triggers their readiness to learn, have internal moti-
vators, and demand an available, knowledgeable resource
to assist them with practical problems and identified needs
(Knowles et al., 1985).
As Knowles and associates (1985) have pointed out,
adult learners often initially assume the comforting and
passive learner roles of pedagogy, but then an inner conflict
develops with their self-directing nature. The adult’s ego
system is based on his or her self-concept and accumulated
knowledge and experiences, whereas a child is gratified by
impressing a parent, teacher, or peer. Knowles’s develop-
mental focus is demonstrated further with his identification
of life problems by age group in early, middle, and later
adult life groups. He specified life problems in the areas of
vocation and career, home and family life, personal devel-
opment, enjoyment of leisure, health, and community 
living (Knowles, 1990). Recall Bandura’s (1995) sources
of self-efficacy (mastery experiences, vicarious experiences,
social persuasion, and physiological and emotional states)
that are consistent with this view.
Adult teaching and learning depend on both physical
and psychological climates. Physical climate relates to the
learning environment. The setup of the room should not
replicate a stilted lecture setting and should promote com-
fort so that the learners can focus on learning needs and
problem-solving. Knowles emphasized the need for adults
to feel at ease in the learning environment, which leads to
the psychological climate for the adult learner. Knowles
identified seven characteristics of the psychological climate
conducive to adult learning: mutual respect, collaborative-
ness, mutual trust, supportiveness, openness and authen-
ticity, pleasure, and humanness (Knowles et al., 1985, 
pp. 15–17). Knowles viewed the teacher as the catalyst and
facilitator. A common thread running through teaching
and learning strategies for adults is mutuality—mutuality
in diagnosing, planning, learning, and evaluating. One key
to successful teaching and learning in adults is their active
involvement throughout the process.
On the basis of Knowles’s work, Vella further identi-
fied 12 principles for effective adult learning. Then, she
further considered six concepts from quantum thinking
(relatedness, holism, duality, uncertainty, participation,
and energy) and reinforced the 12 principles with adult
education, especially in the use of dialogue to promote 
optimal learning:
●Participation of the learners in their needs and 
resources assessment
●Safety in the environment and the process
●Sound relationships between teacher and learner 
●Careful attention to sequence of content and 
reinforcement
●Praxis (action with reflexion, or learning by doing)
●Respect for learners as decision makers
●Holistic ideas, feelings, and actions 
●Immediacy of the learning (relevancy)
●Clear roles and role development (participation in the
search for meaning)
●Teamwork and use of small groups
●Engagement of the learners in all domains of what they
are learning
●Mutual accountability for the learning. (Vella, 2002,
pp. 30–35)
These principles are consistent with our holistic view of
patients as unique individuals with respect for their envi-
ronment. It is critical to promote their empowerment to
address their distinctive healthcare learning needs. Con-
tent and actions must be meaningful to them for learning
to occur.
Transformation Theory
The basis for transformative learning is meaningfulness of
experiences, especially for adults who have accumulated
knowledge, cultural and environmental patterns, and ex-
periences. Think about the last time you said to yourself,
“I’m not going to do that again!”
One of the major theorists in this area is Mezirow
(2000), who defines transformative learning as follows:
. . . the process by which we transform our taken-for-
granted frames of reference (meaning perspective, habits
of mind, mind-sets) to make them more inclusive, dis-
criminating, open, emotionally capable of change, and
reflective so that they may generate beliefs and opinions
that will prove more true or justified to guide action.
(pp. 7–8)
Transformative learning involves three stages: critical
reflection of the situation, changing and integrating the
new perspective and understanding, and acting on that
new understanding. The key is the active and rational process
of reflective thinking on past experiences and personal 
assumptions of the situation. Mezirow (2000) describes
this process as reflective discourse: “that specialized use of
dialogue devoted to searching for a common understand-
ing and assessment of the justification of an interpretation
or belief” (pp. 10–11). This use of dialogue with adult
learners is similar to the one described by Vella and can
be used effectively in individualized or small group learn-
ing environments as adults are actively challenged to find
meaningfulness of the information.
Critical reflection involves challenging one’s assump-
tions and beliefs. Do they still hold true, or is there perhaps
a better way that is acceptable to the adult learner in his or
her unique context? This active and thoughtful process is
personally determined. This theory of learning has been de-
scribed as a “theory in progress” as further research evolves.
In addition, a current nursing model has evolved from this
theory (Fawcett, 2006, p. 504). Transformation theory is
consistent with nursing’s view of the person as a thinking,
feeling, rational being with past experiences and attributes
that influence behavior. But notice that the learners are 
the active ones in the process. They are assisted with the 
information for critical reflection, but they must challenge
their “habits of mind” and “resulting points of view” that
Mezirow (2000) refers to as the two components of one’s
“frame of reference” (p. 17). Then the person must decide
whether to take action on the revised perspective as the
142
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

transformation. As Kippers and Boden (2012) point out,
“at the heart of transformative learning is the notion of 
partnership” (p. 7). The involvement of the patient in the
learning experience must be a partnership for effectiveness. 
Adult learning theories have evolved from a humanistic
philosophy, focusing on the unique combinations of tal-
ents and abilities possessed by an individual based on prior
learning, skill sets, and contextual factors. 
Multiple Intelligences Theory
Another theory of learning focused on the person proposes
multiple intelligences (Gardner, 1993a, 1993b, 1999,
2006), all of which are considered equally important and
are most often found in combination in individuals to dif-
fering degrees. This theory looks beyond cognitive capac-
ity and encourages a view of the individual’s cognitive
profile. The basis for the theory is Gardner’s observations
of and work with children, adults, prodigies, and gifted,
normal, autistic, brain-damaged, and autistic savant indi-
viduals. Gardner (1999) has characterized the seven dif-
ferent multiple intelligences (Table 9.1) according to eight
criteria, two each derived from the biological sciences, log-
ical analysis, developmental psychology, and traditional
psychological research. From his original work, Gardner
(1999) refined his definition of an intelligence as:
A biopsychological potential to process information that
can be activated in a cultural setting to solve problems or
create products that are of value in a culture. (pp. 33–34)
Gardner (2006) further refers to these intelligences as a
“set of abilities, talents, or mental skills” (p. 6). The theory
of multiple intelligences allows a greater focus on individ-
uals and their unique talents and combinations of abilities
in their contextual setting. As Gardner (1999) points out,
“what matters is the use of intelligences, individually and
in concert, to carry out tasks valued by a society” (p. 208).
In addition, “owing to hereditary, early training, or in all
probability, a constant interaction between these factors,
some individuals will develop certain intelligences far more
than others; but every normal individual should develop
each intelligence to some extent, given but a modest op-
portunity to do so” (Gardner, 1993a, p. 278). Gardner has
also thought about two additional intelligences that he in-
dicates meet most of the criteria from his theory. Although
Gardner (2006) does not seem fully committed to these
additions, he names the potential for the naturalist and the
existential intelligences as the 81⁄2 Intelligences (p. 21).
Consider for a moment that you will be caring for 
two patients following hip replacement surgery and are
planning discharge teaching. One patient is an architect
who designs custom homes and meets with his customers
for at least an hour before he develops the house plans to
ensure that he truly understands their desires and ideas.
The other is a retired English professor who is concerned
about the rehabilitation schedule and the completion of a
collection of essays that he must submit to his publisher
in six weeks. Your approach to each will differ on the basis
of his unique talents and abilities.
The perspective of multiple intelligences is humanis-
tic, focusing on the unique combinations of talents and
abilities possessed by an individual. These unique indi-
vidual abilities are consistent with the practice of nursing
dealing with the individual and environmental influences.
Given the variety of learning theories, however, applica-
tion may involve selecting a more eclectic approach. 
Specific teaching guides involve our consideration of
human beings and the environment, given the particular
health focus in contemporary nursing practice. Certain
principles provide direction in this process.
TEACHING AND LEARNING
PRINCIPLES
The philosophical and theoretical structures of any dis-
cipline reflect how the teacher and learner are viewed. In
nursing, we view both the teacher and the learner as
thinking, reasoning, active participants involved in the
CHAPTER 9 The Teaching-Learning Process     ●
143
TABLE 9.1
Seven Intelligences (Gardner, 1999, pp. 42–43)
Intelligence
Description
Example(s)
Linguistic
Language and verbal
Poets, writers, speakers
Logical-mathematical
Mathematical cognitive skills in logic, mathematics, 
Mathematicians, scientists
and science
Spatial
Use of mental models of spatial world and 
Sailors, engineers, artists, pilots, 
manipulate patterns
architects
Musical
Innate musical sense and talent in performance, 
Musicians, composers
composition, and appreciation
Bodily kinesthetic
Use of body or parts of the body in 
Dancers, athletes, craftspeople, 
problem-solving
mechanics
Interpersonal
Understanding intentions, motivation, and 
Politicians, salespeople, teachers, 
desires of others
clergy
Intrapersonal
Understanding of self and one’s life course
Self-awareness

teaching-learning process. We believe individuals are 
influenced by and influence their environment. These
environmental influences, including persons, events, and
tangible surroundings, must be taken into account when
any teaching behavior is considered. In terms of health,
teaching in nursing reflects information to promote 
or maintain the highest level of health attainable. The
teacher’s and the learner’s definitions of health and well-
ness influence physical, psychological, emotional, and
spiritual health as personal determinants of behavior.
Teaching
Although the teaching-learning process is an interactive
communication process, its component parts must be con-
sidered. With this in mind, several processes can be seen
readily as inherent in the teaching-learning process, such
as communication and critical thinking. Teaching is more
than the transmission of information. The information
must be received, understood, evaluated, and accepted by
the learner. Teaching has been described as “an intentional
and reasoned act” (Anderson et al., 2001). Benner (1984)
has identified the teaching-coaching function of the expert
nurse working with acutely ill patients:
1. Use timing to capture learning readiness and 
motivation.
2. Assist with integration of learning into lifestyle.
3. Demonstrate an understanding of patient’s own 
interpretation of the situation.
4. Provide interpretations of situations and rationales 
for new behaviors.
5. Show, through example, coaching behaviors in 
culturally sensitive issues. (pp. 77–94)
These characteristics demonstrate the active roles of
both teacher and learner in the process. Readiness and
motivation must be present for both the teacher and the
learner during the process. The best teachers are those
who truly believe in the information they are sharing and
can communicate this belief. They provide the excite-
ment, or at least some reinforcement, for the learner, who
wants to know more. The active role of the learner in the
process is vital, because passive learning rarely results in
persistent change in attitudes or behaviors. The motiva-
tion of teacher and learner are also important, as the
teacher demonstrates an understanding of the learner’s
unique characteristics and perspective on the subject 
or situation. Providing information is the traditional role
of the teacher, but doing so in the context of the learner’s
reality helps provide a rationale for behavior changes. 
Finally, coaching through example, with sensitivity, is the
essence of expert teaching and nursing.
Teaching is an interactive process, not a unidirectional
transmission of information. As Benner demonstrates in her
examples of expert nurses, we also learn from those we teach.
Learning
Learning is the perception and assimilation of the infor-
mation presented to us in a variety of ways. Learning 
contains the following characteristics:
●Perception of new information
●Initial reaction to the information
●Ability to recall or repeat the information (simple
knowledge level)
●Rejection or acceptance of the information 
(understanding)
●Use of the information in a similar situation 
(application)
●Critical analysis of the information
●Incorporation of the information into the value 
system (evaluation)
●Use of the information in various situations and 
combinations (creation)
An increasing complexity emerges here as the learner
moves from receiving and recalling information through:
We see this process in the patient who accepts informa-
tion on the importance of breast familiarity, is able to per-
form the self-examination, does so on a regular basis in
combination with mammography and clinical examinations,
teaches her daughter or mother the process, and is now 
investigating regular screening for colon cancer for herself
and family members. This patient has moved from simple
knowledge to incorporation of knowledge into the value sys-
tem and behaviors of herself and other family members.
Learning can be enhanced via specific strategies or 
approaches with learners. Learning is not a linear process
of providing information and assessing recall and perfor -
mance. We must also take into account the person in his
or her environment and culture, and the various domains
of learning. Consider the difference between the knowledge
and the consistent demonstration of behaviors. We may
“know” something but either consciously or subconsciously
decide not to demonstrate that behavior. For example, a
patient may have been prescribed a low-fat diet and can
Understanding
⇓
Application
⇓
Analysis
⇓
Evaluation of the knowledge 
acquired and creation of new 
applications
144
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
O N L I NE  C ONSULT  
Albert Bandura at 
https://psychology.stanford.edu/abandura
Howard Gardner at 
http://howardgardner.com/
Abraham Maslow at 
http://www.maslow.com
B. F. Skinner at 
http://www.bfskinner.org

tell you all about foods with high fat content, but may also
decide that ice cream is a part of the diet, ignoring its fat
content.
Domains
A domain is merely a category. There are three domains
of learning or knowledge: affective, cognitive, and 
psychomotor.
The affective domain includes attitudes, feelings, and
values. For example, how the patient feels about the impor-
tance of or the positive effect on his life of a needed dietary
change will influence whether he will make the change.
Often, the nursing goal is to incorporate the value of the diet
into the person’s belief system. Cultural influence, cultural
differences in the individual, family, or group, and the
nurse’s professional influences can all either positively or neg-
atively affect whether the goal is achieved, however.
The cognitive domain involves knowledge and thought
processes within the individual’s intellectual ability. Using
the same example of the patient and the low-fat diet, the
cognitive domain involves understanding the information
received about nutrition, diet, health conditions, and indi-
cations. The ability to conceptualize types of foods, gram
counts, and dietary needs involves comprehension, appli-
cation, and synthesis at an intellectual level before the 
patient performs the actual behaviors.
The psychomotor domain is the processing and demon-
stration of behaviors; the information has been intellectually
processed, and the individual is displaying motor behaviors.
To continue with the example, psychomotor skills are
demonstrated by how the patient has performed on the
changed diet, as seen in food diary reporting, preparing and
ingesting appropriate foods, and even laboratory reports
evaluating bodily functions.
It is important to consider these three domains in the
teaching-learning process. Behavioral objectives, teaching
content and methods, and evaluation of learning can be
very different for the three domains and should be distinct.
Remember, to achieve a lasting change in observed behav-
ior (psychomotor domain), the value of that change 
(affective domain) and the intellectual capacity to under-
stand and process the information for behavioral changes
(cognitive domain) must first be present.
Consistent with the philosophical focus of nursing, the
learning environment is important in any teaching or
learning activity. Physical comfort as well as respect and 
acceptance of the learner are humanistic factors. The con-
sumer of healthcare may also have physical, sensory, or psy-
chological deficits that can interfere with comfort in the
learning environment or in the teaching-learning process,
as seen in the physiological and emotional source of self-
efficacy proposed by Bandura. Comfort measures should
be validated with the patient before and during the process.
Physical comfort can include such things as the tempera-
ture of the room and the height or firmness of the chairs,
in addition to specific effects of acute or chronic health
problems. Sensory concerns include the extraneous sensory
stimuli perceived by the teacher or learner in the learning
environment, such as sounds, smells, and sights. In addi-
tion, the patient may have sensory deficits—such as visual,
hearing, or information processing problems—that may
interfere with learning or may require more resources. 
Psychological deficits, including fear, problems with cog-
nition, attention span, effects from medications, and worry,
can be major inhibitors to teaching and learning. Recep-
tivity of the learner to new and different ideas is vital. 
Creative measures taken by the nurse as teacher to provide
for an environment conducive to learning are essential.
To achieve a lasting change in observed behavior
(psychomotor domain), the value of that change
(affective domain) and the intellectual capacity
to understand and process the information
for behavioral changes (cognitive domain)
must first be present.
COGNITIVE LEARNING STYLES
The cognitive learning process is a broad area that examines
how meaning is perceived, evaluated, remembered, rein-
forced, and demonstrated. Piaget gave us information on
childhood cognition through observations of his own and
other children and provided us with the concepts of 
assimilation and accommodation. Recall that assimilation
is the acquisition and incorporation of new information
into the individual’s existing cognitive and behavioral
structures, and accommodation is the change in the indi-
vidual’s cognitive and behavioral patterns based on this
new information. Cognitive learning styles have been 
discussed with varied research for over 50 years in an 
attempt to improve teaching and learning outcomes.
In the mid-1980s, Kolb (1981) identified specific
learning styles as concrete experience, reflective observa-
tion, abstract conceptualization, and active experimentation.
And the research and the discussion continue as we seek
to understand better how individuals acquire meaning and
knowledge. Increasingly we are concerned with the active
involvement of the learner in the process, for learning to
truly occur. Cognitive learning styles or preferences are
simply the ways learners perceive, think, organize, use, and
retain knowledge. To understand this concept, merely 
recall colleagues in the same learning environment—those
who took copious notes, those who just listened, and those
who made notes or drawings on what they interpreted the
message in the lecture to be. Understanding the differences
in cognitive styles can help teachers and learners make more
informed decisions about which learning activities will 
be useful or productive to learners as individuals and as
members of learning groups or communities.
Stemming from a basis in Jung’s theory of the
unconsciousness and personality, the Myers-Briggs
Inventory was developed and has been used
widely in education and business applications
for learning styles. This personality inventory
uses the following four scales to identify 
16 personality types that can be further 
classified for learning preferences:
●Introversion–Extroversion
●Sensing–Intuition
CHAPTER 9 The Teaching-Learning Process     ●
145

●Thinking–Feeling
●Judging–Perceptive
Check your style with a similar inventory at 
http://www.humanmetrics.com/
cgi-win/JTypes2.asp
Teaching and learning strategies have developed to
match each learner with the teaching resources most effective
for his or her learning style or to develop strategies to adjust
to the prevalent teaching style. The main types of learning
styles look at preferences for visual learning (reading or
watching), auditory (listening or talking), and kinesthetic
(doing or participating). For example, some learners are
highly visual in the way they perceive information and derive
meaning. For these learners, a structured lecture with few vi-
sual aids is a less desirable learning environment than one
enhanced by visual aids. Others learn better through the
written word, either by reading or note taking. Learners who
are highly auditory in their learning preference derive greater
meaning from just listening to the information. The theory
of multiple intelligences can be useful in this situation, to
further tailor the learning to the individual’s talents.
Assessment data on learning style may be obtained from
the patient in a nursing interview rather than formal testing
inventories used with larger groups. In essence, good as-
sessment of the learner is vital to ensure the most effective
teaching and the most efficient and enjoyable learning.
READINESS AND LEARNING
Readiness is an important concept in learning, regardless
of the learner’s chronological age. Readiness relates to the
developmental needs and tasks of individuals. Consider
the views of two developmental theorists: Erikson (1963)
described readiness as critical periods, whereas Havighurst
(1972) referred to readiness as sensitive periods or the
“teachable moment.” For teaching to be effective and
learning to take place, the readiness of the learner must be
a prime consideration. A good example is the issue of com-
pliance and noncompliance in the patient group.
Compliance is an often misused and misunderstood
concept. We talk about patients being noncompliant when
they do not follow their discharge or healthcare teaching
instructions. The reasons and background for the behavior
in the patient group must first be realized and understood,
not assumed. Compliance is yielding to the desire of oth-
ers, possibly as a result of threats or force. But as we see
later in the change process, threats and force do not bode
well for a permanent change in behavior. Human behav-
ioral change is more effective when one is personally in-
volved in the process. Specifically, how do learning and
readiness apply to receiving and accepting information for
a change in lifestyle? Consider the teenager undergoing
dialysis who carefully monitors his sodium intake after
dialysis but fills up on fast food the day or morning before
the scheduled dialysis. Is this truly noncompliance or de-
velopmental maneuvering with peer pressure and dietary
restrictiveness? Now, consider the adult cardiac patient
with a strict dietary sodium restriction. Is noncompliance
by this individual due to a stubborn adherence to food
preferences, culture, or custom, or perhaps failed health
teaching for change because of a failure to achieve learning
readiness?
The learner must be willing to change and accept the
learning need. When this occurs, readiness for learning is
apparent. This can be seen in terms of King’s (1981) the-
ory of goal attainment: Both the nurse and the patient
must be focused on and sensitive to the same goal. Readi-
ness for the learning and teaching is then present. Ulti-
mately, the effectiveness of the teaching methods and
content is evaluated on the basis of the learning that did
or did not take place. Learning readiness involves the fol-
lowing factors: human motivation, understanding or cog-
nitive level, and applicability or acceptability.
Literacy and language issues are an additional consid-
eration in readiness. For the individual with a low literacy
level, years of adaptive behavior may disguise the inability
to read or process basic information. Likewise, an individ-
ual who speaks English as a second language may perceive
information differently. In each situation, the individual
may be unwilling to indicate to the nurse that he did not
fully understand or accept the information presented. In
addition, literacy and health literacy are different, with
health literacy compounded with new or different health
terminology that has different translational or cultural im-
plications. The readiness to learn is inhibited by additional
factors in these cases. As recommended by Singleton and
Krause (2009), “understanding a patient’s level of health
literacy requires an assessment of the patient’s linguistic
skills and cultural norms and the interpretation of these
skills and norms into health literacy strategies for the 
patient’s plan of care” (p. 6). In addition, the Joint Com-
mission (2013) has estimated that there are more than 
300 languages spoken in the United States and more 
than 90 million Americans have low health literacy (with
difficulty understanding and using health information),
thus recommending communicating health information
that encompasses language needs, individual understand-
ing, and cultural and other barriers (p. 1). 
Motivation
Motivation in humans is a manifestation of internal and
external personal and environmental factors that cause
people to respond to a situation in the way that they do.
Motivation has been classically viewed as needs, drives,
and impulses that cause behavior. One view of motivation
in humans is Maslow’s Theory of Human Motivation,
based on the hierarchy of basic needs. Maslow (1954)
identified 16 propositions about human desires or moti-
vation that implied a complex interrelationship in human
motivation based on internal and external factors as per-
sonally interpreted by the individual. Maslow’s work in-
dicated that the hierarchy of human needs is based on
motivation. But motivation is as intricate as the person,
not merely inherent impulses and drives. And even more
focused on the individual, Bandura (1995) proposed that
efficacy beliefs play a key role in the self-regulation of 
motivation in that people motivate themselves and guide
their actions anticipatorily by the exercise of forethought
and form beliefs about what they can do (p. 6).
The concept of motivation, then, considers the person’s
interpretations of the situation and his or her ability and
146
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

willingness. Readiness, therefore, involves motivation and
understanding. Understanding is the cognitive ability to
perceive and intellectualize the content and consequences
of information. Bandura believes that most actions are
under anticipatory control, as humans use symbolic repre-
sentation to envision future outcomes of behavior. The way
the person views these future consequences of behavior be-
comes the motivation to behave or proceed in the present.
This concept relates well to health teaching, in that the 
patient can be motivated to learn with a realistic anticipa-
tion of the situation and consequences. Nurses can recog-
nize patient anticipation  in the assessment phase, through
interview data, diagnosis of the teaching and learning
needs, and development of behavioral objectives. During
this process, motivation can be assessed and stimulated by
the patient as well as by the professional nurse.
Cognitive Level
A person’s cognitive level is a component of understanding;
the content provided must be at the person’s level of under-
standing. Piaget’s theory of cognitive development describes
the differences in learning levels between the sensorimotor
infant developing object permanence and the older child
who is able to learn abstract mathematical skills through for-
mal operations. Information must be available to the person
at his cognitive level for processing and development of
knowledge. The person may require concrete examples to
envision future consequences or may be able to handle more
abstract or even philosophical examples. An important con-
sideration here is the patient’s state of health. Current phys-
iological or psychological functioning and medications may
interfere with reasoning and understanding as well as with
attention span. Readiness for health teaching in this instance
may be at different levels, depending on physical and emo-
tional functioning.
Applicability and Acceptability
Another component of readiness for the teaching-learning
process is applicability and acceptability of the informa-
tion. The person must perceive that the information is 
applicable to him or her, as an individual, a member of
the family, or a member of a group. If the person denies
that a health problem exists, he or she will not be ready
for health teaching in that area. The information is not
perceived as personally applicable. Acceptability means that
the information must be within the person’s worldview.
Cultural influences are important, because values and 
belief systems influence understanding and acceptability
of information. The health problem and readiness must
be seen in the context of the individual’s belief system.
This is an important relationship, as we see in the health
belief model. Cultural assessment data provide important
information on the patient’s belief system that should be
incorporated into the teaching-learning process.
PRACTICAL TEACHING TIPS
Developing behavioral objectives sets the stage for
the teaching-learning process. Objectives lead to the plan-
ning phase with selection of appropriate teaching strategies
and methods, and evaluation of both the learning out-
comes and the teaching process.
Writing Behavioral Objectives
The purpose of writing behavioral objectives is to provide
a frame of reference for the intended outcomes of the
teaching-learning activity for both the teacher and the
learner. The use of behavioral objectives gives us a focus
on learners and evaluation of their experiences with spe-
cific measures for behaviors. Behavioral objectives are the
intended outcomes of the learners, not the teacher’s goals
for the activity.
Think of behavioral objectives in terms of the learner’s
“who, what, where, when, and how.” In viewing the indi-
vidual components of behavioral objectives, consider those
listed at the start of this chapter. Initially, there is the stem
statement, “On completion of this chapter, the reader will
be able to. . . .” This provides the “who”—the reader of
the chapter, and the “when”—after completion of the
chapter. The “what” and “how” are the action-oriented
outcomes that the learner will demonstrate in the listed
behaviors. Behavioral objectives do not address all of the
content that will ultimately be included in the teaching
plan. Rather, the “what” in the behavioral objectives is 
the outcome we wish to evaluate after the teaching has 
occurred. Consider the chapter objectives to determine the
“how” and “what” information:
1. Discuss (how) the components of teaching and 
learning (what).
2. Examine (how) diﬀerences in the ways people learn
(what).
3. Describe (how) methods to assess learning readiness
and motivation (what).
4. Propose (how) diﬀerent teaching methods for a 
variety of learning needs (what).
5. Devise (how) a plan for patient education that 
contains behavioral objectives, a content outline 
with appropriate teaching methods, and methods for
evaluating learner outcomes (what).
This example focuses on the learner at the end of the
prescribed learning activity, with action verbs—discussing,
examining, describing, proposing, and devising—as their
outcome ability, describing “how” they should be able to
perform.
The next focus is on the complexity that you as
the evaluator (whether learner or teacher) wish to see
demonstrated at the end of the activity. This is the degree
that can be measured, or the “where.” The type and com-
plexity of the outcome behavior are determined by the
level of the learning domain.
CHAPTER 9 The Teaching-Learning Process     ●
147
ON LIN E CON SULT 
Joint Commission Hospitals, Language & 
Culture at 
http://www.jointcommission.org/assets/
1/6/ARoadmapforHospitalsfinalversion727.pdf
Think Cultural Health at 
https://www.thinkculturalhealth.hhs.gov/

When developing behavioral objectives, be sure to 
consider the domains of knowledge. Further, within each
domain there is a leveling process, or progress in attain-
ment of increasingly complex skills. From the work of
Bloom and other teaching and learning theorists, a revised
two-dimensional taxonomy was developed. The revised
taxonomy table considers the interrelationship of two 
dimensions: knowledge and cognitive processes (Anderson
et al., 2001). This is the knowledge or the “what” you wish
the learner to acquire, and the cognitive process is the
demonstration or “how” the learning is evaluated. The tax-
onomy table allows objectives to be developed that address
both knowledge and processes. Consider that the nursing
goal for the patient is to be at the procedural knowledge
level to apply a dressing change at home but also at the
factual knowledge level to evaluate signs of infection or
monitor the response to a prescribed medication.
Knowledge Dimension
In this revised taxonomy table, the knowledge dimension
represents the four rows of the table with the following
knowledge categories:
●Factual, as the basic elements
●Conceptual, or the interrelationships among elements
●Procedural, or demonstration of a set of skills
●Metacognitive, as the highest level of awareness of the
thought processes. (Anderson et al., 2001)
Consider the difference of these categories in nursing
practice, as in the case of a sterile field. “Factual” is simply
the knowledge of the components. “Conceptual” would be
the understanding of the interrelationship, as with spillage
and contamination of the field. “Procedural knowledge”
would be in the performance of a dressing change and
maintenance of the field. “Metacognitive knowledge”
would occur during practice with an unanticipated occur-
rence and resolution using critical thinking skills. In patient
education, we strive for the procedural level, for the return
demonstration of a set of skills, as in the dressing change
needed at home and the protection of the surgical or
wound site.
Cognitive Processes Dimension
In the revised taxonomy table, the cognitive process di-
mension is represented in the six columns of the table as
the following levels of increasing complexity:
●Remember, as recognizing and recalling
●Understand, as interpreting, exemplifying, classifying,
summarizing, inferring, comparing, and explaining
●Apply, as executing and implementing
●Analyze, to include differentiating, organizing, and 
attributing
●Evaluate, or making judgments based on certain 
criteria
●Create, or developing a new process (Anderson et al.,
2001)
Cognitive processes in this taxonomy build from the
simple recall of facts to the extrapolation into a new
process. Continuing to use our example, we want the nurse
in a preceptor position for a senior student or a new gradu-
ate to use cognitive skills through evaluation for the main-
tenance of the sterile field in all practice applications with
the novice nurse or nursing student. In advanced practice,
however, the nurse would consistently use all processes in
the domain for the specialty area, including the creation of
new processes within the selected scope of practice. In the
scenario of patient education, the goal would be for the 
patient to be able to remember, understand, and apply spe-
cific skills, and to analyze and evaluate when professional
intervention is needed, as in the case of potential infection
or a complication.
In the cognitive processes dimension, we first have
the knowledge received through recall or recognition.
Next, we proceed to an understanding of the information.
The final levels of the cognitive domain are applying the
information, analyzing, evaluating the information, and
finally creating for application of the knowledge in other
situations. Consider the levels in the cognitive processes
domain with the following action words in your behav-
ioral objectives for teaching a patient about his or her
condition:
1. Knowledge implies simply that the learner has per-
ceived the information and can report it back to the
teacher. Action verbs such as identiﬁes, recalls, recog-
nizes, and repeats are useful for behavioral objectives 
at this knowledge level of the cognitive domains, such
as the ability to recall a list of the signs of infection in
a learning situation.
2. At the next level, the learner demonstrates understand-
ing of the knowledge, based on the four levels of the
knowledge dimension. Action verbs for behavioral ob-
jectives at this level include explains and compares, as
illustrated by the patient who can explain how to look
for redness indicating infection in a surgical wound.
3. The third level of the cognitive domain is application,
demonstrating the ability to relate the learning to a
situation. The following action verbs are appropriate
for behavioral objectives for the learner’s outcomes at
this point: applies, demonstrates, employs, and uses. For
example, “The patient uses the dressing change skill at
home after discharge.”
4. Further critical thinking occurs at the next cognitive
level of analysis. The learner steps back and analyzes
the information objectively. Action verbs useful at this
level of complexity include assesses, appraises, organizes,
and diﬀerentiates. Now the patient has determined the
need to call the physician’s oﬃce for evaluation of 
potential complications from the surgery.
5. Evaluation occurs at the next level of cognitive
processes in which judgment is an essential compo-
nent. Action verbs appropriate for this level include
evaluates, tests, monitors, and critiques.
6. Creation is the highest level of the cognitive domain,
in which the learner manipulates the concepts from
the learning in new combinations and situations. Ac-
tion verbs addressing this level of complexity in the
taxonomy include creates, designs, devises, constructs,
and generates.
Both the cognitive and psychomotor domains appear
in the taxonomy table with the focus on knowledge and
148
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

the cognitive process. The psychomotor domain is easily
apparent in the application of the knowledge. It is impor-
tant to include behavioral objectives at the various knowl-
edge levels to measure patient progress from simple to
complex skills. For example, suppose you have taught a
newly diagnosed diabetic patient to self-administer insulin.
As the teacher, you must be able to see how the learner-
patient has accomplished this task, beyond the simple 
return demonstration with saline injections that you 
observe. At the next level of manipulation of the psy-
chomotor skill, the learner demonstrates the entire proce-
dure of proper injection of insulin, from filling the syringe
to disposing of the supplies. Precision of the psychomotor
skill is demonstrated when the learner can perform the in-
jection on schedule with a sense of comfort in her ability
in the process, expressed with the phrase “Demonstrates
skill in the procedure.” Articulation, or full use of the skill,
is demonstrated when the diabetic patient is able to 
manage at home with insulin, including testing blood 
glucose for additional needs during stressful periods. This
is reflected in the phrase “Uses results of blood glucose
monitoring to regulate. . . .”
The highest level of skill acquisition comes when the
individual has a sense of competence and the skill has 
become a natural part of his routine; the individual can
determine signs of hyperglycemia or hypoglycemia and
self-test as naturally as she dresses or bathes. The individual
has incorporated the process sufficiently to spend a month
traveling with a sense of independence, comfort, and con-
trol in the process. Action terms reflecting this level include
“Independently monitors and effectively regulates admin-
istration of insulin.” These actions demonstrate Bandura’s
concept of mastery experiences in self-efficacy.
The affective domain is less apparent in the revised tax-
onomy table but is inferred in the higher levels of knowledge
and cognitive processes. In fact, the creators of the revised
taxonomy propose that “nearly every cognitive objective has
an affective component” (Anderson et al., 2001). For the
affective domain, complexity progresses from receiving to
responding, valuing, organizing values, and finally charac-
terizing or standing for certain values transmitted. Consider
the newly diagnosed diabetic patient. Acceptance of her
condition is vital to developing long-range personal care
skills. But this is a difficult domain to measure because 
values and attitudes are more difficult to assess than knowl-
edge or psychomotor skills. Although action verbs for 
the affective domain include receiving, responding, valuing,
organizing values, and characterizing, this is a difficult do-
main of learning to evaluate. We must rely on the individual
to communicate her attitudes, feelings, and values honestly
through verbal and nonverbal behaviors.
Behavioral objectives are the intended action-oriented
outcomes of an educational process. These objectives are
tools for teaching, learning, and evaluating. Evaluation
data can provide useful feedback on whether the learner
has achieved the objective or requires repetition, reinforce-
ment, or revision.
Planning for Learning
Once the assessment of learners and teachers takes place
and the behavioral objectives have been developed, we
must plan for the specific content and how it will be trans-
mitted to the patient group. But this sounds very directive
and controlling. Recall that with the adult learner, the
focus is on the holistic individual based on the assessment
data and the mutually acceptable objectives.
The assessment data obtained earlier in this process
have been used to define and describe the patient, includ-
ing characteristics, attributes, learning assets and deficits,
readiness, and specific needs to be addressed. This proce-
dure was conducted with the patient as an individual,
family, or group to diagnose the learning needs and 
prepare for continuation of the process. Next, behavioral 
objectives were identified to guide the process and plan
for the evaluation of outcomes. Now we must plan the
content, teaching strategies and methods of delivery,
learning resources, and specific evaluation procedures.
Traditional lesson plans are frequently prepared in a
column format. The first column contains the behavioral
objectives developed for the learning activity. Subsequent
columns contain learning content, teaching strategies or
principles, learning resources, evaluation methods, and
timing, which can all be viewed easily in relation to the
behavioral objectives. A sample format is posted on the
Intranet site for this text. This format is actually the plan
for the teacher to ensure that the behavioral objectives are
addressed with appropriate content, methods, materials,
and evaluation methods. It may have to be more flexible
based on patient needs.
The learning content is the specific content outline 
designed to meet the objective. Teaching strategies relate
to the objective and the specific content, including varia-
tions for the learning setting and patients. Suggested learn-
ing resources and materials—perhaps identifying the
appropriate tear sheet, pamphlet, learning module, or Web
site—are proposed to enhance the teaching strategy and
meet the learner’s cognitive style, especially if a group or
lecture presentation is appropriate for the general audience
but may not meet the needs of individual learners. These
learning resources may also need to be provided as trans-
lations in the native language of the learner for reinforce-
ment in the home environment.
All of the planning so far is the proposal for the teaching-
learning activity. Before implementing it, one must 
specify evaluation methods along with a proposed time 
frame for the process. Implementation of the teaching-
learning process can then proceed using the strategies iden-
tified in the plan. Evaluation of the teaching-learning process
is essential and is designed to address the behavioral objec-
tives at the level of the taxonomy specified for acquisition of
affective, cognitive, and psychomotor behaviors.
Consider the simple example of a 56-year-old female
outpatient with unstable hypertension without angina.
She has come to the health clinic after being denied
health insurance last week because of the prepolicy 
examination requirement. Blood pressure measurements
ranged from 210/105 to 185/100 on two consecutive 
visits. She has had no serious illness or hospitalizations,
but she is leaving town in five weeks to visit family
abroad for a month. Today, her doctor prescribed daily
antihypertensive medication and a low-sodium diet. The
patient has verbalized the need to lower her blood pres-
sure for insurance purposes. She also reported that she
CHAPTER 9 The Teaching-Learning Process     ●
149

has used a salt substitute for the past three days and has
continued to play tennis three times a week. Her descrip-
tions of nutritional intake indicate high dietary fat and
sodium content in meals prepared at home and selected
in restaurants. She volunteers much information about
cooking for her family as well as attending gourmet cook-
ing classes at the local college, which she signed up for
because she wanted to watch the teacher and ask ques-
tions rather than just read the cookbooks.
The assessment data indicate a teaching deficit, learn-
ing readiness, and the motivation to adhere to a treatment
plan within a confined time frame. You and the patient
determine that you will schedule individualized teaching
sessions with her for her next four weekly visits. Behavioral
objectives for this teaching-learning process might include
the following:
1. Explains food selection and preparation techniques to
maintain a low-sodium diet.
2. Monitors blood pressure regularly.
3. Uses nisoldipine as prescribed, monitoring for side 
eﬀects, adverse eﬀects, and toxicity.
4. Makes appropriate food choices and preparations for
maintenance of a low-sodium diet.
5. Organizes activities including maintenance of her 
exercise program.
6. Reapplies for health insurance coverage.
The objectives should be mutually acceptable to both you
and the patient.
The learning content addresses the behavioral objec-
tives by teaching food selections and revisions needed with
food preparation, periodic assessment of blood pressure,
administration of medication, monitoring for side effects
and toxicity, and maintenance of a healthy nutritional and
exercise program. Teaching strategies are then selected for
the individualized cognitive style of the patient, using 
resources such as videos and written information to take
home. Evaluation methods are proposed to address each
of the behavioral objectives at the following four weekly
visits, specifying the time frame for each activity.
Teaching Strategies and Methods
Teaching strategies and methods are geared toward 
accomplishing the behavioral objectives in light of the
audience. Selection is also based on how the content can
best be delivered and addresses the affective, cognitive,
and psychomotor domains of learning. Teaching meth-
ods generally are lecture presentations, demonstrations,
discussions, modeling, role-playing, individualized 
instruction, programmed instruction, computer-assisted
instruction (CAI), other simulations, and group activi-
ties. This is the overall plan for the learning experience.
The instructional methods that best meet the learner’s
needs must still be determined.
Selection of a teaching strategy and some combination
of teaching methods depends on the patient. For a group
of 24, a lecture format followed by breaking out into 
four small groups to apply the lecture content may be
quite appropriate for presenting information on child de-
velopment and wellness practices. For a group of three
new mothers on the postpartum unit, a lecture would be
impersonal and less effective than a small-group discus-
sion on plans for returning home with their healthy
neonates. In our example of the patient with hyperten-
sion, individualized teaching would be most effective, 
because this individual prefers the interaction with a
teacher and has a limited time frame to accomplish the
behavioral outcome objectives. The characteristics of the
patient group and the intended outcomes, therefore,
guide the selection of appropriate teaching methods. For
further information on selected instructional methods,
refer to Table 9.2.
Enhancing the delivery of content and improving
learning on the basis of the cognitive style of the patient
require careful selection of learning resources. Teaching
aids and instructional technology are frequently used in
teaching situations to enhance the content and actively 
involve the learner in the teaching-learning process. Using
assessment data, consider how the patient told you that he
or she best learned information in the past. When prepar-
ing for larger group presentations, consider how smaller
group activities or assignments will address the needs of
learners who do not do their best in a large group setting.
Remember that adults learn best when actively involved
in the process, both intellectually and physically. Think of
ways to move the patient from a passive to an active learn-
ing situation.
A major consideration is how to enhance the content
for the learner’s own cognitive style. Some learners are
highly perceptive in one or several senses in learning in-
formation. They may be highly visual, auditory, tactile, or
perceptive in some combination of these senses. Recall the
usefulness of understanding multiple intelligences. When
you select teaching resources, consider whether the learners
are highly visual and obtain and process information
mainly through observation of the world around them.
These learners do well with visual aids that enhance the
content presented in the teaching strategy, such as with
presentation graphics or with information presented
through pamphlets, handouts, and online searches.
Compare a visual style to the learner whose auditory
sense is the most perceptive. Effective auditory teaching aids
include video clips, audiotapes, and recordings with well-
developed sound presentations. In addition, this learner may
do well using the voice notes recorder on a smartphone and
reinforce learning through review later. For the individual
who prefers to touch and manipulate new information, plan
for active involvement in the teaching and learning through
demonstrations, models, and samples.
Adults learn best when actively involved 
in the process. Think of ways to move 
the patient from a passive to an 
active learning situation.
Another consideration is whether the learner prefers
to be an individualist or to have other people in the learn-
ing environment for interaction and stimulation. Some
people learn in a very individualistic way. They prefer to
obtain information and then go their own way to process,
analyze, and synthesize the material. Having a group dis-
cussion to evaluate and apply information directly after
it is presented in a lecture is stressful, if not torturous, to
150
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

this individual, who needs time before sharing thoughts
or applying the information. Alternatively, some learners
enjoy interactions and learning in a stimulating group 
environment. A large, impersonal lecture is deadly boring
to this learner, who thrives on group discussion to work
on questions posed in a case study. But learners are gen-
erally not easy to classify; these characteristics can be com-
bined over a wide range. Pure types are rare, and the
challenge is to find those teaching strategies and resources
that enhance the teaching content and promote learning
for each individual. Resources for different cognitive
styles are presented in Table 9.3.
In addition to patient teaching, contemporary nursing
practice consists of collegial teaching and learning oppor-
tunities such as educational programs, lectures, demon-
strations, group discussions, professional and clinical
conferences, case studies, clinical preceptorships, grand
rounds, and chat rooms, just to mention a few. The same
steps are involved in this process as with assessment, diag-
nosis of learning needs, development of behavioral objec-
tives, preparation of a plan with selection of teaching
strategies and resources, and evaluation methods. The dif-
ference generally lies in the size of the group, which can
range from a one-to-one collegial conference to a meeting
of the unit staff to a large interdisciplinary group of 
professionals who are interested in the latest research on a
selected topic. With a large group, it is essential to assess
the prevalent characteristics of the learner population. This
includes the overall learning need that will become the
topic for the presentation. Behavioral outcomes should 
address what the learners are expected to have gained as
knowledge and skills at the end of the program or teaching
session, because they will be the ones providing the evalu-
ation data. Teaching strategies may include an interdisci-
plinary team approach, especially for presentations across
disciplines to foster the development of knowledge and
collaboration. Although active learning in small groups 
is highly effective with professional colleagues, this can 
effectively occur as a small-group breakout phase after the
basic information has been presented in a large group pre -
sentation format. Highly effective learning resources in
this case include multimedia presentations with presenta-
tion graphics, video clips, posters, models, photographs,
pamphlets, handouts, and reading lists. A word of warning
about presentation graphics: Do not read the entire pre -
sentation from the screen. Present the pertinent points
graphically to engage the audience rather than lose their
attention (Box 9.2). In addition, the presentation may be
printed as handouts for the audience in which the learner
can add additional pertinent notes. After the program or
presentation, the teacher or program coordinator receives
completed evaluation forms from the program participants
CHAPTER 9 The Teaching-Learning Process     ●
151
TABLE 9.2
Sample Teaching Methods
Method
Lecture
Group discussion
Computer-assisted 
instruction
Simulated 
environments, 
games, activities, 
and role-playing
Strategies
• To make more learner-centered, provide time for questions/
discussion or break-out sessions for discussion
• Must address mixed audience of visual, auditory, and 
kinesthetic learners
• Focus on important concepts and provide aids for 
application of knowledge by learners
• Requires good skills in group dynamics by the teacher to
keep on the topic and focus the learning
• Allows opportunities for application of critical thinking skills,
problem-solving, and teamwork by the group
• Ideal method for transformative learning
• Mixed audience of visual, auditory, and kinesthetic learners is
still a consideration on a smaller scale 
• May include demonstrations for active learning
• Requires careful design to maintain interest 
• Requires motivation and persistence by learner
• Design promotes individual learner feedback but limited
teacher-learner interaction
• Requires environmental staging and engaging activity
• Role-play may be done with descriptive scripts or be more
flexible
• Requires development of rapport and group skills
• Actively engages learners when the situation is presented in
a nonthreatening and nonpersonal manner and viewed as
“What if . . .”
Characteristics
Large group 
Controlled by the 
teacher
Small group 
Learner-centered as 
long as it does not 
revert to a mini-lecture
Learner-centered, 
independent and 
self-paced activity
Learner-centered, 
with an individual or 
in small groups

152
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
TABLE 9.3
Teaching Methods and Resources to Address the Cognitive Style 
of the Learner
Cognitive Style
Teaching Methods
Teaching Resources
Highly visual
Small-group discussion, role-playing, 
Multimedia presentations, videos, charts, posters, 
simulations, demonstrations, 
models, photographs, whiteboards/bulletin boards, 
programmed instruction, 
publications, handouts, reading lists, CAI with 
computer simulations
effective graphics, e-mail, chat rooms
Highly auditory
Lecture and discussion, role-playing, 
Videos, recordings (prepared audios or 
simulations, demonstrations
self-recorded tapes or notes), CAI with auditory 
reinforcers, telephone follow-up
Highly tactile
Small-group activities, individualized 
Models, bulletin boards, samples, books, pamphlets, 
teaching, role-playing, simulations, 
prepared handouts, CAI requiring responses to 
demonstrations, games, 
cues, chat rooms, e-mail
programmed instruction, 
computer simulations
Highly interpersonal
Small-group discussion, role-playing, 
Videos, audios, charts, posters, models, 
simulations, demonstrations, 
photographs, pamphlets, CAI, teleconferencing, 
some computer simulations
chat rooms, e-mail
Highly individualistic
Lecture, simulations, demonstrations, 
Multimedia presentations, videos, audios, charts, 
programmed instruction, computer 
posters, models, photographs, books, handouts, 
simulations, computer searches
paper and pencils for note taking, CAI, e-mail
BOX 9.2
Tips for Presentations
●Do not read from the screen. Presentation graphics should be used to engage the audience. Use the information on
the screen as talking points to keep you on track, not the audience distracted.
●Do not use all capital letters—they imply shouting and are not visually engaging.
●Use a clear font, not a fancy script that is hard to read and distracting for the audience.
●Limit the information on a slide or screen; for example, use only four or ﬁve lines on the screen and make sure
they are legible from the back of the room.
●Keep it simple. Limit the graphics and displays to important information without distracting background colors or
graphics.
●Consider the essential number of slides or displays, in terms of content, allotted time, essential information, and
printing costs if you are planning on handouts.
●Carefully proofread to avoid spelling and grammatical errors without reliance on the spell-checker function (e.g.,
three, their, and there are all in the dictionary).
●If you plan on distributing copies of your presentation as handouts or electronically, make sure the copies are read-
able, have the same information as your presentation, and include appropriate citations, if applicable.
●Remember your highly auditory learners—speak to them, while assisting your visual learners, who are watching
the display rather than you.
●For the active learner, consider a follow-up activity to reinforce the content you presented.
and then develops an overall analysis based on the evalua-
tion data the participants provide.
Evaluation of Outcomes
Evaluating outcomes is a vital component of the teaching-
learning process. It may be ongoing and may lead to impor-
tant information for revisions needed in subsequent sessions.
Although evaluation strategies focus on both the teaching
and the learning that occurred, the primary focus is on the
learner. Is the learner able to demonstrate the outcomes en-
visioned at the beginning of the process? As in the nursing
process, the evaluation phase of the teaching-learning process
is used to assess the effectiveness of the process and whether
the patient has resolved a knowledge deficit.
Patients are more difficult to evaluate than traditional
student learners. Cognitive domain learning activities of
students are easily measured with paper-and-pencil tests
and computer-adaptive testing that assesses knowledge and
cognitive processes. In the patient teaching situation, such

tests are rarely used except in research or large group situ-
ations. Patient evaluation can be complex, with problems
related to timing, access, continuity, measurement, and
other factors. In addition, recall that adult learners should
be involved in evaluating their own learning. Normally,
patient evaluation is done with methods such as return
demonstrations, observation, diaries, rating scales, discus-
sion, and electronic communication.
We used different action verbs to address the three 
domains of learning and levels, or taxonomy, within each.
Capturing evaluation data requires specificity in the be-
havioral outcome objective. The objectives should indicate
how you are measuring the outcomes of the teaching-
learning process.
The affective domain consists of attitudes, feelings, and
values. Evaluation data should show how the learner pro-
gressed from receiving to internalizing the values mutually
agreed on for the learning. In the case of a newly diagnosed
diabetic patient, the teacher and the learner must be able
to measure or see attitudinal or value changes through 
verbal and nonverbal behaviors. The action verbs in the af-
fective domain are receiving, responding, valuing, organizing
values, and characterizing specific values. We need the indi-
vidual to communicate her attitudes, feelings, and values
in verbal and nonverbal behaviors. Methods of evaluation
in this area include interviews, discussions, and observa-
tions that demonstrate certain beliefs and values. Another
means of evaluating affective learning is a reflective diary
in which the patient can record feelings and problems that
arise between teaching sessions. Analyzing the content of
the diaries with the patient can provide useful information
on the affective domain as well as knowledge gaps in cog-
nitive processes. And with the availability of electronic
communication, cognitive and affective domains can be
evaluated via e-mail or electronic postings.
In the cognitive domain, knowledge builds from simple
recall to understanding, application, analysis, evaluation,
and synthesis or creation of information. Interviews and
discussion with patients can be used to evaluate whether
the learner can repeat or report back the information as
knowledge gains. For understanding, the patient describes,
explains, and compares information during the interview.
Application of the information can be evaluated as the 
patient demonstrates and uses the information, providing
specific examples of how this was done. Critical thinking
and analysis take this one step further, as the patient 
explains problems and difficulties that arose and steps taken
to solve problems without the presence of the teacher. Eval-
uation by the learner occurs when the patient determines
which method worked best. Creation involves manipulat-
ing the learning in new combinations and effectively 
applying the information to a similar problem or situation.
The learner has devised a new way of handling a situation
on the basis of information obtained in another area. 
Occasionally, post-tests are used in patient teaching, but
test anxiety is a major deterrent to their use for some 
patients. The evaluation strategies most useful for both
teachers and learners to gauge cognitive learning are dis-
cussion, questioning, and allowing for description, whether
through face-to-face or by electronic means.
Evaluating patient outcomes in the psychomotor do-
main is easiest through direct observation of skill attain-
ment. At the simplest level of psychomotor skill attainment
is the patient’s ability to imitate, as seen in a return demon-
stration. This allows one to assess understanding and the
ability to perform a specific skill, such as testing one’s blood
glucose. But demonstration of a skill in a clinical setting
can be artificial, because the patient’s own environment
often has additional factors not present in the healthcare
agency, such as shared bathrooms or medication storage
problems in a home with toddlers. Flowcharts, diaries, and
checklists are easy for patients to use as reminders and 
reinforcers in the home, and they can then be discussed at
the next clinic visit or teaching session interview. The level
of psychomotor skills can be assessed with a checklist or
flowchart in terms of following instructions to proper
scheduling, precision, and problem-solving in the proce-
dure. The patient can be encouraged to note problems 
encountered and how they were handled, to demonstrate
skills in both cognitive and psychomotor domains. Con-
sider the use of electronic calendars or smart phones in
some patient situations. This will provide evaluation data
for both the patient, as the learner, and the nurse, as the
teacher.
In our example of the patient with hypertension, we
implemented an individualized teaching strategy within a
limited time frame to accomplish the outcome objectives
aimed at the cognitive and psychomotor domains. One
method of evaluation would be for the patient to maintain
a diary, including daily food intake and exercise, and list
daily blood pressure measurements, and medications
taken. This evaluation method provides visual data that
address the initial five behavioral objectives agreed on by
both the patient and the nurse. At each of the four patient
visits or teaching sessions, the information in the diary is
reviewed and discussed. When both the learner and the
teacher are satisfied that these objectives have been met,
control of the hypertension problem may be present. A
health certificate can then be provided by the primary care
provider so that the last objective, reapplication for health
insurance coverage, can be attempted with an outlook for
success. At the final teaching visit, the patient and the
nurse discuss the strategies and resources used during the
four-week process, to evaluate the teaching that took place.
Electronic communication provides an additional resource
for follow-up and evaluation.
Evaluation data can provide useful feedback that 
objectives have been met or that repetition, reinforce-
ment, or revision is needed. Teaching strategies, like
methods and resources, should be evaluated by both the
teacher and the learner. Discovering what worked and
what may have worked better helps the learner view the
process and reinforce the learning while sharing with the
teacher ways to improve and strategies for the future. 
Important factors here are encouragement and openness
for honest and constructive evaluation data from both
teacher and learner.
CHAPTER 9 The Teaching-Learning Process     ●
153
ON LIN E CON SULT 
National Health Information Center at 
http://www.health.gov/nhic/
Health Literacy Information at 
http://nnlm.gov/outreach/consumer/hlthlit.html

154
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
In 2010, the Association of Women’s Health, Obstetric, and Neonatal Nurses (AWHONN) submitted infor-
mation on assessment and care of the late preterm infant included in the National Guidelines that included 
discharge planning including patient education, counseling, and validation of knowledge including signs and
symptoms of jaundice and strategies to prevent infection (NGC, 2010, p. 1).
Question: How will you use this information as part of discharge planning for the new family with a late
preterm infant? First, consider a mother and child within a traditional family with one older sibling. Second,
consider the mother and neonate discharged to a family environment with a maternal grandmother as the
leader of the family. Remember to consider your patients as individuals and families and their learning needs.
Source: National Guideline Clearinghouse. (NGC). (2010). Assessment and care of the late preterm infant. Evidence-
based clinical practice guideline. Retrieved from http://www.guideline.gov/content.aspx?id=24066&search=
discharge+planning#Section420
K E Y  P O I N T S
●There are several schools of learning theories. Major examples of these theories are behaviorism, gestalt,
social cognitive, humanism, andragogy, transformative learning, and multiple intelligences.
●Teaching is more than transmitting information. The information must be received, understood, and
evaluated by the learner.
●Learning is the perception and assimilation of the information presented to us in a variety of ways.
●Characteristics of learning include:
●Perception of new information
●Initial reaction to the information
●Ability to remember or repeat the information
●Rejection or acceptance of the information (understanding)
●Use of the information in a similar situation (application)
●Critical analysis of the information
●Incorporation of the information into the value system (evaluation)
●Use of the information in various situations or combinations (creation)
●There are three learning domains:
●Affective—attitudes, feelings, and values
●Cognitive—knowledge and thought processes
●Psychomotor—demonstration of behaviors
●Cognitive learning styles look at how information is interpreted, influences from others, and reasoning
methods. Teaching and learning strategies can then be developed to match the learner’s needs and 
resources.
●Readiness occurs when the learner is willing to change and view the learning need and includes motivation,
understanding, and applicability or acceptability. 
●The purpose of writing behavioral objectives is to provide a frame of reference for the intended outcomes
of the teaching-learning activity for both the teacher and the learner with the focus on the learner and
their intended learning outcomes.
●Teaching strategies are geared toward accomplishing the behavioral objectives in light of the audience.
●Evaluating learning outcomes of the teaching-learning process is essential and is designed to address the
behavioral objectives at the taxonomic level specified for the acquisition of affective, cognitive, and 
psychomotor behaviors.
●Evaluation of teaching strategies by the learner provides a further view of the process and reinforces the
learning.

CHAPTER 9 The Teaching-Learning Process     ●
155
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Explain which theory of learning and learning style is applicable to the way in which you learn best.
2. Remember those two patients following their hip replacement surgeries? One is an architect who designs custom
homes and meets with his customers for at least an hour before he develops the house plans to ensure that he
truly understands their desires and ideas. The other is a retired English professor concerned about the rehabilita-
tion schedule and the completion of a collection of essays that must be submitted to his publisher in six weeks.
Plan for their individualized discharge teaching using the theory of multiple intelligences.
3. Develop a staff conference as a seminar presentation on a clinical topic, with appropriate content for a unit 
staff of 10 registered nurses, 6 licensed practical nurses, and 15 certified assistive personnel. Propose assessment
data on the learners and ways to match cognitive styles and teaching strategies for the group. Be prepared to
participate in an online or class discussion, to be scheduled by your instructor.
4. Read the case studies in the Case Study Bank on the Intranet site and be prepared to discuss them in class.
5. Review the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter, and discuss it in the context of the
contents of the chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.
REFERENCES
Anderson, L. W., Krathwohl, D. R., Airasian, P. W., 
Cruikshank, K. A., Mayer, R. E., Pintrich, P. R., 
Raths, R. E., & Wittrock, M .C. (Eds.) (2001). A 
taxonomy for learning, teaching, and assessing: A revision 
of Bloom’s educational objectives (abridged ed.). 
New York: Longman.
Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Bandura, A. (1995). Exercise of personal and collective 
efficacy in changing societies. In A. Bandura (Ed.), Self-
efficacy in changing societies (pp. 1–45). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Bandura, A., Thoresen, C. E., & Plante, T. G. (2007). Spirit,
science, and health: How the spiritual mind fuels physical 
wellness. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Benner, P. (1984). From novice to expert: Excellence and 
power in clinical nursing practice. Menlo Park, CA: 
Addison-Wesley.
Bloom, B. S. (Ed.). (1956). Taxonomy of educational objectives.
New York: Longman.
Erikson, E. H. (1963). Childhood and society (2nd ed.). 
New York: Norton.
Fawcett, J. (2006). Nursing philosophies, models, and theories:
A focus on the future. In A. M. Tomey & M. R. Alligood
(Eds.), Nursing theory: Utilization and application (3rd ed.,
pp. 499–518). St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
Gardner, H. (1993a). Frames of mind: The theory of multiple 
intelligences (2nd ed.). New York: Basic Books.
Gardner, H. (1993b). Multiple intelligences: The theory in 
practice. New York: Basic Books.
Gardner, H. (1999). Intelligence reframed: Multiple intelligences
for the 21st century. New York: Basic Books.
Gardner, H. (2006). Multiple intelligences: New horizons. 
New York: Basic Books.
Havighurst, R. J. (1972). Developmental tasks and education
(3rd ed.). New York: David McKay.
Joint Commission. (2013). Facts about patient-centered communi-
cations. Retrieved from http://www.jointcommission.org/
assets/1/18/Patient_Centered_Communications_7_3_12.pdf
King, I. M. (1981). A theory for nursing: Systems, concepts,
process. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Kippers, S. M., & Boden, C. J. (2012). Pathways to transformation:
Learning in relationship. Charlotte, NC: Information Age.
Knowles, M. S. (1990). The adult learner: A neglected species
(4th ed.). Houston, TX: Gulf.
Knowles, M. S., & associates (1985). Andragogy in action. 
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Kolb, D. (1981). Learning style inventory. Boston, MA: McBer
and Company.
Maslow, A. H. (1954). Motivation and personality. New York:
Harper.
Maslow, A. H. (1971). The farther reaches of the human mind.
New York: Viking Press.
Mezirow, J. (2000). Learning to think like an adult: Core 
concepts of transformation theory. In J. Mezirow & 
associates, Learning as transformation: Critical perspectives 
on a theory in progress (pp. 3–33). San Francisco, CA: 
Jossey-Bass.National Guidelines Clearinghouse. (2010).
National Guideline Clearinghouse (NGC). 2010. Assessment
and care of the late preterm infant. Evidence-based clinical
practice guideline. Retrieved from http://www.guideline.gov/
content.aspx?id=24066&search=discharge +planning#
Section420
Rogers, C., & Freiberg, H. J. (1994). Freedom to learn
(3rd ed.). New York: Merrill/Macmillan.

Singleton, K., & Krause, E. M. S. (2009). Understanding 
cultural and linguistic barriers to health literacy. Online
Journal of Issues in Nursing, retrieved from http://www
.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/ANAMarketplace/
ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/TableofContents/Vol142009/
No3Sept09/Cultural-and-Linguistic-Barriers-.aspx 
Skinner, B.F. (2010). A brief survey of operant behavior. 
Retrieved from http://www.bfskinner.org/BFSkinner/
SurveyOperantBehavior.html
Vella, J. K. (2002). Learning to listen, learning to teach: The
power of dialogue in adult education. San Francisco, CA: 
Jossey-Bass.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ginsburg, H. P., & Opper, S. (1988). Piaget’s theory of intellec-
tual development (3rd ed.). New York: Prentice-Hall.
Knowles, M. S. (1980). The modern practice of adult education:
From pedagogy to andragogy (Rev. ed.). Chicago, IL: Follett.
Mezirow, J. (1991). Transformational dimensions of adult 
learning. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
ONLINE RESOURCES
Joint Commission
http://www.jointcommission.org
Carl Jung
http://www.cgjungpage.org
Howard Gardner
http://howardgardner.com/
Abraham Maslow
http://www.maslow.com
Myers & Briggs Foundation
http://www.myersbriggs.org/
156
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Apply systems theory to an organizational scenario.
2. Examine the goals, structure, functions, and culture of selected organizations.
3. Differentiate between management and leadership.
4. Analyze factors included in motivational and humanistic management and leadership theories.
5. Examine the various managerial and leadership roles for and skills of nurses in a healthcare
organization.
6. Apply methods for appropriate and effective delegation in a healthcare scenario.
7. Inventory your personal knowledge, skills, and abilities in management and leadership for professional
nursing practice.
Organization
Organizational Structure
Centralization
Decentralization
Flat Organizational Structures
Tall Organizational Structures
Organizational Functions
Management
Motivational Theories
Theory X
Theory Y
Hygiene Factors
Motivational Factors
Theory Z
Executive
Leadership
Organizational Culture
Power
Negotiation
Delegation
157
“I am where I am because 
I believe in all possibilities.”
Whoopi Goldberg
Key Terms
Managing and Leading 
in the Organization
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
10

Max Weber (1947), the renowned German sociologist, de-
scribed an organization in economic and social terms 
as “a system of purposive activity of a specified kind” 
(p. 151). An organization is simply an arrangement of
human and material resources for some purpose, as in the
creation of some institution or agency to meet a stated aim.
Organizations range from the single-purpose association to
multipurpose, monolithic institutions. They have been
studied for years in an effort to improve outputs as the in-
tended mission or purpose. Organizations can be viewed in
terms of their structure, function, and people. Most simply,
they can be envisioned as the open system described in
Chapter 2, with inputs, throughput or transformations, and
outputs. But understanding organizations, especially health-
care organizations, becomes more complex as organizations
expand, contract, and redefine themselves. Changes in 
organizations are particularly relevant in light of the need
for more operational transparency that occurred following
recent and highly visible organizational and executive 
scandals, along with a view of the global economy.
This chapter examines how organizations are structured,
managed, and envisioned to meet their intended mission
through management and leadership. Nursing management
and leadership in an organization must have a broad 
environmental, interpersonal, and dynamic vision, beyond 
patients and equipment in an isolated hospital or agency.
Principles of scientific management, management the-
ory, and leadership have undergone continued investigation
and change. Many writers have defined management, but
no one definition of management has been accepted uni-
versally. The same is true on theories of leadership and the
characteristics of a true leader. They discuss the leader and
the manager, sometimes interchangeably. Buckingham
(2005) looks at the difference in terms of the individual’s
focus: the leader on the future, the manager on staff, and
outcomes for the organization. Use of effective management
and leadership theories and skills are critical components 
of professional practice. Communication, negotiation, and
delegation are important factors for both the manager and
the leader in the organization. At times, the nurse may func-
tion as manager, as leader, or as both manager and leader.
However, there are differences between effective manage-
ment and true leadership.
We will initially consider the organization, since this
knowledge is essential to both the manager and the leader
for development of skills and abilities in managing and
leading. Next, we will consider management theory and
applications followed by leadership, since this is often the
course that nurses follow in their professional careers—
first effectively managing care for patients and care
providers and then providing leadership for effective, car-
ing, and innovative care for patients of nursing. Applying
these concepts to contemporary nursing practice is vital
for the operation of a successful organization and an 
effective healthcare system.
ORGANIZATIONS AS SYSTEMS
Systems theory provides a useful perspective for viewing
the internal and external influences with any organization.
In fact, Bertalanffy (1968), who provided the foundations
of general systems theory, stated that the only meaningful
way to study an organization is as a system (p. 9). The actual
selection of a particular systems model depends on the com-
plexity and uniqueness of the organization. It requires care-
ful assessment of the organization, examining mission and
goals, present structure, and the prevailing management and
leadership styles being used to guide practice and address
organizational goals. Interestingly, Hall and Tolbert (2005)
conclude that because organizations are so complex, orga-
nizational theories must be used in combination to address
the complex phenomena (p. 207).
Healthcare delivery systems are complex open envi-
ronmental systems. Agency administrative policy and 
operational structures internally influence and guide the
system. The surrounding environmental system of the 
organization is the healthcare arena that provides the pro-
fessional, specialization, economic, and additional value
structures for the organizational unit and its members.
The broader social environment reflects societal norms
and values through the real and potential needs of health-
care consumers. Direct or indirect linkages among all 
system parts are assumed to be essential for effectiveness
and continuity. Let us look further at this complex system
and the internal environment.
Intricacies of an Organization
A useful perspective for viewing the intricacies of a health-
care organization is to envision it as a system affected by
other systems and within the larger healthcare and societal
systems (environment or suprasystem). In addition, health-
care organizations focus on people and have the dynamic
influence of emerging technology. As a review, consider the
principles of systems theory and organizational characteris-
tics in Table 10.1. To understand the organizational system,
a careful assessment is needed of the organization’s goals and
values, hierarchical structure, leadership and management,
interpersonal and communication systems, resources and
technology, boundaries, and external environments.
Goals and Values
Goals and values are implied in a statement of purpose or
philosophy and are the basis of the organization’s existence.
The institutional mission statement and original or revised
incorporation papers contain important information on
values—how people within the organization are viewed as
customers, staff members, and administrators. Humanistic
versus mechanistic values are apparent in these statements
of mission, philosophy, and purpose. Organizational values,
as the reasons for existence, are provided in vision or goals
statements.
Hierarchical Structure
The hierarchical structure is the institutional design and
lines of authority, as demonstrated by a bureaucratic or
organic structure. The system structure is described in 
formal documents and further interpreted in operation
through informal sources, such as technical staff, to deter-
mine how tasks are actually accomplished in the organi-
zation. The structural design is intended to accomplish the
system’s mission to provide the intended services through
158
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

leadership and management practices. This structure may
be further characterized as complex or simple, centralized
or decentralized, tall or flat.
Leadership and Management
Leadership and management styles vary among organiza-
tions. As seen later in this chapter, these styles may be 
directed from the topmost governing board or corporate
officers downward. For example, in a bureaucratic orga -
nization leadership may come from the board of directors,
through the chief executive officer (CEO), and be highly
prescriptive. Management in this bureaucratic organiza-
tion operating under Theory X will also be directive. 
Alternatively, leadership and management may be more
flexible and participatory, as in Theory Z organizations.
Leadership will guide the organization and drive the mis-
sion. The management style pervasive in the organization
should be meeting the organizational goals.
Communication Systems
The interpersonal and communication systems are the psy-
chosocial and interdisciplinary relationships unique to the
organization—role relationships, attitudes, and values of
people and groups within the system. Examine the expected
behaviors of each member of the organization and the 
interrelationships, in both formal and informal interactions.
The organizational culture is a vital consideration here.
Resources and Technology
Resources and technology are the physical resources and 
collaborative human resources. Physical resources include
operating and investment capital, equipment, informa-
tion systems, services, and tangible assets. Collaborative
resources are the additional skills and expertise to provide
added input to system functions; this includes the re-
sources for evidence-based practice.
External Environments
Once the system itself is characterized, move outward into
the environmental layers of the open system, or the
suprasystem. To understand the external environment, we
must first reevaluate the organization’s mission. As in any
business, this provides us with market forces. Is a product
being produced or a service being delivered, and to whom?
Consider the differences between the environments of
local organizations focused on a specific community and
those of national or multinational conglomerates. To un-
derstand an organization’s initial environmental layer,
focus first on the immediate output of the system. Suppose
we are looking at a home care agency. This type of agency
CHAPTER 10 Managing and Leading in the Organization     ●
159
TABLE 10.1
Systems Theory Components and Organizational Characteristics 
of a Healthcare Agency
Systems Theory
Organizational Characteristics of a Healthcare Agency
Wholeness
Organizational components of the agency or units and their interactions with 
each other and their environments, including the healthcare system, community, 
patient base, external payors, and corporate system (if applicable). The components 
cannot stand alone.
Hierarchical Order
The organizational structure as defined through functional and reporting hierarchy 
and demonstrated by the leadership.
Exchange of Information 
Boundaries among the different organizational units internally and with external 
(Openness)
boundaries and environments. This includes communication internally and 
externally.
Progressive Differentiation
Self-organization. The system become increasingly complex to meet the stated 
organizational goals for the healthcare of individuals and groups. This is the area 
of rules and management procedures to meet the goal for positive healthcare 
outcomes.
Equifinality
Patient needs and conditions, as well as provider differences, determine system 
outcomes. These are the interpersonal relationships and the technology to meet 
the organizational goals, but they may be met in different ways with individual 
circumstances in a dynamic open system.
Teleology
The behaviors in the internal environment, with an arrangement of human and mate-
rial resources, are directed to meet the intended aims. The actions and the behaviors
in the organization are directed at the goal for optimal healthcare outcomes. These
outcomes are defined in the organizational mission, values, and goals statements and
demonstrated by the membership.

provides home care within specific specialty parameters to
an identified service area. In the environment, we initially
have the local community with a specific geography, 
patient population, healthcare provider groups, payment
streams, resources, and healthcare needs. This local agency
has additional environmental influences from state and
federal regulatory bodies and agencies, professional disci-
plines, and the larger healthcare system.
Now, consider these factors with a larger healthcare
agency, which offers more services to a larger patient pop-
ulation, such as a health science center or teaching hospital
with a broader service menu and service area. We have to
consider the geography, patient population, healthcare
provider groups, payment streams, resources, and health-
care needs across the state or perhaps across several states.
Services may include not only acute and chronic care but
also multispecialty clinics, research and development
(R&D), and outreach programs. There are more care
providers, including students, faculty, and visiting special-
ists from various healthcare disciplines. There are also
more requirements and regulations from state and federal
regulatory bodies and agencies and professional disciplines,
just by virtue of the expanded services, funding streams,
and service expectations. Coordination with the broader
healthcare system must also be considered, as people come
from and return to their local areas. External forces also
include inputs of energy, information, materials, and myr-
iad technologies received from the environment, trans-
formed, and returned to the environment as outputs.
In an open system, all boundary influences must
be identified and relationships evaluated to discover inter-
relationships and effects. All external layers and interrelat-
ing systems are important factors for a true understanding
of the influences on any particular open system, as with
community support for a local nonprofit agency. They
may be positive when speakers at public hearings support
county funding. These environmental influences can have
unanticipated repercussions on the system, when this pre-
vious support interferes with corporate leadership or man-
agement decisions.
The healthcare environment can easily be seen as
highly complex, dynamic, and uncertain. Changes occur
constantly. Change is influenced by consumers, techno-
logical advances, government, and third-party payers.
The external forces in the broader environment provide
inputs into the system and affect internal operations and
resultant outputs, such as patient outcomes. Healthcare
organizations must respond to external forces in a rapid,
dynamic, and innovative manner and cannot remain
static. A humanistic philosophy, with its focus on the
people in an organization, is needed for a contemporary
and innovative healthcare organization. It is the people
of the organization that create, define, and fulfill orga-
nizational goals with the patient system as the focus. This
brings us to an examination of the various structures of
organizational systems.
ORGANIZATIONAL 
STRUCTURES
Mintzberg (1983b) has defined organizational structure as
“the sum total of the ways in which its labor is divided into
distinct tasks and then [how] coordination is achieved
among these tasks” (p. 2). Generally, when we think of 
an organizational structure, we conceive of some type of
hierarchy that tells us about positions or roles, responsi-
bilities, status, channels of command or reporting relation-
ships, and tasks to be accomplished. The picture that
comes to mind is usually a bureaucratic structure with a
multitude of “red tape” with which to contend. This is not
always the case. The appropriateness of the structure 
depends on the organization’s purposes (goals and values),
how outcomes are best accomplished (leadership and 
management), the people in the organizational system, the
resources and technology used or available, and influences
from the external environment(s). These system influences
provide us with information on the size and complexity
of the organizational structure.
The structure demonstrates the relationships among
an organization’s components and presents us with its de-
sign. Looking at healthcare organizations, we find two
general structures: bureaucratic and organic. Mintzberg
(1983b) described these two organizational designs at op-
posite ends of a continuum of standardization (Fig. 10.1).
This range gives us a way of viewing organizational struc-
tures. At one extreme is the controlled, mechanistic, and
standardized classic bureaucracy; at the opposite extreme
is the humanistic organization that contains no standard-
ized processes, outputs, or skills across the structure.
Healthcare organizations generally fall somewhere between
the two extremes, depending on their mission.
Bureaucratic Organizations
The most recognized and traditional organization is the
bureaucratic structure. A bureaucracy is a mechanistic
model focused on outcomes. Weber (1864–1920) pro-
vided the original bureaucratic model, with a high degree
of efficiency and control. His work has been translated and
interpreted frequently in research on organizations and 
organizational theory. Merton (1957) further defined a
bureaucratic organization as “a formal, rationally organ-
ized social structure involving clearly defined patterns 
of activity in which, ideally, every series of actions is func-
tionally related to the purposes of the organization” 
(p. 195). The bureaucratic organization has a hierarchical
structure with designated lines of authority and control.
The mission of the organization is all-consuming. Actions
to meet the purposes and directives are taken in lower 
160
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
Bureaucratic
Structure
Organic
Structure
High standardization of
processes, outputs, and
skills
Absence of
standardization
Figure 10.1 Mintzberg’s Continuum of Standardization
in Organizations.  (Adapted from Mintzberg, H. [1983b].
Structure in fives: Designing effective organizations. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.)

layers, whereas policy-making, authority, and control 
reside primarily in the upper layers of the organization.
Specific characteristics of a bureaucratic organization are
as follows:
1. A clear-cut division of labor
2. Diﬀerentiated controls and sanctions
3. Roles assigned on the basis of qualiﬁcations and 
technical eﬃciency
4. Clearly stated rules and conformity to regulations
5. A premium placed on precision, speed, expert control,
continuity, discretion, and optimal returns on input
6. Strict devotion to regulations
7. Depersonalized relationships (Merton, 1957,
pp. 195–196)
Examples of bureaucratic healthcare organizations are
depicted in Figures 10.2 and Figure 10.3. In these exam-
ples, management and control flow downward from the
hospital board through the CEO or chief operating officer
(COO), who is appointed by the board and is responsible
for the organization’s mission, whether for-profit or not-
for-profit. To accomplish these aims, the executive layer
is responsible to the CEO or COO. The executives receive
mandates and strategic initiatives from the board through
the CEO or COO and decide on priorities, plan imple-
mentation, and regulations. Executives, in turn, direct
their administrative staffs, and on down the line. Titles
and functional areas may vary among organizations but
each employee has a specific role in carrying out the orga-
nization’s mission.
A bureaucratic organization is structured, standardized,
controlled, and in many instances, authoritarian. Written
and unwritten policies and regulations are prevalent, as are
specified channels of command. Efficiency and effective-
ness in achieving the organizational mission are organiza-
tional values. Bureaucratic organizational structures are
seen in the older, traditional, and large authoritarian 
settings in which control and the ultimate mission of the
institution are all-consuming. External influences should
be predictable to obtain the most efficient functioning of
the organization. Channels of command and productivity
are important components of the system. But in recent
years, a move toward more flexible and humanistic orga-
nizational structures, focusing on environmental influences
along with employee involvement and job satisfaction for
higher productivity, has led to a transformation to more
innovative practices.
Organic Organizations
Organic organizational structures, or adhocracies, have
evolved to meet the needs of organizations composed of
humans in dynamic and sometimes complex environmen-
tal settings. The term adhocracy implies that the structure
is a design that has been developed to meet the organiza-
tional mission and specific goals. Hall and Tolbert (2005)
characterize these organizations as closely linked to their
environments with a network structure of control, con-
tinual adjustment and redefinition of tasks, and a com-
munication context of information and advice replacing
the traditional supervisory lines (p. 31). These organiza-
tions represent a movement away from the standardized,
mechanistic bureaucracies to humanistic forms arising out
of behavioral organizational research and management
CHAPTER 10 Managing and Leading in the Organization     ●
161
Board of Directors/Trustees with
Chief Executive/Operating Officer as Chair
Vice President
    for Medicine/
    Medical Director
Vice President
    for Finance
Vice President
    for Nursing/
    Director of Nursing
Vice President
for Patient
Services
Directors:
    Plant Operations
    Security
    Resource Mgt.
    Accounting
    Purchasing
    Contracts
    Payroll
    Public Relations
    Computer & EHR
    Legal Counsel
Head:
    Medicine
    Surgery
    OB/GYN/
        Neonatology
    Neurology
    Cardiology
    Oncology
    Pediatrics
    Anesthesiology
    Pulmonology
    Nephrology
Patient Care:
        Coordinators:
    Medical Units
    Surgical Units
    OB/GYN, Peds, Clinics
    Special
    Units/OR/PACU/ER
Directors:
    Staffing
    Practice & Research
    Education
    Quality Assurance
    Infection Control
Directors:
    Laboratory
    Pharmacy
    Radiology
    Social Services
    Food Service
    Supplies
    Housekeeping
    Volunteers
    Physical Therapy
    Occupational
        Therapy
Unit Coordinators
Staff Members 
Medical Staff 
Nursing Staff 
Staff Members
Figure 10.2 Example of flat bureaucratic structure of a community hospital.

162
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
Chief Financial Officer
Hospital Adminstrator
Board of Directors/Trustees
President
Vice President
    for Operations
Vice President
    for Patient Services
Vice President for Nursing/
Director of Nursing
Plant Operations
     & Security
Accounting
Resource Mgt.
Computer & EHR
Purchasing & Contracts
Payroll
Office Heads
Department Staff
Supervisor/Medical-Surgical
Supervisor/Specialty Units
Supervisor/Clinics, ER
Director/QA, Infection Control
Director/Staffing & Education
Director/Practice, Research
Patient Care Coordinatiors
Advanced Practice Nurses
RNs, LPNs, CNAs
Medical Services
Therapeutic Services
Diagnostic Services
Social Services
Housekeeping Services
Volunteer Services
Food Services
Office Heads
Department Staff
Figure 10.3 Example of tall bureaucratic structure of a community hospital.
theories. Mintzberg (1983b) proposed that this structure
is the most useful in a complex and dynamic environment
in which experts, managers, and staff from different disci-
plines cooperate on decentralized project teams to meet a
system output goal innovatively. These organic structures
focus on dynamic environments and rapid responses to
market demands. Several organic designs are seen in health-
care organizations. The most prevalent organic or adho-
cratic designs are functional, product, and matrix forms.
Functional Structure
A functional structure, like the bureaucracy, focuses on
organizational outcomes; but unlike a bureaucracy, it has
control and responsibility spread horizontally across the
system to meet specific organizational functions. Daft
(2007) notes that this structure is most effective when 
in-depth expertise is critical to meeting organizational
goals and the focus is on efficiency. However, the main
weakness “is a slow response to environmental changes
that require coordination across departments” (p. 102). A
functional form can therefore be used in an organization
with a specific function, such as a rehabilitative facility.
The function of the rehabilitative care across specialty lines
is the organization’s purpose. The people in the organiza-
tion have the decision-making authority for their services
in the organization. Functional units are thus arranged in
specialty areas, as illustrated in Figure 10.4.
The organization is designed to focus on the function
of delivering rehabilitative care to the consumer. Two
distinct functions are apparent in our example of this
functional form: (1) finance and administration of the
agency and (2) delivery of rehabilitative health care. An
executive director or president oversees the organization
with the assistance of two directors. The main organiza-
tional function of rehabilitative care delivery is structured
as specialty units under the direction of the healthcare
director. Fragmentation, duplication of services across
specialties, and poor coordination limit this design. This
limitation becomes more severe as the organization grows
in size and complexity—for example, when services in-
crease and the service area is enlarged.
Product Structure
A product or divisional structure is similar to the func-
tional structure except that the organization is focused
only on the product as the outcome, and not also on the
means to the outcome. The people and processes in
the product structure are grouped accordingly to meet the
intended aim with the goals of coordination and patient
satisfaction. The product structure promotes flexibility
and change with decentralized decision making, a focus
on product goals, and coordination across functions (Daft,
2007, p. 104). Consider the example of a large homecare
agency (Fig. 10.5). The product is home care services, with

attention being given to the needs and desires of the home
care patient. The product units are organized in terms of
nursing services, physical therapy, and speech therapy.
Each unit has a director responsible to the president of
the agency for the home care product. Vice presidents are
responsible to the president for general functions of
healthcare referrals, contractual services, personnel, and
marketing. Product units are thus arranged in specified
areas (nursing, physical therapy, and speech therapy),
with each being directed toward service coordination, 
referrals, contractual services, and marketing to meet 
consumer needs.
The product structure works well with an organization
whose services and marketing are directed at the consumer.
This design is flexible in a dynamic or unstable environ-
ment, because consumer needs and satisfaction are of prime
concern. Divisions are separated by product—nursing care,
physical therapy, and speech therapy. But duplication of
services is an immediate problem, especially in healthcare,
in which coordination of therapeutic regimens is vital for
the consumer.
Matrix Structure
To address the need to coordinate consumer services, an-
other adhocratic design combines the functional and
product forms. Multidimensional decision making and
responsibility are the features of a matrix organization. In
a healthcare agency, this can refer to the product of state-
of-the-art care and the function of provision of services
to the patient as the consumer. An example of the matrix
design is an organization whose mission is directed at re-
search and development and provision of care. Research
managers in interdisciplinary areas, such as aging, acute
infectious processes, mental health, rehabilitation, and
health promotion, are located on one side of the matrix,
CHAPTER 10 Managing and Leading in the Organization     ●
163
Executive Director
Director: Finance and Administration
Director: Healthcare Services
Finance, Payroll, & Accounting
Marketing & Public Relations
Quality Assurance
Nursing Services
Medical Referrals
Physical Therapy
Occupational Therapy
Music Therapy
Recreation Therapy
Speech Therapy
Social Services
Homemaker Services
Laboratory Services
Figure 10.4 Example of a functional organization: rehabilitative agency.
Figure 10.5 Example of a product form organization: home care agency.
Agency President
VP Healthcare Referrals
VP Personnel
VP Marketing
VP Contract Services
Director:
    Nursing Division
Director:
    Physical Therapy 
        Division
Director:
    Speech Therapy
        Division
Service Coordinator
Healthcare Referrals
Contract Services
Marketing
Service Coordinator
Healthcare Referrals
Contract Services
Marketing
Service Coordinator
Healthcare Referrals
Contract Services
Marketing

with specialized healthcare providers on the other side
(Fig. 10.6). People as leaders, managers, and workers,
along with tangible resources in the environment, are all
represented in the matrix cells. Although this design is
challenging, it is consistent with the core competency for
health professionals identified in Chapter 1 for working
in interdisciplinary teams.
Consider the example of home care for an elderly 
patient following a hip fracture. Care for the patient and
the family along the continuum would move from acute
care to short-term rehabilitation to home care, with 
interdisciplinary care providers—including home care
coordinators, therapists, and specialists—all contributing
to the decision making and service provision. The com-
plexity of this system is initially breathtaking. Both func-
tions and products must be considered in coordination
of the services needed by the patient. This is a collegial
structure with integrated functions and products that 
require multilayered decisions and a good deal of trust
and collaboration. The number of people involved in the
matrix for decisions varies. Larger organizations may 
involve only the leadership and managers in the matrix,
with traditional departmental structures evolving under
each manager. Smaller organizations, such as the earlier
example of a home care agency, could realistically involve
leaders, managers and providers in the matrix according
to the scope of services (product) and resources (human
and material as functions).
The matrix design promotes innovative practices as a
result of a consumer focus, in the context of current tech-
nology, emergent practice problems, research informa-
tion, and specialty practice. R&D issues are directed at
current practice, with experts from each area represented
for problem-solving and decision making. This matrix
164
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
CEO/President
Research Focus Teams
Aging
Research
Team
Infectious
Diseases
Research Team
Mental
Health
Research Team
Rehabilitation
Research
Team
Health
Promotion
Research Team
Service Providers
Primary
Care
Areas
Acute
Care
Areas
Chronic
Care
Areas
Rehab
Service
Areas
Home
Care
Areas
Figure 10.6 Example of a matrix organizational structure.

design is seen more frequently in health settings with a
dual focus, such as education and service or research and
service. The complexity of the design and problems with
integration of all appropriate people and resources are
the main disadvantages of the matrix form. Daft (2007)
describes its disadvantages more fully as follows:
1. Participants experience dual authority, leading to 
confusion and frustration.
2. Good interpersonal skills and extensive training of
participants are needed.
3. It is time-consuming, with frequent meetings and
conﬂict resolution sessions.
4. Participants must understand and adopt collegial
rather than vertical-type relationships.
5. Dual pressure from the environment is required to
maintain a balance of power. (p. 111)
Coordination problems are a definite disadvantage of 
adhocratic designs. Experts and project teams or divisions
are focused on innovation and targeting of specific outcomes.
This focus may represent only one piece of the mission of
the organization, however. Thus, good communication and
coordination are critical. But coordination problems are
many times outweighed by the advantages of flexibility, 
innovation, and human involvement.
As an additional note, the organization may have more
than one organizational structure, either embedded or
mixed. Recall Mintzberg’s (1983b) continuum of stan-
dardization in Figure 10.1. The healthcare agency may
have a formal organizational structure leaning toward a
bureaucracy as seen in Figure 10.3. But patient services
may have a distinct rehabilitative service with a functional
structure seen in Figure 10.4. This will add to the com-
plexity of leadership and management.
Structural Components for
Leadership and Management
Organizations are also categorized by how the components
are arranged, as centralized or decentralized and flat or tall.
Centralized and decentralized organizational structures 
relate to the lines of control and decision making within
the organization. Centralization occurs when the span of
control or management is in the classic bureaucratic style,
governed from the top downward. Authority, control, and
decision making occur from the leadership and in upper
management, with less participation from the lower levels.
Decentralization distributes authority downward in an 
organization, allowing decision making and control at local
levels. Reasons suggested for decentralization are to estab-
lish a more collegial and participatory model, resulting 
in employee involvement, performance, and satisfaction.
Also, the people who are actually involved in the service are
making the decisions about it.
Organizations can also be described as having flat or
tall structures, depending on the layers of differentiation
for authority, decision making, and coordination. Flat
organizational structures have a wide base and few layers
or tiers for decision making and authority. Decisions,
controls, and governance are widely spread across the 
organization in a horizontal differentiation. Tall organiza-
tional structures have more tiers and lines of command,
with less local decision making at the lower levels. Tall
organizations have more management levels, with lines
of command resulting in a vertically differentiated hier-
archical structure. Compare the organizational structures
in Figure 10.2 and Figure 10.3. Both are bureaucratic
structures, but decisions and work functions are spread
more widely across the organization in flat structures.
Deciding whether a centralized or decentralized, tall or
flat structure is best depends on the characteristics of the
specific organization. As Hall and Tolbert (2005) have 
observed, high levels of centralization mean greater coor-
dination but less flexibility and overloaded communica-
tion channels as communications flow up and down the
hierarchy (p. 62). Many organizations have changed from
centralized, tall structures to encourage more employee 
involvement. But problems can arise when communica-
tion, coordination, and monitoring of activities in the 
organization demand integration for effective functioning.
As in his continuum of organizational standardization (see 
Fig. 10.2), Mintzberg (1983b) suggests that centralization
and decentralization be viewed as opposite ends of a
continuum rather than absolutes (p. 98). The degree of
centralization or decentralization actually should depend
on the organization’s size, structure, technology, people,
and mission to determine where decisions are made best.
ORGANIZATIONAL 
FUNCTIONS
The purpose or function of the organization is to meet the
pre-established goal as outputs from the system. The goals
and values described in the institutional mission and 
purposes statement are the basis for the organization’s 
existence. The mission statement is the overall purpose 
of the organization, including whether it is a for-profit 
organization or a not-for-profit organization. Stockholders
or shareholders expect to see some return on their invest-
ment in a for-profit (or proprietary) organization, and this
expectation is reflected in organizational goals. Not-for-
profit organizations receive funding from various sources,
but there is no sense of ownership. In a not-for-profit 
organization, profits are generally reinvested in the orga -
nization to keep it financially competitive.
Once the mission is understood, the targets to achieve
this mission become the issue. Organizational goals are spec-
ified for effective and efficient functioning. Mintzberg
(1983a) identified four types of goals that demonstrate in-
tent and consistency of behavior in organizations: ideologic,
formal, shared, and system.
●Ideologic goals relate to the values people in the 
organization share. An example of an ideologic goal
in a healthcare organization is access to and provision 
of high-quality healthcare for people of all ages.
●Formal goals are those authorized through the hierar-
chy from people with authority who have a power 
base in the organization.
●Shared goals are those set and pursued by a particular
group in the organization. Involvement of family
members in caregiving is an example of a shared goal
that a specialty group favors and implements in the 
organization.
CHAPTER 10 Managing and Leading in the Organization     ●
165

●System goals are those set to maintain the system.
Mintzberg (1983a) identified system goals as survival,
efficiency, control, and growth. System goals relate to
continuity of the organization and contain a strong
economic component. These survival system goals are
driving many healthcare organizations. These may also
be the strategic initiatives or priorities for the organiza-
tion and specified for action within a certain time
frame.
Organizations are now recognizing that goals that are
too broad can deplete the resources and effectiveness of
the intended outcomes and the system goals. We hear of
companies and major industries streamlining and getting
“back to basics.” They seriously consider examining what
they know best, and refining and focusing it, rather than
diversifying. Linkages with other organizations that can
handle the diversifications better may be more beneficial
to both the organization and the consumer group. This
development has been seen with restructuring in health-
care organizations.
There are three basic reasons for the changes in health-
care structures: environmental influences, changes in the
provider system, and changes in consumer needs and 
demographics. First, external environmental influences
have had a major effect on healthcare organizations, as
with diagnostic-related groups (DRGs), the prospective
payment system (PPS) for healthcare reimbursement, and
safety initiatives. Second, specialization and changes in
the healthcare provider system have confused consumers
and legislators. Disciplinary lines between healthcare
providers necessarily have some overlap as we implement
cross-training, interdisciplinary practice, and focus on 
humanistic and holistic values for persons and groups. An
example is the core competency of working in interdisci-
plinary teams. Coordination and collaboration are essen-
tial attributes in contemporary practice settings. Third,
changes in consumer needs related to increased longevity,
chronicity, personal involvement, and health promotion
must drive the system to provide safe and effective health-
care services.
Healthcare organizations are now seeing the wisdom
of a lesson learned in industry: Not every community 
hospital needs to offer every specialty service. Community
hospitals can offer services that are complementary rather
than duplicated and meager. Regionalization can be 
accomplished by having, for example, maternal and infant
or pediatric services in one agency and cardiac diagnosis,
surgery, and rehabilitation in another. This arrangement
prevents duplication and fosters quality. The population
and the health service needs must drive the goals of the 
organization. A needs assessment provides the information
for revision of organizational goals. Important considera-
tions include the specific operations of the organization
and the available technology.
Specialized knowledge and expertise of professionals
and nonprofessionals are represented in formal and infor-
mal organizational functions. Formal functions are those
defined by the organizational structure. For example,
compare the different managerial functions for a unit
manager in a vertical, bureaucratic organization with 
decision making in the upper levels of the hierarchy with
those for the unit as a cost and decision center in a more
horizontal adhocratic structure. This comparison demon-
strates a difference in formal operational functions. Infor-
mal functions facilitate goal accomplishment and include
effective communication channels and details about how
the organizational plans and how tasks are actually accom-
plished in relation to the available resources. It is essential
to be aware of the human factor—that is, the individuals
who coordinate the people and resources to meet the goals
of the organization, or the managers.
MANAGEMENT
Management, the coordination of resources to achieve or-
ganizational outcomes, involves critical thinking, problem-
solving, and decision making. Management should not
be confused with leadership. A leader mobilizes a group
to achieve great things, whereas a manager focuses on di-
recting the group to meet the desired outcomes for the
organization through thoughtful and careful planning,
direction, monitoring, recognition, development, and
representation.
An effective manager must be a good leader but with a
focus on the established organizational outcomes; the com-
bination of effective leadership and management skills pro-
vides the nurse with the attributes to face the multitude of
challenges in the current healthcare system and the various
organizational structures. Understanding the foundation
of effective management is essential to developing one’s
own management style.
Management Theories
Management has been studied extensively, with the devel-
opment of several major theories that are still used to guide
current practices. During the 20th century, the major
themes were a focus on management science, the process,
the people, and even the activities and the intended 
objectives. Other theories and models are evolving as we
attempt to understand and apply the best approaches to
“getting things done” efficiently and effectively with the
best possible outcomes. The concept of outcomes is an 
important component in the current view of management,
especially in the healthcare arena.
The origins of management theory are often attributed
to Frederick Taylor (1911), an engineer who used time-
and-motion studies to investigate and then apply efficiency
principles with the bottom-line focus on productivity. In
this early industrial period, training the right people for
the task at hand was vital, and these people were rewarded
monetarily as productivity levels rose. The focus was one
of efficiency, effectiveness, and quality control. This ap-
proach was viewed as “working smarter.” These principles
have been used effectively with production lines, as in the
early days of the automotive industry. Taylor’s efficiency
and productivity principles persist to this day, with the
focus on organizing the proper number of trained people
and activities to get a job done in the shortest time. These
principles have been followed in the use and examination
of nurse-patient staffing ratios and skill mix in hospitals.
In the early 20th century, Henri Fayol (1949) looked
further at the process of management and the role
166
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

and functions of the manager. His universal approach
highlighted 14 principles including authority, unity 
of command (one boss and a chain of command), and
communication. The role of the manager in this approach
encompassed five functions: planning, organizing, com-
manding, coordinating, and controlling. During the same
period, Max Weber (1947) was addressing organizational
structure and the need for consistent rules and tasks in the
hierarchical structure of the bureaucratic organization.
Other managerial theories evolved, focused on individ-
uals and the goals of organizations. Motivational theories
are used to identify and describe the forces that motivate
individuals toward a goal. Guided by these theories, an 
effective manager or leader motivates individuals, thus 
enhancing their productivity and achieving organizational
goals. Classic motivational theories have been proposed by
Maslow, McGregor, and Ouchi.
As seen previously, in Chapters 2 and 9, Maslow’s
(1954, 1970) theory of a hierarchy of human needs was
based on his 16 propositions on motivation. Motivation in
humans is a manifestation of internal and external personal
and environmental factors that cause people to respond to
a situation in the way that they do. In these principles, the
focus is on the individual in a dynamic, complex, and
changing environment. Motivation is as intricate as the
person, and an individual’s personal basic needs must be
satisfied before he or she can focus on higher needs, such
as self-esteem in one’s position and organizational goals.
For a manager, understanding individual motivation is as
important as understanding the skills the individual brings
to the task at hand.
McGregor (1960) critically reviewed motivation in 
The Human Side of Enterprise. He proposed his classic two
“theories” about human nature. The focus during this time
continued to be on the human factors of the worker and
how to get the work done. In Theory X, individuals are
viewed as lazy, needing motivation, avoiding responsibility,
and requiring constant direction and control by a manager
to fulfill their job responsibilities and meet the organiza-
tional goals. Rewards and reinforcement are necessary for
the individuals, along with a set of rules they must follow.
This theory of human nature fits well with the centralized,
tall, bureaucratic organizational structure. The role of the
manager is one of direction and control.
Alternately, McGregor (1960) postulated Theory Y,
in which individuals are motivated, self-directed, inter-
ested in working toward meeting organizational goals,
and willing to accept responsibility without the need 
for constant direction and supervision. In fact, constant
“management” by the supervisor could deter workers
from reaping inner rewards from the job. The role of the
manager in this situation should be one of coordination,
guidance, and support.
Herzberg’s (1966) two-factor theory organizes the in-
dividual’s motivation for his work according to hygiene
and motivational factors. Hygiene factors are mainte-
nance factors in the workplace, such as salary, supervision,
company policy, working conditions, status, job security,
and the job’s effect on personal life; these factors in the
workplace can lead to satisfaction or dissatisfaction and
are thus related to the organizational climate. Motiva-
tional factors are satisfiers within the job that motivate
people to higher levels of performance. Motivational 
factors include achievement, recognition, the work itself,
responsibility, and advancement. The manager helps 
improve job performance by ensuring that both hygiene
and motivational needs of the employees are met at some
level for both job satisfaction and incentive to achieve the 
organizational goals.
In the later part of the 20th century, the Japanese style
of collaborative management received much attention,
with the economic successes viewed within a participatory
approach. Ouchi (1981) described this style, Theory Z,
as an approach in which employees are trusted, empow-
ered, and actively involved in decision making. The 
components of Theory Z include collective values and 
decision making, long-term or lifetime employment,
slower but predictable promotions, indirect supervision,
and a holistic concern for employees (Ouchi, 1981). This
participatory style involves indirect supervision with the
focus on the group. Ouchi (1981) believed that more cre-
ative decision making and more effective implementation
occur with the full involvement and consensus of the
group (p. 43). There is a “buy-in” by all team members,
who are valued as individuals and as important members
of the organization. Important values of this theory are
trust, fairness, commitment, and loyalty to the organiza-
tion, which lead to long-term employment and reduced
turnover. The use of “quality circles” and “group think”
emerged from this theory. Competitiveness in some
American organizations is inconsistent with this style of
management.
Management by objectives (MBO) and the role of the
knowledge worker evolved in the business world from the
work of Peter Drucker. Originally from Austria, Drucker
profoundly influenced American businesses through his
many books and observations on organizations and how
they are managed. Drucker focused on the people (both
managers and workforce), the organizational functions,
and the results achieved in the process in line with the 
organizational mission. He believed that “since the man-
ager is someone who takes responsibility for, and con-
tributes to, the final results of the enterprise, the job
should always embody the maximum challenge, carry the
maximum responsibility, and make the maximum con-
tribution” (Drucker & Maciariello, 2008, p. 239). He
proposed that management comprises a few essential
principles; the first is that “its task is to make people 
capable of joint performance, to make their strengths 
effective and their weaknesses irrelevant. This is what an
organization is all about, and the reason that management
is the critical, determining factor” (Drucker & Maciariello,
2008, p. 23). In addition, Drucker (2002) described the
requirement in modern organizations for a manager to be
a knowledge worker or “executive, if by virtue of his posi-
tion or knowledge, he is responsible for a contribution that
materially affects the capacity of the organization to per-
form and to obtain results” (p. 5). The focus became one
of making a contribution to the organization by virtue 
of one’s intelligence, imagination, and knowledge. Recall
that applying quality improvement is one of the five core
competencies for all health professionals (Greiner &
Knebel, 2003). Drucker’s works on management cover a
wide range of businesses, including hospitals, and look at
CHAPTER 10 Managing and Leading in the Organization     ●
167

achievement and contributions of individuals within the
framework of organizational settings.
Nursing Management
The core competencies for health professionals are essential
characteristics in nursing management. The focus of the
nurse manager or nurse executive must be on the provision
of patient-centered care while fostering the use of evidence-
based practice and quality improvement. The complexity
of the interdisciplinary team and the use of informatics will
depend on the organizational system. All of these tasks 
involve people and managing resources for the provision
of safe and effective care and positive patient and organi-
zational outcomes.
Buckingham (2005) identified four key skills of
managers as picking good people, setting clear expecta-
tions, praising excellence, and showing you care for your
people—but above all, the manager must discover what is
unique about each person and capitalize on it (pp. 81–83).
But recall that Fayol (1949) identified management func-
tions as planning, organizing, commanding, coordinating,
and controlling. The question becomes one of consistency
of these functions with the humanistic view of nursing and
care of patients.
Planning and organizing are indeed talents of the
nurse manager. This is an outcome of the steps of assess-
ment and planning in the provision of nursing care in any
organizational context. It is setting clear expectations and
requires an in-depth understanding of the organization
and the people, the true culture of the organization. At
times, it will also involve leading the culture, as with 
incorporation of evidence-based practice in a particular
patient situation and planning for the efficient and effec-
tive use of resources.
Commanding in the context of nursing management
involves ensuring that the job is done through delegation
and supervision, as in the provision of care to patients. It
is picking the right people and capitalizing on their talents
and requires knowledge of the care requirements, the 
patients, and external system influences. It also involves
recognition of individual talents and “a job well done.” All
levels of staffing are a vital consideration, including assis-
tive personnel. Delegation is a skill that grows and evolves,
as the nurse manager grows from novice to expert. Dele-
gation is a skill critical to both the nurse manager and the
leader and one that needs careful and ongoing professional
development, as we will discuss later in this chapter.
In a nursing education program, students focus on
“total patient care” as they learn the interpersonal, tech-
nical, and clinical judgment skills needed in nursing prac-
tice. In the final phase of the educational program, they
are engaged in obtaining leadership or management skills.
This includes assignment and delegation of activities to
other healthcare providers, both licensed and unlicensed.
Often, these activities are performed with other students
rather than within the interdisciplinary team in the acute
care setting. Upon graduation and initial licensure, how-
ever, nurses are expected to manage the healthcare team
effectively and to delegate activities and functions to others
for the provision of efficient care to patients. Challenges
in the workplace, such as economics, constantly add new
twists. This leads to the need for coordination of resources,
including healthcare providers, for accomplishment of the
organizational goals and the provision of safe and effective
care for patients.
Coordinating is another talent of the nurse manager,
as skills in coordination of care have continued to be a
component of the practice scope and setting. Control-
ling in nursing management is ensuring that the care to
patients has been provided effectively. Recall, however,
that management is the coordination of resources to
achieve organizational outcomes and involves critical
thinking, problem-solving, communication, and decision-
making skills. In addition, remember that Drucker
(2002) identifies the executive’s vital talents of intelli-
gence, imagination, and knowledge. These talents are
also critical for leadership.
LEADERSHIP
Although the effective manager may also provide leader-
ship to the team in terms of accomplishing the goals or
objectives for the organization, a leader mobilizes indi-
viduals in group to achieve great things. Leadership
involves action, creativity, motivation, and visioning. It
is viewing the possibilities and motivating others to make
things happen. As Maxwell (2007) observed, “personal
and organizational effectiveness is proportional to the
strength of the leadership” (p. 25). There are many theo-
ries of leadership, yet no consensus on how these talented
individuals make things happen. Much also depends on
the environment and the people in that environment. As
reported by Sigma Theta Tau (2005), the leader is “some-
one who influences people, organizations, and situations
to bring about transforming change (in clinical, educa-
tion, administration, research and policy)” (pp. 5–6).
What has become critical in leadership situations is 
the human factor—the leader, the followers, and the con-
sumers. The increasing focus on the human factor has
emerged in the research and the evolution of leadership
theories and principles.
Leadership Theories
A multitude of studies and manuscripts have emerged on
leadership in an effort to make things happen for the suc-
cess and effectiveness of both the leader and the organiza-
tion. Often, the basis for the literature contains in-depth
research of individuals whose success in their roles has led
to the emergence of a highly effective business or organiza-
tion. Leadership theories have evolved from viewing the 
individual leader’s personal characteristics in the Great
Man and trait theories to those addressing environmental
influences, as in the contingency theory (see Table 10.2).
Understanding subordinates through interaction, coaching,
and enabling techniques has emerged from the focus on
giving direction to meet organizational goals. In her obser-
vations of this new direction in a chaotic world through a
focus on quantum physics and patterns in the universe,
Wheatley (2006) proposed that the leader’s task is to first
embody the organization’s governing principles (vision,
values, beliefs) and then understand that the people in the
organization are best mobilized by concepts that invite their
168
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

participation and energy to create astonishing complexity
and capacity (pp. 130–131). The people in the organiza-
tion are viewed as critical resources to be involved rather
than merely used.
Styles of Leadership
There are three basic leadership styles: bureaucratic, demo-
cratic, and laissez-faire. Leaders who are bureaucratic and
authoritarian generally issue directives and expect things
to happen. The image of the bureaucratic leader that
comes to mind is the captain of the ship, who issues orders
to the crew members to carry out and then walks away,
expecting results. The theories of leadership consistent
with this style of leadership are the Great Man and Trait
approaches. This leadership style has little to do with con-
temporary practice, except perhaps in the face of a dire
emergency. The people do not feel part of the process and
CHAPTER 10 Managing and Leading in the Organization     ●
169
TABLE 10.2
Leadership Theories
Theory
Great Man Approach
Trait Approach
Skills and Abilities 
Approach
Situational Approach
Contingency Approach
Transformational 
Leadership Approach
Authentic Leadership 
Approach
Description
One of oldest theories of leadership, this theory proposes that leaders are born
with the ability to lead and rise to this role. Examples would be royalty, who are
born into the role, and historical figures such as Lincoln, Churchill, and Napoleon.
Much research has been done on the personality characteristics and qualities that
leaders possess. Northouse (2010) identifies the major leadership traits that have
emerged in the literature as intelligence, self-confidence, determination, integrity, 
and sociability (p. 19). These leadership traits have been identified as a focus on the
leader and not the constraints in the environment.
Northouse (2010) describes this contemporary conceptual model that evolved out
of research in the U.S. Department of Defense, which suggests that leadership can
be learned and further developed and applied in an organizational setting and is
based on a set of three basic skills: technical, human, and conceptual. Technical skills
must be consistent with those of the organization. Human skills include the ability 
to understand and work with other people. Conceptual skills are those related to
visioning and conceptual problem solving. Again, the focus is on the characteristics 
of the leader.
This is a directive and supportive approach that is guided by the situation at 
hand. The focus is first on the situation, including both the environment and the
subordinates. Northouse (2010) proposes that “the essence of situational leadership
demands that leaders match their style to the competence and commitment of 
the subordinates” (p. 89). From the situation or environmental context, the leader
directs and redirects subordinates to accomplish tasks and meet the intended aims
in the organization.
This theory matches the leader to the organizational context and setting. There 
are three basic components in this theory: human relations (especially leader and
follower), structure of the work for task accomplishment, and the authority or
legitimate power of the leader in their position. This same leader may not be as
effective in all settings, since it is contingent on the human relations, the work
involved, and the leader’s authority in a given environment.
Northouse (2010) describes this approach as a process that changes and transforms
people and is concerned with emotions, values, ethics, standards, and long-term
goals (p. 171). The transformational leader has the vision and enables others to
promote environmental change. The humanistic dimension in this approach is vital,
with the leader serving as role model, influencer, and enabler to promote change.
This approach is focused on character-based leadership. One model focuses 
on problem identification and decision making and another on leadership
development for effectiveness. Critical to this approach is a genuine and
demonstrated understanding of oneself and others. As Shirley (2006) has indicated,
it is the authenticity component—inclusive of character, knowing oneself, and
demonstrating relational transparency—that differentiates authentic leadership 
from other types of leadership (p. 261).

the solutions for the organization when given authoritarian
commands.
The democratic leader involves others in the process,
seeking group participation and consensus. People are 
valued not only for their ability but also for their cognitive
input into the situation. These people, as subordinates, are
involved and active in discussion and decisions. A focus is
directed at group process and group effectiveness, all 
directed at accomplishment of the task or to address the
problem to meet the organizational mission, values, and
goals. The more contemporary leadership theories em-
brace the democratic leadership style.
The laissez-faire leader is a passive leader, expecting
the group to progress toward goals with little active in-
volvement on the part of the leader. This type of leader
has little relation to our leadership theories. Coaching
and empowerment of subordinates toward a common 
vision, values, and goals are not active endeavors of this
type of leader. This leadership style is one of sitting back
and letting the group members take on the initiatives 
toward progress.
As you can imagine, the people in the environment
can influence and are influenced by the leadership style.
As proposed by the Sigma Theta Tau (2005) Leadership
Institute, “leaders failing to be adaptive and innovative in
the expression of their roles will simply cease to be effec-
tive” (p. 12). The ultimate measure of effective leadership
is whether things are happening or changing to address
the possibilities.
Leadership Competencies
Recall from our discussion in Chapter 1 that leadership
in both the practice setting and in the profession was one
of the standards of professional performance (ANA,
2010) for registered nurses. The identified competencies
for the nurse include oversight, accountability, vision,
good communication, collegiality, commitment, advo-
cacy, and professional involvement. These competencies
address the Skills and Abilities approach (Table 10.2), in
which leadership skills can be developed and enhanced.
In this theoretical approach, there are three basic skills:
technical, human, and conceptual.
In healthcare leadership, technical skills comprise 
two areas, clinical expertise and leadership knowledge.
Clinical expertise provides an understanding and appre-
ciation for what is involved in task requirements and for
efficiency and efficacy in their accomplishment. Leader-
ship knowledge provides a foundation in the principles
needed, along with abilities and evidence of past success-
ful leadership. These two areas of technical skills also
provide credibility to the leader in the eyes of peers and
subordinates.
Human skills are required to provide effective over-
sight, share the vision, use effective communication, and
promote collegiality and commitment to the project. A
keen understanding of the people, use of effective coaching
and motivational strategies, and promoting their assets for
attainment of the goals are invaluable. Personal skills of
the leader, through commitment and professionalism, 
infuse the group with further confidence and constant
focus on the vision, values, and goals.
Conceptual skills allow for dealing with a sometimes
chaotic environment and the mental skills needed to envi-
sion possibilities and plausible approaches. The leader must
be able to deal with ambiguity in the environment and in
the vision. For example, when dealing with the group in a
brainstorming session, the leader must be able to reframe
suggestions within the context of the problem and have the
group address options for the progress toward the vision
and goals without getting lost in the minutia and while
keeping everyone focused.
Bennis (2000) has identified four key competencies of
leaders (Box 10.1). Management of attention is a firm
focus on the vision and the direction to meet the goals to-
ward that vision. Management of meaning is consistently
communicating the message of the goal so that there is
clear focus and no diversion. Management of trust is being
consistent and transmitting a consistent message so that
others are not thinking there are different rules for differ-
ent people or different days. And finally, management of
self is understanding your own strengths and weaknesses.
It is building on these strengths and minimizing weak-
nesses for success toward the vision and goals and taking
the next steps.
All of these competencies require time, commitment,
and energy. As identified by Tichy and Bennis (2007),
“good leaders are able to triage their time and energy and
focus on the consequential” (p. 23).
Leadership in Nursing
When we think of leaders in nursing, images come to
mind of Florence Nightingale, who made great changes in
the care of injured soldiers in the Crimean war and in
nursing education, providing a basis for our history of
nursing practice, theory, research, and administration.
Other nursing leaders that come to mind are our nurse
theorists in the late 20th and early 21st centuries, who pro-
vided practice paradigms. Still other nursing leaders guide
our practice sites as nurse executives, our colleges of nurs-
ing as deans, our knowledge base as researchers, and our
organizations as officers and elected officials. Leadership
is apparent in many venues in nursing and healthcare. But
remember that a leader mobilizes individuals in a group
to achieve great things through action, creativity, motiva-
tion, and visioning to make things happen.
The American Organization of Nurse Executives
(AONE, 2012) is focused on representation of leadership
through their mission to improve healthcare through in-
novation and expert nursing leadership with their stated
values of creativity, diversity and inclusivity, excellence,
integrity, leadership, and stewardship through identified
170
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
BOX 10.1
Leadership Competencies (Bennis,
2000)
●Management of attention
●Management of meaning
●Management of trust
●Management of self

behaviors of broker, convener, designer, futurist, innova-
tor, maximizer, partner, provocateur, and synthesizer 
(p. 1). These values and behaviors demonstrate the active
role of nursing leadership in the process of creating a new
vision for healthcare. These leaders are the drivers of 
improvements in health and nursing care in patient care
arenas. However, leadership is driven not only by the chief
nursing executive but also by talented nursing leaders
throughout the organization, enabled through their re-
spective roles. The focus becomes leadership in nursing
and healthcare.
From a qualitative study with nursing leaders from a 
variety of leadership positions, essential nursing leadership
competencies were identified as a set of five themes:
●Communication proficiency with emphasis on 
listening skills
●Conflict resolution skills
●Ability to communicate a vision, motivate, and inspire
●Ability to use data and technology in decision making
and fiscal savviness
●Courage to be proactive with change and not reactive
and crisis driven (Eddy et al., 2009, p. 8)
Each of these themes is consistent with the skills and
abilities categorized as technical, human, and conceptual.
But notice the identification of fiscal competencies and
the need to not be driven by crisis situations. Another
characteristic in recent literature is the emotional intelli-
gence (Eason, 2009; Feather, 2008; Goleman, 1995),
which includes emotional and impulse control, under-
standing frustration of both self and others, and main-
taining motivation. Malloch (2010) also refers to this as
emotional competence propensities. This demonstrates
a commitment to the vision, despite challenges that will
intervene throughout the process. Effective leadership
will be challenged and be challenging, for both leaders
and followers.
Kouzes and Posner (2002) propose five practices of 
effective leadership:
●Model the way.
●Inspire a shared vision.
●Challenge the process.
●Enable others to act.
●Encourage the heart. (p. 13)
These practices are ideal in the healthcare setting. First, as
Kouzes and Posner (2002) point out, “titles are granted, but
it is your behavior that wins you respect . . . and people
first follow the person, and then the plan” (pp. 14–15).
Modeling the behavior is the technical ability you present
with and your commitment to action. Communicating
the vision and creating buy-in and ownership is next in
the process. Next, expect obstacles, but the whole idea is
a new vision and not business as usual. Encouraging 
collaboration and helping other to excel in the process 
requires all of the human skills that nurses have developed.
The challenge is not to get lost in details and keep focused
on the vision and bring others along in this process. And,
finally, celebrate accomplishments, no matter how small,
and recognize the achievements of others.
Now, imagine a change you see as needed on an acute
care unit in a hospital. Perhaps it is something as ordinary
as changes in a fall prevention program for elderly patients.
You may think that this is already in place with the quality
improvement project that is mandated in policy. But 
suppose you have noticed a couple of near misses and one
actual incident of a patient who fell in the bathroom last
month. Perhaps improvements can be made. So first, be-
come the champion for looking at the issue further. There
is a good deal of literature and evidence-based practice on
the topic. But are there special considerations with the 
patient population in your area or on your unit? You take
the time to look further, and others see you as leading
change in this area. Perhaps you have identified that more
individual patient information would assist in the process.
You propose a new patient profile process that includes
home practices and medications that the patient has taken
and those that are currently prescribed.
You are sharing a vision with colleagues that there
may be more to the picture (your vision). And you are
challenging the current fall prevention program, or per-
haps some gaps that may not have been noticed. You
propose a pilot on your unit and have it approved. The
cost and staff time with this new process have been in-
cluded, and the administration recognized your talent
and commitment. Now, you have a plan to implement
this additional patient assessment procedure, including
identification of risk situations and individuals and
staffing adjustments needed during peak periods. But,
others will need to be encouraged to follow the plan and
evaluate its effectiveness. Everyone is recruited to interact
with those patients identified with a potential risk of
falls, no matter how remote. At the end of the next
month, there are no falls and no near misses, and the 
patient surveys for your unit demonstrated increased 
patient and family satisfaction with staff—from nurses to 
therapists to unlicensed assistants—as caring and helping
them to prepare for returning home. Your employee of
the month list has changed to employees of the month,
and you celebrate your newer and safer environment.
You modeled the way, inspired a shared vision, chal-
lenged the current practices, enabled others to participate
in the process, and celebrated success. You are a nursing
leader.
However, healthcare environments and consumers are
constantly changing. Leadership challenges will continue
to emerge in this dynamic environment. Huston (2008)
proposes competencies for the nursing leader in 2020 as
follows;
●Global perspective
●Technology skills
●Expert decision-making skills
●Focus on quality and safety
●Political astuteness
●Collaborative skills
●Ability to balance authenticity and performance 
expectations
●Ability to effectively cope with change and chaos 
(p. 906)
These skills are expectations for all nursing leaders. Lead-
ership can be found in all environments, the national
organization, the school of nursing, the healthcare or
community agency, or even in a unit of one of these 
CHAPTER 10 Managing and Leading in the Organization     ●
171

environments. Empowering groups for positive changes
with a vision of the future is a sign of leadership. The 
ultimate measure of effective leadership is whether things
are happening or changing to address the possibilities.
There are several areas of common concern to both
leaders and managers. Recall that the leader mobilizes
the group and shares a vision, and the manager coordi-
nates the resources to address the goals of that vision.
However, understanding the organizational culture,
bases of power, negotiation strategies, and delegation
skills are critical to achievement of the goals and the 
vision for the organization.
ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
The organizational culture is perceptible as the culmina-
tion of the norms, attitudes, and values imbedded in the
organizational mission and in the expected behaviors of
the employees. Daft (2007) views organizational culture
as having two dimensions: visible observable symbols (e.g.,
ceremonies, stories, slogans, behaviors, dress, physical 
settings) and the underlying values, assumptions, beliefs,
attitudes, and feelings of the people (p. 361).
Scrutiny of the organizational culture can provide a
sense of the prevailing level of humanism present in the
organization—in other words, how people are viewed as
employees and consumers. New organizational values and
behaviors have emerged as we redefine and recreate orga -
nizations for functioning in today’s world. We moved from
the belief that humans in organizations are lazy and need
direction, in McGregor’s (1967) Theory X, to the age of
humanism. The humanistic perspective is a more positive
one that considers the importance of the people in the
organization. Still, during times of cost-cutting, a human-
istic perspective and recognition of contributions can
quickly disappear when the focus turns to head counts or
full-time equivalents (FTEs).
Important clues on the involvement, satisfaction, and
effectiveness of the people in the organization are reflected
in management and leadership styles and the behaviors and
attitudes of those in the environment. In healthcare, the
organizational culture includes both the consumers and the
providers in the agency. The organizational culture is also
influenced by the environment—the immediate institu-
tional or agency environment as well as societal expecta-
tions and mandates.
As with any set of cultural expectations, the employ-
ees are expected to enculturate (adapt and adopt) and 
espouse the prevailing principles. Failure to enculturate
results in being ostracized or terminated. These cultural
expectations are the customary ways of thinking and 
behaving shared by members of the organization, as a
form of socialization and allegiance to the norms of the
organization. Incorporation of the specific expectations
encompasses this organizational socialization process. An
example is adopting and using a specific theory that
guides the operation of the organization. At the most
ideal level, if the nurse cannot view or provide care for
patients in accordance with the specific model used at
that agency, such as self-care, the best remedy would be
to seek employment at another agency more consistent
with the nurse’s own worldview.
A growing focus on the importance of the organiza-
tional climate is apparent from professional groups and
associations. In their white paper on the hallmarks of pro-
fessional nursing practice settings, the American Associa-
tion of Colleges of Nursing (2002) identified eight key
characteristics of the environment that should be evalu-
ated in the organizational climate. Based on a study in
2002, the American Organization of Nurse Executives
(McManis & Monsalve Associates, Inc., & AONE, 2003)
proposed six critical factors for achieving work environ-
ment excellence (p. 5). In 2005, the American Association
of Critical-Care Nurses also started a multi-year Healthy
Work Environment Initiative that includes six standards
also applicable to the organizational culture. And consider
the value placed on the organizational culture by the
American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC) Magnet
Recognition Program (2014b) and the Pathway to Excel-
lence Program (2014c). Go to the Online Consult and
find the five model components of transformational lead-
ership, structural empowerment, exemplary professional
practice, new knowledge, innovation and improvements,
and empirical quality outcomes and how these evolved
from the 14 “Forces of Magnetism” in the Magnet Recog-
nition Program (ANCC, 2014b) and evaluate their con-
tribution to the organizational culture of a hospital
system. What these positions and initiatives have in 
common is the focus on the organizational culture that
includes positive leadership, communication, participa-
tory management and local decision making, and collab-
oration and interdisciplinary relationships. The concepts
are particularly appropriate to understanding the people
as individuals and groups in healthcare organizations.
Nursing Leadership
The cultural climate generally supports the predominant
leadership style. That is why it is so critical that environ-
ments have strong nursing leadership. This is emphasized
by the AONE as “the importance of forging a supportive,
empowering work environment that values and nurtures
continuous organizational learning and innovation” 
(McManis & Monsalve Associates, Inc., & AONE, 2003,
p. 8). In addition, part of the requirements for Magnet
Recognition is that the nursing leadership meets minimal
education requirements, participates in decision-making
172
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
ON LIN E CON SULT 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing at 
http://www.aacn.nche.edu
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses at 
http://www.aacn.org
American Organization of Nurse Executives at 
http://www.aone.org
Magnet Recognition Program at 
http://www.nursecredentialing.org/Magnet/
International/MagnetProgOverview
Pathway to Excellence Program at 
http://www.nursecredentialing.org/Pathway

bodies, and meets the expected professional standards for
nurse administrators.
Leadership style is a major influence on organiza-
tional culture. Nurse leaders must have the qualities to
envision the future and assist others in the organization
to meet the goals of quality healthcare outcomes for 
patients. The American Association of Critical-Care
Nurses (2006) emphasizes that nurse leaders function as
role models in skilled communication for true collabo-
ration, effective decision making, meaningful recogni-
tion, and authentic leadership (p. 38). But, as Leininger
(2006) points out, nurse administrators “as leaders need
to make their practices congruent with changing cultural
values, beliefs, and the lifeways in their local workplace,
but must also reasonably fit with societal and world-wide
trends” (p. 367). These talented leaders must constantly
be attuned to both the internal and external environ-
ments of the organization.
Communication
Communication of ideas and views is vital in the organi-
zational context. But the prevailing organizational culture
may dictate the communication channels and styles. Being
able to communicate with patients is quite different from
having your ideas heard, considered, and implemented at
the organizational level. Portraying yourself as an expert
and as a colleague is necessary in both patient and profes-
sional interactions within the organization. Whether by
ensuring that all committee or group members have the
opportunity to express their opinions or by making special
efforts to demonstrate recognition and give credit for an-
other’s ideas, attention to cultural differences is important.
It can make the most of the talents, abilities, and skills of
the human resources in the organizational system, espe-
cially in management of interdisciplinary teams. We will
look further at communication in organizations later in
this chapter.
Participatory Management 
and Local Decision Making
Closely related to leadership style is management focus,
whether on individualism and achievement or on collec-
tivism or teamwork as the norms, attitudes, and values of
the organization. Management styles have an important
influence here. Consider the differences in management
with Theory X, which is focused on individual perfor -
mance, versus Theory Z, which emphasizes collectivism
and cooperation. The organizational focus on individual-
ism or collectivism is apparent in promotion and evalua-
tion structures. Administrative policies and procedures
provide important clues to the organization’s official po-
sition. Subgroups or minority groups within the organi-
zation may create factions, however. These subgroups may
set certain expectations for collectivism and cooperation
in behavior or function. For example, the organization
may be highly bureaucratic, with expectations and rewards
valuing individual performance, competition, and task ac-
complishment; but if cooperation is the prevailing value
in the nursing department, it will be translated into ac-
complishing outcomes at the upper level of management.
Think about the need for participatory management
and decision making. The American Organization of
Nurse Executives (McManis & Monsalve Associates, Inc.,
& AONE, 2003) have described this empowered collabo-
rative decision making as follows:
Nurse empowerment combined with collaborative multi-
disciplinary decision-making is an essential attribute of a
work environment that values nurses as professionals and
provides policy development roles for nursing leaders and
staff. (p. 5)
Participatory management and decision making are
also a requirement for Magnet Recognition institutions.
For eligibility, decentralized, shared decision-making
processes must be apparent with nurses in both direct-
care and managerial roles involved in decision-making bod-
ies and organizational policy. ANCC (2014b) describes
this as a component of transformational leadership, rep-
resenting the forces of magnetism as the quality of the
nursing leadership and the management style.
Collaboration and Interdisciplinary
Relationships
One of the core competencies for all health professionals
is to work in interdisciplinary teams. As noted in the 
Institute of Medicine (IOM) report, “teams tend to reduce
the utilization of redundant or duplicate services, and they
also tend to develop more creative solutions to complex
problems because of their members’ diverse academic
backgrounds and experience” (Greiner & Knebel, 2003,
p. 54). Collaboration is a challenge among professionals,
especially when scope of practice issues arise, time is lim-
ited, and workloads increase. But teamwork is apparent in
some organizational climates that foster interdisciplinary
practice.
In 2004, the IOM focused on safety and work envi-
ronment of nurses. They identified two necessary precur-
sors to collaboration: individual clinical competence and
mutual trust and respect (Page, 2004, pp. 212–213).
These two characteristics seem quite basic, but person-
alities, a challenging and demanding environment, and 
incorporation into the organizational culture are issues.
The IOM report further identified the characteristics of
collaboration, including shared understanding of goals and
roles, effective communication, shared decision making,
and conflict management (Page, 2004, p. 213). All of
these characteristics must be given heed in the culture of
a healthcare organization.
Other Concepts in
Organizational Culture
In addition to understanding the people and groups in the
organizational system, other factors provide information
on the organizational culture and the operational climate.
The organization’s history provides a lasting influence.
Discovering the critical decisions made in founding the
organization reveals the original intent for the organization
and views for the future. Closely related to the founding
decisions are the current guiding ideals and mission. The
guiding ideals and mission relate to the service orientation.
CHAPTER 10 Managing and Leading in the Organization     ●
173

Consider the difference between missions and the intended
consumer groups in not-for-profit and for-profit organiza-
tions. This could range from elected fee-for-service care in
the for-profit setting to a not-for-profit agency focusing on
healthcare to the indigent. The philosophy of the organi-
zation provides important information about the current
ideals and mission. If revisions have been made over the
years, it can be quite helpful to look back at old versions to
determine whether the philosophy changed in response to
environmental factors.
Looking into the community can also influence the 
organizational culture. Although nurses are quite mobile and
no longer tied to a geographic area, community ties with a
rural hospital may provide a profound influence. Remem-
bered history and symbolism of the organization contribute
additional information, for example, about an institution de-
signed to provide hospital care for a county that has evolved
into a regional referral and tertiary-care center. Remembering
the traditions of personalized obstetric care, a local woman’s
group may provide funding for a special prenatal program
for indigent pregnant teenagers.
Finally, institutional arrangements and linkages, such as
consortia and cooperating or referral agencies, are frequently
quite complex but provide essential information on organi-
zational relationships and interrelationships. These facts are
necessary for understanding the culture and influences on
the organization. But, as Hall and Tolbert (2005) point out,
“culture is not a constant. . . . [V]alues and norms change
as the events affect the population involved” (p. 183). The
potential for change in the organizational culture requires
diligent assessment and communication skills on the part
of the nurse manager or leader.
COMMUNICATION UNIQUE 
TO ORGANIZATION
Communication is vital in complex, highly technological,
and dynamic organizations. As was illustrated with orga-
nizational functions, the structure of the organization plays
an important role in communication channels. Formal
channels are easily apparent in highly bureaucratic struc-
tures, as dictated by the organizational diagram. But 
informal communication channels (“grapevines”) are
sometimes less evident and can be highly effective in such
a structure. Consider the need for supplies in some areas
of an agency. Ordering can easily be handled through the
computerized entry system. But what if some urgently
needed item is unavailable through the system? An infor-
mal channel may be used to locate a supply from which
the item may be “borrowed,” to be replaced as soon as the
official order is fulfilled. The departmental administrative
assistant or clerk who has an informal chain of communi-
cation may be able to use his or her knowledge of these
informal systems effectively in such a procurement process.
Communication channels are important considera-
tions for effective decision making to achieve quality out-
comes. Organizational goals and values must be translated,
transmitted, and reinforced throughout the system to meet
the institutional mission. The specialized knowledge,
skills, and resources represented by people require excellent
communication within the system and from external envi-
ronments to be current and responsive to changes in the
knowledge base and technology. Communication is the
action component of interpersonal and interdisciplinary
roles, behaviors, and relationships in the organization 
system. The formal and informal communications and in-
teractions are the essence of the organizational culture.
The organizational structure is the formal design—with
its hierarchy or lines of authority—for the communication
channels. Communications may be formally dictated in a
linear manner by the bureaucratic structure, or they may
be flexible and circular in adhocratic matrix designs. 
Informal communications must be identified to reveal 
the actual flow of information, decision making, and goal
accomplishment. Communication of information and 
expectations stems from the pervasive leadership and 
management styles. Evaluation of the appropriate channels
is vital for effective functioning in the organizational 
setting.
Organizations routinely use methods of communica-
tion in addition to the verbal and nonverbal interpersonal
communication techniques. Consider the informatics
available in organizational settings. We have computer net-
works, fiber optics, satellite, and teleconferencing technol-
ogy. Computers manage information storage, inventory,
and rapid retrieval, data processing, data analysis, report
generation, and even meetings at a distance. The informa-
tion we compile and the methods we use to transmit it
vary with the nature of the communication channel we are
using. For example, a general rule in an organization is to
limit memos to one page or less and disperse them to the
appropriate parties; however, the sender must consider the
available and appropriate technology, such as interoffice
paper copies or e-mail or messaging.
Considering the purpose of communication in an 
organization is indispensable. Whether we are commu-
nicating with patients or assistive personnel, both the
sending method and the receiver of the information are
important. Clear, concise, and timely transmission of in-
formation is necessary for an effective management
process. Recall from Chapter 8 the “rights” of organiza-
tional communications: (1) the right information or con-
tent, (2) the right communication channel, (3) the right
format, including use of correct grammar, terms, and 
language, (4) the right level of understanding, (5) the right
technology, and (6) the right follow-up. The appropriate
communication channel must be selected, using the appro-
priate chain of command to convey your message.
NURSING: POWER,
NEGOTIATION, DELEGATION
In the past decades, healthcare organizations have under-
gone radical change and restructuring. We are now 
focused on outcomes, patient satisfaction, safety, adequacy
of reimbursement for services provided, and the imperative
to address health disparities and health literacy.
Systems theory fits well with changes going on in
healthcare organizations. But as the system becomes more
and more multilayered, the focus shifts to the openness and
flexibility of the system boundaries, greater attention to 
environmental forces, and expanding relationships among
organizations. Special attention to external influences is 
essential for effective leadership and management. This 
174
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

includes a focus on the organization, considering its human
resources, information systems, and governance structures
for delegation and coordination. Ongoing feedback and
evaluation become essential. Professional nurses have major
roles in all steps of this process as we now focus on strategic 
initiatives.
Administrative nursing positions in healthcare systems
have been expanded at all levels. Director and supervisor
roles, when still apparent in an organizational chart, have
been greatly expanded. Nurses have major leadership 
responsibilities in healthcare organizations. Nurses influ-
ence many different types of colleagues. Nurse managers
have knowledge of people and the environmental influ-
ences on healthcare needs. This is the domain of nursing.
In addition, nurses are now well prepared in organizational
theory, finance, and policy. We have entered the adminis-
trative arena as interdisciplinary care managers, coordina-
tors, and leaders. Strategic planning, public relations, and
cost containment have become essential skills. Nurses who
have this knowledge have legitimate power in healthcare
organizations. But, along with this power comes responsi-
bility, accountability, and the need for effective negotiation
and delegation skills.
Power
Max Weber (1947) defined power as “the probability that
one actor in a social relationship will be in a position to
carry out his own will despite resistance, regardless of the
basis on which this probability rests” (p. 152). More spe-
cific to organizations, Mintzberg (1983a) defines power as
“the capacity to effect (or affect) organizational outcomes”
(p. 4). This latter definition has much relevance for pro-
fessional nursing practice, because nurses in healthcare or-
ganizations are positioned to effect (or affect) positive
healthcare outcomes. These outcomes can be viewed as
outputs from the healthcare system, such as patients with
improved health status. Legitimate power is the authority
to effect change within one’s position. The professional
relationship provides the opportunity for legitimate power,
and many nurses now have legitimate power by virtue of
their position, role, and expertise. Informal power is the 
assertion of one’s will over a situation to achieve a goal
without formal or “vested” authority.
Mintzberg (1983a) identified five general bases of power
(Box 10.2). These power bases are applicable to professional
nursing, especially in organizational settings. First, nurses
have demonstrated effective management of resources in 
decentralized and vertical organizations. They are being
vested with responsibility especially with regard to decisions
and resources needed for effective organizational function-
ing. Second, care of patients involves technical skills that
must be performed or supervised by nurses. Third, nursing
continues to develop its unique body of knowledge needed
for evidence-based practice and the health of patients. The
fourth base of power involves the legal prerogatives granted
and implied under the practice acts, licensure, certification,
and professional codes described in Chapter 1. And finally,
nurses in interdisciplinary practice have access to colleagues,
patients, and influential people on whom they rely for access
to the other bases of power. To effect positive healthcare
outcomes, skills in negotiation are often necessary.
Negotiation for power must first be related to the goals
of the organization. Nurses have the ability and responsi-
bility to negotiate for legitimate power in organizations.
Nurses certainly have access to these power sources if devel-
oped, effectively negotiated, and used.
Negotiation
As discussed in Chapter 8, conflict situations can easily
arise in a group setting. And the healthcare organization
provides the potential for many groups with different
compositions, all with the potential for conflict situations
to arise. Both the nurse leader and manager will frequently
encounter conflict among individuals or groups that 
necessitates artful use of interpersonal and negotiation
skills. Effective conflict resolution requires negotiation
and, ultimately, coming to some compromise. This com-
promise is most effective when the result is acceptable at
some level to all parties involved.
Negotiation involves a discussion process whereby in-
dividuals or groups with different views on some issue at-
tempt to reach a compromise acceptable to all involved on
an area of dispute or conflict. The best scenario is a “win-
win” situation with collaboration. In this situation, the so-
lution is satisfying to both sides, who have collaborated, and
each side senses some satisfaction and feeling of a “win” sit-
uation. Alternately, one side prevails (“win-lose” situation)
or both sides experience a compromise that is not really sat-
isfying to either side, thus a “lose-lose” situation.
An effective negotiator should consistently refine and
nurture negotiation skills (Box 10.3). First, the negotiator
must have excellent communication and interpersonal skills.
The negotiator must be a skilled communicator, for under-
standing the concerns of both sides and promoting awareness
and collaboration. He or she must focus on the facts (verbal
and nonverbal) and try to diffuse emotions with effective
communication. Aiken (2004) describes negotiation as a
communication process with exchanges of needs and prior-
ities to achieve consensus on critical issues and to gain ad-
vantages in the process (p. 439). In this process, power
contests may be expected but need to be diffused with a focus
on reconciliation of interests on the issue at hand.
As with any nursing care situation, assessment skills are
needed to understand the interpersonal and situational 
influences from all sides. For example, consider a conflict sit-
uation that arises in the intensive care setting as the group of
physicians and nurses attempt to implement a collaborative
practice model. The ultimate goal is for the effective care of
CHAPTER 10 Managing and Leading in the Organization     ●
175
BOX 10.2
The Five General Bases of Power
●Control of resources
●Control of a technical skill
●Control of a body of knowledge
●Exclusive rights or privileges to impose choices (legal
prerogatives)
●Access to people who have and can be relied on for
the other four
Source: Data from Mintzberg, H. (1983a). Power in and around 
organizations. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

the patient; the negotiator must have an understanding of
all of the facts in order to uncover the common ground 
for all—physicians, intensivists, advanced practice nurses
(APRNs), staff nurses, technicians, therapists, associated ser -
vice providers, and patients. The skillful negotiator must un-
derstand what is being said and what is actually occurring in
the setting, and should be sensitive to all behaviors, nonver-
bal and expressed cues, and views. The skillful negotiator
must assess not only content but also context, culture, be-
haviors, and players involved.
The ability to envision what potential outcomes could
be and how they would affect each side, individually and
collectively, is key. The vision of the potential outcomes
must be framed for the individuals involved, on the basis 
of the facts of the situation and the resources available. 
Endurance is a definite prerequisite throughout the process
and during the inevitable peaks, valleys, and stalemates that
can occur. There are times when the negotiation process
must be halted to allow the various individuals or groups to
refocus on facts and dilute emotions.
The acute awareness of the negotiator must prevail
throughout the entire process, from identification of con-
flict, alertness to all behaviors and actions throughout, to
the levels of satisfaction of both parties once the resolution
has been agreed upon. This awareness of behavior and sit-
uation will have to be restated to all parties on an ongoing
basis to focus on the facts continually.
Another important characteristic of the negotiator is
trustworthiness. All parties must sense the fairness of the
negotiator in the process. Building trust is a necessary skill,
not only to gain the cooperation of both sides during the
negotiation but also to help build trust in the process and
the ultimate resolution. The process is often not a smooth,
linear activity when one is dealing with people, partiality,
and conscious or unconscious behaviors.
Marquis and Huston (2015) identify destructive or
manipulative negotiating tactics as the use of ridicule, in-
appropriate questioning, flattery, demonstrating a sense of
helplessness, and aggression or taking over the situation
(pp. 503–504). These tactics are ineffective and may delay
resolution or even escalate the conflict. Such tactics inhibit
the building of trust and negate the collaborative process.
The result of the negotiation process must be a compro-
mise acceptable to all at some level of satisfaction. If a com-
promise cannot be reached, an impasse results. In this
situation, the conflict will escalate at some later point, 
perhaps in a different form or with different players.
Ideally, the negotiation process should take place
on neutral ground, or at least in a secure environment 
acceptable to both parties. Specific terms are used in 
negotiation tactics, like “reaching a stalemate” (an im-
passe) and “tradeoffs” (concessions), of which the nego-
tiator must be aware. Marquis and Huston (2015)
recommend further that upon resolution of the conflict,
the negotiator send a follow-up letter to both parties 
describing the agreed terms (p. 504). This follow-up
serves as reinforcement for both recognition of individual
involvement and the results of the process. The correspon-
dence can take the form of a formal memo or an electronic
communication commending the participation of both
sides in the resolution and restating the agreed-upon con-
ditions. The attributes of a successful negotiator are also
essential in delegation activities.
Delegation
Delegation is defined as the “transfer of responsibility of
the performance of a task from one individual to another
while retaining the accountability for the outcome” (ANA,
2010, p. 10). Further, the National Council of State
Boards of Nursing (NCSBN, 2005) views delegation as 
“a skill requiring clinical judgment and final accountability
for patient care” (p. 1).
Delegation activities are required when the novice nurse
enters practice on the first day of professional practice. But,
as mentioned, educational preparation provides the con-
cepts for the process, although seldom the opportunity to
truly develop these critical skills, especially when the new
nurse is confronted with long-term interdisciplinary staff
who may be entrenched in a certain way of providing care.
The new nurse is responsible for the care of a group of 
patients and works with assistive personnel necessary for the
provision of quality care. But delegation is a difficult activity
for the novice whose skills are being developed and refined.
And the accountability for the delegated act is not consis-
tently internalized, as simple tasks are performed by others
for the delivery of care. It is not a matter of simply “assign-
ing” a list of tasks or relying on a nurse manager to make
these assignments. Consider the standard practice of routine
vital signs taken by assistive personnel like certified nursing
assistants (CNAs) or unlicensed assistive personnel (UAPs).
We have lost the concept of “monitoring” vital signs when
the nurse assumes that the readings will be reported by 
the assistive personnel in a timely manner. Consider the
problems with this arrangement:
●Skill of the assistive personnel
●Accuracy of readings according to a prescribed 
schedule
●Accuracy and proper functioning of equipment
●Environmental influences and artifacts on both the 
patient and the assistive personnel
●Report on the findings
●Interpretation of readings
●Nursing judgment on readings, their accuracy, and
other variables in the patient’s condition
●Alternate comfort measures or positioning that could
have an effect on readings
And the list goes on.
Delegation is not the “handoff” of a routine task. Appli-
cation of the principles of delegation is essential to effective
leadership and management as well as for patient safety.
176
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
BOX 10.3
Attributes of a Skilled Negotiator:
CAVEAT
●Communication and interpersonal skills
●Assessment skills
●Vision and application of needed resources
●Endurance
●Awareness
●Trustworthiness

Principles of Delegation
In 2006, the ANA and the NCSBN announced a joint state-
ment on delegation. Subsequently, the ANA (2012) further
detailed Principles for Delegation to unlicensed assistive per-
sonnel. Basic principles of delegation involve awareness of the
differences between assignment, delegation, responsibility,
and accountability. “Assignment is the distribution of work
that each staff member is responsible for during a given work
period” (ANA, 2012, p. 5). Delegation “is the transferring to
a competent individual the authority to perform a selected
nursing task in a selected situation “however, the nurse retains
accountability for the delegation (NCSBN, 2005 p. 1). The
responsibility for completion of the task has been delegated,
but not the accountability for ensuring that the task has been
completed correctly by the right person, who has been super-
vised appropriately. Recall from Chapter 1 that according to
the ANA Code of Ethics for Nurses, responsibility is defined as
“an obligation to perform required professional activities at a
level commensurate with one’s education and in compliance
with applicable laws and standards . . .” (ANA, 2015, p. 45)
whereas, accountability is being answerable to self and others
for one’s own choices, decisions and actions as measured
against a  a standard . . .” (ANA, 2015, p. 41). The nurse
maintains both the responsibility and the accountability for
the delegated action. Delegation is required of both the leader
and the manager to address the intended goals and, especially
with some activities, for necessary care of the patient and to
ensure patient safety.
Process of Delegation
NCSBN (2005) envisions delegation as a four-step process:
assessment and planning, communication, surveillance,
and evaluation and supervision and feedback. The impor-
tance of delegation as a process is based on good assessment
of the patient, the environment, and providers who are 
capable and able to be delegated to provide appropriate care
for the patient. The process does not stop with delegation.
The delegation of a responsibility must be based on this 
assessment and must be made to the correct person, with
monitoring by the nurse, who maintains the accountability
for the function. NCSBN (2005) has further provided de-
cision trees in their position paper, located on their public
Web site, one as a tool to assist in the process of delegation
to assistive personnel and one for accepting assignment to
supervise assistive personnel. (See the Online Consult.)
These decision trees are also available in Appendix B of the
Joint Statement on Delegation by the ANA and NCSBN
(ANA & NCSBN, 2006). Both of these decision trees pro-
vide specific questions to be addressed for safe practice with
delegation. The delegation tree developed by the ANA
(2012) clearly illustrates that the nurse assesses the patient,
the delegate, the setting, and the task, but that the nurse
retains the accountability for the delegation and the patient
outcomes. Even when the situation involves the leader 
delegating a management responsibility to a nurse manager
in a situation not involving direct care to a patient popula-
tion, the leader is accountable for selection the correct man-
ager to achieve the intended and effective outcomes for the
situation. Nursing judgment plays a role in the entire
process through the evaluation phase. It is vital to remem-
ber that nursing judgment cannot be delegated.
In their classic work on delegation, NCSBN (1998)
identified five “rights” of delegation (Box 10.4). These five
rights were further endorsed in the 2006 ANA/NCSBN
Joint Statement. First, the task must be the right one for
the patient. The nurse must use clinical judgment, not
merely assign a CNA a group of rooms for taking vital
signs. The circumstances must be right for the particular 
patient and the care needs—again a nursing judgment—
as well as for delegation. The right person means the right
person for the care activity, nurse, technician, or assistive
personnel. This person, who will be delegated the care of
the patient, must clearly understand what is involved with
the care to be given (direction). Two-way communication
skills are critical. The fifth right is the provision of the cor-
rect supervision and evaluation of the care and the person
who was delegated to provide the care. Once again, super-
vision and evaluation require the use of nursing judgment.
Where is the patient in a nursing management situa-
tion? Consider the patient, fresh from surgery, who has just
arrived on the floor: The nurse first makes the assessment
of the patient to determine status and care needs. The nurse
then decides what type of monitoring of vital signs is
needed for the patient’s well-being. The assistive person has
been trained to take vital signs and has demonstrated this
skill (that is, has been certified to perform it). But does this
nurse know that the vital signs will be taken accurately and
as directed; in other words, is this the right person for the
job? If this assistive person is the correct person, then 
the nurse gives clear, understandable directions, including
the reporting cycle back to the nurse for the nurse’s clinical
judgment. Along with this, the nurse provides the appro-
priate supervision and evaluation of the care given.
Delegation involves giving responsibility 
but not abdicating the accountability 
for the task or activity.
The manager’s or the leader’s knowledge of her staff is
critical to successful delegation. The education, experience,
prior performance, willingness, trustworthiness, and expert-
ise of the person should be considered before appropriate
delegation can occur. It is the responsibility of the delegator
to make an adequate assessment, which should include how
long the individual will need supervision and what type of
supervision. Individual Nurse Practice Acts in some states
provide specific language and requirements for appropriate
delegation by nurses. Be aware of both the provisions in your
state practice act and the agency policies and procedures. You
must abide by the legal authority in your practice act.
CHAPTER 10 Managing and Leading in the Organization     ●
177
BOX 10.4
The Five Rights of Delegation
The RIGHT
●Task
●Circumstances
●Person
●Direction/Communication
●Supervision/Evaluation
Source: From National Council of State Boards of Nursing. (1998).
The five rights of delegation. Chicago, IL: Author.

Delegation errors can jeopardize the patient. The cor-
rect balance is the key. Delegation is necessary to provide
effective care for patients. The nurse must be the one 
involved with the clinical judgment for the patient’s well-
being but cannot perform all tasks involved in this
process. Delegation is an essential skill of the nurse. 
Delegation is described in Provision 4 in the Code of
Ethics for Nurses (ANA, 2015) specifies that “nurses in
management and administration have a particular respon-
sibility to provide a safe environment that supports and
facilitates appropriate assignment and delegation” (ANA,
2015, p. 17). This environment includes appropriate ori-
entation, mentoring, and protections for patients. Once
again, we have the core competencies for the nurse as pro-
viding patient-centered care that is based on evidence of
efficacy and quality improvement, provided in an inter-
disciplinary team, and communicated with the assistance
of informatics.
As observed by Northouse (2010), “to be effective, or-
ganizations need to nourish both competent management
and skilled leadership” (p. 11). These competent managers
and skilled leaders address the quote provided at the 
beginning of this chapter by Whoopi Goldberg: “I am
where I am because I believe in all possibilities.” Change
for the good of patients or the healthcare industry can be
a result of applying principles of management and theories
of leadership in healthcare organizations and addressing
innovative possibilities. As we will see in the next chapter,
professional nursing practice has an integral role in this
process of change and innovation.
178
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
ON LIN E CON SULT 
ANA Principles for Delegation at 
http://nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories
/Policy-Advocacy/Priority-Issues/ANAPrinciples
/PrinciplesofDelegation.pdf (if an ANA member)
ANA/NCSBN Joint Statement on Delegation at 
https://www.ncsbn.org/Delegation_joint
_statement_NCSBN-ANA.pdf
NCSBN Delegation Documents at 
https://www.ncsbn.org/1625.htm
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
You have read an article on how nursing leaders can promote evidence-based practice as a value in their
organizational environments. The article reports that “transformational nursing leaders promote learning
cultures, engendering commitment that brings competitive advantages for organizations as new knowledge
is transferred to practice” (Halm, 2010, p. 377). The article supported practices of transformational leaders
including providing a shared vision, challenging current processes, enabling action by others, and encourag-
ing individual actions. You start thinking about the acute care unit where you are a nurse manager and
about the leadership that is needed to foster more evidence-based practice despite staff changes.
Question: How will you use this information to provide leadership and additional focus on the application
of evidence-based practice? Identify the skills you will use and those you wish to develop in the nursing staff.
Source: Halm, M. A. (2010). “Inside looking in” or “Inside looking out”? How leaders shape cultures equipped for evidence-
based practice. American Journal of Critical Care, 19, 375–378.
K E Y  P O I N T S
●An organization is simply an arrangement of human and material resources for some purpose, such as
creating an institution or agency to meet a stated aim. Organizations can be viewed in terms of their
structure, function, and people.
●Organizational structure is the design of the organization, including the type of hierarchy that tells us
about positions or roles, responsibilities, status, channels of command or reporting relationships, and tasks
to be accomplished. The major organizational structures are bureaucratic and organic (adhocratic).
●Centralized versus decentralized organizational structures involve the lines of control and decision making
within the organization.
●Organizations are also described according to the layers of differentiation for authority, decision making,
and coordination. Flat organizational structures have a wide base and few layers or tiers for decision 
making and authority, whereas tall organizational structures have more tiers and lines of command, 
with less local decision making at the lower levels.
●Organizational functions include goals and operations to fulfill the mission of the organization.
●Management is the coordination of resources to achieve organizational outcomes and involves critical
thinking, problem-solving, and decision making.

CHAPTER 10 Managing and Leading in the Organization     ●
179
K E Y  P O I N T S—cont’d
●From a focus on the organization and increasing productivity, humanistic theories of management emerged,
including the classic motivational theories proposed by Maslow, McGregor, Herzberg, and Ouchi.
●Drucker (2002) proposes that a manager is an executive who is focused on contributing to the 
effectiveness of organization by virtue of intelligence, imagination, and knowledge (p. 2).
●Leadership involves action, creativity, motivation, and visioning. It is viewing the possibilities and 
motivating others to make things happen.
●The three basic leadership styles are bureaucratic, democratic, and laissez-faire.
●The organizational culture involves the culmination of the norms, attitudes, and values related to the 
organizational mission, accompanied by the expected behaviors of people.
●The organizational communication process can also be thought of as containing “rights”: (1) information 
or content, (2) communication channel, (3) format, including use of correct grammar, terms, and language,
(4) level of understanding, (5) technology, and (6) follow-up.
●Power is the ability to effect change in people’s behavior or in the organization. Legitimate power is the
authority to effect change within one’s position. Power bases are built on control of resources, technical
skills, and a body of knowledge as well as exclusive rights and access to other people with power.
●Effective conflict resolution requires negotiation or coming to a win-win solution.
●Delegation is the “transfer of responsibility of the performance of an activity from one individual to 
another while retaining the accountability of the outcome” (ANA, 2010, p. 64).
●The five “rights” of delegation are the right task, the right circumstances, the right person, the right 
direction or communication, and the right supervision or evaluation (NCSBN, 1998).
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Characterize the organization where you work. Describe the structure, functions, lines of decision making, commu-
nication patterns, and sources of power relative to the organizational mission. Be prepared to participate in a 
discussion (online or in class) to be scheduled by your instructor.
2. Differentiate between management and leadership. Where do the two roles overlap?
3. Interview a member of the administrative team from a large healthcare facility on the various positions held by
nurses. Describe their roles, changes that have occurred, areas of legitimate power, and the skills professional
nurses need in this setting. Be prepared to participate in a discussion to be scheduled by your instructor.
4. Locate an evidence-based practice summary in your area of clinical interest. Describe how you, as the leader,
would plan for practice changes and utilize the practices of effective leadership to describe your strategies in the
process. Recall that these five practices are as follows:
• Model the way.
• Inspire a shared vision.
• Challenge the process.
• Enable others to act.
• Encourage the heart. (Kouzes and Posner, 2002, p. 13)
5. Observe the start of a shift on a nursing unit. Describe the differences between assignment and delegation. Be
prepared to participate in a discussion to be scheduled by your instructor.
6. Review the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter, and discuss it in the context of the contents
of the chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.

REFERENCES
Aiken, T.D. (2004). Legal, ethical, and ethical issues in nursing
(2nd ed). Philadelphia, PA: FA Davis.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2002).
AACN white paper: Hallmarks of the professional nursing prac-
tice environment. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu
/publications/white-papers/hallmarks-practice-environment
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses. (2005). AACN’s
standards for establishing and sustaining healthy work 
environments: A journey to excellence. Retrieved from http://
www.aacn.org/WD/HWE/Docs/HWEStandards.pdf
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2010). Nursing: Scope
and standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Spring, MD:
Nursesbooks.org.
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2012). ANA’s principles
for delegation by registered nurses to unlicensed assistive 
personnel. Silver Spring, MD: Nursebooks.org. Retrieved
from http://nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories
/ThePracticeofProfessionalNursing/NursingStandards/ANA
Principles/PrinciplesofDelegation.pdf (members only site)
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2015). Code of ethics for
nurses with interpretive statements. Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursesbooks.org.
American Nurses Association (ANA) & National Council of
State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN). (2006). Joint statement
on delegation. Retrieved from https://www.ncsbn.org
/Delegation_joint_statement_NCSBN-ANA.pdf
American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC). (2014a). 
Addendum: Changes to the 2014 Magnet® application manual. 
March 2014. Retrieved from http://www.nursecredentialing
.org/2014-MagnetManualUpdates
American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC). (2014b). 
The Magnet Recognition® Program: Program overview. 
Retrieved from http://www.nursecredentialing.org/
Magnet/ProgramOverview
American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC). (2014c). 
Program overview: Pathway to Excellence® Program: Program
overview. Retrieved from http://www.nursecredentialing.org
/Pathway/AboutPathway
American Organization of Nurse Executives (AONE). 
(2012). 2014-2016 strategic plan. Retrieved from
http://www.aone.org/membership/about/docs
/2014-2016%20AONE%20StratPlan.Final.pdf
Bennis, W. (2000). Managing the dream: Reflections on leader-
ship and change. Cambridge, MA: Basic Books.
Bertalanffy, L. V. (1968). General system theory: Foundations, 
development, applications. New York: George Braziller.
Buckingham, M. (2005). The one thing you need to know . . .
about great managing, great leading, and sustained 
individual success. New York: Free Press.
Daft, R. L. (2007). Organizational theory and design (9th ed.).
Mason, OH: Thompson South-Western College 
Publishing.
Drucker, P. F. (2002). The effective executive revised. New York:
Harper Collins Publishers.
Drucker, P. F., & Maciariello, J. A. (2008). Management
(rev. ed.). New York: Collins Business.
Eason, T. (2009). Emotional intelligence and nursing leadership:
A successful combination. Creative Nursing, 15, 184–185.
Eddy, L. L., Doutrich, D., Higgs, Z. R., Spuck, J., Olson, M.,
& Weinberg, S. (2009). Relevant nursing leadership: An 
evidence-based programmatic response. International 
Journal of Nursing Education Scholarship, 6. Retrieved 
from http://www.bepress.com/ijnes/vol6/iss1/art22/
Fayol, H. (1949). General and industrial management
(C. Storrs, Trans.). London, UK: Pittman & Sons.
Feather, R. (2008). Emotional intelligence in relation to 
nursing leadership: Does it matter? Journal of Nursing 
Management, 17, 376–382.
Goleman, D. (1995). Emotional intelligence: Why it can matter
more than IQ. New York: Bantam Books.
Greiner, A. C., & Knebel, E. (Eds.). (2003). Health professions
education: A bridge to quality. Washington, DC: Institute of
Medicine.
Hall, R. H., & Tolbert, P. S. (2005). Organizations: Structures,
processes, and outcomes (9th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Pearson Prentice-Hall.
Halm, M.A. (2010). “Inside looking in” or “Inside looking out”?
How leaders shape cultures equipped for evidence-based
practice. American Journal of Critical Care, 19, 375–378.
Herzberg, F. (1966). Work and the nature of man. Cleveland,
OH: World Publishing.
Huston, C. (2008). Preparing nurse leaders for 2010. Journal of
Nursing Management, 16, 905–911.
Kouzes, J. M., & Posner, B. Z. (2002). The leadership challenge
(3rd ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Leininger, M. (2006). Culture care theory and uses in nursing
administration. In M. Leininger & M. R. McFarland, Cul-
ture care diversity and universality: A worldwide nursing the-
ory (2nd ed., pp. 365–379). Boston, MA: Jones & Bartlett.
Malloch, K. (2010). Innovation leadership: New perspectives 
for new work. Nursing Clinics of North America, 
45, 1–9.
Marquis, B. L., & Huston, C. J. (2015). Leadership roles and
management functions in nursing: Theory and application
(8th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.
Maslow, A. H. (1954). Motivation and personality. New York:
Harper.
Maslow, A. H. (1970). The farther reaches of the human mind.
New York: Viking Press.
Maxwell, J. C. (2007). The 21 irrefutable laws of leadership: 
Follow them and people will follow you (rev. ed). Nashville,
TN: Thomas Nelson.
McGregor, D. (1960). The human side of enterprise. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
McGregor, D. (1967). The professional manager. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
McManis & Monsalve Associates, Inc., & American 
Organization of Nurse Executives. (2003). Healthy work 
environments, Vol. 2: Striving for excellence. Chicago: 
American Organization of Nurse Executives.
Merton, R. K. (1957). Social theory and social structure
(Rev. ed.). Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Mintzberg, H. (1983a). Power in and around organizations. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Mintzberg, H. (1983b). Structures in fives: Designing effective 
organizations. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN).
(1998). The five rights of delegation. Chicago: Author.
National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN).
(2005). Working with others: A position paper. Retrieved
from https://www.ncsbn.org/1625.htm
180
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

Northouse, P.G. (2010). Leadership: Theory and practice
(5th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ouchi, W. G. (1981). Theory Z: How American business can
meet the Japanese challenge. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Page, A. (ed.). (2004). Keeping patients safe: Transforming the
work environment of nurses. Washington, DC: Institute of
Medicine.
Shirley, M. R. (2006). Authentic leaders creating healthy work
environments for nursing practice. American Journal of 
Critical Care, 15, 256–267.
Sigma Theta Tau. (2005). Resource paper and position statement
on: Leadership and leadership development priorities. 
Retrieved from http://www.nursingsociety.org/aboutus
/PositionPapers/Documents/position_leadership.pdf
Taylor, F. W. (1911). The principles of scientific management.
New York: Harper & Row.
Tichy, M. N., & Bennis, W. G. (2007). Judgment: How winning
leaders make great calls. New York: Penguin.
Weber, M. (1947). The fundamental concepts of sociology 
(A. M. Anderson & T. Parsons, Trans.). In T. Parsons
(Ed.), Max Weber: The theory of social and economic 
organization (pp. 87–157). New York: Oxford University
Press.
Wheatley, M. J. (2006). Leadership and the new science: 
Discovering order in a chaotic world (3rd ed.). 
San Francisco, CA: Berrett-Koehler.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
American Nurses Association. (2009). Nursing administration:
Scope and standards of practice (3rd ed.). Silver Spring, MD:
Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Credentialing Center. (2014). Transforma-
tional leadership: Criteria for nursing excellence. Silver Spring,
MD: Author.
Disch, J. (2009). Generative leadership. Creative Nursing, 15,
172–173.
George, B. (2004). Authentic leadership: Rediscovering the secrets
to creating lasting value. New York: John Wiley.
Grossman, S. C., & Valiga, T. M. (2012). The new leadership
challenge: Creating the future of nursing (4th ed.). 
Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Hendren, R. (2010). Six steps to ensure new nurse manager 
success. Retrieved from http:// www.healthleadersmedia
.com/content/NRS-252808/Six-Steps-to-Ensure
-New-Nurse-Manager-Success.html
Houser, B., & Player, E. (2010). Pivotal moments in nursing:
Leaders who changed the path of a profession, Volume I. 
Indianapolis, IN: Sigma Theta Tau.
Johansen, B. (2012). Leaders make the future: Ten new 
leadership skills for an uncertain world. San Francisco, CA: 
Berrett-Koehler.
Locke, E. A. (1982). The ideas of Frederick W. Taylor: An
evaluation. Academy of Management Review, 7(1), 14.
ONLINE RESOURCES
American Nurses Association
http://nursingworld.org
American Association of Colleges of Nursing
http://www.aacn.nche.edu
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses
http://www.aacn.org
American Organization of Nurse Executives
http://www.aone.org/
Dale Carnegie and Associates
http://www.dalecarnegie.com
Magnet Recognition Program
http://www.nursecredentialing.org/Magnet
National Council of State Boards of Nursing
http://www.ncsbn.org
Peter F. Drucker
http://www.druckerinstitute.com/link/about-peter-drucker/
CHAPTER 10 Managing and Leading in the Organization     ●
181

Change and Innovation
182
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Differentiate among the theories of change.
2. Apply the stages of change to a patient situation.
3. Given a practice situation, describe the roles and characteristics of an effective change agent.
4. Discuss differences needed in the change process for use with individuals, families, and groups.
5. Describe the process and strategies for effective organizational change.
6. Evaluate his or her personal change quotient.
Change
Planned Change
Change Agents
Restraining Forces
Driving Forces
Unfreezing
Moving
Refreezing
Innovation
Transtheoretical Approach
Transitions
Internal Sources of Change
External Sources of Change
Change Quotient
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
“We must always change, renew, 
rejuvenate ourselves; 
otherwise we harden.”
Johann von Goethe 1749–1812
Key Terms
11

In professional practice, we need to focus on the process
of planned change, being proactive rather than reactive. In
fact, nursing professionals have been challenged to take a
leadership role in healthcare. The Institute of Medicine’s
(2011) seminal report, “The Future of Nursing: Leading
Change, Advancing Health,” clearly states: “By virtue of
its numbers and adaptive capacity, the nursing profession
has the potential to effect wide-reaching changes in the
health care system (p. S-1). This statement provides a
clear directive for change and innovation with nurses as
major players in the process. 
Change is a part of normal daily life. We talk about
changing our hair color, our attitude, someone else’s
mind, and so on. Change can be defined as a process that
results in altered behavior of individuals or groups.
Change that is accidental, spontaneous, or haphazard is
caused by outside forces. On the other hand, intentional
or planned change involves conscious effort toward some
goal as a deliberate and collaborative process. Change is
an integral and essential component of professional nurs-
ing practice, with nurses as change agents in healthcare
settings.
In today’s world, change must be viewed as affecting
both the individual and the group. One example of
planned change would be an individual going on a diet.
The result (the change) is a decrease in weight. Such a
change may also come about unintentionally, through
outside influence. A family crisis or a bout of depression
may lead to weight change. Or suppose the individual
started eating a lot of chocolate. Gaining weight was not
the intention—eating chocolate was—but weight gain was
an unintended consequence. In contrast, as a planned
change process, the same individual may have gone to
Weight Watchers. Improved nutrition and eating practices
also influence other family members through food selec-
tions and meal preparation in the home, and may even 
influence friends and colleagues through the individual’s
example.
Change is a daily occurrence in society. Think about
the number of times you have read or heard of global re-
lations, changes in political forces, and changes in health-
care organizations as restructuring. More people are
beginning to embrace change since Johnson (2002) pub-
lished his now classic Who Moved My Cheese? comparing
the mice and the Littlepeople doing simple things that can
either work or immobilize the situation when things
change. Still, making change is not an easy process for 
individuals or organizations.
In professional practice, we need to focus on the
process of planned change, being proactive rather than re-
active. As we saw in the previous chapter, the ability to
embrace change and innovation is a leadership character-
istic. Planned changes for individuals or groups in the en-
vironment require structural shifts or altered behaviors for 
improved functioning. Improved functioning involves
new (changed) behaviors, attitudes, and relationships. Pro-
fessional nurses are change agents for people and health.
Their role is to move for needed, planned change for in-
dividuals, families, community groups, and society. Such
practice should occur in individual practice as well as on
an organizational level.
THEORIES OF CHANGE 
AND INNOVATION
Understanding the theories of change applicable to indi-
viduals, families, groups, and society is the first step in
moving from being reactive to unintended change to be-
coming proactive in creating positive, planned change.
Chinn and Benne (1976) described three classic
change philosophies: (1) the empirical-rational nature of
man, (2) normative-reeducative philosophy, based on
human motivation and norms (attitudes, values, skills,
and relationships), and (3) power-coercive philosophy,
based on leadership and the application of power (p. 23).
The change models that follow reflect the empirical-
rational and the normative-reeducative philosophies.
These two philosophical orientations focus on the nature
of the person or the group in the context of the environ-
ment and are consistent with contemporary leadership 
theories.
Lewin
The classic change theorist was Kurt Lewin, with his nor-
mative-reeducative model based on human motivation
and norms in the group. Lewin (1951) developed a model
based on his Field Theory, a method of ana lyzing causal
relationships and building the scientific constructs for
change (p. 45). The mathematical model in his theory
merely indicates that human behavior is based on the
human being (or group) and his or her environment at
that point in time. Lewin (1951) focused on social change,
pointing out that “group life is never without change,
merely differences in amount and type of change exist” 
(p. 199). In groups and organizations, multiple influences
from individuals and their reactions to the environment
cause group behaviors and norms. Field Theory proposes
that the status quo, or a state of equilibrium, is maintained
when restraining forces and driving forces balance each
other. To achieve change, the restraining forces must be
weakened and the driving forces strengthened. Consider
the illustration of change in Figure 11.1.
Restraining forces in society resist change; they include
norms, values, relations among people, morals, fears, per-
ceived threats, and regulations. In essence, these restrain-
ing forces are the “old guard” that maintains the status
quo. Driving forces, on the other hand, support change
and include the desire to please or the desire for more
novel, effective, efficient, or merely different activities. 
System imbalance becomes the impetus for change. The
process involves weakening the restraining forces and
strengthening the driving forces. To do this, Lewin pro-
posed three methods: unfreezing, moving, and refreezing
of group standards.
Unfreezing involves disequilibrium, discontent, and
uneasiness. Lewin (1951) states that “to break open the
shell of complacency and self-righteousness, it is some-
times necessary to bring about deliberately an emotional
stir-up” (p. 229). The restraining and driving forces 
are identified, and comparisons are drawn between the 
ideal and the actual situation. To bring about change, 
participants must make the need for change apparent and
CHAPTER 11 Change and Innovation     ●
183

accepted. In many situations, making individuals uneasy
and discontented with the environmental system is the ini-
tial step in the process. Malcontents want change, whereas
individuals who are satisfied and comfortable with the cur-
rent state of affairs resist changes that will create disequi-
librium. Activities are centered on unfreezing the existing
equilibrium.
Moving occurs when the previous structure is re-
arranged and realistic goals are set. The system is moved
to a new level of equilibrium. Choices must be made about 
accepting the change agent and the roles of the group
members in the change process. At this stage, group deci-
sions are preferable for moving toward permanent change.
This represents the distribution of power among the group
members to make them driving forces engaged in the
process. The individual involved in the change process acts
as a member of a group in which new social values and
norms are being established.
A new status quo is established with refreezing. Re-
freezing describes the new level of equilibrium and rein-
forcement needed for the new patterns of behavior. The
focus is on maintaining the goal achieved and highlighting
the present benefits over past practices.
Consider Lewin’s model with a patient population.
The individual with heart disease who is started on a 
low-salt, low-fat diet has a teaching need to bring perma-
nent change to his diet. You discover through interviews
with the patient and family members that the diet at 
home is highly seasoned and high in animal protein and
fats. Restraining forces in this situation are cultural values;
family traditions; individual and group (family) prefer-
ences in food selection and preparation; attitudes toward
diet, foods, or food preparation; fears of further illness
with changes in diet; and attitudes toward restrictions on
personal lifestyle.
Now consider each of these factors in relation to all
members of the household and the patient’s work, recre-
ation, and social environments. Think about the driving
forces: fear of further illness without the dietary changes,
respect for advice given, support network, educational pre-
sentations, role models, and so forth. Unfreezing involves
the identification of the restraining and driving forces, 
motivating the patient toward change, and assessing 
readiness for teaching. Moving consists of supporting a 
positive attitude toward change and providing nutritional
information, including food selection, preparation, and
presentation options. Refreezing would occur with the 
patient’s stabilization, evidenced through subjective 
reports (e.g., food diary), objective observations (e.g.,
health assessment), and laboratory findings in the rehabil-
itation phase. Valuable nursing theories to support nursing
actions include King’s Theory of Goal Attainment and
Orem’s Self-Care Agency. Supporting attitudinal and be-
havioral changes could occur through follow-up telephone
or e-mail service after discharge or interviews at clinic ap-
pointments. A similar application could be developed for
group change using Lewin’s Field Theory or the Health
Promotion Model. See Chapter 4 for more information.
Lippitt
As an outgrowth and expansion of Lewin’s theory, Lippitt
(1973) pointed out that “if we want to understand, explain,
or predict change in human behavior, we need to take into
account the person and his environment” (p. 3). He iden-
tified several complex factors of human behavior that must
be considered: motivation, multiple causation, and over-
rationalized habits. Looking at both individual and orga-
nizational change, he focused further on the change agent
and defined seven specific phases (Fig. 11.2) within an idea,
similar to Lewin’s change model. Thus, Lippitt described
more specific activities that are still applicable to the three
steps of unfreezing, moving, and refreezing.
Unfreezing, Moving, Refreezing
For unfreezing, there is the need to collect data and 
diagnose the problem and the key people. The driving and
184
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
Restraining Forces
Driving Forces
(Equilibrium)
Restraining Forces
Driving Forces
(Unequilibrium; setting for change)
STATUS QUO
STATUS QUO
Figure 11.1 Illustration of restraining and driving forces in the change process.
7.
6.
5.
4.
3.
2.
1.
 
Terminating the Relationship
 
Maintaining the Change
 
Choosing the Change Agent’s Role
 
Selecting Change Objectives
 
Change Agent’s Motivation and Resources
 
Assessment of Motivation and Capacity for Change
Diagnosis of Problem
Figure 11.2 Lippitt’s (1973) seven stages of planned
change.

restraining people, environmental, and organizational
forces are identified, defined, and targeted. Second, the
motivation and resources are assessed to identify the desire
and capacity for change. This includes the resistance and
readiness of the people in the environment. In the third
step, the change agent’s motivation, commitment, and re-
sources must be assessed for the potential success of the
change activity. The skills, efforts, and responsibilities are
critical planning pieces in this phase of change.
For moving, change objectives must be selected with
consideration of activities for progressive change. Lippitt
uses the leverage point concept as the starting point at
which receptivity for change is apparent and the objectives
are initiated. Planning and evaluation are  primary activities
in this step. Then, following the development of an action
plan with evaluation criteria, the change agent and group
roles are selected and assigned. Acceptance and selection
of an appropriate role is critical in defining the power, out-
comes, and strategies of the change agent.
Refreezing, or maintaining the change, occurs through
ongoing training, communication, and support of the peo-
ple in the environment. Communication by both sides,
the driving and the restraining forces, advertises the success
of the change using actual evaluation results. In many
cases, the loudest and most visible of the restraining forces
become the change agent’s greatest supporters when they
accept the merits of the process with evaluation. How
many times have you heard someone say, “I never thought
it could be done but . . .” or “I was behind that all along
but I did not want to show it”? Finally, terminating the
helping relationship is necessary on the part of the change
agent and major players for the change to become part of
the people and the environment, and not just the activity
of a select individual or group. Rather, it becomes the new
norm of the people or the organization.
Role of Change Agent
A major piece of Lippitt’s (1973) model involves the roles
for the professional change agent. He proposed four major
roles for the change agent:
●Specialist
●Coordinator
●Fact finder and information link
●Consultant
Lippitt views the selection of the appropriate role for
the change agent as essential in the moving phase of
change. As a specialist, the change agent is the expert in
the environment on methods and strategies for change.
As a coordinator, the change agent functions as manager,
who plans, organizes, and co ordinates efforts and pro-
grams for the change. The change agent as a fact finder
and information link serves as a seeker, clarifier, synthe-
sizer, reality tester, and provider of information, as well
as a communications link among all participants in the
system (Lippitt, 1973, pp. 60–61).
The consultant role is viewed as the most important
role for the change agent, both inside the system and with
external individuals, groups, and environments. In fact,
Lippitt (1973) developed a model of eight  specific activity
roles within this consultant role, which are viewed along
a continuum from advocate through expert, trainer, al-
ternative identifier, collaborator, process specialist, fact
finder, and reflector (p. 63). The correct role for the
change agent depends on the  people, the environment,
and how much direction is needed from the agent to im-
plement the change. As the advocate, the change agent as
a consultant is highly directive in leading the group to-
ward change. Conversely, the change agent is the least di-
rective as a reflector, helping the group clarify and
evaluate their efforts. The change agent must have knowl-
edge, skill, and perseverance in the work-intensive process
of change.
Consider, again, our example of the patient who
must change to a low-salt, low-fat diet. Under Lippitt’s
model, first, you need to collect data on meals, food pref-
erences, and preparation at home. You identify, define,
and target the environmental forces—family, friends, and
cultural and collegial (work or recreational) forces. Second,
you assess the motivation, resistance, readiness, and re-
sources of the patient and his family to identify the desire
and capacity for change in dietary habits. In the third step,
your motivation, commitment, and resources must be re-
alized as the nurse–change agent. Your skills, efforts, and
responsibilities are critical in this planning phase. Lippitt’s
concept of leverage point occurs when the patient and his
family are receptive to change and the action plan is initi-
ated with evaluation criteria. Your role as change agent is
defined specific to the patient and his needs. Consider the
applicability of Orem’s three modes of nursing, especially
the supportive-educative mode, in relation to his contin-
uum of consultant activities. Your role as change agent
may alter rapidly as the patient moves from the hospital
setting to the home and clinic settings. Empowerment of
the patient and his significant others is critical for success
in this type of change. And with the maintenance of the
change in diet and health status that occurs through on-
going training in dietary management, communication,
support, and reinforcement during the follow-up period,
the patient and family are moved into the termination
phase. The helping relationship is no longer necessary and
the dietary changes have become part of the person and
family in their environment.
Havelock
Havelock (1971) used a system and process model to de-
pict an organization with the following major concepts:
role, linkages, and communication for transfer and use of
knowledge. Using the three major perspectives of prob-
lem-solving, research-development-diffusion, and social
interaction, Havelock further examined the linkage process
to view the change in the broader system (Havelock &
Havelock, 1973). His model reflects the empirical-rational
nature of humans. 
Building on Lewin’s stages of change, Havelock added
steps highlighting communication and interpersonal 
activities:
●Perception of need
●Diagnosis of the problem
●Identification of the problem
●Devising a plan of action
CHAPTER 11 Change and Innovation     ●
185

●Gaining acceptance of the plan
●Stabilization
●Self-renewal (Havelock & Havelock, 1973)
Unfreezing, Moving, Refreezing
For unfreezing, the perception of a need for a change in
the system is followed by diagnosis and identification of
the problem. At this time, a reciprocal relationship devel-
ops between the user (patient) system and a resource 
system. Linkages with needed resources are made in this
initial stage before moving on the change. Havelock and
Havelock (1973) stress that the problem-solver must be
“meaningfully linked to outside resources” (p. 23).
Moving toward change requires devising a plan of ac-
tion and gaining acceptance of the plan in the system. This
is a stage of searching for a solution and applying that 
solution to the identified problem, using resource linkages
in the environment. 
In the final step, refreezing, stabilization and the need
for self-renewal are specified. First, stabilization in the
system is specified to sustain the change (refreezing).
Havelock describes self-renewal as being needed to
 sustain the patient system in the future. This sense of
self-renewal is the empirical-rational nature of people
where the new values, goals, and activities of the system
become the norm.
Role of Change Agent
The importance of and roles for the change agent are also
key components of Havelock’s model, which lists four
roles for the change agent:
●Catalyst
●Solution giver
●Process helper
●Resource linker (Havelock & Havelock, 1973, p. 60)
These roles become increasingly complex. The catalyst
serves as the impetus for change. The resource linker
brings people, environments, and resources together at the
system and macrosystem levels (Havelock & Havelock,
1973, pp. 60–64). For effective functioning within these
roles, Havelock further developed a training program for
preparing effective change agents.
Havelock’s model can also be used with the example
of dietary change for our patient with heart disease. Com-
munication and interpersonal activities are core ingredi-
ents in the nurse-patient relationship. Identifying the need
for altering dietary salt and fat relates to the patient’s med-
ical condition. The personal, environmental, social, cul-
tural, and dietary habits are assessed through interview, to
define the problem. A reciprocal relationship between the
patient system and a resource system occurs through link-
ages, including meeting with a nutritionist for food selec-
tion and preparation options. Informational lists on
cookbooks, restaurants, and community associations ad-
vocating healthy eating with low-fat, low-salt meals are
provided. Using this model, the nurse encourages linkages
with outside resources such as the American Heart Asso-
ciation, American Association of Critical-Care Nurses, 
and collegial relationships with nutritionists, rehabilitation
specialists, and cardiologists. The plan for dietary change
is devised in collaboration with the patient system and in-
cludes linkages with community resources acceptable to
the patient and his family. Recall the concept of cultural
competence from Chapter 4 and how it is necessary in this
model. Linkages must be retained with the patient after
discharge, in the home, clinic, or rehabilitation setting.
This follow-up is necessary for stabilizing the diet, given
the patient’s physiological and psychosocial system influ-
ences. The role of the nurse-change agent has moved from
catalyst and solution giver in the initial phase of problem
identification, to process helper in the planning phase, and
then to resource linker. The changes in diet must become
a part of the patient’s value system. The nurse–change
agent then terminates the relationship with the patient,
while linkages with external resources provide the patient
with self-renewal.
Rogers
As an outgrowth of the change model, Rogers developed
the Diffusion of Innovations model. In 1971, Rogers and
Shoemaker stated the following:
Although it is true that we live more than ever before in
an era of change, prevailing social structures often serve
to hamper the diffusion of innovations. Our activities in
education, agriculture, medicine, industry, and the like
are often without the benefit of the most current research
knowledge. The gap between what is actually known
and what is effectively put to use needs to be closed. 
(p. 1)
This is still true today, more than 40 years later. We live
in a time of even greater social change. This model was
used in nursing in the 1980s to promote research-based
practice and is quite appropriate today with the imperative
for evidence-based practice. We are not just changing from
one practice to another. We want change to be evidence-
based, for efficacy related to patient outcomes. Often, this
will involve innovation or moving to a new, more novel
or advanced approach than the one used in the past.
Rogers and Shoemaker (1971) focus on communi -
cation and view change as the effects of a new idea or in-
novation being adopted and put into use or rejected.
Change may occur at the level of the individual, group,
organization, or society. The model was first proposed
with four major steps in the process of social change:
knowledge, persuasion, decision, and confirmation
(Rogers & Shoemaker, 1971, p. 25). Rogers (1983) then
extended the Innovation-Diffusion process to five stages:
●Knowledge
●Persuasion
●Decision
●Implementation
●Confirmation
The interest and commitment of key people and policy-
makers are critical in this model.
Notice how these stages are similar to those in the ACE
Star Model of Knowledge Transformation (see Fig. 5.1).
Recall that the steps in knowledge transformation were
discovery, summary, translation, integration, and evalua-
tion (Stevens, 2009).
186
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

Unfreezing, Moving, Refreezing
Developing a sequence of knowledge, persuasion, and de-
cision making is the key activity in the unfreezing stage.
To develop knowledge, key people and policy-makers are
introduced to the innovation to gain understanding. Then
comes persuasion to develop attitudes on the innovation.
Rogers (1983) uses persuasion to focus on the individual
whose attitudes change, either positively or negatively to-
ward the innovation, not on the external force that
changes one’s mind. The decision to adopt or reject an in-
novation is the bridge between the unfreezing and moving
stages in Rogers’ model.
Implementation applies to the stage of moving. Revi-
sions, potential adoption, or rejection of the innovation oc-
curs in this implementation phase. Rogers’ fifth step, when
the innovation changes from being novel to being part of
the routine or norm, involves refreezing the equilibrium. He
calls this step confirmation, in which reinforcement is sought
and the key people and policy-makers decide to maintain
or discontinue the innovation. Rogers (1983) admitted that
the research evidence shows no clear distinction between
the implementation and confirmation steps. This may be
related to the idea of a flexible time span between imple-
mentation and confirmation, when the process of refreezing
for the innovation occurs. Rogers (1983) describes the final
confirmatory stage as “routinization” of the innovation.
Throughout the entire process, five attributes deter-
mine the rate of adoption of an innovation by members
of a social system:
●Relative advantage
●Compatibility
●Complexity
●Trialability
●Observability (Rogers & Shoemaker, 1971, p. 39;
Rogers, 1983, pp. 238–240)
These attributes should be included in all evaluation
plans and data on the change. Relative advantage is deter-
mined through comparison of the innovation with what
was done in the past. The advantage may be effectiveness
as well as efficiency, and the process has been described as
weighing economic advantages or the cost-effectiveness.
Compatibility with the values, beliefs, and needs of the
group is the second factor. The complexity (difficulty in
use), trialability (experimental trials), and observability
(visible evidence) are all considered in the implementation
stage and have a direct effect on adoption, revision, or dis-
continuation of an innovation.
Role of Change Agent
Rogers’ model also highlights the roles of the change agent,
which occur in the following sequence:
1. Develops the need for change
2. Establishes the relationship with the individual system
3. Diagnoses the problems
4. Motivates the individual system for change
5. Translates intent for change into the actions needed
6. Stabilizes change in system and “freezes” new behavior
7. Terminates the relationship (Rogers, 1983, 
pp. 315–317)
Like Lippitt, Rogers views the change agent as a profes-
sional, skilled in change for effective functioning in 
the role.
We take a slightly different approach with the appli-
cation of Rogers’ Innovation-Diffusion process model to
our example of the patient who needs to change his diet.
You have found research studies on effective dietary com-
pliance in cardiac rehabilitation. You now wish to bring
this innovation into practice in your organization to use
in patient teaching programs. During the initial devel-
opment of knowledge, key people and policy-makers in
nursing service and cardiology are introduced to the
teaching program content and methods, along with 
the results from use with patients in other settings. Next,
you need to persuade people of the effectiveness and 
applicability of this approach—the organization and its
resources as well as the patient population. The decision
is made to either adopt or reject the new teaching pro-
gram. If it is decided to try the teaching program with 
a patient population, the phase of implementation is 
entered. The teaching program may be revised, adopted,
or rejected on the basis of its specificity and acceptability
to the patient group and the organization. If the teaching
program is found to be applicable and advantageous, it
is “confirmed” as the agency procedure or organizational
norm. If the procedure is not adopted, the key people
and policy-makers must confirm the decision to discon-
tinue the program. These are the steps toward imple-
menting evidence-based practice at the organizational
level.
The Transtheoretical Approach
Another model of change arose from a behaviorist perspec-
tive and psychotherapy. Prochaska, DiClemente, and Nor-
cross (1992) describe their program of research focused on
how people as “self-changers” intentionally change their
behavior, both with and without psychotherapy (p. 1102).
This led to the emergence of their Transtheoretical 
Approach to change, which they describe as an eclectic
model that does not dictate adherence to a specific type of
psychotherapy. The empirical basis for this theory provides
a broad range of studies on individuals and groups (both
inpatients and outpatients), from family therapy to addic-
tive conditions and health-promotion activities. One 
of the original core concepts of this theory is that people
who change or who recover from an addictive condition
experience an invariant series of stages for the change to
occur (Prochaska & DiClemente, 1984, p. 21). Key com-
ponents of this model are stages of change and processes
for intentional change to occur. Developmental and envi-
ronmental changes can also occur, but unless individuals
see this as an intentional change, they will feel coerced,
and reversion to the prior behavior may occur (Prochaska
& DiClemente, 1984, p. 80).
Originally, the Transtheoretical Model included five
linear stages (precontemplation, contemplation, deci-
sion, action, and maintenance) but was then modified
based on statistical analysis to four stages, because 
the individual’s decision to make a change included
both contemplation and action. The four stages of
change—precontemplation, contemplation, action, and
maintenance—were envisioned as a revolving door with
CHAPTER 11 Change and Innovation     ●
187

the potential for relapse (Prochaska & DiClemente,
1984, p. 23). 
Further research provided the basis for the refinement
of the model, as a spiral with five stages of change, in
which relapses were the norm, resulting in regression and
the potential for later progression through the five stages
(Prochaska et al., 1992, p. 1104). Consider these five
stages as described in Table 11.1. Termination with the
firm establishment of the changed behavior does not occur
until the individual no longer has to make any conscious
efforts to avoid a relapse to the prior behavior (Prochaska
& DiClemente, 1984, p. 29). The research has indicated
that most “self-changers” will “recycle several times
through stages before achieving long-term maintenance”
(Prochaska et al., 1992, p. 1111).
In addition to the stages of change through which the
individual progresses, the model proposes that  certain be-
haviors or processes are more apparent and effective in se-
lected stages of change. A behaviorist philosophy to change
is apparent in the 10 proposed processes that occur in the
different stages of change as follows:
●Consciousness raising with education and information
●Self-reevaluation as with values clarification
●Self-liberation with a commitment to action
●Counter-conditioning as with alternatives to the 
behavior
●Stimulus control or counteracting negative stimuli
●Reinforcement management or self-rewards for 
positive behaviors
●Helping relationships, both social and therapeutic 
support systems
●Dramatic relief or expressing feelings
●Environmental reevaluation as with the effect of the
problem on the environment
●Social liberation and advocacy (Prochaska et al., 1992,
p. 1108) 
Subsequent research has identified that the most fre-
quently used processes across the various types of inten-
tional change were helping relationships, consciousness
raising, and self-liberation, except in the case of overweight
individuals who used more self- liberation and stimulus
control (Prochaska et al., 1992, p. 1107). These change
processes focus on cognitive, affective, and psychomotor
behaviors. In the early precontemplation and contempla-
tion stages of change, the cognitive change processes can
lead to preparation for change. Active behavioral change
processes are critical in the action and maintenance stages,
however (Prochaska et al., 1992, p. 1112). 
188
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
TABLE 11.1
Transtheoretical Model and the Stages of Change
Stage of Change        Behavioral Characteristics                                           Changes Processes
Precontemplation            Satisfaction with the current situation. The                           Consciousness raising
                                    individual indicates no intention to change and           
↓
        Dramatic relief
                                    may deny the existence of a problem.                       ↓
Contemplation                Acknowledges that a problem exists but has             ↓        Environmental reevaluation
                                    not made a commitment to change                                    
                                    the negative behavior. An important clue for             ↓        Self-reevaluation
                                    this stage is a lack of readiness for the change                       
                                    despite thoughtful consideration of the                                
                                    positives and negatives of the situation.
Preparation                     In this stage the commitment to change is                 ↓        Self-liberation
                                    made and the individual is intending to take 
                                    action in the near future.
Action                            Positive actions are now taken for a change               ↓        Reinforcement management
                                    in behavior.
                                    Individuals in this stage have altered their                  ↓        Helping relationships
                                    behavior for a period from one day to six 
                                    months (Prochaska et al., 1992, p. 1104).                   ↓        Counter conditioning
Maintenance                   The new behaviors have now replaced the               ↓        Stimulus control 
                                    prior ones. The individual is committed to the 
                                    change on an ongoing basis. The theorists 
                                    describe the “hallmarks” of this stage as 
                                    stabilizing behavioral change and avoiding 
                                    relapse, which can last from six months to a 
                                    lifetime (Prochaska et al., 1992, p. 1104). 
Source: Prochaska, J. O., DiClemente, C. C., & Norcross, J. C. (1992). In search of how people change: Applications to 
addictive behaviors. American Psychologist, 47, 1102–1114.

CHAPTER 11 Change and Innovation     ●
189
Unfreezing, Moving, Refreezing
The five stages of change in the Transtheoretical Model
are also consistent with Lewin’s stages of change. Unfreez-
ing occurs in the stages of precontemplation, contempla-
tion, and preparation, especially with the cognitive change
processes. Moving starts with the stage of preparation for
the change and then into action. Recall that in the action
stage of the Transtheoretical Model, the individual has im-
plemented a changed behavior from one day to six
months. Refreezing occurs in the maintenance stage with
the stabilization of the behavior.
The Individual as the Change Agent
In this theory, the individual is the agent of change, with
external assistance of “helping relationships” in the change
process. The focus is clearly on the individual and the po-
tential for relapse and is applicable for individuals as “self-
changers,” especially given a situation for patient teaching.
Applications of the theory have been noted in the case
of both addictive behaviors and for promoting healthier
lifestyles. For use with groups, effectiveness depends on
whether the individuals are at the same stage of change
(Prochaska & DiClemente, 1984). For example, for effec-
tiveness, group members must be homogeneous in terms
of their readiness for change as opposed to a group with
some individuals in the precontemplation stage (and sat-
isfied with the status quo) and others in the action or
maintenance stages. 
The focus of the Transtheoretical Approach is on the
individual, and the potential for relapse is consistent with
the focus of nursing on human beings in their unique
environment and with their unique characteristics and
needs. They may need additional time to succeed in the
changed behavior. As previously noted by the theorists,
many need to “recycle” through the stages. As with our
example of the patient who must change to a low-salt,
low-fat diet, assessment of individual and environmental
characteristics is still essential, as is readiness for change.
This assessment of readiness will direct your use of
change processes to assist the individual through the 
particular stage of change. For example, with patient
teaching as a helping relationship, you may be providing
informational materials in the precontemplation and
contemplation stages as consciousness raising activities.
Also consider the use of active behavioral change activi-
ties with food diaries and reinforcement management in
the active stages of change. A key component of the self-
liberation process in change in the Transtheoretical 
Approach is the concept of choice, with the component
of decision-making and commitment to the decision
(Prochaska & DiClemente, 1984, p. 38). And individual
differences, self-esteem, and motivation must be consid-
erations in the case of a relapse. 
TRANSITIONS
In the area of organizational change, the concept of transi-
tions, as a corporate change phenomenon, has emerged with
the move to more humanistic organizational theories as
these same organizations struggle to survive and thrive in
the economic climate. As illustrated in the Harvard Business
Essentials publication (2003), “accepting the necessity and
inevitability of change enables [businesses] to see times of
transformation not as threats but as opportunities—
opportunities for reinventing the company and its culture”
(pp. 1–2). Numerous consultants as change agents assist
corporations through these transitions. Organizational
changes fall generally in the areas of mergers, cost-cutting,
 customer service, or changes in processes of how things get
done (Harvard Business Essentials, 2003). In healthcare we
have seen all of these types of changes, with process changes
an imperative as we focus on safety initiatives and evidence-
based practice. Two particular change models reflect the
humanistic focus of organizations in transition.
Bridges
Rather than focusing on change as a situation like reloca-
tion, Bridges (2009) looks at the psychological processes
in stages of transition (Box 11.1), where people must
“come to terms with the details of the new situation that
the change brings about” (p. 3). These three stages of tran-
sition are interacting and nonlinear and may be occurring
at the same time at different parts of the organization and
with different people.
In the initial stage, this theory focuses on people who
have to first “let go” of the comfortable and safe in their
day-to-day lives and experience loss. Resistance is to be
expected; Bridges (2009) regards this initial stage as an
ending in that “before you can learn a new way of doing
things, you must unlearn the old way” (p. 23). He de-
scribes a grief and mourning process requiring acceptance
of and assistance from the people in the organization.
Bridges (2009) describes the second stage as one of
great uncertainty, chaos, and the opportunity for innova-
tion. People have given up the old way of doing things but
need support in innovation and assistance in the process.
He describes Neutral Zone Management as the “only way
to ensure that the organization comes through the change
intact and that the necessary changes actually work the
way they are supposed to” (Bridges, 2009, p. 42). He even
recommends the use of transition teams composed of or-
ganizational members to monitor the process, progress,
and to be the communication channel to the leadership of
the organization. 
The third stage is the New Beginning, described as a
release of new energy in a new direction and with a new
identity (Bridges, 2009, p. 57). Again, the humanistic
perspective is apparent, with celebrations of the new 
corporate identity and the people in the new culture 
actively involved and rejuvenated. Bridges actively
speaks to leadership and provides examples of successes
BOX 11.1
Bridges’ Stages for Managing 
Transitions
●Ending, Losing, Letting Go
●The Neutral Zone
●The New Beginning
Source: Bridges, W. (2009). Managing transitions: Making the most of
change (3rd ed.). Cambridge, MA: DaCapo Press.

and pitfalls that occur in the transition. Organizational 
leadership must focus on the culture, with respect 
for transition to the new beginning. Checklists are pro-
vided to address questions on progress throughout the
process. 
Bridges’s three stages of organizational change can par-
allel the three stages of unfreezing, moving, and refreez-
ing, but this model focuses on the management and
people in the organization for success in the process. As
Bridges (2009) points out, “we have learned how self-
defeating it is to try to overcome people’s resistance to
change without addressing the threat the change poses to
their world” (p. xi).
Four Quadrants of Change
Another organizational change model focuses on the hu-
manistic factors within the organization, with important
considerations of personal transformation. Although not
related to particular stages, the Four Quadrants of Change
(see Box 11.2) is illustrated as a circle divided into quarters
as interacting and vital considerations for success in the
organizational change process. The top two quarters rep-
resent the individual in the organization but first with psy-
chological, spiritual, and cognitive attributes that must be
considered in the transformation process. Quadrant one
focuses on the inner development of people, and the
recognition that no substantive change is possible without
a change in the consciousness of the people (Anderson,
Klein, & Stuart, 2000, p. 32). Quadrant two represents
the interpersonal and technical skills for motivation and
peak performance in the organization (Anderson et al.,
2000, p. 32).
At the bottom of the circle, quadrants three and four
represent the organizational influences. Quadrant three
is the organizational culture and traditions. Quadrant
four is the organizational design with technology, policies,
procedures, and workflow that determine performance of
the organization (Anderson et al., 2000, p. 33). Consid-
eration of all four quadrants is vital in the change process
for an organization, but the theorists caution that the 
humanistic quadrants are vital for an organizational
change to succeed. They consider this a personal trans-
formation and a conscious choice because “organizational
change is not a question of skills and structure 
alone, but of identity and worldview” (Anderson et al.,
2000, p. 34). 
The Role of the Change Agent
In both transitions models, the role of the change agent
is the leadership driving the change, with management
firmly focused on the organizational culture for rein-
venting the organization and survival in a humanistic
environment. Understanding of human nature and its
resistance to change as a loss of the comfortable is nec-
essary for the change agent. The transitions models
are focused on organizational change, but the view of
change as a transition with the concepts of loss and 
rejuvenation are still applicable to our example of the 
patient with a need for a change in diet. The grief,
mourning, and loss over past heritage and practices must
be considered along with the uncertainty and potential
for innovation during the time of transition to the new
dietary regime. Perhaps this could be a family cookbook
of new recipes and preparations. An important thought
is the celebration of the new beginning and whether we
help our patients sufficiently celebrate their success with
a changed behavior. 
The various models of change are summarized in
Table 11.2. Selecting an appropriate model to guide
practice involves how you look at the world and what 
is most helpful in driving your skills as an agent in 
the change process. Moving from the theoretical 
stages of change to strategies for change and innovation
brings the focus to the external influence or change
agent.
CHANGE AGENTS
Our second step in becoming a major player in the change
process is to develop greater understanding of the roles and
attributes of a successful change agent. We have seen the
importance of the change agent emerge in the models of
Lippitt, Havelock, and Rogers. Recall that in the Trans-
theoretical Approach, your role as an agent of change will
be a part of the “helping  relationship.” Table 11.3 sum-
marizes the roles and activities of the change agent in these
models. In Lewin’s original model, change in humans is a
function of the person and his or her environment at that
point in time. Consider the roles of the change agent in
the three general phases of change.
Unfreezing
Good interpersonal and assessment skills are needed to
acquire data to weaken restraining forces and enhance
driving forces in the present system, and the agent must
consider both internal and external system forces. The
change agent must then establish a climate that encour-
ages and supports change. Needs assessment, diagnosis,
and the establishment of a professional relationship have
occurred consistently during the unfreezing phase in all
models. Now consider the similarity of this stage to 
the assessment and diagnosis activities of the nursing
process.
190
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
O N L I NE  C ONSULT  
William Bridges & Associates at 
http://www.wmbridges.com
BOX 11.2
The Four Quadrants of Change
●Quadrant 1: Individual/Internal
●Quadrant 2: Individual/External
●Quadrant 3: Collective/Internal
●Quadrant 4: Collective/External
Source: Anderson, B., Klein, E., & Stuart, J. (2000). Why change is a
consciousness choice. The Journal for Quality and Participation, 23,
32–36. 

CHAPTER 11 Change and Innovation     ●
191
TABLE 11.2
Comparison of the Stages of Change Represented in Theoretical Models
Theorist                                                                        Stages                                               
In the nursing process, health assessment data are col-
lected and problems are identified. Assessing the patient’s
characteristics, current level of satisfaction with the health
problem and condition, and perception of the situation 
is an essential component of this activity. Diagnostic 
statements are developed after needs identification. Asking
questions and diagnosing the problem for changed behav-
iors or responses lead to the planning stage of the nursing
process.
Moving
The change agent must help the patient set and strive for
clear, realistic goals. A good deal of the change agent’s time
and energy is needed during this phase for strategies to
deal with those who are resisting change. Again, interper-
sonal and motivational skills are critical. The change agent
must constantly assess and evaluate resistance, conflict,
readiness for change, and motivation in the individual sys-
tem, and must maintain movement toward the goals and
objectives of change.
As in the nursing process, the major activities of the
moving stage are implementing plans, goals, and objec-
tives and collecting evaluation data. Patient data are
 analyzed, interpreted, and acted upon. The nurse actively
uses critical thinking, decision-making, interpersonal,
and evaluation skills. The same skills are necessary to
move toward change. This stage will probably be the
most comfortable for the nurse functioning as a change
agent, because skills in this area are developed through
nursing practice.
Refreezing
Providing rewards and reinforcement for the change is a
major part of the change agent’s role in the third stage.
Evaluation data for reinforcement of change must be used
as supportive evidence. Activities for the change agent 
during this stage are supportive initially, but involvement
decreases with the need to terminate and have the patient
system totally involved in and responsible for the change
without external intervention from the change agent. 
Recall that in the Transtheoretical Approach, the stage of
maintenance may last a lifetime until the individual no
longer has to make any conscious effort to avoid a relapse,
and the helping relationships may be the social support
system.
In the nursing process, the nurse-patient relationship
is terminated when objectives are achieved and nursing 
diagnoses are resolved. The nurse has prepared the
 person or family for this termination long before
 discharge orders are written or the person leaves the
Lewin 
(1951)
Force Field
Lippitt 
(1973)
Planned 
Change
Havelock
(1971)
Linkages
Rogers 
(1983)
Innovation-
Diffusion
Prochaska 
et al. (1992)
Transtheo-
retical 
Approach
Bridges 
(2009)
Making 
Transitions
[1]
Unfreezing
[1]
Diagnosis 
of prob-
lem
[1]
Perception 
of need
[1]
Knowledge
[1]
Precon-
templation
[1]
Ending, 
Losing, 
Letting Go
[2]
Assessment
of motivation
and capacity
for change
[2]
Diagnosis of 
the problem
[2]
Persuasion
[2]
Contempla-
tion 
[2]
Moving
[4]
Selecting 
change 
objectives
[4]
Devising a 
plan of 
action
[4]
Implementa-
tion
[4]
Action
[5]
Choosing
change
agent’s role
[5]
Gaining ac-
ceptance of
plan
[3]
Refreezing
[6]
Maintaining
the change
[6]
Stabilization
[5]
Confirma-
tion
[5]
Maintenance
[3]
The New
Beginning
[7]
Terminating
the relation-
ship
[7]
Self-renewal
[3]
Change
agent’s moti-
vation and
resources
[3]
Identification
of the 
problem
[3]
Decision
[3]
Preparation
[2]
The Neutral
Zone

192
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
TABLE 11.3
Comparing Roles for the Change Agent from Different Theoretical Models
Stages of 
Change
Unfreezing
Moving
Refreezing
Lippitt 
(1973)
A specialist in the di-
agnosis and assess-
ment of patient
system and change
agent as:
• Information seeker
• Clarifier
• Synthesizer
• Reality tester
• Provider
• Problem-solver
Communication 
link viewed within 
one of eight 
directive to 
nondirective 
consultative roles:
• Advocate
• Expert
• Trainer
• Alternative identi-
fier
• Collaborator
• Process specialist
• Fact-finder
• Reflector
Consultation for:
• Maintenance of the
change
• Termination of the
relationship
Havelock 
(1973)
A catalyst in the
identification of
needs, diagnoses, 
and all aspects of the
problem within the
roles of:
• Clarifier
• Synthesizer
• Reality tester
• Provider
• Problem-solver
Solution giver and 
process helper as:
• Clarifier
• Synthesizer
• Reality tester
• Provider
• Problem-solver
Resource linker for
stabilization and self-
renewal as:
• Clarifier
• Synthesizer
• Reality tester
• Problem-solver
Rogers 
(1983)
Range of roles from
support to consultant
for sharing knowl-
edge, building persua-
siveness, and leading
the group toward de-
cision making on in-
novation through
activities of:
• Needs identification
• Establishment of
professional 
relationship with
patient system
• Diagnosis of 
problems
• Motivation of 
patient system
Range of roles from
support to consultant
to translate intent for
change into the ac-
tions needed
Range of roles from
support to consultant
for:
• Confirmation of
change and stabiliz-
ing the adoption to
prevent discontinu-
ance and reinforce
new behaviors
• Termination of 
relationship
Bridges 
(2009)
The critical ingredient is the
match or at least a working
understanding of the consis-
tency between the character
type of the organization and
the change agent.
Acceptance and acknowl-
edgment of the grief and
mourning process for the loss
is vital.
The need for detailed in-
formation on the plan be-
cause the transition must be
transmitted and reinforced.
Good listening and communi-
cation skills are essential with
a focus on the person as a
member of and part of the
organization.
The Neutral Zone is a time
of uncertainty and uneasiness
in the organization and
among the people. 
Once again, excellent com-
munication skills are vital to
keeping people informed, on
target, and to avoid the de-
velopment of damaging coali-
tions, which can inhibit the
transition. A transition moni-
toring team keeps manage-
ment aware of the progress
of the grass-roots members
in their transition. Bridges
(2009) does point out that
role of the team is to moni-
tor progress and should be
time limited.
The New Beginning is a time
of excitement and celebration
for members of the organiza-
tion in the new ways of the
organization. 
Important roles for both the
change agent as the manager
of the transition and also for
the leadership of the organi-
zation with the new culture.

CHAPTER 11 Change and Innovation     ●
193
agency environment. Just as discharge planning starts
with admission, this last stage must be planned for and
worked toward during the entire change process, with
the person, family, or group taking increasing responsi-
bility for the new behaviors.
The interventions of a skilled change agent can make
all the difference in the planned change process. The 
essential skills of change agents include the following:
●Vision for the future and creativity
●Ability to look at a situation narrowly and broadly 
(assessment and critical thinking skills)
●Good interpersonal skills, including those of
communication, motivation, assertiveness, problem-
solving, and group process
●Flexibility and a willingness to consider alternative
views
●Perseverance and a positive attitude
●Integrity and commitment
●Ability to manage conflict and resistance
●A focus on human beings and celebrating their accom-
plishments
CHANGE IN INDIVIDUALS,
FAMILIES, AND GROUPS
As noted earlier, Chinn and Benne (1976) categorized
change strategies into three major types: empirical-
rational, normative-reeducative, and power-coercive.
Power-coercive strategies are based on the application
of power by legitimate authority. Nursing concerns are
with human beings and their empowerment for healthy
behaviors or the creation of optimal health status. Ap-
plying power as “the authority” is inconsistent with 
empowering people. One can alter practices, procedures,
or the environment in organizations as a coercive change
by imposing major policy, but think of the upheaval this
change creates. Coercive change may be necessary in an
emergency situation or when the person or family must
have major assistance. The problem is that the change
may not persist unless the person or group has internal-
ized it into the value system.
The philosophical basis of nursing is consistent with
the empirical-rational or the normative-reeducative strate-
gies for change. The empirical-rational strategy assumes
that people are rational and have self-interest in change.
Power for the individual or group occurs through knowl-
edge. The normative-reeducative approach is based on 
social norms and the person’s interaction with the envi-
ronment. The normative-reeducative philosophy can be
viewed as empowerment with an emphasis on interper-
sonal skills. Both of these philosophical orientations are
consistent with nursing, but their applicability differs 
according to the nursing model selected for practice. For
example, King’s Theory of Goal Attainment, Orem’s Gen-
eral Theory of Nursing, and Roy’s Adaptation Model con-
tain philosophical assumptions similar to the reeducative
strategies, with the person viewed as a thinking, feeling,
reacting being in the context of his or her environment.
Because nursing looks at human beings and their 
interactions within the environment, several factors 
must be considered in the change process. These include
resistance to change, empowerment or involvement of the 
individual, and environmental, cultural, or situational 
factors.
Resistance to Change
A major concern of the change agent is the person’s or
group’s resistance to change. To handle this resistance, one
must evaluate what makes people resist change. People are
naturally threatened by change. Change involves loss. It is
a threat to their value system and a loss of the comfortable
status quo. They feel vulnerable and insecure. Stress is cre-
ated and must be managed. The need for the change may
also be mistrusted or  misunderstood. Another innately
human characteristic is the fear of failure or being unable
to perform the new activities or tasks. This creates more
stress. This is the state of relapse in the Transtheoretical
Approach in which the individual can then “recycle”
through the stages.
Resistance to change can be reduced by several 
techniques:
●Careful planning
●Allowing sufficient time
●Support and reinforcement
●Involving the person or group
Understanding the full impact of individual or group
norms and planning for a change in attitudes can lead to
changes in behavior. Recall the adage, “Fools rush in. . . .”
Allowing sufficient time for the change to occur and per-
sist is essential. A gradual move toward change is more ef-
fective than a radical move. The time needed depends on
the physical, psychosocial, cultural, and attitudinal char-
acteristics of the individual or group. Patience, persistence,
perseverance, and creativity are essential traits of the
change agent. Another strategy for decreasing resistance to
change is good communication with key and resource peo-
ple throughout the entire process. In addition, a good deal
of support and reinforcement will be needed. This requires
excellent interpersonal skills, verbal and nonverbal, with
both individuals and groups.
The involvement of the person or group is needed for
lasting change. It is essential to build on their readiness,
motivation, self-concept, abilities, and resources through-
out the process. Involving people in planning and decision
making both reduces resistance to change and creates 
empowerment. Strategies for involving people include 
education, training, socialization and persuasion (not im-
posing), and facilitation. This is a “helping relationship.”
It would often be easier to make the change yourself 
as an external force, but the action by the individual is
slower and more enduring. Note that education and 
training involve enlightenment and preparation rather
than preaching. This creates the empowerment and sets
the stage for a revision of the norm or value system and
self-efficacy.
Environmental Assessment
Looking at the situation or environment is critical in the
change process. First, one must understand the past or 

the personal history of the individual, family, or group.
You include a past, personal, psychosocial, family, and 
environmental history in a health history. These are 
important basic items of information to obtain before
doing the physical appraisal in any health assessment. The
same thing is needed in the change process. The following
questions will help in understanding the  situation and 
people:
1. What types of change has the person or group faced in
the past? Information on experience and success with
change is valuable to determine whether this person is
a novice with change, has embraced change through-
out life, or falls somewhere between these experiential
extremes.
2. How has the person or group handled change? Stress
and coping factors will emerge with this information.
You can then discover how to  motivate and support
behaviors.
3. What resources have been available or used in 
previous change activities?
4. What is the person’s or group’s perspective on the 
applicability of the resources in the environment to
the present situation? Human resources are support
systems, and can include family, friends, colleagues,
clergy, professionals, and even “ideal” role models.
These resources may help the person or group. If these
are not available or appropriate, linking the person or
group with similar resources may be eﬀective. Some
people do well in support groups whereas others need
more individualized support.
HEALTHCARE
ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE
Both internal and external influences in contemporary
healthcare are major considerations for change in health-
care institutions. As Hall and Tolbert (2005) propose,
“organizational survival, or the avoidance of death, is . .
. the ultimate test of an organization, but at any time,
unless death is imminent, what goes on in the organiza-
tion is based on both environmental pressures and goals”
(p. 155).
Everyone within an organization has faced organiza-
tional change, from minor changes in policy to restruc-
turing of services. Many have experienced or know a
colleague who has experienced a radical reorganization,
with restructuring and managerial shifts, layoffs, or own-
ership changes. With organizational change comes ten-
sion and conflict as a natural function of stress on the
system, its people, and their daily activities and interac-
tions. Transitions and the sense of loss are important
considerations.
Systems theory provides a useful perspective for view-
ing the internal and external forces of any organization.
A healthcare institution or agency is an open environmen-
tal system with great complexity. The organization must
be considered in terms of the system, as well as the
macrosystem and patient system. Internal sources of
change come from agency administrative, policy, and 
operational factors guiding the system. Bridges (2000) 
describes this as the character of the organization. The
surrounding environmental system of the organization is
the healthcare arena, which provides the professional, spe-
cialization, reimbursement, and additional value struc-
tures for the organizational unit and its members. The
broader social or macroenvironment reflects societal
norms and values through the needs and potential needs
of consumers of healthcare. Linkages among all system
parts are assumed as necessary for effectiveness and con-
tinuity. But look further at this complex system and the
internal environment.
When change is proposed for an agency or institutional
system, an in-depth look at the organizational environ-
ment is needed. Internal sources of change can arise from
any one or some combination of these system compo-
nents. Consider the traditional healthcare agency, the hos-
pital. The associated internal forces can be described as
follows:
●Goals and values for healthcare are specified for an
organization as a purpose, philosophy, vision, or
mission statement. Valuable information on the
internal forces is apparent with this organizational
view of people, health, and healthcare before
translation into departmental or policy statements.
Insight can also be obtained from the historical
documents on how the institution evolved into a
modern healthcare organization.
●The knowledge and skills of the healthcare providers
and physical resources in the system are vital consid-
erations. Consider internal forces from the specific
equipment, services, and expertise of professional 
and nonprofessional labor forces in the organizational
setting.
●Interpersonal and interdisciplinary relationships with
role relationships, attitudes, and values of people and
groups within the system must also be considered.
Nurses are expected to exhibit behaviors related to the
roles of healthcare provider, manager, teacher, re-
searcher, and advocate and to collaborate with mem-
bers of other healthcare disciplines. 
●The organizational design to provide healthcare serv-
ices must also be considered. In addition to organiza-
tional charts, position descriptions, and  policy and
procedure manuals, informal sources, such as technical
and clerical staff, can provide valuable information on
the organization’s daily operations to illustrate how
tasks are accomplished in the organization.
●Governance by a governing board and corporate offi-
cers may include paid or volunteer board  members, re-
quired institutional review boards, and the chief
executive team or officers.
External environmental influences are the next factors
to consider in terms of impact on the system. External
sources of change include inputs of energy, information,
and materials received from the environment, trans-
formed, and returned to the environment as outputs. One
input into the hospital environment is the patient system.
The patient enters the hospital with a health deficit and,
through the care received while hospitalized (throughput),
strives for a higher level of wellness as the intended out-
come (output). But, environmental influences add more
complexity. External forces are the broader environment
194
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

providing inputs into the system. As with any open sys-
tem, however, the external forces affect internal opera-
tions, and an exchange of information is returned to the
environment as outputs.
External forces have a major impact on the function
of the traditional hospital. Suppliers to be considered in-
clude physicians, drug and equipment companies, vol-
unteers, and educational facilities. Physicians supply
patients. Drug and equipment companies compete for
contracts, and organizations seek purchasing power with
consortia or multiorganizational contracts. Volunteers
provide valuable transportation, recreational, and inter-
personal services without which many hospitals could
not survive. Educational suppliers provide additional
services, with trainees as residents, interns, nurses, ther-
apists, and other preparers of ancillary personnel, as well
as the future workforce. And national safety initiatives
add additional responsibility and complexity. In addi-
tion, new staff members bring different ideas and meth-
ods into the system.
Customers are generally thought of as the patient sys-
tem: inpatients, same-day surgery patients, and clinic 
patients. But the concept of customer can be seen more
broadly to include community initiatives, educational pro-
gramming, health contracts with business and industry,
health maintenance organizations (HMOs), and provider
practice groups. Large corporate entities, intraorganiza-
tional agreements, health insurers, and second- and third-
party payers are major service and economic influences on
the patient system. Federal legislation, state laws, local or-
dinances, regulatory bodies, court precedents, insurers,
and professional organizations all have a legal effect on the
hospital.
On a broader, macrosystem level, consider changes
predicted for the population. The increase in the elderly
population, especially frail elders and those with chronic
diseases, has a great impact on services that will be needed.
The national, state, and local economies, with their asso-
ciated concerns about costs, are other societal factors that
have a profound effect on hospitals and healthcare organ-
izations. All of these factors, individually and combined,
influence how the hospital markets and cares for its cus-
tomers and personnel and meets their organizational man-
dates and mission. And then, consider the changes in those
insured and reimbursement dictates.
But let us return to the change process and activities
in the phases of unfreezing, moving, and refreezing. Dur-
ing unfreezing, the major change activities include assess-
ment, diagnosis, and establishment of a professional
relationship. Assessment must involve in-depth analysis
and synthesis of both internal and external forces. As with
individuals, families, and groups, methods for data col-
lection include interviews and observation. But with a
larger group of people, methods can include question-
naires or surveys for timely and, at times, confidential col-
lection of data.
Like the past and personal change history obtained on
a smaller scale with the person, family, or group, an orga-
nizational history provides valuable insights. The organi-
zational history can reveal information on development
and problem resolution to this point. Methods for 
gathering an organizational history require not only skillful
interviewing of key people but also a careful review of
records and documents of the organization.
Consider all environments, including the constraints,
demands, and opportunities present. Resources in the 
environment—people and physical resources—provide
major influences on any organizational change. Identifying
the driving forces and individuals in the system is essential
to building a base of support. Analyze external environ-
ments, especially population trends.
Diagnosis of problems becomes more complex as the
volume of information and number of people increase.
Whether the change agent is selected from within the or-
ganization or is an external consultant, he or she will need
a high level of skill to achieve organizational change. Clear
understanding of both internal and external forces will be
necessary, along with a good deal of fortitude to survive
the experience. And keep in mind the sense of loss mem-
bers of the organization may experience in this initial stage
of transition.
The moving phase in organizational change involves
developing strategies to match resources with constraints,
demands, opportunities, and history as part of the plan-
ning process for change to proceed. Changes in goals and
values must be reflected in organizational documents. Key
work groups will be needed for decision making and policy
formation. People in the organization will need some re-
training and educational programs to transmit knowledge
of resources and to refine skills. A great deal of time and
energy will be needed for the people. Role and status 
relations will require finesse and great sensitivity. Relating
to the variable and altering readiness, resistance, and mo-
tivation of many individuals and groups will be quite a
challenge.
People must be actively incorporated and empowered
in this decision-making and implementation phase. Re-
member that this may be an opportunity for innovation
in moving to a new organizational design or initiative.
Involvement of people in the organizational change
process necessitates use of excellent leadership and skills
in group dynamics, conflict management, and team
building. This is especially true when the methods for
accomplishment of work activities have undergone major
revisions. Communication links with management must
be increased and reinforced as  organizational members
are included rather than alienated from key planners and
controllers in the system. Minimizing people’s stress and
turmoil is a major function of the change agent in this
phase.
A formalized evaluation plan must be in place and
must be initiated in this moving phase. Data collection
and feedback on the process, communicating even small
results, are vital and must be ongoing. People in the system
need to be continually aware of the result of their efforts.
If indicated in the evaluation data, additional resources or
linkages must be sought. This is the feedback loop that
continues through the phase of refreezing and is essential
to any successful organizational change. Evaluation data
must be systematically recorded, analyzed, interpreted, 
and communicated. Evaluation data can be communi-
cated through distribution of short reports, articles, or ob-
servations from various sources in newsletters and on
bulletin boards, electronically, and in formal and informal
CHAPTER 11 Change and Innovation     ●
195

discussion groups. Keeping people on track and moving
toward new organizational goals and norms requires stam-
ina and a positive outlook despite the inevitable pitfalls
and sidetracking that will occur.
Involvement of people in the organizational
change process necessitates use of 
excellent leadership and skills in group 
dynamics, conflict management, and team
building.
Refreezing the change may take longer than antici-
pated in the multilevel organizational system. The tur-
moil and differences that have arisen in the organization
environment and the strength of external forces will in-
fluence the firm establishment of the change as the new
organizational norm. Support and reinforcement are 
indispensable activities of the change agent, along with
ongoing analysis, interpretation, and communication of
the evaluation findings. The role of the change agent
will naturally become more consultative as termination
approaches. At this point, the change should be a part
of the expectations of the organization and its members.
Ownership of the change is held by the people in the in-
stitutional or agency environment and not by key people
or the change agent.
Consider the following example of organizational
change, extending services from the traditional hospital
into the community. Needs assessment, diagnosis of prob-
lems, and motivation in agency subsystems must occur in
the unfreezing phase for organizational change. In addi-
tion to the traditional hospital, this change may involve
outpatient departments and clinics, homecare agencies, re-
habilitation or nursing home settings, care provider
groups, and therapy group practices.
Internal restraining and driving forces are also impor-
tant. Organizational goals and values for healthcare in the
mission statement must change with the move from hos-
pital to home, outpatient, or community care. The phys-
ical resources, knowledge, and skills of the healthcare
providers must now be broadened, such as intravenous
and other therapies requiring periodic skilled in-home
nursing care. Extended interpersonal and interdisciplinary
relations are needed with a move into the community,
along with coordination of services, role relationships, at-
titudes, and values of people. Nursing roles of healthcare
provider, manager, teacher, researcher, and advocate are
expanded to include service facilitator and coordinator.
The organizational structure is enlarged, with agencies
providing both inpatient and community services, and it
becomes more flexible and interactive with other environ-
ments providing healthcare services. Management is 
similarly broadened to include overseeing corporations,
resulting in buying power, larger constituencies, and over-
riding governing boards. This translates into more com-
plex goals and policies and comprehensive strategic
initiatives provided by the governing board in an effort to
reach out into the community. 
The design for the provision of care has changed 
from the image of the traditional 120-bed community
hospital. The external forces that drove the need for
change include healthcare needs of the patient popula-
tion, reimbursement policies, provider restrictions, 
and societal trends. Earlier hospital discharge and high-
technology home care have driven service providers from
the traditional hospital setting into the community. A
good deal of this move into the community environ-
ment has been secondary to the reimbursement and 
insurance restrictions.
Organizational Change Suggestions
Organizations will continue to change and evolve in 
response to internal and external forces and the needs of
patients. This may require more innovative approaches.
Recall that innovation is moving to a new, more novel
or advanced approach than the one used in the past. 
Innovation has become a hot topic in top business prac-
tices and healthcare organizations as they attempt 
address consumer needs and capture new markets. 
In business, Kelley (2001) describes a five-step process
(Box 11.3) that has led to new product designs. These
steps can be used in the change process when a new, in-
novative approach is needed.
Understanding the market, client, technology, and
constraints is part of the assessment process in the unfreez-
ing step. However, this assessment also involves observing
real people and real life. It is stepping back and looking at
the situation, putting away preconceived ideas. Look at
what is really occurring in the environment. This will
allow you to visualize new concepts and individual needs.
Evaluating and refining prototypes occurs in the stage of
moving when you also implement the new concept. Test-
ing and evaluation occurs throughout this process and
leads to refreezing if the innovation is effective, as in
Rogers’ model of inno vation. Consider how you could use
this process on a surgical unit.
Look at changes in the patient group. Perhaps you
are seeing more patients with limited literacy skills or
those of a different cultural group. We know that teach-
ing for care at home must occur before those discharge
orders are written. Understanding patients as consumers
includes literacy, cultural preferences, and the available
technology. You know that time for teaching is a con-
straint. However, teaching can take more time if the best
materials are not available or the methods are ineffective.
What are the patients’ needs in their real life, at home
and in their community? A preconceived idea may be
196
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
BOX 11.3
Basic Steps for the Process 
of Innovation
●Understand: the market, client, technology, and
constraints.
●Observe: real people and real life
●Visualize new concepts and customers
●Evaluate and reﬁne prototypes
●Implement the new concept
Source: Kelley, T. (2001). The art of innovation. New York: 
Doubleday

that the instruction sheet that has been translated into
another language is the answer. But perhaps it may be
ignored, along with the other forms received before dis-
charge. Look at what is really occurring in the environ-
ment and the patient’s interactions with family and
friends. This will allow you to visualize new concepts and
patient needs. Perhaps the patient could  benefit from a
calendar to help in checking off when medications or
dressing changes are due. Perhaps the instruction sheet
that had been translated is too “dense” and needs illus-
trations to promote better understanding. Evaluating 
and refining your teaching materials as prototypes will
help address these new patient groups and assist with 
the implement of new and more effective materials for
discharge. 
Nurses have a growing responsibility for more  creativity
and involvement in change. The American Organization of
Nurse Executives (AONE, 2010) has identified the need
for nurses to embrace change, stating that “dramatic change
and revolutionary thinking are imperative” and indeed are
the basis for their guiding principles (p. 1). Nurses function
as members of change teams, as change agents, and as de-
velopers of organizational systems. This will continue and
expand in interdisciplinary practice as their skills in change
are recognized and sought. Remember the following steps
regardless of the extent of the organizational change:
●Always do your homework. Be prepared with informa-
tion about and knowledge of the organization. Spend
the time and acquire the information and background
needed before acting or reacting. Then proceed from a
solid theoretical base. Understand the change process
and all the steps. Review your talents for change 
strategies.
●Know your restraining and driving forces. Take the
time to understand or, at minimum, recognize 
these behaviors. Share information. Make both 
sides aware of the situation. Take more time to un-
derstand behavioral reactions. Cultivate the driving
forces and become viewed as the champion for the
cause. Use all your skills in interpersonal relation-
ships, and develop more.
●Be sensitive to environments. Increase your awareness 
of what is occurring in society and healthcare. Look
beyond your immediate environment. Analyze the 
internal and external forces and imagine how your 
environment could be affected by these forces. Use 
intuition and insight as well as foresight. Be both 
inspired and inspiring.
●Maintain a positive attitude and refuse to be diminished
by negativity. Negative colleagues and superiors will al-
ways be present. They are an environmental hazard.
Someone will always be available to tell you that some-
thing never has been or never can be done. If your
“homework” background knowledge told you differ-
ently, become the agent of change instead of another
restraining force. Have courage.
●Be open and receptive to new ideas. No matter how you
long to keep things as they currently are, be mindful 
that there may be a better way of doing things. Refuse 
to be limited by the present, and look to the future
and evidence-based practice—a core competency. 
Remember, conventional wisdom can be a barrier to
needed change.
●Be open to new people. Venture out of your discipline.
View the situation as larger than nursing care. 
Collaborate with other health professionals. Discuss.
Debate. Interact. Try to recognize when turf issues
arise, and negotiate on the basis of facts and 
what will be best for the patients and the organiza-
tion while maintaining the integrity of your 
profession.
●Involve others. Try not to do it all yourself. Remember
that the most successful and enduring changes occur
when others are involved. The change has to become
the norm and the expectation of the people in the 
environment.
●Refine skills. Cultivate your change agent skills. Recall
the skills and roles of the change agent. Continually
develop and refine these skills. Make adaptations 
necessary for the people and the environments. Look
at yourself as objectively as you look at others. If 
assistance or collaboration is needed, get it. 
●Reassess and evaluate. Remember to evaluate activity 
and progress continually. Sufficient time for the change
to occur and persistence are necessary components of
organizational change. Recall Rogers’ (1983) attributes
in the diffusion of innovations, which determine the
rate of adoption by members of a social system: relative
advantage, compatibility, complexity, trialability, and
observability. Include these attributes in your evaluation
process.
●Persevere, persevere, persevere. Have fortitude. Use
resources to cope with your stress and frustration
levels. Organizational change is not easy. Look for
small gains as major steps in the process. Strive for
the finish line, but do not look for accolades.
Terminate the relationship as the organizational
norm takes hold and the organization congratulates
itself on the accomplishment. Celebrate successes.
The philosophical basis of nursing focuses on the
health of human beings as individuals, families, groups,
and society in a complex environment. And practice
must be based on the latest evidence of efficacy and 
acceptability. In this role, nurses can be highly effective
change agents. How comfortable are you with change?
Think about your change quotient as your ability to 
address needed change and to help others as a change
agent.
In addition to his work in psychology on multiple in-
telligences, Gardner (2008) has identified five capacities
that individuals need to address the future (Box 11-4).
As was illustrated in Chapter 3, the discipline of nursing
has a unique body of knowledge. Although we draw on
other knowledge disciplines, we have a unique and valued
discipline, as has been illustrated in the IOM report on
the Future of Nursing. Gardner (2008) identifies the
components of synthesis as goals, ideas, approaches, and
feedback. The use of evidence-based practice embodies
this process. As Gardner (2008) points out, “synthesizing
the current state of knowledge, incorporating new find-
ings, and delineating new dilemmas is part and parcel 
of the work of any professional who wished to remain 
CHAPTER 11 Change and Innovation     ●
197

198
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: CONSIDER THIS....
You are reading an EBP article on sleep deprivation that addresses individual differences for patients, environ-
mental considerations, and the influences from nursing interventions. One of the recommendations was that
“critical care nurses can optimize the sleep environment by restructuring work-flow habits” (p. 33). You start
thinking about the acute care unit where you work and the routines during the evening and night. You know
staffing is an issue but are concerned about the assessment and documentation of the patients’ sleep quality
and sleep patterns.
Question: How will you use this information as a change agent to implement a program on your unit for
assessment of patients’ sleep patterns and restructuring work-flow patterns?
Source: Makic, M. B. F., Rauen, C., Watson, R., & Poteet, A. W. (2014). Examining the evidence to guide practice: Challenging 
practice habits. Critical Care Nurse, 34(2), 28–44. 
K E Y  P O I N T S
●The classic change model was developed by Lewin (1951), based on his Field Theory. This model con-
tained three phases in the change process: unfreezing, moving, and refreezing.
●Building on Lewin’s work, Lippitt (1973) considered human motivation, multiple causation, and habits. He
defined seven specific phases in the change process: diagnosis of the problem, assessment of motivation
and capacity for change, change agent’s motivation and resources, selecting change objectives, choosing
the change agent role, maintaining the change, and terminating the relationship. A focus on the change
agent emerged with four specific roles and skills.
●Havelock’s change model contains the major concepts of role, linkages, and communication. This adds
steps to the three stages of change, with heightened communication and interpersonal activities. Have-
lock and Havelock’s (1973) seven steps in the change process are perception of the need, diagnosis of
the problem, identification of the problem, devising a plan of action, gaining acceptance, stabilizing the
plan, and self-renewal. Four different roles for the change agent are proposed in Havelock’s model.
●Rogers’ (1983) Diffusion of Innovations model has a five-stage view of change: knowledge, persuasion,
decision, implementation, and confirmation. Rogers also considers five factors that influence the rate of
adoption of an innovation and that may be used as evaluation criteria in the change process. Seven roles
for the change agent are highlighted in this model of change.
●The Transtheoretical Approach to change focuses on the individual as a ”self-changer” and is depicted as
a spiral with five stages of change: precontemplation, contemplation, preparation, action, and mainte-
nance, with 10 associated change processes that occur in the different stages of change (Prochaska et al.,
1992).
●Bridges (2009) looks at the psychological processes of change within the stages of (1) ending, losing, 
letting go, (2) the neutral zone, and (3) the new beginning.
BOX 11.4
The Five Minds for the Future
●1: The Disciplined Mind
●2: The Synthesizing Mind
●3: The Creating Mind
●4: The Respectful Mind
●5: The Ethical Mind
Source: Gardner, H. (2008). 5 Minds for the future. Boston: 
Harvard Business Press.
current with her craft” (p. 6). Creativity is a component
of leading change. As noted by Gardner (2008), “rewards
accrue to those who fashion small but significant changes
in professional practice” (p. 7). Respect and ethics are core
components of professional nursing practice. Whether in-
teracting with patients and groups or professional col-
leagues, respect needs to be present and shared. And as
illustrated in Chapter 1, nursing has a distinct ethical
code, and some issues that affect daily practice will be dis-
cussed in the next chapter. 

CHAPTER 11 Change and Innovation     ●
199
●The roles and attributes of a skilled change agent are included in the models by Lippitt, Havelock, and
Rogers. General roles for the change agent are assessor or evaluator, communicator, translator, encour-
ager, mediator, and consultant.
●In relation to the activities in the nursing process, the phases of change are consistent with assessment, 
diagnosis, planning, implementation, and evaluation for resolving the problem or stabilizing the change.
They can also lead to the implementation of evidence-based practice in place of traditions from the past.
●The skills of change agents include having a vision for the future and creativity, good assessment skills,
good interpersonal skills, flexibility, perseverance, and a positive attitude, integrity and commitment, the
ability to manage conflict, and resistance.
●Strategies for reducing resistance to change include careful planning and timing, along with good commu-
nication and interpersonal skills.
●Empowerment or involvement of the patient is needed for lasting change. Strategies for patient involvement
include education, training, socialization and persuasion, and facilitation.
●Environmental or situational factors relative to individuals, families, and groups provide additional informa-
tion in the change process. Past experience, stress and coping factors, motivational clues, and resources
are important data sought by the change agent.
●To view organizational change, look at internal and external forces with a multisystem approach. And
consider the concept of transitions.
■Suggestions for people involved in organizational change include (1) being knowledgeable about the or-
ganization, its restraining and driving forces, and the environments, (2) maintaining a positive attitude and
being receptive to new ideas and people, (3) involving other people in the change, (4) continuing to re-
fine skills and reevaluating the situation, and (5) persevering throughout the process.
K E Y  P O I N T S —cont’d
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Recall a change that has taken place in your family. Using Lewin’s theory, identify the restraining and driving forces.
2. Identify some specific sources of internal change in your organization and name the driving forces.
3. Recall a change that has taken place in your organization. Using Lippitt’s theory, identify the seven stages of
planned change and the roles of the change agent(s) in the process.
4. List at least six specific environmental factors that could influence change in a healthcare organization. Be prepared
to discuss these factors in class or online, as scheduled by your instructor.
5. Use Lewin and the Transtheoretical Approach to explain the steps of the process for permanent change to help a
new 18-year-old single mother with a normal 7 lb, 9 oz full-term infant (appropriate for gestational age [AGA],
Apgar score of 9) develop parenting skills and healthcare, including prevention and health maintenance.
6. Read Who Moved My Cheese? by S. Johnson (2002) and determine which character you most resemble and which
one you most want to be like. Be prepared to participate in a discussion on your selection of characters, either
online or in class as scheduled by your instructor. 
7. Review the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter, and discuss it in the context of the chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.

REFERENCES
American Organization of Nurse Executives (AONE). 
(2010). AONE Guiding Principles for the role of the nurse in
future patient care delivery toolkit. Retrieved from http://
www.aone.org/resources/PDFs/AONE_GP_for_Role_of_
 Nurse_Future.pdf
Anderson, B., Klein, E., & Stuart, J. (2000). Why change is 
a consciousness choice. The Journal for Quality and 
Participation, 23, 32–36.
Bridges, W. (2000). The character of organizations: Using person-
ality type in organization development. Mountain View, CA:
Davies-Black.
Bridges, W. (2009). Managing transitions: Making the most of
change (3rd ed.). Cambridge, MA: DaCapo Press.
Chinn, R., & Benne, K. D. (1976). General strategies for 
effecting change in human systems. In W. G. Bennis, K. D.
Benne, R. Chinn, & K. E. Corey (Eds.), The planning of
change (3rd ed., pp. 22–45). New York: Holt, Rinehart 
& Winston.
Gardner, H. (2008). 5 Minds for the future. Boston, MA: 
Harvard Business Press.
Hall, R. H., & Tolbert, P. S. (2005). Organizations: Structures,
processes, and outcomes (9th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Pearson Prentice-Hall.
Harvard Business Essentials (2003). Managing change and 
transition. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Havelock, R. G. (1971). Planning for innovation through 
dissemination and utilization of knowledge. Ann Arbor, MI:
Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan.
Havelock, R. G., & Havelock, M. C. (1973). Training for
change agents: A guide to the design of training programs in
education and other fields. Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for 
Social Research, University of Michigan.
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2011). The future of nursing:
Leading change, advancing health. Washington, DC: 
National Academies Press. Retrieved from http://www
.thefutureofnursing.org/sites/default/files/Future%20of
%20Nursing%20Report_0.pdf
Johnson, S. (2002). Who moved my cheese? New York: G. P.
Putnam’s Sons.
Kelley, T. (2001). The art of innovation. New York: Doubleday.
Lewin, K. (1951). Field theory in social science. New York:
Harper & Row.
Lippitt, G. L. (1973). Visualizing change: Model building and
the change process. La Jolla, CA: University Associates.
Makic, M. B. F., Rauen, C., Watson, R., & Poteet, A. W. (2014).
Examining the evidence to guide practice: Challenging 
practice habits. Critical Care Nurse, 34, 28–44. 
Prochaska, J. O., & DiClemente, C. C. (1984). The transtheo-
retical approach: Crossing traditional boundaries of therapy.
Homewood, IL: Dow Jones–Irwin.
Prochaska, J. O., DiClemente, C. C., & Norcross, J. C. (1992).
In search of how people change: Applications to addictive 
behaviors. American Psychologist, 47, 1102–1114.
Rogers, E. M. (1983). Diffusion of innovations (3rd ed.). 
New York: Free Press.
Rogers, E. M., & Shoemaker, F. F. (1971). Communication of
innovations: A cross-cultural approach (2nd ed.). New York:
Free Press.
Rose, J. (2009). Quiz on resistance to change. Retrieved from
http://www.suite101.com/content/quiz-on-resistance-to-
change-a110891 
Stevens, K. R. (2009). Essential competencies for evidence-based
practice in nursing (2nd ed.). San Antonio, TX: Academic
Center for Evidence-Based Practice.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bennis, W. (2000). Managing the dream: Reflections on leadership
and change. Cambridge, MA: Basic Books.
Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of
behavioral change. Psychological Review, 84(2), 191–215.
Flower, J. (1996). The four quadrants of change. Retrieved from
http://well.com/user/bbear/quadrant.html 
Levesque, D. A., Prochaska, J. O., Cummins, C. O., Terrill, S.,
& Miranda, D. (2001). Assessing Medicare beneficiaries’
readiness to make informed health plan choices. Healthcare
Financing Review, 23(1), 87–104.
Lippitt, G. L., & Nadler, L. (1967). Emerging roles of the
training director. Training and Development Journal, 9, 2–10.
ONLINE RESOURCES
William Bridges & Associates Transition Training
http://www.wmbridges.com 
200
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Examine ethical principles in professional practice. 
2. Apply the terminology used in ethical decision making.
3. Analyze ethical dilemmas in contemporary healthcare situations.
4. Apply the components of the ANA Code of Ethics for Nurses to a healthcare scenario.
5. Identify ethical decision making in the practice setting in patient and collegial situations.
Right
Basic Human Rights
Beneficence 
Nonmaleficence
Justice
Fidelity
Self-determination (autonomy)
Full Disclosure
Veracity
Informed Consent
Privacy
Confidentiality
Utilitarianism
Deontology
Code of Ethics
Standards of Care
Advance Directives
Euthanasia
Human Genome
Impaired or Incompetent Colleagues
201
“When we do the best we can, we never know 
what miracle is wrought in our life 
or the life of another.”
Helen Keller, 1880–1968
Key Terms
Professional Ethics
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
12

As a professional nurse, you are confronted by ethical is-
sues on a daily basis. But have you carefully considered all
the implications? Are they ethical dilemmas? Dahnke and
Dreher (2006) define an ethical dilemma as a problem
with options that seem equally unfavorable (p. 4). Let’s
look at some of the principles and issues in daily practice.
In patient situations, think about informed consent, ad-
vance directives, a persistent vegetative state, organ procure-
ment and donation, and genomics. In addition, consider
ethical dilemmas in interdisciplinary practice, with impaired
or incompetent colleagues. However, before looking at spe-
cific situations, consider the basis of ethical decision making
and professional ethics.
ETHICAL PRINCIPLES
We hear a good deal about human rights. First, consider
the concept of rights. A right is an agreed-upon entitle-
ment. It is a constant and does not change with the
 circumstances. Husted and Husted (2008) warn that it is
a grave ethical mistake to regard the term rights as a polit-
ical term that can be an ever-changing product of legisla-
tion, rather than a more fundamental ethical term. Aiken
(2004) describes this blurring of ethical and political use
of the term and differentiates among welfare rights, ethical
rights, and option rights. Welfare rights are legal rights
guaranteed by law, such as freedom of speech. However,
legal rights can be changed or modified through legislation.
Ethical rights are based on ethical principles like self-
determination and autonomy of the individual. Option
rights allow some freedom of choice within certain param-
eters, like choices with advanced directives and not active
euthanasia. With this in mind and with our prior focus
on the rights of subjects in research, consider more broadly
the following ethical and basic human rights: 
●Beneficence 
●Justice and fidelity
●Self-determination and autonomy
●Full disclosure and veracity
●Informed consent
●Privacy and confidentiality
Beneficence is the principle of doing good with the
person’s best interests as the goal of all actions. This in-
cludes the concept of nonmaleficence in that we “do no
harm” to the individual, family, or group. In healthcare,
our role is to help, but the person may be at risk of harm
with the treatment. We must be vigilant to protect the per-
son from avoidable harm or error. We will consider this
further in the following chapter on safety initiatives in
healthcare environments and in the community, as with
the use of bar coding to reduce medication errors. Associ-
ated with the concept of beneficence are justice and fi-
delity. Justice is fairness to all and avoidance of favoritism.
All patients deserve fair access to quality healthcare. The
concept of justice embodies health equity and fair distri-
bution of resources. Fidelity is loyalty to the person. If we
tell a patient we will be back to check on his or her pain
relief in ten minutes, we need to be true to that time
frame.
Full disclosure and self-determination are associated
ethical principles. Self-determination or autonomy is the
sense a person has the right to determine his or her fate.
The development of a living will or advanced directives are
examples of self-determination when the patient makes
decisions in advance of a cri tical situation. However, to
make life decisions, the person must have complete infor-
mation, or full disclosure. The individual deserves all 
relevant information about his or her health status to 
make an informed decision. Full disclosure includes the
principle of veracity, or providing truthful information.
Informed consent incorporates these ethical principles. 
Informed consent occurs when the individual has com-
plete information on all sides of the issue and makes a 
decision freely and without constraint after careful
consideration of both advantages and disadvantages of the
action. Think about the patient signing an informed con-
sent form for a procedure. Does that individual under-
stand what is being agreed to, or is he or she in pain and
merely signing all forms in the hope that the pain will be
relieved? And closely associated with this is the considera-
tion of the significant others. Do they really understand
what their loved one wants and is requesting? In addition,
will they adhere to the wishes of the significant other in a
time of emotional crisis? And think how healthcare pro-
fessionals are responsible for fidelity to the patient and sig-
nificant others, especially in stressful, critical, or conflicting
situations.
Privacy and confidentiality are also closely associated
concepts. Privacy means that the person has the right to
determine and control the amount of information to re-
veal about himself or herself. The professional relationship
allows the person to provide this private information with
the knowledge that it will be respected and remain private.
This is confidentiality—the information that the person
does reveal is respected and not revealed to others except
as necessary as part of this professional relationship. This
situation can be a delicate one, as in the example of a fam-
ily history of mental illness, or in any past situation from
which the patient feels sensitivity or unease. And how se-
cure is the information from being revealed to others? The
patient must have trust in the healthcare professional to
feel comfortable to reveal such sensitive information.
Again, add the complexity of significant others who may
be directly involved in private communications with
healthcare providers or be remote and unaware of infor-
mation shared. Both hard copy and electronic data storage
of information are considerations. All of these ethical prin-
ciples are guided by the way we look at the world. And
with our expanding channels of information, including
electronic information and health records, the ANA de-
veloped a position paper on privacy and confidentiality
with nine principles that address patient advocacy and
trust in the professional relationship and emphasize that
“confidentiality protections should extend to not only
health records, but also to all other individually identifi-
able health information, including genetic information,
clinical research records, and mental health therapy notes”
(ANA, 2006, p. 1). The International Council of Nurses
(ICN, 2008) states that patients should be the primary
owners of their health information, and this “includes in-
formation related to their health problems, the actions
proposed or taken by caregivers, and the consequences of
these actions” (p. 1).
202
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

As a healthcare provider, you have had required orien-
tation to the Health Insurance Portability and Accounta-
bility Act (HIPAA) legislation from 1996. Think about
what this legislation means to you: more forms for signature,
codes for release of any patient information, even to family
members, and additional regulation of healthcare? And what
does it mean for the patient? Does she understand that you
cannot tell her nephew about her condition, even when he
keeps calling the unit? And the ethical question: Have
HIPPA regulations provided patient confidentiality or ad-
ditional burden? Is this a potential burden to the patient or
to the healthcare professionals? And are protections in place
or being worked around? Think about it.
SYSTEMS OF ETHICAL 
DECISIONS
Ethics has been defined as a “system of standards to mo-
tivate, determine, and justify actions directed to the pur-
suit of vital and fundamental goals” (Husted & Husted,
2008, p. 315). There are two systems of standards that
can be differentiated based on consequence or outcome
(utilitarianism) or the obligation for action or inaction
(deontology). Utilitarianism is focused on the conse-
quence or the outcome. It is based on two basic ideas:
happiness and the greatest good for the greatest number.
Decisions are made in this framework in terms of means
that justify the way of getting there—for the greatest good
in the end. Some ethicists further differentiate utilitari-
anism into rule and act utilitarianism. Rule utilitarianism
draws on past experiences to formulate personal rules to
determine what you consider to be the “the greatest
good” for the intended outcome. Act utilitarianism is
based on the unique situation in the present circum-
stances for the determination of what is considered
“right” and best to reach the intended consequence. As
noted by Aiken (2004), this system is oriented toward the
good of the population in general, and rules and regula-
tions are not necessarily followed to reach the intended out-
come. Think about the times you may have been posed
with the question of who should be in the lifeboat? Or who
should be saved? Using the system of utilitarianism focuses
on the consequences for the greatest number and the great-
est chance of happiness and success, regardless of the means
of getting there. With our focus on each individual’s
unique needs and characteristics, this system does pose lim-
itations when making decisions. Do the “ends” really justify
the “means”? Think about it! And who is the one to decide
what is the “best” outcome in the situation? Should it be a
collaborative decision with the patient as the captain de-
ciding the decision? How will the patient be sure that he
or she asks the correct questions and receives the appropri-
ate information upon which to make a critical decision?
And further, consider the differences that will be made on
past experiences or a unique situation. 
The second system, deontology, is based on obligations
as rules and unchanging principles. Based on the writings
of the German philosopher Immanuel Kant (1724–1804),
this system requires adherence to a set of established rules.
The absolute rules are the means to reach the decision.
These rules are absolute and unchanging, as is seen in some
religious ethical decision-making systems. As with utilitari-
anism, deontology is divided into two subsets, rule versus
act deontology. With rule deontology, the ethical standards
or rules are made by people—past or present. These rules
must be followed and do not change, regardless of the situ-
ation or individual factors. In act deontology, the highest
value is placed on the moral values of the individual. You
must make the same decision in any similar situation, re-
gardless of the circumstances. As opposed to rule deontol-
ogy, with act deontology, you are the one following the
rules, based on data you obtain about the situation. But you
make the decision and act in a consistent manner, following
those rules. You must arrive at the same decision in similar
circumstances. Consider this system of ethics and the issue
of patient autonomy and self-determination. First, consider
who will be making the decisions and which rules and 
principles are being considered. 
CODE OF ETHICS
A professional abides by a certain code of ethics app licable
to the practice area. Developed within the profession, the
code addresses general ethical practice issues. The Code 
of Ethics for Nurses developed by the American Nurses 
Association (ANA) is the ethical standard for professional
nursing practice. As the ANA states, the “The Code is
non-negotiable in any setting. . . . [and expresses] the 
values, virtues, and obligations that shape, guide, and 
inform nursing as a profession” (ANA, 2015, p. vii). The 
interpretative statements promote understanding for ap-
propriate application of the code of ethics in professional
practice. The ethical principles of human rights, self-
determination, privacy and confidentiality, autonomy, and
responsibility and obligations are specifically addressed in
the code of ethics. Adherence to this specific code may be
regulated in your state’s practice act. In addition, additional
competencies for the nurse prepared at the graduate level
are expectations based on preparation, knowledge level, and
performance expectations. However, there are other ethical
codes, including those of other countries, such as Canada
(Canadian Nurses Association, 2008), and globally with the
International Council of Nurses (ICN, 2012) Code of Ethics
for Nurses. As we discussed in Chapter 1, the ANA is one of
almost 140 nurses organizations from around the world that
are members of ICN. The International Code of Ethics for
Nurses presents four elements associated with nurses: people,
practice, the profession, and coworkers (ICN, 2012). In ad-
dition, for each of the elements it illustrates the roles of prac-
titioners and managers, educators and researchers, and
national nursing associations. The Code of Ethics for Regis-
tered Nurses of the Canadian Nurses Association (2008)
identifies seven values of ethical nursing practice. Achieving
professional status requires ethical standards for expected
behaviors with patients, colleagues, and other professionals.
Further information on these ethical codes can be found at
their Web sites. 
CHAPTER 12 Professional Ethics     ●
203
O NL I NE  C O NSULT  
Official HIPAA site at
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/

Associated with a code of ethics is the concept of stan-
dard of care. Aiken (2004) defines standards of care as
“the average degree of skill, care, and diligence exercised by
members of the same profession under the same or similar
circumstances” (pp. 38–39). Definition of practice and spe-
cific practice standards are further specified within the pro-
fessional community through major nursing associations.
The ANA has specified a variety of practice standards for
the profession, both general and specific to certain practice
areas. The ANA has prepared several specialty standards
documents jointly with the particular  specialty organization
to reflect the expectations for specialized professional prac-
tice. These standards are described as “authoritative state-
ments of the duties of all registered nurses, regardless of
role, population, or specialty, are expected to perform com-
petently” (ANA, 2010a, p. 2).
The publication Nursing: Scope and Standards of Prac-
tice (ANA, 2010a), for example, prescribes standards of
practice and standards of professional performance. Stan-
dards of practice address safe practice and use of the nurs-
ing process with the actions of assessment, diagnosis,
outcome identification, planning, implementation, and
evaluation (ANA, 2010a). Standards of professional per-
formance (Box 12.1) are expected professional roles and
behaviors, including ethics, education, evidence-based
practice and research, quality of practice, communication,
leadership, collaboration, professional practice evaluation,
resource utilization, and environmental health (ANA,
2010a, p. 3). Under the area of ethics, the registered nurse
is required to adhere to the Code of Ethics for Nurses 
with Interpretative Statements “to guide practice” (ANA,
2010a, p. 47).
Further, standards of specialty practice are provided
through the certification process with specialized educa-
tion, testing, and ongoing learning requirements. Prac-
tice standards and expectations have also been developed
by the applicable specialty organization. Adherence to
standards of practice is designed to  promote safe and 
effective care, but nurses still face ethical dilemmas on a
daily basis.
204
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
ON LIN E CON SULT 
ANA (2015) Code of Ethics for Nurses at 
http://nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories
/EthicsStandards/CodeofEthicsforNurses
ANA Position Statements at
http://nursingworld.org/positionstatements
.aspx
ICN Code of Ethics for Nurses at
http://www.icn.ch/images/stories/documents
/about/icncode_english.pdf
Canadian Nurses Association Code of Ethics for
Registered Nurses at
http://www.cna-aiic.ca/en/on-the-issues/best
-nursing/nursing-ethics
Canadian Nurses Association Position Statements at 
http://www.cna-aiic.ca/en/advocacy/policy
-support-tools/cna-position-statements
BOX 12.1
Standards of Professional Performance: Ethical Competencies (ANA, 2010a)
The ANA (2010a) has identiﬁed the following competencies for ethical practice by the registered nurse:
●Uses the Code of Ethics for Nurses with Interpretative Statements (ANA, 2001) to guide practice.
●Delivers care in a manner that preserves and protects healthcare consumer autonomy, dignity, rights, values, and
beliefs.
●Recognizes the centrality of the healthcare consumer and family as core members of any healthcare team.
●Upholds healthcare consumer conﬁdentiality within legal and regulatory parameters.
●Assists healthcare consumers in self determination and informed decision making.
●Maintains a therapeutic and professional healthcare consumer-nurse relationship within appropriate professional
role boundaries.
●Contributes to resolving ethical issues involving healthcare consumers, colleagues, community groups,  systems,
and other stakeholders.
●Takes appropriate action regarding instances of illegal, unethical, or inappropriate behavior that can  endanger or
jeopardize the best interests of the healthcare consumer or situation.
●Speaks up when appropriate to question healthcare practice when necessary for safety and quality  improvement.
●Advocates for equitable healthcare consumer care.
Source: American Nurses Association. (2010a). Nursing: Scope and standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursesbooks.org.
MAKING ETHICAL DECISIONS
Making ethical decisions is not an easy task. The choice may
be between two equally unpleasant options. In the search
for assisting with ethical dilemmas, several models for ethical
decision making have been proposed and evaluated over the
past years. For example, Husted and Husted (2008) have pro-
posed analysis through extremes to clarify relationships and
discover the right thing to do when what is wrong is easier to
determine (p. 125). Aiken (2004) proposed a five-step model:
data collection and interpretation, stating the dilemma, con-
sidering choices of action, analyzing the advantages and 
disadvantages of the options, and making the decision 
(pp. 104–106). A classic model by Curtain (1978) provides
the following steps for the ethical decision-making process:
1. Obtaining background information
2. Identifying the ethical components
3. Identifying the ethical agents or people involved
4. Identifying the options available

5. Applying ethical principles to the issues, like self-
determination
6. Making a ﬁnal resolution or decision to the ethical
dilemma
Think about an ethical dilemma that you have encoun-
tered in the past. Return to the basic information and 
ignore the resolution that was reached. Follow Curtain’s
(1978) six steps and evaluate the resolution that did occur
in that situation.
Despite our code of ethics, that provides direction, or
the ethical principles we use, ethical dilemmas arise on a
daily basis in healthcare situations. These decisions are not
easy, and are made even more complex since they are not
made in isolation. Other professionals, and most notably
the patient, must be part of the decision to address our
ethical principles. And often, these decisions remain a part
of us as we recall events and considerations. Interestingly,
Husted and Husted (2008) have proposed several charac-
teristics of an unflawed ethical decision as follows:
●The decision is going to be acted upon
●Will guide actions to a justifiable end
●Affects one’s life and character over time
●Provides the belief that the actions will make life better
●Allows changing one’s direction during action (p. 16)
Consider the following issues in nursing practice and
the ethical dilemmas involved.
Informed Consent. One of the most common ethical situ-
ations concerns self-determination with true informed con-
sent. We are not speaking of simply getting the patient to
sign a form. This is not a role for the nurse. The issue of in-
formed consent contains many of the ethical principles we
have reviewed: beneficence (doing good with the person’s
best interests as the goal), justice (avoidance of favoritism),
fidelity (loyalty to the person, rather than to what we may
see as the reasonable treatment), full disclosure (with com-
plete information on the risks, benefits and options), self-
determination (to decide for oneself and not for the sake of
others), and without constraint after careful consideration of
the situation, knowing that one’s privacy is being protected
in the confidentiality of the patient-professional relationship.
This is what we would want for ourselves. So now, look back
at the steps in the decision-making model.
Can you identify the six steps of Curtain’s model? First,
consider whether all background information has been ob-
tained, including culturally appropriate information. Recall
that some medical or surgical procedures are acceptable to
certain people or cultures and not to others. So, has appro-
priate background infor mation been obtained, assumed, dis-
cussed, or ignored with a focus on our healthcare model?
Have all the  ethical components of the procedure and the
situation been explained appropriately and been given careful
consideration by the patient? And have all the ethical agents
or people involved been identified, including relevant ex-
tended family members? What are the options available to
the patient, and have these been explained and are they fully
understood? Now is the time to apply the ethical principles
to the issues, like self-determination. What do you think? As
for your final resolution to the informed consent—was it
true to the ethical principle? You see now why this is not as
simple as completing a consent for treatment form!
Advance directives. Most healthcare providers are famil-
iar with advance directives, in which individuals provide
specific written instructions for their wishes relative to their
future health, illness, and care at a time when they are able
to specify their wishes, in the event that they are unable to
communicate these wishes at that time. The ethical prin-
ciples of autonomy and self-determination are the basis for
advance directives, which can take the form of a living will
or healthcare proxy and durable power of attorney. 
Advance directives have their basis in both law and
ethics. Originally enacted in law and revised in the 1980s,
the Uniform Rights of the Terminally Ill Act provides for the
development of a living will specifying personal requests on
care and life support in the case of a terminal illness or in-
jury. A healthcare proxy may also be developed to appoint
a person to make decisions on care in the event that the per-
son cannot make them. Making decisions in advance of a
critical situation allows the person self-determination of
their fate. Yet, when not faced with a terminal diagnosis,
additional emotions and considerations may be ignored. In
addition to self-determination, there are other ethical prin-
ciples that must also be honored. When developing advance
directives, the individual must understand his or her options
and have full disclosure and understanding of the terminol-
ogy, especially when standard forms are used. The individ-
ual must understand the options for the different life
support equipment and hydration and nutrition. As re-
ported by the ANA (2012), difficulties and confusion about
DNR orders still exist despite efforts to assist consumers in
making informed decisions (p. 1). This is also the time to
address the choice for organ donation. The documents must
be witnessed and notarized, and state requirements should
be considered, especially if the individual travels or lives in
multiple states. The person can change his or her mind, but
a revised document must be developed.
The individual must also have full trust in the person
identified as the proxy. This is not a time for favoritism, but
one of trust that one’s wishes will be honored with judg-
ment and fidelity. Consider the  person who has been des-
ignated as the “proxy.” Is that person agreeable to serve in
that role? Does he or she feel compelled to serve, or instead
comfortable serving and adhering to the patient’s wishes?
Does he or she have the resources to advocate for the patient
when  family members with divergent options arrive on the
scene? When a patient is transported to the emergency de-
partment, does the individual serving as the proxy have ac-
cess to the legal documents that will need to be part of the
patient’s record? Privacy and confidentiality are also im-
portant concepts in that one’s advance directives are just
that—private, not public information, even if the family
members do not consider themselves as “the public.” It is
the individual’s self-determination to make the advance de-
cisions and have the documents available to the healthcare
proxy, healthcare providers, legal counsel, and family. 
Ultimately, it is the individual’s decision and autonomy. 
However, recall the concept of option rights: The range
of decisions for the individual to make in advance directives
vary by state and nation. In the United States, for example,
there are differences among states like Oregon that enacted
legislation on physician-assisted suicide. As noted by Bosek
and Jannette (2013), three other states (Washington, 
Montana, and Vermont) have now legislated a form of 
CHAPTER 12 Professional Ethics     ●
205

“patient-directed dying” (p. 136). Proposed legislation in
Maine “died in committee” in 2013, and Arizona provided
language to assist in palliative care and a proposal for access
to non-FDA-approved drugs. Many states have specific
forms and language that must be included to be considered
a legal and enforceable document. Active euthanasia or
“mercy killing” is not a component of advanced directives
in this country. However, in the Netherlands, Belgium,
and Luxembourg, voluntary active euthanasia is legal under
strict conditions for valid adult consent (Campbell, 2013,
p. 107). The Code of Ethics for Nurses (ANA, 2015) dictates
that nurses should be knowledgeable about advance direc-
tives and “should provide interventions to relieve pain and
other symptoms in the dying patient consistent with pal-
liative care practice standards and may not act with the sole
intent to end life” (p. 3).
Some people feel that advance directives lessen the bur-
den on the family in the case of a crisis. The focus here is on
the individual’s autonomy and wishes. However, families are
made up of individuals who may be facing the dilemmas of
beneficence in adhering to the person’s best interests, justice
in ensuring that all appropriate care is provided, and fidelity
in being loyal to the person’s wishes. Although the family
does not have to “second guess” the individual’s wishes, since
these decisions have been specified in the advance directives,
at an end-of-life event, many conflicting emotions may sur-
face, and healthcare professionals must be supportive to both
the individual and the family while upholding legally en-
forceable directives. Check out some of the online informa-
tion available to patients, but ensure that patients are
accessing reputable and appropriate information.
Additional dilemmas involved with advanced directives
include the following:
●The patient and the family are not in agreement.
●The patient/family is not in agreement with the
healthcare provider(s).
●There is disagreement about the issues of 
• “Do not resuscitate” orders
• Hydration versus nutrition
• Ventilation
• Dialysis
• Pain management
• Religious and cultural differences 
• End-of-life final requests and planning
• Organ and tissue donation
• The meaning of palliative care and what it will be like
for the patient, the proxy, and the significant others
What others can you identify?
As noted by the ICN (2012b), “the roles of nurses and
other healthcare professionals in caring for dying patients
continues to be debated, and nurses must be knowledge-
able about the current issues and legislation about end
stage of life issues” (p. 2). The concepts of hospice care
and palliative care continue to evolve and be differentiated.
As reported by the ANA (2013), “both the definition and
the terminology associated with palliative sedation have
been widely debated” (p. 5), and nurses are urged to take
a leadership role in patient advocacy and interprofessional
collaboration while adhering to the Code of Ethics.
The Persistent Vegetative State. Another dilemma that
has had major legal and ethical challenges over the past
years is the identification of the persistent  vegetative state.
The pronouncement of “brain death” is well established
and has objective data that must be met. However, the
persistent vegetative state has been debated in the courts
with specified criteria now proposed. But there is still
much discussion, debate, and media coverage. Perry et al.
(2005) have illustrated the issues and dilemmas involved
in the case of Terri Schiavo, a young woman who was in
a constant vegetative state and who persisted in this state
beyond the limits of a normal period of recovery. As the
authors reported, “no patient, even those with traumatic
brain injury, has been reported to recover after a full year
of being in a persistent vegetative state” (p. 744). As a re-
sult of all the legal contests and ethical debates, Schiavo
persisted in this vegetative state for 15 years. However, as
a result of her condition and the plight of her family, with
debates in the legal and medical communities, specific cri-
teria to understand the persistent vegetative state criteria
were developed to address both traumatic and nontrau-
matic brain injuries. So, think about the dilemmas within
the family and in the medical community:
●Would or could she recover?
●The criteria for brain death were not met.
●What would this young woman want since there were
not advance directives in place?
●What does the family know, want, perceive, and 
interpret?
●What different perceptions and feelings exist in the
family structure?
●What are the benefits and risks of each treatment to
the patient, the family, and society?
●What if you were reliant on a feeding tube for 
existence?
●What about the use of healthcare resources and the
chances of meaningful life?
What others can you identify?
206
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
ON LIN E CON SULT 
AARP at 
http://www.aarp.org/home-family/caregiving
/legal-and-money-matters/
FamilyDoctor.org: Advance Directives and Do Not
Resuscitate Orders at 
http://familydoctor.org/familydoctor/en/
healthcare-management/end-of-life-issues/
advance-directives-and-do-not-resuscitate
-orders.html
MedlinePlus: Advance Directives at 
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus
/advancedirectives.html
National Alliance on Mental Illness: Advance 
Directives at
http://www.nami.org/Content/ContentGroups
/Policy/Issues_Spotlights/Psychiatric_Advance
_Directives_An_Overview.htm
National Cancer Institute: Advance Directives at 
http://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/managing
-care/advance-directives
Medline Plus: Organ Transplantation at
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus
/organtransplantation.html

Organ Procurement and Donation. Although organ
transplants have become a common procedure, there are
ethical concerns on both sides of the donation situation.
Consider the dilemma of “harvesting,” access, self-deter-
mination, and cultural beliefs, among others. In the case
of procurement or harvesting organs, care must be given
to the dignity and wishes of the donor. Family issues are
also of concern, with grief on the donor’s side and hopeful
expectation for the other family. Consider the physiolog-
ical and emotional issues of the patient in failing health
who is awaiting an organ donation, and the care concerns
and emotions impacting the significant others. Access
continues to be an issue, with cost and accessibility to
healthcare. In addition, coming from a utilitarian stance
is consideration of the greatest good for the greatest num-
ber and issues of care and success as the consequence. In
the case of deontology, consistent rules are applied for ac-
cess, regardless of individual considerations. Self-determi-
nation applies, as the wishes of both the donor and the
recipient. Cultural beliefs are also a consideration. As
noted by Spector (2013), organ donation is permitted in
many religious groups but not in the case of Jehovah’s
Witness followers. 
Returning to Curtain’s steps in the decision-making
process, obtaining background information is vital in the
assessment process for both the donor and the recipient as
the ethical components, ethical agents, and the available op-
tions are identified, and the ethical principles are applied in
the final decision. Understandably, individuals on a waiting
list are in a constant state of unease and rapidly failing health
and functioning. In addition to the disease process limiting
the person’s functioning, the individual and significant oth-
ers are facing potential mortality if a suitable organ is not
available, along with the emotional impact of being a num-
ber on a waiting list and thus constantly on alert in case an
appropriate donor emerges. The individual may not retain
the same placement on the waiting list if his or her condition
changes or if another individual emerges with higher prior-
ity for a transplant. In addition to the numbers of individ-
uals on waiting lists, there are other complex issues to
confront with the type of donation (blood, tissue, organs,
and stem cells) and the individuals involved (youth, aged,
minorities, religious and cultural groups). Consider the on-
line information available to the donors and individuals in
need and their families. Overall, respect for individuals is
an issue. How will you reply when renewing your driver’s
license if you are asked whether you want your donor status
indicated on your license? And, what about the response of
a family member to this same question?
Genomics. The Human Genome Project has been a
 significant scientific achievement that provided new infor-
mation on gene structure, function, and dysfunction. 
The DNA sequencing of the human body has been a
breakthrough in modern science, providing valuable in-
formation on the human genome or the complete set of
the human DNA. We now know what gene is affected in
specific genetic diseases such as sickle cell disease and cystic
fibrosis. Current research is ongoing on the genetic muta-
tions that occur with various cancers. Use of individual
DNA in the criminal system  frequently makes news and
is the topic of television entertainment series. But what
about the individual’s right to privacy? Also consider in-
dividual responsibility, as more information is known on
certain conditions that can be affected by either heredity
or environment. And think about tailoring drug doses for
individual DNA profiles. This balance of privacy and 
responsibility presents numerous ethical dilemmas.
Consider the rights of parents and children. Recall that a
right is an agreed-upon entitlement. Genetic mapping “can
offer firm evidence that a disease transmitted from parent to
child is linked to one or more genes . . . and can be used to find
the single gene responsible for relatively rare inherited disorders
. . . or more common disorders, such as asthma” (National
Human Genome Research Institute, 2012, p. 1). So consider
knowledge of transmission versus ignorance of a pre-existing
genetic trait—from both the parents’ and child’s perspective. 
We continue to gain much needed scientific informa-
tion from research on human DNA, but the ethical consid-
erations cannot be ignored in the quest for knowledge or
medical breakthroughs. And the ethical issues become as
complex as the individual human genome. For example, as
Huddleston (2013) describes, genetic-informed consent is
more than a signed document and the permission to per-
form genetic testing because, as some have argued, it is not
possible to provide informed consent for genetic research
when knowledge is advancing so rapidly that we do not
know what tests will be possible or what variants may be
identified next week (p. 2). Over a decade ago, Pang (2002)
noted that advances in genomics are likely to alleviate in-
fectious diseases and chronic disorders but that “attention
must be paid to complex ethical, legal, social and economic
issues, as well as to public education and encouragement”
(p. 1077). And this is still true as the technology evolves.
And what about cloning beyond sheep? At the national
level, the Ethical, Legal, and Social Implications (ELSI) Re-
search Program has been established to address the ethical
challenges with genomic research. Some of the current re-
search priorities include recruitment issues, such as diversity,
perceptions of risks and benefits, informed consent, privacy
and identifiability of genomic information, data sharing and
data security, governance structures, compensation and dis-
tribution of benefits, and the role of community and con-
sultation engagement (National Human Genome Research
Institute, 2014). These issues are just a peek at the future
dilemmas that the scientific and the healthcare communities
will confront. As originally stated by Collins et al. (2003),
CHAPTER 12 Professional Ethics     ●
207
O NL I NE  C O NSULT  
U.S. News on msnbc.com: “Schiavo autopsy 
shows irreversible brain damage” at 
http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/8225637/ 
Terri Schiavo Life & Hope Network at 
http://www.terrisfight.org/
ON LIN E CON SULT 
U.S. Government Information on Organ and Tissue
Donation and Transplantation at
http://www.organdonor.gov/ 
Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network at 
http://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/

“society must formulate policies to address many of the
questions raised by genomics” (p. 845). 
One of these questions addressed consumers’ fears with
genetic testing and involvement in research with the use of
genetic information and discrimination in health coverage
and employment. The Genetic Information Nondiscrimi-
nation Act (GINA) of 2008 was enacted to provide consis-
tent protections throughout the United States to prohibit
discrimination in health insurance coverage and employment
based on genetic information. For example, this law provides
protection against an increase in the overall premium rate
for an employer group plan based on genetic information of
an individual. The employer can still determine eligibility or
premium rates for an individual with the disease but not use
the plan to increase rates for all. Think about the incidence
of breast cancer in families. In this case, genetic information
and family history cannot be used to discriminate for em-
ployment or for health coverage based on this information
for an individual who does not manifest the disease or con-
dition. If the person does manifest the condition, he or she
may be denied coverage or pay additional premiums. How-
ever, the employer cannot raise all premiums in an effort to
project costs and coverage impacts on the company’s plan.
The American Nurses Association, in collaboration with
stakeholder groups, published essential competencies for
nurses and for curriculum in the area of genetics and ge-
nomics in 2006, with revisions in 2008 and further com-
ments on the competencies of graduate nurses solicited in
2010. These competencies address practice standards for
registered nurses. In the area of professional responsibilities,
awareness of one’s own values, advocacy for patients, and
competency in the nursing role relative to genetics and ge-
nomics are  minimum competencies. In the practice do-
main, the ANA (2008) competencies focus on nursing
assessment; identification of patients, valid information, and
ethical standards; referral activities, and the provision of ed-
ucation, care and support (pp. 11–13). These  competencies
include the need for critical analysis, advocacy, and collab-
oration with patients and other healthcare providers. Aware-
ness of the terminology, current developments, and ethical
standards are vital. To demonstrate the effect of this area on
current health priorities, federal agencies such as the Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality have included acti vities
in their annual line item budgets related to genomics. In-
vestigate some of the fact sheets provided at the Web site of
the National Human Genome Project and the expected
professional competencies.
Impaired or Incompetent Colleagues. As an advocate
for effective healthcare for patients, a nurse does not want
to be faced with impaired or incompetent colleagues.
Unfortunately, it does happen, and this creates ethical
dilemmas. The ICN (2006b) addresses continuing com-
petence as a professional responsibility and a public right
and further mandates the “report of practitioners who 
fail to deliver competent professional practice” (p. 1). 
This mandate addresses both impaired and incompetent
practice of any healthcare professional and is highlighted
in the revised ANA Code of Ethics for Nurses. The Code
states, “nurses must be alert to and take appropriate action
in all instances of incompetent, unethical, illegal, or im-
paired practice or actions that place the rights or best in-
terests of the patient in jeopardy” (ANA, 2015, p. 12).
Again, no one likes to think about working with or
being aware of an incompetent or impaired colleague. It is
dangerous to both the patient and others. It endangers pa-
tients first but also impacts family members, colleagues,
managers, organizational leaders and managers, the profes-
sion, and the community at large. Chemical dependency is
a complex disease. Drug dependency can be a result of prior
conditions that required pain management in the nurse’s
personal life, a complex biochemical and mental health
issue, or psychological issues. Drug diversion, or taking
drugs from a patient or the institution, whether for personal
use or for a friend or family member, is a criminal offense.
The patient may be denied effective pain management or
only receive partial doses. This situation is a form of harm
to the patient both physiologically and economically. But,
the health professional is also being harmed. Healthcare
providers have controlled access to drugs like opiates in their
care of patients, and this can be a powerful inducement at
a time of chemical or emotional weakness or even workload
stress. It can also be quite frightening to co-workers who
notice unusual behavior in a colleague. As described by
Wolf (2012), “when substandard, neglectful nursing care is
tolerated or ignored, intense moral distress follows” (p. 22).
In a case of impaired practice, discovery is upsetting to
the individual, colleagues, and management. And the 
patient may have experienced harm from the failure to re-
ceive their prescribed medications. Administration may be
called and intervene, requesting that the employee submit
to a drug screen immediately. This confrontation can en-
gender defensive or escapist behaviors. Discovery may also
occur when the employee is off duty during an investiga-
tion of drug administration or control irregularities, and
the employee is called in to meet with administration or
an employee assistance representative. Regardless, if diver-
sion of controlled substances is suspected, drug enforce-
ment and control officials may be called, and the employee
may face arrest and criminal prosecution. This criminal
action will be in addition to an investigation by the Board
of Nursing and perhaps immediate suspension of the li-
cense and privilege to practice. The impaired professional
may be referred to a special rehabilitative program during
this process. Angres, Bettinardi-Angres, and Cross (2010)
describe that this referral source expects a treatment provider
to determine whether the nurse needs a detoxification pro-
gram and subsequent treatment including follow-up treat-
ment, family services, and after-care (p. 17). Employment
and earning potential may be severely affected for the em-
ployee and his or her family. The organization is affected
operationally, economically, and emotionally. The entire
situation is upsetting and harmful to all involved, especially
208
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
O N L I NE  C ONSULT  
Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act 
(GINA) of 2008 at
http://www.genome.gov/10002077#al-2
National Human Genome Research Institute at 
http://www.genome.gov/
American Nurses Association at
http://www.nursingworld.org/MainMenu
Categories/EthicsStandards/Genetics-1
/default.aspx

the patient. Consider the principles of beneficence, non-
maleficence, justice, fidelity, and veracity. And drug diver-
sion, whether directly from patients or from the organization,
impacts both the patient and the healthcare system.
Bettinardi-Angres and Angres (2010) encourage nurses
in authority to understand the disease of addiction as a
biopsychosocial disease process and chronic health problem
and to use an effective and compassionate approach to ben-
efit the addicted nurse, the healthcare profession, and so-
ciety (p. 31). Impaired nurses can not only injure
themselves and their patients through unprofessional prac-
tice, but could seriously impact the performance of col-
leagues in the performance of their role or even injure or
kill others in a motor vehicle  accident on the way to or
from the healthcare setting. The scope of this discussion is
not directed at understanding the disease of chemical ad-
diction or dependency but the effect in the organization
and on the leadership and management. In cases that are
not subject to criminal charges, the employee assistance
program may seek to assist the impaired professional. But
reporting an impaired professional to the Board of Nursing
starts an investigative process with the potential for disci-
pline and is a requirement that has an impact on the em-
ployee, the organization, and society. As the nursing leader
or manager, you may be faced with such a situation. You
will be confronted with reporting requirements, employee
rehabilitation potential or termination, and damage control
in the situation and interpersonal situations, and you may
even be required to provide testimony to state or law en-
forcement representatives or agencies. The best scenario is
to provide employee assistance and intervention before the
impaired practice or diversion occurs. This may not be pos-
sible given longstanding physiological and emotional issues.
But, consider how to react and respond in the situation.
The first consideration in knowing the legal requirements
in your nurse practice act, as the statue or law, and in the
regulations that interpret and explain the law. 
Incompetent practice, or failure to meet the standard of
care, is also harmful to the patient, colleagues, the organiza-
tion, and the profession. Consider the  reactions of a colleague
who observes this situation: disbelief, denial, making excuses,
or perhaps blame directed at the situation or the environ-
ment. Consider a possible ethical dilemma: protection of the
patient or “whistle-blowing” on a colleague. Once again, re-
turn to the ethical decision-making model in this situation: 
●Obtaining background information
●Identifying the ethical components
●Identifying the ethical agents or people involved
●Identifying the options available
●Applying ethical principles to the issues, like self-
determination
●Making a final resolution or decision to the ethical
dilemma
First, you will have to collect the facts on what happened.
These facts will also be necessary for an incident report or ob-
servation that you will need to provide. Next, in your under-
standing of the situation, a critical determination will be
patient safety and your consideration of the principles of ben-
eficience, nonmaleficence, justice and fidelity. Veracity is di-
rected at the patient, the colleague, and the organization as
you identify the ethical agents and the people involved. Next,
consider your options and what immediate interventions are
needed on the part of the patient and the colleague as you
function as a professional and a patient advocate. These in-
terventions for beneficience and fidelity to the patient’s safety
will be of paramount concern. At the same time, your patients
will need the appropriate level of care to ensure their care and
safety. Your final steps in the resolution will be based on the
facts, ethical principles, and your professional obligations and
accountability. Advocacy for patients in the case of an im-
paired or incompetent colleague presents an ethical dilemma
that requires intervention and addressing patient safety while
facts surrounding a situation are being collected and blame
and personal conflict are minimized.
You will encounter other ethical dilemmas throughout
practice. As described in the ANA (2010b) position state-
ment on The Nurse’s Role in Ethics and Human Rights,
“clearly articulated ethical positions, astute understanding
of human rights, careful discernment of human rights vi-
olations and bold acceptance of responsibility converge to
provide a backdrop for all nursing activities” (p. 2). Ad-
herence to ethical principles is a part of clinical judgment
and professional practice. Your skills in assessment, critical
analysis, and nursing process will be invaluable as you 
confront the situations as they arise.
CHAPTER 12 Professional Ethics     ●
209
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
In 2010, the Food and Drug Administration requested that the Institute of Medicine examine when and how
to conduct clinical trials ethically in order to evaluate the safety of drugs. The basis for this request is to ad-
dress both ethical and patient safety concerns especially when patients are involved in clinical trials. 
In its report, the IOM (2012) concluded that the FDA’s current approach to drug oversight is not suffi-
ciently systematic to ensure that it assesses the benefits and risks of drugs consistently over the drug’s life
cycle and recommended adopting a framework standardized across all drugs that is flexible enough to make
the decision-making process more predictable, transparent, and proactive (p. 1). 
Suppose clinical drug trials are currently being conducted in your organization. Read the current informa-
tion and response provided by the IOM at http://www.iom.edu/Reports/2012/Ethical-and-Scientific-Issues-in-
Studying-the-Safety-of-Approved-Drugs.aspx.
Question: How would you apply the ethical decision-making process by Curtain (1987) to this situation
with the current information on this topic?

210
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice
K E Y  P O I N T S
●Rights are agreements that may be welfare or legal rights (based on laws that may be revised), ethical or
moral rights (based on an ethical system or rules of conduct) and option rights (with differences within
the overall legal parameters). 
●Basic human rights include beneficence, justice and fidelity, full disclosure and veracity, self-determination
and autonomy, informed consent, and privacy and confidentiality. 
●Beneficence is the principle of doing good with the person’s best interests as the goal of all actions. Asso-
ciated ethical principles include justice (fairness) and fidelity (loyalty).
●Self-determination is the sense of autonomy, where the person has the right to determine their fate. 
●Full disclosure occurs when the individual has complete and relevant information to make an informed
decision and includes the principle of veracity or providing truthful information.
●Informed consent occurs when the individual has complete information on all sides of the issue and
makes a decision for care (or not) freely and without constraint given careful consideration on both 
advantages and disadvantages of the action.
●Privacy means that a person has the right to determine and control the amount of information to reveal
about himself or herself, while confidentiality means that the information that the person does reveal is
respected and not revealed to others except as necessary as part of this professional relationship. 
●Standards of care are the accepted practice that is reasonable under a given set of circumstances for a
specific profession.
●The two generally established systems of ethical decision making are utilitarianism (based on the conse-
quence) and deontology (based on the consistent obligations as rules and unchanging principles). 
●The Code of Ethics for Nurses developed by the American Nurses Association is the ethical standard for
professional nursing practice in the United States.
●There are various ethical decision-making models. A classic model includes obtaining background infor-
mation, identifying the ethical components, identifying the ethical agents or people involved,  identifying
the options available, applying ethical principles, and making a final decision on the dilemma (Curtain,
1987).
●Advance directives are legal documents (living wills and durable powers of attorney) that provide specific
written instructions for an individual’s wishes relative to the future healthcare and end-of-life decisions at
a time when the person is able to specify his or her wishes. 
●Active euthanasia is also called “mercy killing,” with an active role with the sole intent to end life is not 
allowable in the Code of Ethics for Nurses (ANA, 2015, p. 3).
●The Human Genome Project has been an outstanding scientific achievement that provided new informa-
tion on gene structure, function, and dysfunction for the human genome (the complete set of the human
DNA). 
●Advocacy for patients in the case of an impaired or incompetent colleague presents an ethical dilemma
that requires intervention and addressing patient safety while facts surrounding a situation are being col-
lected and blame and personal conflict is minimized.
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Reflect carefully and identify an ethical dilemma and debate each side with a colleague, one of you using the utili-
tarianism philosophy and the other using deontology.
2. Identify the basic human rights reflected in the ANA Code of Ethics for Nurses (2015).
3. What commonalities can you identify in the ANA Code of Ethics for Nurses (2015), the Canadian Nurses Associa-
tion Code of Ethics (2008), and the ICN Code of Ethics for Nurses (2012)?

CHAPTER 12 Professional Ethics     ●
211
4. Review one standard of care from your facility’s policy and procedure manual and investigate its basis in the pro-
fessional literature.
5. Find a peer from a different ethnic or cultural background and share your values on an ethical topic of your choice.
6. Discuss the Chapter Thought in the context of professional ethics.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.
REFERENCES
Aiken, T. D. (2004). Legal, ethical, and ethical issues in nursing
(2nd ed). Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2006). Position 
statement: Privacy and confidentiality. Retrieved from
http://nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/Ethics
Standards/Ethics-Position-Statements/Privacyand
Confidentiality.html
American Nurses Association. (2008). Essentials of genetic
and genomic nursing: Competencies, curricula guidelines, 
and outcome indicators (2nd ed.). Retrieved from http://
nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/EthicsStandards
/Genetics-1/Background-Genetics-and-Genomes
/EssentialNursingCompetenciesandCurriculaGuidelines
forGeneticsandGenomics.pdf
American Nurses Association. (2010a). Nursing: Scope and 
standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursesbooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2010b). Position Statement: The
nurse’s role in ethics and human rights: Protecting and promot-
ing individual worth, dignity, and human rights in practice
settings. Retrieved from http://www.nursingworld.org
/ethicsrole 
American Nurses Association. (2012). Nursing care and do not
resuscitate (DNR) and allow natural death (AND) decisions.
Retrieved from http://www.nursingworld.org/MainMenu-
Categories/EthicsStandards/Ethics-Position-Statements
/Nursing-Care-and-Do-Not-Resuscitate-DNR-and-Allow
-Natural-Death-Decisions.pdf
American Nurses Association. (2013). Euthanasia, assisted sui-
cide, and aid in dying. Retrieved from http://nursingworld
.org/MainMenuCategories/EthicsStandards/Ethics
-Position-Statements/Euthanasia-Assisted-Suicide-and
-Aid-in-Dying.pdf
American Nurses Association. (2015). Code of ethics for 
nurses with interpretative statements. Silver Spring, MD:
Nursebooks.org.
Angres, D. H., Bettinardi-Angres, K., & Cross, W. (2010).
Nurses with chemical dependency: Promoting successful
treatment and reentry. Journal of Nursing Regulation, 1, 
16–20.
Bettinardi-Angres, K., & Angres, D. H. (2010). Understanding
the disease of addiction. Journal of Nursing Regulation, 1,
31–35.
Bosek, M. S. D., Jannette, J. (2013). Attitudes of nurses toward
patient-directed dying: A pilot study. JONA’S Healthcare,
Law, Ethics, and Regulation, 15(4), 135–139.
Campbell, A. V. (2013). Bioethics: The basics. London, UK: 
Routledge.
Canadian Nurses Association. (2008). Ethical practice: The code
of ethics for registered nurses. Retrieved from http://www
.cna-aiic.ca/en/on-the-issues/best-nursing/nursing-ethics
Collins, F. S., Green, E. D., Guttmacher, A. E., Guyer, M. S.
(2003). A vision for the future of genomics research: A 
blueprint for the genomic era. Nature, 422(6934), 835–847.
Retrieved from http://www.genome.gov/11007524
Curtain, L. L. (1978). A proposed model for critical ethical
analysis. Nursing Forum, 17(1), 12–17.
Dahnke, M., & Dreher, H. M. (2006). Defining ethics and 
applying the theories. In V. D. Lachman (Ed.), Applied
ethics in nursing (pp. 3–13). New York: Springer.
Department of Health and Human Services. (2009). GINA:
The Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008:
Information for researchers and health care professionals.
Retrieved from http://www.genome.gov/Pages/PolicyEthics
/GeneticDiscrimination/GINAInfoDoc.pdf 
Huddleston, K. (December 23, 2013). Ethics: The challenge of
ethical, legal, and social implications (ELSI) in genomic
nursing. OJIN: The Online Journal of Issues in Nursing,
17(1). Retrieved from http://nursingworld.org
/MainMenuCategories/ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals
/OJIN/Columns/Ethics/Ethical-Legal-Social-Implications
-in-Genomic-Nursing.html
Husted, G. L., & Husted, J. H. (2008). Ethical decision 
making in nursing and health care: The symphonological 
approach (4th ed.). New York: Springer.
Institute of Medicine. (2012). Ethical and scientific issues in
studying the safety of approved drugs: Retrieved from
http://www.iom.edu/reports/2012/ethical-and-scientific
-issues-in-studying-the-safety-of-approved-drugs.aspx
International Council of Nurses (ICN). (2006). Position state-
ment: Continuing competence as a professional responsibility
and public right. Retrieved from http://www.icn.ch/images
/stories/documents/publications/position_statements/B02
_Continuing_Competence.pdf
International Council of Nurses (ICN). (2008). Position state-
ment. Health information: Protecting patient rights. Retrieved
from http://www.icn.ch/images/stories/documents
/publications/position_statements/E05_Health_
Information_Patient_Rights.pdf
International Council of Nurses (ICN). (2012a). The ICN code
of ethics for nurses. Retrieved from http://www.icn.ch
/icncode.pdf 
International Council of Nurses (ICN). (2012b). Nurses’roles in
providing care to dying patients and their families. Retrieved
from http://www.icn.ch/images/stories/documents
/publications/position_statements/A12_Nurses_Role_Care
_Dying_Patients.pdf 

National Human Genome Research Institute. (2012). Genetic
mapping. Retrieved from http://www.genome.gov/10000715
National Human Genome Research Institute. (2014). ELSI 
Research Program. Retrieved from http://www.genome.gov
/10001618#al–2
Pang, T. (2002). Health policy and ethics forum: The impact
of genomics on global health. American Journal of Public
Health, 97(7), 1077–1079.
Perry, J. E., Churchill, L. R., & Kirshner, H. S. (2005). The
Terri Schiavo case: Legal, ethical, and medical perspectives.
Annals of Internal Medicine, 143, 744–748.
Spector, R. E. (2013). Cultural diversity in health & illness (8th ed.). 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Blasi, A.E. (2012). An ethical dilemma: Patients & profits v. 
access & affordability. Journal of Legal Medicine, 33, 115–128.
Blennerhassett, M. (2013). Breast cancer screening: An ethical
dilemma or an opportunity for openness? Quality in 
Primary Care, 21, 39–42.
Collins, F., & Barker, A. (2007). Mapping the cancer genome:
Pinpointing the genes involved in cancer will help chart a
new course across the complex landscape of human malig-
nancies. Scientific American, 296(3), 50–57. 
Greipp, M. E. (1995). A survey of ethical decision making mod-
els in nursing. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 1(1–2), 51–60.
Health; End of Life; Patient Directed Dying Act, VT LEG
262460.1. Retrieved from http://www.leg.state.vt.us/docs
/2012/Bills/Intro/H-274.pdf
Lea, D. H. (2009). Basic genetics and genomics: A primer for
nurses. OJIN: The Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 14(2).
Retrieved from http://www.nursingworld.org/Main
MenuCategories/ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN
/TableofContents/Vol142009/No2May09/Articles
-Previous-Topics/Basic-Genetics-and-Genomics.html
Lea, D. H. (2009). The Genetic Information Nondiscrimina-
tion Act (GINA): What it means for your patients and fam-
ilies. OJIN: The Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 14(2).
Retrieved from http://nursingworld.org/MainMenu
Categories/ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN
/TableofContents/Vol142009/No2May09/Articles
-Previous-Topics/The-Genetic-Information
-Nondiscrimination-Act-GINA.aspx
McCue, C. (2010). Using the AACN framework to alleviate
moral distress. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 16(1).
Retrieved from http://nursingworld.org/MainMenu
Categories/ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/
TableofContents/Vol-16-2011/No1-Jan-2011/Articles
-Previous-Topics/AACN-Framework-and-Moral-Distress.html
Sofaer, N., & Strech, D. (2011). The need for systematic 
reviews of reasons. Bioethics, 26, 315–328.
Ulysse, F. G., Balicas, M., & Xu, Y. (2011). Ethical dilemma:
Therapeutic nondisclosure. Clinical Scholars Review, 4(2), 
115–118. 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2010).
Health information privacy. Retrieved from http://www
.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/ 
Winters, N. (2013). Whether to break confidentiality: An 
ethical dilemma. Journal of Emergency Nursing, 39,
233–235.
Wolf, Z.R. (2012). Nursing practice breakdowns: Good and
bad nursing. MESURG Nursing, 21(1), 16–22, 36.
ONLINE RESOURCES
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
http://www.ahrq.gov
AARP
http://www.aarp.org/home-family/caregiving/
American Nurses Association
http://www.nursingworld.org
Bioethics Databases
http://bioethics.od.nih.gov/withinnih.html
Familydoctor.org
http://familydoctor.org/familydoctor/en/healthcare
-management/end-of-life-issues.html
HIPAA
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/ 
MedlinePlus 
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/medlineplus.html
Medline Plus: Organ Transplantation
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus
/organtransplantation.html
National Alliance on Mental Illness
http://www.nami.org
National Cancer Institute: Advance Directives
http://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/managing-care
/advance-directives
National Human Genome Research Institute
http://www.genome.gov/
Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network
http://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/
Terri Schiavo Life & Hope Network
http://www.terrisfight.org/
U.S. Government Information on Organ and Tissue 
Donation and Transplantation
http://www.organdonor.gov/ 
212
●
SECTION II Critical Abilities in Professional Nursing Practice

Quality and Safety 
in Healthcare 
214
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Describe the steps in the processes of continuous quality improvement. 
2. Discuss the role of regulatory agencies in promoting safety and evaluating quality in healthcare settings.
3. Discuss the changes in quality improvement and safety standards and expectations and their impact on
current professional nursing practice. 
4. Differentiate between the cultures of safety and blame.
5. Explain the use of a root cause analysis for a sentinel event.
6. Identify quality improvement factors to be considered at the unit, organizational, and system levels.
Quality
National Patient Safety Goals
National Hospital Quality 
Measures 
Transformation
Quality Planning
Quality Control
Quality Improvement
Learning Organization
Total Quality Management (TQM)
Continuous Quality Improvement
(CQI)
Benchmarking
Quality Assurance
Risk Management
Just-in-time learning
Just Culture 
Sentinel Event
Root Cause Analysis
Process Teams
QI Tools
Flow Chart
Cause-and-Effect Diagram
Data Sheets
Check Sheets
Surveys
Indicators
Variation
Work Redesign
●Francoise Dunefsky  ●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
“Quality is shared and is everyone’s
responsibility.”
Francoise Dunefsky
Key Terms
13

CHAPTER 13 Quality and Safety in Healthcare     ●
215
In healthcare arenas, we continue to examine the
 definition of quality and its relationship to costs. This 
effort has been stimulated by several factors: the necessity
to compete in a global marketplace, where production
costs are often significantly lower; the ongoing explosion
in technological advances; exponentially increasing expen-
ditures for healthcare services; individual and corporate
consumer pressures to improve value, and portability of
health information; potential reduction of fragmentation
of care; and, of critical importance, the safety of healthcare
consumers.
Healthcare institutions are attempting to understand
and apply principles and techniques previously reserved
for the business world. In their codes of ethics and stan-
dards of practice, professional groups, including nurses
and physicians, have historically expressed the intent of
ensuring that individual patients receive optimal care. The
impact of structures and processes on these individual and
aggregate outcomes was previously not documented nor
necessarily understood.
In addition, societal forces are shifting the healthcare
paradigm from a paternalistic model of delivering care 
and services to one that responds to customer demands.
Making providers accountable for evaluating the quality
of care they deliver, and for communicating that quality
effectively to the public, is an emerging task influenced by 
corporate buyers of services, who want to know what they
can expect to receive for their money. Much progress has
been made in the last decade to create an infrastructure
that can be used to improve the entire system of care for
all stakeholders. In fact, the Agency for Healthcare Re-
search and Quality (AHRQ) is now required to report to
Congress annually on healthcare quality and disparities.
In a recent report, the AHRQ (2014) noted that health-
care quality was fair but improving, with 70 percent of
recommended care actually received, but there was varia-
tion across states, with hospital care improving more rap-
idly and ambulatory, diabetes, and maternal and child care
lagging (p. H-1).
With its professional commitment to patients, respon-
sibility for coordinating care, and roots in the psychosocial
and physical sciences, nursing is poised to play an 
important role in the ongoing development and imple-
mentation of care delivery models that are effective and
efficient, meet customer expectations, and ensure excellent
clinical outcomes and safety. The dictionary defines qual-
ity as a “degree of excellence or distinguishing attribute”
(Merriam-Webster Dictionary, 2014). In healthcare, we
previously defined it as being “free of mistakes” or perfect
relative to process. The standard of perfection, or 100 per-
cent compliance, was focused within. The current quality
movement is evolving a definition of quality that includes
“meeting customer needs” and focusing on outcomes, ef-
ficacy, and safety. The Institute of Medicine (IOM) uses
the following definition: “The degree to which health serv-
ices for individuals and populations increase the likelihood
of desired health outcomes and are consistent with current
professional knowledge” (IOM, 2001, p. 232). A new par-
adigm for clinical practice across disciplines is  contributing
to nursing’s body of knowledge, current standards of prac-
tice, nursing care outcomes, and the consistent use of ev-
idence-based practice. Recall that we have previously
defined evidence-based practice as “an integration of the
best evidence available, nursing expertise, and the values
and preferences of the individuals, families, and commu-
nities who are selected” (Sigma Theta Tau, 2005, p. 1). 
Healthcare providers have consistently looked at clin-
ical care as the measure for quality. Traditionally, the qual-
ifications of clinicians, state-of-the-art technology, and
episodic interventions that cure illness and “do no harm”
were considered indices of quality. But asking customers
how they perceive “quality” has enabled a more complex
picture to emerge. The consumer expects expert clinical
care. But equally important are safe, timely, courteous, and
respectful treatment, easy access to caregivers and infor-
mation, unfragmented care delivery, reasonable costs, and
the ability to maneuver through the system without too
many obstacles. Understanding the convergence of the
consumer’s perspective of quality and use of evidence-
based nursing practice, together with an ongoing focus on
continuous improvement, are an integral part of meeting
our professional commitment.
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVES
Human societies have always strived for excellence. 
Reliance on professional associations such as guilds and
inspection by consumers are centuries-old methods of
judging quality. Societal values, however, are changing the
context in which quality is evaluated.
Pre–World War II healthcare delivery in the United
States was mostly a cottage industry. This time is referred
to as the “charitable era of healthcare.” The wealthy and
fortunate rural populations relied on services delivered in
the home. The poor and urban working classes were sent
to hospitals in critical circumstances or died at home. A
sudden growth in technology and treatment modalities
and the building of hospitals stimulated by the Hospital
Survey and Construction Act of 1946, also known as the
Hill-Burton Act, began the corporatization of healthcare
delivery. This “technologic era” lasted for more than 
30 years. Extensive development of policies, procedures,
standards of practice, and professional disciplines ensued.
It took 20 years before the industrial model of reliance on
departmental inspection and supervisory audits became
part of the fabric of healthcare. The role of Medicare and
federal and state government accelerated this growth.
The early 1970s saw the beginning of formalized meas-
urement of clinical performance and outcomes. Organi-
zations such as the Joint Commission (formerly known as
the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare 
Organizations, or JCAHO), professional review organiza-
tions (PROs), and some state health departments played
a major role in the initial movement. Retrospective audits,
investigation of problems, and indicator measurements
were all attempts to discover less than acceptable perform-
ance by an individual, discipline, or department. The ob-
jective was to discover the “bad apples,” implement a
corrective action plan, and monitor its effectiveness
through ongoing measurement. It was assumed that qual-
ity was a result of the performance of individuals or groups
of individuals. The tools of the corrective action plans were
education, disciplinary action, and increased resources
such as technology and staffing.

216
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
A gradual quality paradigm shift began in the  second
half of the 1980s. The “economic era” of healthcare was
emerging. Other industries purchasing healthcare for their
employees at rapidly rising costs challenged the healthcare
sector to provide “more” and “better” for “less.” The
Japanese were successfully invading the American market-
place as a result of quality methodologies developed by
Deming, Juran, and others. Deming had persuaded the
Japanese  government and industry that they should focus
on quality rather than price and costs. Knowing that this
focus would take time and commitment, they infused their
businesses with the belief that work is performed by inter-
dependent teams, that individuals want to do a good job,
that those who do the work itself know its processes better
than anyone else, and that mass inspection and fear do not
automatically result in quality.
Juran proposed the notion that by planning for quality,
one avoids multiple trial-and-error situations and costly
rework, often referred to as “the cost of poor quality.”
Quality could be cost-effective. Improvement required
even higher goals for quality. Reliance on systems analysis
and statistical methods and techniques produced better-
quality products than did supervision and inspection of
individual human behaviors.
During the next 10 years, companies began to recog-
nize that care is delivered by individuals who function as
members of cross-functional and interdisciplinary teams,
and those individuals and teams are tools for, rather than
objects of, improvement. Currently a body of scientific re-
search is emerging that tests the new  theories that care is
supported by environmental, managerial, support, and
governance structures, and that ensuring accepted clinical
outcomes is not enough to meet customer needs.
Many individuals and organizations have contributed
to the quality journey over the past 30 years. The Joint
Commission, the Institute for Healthcare Improvement,
and the IOM are but a few organizations that deserve
recognition for being driving forces in the implementation
of the new quality care models. In 1996, the IOM, a 
member of the National Academies, began a multiple-
phase Quality Initiative; its landmark reports include To
Err is Human: Building a Safer Health System (2000),
Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the
21st Century (2001), Keeping Patients Safe: Transforming
the Work Environment of Nurses (Page, 2004), and more
recently, in collaboration with the Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation, The Future of Nursing: Leading Change, 
Advancing Health (2011). These and other IOM reports
focus on the quality problems and on the multiple levels
of system reform needed. 
Largely as a result of the IOM’s activities and reports,
the Joint Commission in 2002 approved National Patient
Safety Goals. Requirements define performance expecta-
tions with respect to structure, process, and outcomes in
order that patient safety and quality may be enhanced. The
requirements to meet these goals are surveyed in all health-
care organizations seeking their accreditation. Since then,
these goals have undergone revision and updating to focus
efforts on current issues and strategies, all directed at pa-
tient safety in a variety of environments. 
In 1998, the Joint Commission began the journey to-
ward the standardization of core measures with the goal
of quality improvement of patient outcomes. In 2004, the
Joint Commission partnered with the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid (CMS) on the core measures for
greater standardization as common measures. These core
measures became National Hospital Quality Measures
identified as integral to improving the quality of care pro-
vided to hospital patients and bring value to stakeholders
by focusing on the actual results of care with common and
consistent measurement (Joint Commission, 2013h). At
first, the focus was on metrics through the identification
and implementation of these national measures, followed
by expansion and enhancement across the national system
for demons trable improvement in healthcare quality and
patient safety. Of note is the collaborative work through-
out this endeavor between the Joint Commission, CMS,
and the National Quality Forum (NQF), as well as other
partners. In 2010, hospitals were required to submit data
to the Joint Commission on a minimum of four core stan-
dards or a combination of applicable core measures or
noncore measures, depending on agency size and focus
(Joint Commission, 2010, p. 1). (See current core mea -
sures, identified in Box 13.1.) Separate systems can now be
compared by using core measures in a standardized fashion.
By using specific performance measures for diseases such
as acute myocardial infarction or stroke and their manage-
ment, hospitals regardless of geographical location could
be easily compared. In addition, the aim was to minimize
 redundancy in data collection. Initially the work was hos-
pital-based. However, the measures have now been ex-
panded to provide a greater scope of selection options in
long-term care, home care, behavioral healthcare, and am-
bulatory care, so standardized performance improvement
is implemented throughout the entire continuum of care.
CMS has well-established “Compare” websites for hos-
pitals, nursing homes, HHAs, and ESRD facilities. In
March 2008, it began posting cost in addition to quality
information on Hospital Compare about selected inpa-
tient hospital stays provided to Medicare patients. More
recently the site has added 10 new measures of patient 
experiences of care (Hospital Consumer Assessment of
Healthcare Providers and Systems, or HCAPs). Con-
sumers now have access to the three critical elements of
quality, satisfaction, and pricing information for specific
procedures performed at their hospitals when making in-
formed decisions about where to seek care.
Simultaneously with the Compare activities, CMS 
developed the Roadmap for Implementing Value Driven
Healthcare in the Traditional Medicare Fee-for-Service
Program. This included promoting efficiency in resource
O N L I NE  C ONSULT  
The Joint Commission at 
http://www.jointcommission.org/
The Joint Commission’s Quality Report at 
http://www.QualityCheck.org
The Institute for Healthcare Improvement at 
http://www.ihi.org
The Institute of Medicine: Quality and Patient
Safety at 
http://iom.edu/Global/Topics/Quality-Patient
-Safety.aspx

use while providing high-quality care, namely paying for
value. Initial steps required Medicare to stop paying for
certain reasonably preventable Hospital Acquired Condi-
tions (HACs). As of fiscal year 2013 steps have been im-
plemented to move hospitals from a pay-for-reporting to
a pay-for-performance program, called Value-Based Pur-
chasing (VBP). Other providers are preparing for the next
phase of the VBP implementation.
The role nursing plays in all of the quality and safety
work has been pushed to the forefront. The American
Nurses Association, through its National Database of
Nursing Quality Indicators (NDNQI), has identified
acute care patient outcomes that are dependent primarily
on nursing care, commonly referred to as “nurse sensitive.”
On the basis of evidence-based practice, targets are being
set for nurse-sensitive outcomes such as patient falls, pres-
sure ulcers, and peripheral intravenous infiltration. Na-
tional Database of Nursing Quality Indicator (NDNQI,
2014) guidelines now exist on data collection on nurse-
sensitive indicators such as nursing care hours per patient
day, skill mix, falls, and falls with injury. 
One initiative in nursing education was the develop-
ment and promotion of the Quality and Safety Education
for Nurses (QSEN) competencies by the American 
Association of Colleges of Nursing. These QSEN compe-
tencies were developed along with the IOM competencies
for all health professionals, patient-centered care, teamwork
and collaboration, evidence-based practice, quality im-
provement, safety, and informatics (see Chapter 1). Knowl-
edge, skills, and attitudes were identified for each of the
competencies. Subsequently, these competencies were in-
corporated into the Essentials of Baccalaureate Education for
Professional Nursing Practice (AACN, 2008). Baccalaureate
program faculty were trained on these QSEN competencies
with content now incorporated in the undergraduate cur-
riculum. This movement then spread to the incorporation
of QSEN competencies in graduate nursing education. In
addition, QSEN Web-based learning modules are available
on each of the six core competencies. The competency for
quality improvement has been defined as “the use of data
to monitor the outcomes of care processes and use im-
provement methods to design and test changes to contin-
uously improve the quality and safety of health care
systems” (Cronenwett et al., 2007, p. 127; Smith, Cronen-
wett, and Sherwood, 2007, p. 133). The knowledge 
required in the area of quality improvements includes the
following:
●Care outcomes in the setting
●Interprofessional systems and tensions affecting these
outcomes
●Importance of variation and measurement to assess
quality of care
●Various approaches for changing processes 
(Cronenwett et al., 2007)
Check out the knowledge, skills, and abilities required
for quality improvement and the other QSEN competen-
cies at http://qsen.org/. Quality improvement is now an
expectation in all professional practice arenas, from basic
education through professional practice. 
What has become evident is the focus on quality 
improvement and the use of evidence-based metrics.
THEORETICAL MODELS
FOR QUALITY
The models used for quality improvement have come
from industry. Some have been adapted for healthcare, but
all share the common theme of using the scientific process.
Deming’s Principles 
for Transformation
W. Edwards Deming was the first to challenge seriously
the managerial notion that quality and increased produc-
tivity are incompatible. In doing his research and devel-
oping his 14 Points for Management (Box 13.2), he
assumed the radical new approach of listening to
CHAPTER 13 Quality and Safety in Healthcare     ●
217
BOX 13.1
National Hospital Quality Measures
Core Measures:
●Acute myocardial infarction
●Children’s asthma care (CAC)
●Emergency department
●Heart failure
●Hospital-based inpatient psychiatric services
●Hospital outpatient department
●Immunization
●Perinatal care
●Pneumonia measures
●Stroke
●Substance use
●Surgical care improvement project (SCIP)
●Tobacco treatment
●Venous thromboembolism
Source: Joint Commission. (2014a). Core measure sets. Retrieved from
http://www.jointcommission.org/core_measure_sets.aspx. 
Specifications Manual for National Hospital Inpatient Quality Measures
Discharges 01-01-15 (1Q15) through 09-30-15 (3Q15).
ON LIN E CON SULT 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing at
http://www.aacn.nche.edu/qsen/home
CMS Quality of Care Center at 
https://www.cms.gov/Center/Special-Topic
/Quality-of-Care-Center.html
National Patient Safety Foundation at
http://www.npsf.org/
NDNQI at
http://pressganey.com/ourSolutions/performance
-and-advanced-analytics/clinical-business
-performance/nursing-quality-ndnqi
QSEN Institute at
http://qsen.org/
The Joint Commission at
http://www.jointcommission.org/facts_about_joint
_commission_accreditation_standards/

those who actually do the work (Deming, 1982, 1986).
Deming contended that the model can be applied any-
where, including service industries. Nursing leaders at all
levels of the organization can apply the principles in their
quest to implement quality care. The more  pervasive the
quality culture in the organization, the easier the model
application becomes. The stronger and more visible lead-
ership is in its  support for quality, the more rapidly a qual-
ity culture transformation can be implemented.
The 14 Points for Management
Following is a brief description of each of Deming’s (1982,
1986) 14 Points of Management:
1. Create constancy of purpose for improvement of product
and service. Innovation is the foundation for the fu-
ture. It requires a belief that there is a future and an
unshakable commitment to quality and productivity.
Resources must be put into  education and research so
we can constantly improve. The aim is to meet our
mission and serve our customers, because otherwise we
will not stay in business. We must address day-to-day
problems without getting stuck in them. Nurse man-
agers must plan their resources, energy, and time to
deal with the future; work better, not harder, to plan
new services. Meeting our customers’ needs, and
training and retraining personnel, will help deal with
required change.
2. Adopt the new philosophy. Do not accept existing levels
of mistakes or staﬀ members who are not adequately
prepared to perform. Become the change agent who
meets the challenge. Propose, develop, and implement
improvements in systems and services.
3. Cease dependence on mass inspection. The inspection
stage is too late to improve quality. Quality comes
from improvement in production processes. Tools,
such as 100 percent case review, will not improve 
care, are time-consuming, and require resources 
that could be better spent in improving design or 
systems. Measuring incomplete records, medication
errors, or service delays, in and of themselves, will 
not improve the delivery of care.
4. End the practice of awarding business on the basis of
price tag alone. The nurse manager has a responsibil-
ity to include total cost when recommending the
purchase of goods or services. This includes not
only the “up-front” price but also the cost of dispos-
ables and maintenance, amount of vendor support
provided, ease of training in use, labor costs, and
cross-functional use. It is a managerial responsibility
to make well-prepared, comprehensive recommen-
dations to the executive team. Deming believes that
limiting the suppliers we deal with and establishing
long-term relationships with vendors creates inter-
dependency, which assists in the achievement of
quality.
5. Improve constantly and forever the system of produc-
tion and service. Quality must be built and incorpo-
rated during the design phase in order to avoid
costly rework. Teamwork is essential in this process,
especially in service industries such as healthcare, in
which we rely on interdependent, cross-disciplinary
teams to deliver the care that is our product. As our
customers’ needs and available resources change, we
are obliged to improve existing systems. Reductions
in length of stay, shifts in delivery of care along the
continuum, and changing demographics all require
us to seek opportunities to “do it better.” It is no
longer acceptable to think, “We always did it this
way and it worked.”
6. Institute training. Learning must be lifelong and per-
vasive. The principles of adult learning, and an appre-
ciation for the fact that diﬀerent people learn by
diﬀerent methods, apply at all layers of the organiza-
tion, regardless of length of employment. All must un-
derstand the institution’s mission, values, customer
needs, and expectations. What the assignment is, what
acceptable work is, and how we prepare people all
must be deﬁned. For the manager, this includes
knowing which processes are assigned and under-
standing variation in these processes. We must be-
come learning organizations.
7. Adopt and institute leadership. The job of  management
includes leadership—namely, vision and communica-
tion of that vision—not just supervision. The assign-
ment is to work on quality of service, designing 
for quality and  delivering an actual product. The man-
ager must understand the work supervised and must
remove barriers that prevent the staﬀ members from
doing their work.
8. Drive out fear. Fear of reprisal, fear of admitting
mistakes, fear of not having necessary new knowl-
edge, and fear of not meeting deadlines or quotas
interfere with seeing opportunities for improve-
ment. Errors, complaints, and areas that appear 
218
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
BOX 13.2
Deming’s 14 Points
1. Create constancy of purpose for improvement of
product and service.
2. Adopt the new philosophy.
3. Cease dependence on mass inspection.
4. End the practice of awarding business on the basis
of price tag alone.
5. Improve constantly and forever the system of 
production and service.
6. Institute training.
7. Adopt and institute leadership.
8. Drive out fear.
9. Break down barriers between staﬀ areas.
10. Eliminate slogans and targets in the workplace
that urge increased productivity.
11. Eliminate numerical quotas for the workplace 
and management.
12. Remove barriers that rob people of pride in 
workmanship.
13. Encourage education and self-improvement for
everyone.
14. Take action to accomplish the transformation.
Source: Reprinted from Out of the crisis by W. Edwards Deming by
permission of the W. Edwards Deming Institute®. Copyright 1986
by The W. Edwards Deming Institute®.

out of control must be studied and analyzed for
opportunities to improve.
9. Break down barriers between staff areas. This point
has proved especially difficult in healthcare, where
the struggle to establish distinct professional do-
mains fostered accountability, review, and discipli-
nary actions within professions. The emergence of
matrix organizations, patient care departments, use
of product- or service-line teams, cross-training,
and decentralization of services will assist in the im-
plementation of patient care teams focused on the
patient rather than the professional. Simultane-
ously, this will create a new challenge to ensure that
no one can hide behind or dominate the team. All
professional groups must be held accountable for
their professional practice and for quality in service
delivery.
10. Eliminate slogans and targets in the workplace that
urge increased productivity. The assumption that
one can improve quality and productivity by trying
harder does not take into account that most prob-
lems come from systems rather than individuals.
The role of management is to improve the system
with the results of sound statistical methods.
11. Eliminate numerical quotas for the workforce and
management. Quotas assume that the target is cor-
rect, not too high or too low, and that all can attain
them. They have a negative eﬀect on pride in work-
manship. Productivity should be studied, analyzed,
and understood. Everyone should know what to do
and how to do it. A sustained requirement for all to
participate in setting goals and  ﬁguring out how to
reach them is needed.
12. Remove barriers that rob people of pride in workman-
ship. Make clear what the job is and what the ex-
pectations are. Improving the system to make 
it easier for people to work well will help them 
invest in the organization, reducing turnover and
absenteeism.
13. Encourage education and self-improvement for every-
one. Study and development should not focus only
on the immediate needs of the organization or de-
partment. Develop the organization and its members
for the future as well as for the present.
14. Take action to accomplish the transformation. The
leaders must adopt the new philosophy with 
pride. It must be explained often and well to a 
critical number of individuals. Everyone in the 
organization must be asked to participate. This 
requires substantial and sustained commitment
and energy.
Obstacles to Quality Transformation
Deming (1982, 1986) also recognized obstacles to the
transformation:
●Desire to achieve instant results by hiring a 
consultant
●Supposition that solving problems creates
 transformation
●Belief that one can simply transfer systems from 
another organization
●Belief that the quality department takes care of 
quality
●Belief that your problems are different
●Poor understanding of statistical methods
Deming (1982, 1986) referred to more serious blocks
as “deadly diseases” because of their severity and resistance
to eradication:
●Lack of constancy of purpose
●Emphasis on short-term profits
●Evaluation of performance without long-term 
improvement in mind
●Mobility of management
●Management by numbers only
When considering applying Deming’s principles for
transformation, the nurse has to acknowledge realities
in the organization. It may be necessary to maintain an-
nual performance review, existing merit systems, strict
organizational and professional hierarchies, and a focus
on monthly budget fluctuations. Nevertheless, the gen-
eral principles of constancy of purpose, focus on im-
provement, creating a learning environment, reducing
fear, and removing barriers to pride in workmanship can
be adopted by anyone in any setting.
Juran Trilogy
Deming offers a framework for how to transform any or-
ganization by incorporating quality, but the Juran Trilogy
focuses on the tools that organizations can use while doing
the work. The two models are complementary and are
often used together.
Joseph Juran (1989) defines quality as “fitness for use.”
This definition assumes both freedom from defects and
presence of the multiple elements required to meet the
total needs of a customer. The freedom from defect does
not guarantee that this is the product the customer wants.
The patient assumes we can deliver care without errors.
Waiting time, ease of access, and cleanliness may be crucial
factors in determining whether a patient chooses a partic-
ular provider or urgent care center. Patients may opt to
seek urgent care services in freestanding facilities with
shorter wait times or diagnostic mammographies in 
zen-like women’s health centers.
The Juran Trilogy utilizes three managerial processes:
planning, control, and improvement (Box 13.3). The tril-
ogy’s proposed procedural steps and tools are unique.
Quality Planning
Planning for programs or services requires that quality is
built into them. This stage of quality planning follows
five distinct steps:
1. Determine who the customers of the program or
service are. They can be external customers, 
internal customers, or both. In healthcare, patients,
families, and payers are all external customers. 
Departments and providers are internal customers
of one another. Nursing receives services from 
dietary or medical records, and those departments 
in turn are customers of nursing. Independent
CHAPTER 13 Quality and Safety in Healthcare     ●
219

 medical staff members are often considered 
both internal and external customers because of
their ability to choose the institution and their 
influence and provision of services within the 
institution.
2. Determine the customers’ needs. Surveys, focus
groups, individual patient interviews, complaint re-
views, and market analysis can be used to determine
what our customers want.
3. Develop product features that respond to the cus-
tomer’s needs. Consider oﬀering services outside 
traditional business hours. Weekend day surgery, 
diagnostic procedures early and late in the day, and
respite care are but a few examples.
4. Develop processes that are able to produce those 
product features.
5. Transfer the resulting plans to the implementation
team.
For example, while teaching breast self-examination
at a customer-friendly breast clinic, a nurse hears patients
express concerns about the time it takes to receive
 mammography results. In response to complaints, the
nurse, working with the department and a local women’s
group, initiates a formal survey of women who currently
use the center and women who do not. The survey re-
veals that women want to receive test results within
24 hours and to be able to refer themselves for mammog-
raphy. As a result, the services at the center are redesigned
to incorporate these features. The clinic applies for and
obtains an expanded license for self-referral. It institutes
policies, procedures, and standards to ensure that the im-
proved services are implemented and monitored.
Quality Control
The three steps of quality control involve:
1. Evaluating actual quality performance. This requires
knowledge of statistical methods of measurement and
analysis.
2. Comparing actual performance with quality goals.
3. Acting on the diﬀerence. This assumes understanding
of common and special cause variation. Variation is
part of any process. Constant reaction to it may desta-
bilize an otherwise stable process.
220
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
BOX 13.3
Juran Trilogy
A. Quality Planning
1. Determine who the customers are.
2. Determine the needs of the customer.
3. Develop product features that respond to the customer’s needs.
4. Develop processes that are able to produce these product features.
5. Transfer the resulting plans to the operating forces.
B. Quality Control
1. Evaluate actual quality performance.
2. Compare actual performance to quality goals.
3. Act on the diﬀerence.
C. Quality Improvement
1. Establish an infrastructure.
2. Identify needs for improvement.
3. Establish project teams for each project.
4. Provide the teams with resources, motivation, and training.
Source: Adapted with the permission of The Free Press, a division of Simon & Schuster Adult Publishing Group, from Juran, J. M. (1989). Juran on
leadership for quality. New York: The Free Press, © 1988 by The Juran Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.
Example
1. Measure the number of women who underwent
mammography and received their results within 
24 hours.
2. Compare the number to the agreed-upon
 benchmark.
3. Analyze the discrepancies for special cause  variation
and develop an improvement plan.
Quality Improvement
Raising performance to unprecedented levels or quality
improvement requires four steps:
1. Establishing the infrastructure needed to secure
ongoing quality improvement. The infrastructure,
which may comprise a quality council, departmental
teams, and assigned roles, ensures that quality
improvement is part of the way business is done.
2. Identifying speciﬁc needs for improvement. Data
from quality control, feedback from customers,
and goals of the organization help determine
what needs to be improved and what needs to be 
prioritized.
3. Establishing a project team for each project. Responsi-
bility must be deﬁned clearly. This includes the objec-
tive for improvement and  measures of success.
4. Providing resources, motivation, and training for the
teams to diagnose causes of lesser quality, stimulate 
a remedy, and establish controls to hold the gains in
improvements.

Juran’s work has shown that most of the potential for
eliminating errors and improving the system does not lie
in changing workers. The 85/15, rule as it is now com-
monly referred to, states that 85 percent of problems can
be corrected only by changing systems.
Both Deming and Juran have provided the foundation
for today’s quality movement in industry and in health-
care. The national initiatives aimed at both quality and
safety have helped in the transition from quality assurance
to quality improvement.
Monitoring and Evaluation as a
Goal of Accreditation
The Joint Commission takes the position that improve-
ment requires effective monitoring and that effective mon-
itoring requires good indicators. Quality assurance evolved
into quality improvement largely as a result of this posi-
tion. The monitoring and evaluation process has been re-
vised over time but remains part of the foundation on
which many of quality activities are based. The process re-
quires identifying the most important aspects of care for a
particular organization or division, selecting indicators that
reflect these aspects, taking opportunities to improve care,
taking action, and evaluating the effectiveness of that ac-
tion. Doing the right thing includes efficacy and appro-
priateness. Doing it well involves availability, timeliness,
effectiveness, continuity, safety, efficiency, and providing
services with respect and caring.
You may have been involved in survey visits at your
agency. The Joint Commission (2013a) describes the ac-
creditation process as designed to help organizations
strengthen community confidence in the quality and
safety of care, treatment, and services and to organize and
strengthen patient safety efforts (p. 1). The process is de-
signed to monitor compliance with standards and ongoing
quality improvement. The leaders in the organization are
responsible for fostering quality improvement and setting
priorities for assessment and improvement. Leaders are de-
fined as the leadership of the board; the executive team,
including the nurse executive; the leaders of the medical
staff; and department directors. Nurse managers and other
leaders in the nursing staff have direct responsibility for
quality. 
The unique character of the organization and the scope
of services must be viewed consistently by all to be clear
about who patients are and what these patients need. Key
functions in the organization warrant ongoing monitoring
and prioritization. The key function in outpatient areas
are often very different from those in bedded units, as are
the ones from services focusing on prevention, action, or
chronic illness. Timeliness as an aspect of care may vary
based on the scope of service and aspects of care of a par-
ticular service. Interdisciplinary teams develop and select
indicators for those aspects of care that have been priori-
tized. As an example, turnaround time for laboratory re-
sults could be an indicator selected to reflect timeliness in
an emergency department. Further, the team determines
at what level and time evaluations will be triggered. Iden-
tifying thresholds that are not met after quarterly reviews
is an example of how to implement evaluation. The review
of every unexpected return of a patient to the surgical suite
within 24 hours after surgery may be another.
Defining data sources and methodology for col lection,
the actual data collection, and organization all are parts of
this process. Once it is determined that  further evaluation
is needed, other feedback may be taken into consideration.
Intensive evaluation should be performed by teams. Ac-
tions for improvement are identified and include changes
in the system, education, designation of clear authority
and accountability, and development of standards. These
actions must undergo ongoing evaluation for effectiveness.
In addition to this intensive analysis of the processes
of the organization, attention to and report of national 
accountability measures is now required as part of the ac-
creditation process. The collection of national information
on core measures of performance began in 2002. Collab-
oration on these core measures with other national groups
concerned with quality and safety led to the establishment
of national quality measures as accountability measures.
The Joint Commission (2014b) defines these accounta-
bility measures as “quality measures that meet four criteria
designed to produce the greatest positive impact on patient
outcomes when hospitals demonstrate improvement” 
(p. 1). The four criteria for these accountability measures
are as follows:
1. Are evidence based
2. Have proximity, in that the care is connected to the
patient outcome
3. Accurately measure the provision of care
4. Have little or no adverse consequences (Joint 
Commission, 2014b, p. 1) 
These accountability measures are used to compare in-
stitutions and to present a national vision on quality of pa-
tient care. Consumers can readily check the quality reports
of healthcare organizations in their community and region
on these measures at http://qualitycheck.org. In the past
years, the focus from within departments to processes, the
level of accountability, the understanding and application
of statistical methodologies, the role of leadership, and
accoun tability to the public have evolved significantly. 
CHAPTER 13 Quality and Safety in Healthcare     ●
221
Example
The special cause variation for the delay in result re-
porting of the mammographies appears to be linked to
the day of the week (Friday) and the shift (evening).
The radiology nursing staﬀ is drastically reduced on
Saturdays with only interventional radiology nursing
staﬀ covering for the mammography service. After
training this staﬀ regarding the necessary skills about
results reporting, you resume measuring and see a
marked improvement.
O N L I NE  C ONSULT  
The W. Edwards Deming Institute at 
http://deming.org
Juran: The Source for Quality at 
http://www.juran.com

Organizational leaders can no longer delegate respon -
sibility to the quality department. Hiding behind profes-
sional or departmental boundaries is not acceptable.
Leaders of boards, executive and management teams, and
the medical staff are all being held accountable for delivery
of quality care and for participation in the transformation
of the healthcare system. The focus is on continuous qual-
ity improvement and safety.
The right thing includes efficacy and
appropriateness. Doing it well involves 
availability, timeliness, effectiveness, 
continuity, safety, efficiency, and providing 
services with respect and caring.
CONTINUOUS QUALITY
IMPROVEMENT IN
HEALTHCARE
Healthcare organizations strive to embed quality in every
service they provide. Their success lies in their ability to
incorporate quality as a key component of their strategic
mission and to implement a model by which they contin-
ually evaluate and improve quality.
Quality as Strategy
The guiding members of any organization are responsible
for developing the mission, vision, and core strategies cho-
sen to achieve the vision. Not every business will choose
quality as a strategy. Instituting competitive pricing, in-
stilling a customer service focus, promoting access to the
product, and creating a niche market are all examples of
different strategies. It is not accidental that agencies ac-
credited by the Joint Commission are required to include
a quality plan in their strategic plan. To survive and thrive
requires a formal, well-thought-out approach with a focus
on the communities we serve.
“Doing the right things right” means that we have
identified the “right things.” They will vary according to
the needs of the particular community and the mission
and vision of the organization. Not every hospital can or
should serve all the healthcare needs of its community.
Such needs may be met better by other community agen-
cies or tertiary care centers. Once the healthcare agency
defines what the “right things” are, or what the scope of its
services is, it must design quality into the structures and
processes, monitor and analyze performance, and identify
opportunities for improvement in order to ensure that the
right things are “done right” and that the desired outcomes
result.
A successful strategic plan also requires identifi cation
of needed core competencies and methods to address ex-
isting gaps. Core competencies define the organizational
capabilities as well as the subsequent employee competen-
cies needed to achieve the vision through utilization of the
strategic plan. Core com petencies are not stagnant; they
change with the organization’s strategies. The recruitment,
retention, development, and performance management 
of everyone working in or for the organization plays a 
key role. Creating a learning organization, in which skill
development is dynamic, is strategic in and of itself. Un-
derstanding how to build quality and safety into structures
and processes, knowing the tools and measures to be uti-
lized, knowing how to monitor and analyze performance,
and understanding team process, group dynamics, and im-
provement methods all require learning, which must be
included in the organizational development strategies.
Quality is everyone’s responsibility. It is a business
strategy, or centralized philosophy, with accountability 
at every service level. Because quality is everyone’s job,
everyone must be educated and must demonstrate com-
petence about quality—the leadership, the providers, and
the customers.
Total Quality Management and
Continuous Quality Improvement
The terms total quality management (TQM) and con-
tinuous quality improvement (CQI) have been used in-
terchangeably. TQM is mostly linked with industrial
models, whereas CQI has received wide acceptance in
healthcare. Because the underpinnings of the two terms
are the same, CQI is used throughout the remainder of
the chapter.
The basic concepts of CQI are that quality improve-
ment is an ongoing process that utilizes proactive and 
reactive strategies. The process goes beyond meeting pre-
established goals or catching up to the competition; rather,
it involves exceeding expectations and creating new op-
portunities. Improvements can be large-scale or incremen-
tal. Quality is defined as satisfying the needs of external
and internal customers, including anticipating developing
needs and introducing new services. Teamwork is the 
underlying framework. Improvement activities and meas-
urement are always linked, because without measurement
we cannot be sure that improvement has occurred. 
Additionally, measurement keeps teams focused on
concrete opportunities and provides feedback regarding
which core strategies helped achieve the vision and mission
of the organization. Choosing measures to analyze internal
trends may precede the need for external comparisons.
Benchmarking, the process of comparing with the best
of the industry, requires understanding of statistical meth-
ods, including the validity and reliability of the tools 
and measures used in both organizations, understanding 
systems variation, and sampling methods.
Transition from Quality Assurance
to Continuous Quality Improvement
The traditional model of quality assurance (QA)—
relying on inspection to catch problems and correcting in-
dividual performances—has already evolved in many seg-
ments of the healthcare industry. The expectation of
perfection is gone, but the search for safety and excellence
is essential.
To assume that the journey through quality assurance
was wasted fails to recognize that many of the tools used
in quality assurance are still used in quality improvement,
and the journey helped define what  constitutes quality
care. There are many differences, however. CQI is widely
recognized as being broader in scope, involving the 
222
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

leadership and many more people, and blurring bound-
aries. The Joint Commission uses the term performance
improvement (PI) to integrate the concepts and activities
of both QA and CQI. The PI standards support the role
of leadership in priority setting and systems development,
data collection, and data analysis to identify trends, pat-
terns, and opportunities for improvement.
It is important to understand that the evaluation of in-
dividual performance must continue. Standards for hiring
competent team members are more important than ever.
Results of individual performance should be looked at for
trends across shifts, units, and departments. Findings can
be used for staff and leadership development. Individual
competence remains a professional obligation. The shift
in focus from individual to team does not change our stan-
dards or our accountability to those we serve. Department-
or unit-based quality programs remain valuable and
should not be demolished. They are an important vehicle
for teaching the concepts of CQI and provide needed
mechanisms for ongoing measurement and application of
standards. They also recognize that much improvement
does not require large teams but can occur at the unit level.
Risk management evaluates the legal standards and
their application to the delivery of care, the environment
of care, and other services and functions. As with quality
assurance, it relies on inspection; however, the focus is on
how to protect the assets of the organization against lia-
bility. Table 13.1 highlights the differences and similarities
between quality improvement, quality assurance, and risk
management.
An example of how the same problem may be ap-
proached differently with the three approaches is in deal-
ing with a medication error. In the environment of quality
improvement, the investigation will search for what system
weaknesses may have contributed to the error: Is the dis-
pensing system weak? Are high-risk medications kept sep-
arate? and so on. At the unit level, quality assurance may
investigate the individual nurse’s competencies and per-
formance. In the risk management arena, the focus may
be on documentation problems that could be discoverable
in court in a malpractice claim.
Putting a Continuous Quality
Improvement Structure in Place
It is now widely accepted that quality journeys are lengthy
and costly. They require a well-developed structure and
plan to connect the vision with the implementation. Be-
cause CQI is, first and foremost, a management philoso-
phy, the leaders must be competent in its principles and
methodologies.
The actual mechanisms of setting up the program are
beyond the scope of this chapter. Creating a structure
usually involves a quality council and designation of 
a CQI coach. The coach functions as the facilitator, 
educator, and expert in tools and techniques. For organ-
izations seeking Joint Commission accreditation, well-
established guidelines and widely used tools are readily
available. The function of the council is to create inte-
gration, prioritize efforts, allocate resources, develop a
learning organization, and charter cross-functional
teams. The journey is usually expected to take between
three and five years, depending on the resources avail-
able and the readiness for change.
Leaders and followers alike need to internalize the new
beliefs and learn to use the new techniques and tools.
Many organizations fail in the quest to implement the new
quality organization because the efforts are all focused on
the beginning of the journey. Just-in-time learning, the
process of acquiring knowledge and skills as they are
needed and used, tends to eliminate the feeling that CQI
may be another managerial gimmick gone awry.
Another common mistake is the failure to prioritize ef-
forts. Improvement activities require resources and should
be linked to strategic objectives, serious quality and safety
concerns, or identified needs. Quality costs money, espe-
cially in the time and effort of human resources, and few
organizations can afford to attempt to improve on all
CHAPTER 13 Quality and Safety in Healthcare     ●
223
TABLE 13.1
Comparing Quality Improvement, Quality Assurance, 
and Risk Management
Quality Improvement
Quality Assurance
Risk Management
Broad in scope 
Organizational leadership 
designs and sets priorities
Purpose is improvement
Focus is on customers
Uses problems as opportunities 
for improvement
Focus is on the system as a whole
Based at unit or departmental 
level
Often uses separate department
or committee to design and 
set priorities
Compares against standards
Focus is on the organization
Continuous ongoing monitoring 
identifies problems (inspection)
Focus is on individual 
performance
Often its own, separate department
Looks at legally acceptable level of 
care or service
Purpose is risk reduction
Focus is on preventing loss
Continuous ongoing monitoring 
(inspection)
Focus is on protecting organization’s
assets

fronts at once. However, safety is of primary concern. Ul-
timately leaders, including nursing leaders at the unit, or-
ganizational, and systems level are responsible for setting
priorities and for providing resources that support safety
and quality.
A CALL TO SAFETY
We have seen nursing and healthcare change radically in
recent years with care that must be framed in the context
of safety, evidence-based practice, and patient involve-
ment. This imperative requires acute attention to safety
and a new vision of the culture of healthcare.
Health professions and consumers of healthcare were
alarmed with the release of reports from the Institute of
Medicine (IOM) of the National Academies on the high
incidence of medical errors. There was a definite call to
improve safety to patients, and the IOM continued this
important work identifying rules for healthcare, overall
aims, and core competencies for health professionals. 
Patient safety and effectiveness of outcomes became major
national objectives and directed additional attention to
nursing. Research by the Agency for Healthcare Research
and Quality (AHRQ) has focused on expanding the
knowledge base on how the quality of the healthcare work-
place affected the quality of healthcare provided, especially
in the areas of workload and working conditions, effects
of stress and fatigue, reducing adverse events, and the or-
ganizational climate and culture. Patient outcomes were
now being investigated, along with nursing-sensitive indi-
cators and factors that promote safe and effective practice.
In late 2003, nursing itself was the focus of the IOM in
their report, Keeping Patients Safe: Transforming the Work
Environment of Nurses. The IOM’s Committee on the
Work Environment and Patient Safety provided specific
recommendations to both acute care and long-term care
organizations on issues of management practices, work-
force capability, work design, and the organizational safety
culture (Page, 2004, p. 3). At the same time, another 
report from the IOM, Patient Safety: Achieving a New
Standard of Care, was released with the focus on data stan-
dards for patient safety—i.e., standardized representations
of clinical data important to systems that promote patient
safety or, in essence, a new health information infrastuc-
ture to support safety programs nationally (Committee on
Data Standards for Patient Safety, 2004, p. 40). 
In subsequent years, the IOM investigated health dis-
parities, the role of the government (including Medicare),
rural health, healthcare reimbursement practices, and
mental health conditions among other quality improve-
ment initiatives. Of particular note was a study mandated
by the United States Congress on preventing medication
errors. In July 2006, the IOM report released on Prevent-
ing Medication Errors presented information available on
the incidence of medication errors in acute care settings,
long-term care, and in ambulatory care—including errors
in the homes of consumers—in an effort to develop an
agenda for the nation to reduce preventable errors and 
adverse drug events and enhance medication safety. 
Although the incidence rates were approximated based 
on the data, the report did emphasize that these rates 
were most likely underestimates, based on available and
reportable data and the incidence of adverse events. It 
was reported, however, that at least 25 percent of all harm-
ful adverse drug events are preventable (Aspden et al., 
2006, p. 4). 
Based on the ten rules from the earlier Quality Chasm
report in 2001, the IOM (Aspden et al., 2006) recom-
mended the transformation of the entire system to a pa-
tient-centered, integrated-use system with specific action
agendas to support the consumer-provider partnership for
healthcare organizations; the pharmaceutical, medical 
device, and health information technology industries; 
research on safe medication use; and oversight, regulation,
and payment.
The IOM (Aspden et al., 2006) focused further on
these seven recommendations:
●Consumer empowerment for self-medication
 management
●Improvement and standardization of resources by 
governmental agencies
●Implementation of patient-information and decision-
support technologies nationwide
●Improved labeling, packaging, and distribution, 
including studies on use of samples
●Standards for drug information technologies, includ-
ing design and alert systems
●Funded research on safe and appropriate
medication use across settings, especially on error
prevention
●Adoption of broad practices, technologies, and profes-
sional behaviors focused on safety and error reduction
In the past, errors resulted in incident reports and some-
one being identified as the cause. Such finger-pointing 
at an individual or individuals promotes a  culture of
blame. This culture and associated practices did not gen-
erally yield improvements but, rather, loss of opportunities
to make improvements and, at times, secretive practices.
Consumers, insurers, and the media became concerned for
safety and often questioned too much or too little care and
testing. Systemic issues in the healthcare environment were
now questioned and targeted for improvement. In a report
on Leadership in Healthcare Organizations addressing the
hospital culture and system performance, five key systems
were identified for improving safety and quality of care:
“using data, planning, communicating, changing perform-
ance, and staffing” (Schyve, 2009, p. 19). Further, in a
meta-analysis review of the patient safety literature de-
signed to describe the patient safety “culture,” Sammer,
Lykens, Singh, Mains, and Lackan (2010) identified the
following themes as “subcultures”:
●Leadership
●Teamwork
●Evidence-based practice
●Communication
●Learning
●Just Culture
●Patient-centered care (p. 157)
We have entered the culture of safety, in which the en-
vironment and the entire system is the focus to allow
healthcare providers and consumers to address quality im-
provement. For years, safety investigations in healthcare,
224
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

with the goal of quality improvement, have investigated a
broad range of safety concepts, including information and
applications from the aviation industry in their quest to
make air travel safer. Crew Resource Management (CRM)
is a safety system used by multiple industries in which
human error can have devas tating effects. The Federak Avi-
ation Administration (FAA) defines CRM as “the effective
utilization of all available resources—Hardware, software,
and personnel—to achieve safe, efficient flight operations”
(Driskell and Adams, 1992, p. 8). It is an integrated train-
ing, process improvement, and management system with
roots in aviation but recommended by the Joint Commis-
sion for preventing patient injury. The purpose is to create
a culture of open communication among team members,
to provide a framework for an approach to procedures, es-
pecially in high-risk, highly chaotic environments, that is
standardized, thorough, and routine. The recent reports on
healthcare environments demonstrated the change of focus
from an individual causative agent to an environmental
practice that needed to change. Concerted efforts must now
be collaborative among professionals, governmental agen-
cies, suppliers, educators, and regulators, with the con-
sumer involved in the process. We have moved from a
culture of blaming isolated individuals to a culture of safety,
or a Just Culture. Sammer et al. (2010) have defined a Just
Culture as “a culture that recognizes errors as a system fail-
ure rather than individual failures and, at the same time,
does not shrink from holding individuals accountable for
their actions” (p. 157). Further, in their position paper en-
dorsing the Just Culture concept, the American Nurses As-
sociation (ANA, 2010) stated, “By promoting system
improvements over individual punishment, a Just Culture
in healthcare does much to improve patient safety, reduce
errors, and give nurses and other health care workers a
major stake in the improvement process” (p. 7). The focus
is firmly on safety, positive patient outcomes, evidence-
based practice, and continuous quality improvement. 
Healthcare Safety Initiatives
Ongoing efforts have been mandated to provide a safer
healthcare environment. We have seen the Joint Commis-
sion’s focus on safety and the quality of patient care move
from not only the performance of the entire agency and
system with periodic onsite reviews and annual reports to
the inclusion of safety statistics and annual performance
on specified accountability measures. We have also seen
the implementation of various safety initiatives, including
physician order entry, bar coding, intensivists, and limi-
tations on abbreviations that lead to errors. In 2004, the
Joint Commission (2013c) published the official “DO
NOT USE” list in an effort to further reduce medication
errors from faulty or misinterpreted orders.
As part of the safety movement, annual healthcare
safety goals for the various healthcare agencies have been
specified. For example, the goals for acute care hospitals
include accurate patient identification, improved staff
communication, safe medication practices, using alarms
safely, prevention of infections, identification of patient
safety risks as in suicide prevention, and prevention of mis-
takes in surgery (Joint Commission, 2014e). Evidence-
based practice is a vital component of these goals and the
quest to improve safety.
When an error or adverse event occurs, it is not a matter
of completing an incident report but conducting a careful
analysis of the event. The Joint Commission (2013g) defines
a sentinel event as “an unexpected occurrence involving
death or serious physical or psychological injury, or the risk
thereof . . . [and] signal the need for immediate investigation
and response” (p. 1). (See Box 13.4.) The investigation in
the case of a sentinel event takes the form of a special analysis.
A root cause analysis is an intensive questioning into the
cause of a problem, with the goals of providing corrective ac-
tion, eliminating the problem from recurrence, and instilling
quality improvements. This type of intensive analysis con-
siders the entire system, not just individuals. It considers
what happened, why it happened, and the causative factors,
including factors relating to the following:
●Human beings, including communication, leadership,
and management practices
CHAPTER 13 Quality and Safety in Healthcare     ●
225
O N L I NE  C ONSULT  
The Joint Commission: Do Not Use List at 
http://www.jointcommission.org/about_us
/patient_safety_fact_sheets.aspx
ON LIN E CON SULT 
The Joint Commission: National Patient Safety
Goals at
http://www.jointcommission.org/standards
_information/npsgs.aspx
BOX 13.4
Types of Reportable Sentinel Events
in Hospitals (Joint Commission, 2013g)
●An unanticipated death or major permanent loss of
function not related to the natural course of the 
patient’s illness or underlying condition
●Suicide of any patient receiving care in a staﬀed, 
24-hour setting within 72 hours of discharge 
●Discharge of infant to the wrong family
●Abduction of any patient receiving care, treatment,
and services 
●Hemolytic transfusion reaction from blood group
incompatibilities
●Invasive procedure, including surgery, on the
wrong patient, at the wrong site, or using the
wrong procedure 
●Prolonged ﬂuoroscopy
●Rape, assault (leading to permanent loss of function),
or homicide of any patient receiving care or of a staﬀ
member, licensed independent practitioner, visitor,
or vendor while on site at the healthcare organization
●Severe neonatal hyperbilirubinemia
●Unanticipated death of a full-term infant
●Unintended retention of a foreign body in a patient
after surgery or other invasive procedures

●Equipment, both in terms of proper operation and as
contributor to the problem
●Environment, especially those that can be controlled
To assist in the process, special teams are involved, soft-
ware and consultants may be used, and forms and matrices
to assist in the analysis are available on the Joint Commis-
sion Web site. The result is the development of an action
plan to prevent recurrence of the sentinel event. In addi-
tion, the Joint Commission (2013g) has policies and pro-
cedures for sentinel events and encourages organizations
to report sentinel events and the results of the root cause
analysis to be shared with other organizations and inter-
ested parties in a special newsletter alert.
Notice that the effort is on problem-solving and find-
ing solutions rather than blaming individuals. Recall that
a system has inputs, throughputs, and outputs. In this
case, the sentinel event was an output from the system as
an adverse event. The people involved, the processes that
took place, and the equipment and environmental factors
are scrutinized. However, the healthcare professionals are
still accountable for actions and decisions.
The Joint Commission is one of many organizations
that actively promote patient safety. ANA has long focused
on safety and quality improvement for the profession 
and for consumers. ANA’s National Center for Nursing
Quality (NCNQ®) addresses both the safety and quality
of nursing care for patients and the quality of the nurses’
work environments. As described, in the mid 1990s, as
part of a safety and quality initiative, ANA began research
on nursing-sensitive indicators that looks at care and pa-
tient outcomes most affected by nursing care. A database
has been developed and continues to be tested nationwide
on these nursing-sensitive indicators. ANA (2006) has also
developed a position paper on the association between pa-
tient safety and healthy nursing work hours to ensure that
nurses have adequate resources especially in terms of
scheduling, sufficient compensation, and appropriate
staffing.
A notable leader for quality and safety in healthcare has
been the Leapfrog group, formally established after the
IOM report on patient safety. This organization is made
up of major corporate leaders and employers (such as
Aetna, Dow Chemical, FedEx, Toyota, Verizon, and
many others) who want the most for their employees, in
terms of both safety and purchasing power. They reward
best practices and publish “report cards” on provider per-
formance. The Leapfrog Group (2014) has identified four
basic quality practices, called “leaps,” based on the safety
research:
●Computerized physician order entry (CPOE) systems
●Staffing ICUs with intensivists
●Referrals to hospitals with the best results for treating
certain high-risk conditions
●Implementation of the Leapfrog Safe Practices, en-
dorsed by the National Quality Forum (NQF)
Hospitals are scored on their safety records and the imple-
mentation of these proven safe practices. The major cor-
porate members are also purchasers for healthcare, and
they want the best for their purchasing power.
The NQF has endorsed selected safe practices in
healthcare as they address the quality of healthcare in the
nation. With a broader composition of both public and
private partners, including organizations and national,
state, and local governmental agencies, the NQF (2014)
describes its mission to lead “national collaboration to im-
prove health and healthcare quality through measure-
ment” (p. 1). Current topics of focus include affordable
care, effective communication and care coordination,
health and well-being, patient safety, person- and family-
centered care, and prevention and treatment of cardiovas-
cular disease (NQF, 2014).
The Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI) is a
not-for-profit organization focused on patient safety and
quality improvement worldwide. This organization strives
to build awareness through education, collaborative im-
provement, and system redesign to promote quality im-
provement for worldwide healthcare community. It
focuses on best practices and sharing the information and
unifying the healthcare industry on quality improvement.
The IHI (2014) identifies its aims to “improve health and
health care worldwide” (p. 1).
Many more organizations, groups, and individuals are
actively pursuing patient safety at the local, state, national,
and international levels. The few that have been described
here will lead to other collaborations and initiatives 
focused on the quality and safety in healthcare.
TOOLS AND TECHNIQUES
USED IN QUALITY
IMPROVEMENT
An entire body of knowledge has been created in the area
of valid techniques to be used for improving quality. In-
novation requires team techniques such as brainstorming,
boarding, decision matrices, multi-voting, management of
conflict, and quality communication.
Process Teams
Not all improvement projects require a process team. If
the project or problem crosses functions and disciplines
226
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
ON LIN E CON SULT 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality at 
http://www.ahrq.gov/qual/
American Nurses Association at
http://www.nursingworld.org/MainMenu
Categories/ThePracticeofProfessionalNursing
/PatientSafetyQuality
Institute for Healthcare Improvement at 
http://www.ihi.org/ihi
Joint Commission at 
http://www.jointcommission.org
Leapfrog Group at 
http://www.leapfroggroup.org
National Patient Safety Foundation at 
http://www.npsf.org
National Quality Forum at 
http://www.qualityforum.org

and cannot be resolved in the day-to-day operations,
a process team is usually necessary. These “project” teams
focus on improving or developing specific processes and
come together to achieve a specific goal, such as analyzing
variation, and have a beginning and an end. Process teams
must be chosen carefully to  represent those involved in 
or affected by the process. If the team is very large, the
project chosen may be too big and may have to be broken
into steps.
How, then, does one choose an improvement project?
Listen to your customers. Repeated complaints or requests
for a particular service may require action. Suppose the
evening charge nurse in a nonsectarian hospital receives
ongoing requests for pastoral services from patients and
their families. Each request requires multiple telephone
calls and often results in delays. The nurse recognizes that
the nursing department cannot address this problem
alone. It involves not only the hospital but also the com-
munity. The nurse develops a proposal for a process team.
Other methods for selecting or recognizing processes 
to be improved include asking the people in the process,
reviewing existing reports, and recognizing excess com-
plexity or long delays.
Process teams require resources. Because resource allo-
cation is a leadership function, many organizations require
the development of a proposal and subsequent approval
by the quality council. All teams should develop an op-
portunity statement (what is wrong or needs improving),
define the expected output of the project, and include
measures of success. Members of the team must include,
at a minimum, a team leader who is invested in the
process, a facilitator who brings CQI skills, and a recorder
or minute taker. Depending on the skills and information
systems available, analytical and statistical support may be
necessary.
Because process teams are groups, they will need to go
through the stages of group development—forming,
storming, norming, performing, adjourning. (Refer to
Chapter 8 on Working with Groups.) All teams must ma-
ture to perform. It is important to recognize that anxiety,
testing of boundaries, competition for control, and mini-
mal completion of work are all part of the early stages.
Early cohesiveness and work do not start until the norm-
ing stage. Real performance and “team” feeling belong to
the performing step. Many teams also struggle with the
adjourning phase— namely, meeting the final deadlines
and dissolving the group.
The process team must adopt a model or method for
doing its work. This model is usually organization-wide.
There is value in choosing one model, because it minimizes
relearning and allows different teams to communicate 
easily. Some common models are the Juran (1989) quality
improvement project model and Deming’s (1982, 1986)
PDCA (Plan-Do-Check-Act) cycle.
Quality Improvement Tools
Quality improvement (QI) tools can usually be divided
into four categories, those used for:
●Process description
●Data collection
●Data analysis
●Process improvement
Many excellent texts provide further assistance in this
area. The ultimate purpose of all the QI tools is to have
data that can be used and translated into information.
The novice in QI tools and techniques may need 
assistance from the CQI coach or further study of these
techniques.
Process Description Tools
One tool for process description is the flow chart, which
describes the process in detail, from beginning to end, as
accurately as possible. It is a picture of the movement of
information, people, or materials. The top-down flow
chart (Figure 13.1) takes the major steps in the process,
writes them in a horizontal sequence, and illustrates the
substeps to be taken under each step. Flow charts show
the rework that gets done, the number of substeps or com-
plexity in each area, the number of handoffs between in-
dividuals and departments, and when subteams need to
be formed from a particular process team. A flow chart
that is too detailed makes it difficult to focus and impedes
progress or action.
The cause-and-effect diagram (Figure 13.2), also
called the fishbone or Ishikawa diagram, helps identify 
the root causes of a problem. Typical categories are 
equipment, personnel, method, materials, and environ-
ment. The main arrow points toward the problem or 
CHAPTER 13 Quality and Safety in Healthcare     ●
227
ON LIN E CON SULT 
The PDCA cycle at 
http://www.isixsigma.com/dictionary/deming
-cycle-pdca/
http://asq.org/learn-about-quality/project
-planning-tools/overview/pdca-cycle.html
Substeps
STEP 1
Substeps
STEP 2
Substeps
STEP 3
Substeps
STEP 4
Figure 13.1 Top-down flow chart.

desired result. It is important to remember that cause-and-
effect diagrams point only toward possible causes, and
more data must be collected to identify the root causes.
Cause-and-effect diagrams are most effective after the
process has been described, because flow charts help iden-
tify what must be included in the diagram.
Tools for Data Collection
Tools for data collection include asking the right ques-
tions, and using, among other things, data sheets, check
sheets, surveys, focus groups, and interviews. Often, data
are collected that turn out to be useless because the ques-
tion asked was wrong, too broad, or poorly formulated.
Data sheets and check sheets are both used to record data
(Figure 13.3). They differ in that data sheets need further
analysis. Ordinarily, a data sheet is completed for each oc-
currence or event in the study. The data are subsequently
aggregated and then sorted according to categories of 
interest.
Check sheets are used to record multiple events
by simply putting a mark in the appropriate box. The
best check sheets are those that are easy to use, do not
require much interpretation, and visually display the
data. An example in which either tool could be used
is the study of the delivery time of medications to a pa-
tient care unit. With data sheets, every time a medica-
tion is taken from the pharmacy, the runner uses a new
data sheet. At the end of the study, all the sheets are
gathered and analyzed. With the check sheet, the runner
could calculate the time it took to deliver the drug and
check the appropriate time box on a check sheet. Both
data sheets and check sheets may be either in hard or
electronic copy.
There are obvious advantages and disadvantages to
both tools. Data sheets tend to be more accurate because
only one event is recorded on each. Check sheets quickly
display trends as they occur without requiring a lengthy
analysis. Data sheets and check sheets should be tested be-
fore project-wide work is undertaken, so that improve-
ments can be made to ensure that only useful data are
collected.
Surveys are a tool for obtaining input from large
groups. The response rate and the specificity of the ques-
tions affect the usefulness and quality of the information
obtained. Focus groups and individual interviews are
time-consuming and expensive and may require the use
of experienced interviewers, but they enable one to ask
open-ended questions and probe deeper, if necessary.
Data Analysis Tools
Tools for data analysis include those that compare
 categories. Bar and pie charts and the Pareto diagram 
(Figure 13.4), for example, analyze data within a category,
such as numerical and graphic summaries. The Pareto
principle, sometimes called the 80/20 rule, was applied to
management by Juran. It identifies the few sources of
problems that contribute most to the outcome. By ranking
problems on a bar graph in descending order, from left to
right, Pareto diagrams focus attention on the most com-
mon problems and often build consensus about where to
concentrate attention and effort.
Analysis of a particular category can include numerical
summaries such as average, median, mode, and standard
deviation. Graphic summaries—line graphs, histograms,
scatter diagrams, and control charts—are especially valu-
able for working in diverse groups. They provide pictorial
display of data, possible analysis and interpretation of pat-
terns, relationships between variables, and the ability to
distinguish between common and special cause variation.
Improvement Activities
Criteria-based information and tools are essential in evi-
dence-based practice, performance improvement, and 
patient safety initiatives. The AHRQ launched its Web
site in 2003 as a repository of practical, ready-to-use tools
for assessing, measuring, and improving the quality and
safety of healthcare.
DEVELOPING A
MEASUREMENT PROGRAM
As previously mentioned, improvement and measurement
or evaluation are linked. Measurement of the capability
of the organization, or its competence, determines the or-
ganization’s ability to provide, and competence in pro-
viding, quality and safe care. Measurement of outcome
determines whether the process yielded favorable results.
For example, the Breast Care Clinic used as an earlier 
228
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
Equipment
Method
Materials
Environment
Problem
Personnel
Figure 13.2 Cause-and-effect 
diagram.
ON LIN E CON SULT 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality:
Health IT Tools and Resources at 
http://healthit.ahrq.gov/health-it-tools-and
-resources

CHAPTER 13 Quality and Safety in Healthcare     ●
229
AVERAGE DELIVERY TIME
AVERAGE DELIVERY TIME
DATA SHEET
CHECKSHEET 
A
B
Time you left the department_______________
Time you deliveredthe item ________________
Delay - YES - NO
Time you left the department_______________
_____________________________________
_____________________________________
_____________________________________
1
#
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 Minutes 
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Figure 13.3 Average delivery time (A) data sheet and (B) check sheet.
example will not only focus its review on the ability to re-
port examination results within 24 hours and on whether
there is a system in place allowing women to self-refer for
mammography, it will also measure whether these out-
comes actually occur.
Selecting Indicators for
Measurement
Indicators are events that are measured. They are
 categorized by type. They can be structure, process, or
outcome indicators chosen in the functions of patient
care, services that support the delivery of patient care,
practices, and leadership/governance. Structure encom-
passes the policies or standards regarding how service is
delivered and resources made available. Process refers to
the activities, and outcome is the result of activities based
on policies, standards, and resources. For example, ac-
cording to policy, patients receiving conscious sedation
shall be monitored by a professional nurse certified in
advanced life support (structure), professional nurses
competent in advanced life support are hired and creden-
tialed for those services (process), and all patients receiv-
ing conscious sedation are monitored according to policy
(outcome).
Practice indicators measure professional standards 
used in the delivery of patient care. Examples of practice

indicators include measurement of documentation fre-
quency and content, and utilization of aseptic technique
as required. Leadership indicators measure organizational
function, namely how the system affects the delivery of
care and services.
When standards are clearly written and defined, are
valid, and can be measured, indicators are more easily 
selected and usable. Meaningful indicators are specific,
relevant, reliable, valid, and measurable. They use a 
numerator and denominator, have a target (internal or
external benchmark), relate to specific standards, and 
define where the data or information can be found. For
example, the number of individuals monitored by an ad-
vanced life support credentialed nurse (numerator) of all
the patients receiving conscious sedation (denominator)
based on the standard, as documented in the outpatient
record.
Many national organizations are currently working on
indicators that can be used as external benchmarks, such
as the Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information 
Set (HEDIS) from the National Committee for Quality
Assurance (NCQA). Other professional groups continue
to refine and expand the available  indicators. Utilizing ex-
ternal performance measures exclusively is not sufficient.
Internal performance indicators based on the scope of
service, mission, vision, strategic plans, core competen-
cies, organizational culture, and values ensure that overall
organizational effectiveness is measured. In turn, external
benchmarks compare that performance with the best in
the industry. As previously stated, the Joint Commission’s
work started around the identification, implementation,
and use of standardized tools for measuring and improv-
ing patient care. By 2004, the implementation of core
measures in all acute care hospitals was implemented,
with the goal for expansion into other clinical areas 
and further study these measures. The focus on under-
standing quality and safety continues with transparency
to consumers.
Understanding Variation
Variation is part of any process. People, equipment, sup-
plies, procedures, techniques, and inaccuracies in the data
all contribute to variation in data from an otherwise stable
process. Common-cause variation is the ongoing, minute
variations that are part of nature. Special-cause variation is
much larger and can be attributed more easily to contribu-
tors through statistical methods such as run charts and con-
trol charts. These charts can monitor processes because,
even though individual data points may be unpredictable,
a fluctuating pattern will emerge over time. The normal
pattern is bell-shaped, meaning that most points are near
the center.
The manager of a process must know when to react
to particular data or situations and when it is necessary
to improve the entire process. For example, suppose you
have monitored medication errors on your unit for
many months. When you calculate the number of errors
over the number of doses administered, a percentage
230
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
Type
100
80
60
40
20
0
%
Figure 13.4 Pareto diagram.
ON LIN E CON SULT 
National Committee for Quality Assurance: 
HEDIS at 
http://www.ncqa.org/tabid/59/Default.aspx
The Joint Commission at 
http://www.jointcommission.org/performance
_measurement.aspx

ranging between 0.01 and 0.02 percent emerges. This
is probably the common-cause type of variation. You
may want to compare that figure against those of other
local institutions, of similar type or size, to evaluate
whether this is an acceptable error rate. If, for the first
time ever, you see a rise to 0.03 percent, it would be wise
to analyze the data further before taking action or de-
ciding to wait. Are all the errors of the same type attrib-
utable to a few individuals, or have new systems been
introduced? Constant tinkering with systems, without
understanding what the causes of the variation are,
destabilizes the process. Understanding variation is im-
portant. Common-cause variation requires an answer to
the question “Is this level acceptable when looked 
at over time?” Special-cause variation needs careful 
evaluation to identify the cause and make appropriate,
focused interventions. And there is a directive to ensure
that these interventions are safe for the consumers of
healthcare, whether through actions by healthcare
providers or by the consumer once back in the commu-
nity or home setting.
CONTINUOUS QUALITY
IMPROVEMENT IN CONTEXT
CQI in practice requires a number of cost and implemen-
tation considerations and varies significantly with the con-
text of the healthcare organization. The rapid changes in
healthcare and the added focus on patient safety have re-
quired redesign of its delivery. We have a professional ob-
ligation to ensure that the way we deliver care is evaluated
along the continuum. Despite our frustration with cost
containment efforts, we must prudently manage resources
to enable us to provide the greatest benefit safely to the
largest number of patients possible. We may need to de-
velop new delivery models that optimize the role of the
professional nurse, delegate tasks, and meet the needs of
our customers.
Case management and work redesign have been used
across the country for delivery redesign. Case manage-
ment requires collaboration in the process of providing
options for services that meet an individual’s health needs
and that promote quality and safe cost-effective out-
comes. Critical pathways are tools commonly used in this
process. Brainstorming, data-driven decision making,
consensus seeking, process flow charting, evaluation of
costs, and satisfaction are all tools used in case new quality
model.
Work redesign—the process of analyzing how work
is done and what system changes need to be implemented
to achieve effective and efficient care delivery—also re-
quires quality to be built in up front. Professionals need
to participate actively in this evolving course. Reliance on
inspection and control will not ensure delivery of quality
care. Simultaneously, we cannot insist on doing it the old
way. Review of studies on the implementation of redesign
activities demonstrate that many focused largely on 
increasing efficiency and that the changes may not have
been managed effectively, resulting in loss of trust in the
administration and reduction of clinical nursing leadership
(Page, 2004).
Brainstorming, data-driven decision making,
consensus seeking, process flow charting,
evaluation of costs, and satisfaction are 
all tools used in case management 
as well as in the new quality model.
Continuous Quality Improvement
in the Managed Care World
Managed care has received some favor as a methodology
for controlling escalating healthcare costs. Buyers of man-
aged care, such as employers and state and federal govern-
ments, have something to say about quality, access, choice,
and satisfaction with services. The more competitive the
environment becomes, the more important demonstrated
quality will become, to differentiate between one contract
or provider and another. The managed care industry is al-
ready developing nationally accepted outcomes and indi-
cators. Report cards on customer satisfaction with
individual providers and organizations have gained popu-
larity. Nursing must take an aggressive professional role in
ensuring that the data on care delivery reflect direct nurs-
ing care delivery, coordination provided by nursing, pa-
tient and family teaching, and nursing management along
the continuum of care delivery. Recommendations on the
need to develop reliable and valid methods to measure
nursing care requirements and minimum staffing levels in
acute care and long-term care are considered essential
(Page, 2004). As more research evolves on the nurse-
sensitive indicators, further evidence-based practice can
evolve in this area.
Ongoing Role for
Regulatory Agencies
Agencies such as the Joint Commission, professional re-
view organizations (PROs), and state and federal govern-
ment will continue to have a significant role in the
assurance that quality, safe healthcare is delivered. Many
of the organizations actively collecting benchmarking in-
formation. The Joint Commission, in particular, acts as
an external change agent with regard to guaranteeing that
all providers accept and implement the new paradigm.
The hospital associations are helping their members deal
with uniform responses to the report cards required by
many managed care contracts. Regulators and providers
alike are struggling with the implementation of signifi-
cant change in the delivery of quality healthcare. As
noted by Amer (2013), quality “is not a finite goal but
rather an ongoing process that is subject to the changing
needs of society and the knowledge, expertise, and 
creativity of the healthcare team and the scientific com-
munity” (p. 236). The goal is for continuous quality 
improvement for patient safety and efficacy of healthcare
outcomes.
CHAPTER 13 Quality and Safety in Healthcare     ●
231

232
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
In 2013, the Joint Commission (2013f) issued an alert on medical device safety in the hospital based on 
research over a 3-year period and identified the following major causal factors from 98 reported events:
●Absent or inadequate alarm system  
●Improper alarm settings  
●Alarm signals not audible in all areas 
●Alarm signals inappropriately turned off 
Alarm fatigue was identified as the most common contributing factor (Joint Commission, 2013f, p. 2). 
The recommendations can be reviewed at http://www.jointcommission.org/assets/1/18/SEA_50_alarms
_4_5_13_FINAL1.PDF
Question: Have there been any of these events in your hospital over the past year? Who oversees medical 
device and alarm safety at your organization? What is the level of risk in patient care units, intensive care units,
and the emergency department? And, how can you be involved in policy development for promoting medical
device alarm safety in your organization?
Joint Commission. (2013f).  Sentinel event alert: Medical device safety in hospitals, issue 50, April 8, 2013. Retrieved from http://www.jointcommission
.org/assets/1/18/SEA_50_alarms_4_5_13_FINAL1.PDF
K E Y  P O I N T S
●Rapid changes in healthcare have prompted a new way of doing business.
●Reliance on inspection and control against pre-established standards (the traditional quality assurance
model), although of ongoing value, is no longer sufficient.
●Quality models, such as Deming’s Principles for Transformation, the Juran Trilogy, and the requirements for
accreditation by the Joint Commission provide an excellent foundation for improving quality of care.
●Quality improvement does not just entail correcting problems but also requires ongoing improvement.
●Specific knowledge, tools, and techniques are required to create a new quality and include cross-
 functional teamwork, lifelong learning, and process improvement.
●Process teams are required for those improvement activities that cross functions and disciplines and 
cannot be dealt with in the day-to-day operations.
●Variation is part of all processes. It requires statistical analysis before actions that may destabilize the
process are taken.
●Benchmarking is the process of comparison with the best practices in the industry.
●Tools for improvement can be divided into four categories: those used for process description, such as
flow charts and cause-and-effect diagrams; those used for data collection, such as data sheets and check
sheets; those used for data analysis, such as bar and pie charts and the Pareto diagram; and those used
for process improvement.
●In the “culture of blame,” someone is traditionally identified as the cause of an adverse event. Systemic is-
sues are questioned and targeted for improvement in the “culture of safety,” in which the environment and
the entire system is the focus to allow healthcare providers and consumers to address quality improvement.
●Sammer et al. (2010) have defined Just Culture as “a culture that recognizes errors as a system failure
rather than individual failures and, at the same time, does not shrink from holding individuals accountable
for their actions” (p. 157). 
●The Joint Commission (2013g) defines a sentinel event as “an unexpected occurrence involving death or
serious physical or psychological injury, or the risk thereof” (p. 1). 
●A root cause analysis is an intensive questioning into the cause of a problem with the goals of providing
corrective action, eliminating the problem from recurrence, and instilling quality improvements. 
●To improve quality, you must improve the system.

REFERENCES
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). (2013).
National healthcare quality report 2013. Retrieved from
http://www.ahrq.gov/research/findings/nhqrdr/index.html 
Amer, K. S. (2013). Quality and safety for transformational 
nursing: Core competencies. Boston, MA: Pearson.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2008).
The essentials of baccalaureate education for professional 
nursing practice. Washington, DC: Author.
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2006). Assuring patient
safety: The employer’s role in promoting healthy nursing work
hours for registered nurses in all roles and settings. Retrieved
from http://www.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories
/Policy-Advocacy/Positions-and-Resolutions
/ANAPositionStatements/Position-Statements
-Alphabetically/AssuringPatientSafety.pdf
American Nurses Association. (2010). Position statement: Just
culture. Retrieved from http://www.nursingworld.org
/MainMenuCategories/Policy-Advocacy/Positions-and
-Resolutions/ANAPositionStatements/Position-Statements
-Alphabetically/Just-Culture.html
Aspden, P., Wolcott, J., Bootman, L., & Cronenwett, L. R.
(Eds.). (2006). Preventing medication errors. Washington,
DC: National Academies Press. 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2009).
Roadmap for implementing value driven healthcare in the 
traditional Medicare fee-for-service program. Retrieved from
http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality-Initiatives-Patient
-Assessment-Instruments/QualityInitiativesGenInfo/
Downloads/RoadmapOverview_OEA_1-16.pdf
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2013).
Medicare hospital quality chartbook: Performance report on 
outcome measures. Retrieved from https://www.cms.gov
/Medicare/Quality-Initiatives-Patient-Assessment-Instruments
/HospitalQualityInits/Downloads/
Cronenwett, L., Sherwood, G., Barnsteiner, J., Disch, J., 
Johnson, J., Mitchell, P., . . . Warren, J. (2007). Quality and
safety education for nurses. Nursing Outlook, 55, 122–131. 
Driskell, J. E, & Adams, R. J. (1991). Crew resource management:
A introductory handbook. Springfield, VA: National Technical
Information Service. Retrieved from http://aireform.com
/wp-content/uploads/19920800..-CRM-Handbook
-contracted-for-FAA.pdf
Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI). (2014). IHI vision
and values. Retrieved from http://www.ihi.org/about/pages
/ihivisionandvalues.aspx
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2000). To err is human: Building
a safer health system. Washington, DC: National Academy
Press.
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2001). Crossing the quality
chasm: A new health system for the 21st century. Retrieved
from http://books.nap.edu/openbook.php?
record_id=10027&page=232 
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2011). The future of nursing:
Leading change, advancing health. Retrieved from
http://books.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=12956 
Joint Commission. (2010). The evolution of performance
measurement at The Joint Commission 1986-2010: 
A visioning document. Retrieved from http://www
.jointcommission.org/performance_measurement
.aspx 
Joint Commission. (2013a). Benefits of Joint Commission 
accreditation. Retrieved from http://www.jointcommission.
org/benefits_of_joint_commission_accreditation/ 
Joint Commission. (2013b). Facts about the national patient
safety goals. Retrieved from http://www.jointcommission
.org/standards_information/npsgs.aspx 
CHAPTER 13 Quality and Safety in Healthcare     ●
233
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. You are the nurse manager of an ambulatory surgery unit. Recently, you have seen a sudden rise in the number of
surgical patients coming through the unit. Simultaneously, patients, physicians, and other providers have started to
complain about long delays during pretesting.
• Would you attempt to fix this problem by addressing it during a staff meeting? Why or why not?
• Compare how to address this problem using a process team versus using the staff meeting approach.
• Describe how you would analyze the process.
• Explain which tools are appropriate to use for the analysis.
2. A sentinel event has just been identified at your hospital and you have been identified to serve on the team con-
ducting a root cause analysis. Choose a sentinel event from the list provided in Box 13.4. Describe the process for
the root cause analysis and suggest learning strategies for staff for continuous quality improvement.
3. To foster professional accountability, discuss how you would plan and implement an interdisciplinary staff educa-
tion session on Just Culture. Be prepared to participate in an online or class discussion on this topic, to be sched-
uled by your instructor.
4. Discuss the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter and discuss it (online or in class) in the 
context of the contents of the chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.

Joint Commission. (2013c). Facts about the official “do not
use” list. Retrieved from http://www.jointcommission.org
/assets/1/18/Do_Not_Use_List.pdf
Joint Commission. (2013d). Facts about ORYX® for hospitals
(national hospital quality measures). Retrieved from http://
www.jointcommission.org/facts_about_oryx_for_hospitals/ 
Joint Commission. (2013e). Root cause analysis and action
plan framework template. Retrieved from http://www
.jointcommission.org/sentinel_event.aspx 
Joint Commission. (2013f). Sentinel event alert: Medical device
safety in hospitals, Issue 50, April 8, 2013. Retrieved 
from http://www.jointcommission.org/assets/1/18/
SEA_50_alarms_4_5_13_FINAL1.PDF
Joint Commission. (2013g). Sentinel event policy and proce-
dures. Retrieved from http://www.jointcommission.org
/Sentinel_Event_Policy_and_Procedures/
Joint Commission. (2013h). Specifications manual for national
hospital inpatient quality measures. Retrieved from
http://www.jointcommission.org/specifications_manual
_for_national_hospital_inpatient_quality_measures/ 
Joint Commission. (2014a). Core measure sets. Retrieved from
http://www.jointcommission.org/core_measure_sets.aspx
Joint Commission. (2014b). Facts about accountability 
measures. Retrieved from http://www.jointcommission.org
/facts_about_accountability_measures/
Joint Commission. (2014c). Facts about patient safety. Retrieved
from http://www.jointcommission.org/about_us/patient
_safety_fact_sheets.aspx 
Joint Commission. (2014d). Improving America’s hospitals:
The Joint Commission’s annual report on quality and safety
2013. Retrieved from http://www.jointcommission.org
/annualreport.aspx 
Joint Commission. (2014e). National patient safety goals. Re-
trieved from http://www.jointcommission.org/standards
_information/npsgs.aspx 
Juran, J. M. (1989). Juran on leadership for quality: An executive
handbook. New York: Free Press.
Leapfrog Group. (2014). The Leapfrog Group fact sheet.
Retrieved from http://www.leapfroggroup.org/about_
leapfrog/leapfrog-factsheet
Merriam-Webster Collegiate Dictionary. (2014). Retrieved from
http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/quality 
National Database of Nursing Quality Indicators (NDNQI).
(2014). About NDNQI. Retrieved from http://www
.nursingquality.org/About-NDNQI 
National Quality Forum (2014). About NQF. Retrieved from
http://www.qualityforum.org/about/ 
Page, A. (Ed.) (2004). Keeping Patients Safe: Transforming the
Work Environment of Nurses. Washington, DC: National
Academy Press. 
Sammer, C. E., Lykens, K., Singh, K. P., Mains, D. A., &
Lackan, N. A. (2010). What is patient safety culture? A 
review of the literature. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 42,
156–165.
Sigma Theta Tau. (2005). Evidence-based nursing position 
statement. Retrieved from http://www.nursingsociety.org
/aboutus/PositionPapers/Pages/EBN_positionpaper.aspx
Smith, E. L., Cronenwett, L., & Sherwood, G. (2007). Current
assessments of quality and safety education in nursing.
Nursing Outlook, 55, 132–137.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Barnsteiner, J. (2011). Teaching the culture of safety. Online 
Journal of Issues in Nursing, 16(3), Manuscript 5. Retrieved
from http://www.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories
/ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/TableofContents
/Vol-16-2011/No3-Sept-2011/Teaching-and-Safety.html
Barnsteiner, J., & Disch, J. (2012). Second generation quality
and safety education for nurses. Nursing Clinics of North
America, 47, xi–xiii.
Barnsteiner, J., Disch, J., Johnson, J., McGuinn, K., & 
Swartwout, E. (2012). Diffusing QSEN competencies
across schools of nursing: The AACN/RWJF Faculty 
Development Institutes. Journal of Professional Nursing, 
29, 68–74. 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2013).
Medicare hospital quality chartbook: Performance report on
outcome measures. Retrieved from https://www.cms.gov
/Medicare/Quality-Initiatives-Patient-Assessment
-Instruments/HospitalQualityInits/Downloads/
-Medicare-Hospital-Quality-Chartbook-2013.pdf
Chassin, M. R., Loeb, J. M., Schmaltz, S. P., & Wachter, R. M.
(2010). Accountability measures: Using measurement to
promote quality. New England Journal of Medicine, 363,
683–688.
Deming, W. E. (1994). The new economics for industry, govern-
ment, education (2nd ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hughes, R. G. (ed). (2008). Patient safety and quality: An 
evidence-based handbook for nurses (AHRQ Publication 
No. 08-0043). Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare
Quality and Research. Retrieved from http://www
.ahrq.gov/qual/nurseshdbk/ 
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2010b). Quality and patient
safety. Retrieved from http://www.iom.edu/Global
/Topics/Quality-Patient-Safety.aspx 
International Council of Nurses (ICN). (2012). ICN position:
Patient safety. Retrieved from http://www.icn.ch/images/
stories/documents/publications/position_statements/
D05_Patient_Safety.pdf 
Juran, J. M. (1988). Juran on planning for quality.New York:
Free Press.
Nace, J. J. (2008). Why hospitals should fly: The ultimate flight
plan to patient safety and quality care. Bozeman, MT: 
Second River Healthcare Press.
Orsini, J. N. (Ed.). (2013). The essential Deming: Leadership
principles from the father of quality. New York: McGraw-Hill.
National Database of Nursing Quality Indicators (NDNQI).
(2014). Frequently asked questions. Retrieved from
http://www.nursingquality.org/FAQ 
National Quality Forum. (2012). National voluntary consensus
standards for patient safety measures: A Consensus report. 
Retrieved from http://www.qualityforum.org/Publications/
2012/06/National_Voluntary_Consensus_Standards_for
_Patient_Safety_Measures_A_Consensus_Report.aspx
President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology
(PCAST). (2014). Report to the president: Better health care
and lower costs: Accelerating improvement through systems 
engineering. Retrieved from http://www.whitehouse.gov
/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/PCAST/pcast_systems
_engineering_in_healthcare_-_may_2014.pdf
234
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

QualityNet. (2014). Hospital inpatient quality reporting (IQR)
program overview. Retrieved from
https://www.qualitynet.org/dcs/ContentServer?c=Page&
pagename=QnetPublic%2FPage%2FQnetTier2&cid=
1138115987129
Sullivan, D. T., Hirst, D., & Cronenwett, L. (2009). Assessing
quality and safety competencies of graduating prelicensure
students. Nursing Outlook, 57, 323–331. 
ONLINE RESOURCES
American Association of Colleges of Nursing
http://www.aacn.nche.edu/qsen/home
National Committee for Quality Assurance
http://ncqa.org
National Database of Nursing Quality Indicators (NDNQI) 
http://pressganey.com/ourSolutions/performance-and
-advanced-analytics/clinical-business-performance
/nursing-quality-ndnqi
PDCA Cycle
http://www.isixsigma.com/dictionary/deming-cycle-pdca/
http://asq.org/learn-about-quality/project-planning-tools
/overview/pdca-cycle.html
http://www.ihi.org/resources/Pages/HowtoImprove
/ScienceofImprovementHowtoImprove.aspx
QSEN Institute
http://qsen.org/
The Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI)
http://www.ihi.org/IHI/
The Institute of Medicine
http://www.iom.edu
The Joint Commission 
http://www.jointcommission.org
The Joint Commission: Quality Check
http://www.QualityCheck.org
CHAPTER 13 Quality and Safety in Healthcare     ●
235

Population Health
236
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Describe the national initiatives aimed at improving health equity and reducing health disparities.
2. Identify trends and health needs of our at-risk populations.
3. Discuss strategies for reducing health disparities for at-risk population groups.
4. Discuss the characteristics of the aging population.
5. Examine the issues to address in minority health promotion activities.
6. Contrast urban and rural community needs and resources.
7. Identify the role for professional nurses in community and public health initiatives.
Public Health 
Population Health
Healthy People
Healthy Communities
Health Promotion Strategies
Health Protection Strategies
Preventive Services
Determinants of Health
Leading Health Indicators
Topical Areas
Foundational Health Measures
Aging Adults
Disability
Chronicity
Minority Health
Health Equity
Social Determinants of Health
Urbanized Area
Rural Area
Rural Health
Community Health Nursing
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
“Wherever we look upon this earth, 
the opportunities take shape 
within the problems.”
Nelson Rockefeller, 1908–1979
Key Terms
14

CHAPTER 14 Population Health     ●
237
Initiatives to address the health and wellness of the pub-
lic have been in existence for hundreds of years. Re-
cently, however, efforts to address the health of
population groups locally, nationally, and globally have
become more visible. The mission of public health con-
tinues to focus on protection of the public from health
threats. The Committee for the Study of the Future of
Public Health (1988) traced the history of public health
in the United States over the past 200 years, from the
18th century efforts directed at control of the spread of
diseases like cholera through isolation and quarantine;
to the implementation of sanitary standards, water pu-
rification, immunization, and the establishment of state
health departments; to personal clinical care and health
promotion activities of private and governmental agen-
cies in the 20th century. Community health nursing has
had a vital role in these activities since the early 20th
century when Lillian Wald established the Henry Street
Settlement with a focus on immigrant populations,
which became the Visiting Nurses Service in New York
City. The ultimate aim is to treat and promote health
in population groups. As noted by Kindig and Stoddart
(2003), population health does not have a precise def-
inition but is generally a research approach focused on
determinants of health (p. 380). This lack of a precise
definition was further supported by the IOM (2014) in
its workshop summary and implications with the pas-
sage of the Accountable Care Act in 2010.
Population health and measures for the determinants
of health have become a constant theme as we strive to im-
prove health status and outcomes and address health dis-
parities. Two major community health initiatives began
in the last decades of the 20th century in the United
States: Healthy People and Healthy Communities. The
focus became the health of the nation as a whole through
concentration on wellness and healthful initiatives as a
strategic planning process for disease prevention and
health promotion.
As a corollary to this movement, we have seen a
greater focus on consumer and public protection. In
1998, the President’s Advisory Commission on Con-
sumer Protection and Quality in the Industry presented
a report with more than 50 objectives identified to ad-
dress problem areas, including avoidable errors, both
underutilization and overuse of services, and variation
in services. Measures proposed to strengthen the health-
care industry included use of group purchasers, having
informed consumers with access to services, accounta-
bility, reducing errors and increasing safety, and ad-
dressing the needs of vulnerable populations. Sources
of vulnerability were identified as economic status and
geographic location; health, age, and functional or de-
velopmental status; communication barriers; and unex-
plained vulnerability associated with race, ethnicity,
and sex (The President’s Advisory Commission on
Consumer Protection and Quality in the Health Care
Industry, 1998, pp. 130–132). At the end of the 20th
century and into the next decade, the focus on patient
safety was highlighted further with the subsequent 
Institute of Medicine (IOM) reports on the current
state of healthcare for consumers and calls for safety 
improvements.
The nation’s population profile is changing. We are
older and more diverse. Although we remain a youth-
oriented society, the aging of the baby boomers has had a
profound effect on the demographics and the health needs
of the population. In addition, we are becoming more cul-
turally diverse and must endeavor to celebrate, respect, and
embrace our differences while eliminating health dispari-
ties. Professional nursing practice has a vital role in utiliz-
ing and expanding knowledge of health determinants,
promoting health initiatives, and in eliminating health 
disparities.
HEALTHY PEOPLE
For Healthy People 2000 (U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, Public Health Service [USDHHS,
PHS], 1992), groups at higher risk were identified as part
of the design more extensively than in the 1990 objec-
tives according to demographic and socioeconomic di-
mensions of risk (p. vii). This focus continued as a
national commitment with Healthy People 2010, which
was introduced in 2000, and Healthy People 2020, which
was introduced late in 2010. Healthy Communities was
designed to help implement these objectives in commu-
nity settings. It became an accepted fact that healthy be-
haviors and prevention are vital for individuals, families,
and society.
In Healthy People 2000, three general goals were
stated as national health promotion and disease preven-
tion objectives (see Table 14.1). This initiative took a
major step in that it did not merely look at the health of
the nation, but rather, it devised strategies for improve-
ment. The outcome was the specification of 22 priority
areas for health promotion and disease prevention. For
each priority area, the workgroup formulated objectives
with specific targets to measure success in addressing the
three major goals. The priority areas were further classi-
fied as health promotion, health protection, and preven-
tive services. Recall the discussion on levels of prevention
(primary, secondary, and tertiary) in Chapter 4. The ter-
minology from Healthy People 2000 (USDHHS, 1992)
identified health promotion strategies as individual
lifestyle and personal choices. Health promotion activi-
ties are both protective and preventive, but they require
consumers to be actively involved in all levels of preven-
tion. Health protection strategies consist of environ-
mental or regulatory measures that confer protection on
population groups. Preventive services comprise coun-
seling, screening, immunization, and chemoprophylactic
interventions.
Findings on the 22 priority areas were reported along
with identification of problem areas. For example, in the 
area of health promotion, in terms of physical activity and
fitness and nutrition, they found a decline in coronary deaths
but overweight prevalence, iron deficiency, and a need for
more physical activity. In addition, health disparities were
becoming apparent with the identification of increased
pregnancy rates in adolescents, marijuana use in adoles-
cents, increased diabetes, and cirrhosis deaths in certain 
minority groups. 
The initiative also looked at specific age groups (in-
fants, children, adolescents and young adults, adults, and

238
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
TABLE 14.1
Overall Goals for Healthy People Initiatives, 2000, 2010, and 2020
Healthy People 2000               Healthy People 2010            Healthy People 2020
(USDHHS, 1992, p. 6)            (USDHHS, 2000a)               (USDHHS, 2010c, p. 1)
¬
Goals:
• Increase the span of healthy
life for Americans
• Reduce health disparities
among Americans
• Achieve access to preventive
services for all Americans
Priority Areas (22)
Health Promotion
• Physical Activity and Fitness 
• Nutrition
• Tobacco
• Alcohol and Other Drugs
• Family Planning
• Mental Health and Mental 
Disorders
• Violent and Abusive Behaviors
• Educational and Community-
Based Programs
Health Protection
• Unintentional Injuries
• Occupational Safety and
Health
• Environmental Health
• Food and Drug Safety
• Oral Health
Preventive
• Maternal and Infant Health
• Heart Disease and Stroke
• Cancer
• Diabetes and Chronic
Disabling Conditions
• HIV Infection
• Sexually Transmitted Diseases
• Immunization and Infectious
Diseases
• Clinical Preventive Services
Other
• Surveillance and Data Systems
Goals:
• Increase the quality and
years of healthy life
• Eliminate health disparities
Focus Areas (28)
• Access to Quality Health
Services
• Arthritis, Osteoporosis,
and Chronic Back
Conditions
• Cancer
• Chronic Kidney Disease
• Diabetes
• Disability and Secondary
Conditions
• Educational and
Community-Based
Programs
• Environmental Health
• Family Planning
• Food Safety
• Health Communication
• Heart Disease and Stroke
• HIV
• Immunization and
Infectious Diseases
• Injury and Violence
Prevention
• Maternal, Infant, and Child
Health
• Medical Product Safety
• Mental Health and Mental
Disorders
• Nutrition and Overweight
• Occupational Safety and
Health
• Oral Health
• Physical Activity and Fitness
• Respiratory Diseases
• Public Health Infrastructure
• Sexually Transmitted
Diseases
• Substance Abuse
• Tobacco Use
• Vision and Hearing
Goals:
• Attain high-quality, longer lives free of preventable
disease, disability, injury, and premature death
• Achieve health equity, eliminate disparities,
and improve the health of all groups
• Create social and physical environments that
promote good health for all
• Promote quality of life, healthy development,
and healthy behaviors across all life stages
Topical Areas (42)
• Access to Health Services
• Adolescent Health
• Arthritis, Osteoporosis, Chronic Back Conditions
• Blood Disorders and Blood Safety
• Cancer
• Chronic Kidney Disease
• Dementias, including Alzheimer’s Disease
• Diabetes
• Disability and Health
• Early and Middle Childhood
• Educational/Community-Based Programs
• Environmental Health
• Family Planning
• Food Safety
• Genomics
• Global Health
• Health Communication and Health IT
• Healthcare-Associated Infections
• Health-related Quality of Life and Well-being
• Hearing/Other Sensory or Communication
Disorders
• Heart Disease and Stroke
• HIV
• Immunization and Infectious Diseases
• Injury and Violence Prevention
• Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Health
• Maternal, Infant, and Child Health
• Medical Product Safety
• Mental Health and Mental Disorders 
• Nutrition and Weight Status
• Occupational Safety and Health
• Older Adults
• Oral Health
• Physical Activity 
• Preparedness
• Public Health Infrastructure
• Respiratory Diseases
• Sexually Transmitted Diseases
• Sleep Health
• Social Determinants of Health
• Substance Abuse
• Tobacco Use
• Vision

older adults) and special populations (low-income, minori-
ties, and people with disabilities) in order to address spe-
cific health promotion and disease prevention efforts
within these divergent groups. For example, a dramatic
decline in the infant mortality rate had occurred; however,
continued attention was needed in the area of maternal
and infant health. In addition, progress was demonstrated
with a decrease in injuries in children with the increased
use of child restraint systems in motor vehicles; however,
a continued problem area was the asthma hospitalization
rate for children, which was identified as a major cause of
morbidity. Additional differences were identified for other
age groups.
Healthy People 2000 focused also on health disparities.
A disparity existed between African Americans and the
overall population with respect to average life expectancy,
with African Americans having a significantly lower life
expectancy (USDHHS, 2000a, p. 12). Disparities also 
included differential rates in infant mortality, receipt of
prenatal care, maternal mortality,homicides, AIDS, lung
cancer, breast cancer, coronary heart disease, diabetes com-
plications and related deaths, and immunizations. For 
Native Americans and Alaskan natives, seven health areas
were highlighted: alcoholism and substance abuse, child
and family violence, diabetes, women’s health, the health
of the elderly, maternal and child health, and injuries.
Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders were found to have
a higher life expectancy than the population as a whole.
However, several health problems were particularly note-
worthy for these groups, including increasing rates of cere-
brovascular diseases and cancer deaths. Elimination of
these health disparities became a major initiative in
Healthy People 2010.
People with disabilities and those in low-income groups
were also investigated. Although a decline was found 
in nonfatal head injuries and spinal cord injuries, there 
was an increase in other conditions that led to disability,
including fetal alcohol syndrome, visual impairments,
asthma, and complications of diabetes. An escalating 
relationship between lower incomes, limitations in activity,
health promotion and screening activities, insurance cov-
erage, and chronic conditions was also a finding from
Healthy People 2000.
During the same period, the American Public Health
Association (APHA, 1991) published Healthy Communi-
ties 2000: Model Standards to assist planners in adapting
the Healthy People 2000 objectives to the needs and re-
sources of individual communities. The conceptual basis
of healthy communities included an emphasis on health
outcomes, flexible planning, a focus on the entire commu-
nity with the involvement of local governments and local
flexibility, uniform standards and guidelines, and an 
emphasis on accessibility of programs (APHA, 1991, 
pp. xvii–xix). 
By the final review point for Healthy People 2000, most
states, the District of Columbia, and Guam had statewide
objectives, some with compre hensive strategic plans and
assessment projects that addressed the objectives. The
strategic planning process continued with a look to revised
resources to address the newer national initiatives in
Healthy People 2010.
The prevention agenda for the nation and the asso-
ciated objectives for the next decade were introduced in
January 2000 as Healthy People 2010 (USDHHS,
2000a), with two major goals that were more aggressive
than the 2000 objectives. For instance, Healthy People
2000 sought to reduce health disparities, whereas
Healthy People 2010 proposed to eliminate them. Build-
ing upon Healthy People 2000, Healthy People 2010
specified 28 focus areas (Table 14.1) containing objec-
tives and targets for the nation to address the specific
trends of the decade, such as diversity and the aging
population. Healthy People 2010 used a systematic ap-
proach to health improvement guided by a model with
four key elements: goals, objectives, determinants of
health, and health status. The objectives were designed
to “focus on the determinants of health, which encom-
pass the combined effects of individual and community
physical and social environments and the policies and
interventions used to promote health, prevent disease,
and ensure access to quality health care” (USDHHS,
2000a, p. 7).
Specific objectives in each focus area were designed to
address the health initiative as subgoals under the direc-
tion of a lead government agency. Objectives were both
measurable (with specific set  targets for which data were
tracked) and developmental (for which no baseline data
were available). Availability of data and interagency col-
laboration were essential components of this aggressive
and evidence-based project to address the health of the
nation.
The midcourse review of Healthy People 2010 was con-
ducted in 2005 on the status of the objectives and was
based on public comments and expert evaluation of the
data, apparent trends, and emerging knowledge. Objectives
were revised, clarified, and some recommended for deletion
if there was not a valid data source. For some developmen-
tal objectives, researchers established targets because data
were now available for baselines and the objectives could
now be measured and tracked. For example, the develop-
mental objective on reducing the number of school or work
days missed by persons with asthma now had an established
baseline of about six days for persons aged 5 to 64 years,
with a target set to reduce the days to two by 2010 
(USDHHS, 2006a).
Other developmental objectives were dropped when
no data source could be established, as with the objective
to increase the number of state prison systems that provide
comprehensive education on sexually trans mitted diseases.
Some developmental objectives were retained if the data
source was identified and the objective clarified with the
potential for measurement prior to 2010, as with the ob-
jective for reducing the proportion of females with human
papillomavirus (HPV) infection (USDHHS, 2006b).
Other objectives and subobjectives were retained and were
being measured or had revisions in language, baselines, 
or targets.
Reducing health disparities involved addressing the
needs of individuals or groups at risk. The needs of these
at-risk populations were identifiable in the focus areas and
objectives to be addressed. The demographic characteristics
identified and targeted for action included gender, age, race
and ethnicity, income and educational level, disability, 
geographic location, and sexual orientation.
A component of the Healthy People 2010 document
was the identification of leading health indicators
CHAPTER 14 Population Health     ●
239

(Box 14.1). “The leading health indicators reflected the
major public health concerns in the United States and
were chosen based on their ability to motivate action, the
availability of data to measure their progress, and their rel-
evance as broad public health issues” (USDHHS, 2000a,
p. 24). These 10 indicators, linked to the Healthy People
2010 objectives, were designed for the ability to provide a
snapshot at a point in time by which to view the health of
the nation to “illuminate indi vidual behaviors, physical
and social environmental factors, and important health-
system issues that greatly affect the health of individuals
and communities [and] underlying each of these indicators
is the significant influence of income and education” 
(USDHHS, 2000a, p. 24).
An emphasis on health promotion and disease
 prevention is evident in these identified leading health
indicators. And continued emphasis from the Healthy
People 2000 results was apparent, as with physical activ-
ity and obesity. For example, although the benefits of
physical activity have been demonstrated, sedentary
lifestyles were still common in the United States, which
is a major public health concern. This health indicator
targeted perceived barriers to regular, moderate physical
activity and sought to prevent conditions associated with
lack of activity. Disparities were identified with gender,
age, race, educational level, geography, and socioeco-
nomic status. At-risk groups were identified as females,
the elderly, African Americans, Hispanics, low-income
individuals, the disabled, and individuals in the south-
ern and northeastern states (USDHHS, 2000b). In ad-
dition, increasing trends and associated conditions like
heart disease,  diabetes, and other chronic illnesses can
be directly attributed to overweight and obesity. The in-
teraction with physical activity is evident, along with
metabolic and genetic factors, as well as behaviors af-
fecting dietary intake and physical activity; environmen-
tal, cultural, and socioeconomic components also play
a role (USDHHS, 2000b, p. 19–4). Disparities were re-
ported both within and among population groups 
related to gender, race, ethnicity, and socioeconomic sta-
tus. Obesity and overweight continue to be a concern
in children and adolescents. Objectives in both this area
and under physical activity were directed at these pop-
ulation groups.
The use of tobacco and substance abuse were two ad-
ditional leading health indicators. Tobacco use, whether
by smoking, chewing, or exposure to secondary smoke
in the physical environment or in utero, has long been
associated with serious complications and consequences.
Objectives addressed use of specific products in selected
groups, cessation efforts, secondhand exposure, and
needed social and environmental changes for limitations
or cessation in select popu lations. Disparities existed by
age, gender, race and  ethnicity, socioeconomic status, ed-
ucational level, and geography. Several refinements to the
objectives, subobjectives, and baseline data were made for
this indi cator at the midcourse review, as with revisions of
data sources or elimination of subobjectives due to unre-
liable sources for data. Substance abuse represents more
than the use of illicit drugs; it includes adverse drug 
consequences such as motor vehicle and other accidents,
domestic violence, intentional or unintentional overdoses,
experimentation with other substances, bingeing, lost pro-
ductivity, and associated conditions. Substance abuse
crosses all ages, genders, racial and ethnic groups, regions,
educational levels, and socioeconomic groups.
In Healthy People 2010, sexually transmitted diseases
(STDs) were described as “common, costly, and prevent-
able” (USDHHS, 2000b, p. 25–7). Although they exist
in all gender, racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic groups,
differences in responsible sexual behaviors were identified
within and among groups for use as targets for interven-
tion activities in the stated objectives. Several developmen-
tal objectives were deleted for this indicator at the
midcourse review, and refinements in others were based
on data and current trends. For example, the objective for
a reduction in the proportion of cases of HPV infection
was made specific to females rather than humans, as more
became known about data sources and the infection.
“Mental health is a state of successful performance of
mental function, resulting in productive activities, fulfilling
relationships with other people, and the ability to adapt to
change and to cope with adversity” (USDHHS, 2000b, 
p. 18–3). Although differences have been identified within
and among groups, “mental disorders occur across the lifes-
pan, affecting persons of all racial and ethnic groups, both
genders, and all educational and socioeconomic groups”
(USDHHS, 2000b, p. 18–3). Comorbidities and secondary
240
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
BOX 14.1
Healthy People 2010 and Healthy 
People 2020
Healthy People 2010 Leading Health Indicators
●Physical activity
●Overweight and obesity
●Tobacco use
●Substance abuse
●Responsible sexual behavior
●Mental health
●Injury and violence
●Environmental quality
●Immunization
●Access to healthcare
Healthy People 2020 Leading Health Indicators (LHI)
(26 LHI organized under the following 12 topics):
●Access to Health Services (2)
●Clinical Preventive Services (4)
●Environmental Quality (2)
●Injury and Violence (2)
●Maternal, Infant, and Child Health (2)
●Mental Health (2)
●Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Obesity (4)
●Oral Health (1)
●Reproductive and Sexual Health (2)
●Social Determinants (1)
●Substance Abuse (2)
●Tobacco (2)
Sources: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2000a). Healthy People 2010: Volume 1 (2nd ed.). Washington,
DC: Author.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS). (2014f).
Leading health indicators. Retrieved from http://healthypeople.gov/
2020/LHI/default.aspx

problems are vital considerations for this indicator, as are
treatment opportunities. The midcourse review resulted in
revised data, objectives, and targets for this indicator, in-
cluding a focus on the homeless. New targets were aimed
at treatment rather than merely the identification of the pro-
portion of the homeless who are identified with serious
mental health problems.
Objectives related to the leading health indicator on
injury and violence called for the reduction in injuries, dis-
abilities, and deaths. Healthy People 2010 noted that 
“although the greatest impact in injury is human suffering
and loss of life, the financial cost is staggering [including
costs of] . . . direct medical care and rehabilitation as well
as lost income and productivity” (USDHHS, 2000b, 
p. 15–4). In addition, disparities in rates of injuries by age,
racial and ethnic group, and economic status were noted.
The four developmental objectives for this indicator be-
came measurable and provided baseline data and targets
at the midcourse review, as with bicycle helmet use and
protective equipment in school sports activities.
The environmental quality indicator addressed air and
water quality and toxic influences in homes, at worksites,
and in the community to promote public health and pro-
tection. Individuals of certain races and socioeconomic sta-
tus were identified as being at greater risk for indoor air
pollution, inadequate heating or cooling, sanitation, or 
environmental structural issues including fire hazards 
(USDHHS, 2000a, p. 8–7). The midcourse review pro-
vided data enhancement and refinement, as with the meas-
urability that became available for fish contamination in
the nation’s lakes and rivers, providing baseline and 
target data.
Strategies to address the identified increase in infectious
diseases included immunization recommendations and
programs, both universal and targeted, as well as concen-
trating on selected infectious processes and antimicrobial
resistance. Particular at-risk populations were identified re-
lated to age, ethnicity and race, and geography. Updated
information on tuberculosis, hospital-acquired infections,
and immunization recommendations arose and are avail-
able on an ongoing basis with the data provided through
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Access to quality services was identified as a leading
health indicator and continues to be a concern. Consider
the implications of this leading health indi cator and its tar-
get of 100 percent health insurance  coverage by 2010.
Needless to say, the target was not met. The objectives for
this indicator addressed clinical preventive care, primary
care, emergency services, and long-term care and rehabil-
itative services. Disparities have been monitored during
the data collection process. At the June 2002 progress re-
view, lower levels of insurance were noted in the Latino,
Native American, and Alaskan Native populations. Lower
levels of health insurance and ongoing sources of care were
also noted in populations with lower levels of family in-
come and education. Racial and ethnic representation in
the health professions were also under study with this ob-
jective, as a component of cultural com petence. Little
change has been demonstrated, with minority underrep-
resentation persistent in the health professions. In Healthy
People 2010 (USDHHS, 2000a), access to quality health-
care services was viewed through selected indicators con-
sidered “pre dictors” of availability and acceptability of
quality services. These indicators or predictors included
having health insurance, having a regular provider of on-
going care, and the use of prenatal care as a preventive
service (USDHHS, 2000a). The baseline year was 1997,
with 83 percent of persons under 65 years of age with
health insurance, and we remained at the same percentage
in 2010.
At the local levels, Healthy Communities 2010 was in-
volved with initiatives and data collection. States  initiated
Healthy People 2010 plans specific to their population and
geography. For example, Alaska implemented a Talking
Circle, Arizona had 12 Focus Areas, Michigan concen-
trated on 25 specific Focused Indicators, and Vermont had
specific Goals for Healthy Vermonters.
At the national level, ongoing collaboratives to address
the public’s health continued. For example, preventing
medication errors was included as an issue related to pre-
vention of injury in the focus area of  medical product
safety. Following an act of the United States Congress, the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) spon-
sored a study by the IOM in 2006 with the aim of devel-
oping a national agenda for reducing medication errors in
hospitals, long-term care and ambulatory-care facilities,
and in community and home settings (Aspden, Wolcott,
Bootman, & Cronenwett, 2006). Activities to address
error reduction and adverse drug events address the
Healthy People 2010 goals to eliminate health disparities
and increase the quality and years of healthy life. 
The work on Healthy People 2020 began in 2007
 following the midyear review for Healthy People 2010. 
Unlike with the past two projects, for this new initiative,
a statement of vision, mission, and goals was developed
based on data and public input. The overarching goals
were stated as follows:
●Attain high-quality, longer lives free of preventable 
disease, disability, injury, and premature death.
●Achieve health equity, eliminate disparities, and 
improve the health of all groups.
●Create social and physical environments that promote
good health for all.
●Promote quality of life, healthy development, and
healthy behaviors across all life stages. (USDHH,
2014a)
Notice that the focus is now firmly on quality of life
for all, across the life span. Now, there were 42 identified
topical areas (see Table 14.1) with four foundation
health measures to monitor the health of the nation both
for progress and in terms of quality of life issues:
●General Health Status
●Health-Related Quality of Life and Well-Being
●Determinants of Health
●Disparities (USDHHS, 2014b).
A continuing focus remained on most of the focus
areas from Healthy People 2010—for example, access to
health services as well as certain chronic and infectious dis-
eases like arthritis, osteoporosis and chronic back condi-
tions, diabetes, kidney disease, respiratory diseases, and
HIV. Selected groups for continued attention remained
as well, as with maternal, infant, and child health. Health
promotion activities were carried forward with oral health,
physical activity, and environmental health. However, 
CHAPTER 14 Population Health     ●
241

additional age groups received added focus, such as early
and middle childhood, adolescent health, and older adults,
as with Healthy People 2000. Thirteen newer focus areas
emerged, for example, genomics, global health, and social
determinants of health. For the development of the objec-
tives for these goals, specific criteria were established, and
each objective must include the following:
●Reliable data source
●Baseline measurement
●Specific improvements targeted to be achieved by
2020 (USDHHS, 2014g)
These objectives were to be relevant, reliable, current,
reflective of the population, and measurable. Public
meetings were held and comments were requested. The
criteria that were set for the objectives were rigorous to
include measurability and based on scientific evidence.
The model for the process had added complexity from
the 2010 objectives and has become an action model
looking at assessment, monitoring, evaluation, and dis-
semination of interventions and outcomes for determi-
nants of health through interconnected variables using a
life span perspective.
Proposed objectives were also based on the data from
Healthy People 2010. Some of the 2010 objectives were re-
tained, revised, or moved to a different topical area with
data sources identified. For example, in the first topical
area on Access to Health Services, five of the objectives in
this area were retained from Healthy People 2010 to con-
tinue toward the target. Vital areas carried over from the
Healthy People 2010 initiative included the proportion of
people with health insurance, those with a usual primary
healthcare provider, and access to and use of emergency
medical services. Three of the 2010 objectives in this area
were also retained but modified for additional specificity
to address the targets or had a portion removed from the
objective since it was best measured in another topical area
of Healthy People 2020. Five of the 2010 objectives in this
area were moved to other areas in Healthy People 2020. 
Six other 2010 objectives were archived because the pre-
vious target had been met, there was inadequate data to
address the objectives, or they duplicated measures in
other areas (USDHHS, 2008). Two new objectives were
added to Healthy People 2020 focused on evidence-based
and primary care, both developmental to assess adequacy
of data sources. In late 2010, the Institute of Medicine
provided direction for addressing healthcare quality and
disparities and appointed a  special committee to work to-
ward recommending leading health indicators and objec-
tives for Healthy People 2020.
As illustrated in Box 14.1, Healthy People 2020 was 
focused on additional metrics with specified targets to 
assess the health of the public. Moving from the 10 Lead-
ing Health Indicators (LHI) in 2010, there were now 
26 specific measures organized under 12 topical areas. 
At the progress review in March 2014, positive progress
was reported on many of the indicators on the Healthy
People 2020 targets as follows:
●15.4% (4 LHI) met or exceeded the targets
●38.5% (10 LHI) demonstrated improvements
●30.8% (8 LHI) demonstrated little or no change
●11.5% (3 LHI) demonstrated a decline in performance
●3.8% (1 LHI) had only baseline date (USDHHS,
2014e, p. 2)
The targets were met in the areas of environmental
quality (air quality and children exposed to secondhand
smoke), number of homicides, and on the physical activity
of adults. For example, for adults meeting the recom-
mended aerobic physical activity indicator, the target was
20.1% with the baseline of 18.2% in 2008 and the 2012
measure of 20.6% (USDHHS, 2014e, p. 3). Although the
targets were not met in 2014, improvements were demon-
strated in the areas of adults receiving colorectal screening,
adults with controlled hypertension, childhood immuniza-
tions, the number of injury deaths, infant mortality and
pre-term births, knowledge of serostatus among HIV-
positive individuals, students awarded a high school
diploma four years after starting ninth grade, adolescents
using alcohol or illicit drugs, and cigarette smoking in
adults. For example, the target for adolescents using alcohol
or illicit drugs was set at 16.6% with a 2008 baseline of
18.4% and the 2014 measure of 17.4% (USDHHS,
2014e, p. 4). Little or no detectable change was reported
in 2011–12 for two LHI in the access to health services,
but this may be significantly improved with the implemen-
tation of the Affordable Care Act in 2014–15. Little or no
improvement was also reported in the areas of diabetes,
obesity, intake of vegetables, and adolescent cigarette smok-
ing. Performance declines were reported on two mental
health indicators and percentage of visits to a dentist.
One of the most notable factors in this process is the re-
liance on measurability and the use of scientific evidence.
Data were available on a variety of measures and were evolv-
ing in other areas. Support of interventions and outcomes
with evidence is of prime concern. We are concerned about
individuals, families, groups, and communities as we strive
to raise the health status of the nation. These activities are
especially important in light of our aging population and
attendant health challenges.
OUR AGING POPULATION
The term healthy life applies not only to longevity but 
also to functional independence and the perception of
healthy days. Older adults are now included back into
Health People 2020 as a distinct area for attention as we
focus on the issue of quality of life and healthy life ex-
pectancy. The major causes of death in people 65 years
and older are heart disease, cancer, and stroke. Consider
the life expectancy trends reported in Table 14.2. 
Although life expectancies for both men and women have
increased, the years of functional health and independence
after age 65 are less than the 12 to 19 actual remaining
years of life. In addition, disparities exist by gender and
race. On the other hand, trends in limitation of activities
of daily living, defined as physically unhealthy days, have
declined only marginally for aging adults 65 years and
242
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
O N L I NE  C ONSULT  
Healthy People 2020 at 
http://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/
aboutdefault.aspx

older living in the community with disability percentages
showing an increase to 37.9 percent in 2010 (CDC,
2013d, p. 15). The annual trend report for mean number
of unhealthy days reported by age group has changed little,
especially for the 65 to 74 and 75+ age groups. The rates
were 4.8, 5.1, and 4.9 and 6.1, 6.4, and 6.0 for the years
1993, 2003, and 2010 for the 65 to 74 and 75+ age groups,
respectively (CDC National Center for Chronic Disease
Prevention and Health Promotion, 2012). When consid-
ering self-reported activity limitations due to poor physical
health, there were 2.4 and 2.9 days in the last 30 days 
reported by the 65 to 74 and 75+ age groups, respectively
(CDC, 2011b). In addition, more activity limitations and
physically unhealthy days were reported with lower educa-
tional levels, with lower annual household income, and for
race/ethnicity other than Asian and white/non-Hispanic
(CDC, 2011a, 2011b). The difference between healthy life
and unhealthy life is the loss of independence in activities
of daily life and increasing dependence on others.
The percentage of the population aged 65 years and
older has been steadily increasing, with 13 percent of the
population in this age group according to the 2010 census.
To look further at this perspective, there were 30 million
people in this age group in 1988, with a projected 40 mil-
lion in 2011 and 50 million in 2019 (National Institute
on Aging, 2009, p. 5). And, 72 million older Americans
are predicted to be alive in 2030 when the last of the “baby
boomers” turns 65 years old (CDC, 2013, p 1). In fact,
the population 85 years and older grew dramatically from
1950 to 1990. According to U.S. Census Bureau esti-
mates, there were 5.7 million Americans aged 85 and older
in 2010, with the projection that this number will grow
to 8.5 million in 2030 and 18.2 million in 2050 (National
Institute on Aging, 2009, p. 5). Worldwide, the popula-
tion over 65 years of age and older was estimated as 
524 million in 2010 (8 percent of the global population)
with a projection that by 2050 there will be 1.5 billion
older people, or 16 percent of the global population 
(National Institute on Aging, 2011, p. 4). The country
with the greatest percentage of people over 65 is currently
Japan, but with the rapid population growth by 2050, 
65 and older population predictions are expected in China
(330 million from 110 million in 2010) and India 
(227 million from 60 million in 2010) (National Institute
on Aging, 2010, p. 5). 
Despite Medicare coverage, the growing population 
of aging Americans, especially those over 85 years, is 
experiencing differences in purchasing power and socioe-
conomic status. The affordability of healthcare and med-
ications is a serious concern to our aging population. For
example, in 2008, older Americans averaged a 57 percent
increase of out-of-pocket expenditures since 1998 and
spent an average of $2,844 for insurance, $793 for medical
services, $821 for drugs, and $143 for medical supplies
(Administration on Aging [AOA], 2009, p. 15). Medicare
Part D and new provisions with the Affordable Care Act
will reduce some of these escalating expenditures.
However, disposable income is a consideration in 
retirement. In 2008, approximately 3.7 million elderly
persons (9.7%) were living below the federal poverty level,
with another 6.3 million classified as “near poor” at 125 per-
cent of the federal poverty level (Administration on Aging,
2010, p. 11). In 2010, this percentage of elderly people living
at the federal poverty level had declined to 9 percent, 
with 26 percent classified in a low income group (Federal
Interagency Forum on Aging-related Statistics, 2012, 
p. 13). There has been some change related to availability
of pensions to workers in the second half of the 20th cen-
tury in addition to Social Security assistance, but differ-
ences in income are evident related to socioeconomic
status, race, gender, marital status, and geography.
The difference between healthy life and unhealthy 
life is the loss of independence in activities of daily life
and increasing dependence on others for health and rou-
tine care. We now see chronic illness rather than acute 
illness as the major morbidity factor in aging adults. Pre-
vention of disability and promotion of independent func-
tioning are essential and can be aided by healthy behaviors
such as smoking cessation, good nutrition, reduction 
of sodium intake and body weight, reduction in social 
isolation, regular physical activity, and availability of 
primary care services.
Approximately one-third of people hospitalized are
older than 65 years. In the acute care setting, the average
length of stay for individuals over 65 years was 5.6 days,
compared with 4.8 days for individuals of all ages (AOA,
2010, p. 13). Even though the average length of hospital
stays has shortened, those older than 65 years require a
great proportion of our resources, both in and out of the
acute care setting. With projections for a dramatic increase
in the older population and the associated costs, several
national projects and metrics have been initiated to pro-
mote healthy lifestyles and lifestyle changes for seniors. As
noted by the director of the Centers for Disease Control
CHAPTER 14 Population Health     ●
243
Life Expectancy (in Years) at Birth, 65, and 75
1900
1950
1980
1990
2000
2010
At Birth
47.3
68.2
73.7
75.4
76.8
Males 76.2 Females 81.0 Both sexes 78.7
At 65 Years
11.9
13.9
16.4
17.2
17.6
Males 16.0 Females 19.0 Both sexes 17.6
At 75 Years
—
—
10.4
10.9
11.0
Males 11.0  Females 12.9, Both sexes 12.1
Sources: National Center for Health Statistics. (2013). Life expectancy at birth, at age 65, and at age 75, by sex, race, and Hispanic
origin: United States, selected years 1900–2010. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/hus13.pdf#018
TABLE 14.2

and Prevention (CDC, 2013d), “more than a quarter of
all Americans and two out of three older Americans have
multiple chronic conditions, and treatment for this pop-
ulation accounts for 66% of the country’s health care
budget” (p. ii). For example, think about safety with med-
ications (availability, administration, and interactions) and
in the prevention of falls and the associated cost factors.
Theories on and Types of Aging
With the focus on health promotion and quality of life for
the growing aging population and the entry of the in-
creased number of baby boomers into this category, re-
search has evolved in several disciplines, all proposing
different theories on aging. No agreement on a specific the-
ory has emerged. Research continues, and our knowledge
of the aging process grows with biological, sociological, psy-
chological, longevity, medical, and nursing theories on
aging. For example, medical theories highlight disease-
related influences on physiological functioning of the per-
son, while nursing theories propose functional consequences
in which age-related changes are the risk factors.
Interestingly, aging has also been classified as success-
ful, usual, or pathological (Rowe & Kahn, 1987). In suc-
cessful aging, there is a positive interaction between the
individual’s genes and the environment. Such an interac-
tion results in no serious detriment in functioning from
the middle 20s until the early 70s. Minimal measurable
changes in functioning are seen, with these  individuals as
the energetic and functional “survivors” in aging. Success-
ful agers represent only about 5 to 10 percent of the pop-
ulation. These individuals are the aging “stars” we aspire
to be—those active, energetic, and involved elders we 
revere, admire, or respect.
Usual aging occurs in the vast majority of indivi duals.
With usual aging we observe an interaction between the
person’s genetic endowment and their environment. A
neutral or negative environment has positive or neutral
genes. Think about diet, cholesterol, and heredity, and in-
dividual differences for the person as affected by heredity
and the unique environment. This raises concern for the
reversible risk factors that occur with aging. The gene-
environment interaction leads to obvious functional lim-
itations, but the limitations are not serious enough to af-
fect activities of daily living (ADLs) as long as the person
makes compromises and adaptations. An example is the
person whose mobility is limited but who adjusts to the
limitation and is still able to live independently without
assistance in daily life. With usual aging, we may also see
genetic diseases, but again, adaptations are made that do
not significantly interfere with independent daily func-
tioning. This is the quality of life focus for the increasing
numbers of aging adults.
At the opposite extreme is pathological aging. Here we
see a negative interaction between genetic and environ-
mental factors. Some combination of negative or neutral
influences arises from both the individual’s genes and the
environment. We often see clinical evidence of genetic dis-
eases in these aging individuals. This gene-environment
interaction leads to serious functional limitations for the
individual, such as being unable to take care of personal
needs, inability to  perform ADLs, and sometimes the in-
ability to sustain life. These functional limitations require
substantial intervention. Prevention of disabilities and
quality of life issues in this population are the focus of
healthy initiatives.
Characterizing Aging Americans
We have acknowledged that aging adults represent a grow-
ing segment of our population, especially those 85 years
and older and those who are members of minority groups.
As these population proportions increase even more, we
will need to consider individual differences, needs of age
groups, cultural and ethnic trends, and changing family
patterns. Intergenerational issues will involve more than
children, parents, grandparents, and great-grandparents.
Consider the complexity of a family with two or three
older adult groups, those in their middle to late 60s, 80s,
and 100s, as well as the family members younger than age
60. The concern also arises as to who will be the caregiver
for the frail older adult. Will the 80-year-old be caring for
a frail spouse as well as a 99-year-old mother, or will the
60-year-old be caring for both the 80-year-old parents and
the 99-year-old grandmother and perhaps be the head of
the household also caring for grandchildren? Older women
are expected to continue to outnumber men by at least
three to two, according to life expectancy projections.
Residential Changes
About 30% (11.3 million) of noninstitutionalized older
persons live alone (8.3 million women, 3.0 million men).
Half of older women (49 percent) aged 75 years and older
live alone. 
Living arrangements are an important factor for aging
adults. Most aging adults live in the community, usually
with a spouse, alone, or with adult offspring. The propor-
tion of people older than 65 who are living in nursing
homes is less than 5 percent. And approximately 30 per-
cent, or 11.3 million aging adults, live alone in the com-
munity, with 49 percent of women 75 years of age and
older living alone (AOA, 2010, p. 1). Decisions about liv-
ing arrangements should include considerations for optimal
promotion of functional independence and health. Oppor-
tunities for social interactions and access to resources and
caregivers, when needed, are vital considerations.
Various housing options are considered by aging
adults. In our more mobile society, being tied to a home-
stead may no longer be preferable, especially for urban
and younger aging adults. Retirement planning may in-
clude relocating to a more temperate climate or closer to
grandchildren. Instead of the large family home, smaller
detached homes, condominiums, town homes, gated re-
tirement communities, continuing care communities, as-
sisted-living apartments, senior homes, and group homes
are options, depending on needs, affordability, and acces-
sibility. In addition, a frail elder may relocate again to live
with a child or other relative after the death of the spouse,
sale of the retirement home, or growing loss of functional
independence.
Physical Changes
Characteristics of aging adults continue to be as varied as
the individuals themselves. Aging adults come with years
244
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

of unique experiences that have molded their  psychosocial
profile. Physically and physiologically, aging adults also
differ in development and progression of age-related
changes. Aging is progressive and irreversible, but the
manner in which these changes occur is variable. Appear-
ance changes and motor activities slow down. But things
do not stop without some disease process. Aging adults are
more susceptible to disease and environmental factors.
Maintaining homeostasis is more difficult.
Age-related changes occur in biological systems. Skin
becomes less elastic. Sweat glands, temperature recep-
tors, pigment, and subcutaneous fat decrease. This
makes the aging adults more susceptible to temperature
extremes (cold and hot), sunlight, and injury. Other
senses are affected by aging as well. Visual and hearing
acuity diminish. Adaptation of the lens and ocular 
muscles decreases, with a decrease in depth perception.
Glare and driving at night become stressful, especially
if the aging person looks at oncoming headlights. The
home environment must be well illuminated, but with
nonglare lights. For example, reducing the glare with
fluorescent lights can also lower the chance of accidents,
especially falls. Print may need to be larger and bolder.
Eye examinations are important. The loss of the driver’s
license may be devastating to an aging person, even if
his driving is limited.
Moreover, muscle mass and strength decrease, and
joints may be stiff with arthritis. Muscle mass may be re-
placed with connective tissue. Osteoporosis occurs with
calcium losses and hormonal changes, and worsens with
inactivity. Low-impact, isometric, and routine exercises
can prevent further immobility and loss of function. 
Digestion and slower motility are improved with small
meals. Food may taste and smell bland. Herbs and sea-
soning can be used, but one must beware of hidden
sodium content.
Changes in level of consciousness and delirium are
not normal signs of aging. Neurological changes do
occur but may indicate an underlying pathology or drug
interaction. If this situation continues, possibilities
should always be investigated further with referrals.
Time rather than loss should be the first thought with
the delays that may happen; it may take a little more
time to remember something, but that does not mean
that the memory is lost.
Sexuality and sexual intercourse continue, but adapta-
tion may be needed as well, such as more time for arousal,
excitement, and foreplay, or lubrication for vaginal dry-
ness. Impotence should be evaluated for pathology or pos-
sible drug side effects. Counseling, erectile aids, reduction
in alcohol consumption, and changes in medications are
all possible treatments. Sexual activity need not stop be-
cause of advancing age, although partner availability may
become an issue.
Major Health Problems 
of Aging Adults
Chronic illness and frailty are primary concerns of aging
adults and their healthcare professionals. Diseases com-
mon to aging include osteoporosis, diabetes, stroke, de-
pression, arthritis, dementias, cancer, and cardiovascular
disease.
Consider the key health indicators of older Americans
listed in Box 14.2. The first one, physically unhealthy 
days, measures the number of days out of the previous 
30 days that a respondent’s physical health, including
physical illness and injury, was self-reported as “not good.”
A slight but insignificant decline in the mean number of
days was reported between 2004 (5.1 days for adults 
65 to 74 years and 6.4 days for adults 75+ years) and 2010
(4.9 days for adults 65 to 74 years and 6.0 for those 
75+ years of age) for all states (CDC, 2012), but some
states had lower scores reported by aging adults, as with
respondents in Hawaii, New Hampshire, North Dakota,
and Connecticut in 2010. Self- perception of health status
was also assessed in 2009, with 41.6 percent of older per-
sons assessing their health as excellent or very good in the
overall population, and little difference between men and
women over 65 years (AOA, 2010). However, there were
differences among racial groups, with older African Amer-
icans (25.1 percent), American Indians/Alaska Natives
(23.2 percent), and Hispanics (28.0 percent) less likely to
rate their health as excellent to very good than their coun-
terpart of older whites (41.8 percent) or Asians (35.2 per-
cent) (AOA, 2010). Another study on disability and
activity limitations in 2007 found that 25 percent of older
adults living in the community had difficulty performing
one or more ADLs (AOA, 2010, p. 14), however, these
limitations were increased markedly by age groups 65–74,
74–84, and 85 and older. Older individuals living in the
community increasingly report limitations of daily activi-
ties as a result of at least one chronic illness. In addition,
it has been noted that the presence of a severe disability 
is associated with lower income levels and educational 
attainment (AOA, 2010, p. 14).
Consider the difference between disability and
chronicity. Disability is the inability to do something be-
cause of a physical or mental impairment. Chronicity is
CHAPTER 14 Population Health     ●
245
BOX 14.2
Key Indicators of Older Adult Health
Health Status
●Physically Unhealthy Days 
●Frequent Mental Distress 
●Oral Health; Tooth Retention
●Disability 
Health Behaviors
●Leisure Time Activity in the Past Month 
●Fruits and Vegetables Consumed Daily 
●Obesity 
●Current Smoking
●Medication for Hypertension  
Preventive Care and Screening
●Flu Vaccine in the Past Year 
●Pneumonia Vaccine 
●Mammogram Within the Past 2 Years 
●Colorectal Cancer Screening 
●Up-to-date on Preventive Services 
Injuries
●Fall Within the Past Year  
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013b). Healthy
people targets. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/aging/help/
DPH-Aging/healthy-people.html   

related to duration or recurrence of a condition. The in-
dividual may have a chronic condition but, with healthy
behaviors, he or she can limit, delay, or prevent disability.
Hence, health promotion behaviors and empowerment of
the individual are essential for taking charge of one’s own
life. Unlike the irreversible normal changes of aging, risk
factors can be reduced and in some cases eliminated.
Risks in aging adults include physical, environmental,
psychosocial, and chemical factors. Physical risks affect the
biological system and related physiological function. 
Examples of physical risks are limitations in flexibility lead-
ing to falls and vision changes, resulting in automobile 
accidents. Environmental risks can be natural or artificial.
Natural environmental risks include ultraviolet radiation
and weather extremes. Examples of artificial or human-
made environmental risks are poor air quality, hazards in
housing, and lack of maintenance of equipment. Psychoso-
cial risks are a part of everyday life, whether the aging 
person is isolated or active. Stress levels from illness of self,
family members, or friends take an increasing toll on the
individual. An inward focus on problems may make the
aging person more egocentric and, as a result, more iso-
lated. To address these risks, the special needs of aging
adults should be considered.
Needs of Aging Adults
The major needs of aging adults roughly parallel the lead-
ing health indicators in Healthy People 2010 and have been
made a distinct topical area for Healthy People 2020.
Longevity factors that have been supported by research 
include genetics, gender, environment, physical activity,
alcohol consumption, sexual activity, nutrition, and social
factors (such as economics, marital status, and family), 
religious beliefs, purpose in life, and laughter. Positive 
behaviors must be directed at promoting and maintaining
health and functional independence and at reducing risk
factors and disability. The aging adult also requires access
to affordable healthcare, including transportation and 
acceptability of the provider to the person.
Family needs and issues are another consideration.
Given the proportion of aging adults living in the
 community and projections for population increases, espe-
cially in the group 85 years and older, family needs are a
major issue in health promotion and care activities. Much
can be found in the literature about family decisions for
nursing home placement and the “sandwich generation” of
caregivers. But recall that only a small proportion of older
adults live in institutional settings, the great majority being
cared for in the community. In addition, consider the pro-
jected increase in number of aging adults in minority
groups and the importance of the extended family in some
cultures. Likewise, the growing older population uses many
resources, placing a strain on society as a whole.
Lay Caregivers
The fact is that caring for a frail older adult takes a major
toll on the caregiver and the family. The number of infor-
mal and family caregivers is approaching 40 million na-
tionwide, most of them women caring for relatives, adult
children with disabilities, or their grandchildren. The
physical and emotional toll on the caregiver can be enor-
mous while the caregiver continues maintaining other
family, social, work, and personal obligations. The physi-
cal and emotional strains on the caregiver often compro-
mise her health. Financial and economic difficulties can
compound the strain on the caregiver.
The concept of respite care, to give the caregiver 
a break, is ideal but is not always perceived as available, 
affordable, or even emotionally acceptable. Regardless, the
caregiver will need some form of respite, and this must be
determined, sought, and used regularly. The reauthoriza-
tion of the Older Americans Act supported demonstration
projects on caregiving and authorized the National Family
Caregiver Support Program. This program provides sup-
port and resources at the state and local levels for informal
caregivers providing care for their older relatives or adults
with disabilities. User-friendly Web sites are available to
provide information on resources and support for both
caregivers and professionals. Tax credits and reimbursable
services are available in some areas for lay care of elders.
In addition, family leave through the Family and Medical
Leave Act (FMLA) also addresses the need for care of
spouses and parents with serious health conditions.
Societal Needs
Societal needs and issues are another consideration for
aging adults. Public policy issues include the availability
and allocation of resources for aging adults as well as the
use of these resources. Some people contend that aging
adults are using the vast majority of the resources with
their chronic health problems. Focusing on the prevention
of these health problems in the baby boomers is critical.
Healthcare legislation and financing for aging adults
occur mainly through the Social Security amendments and
246
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
O N L I NE  C ONSULT  
CDC: The State of Aging and Health in America
Report at 
http://www.cdc.gov/features/agingandhealth/state_
of_aging_and_health_in_america_2013.pdf
ON LIN E CON SULT 
AARP: Caregiving at 
http://www.aarp.org/relationships/caregiving/ 
Administration for Community Living at
http://www.acl.gov/Index.aspx
CDC: Family Caregiving: The Facts at
http://www.cdc.gov/aging/caregiving/facts.htm
Family Caregiver Alliance at 
https://caregiver.org/about-fca
National Alliance for Caregiving at 
http://www.caregiving.org/ 
AOA: The National Family Caregiver Support 
Program at
http://www.aoa.acl.gov/AoA_Programs/HCLTC
/Caregiver/index.aspx
The Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 at
http://www.dol.gov/whd/fmla/index.htm

budget reconciliation acts, which include Medicare and
Medicaid funding. With Medicaid, the role, legislation, and
funding levels fall within the domain of the state of resi-
dence. But what about part-time residents who spend half
of the year in a state in which they do not claim primary
residence? What about the issue of reverse migration of frail
aging adults who, after years of retirement in a satisfactory
condition in one state, lose a spouse and become increas-
ingly frail, move to be cared for by their children? Their af-
fluence was spent somewhere else, but when they move near
the children, the new community must absorb the cost of
chronic health conditions and increasing frailty. Similar sit-
uations can have great impact on society and resources.
Elder Abuse
Another area of concern at the individual, family, and 
societal levels is elder abuse. This includes physical neglect
or violence, verbal abuse, psychological or emotional
abuse, financial exploitation, and sexual abuse. It may be
intended or unintended in active or passive actions of the
abuser. Those aging individuals most at risk are the frail
elderly who are functionally impaired and depend on oth-
ers. The Administration on Aging (AOA, 2014a, 2014b)
provides information on this serious situation and finan-
cially funds the National Center on Elder Abuse. The 
National Center on Elder Abuse (2014a) has reported that
elder abuse perpetrators are frequently family members,
both men and women, most often the victim’s adult child
or spouse. The  elders may be in dysfunctional family sit-
uations or even in nursing homes, but they often fear
being alone more than the abuse or neglect they are expe-
riencing. The National Center on Elder Abuse (2014b)
has described the abuse of noninstitutionalized, institu-
tionalized, and disabled elders but cannot determine the
exact extent of the problem because many cases are not 
reported. Assessment, reporting, education, and counsel-
ing are responsibilities of providers and members of soci-
ety. Elder abuse has also been related to caregiver stress.
Special efforts being made to address this growing problem
include the Older Americans Act and other national leg-
islation for awareness and outreach. “Additionally, a new
indicator has been included in the Healthy People 2020
 initiative, increasing the number of states that collect and
publicly report incidences of elder maltreatment” (Federal
Interagency Forum on Aging-Related Statistics, 2012, 
pp. 72–73).
Elder abuse is only one aspect of the broader domestic
violence problem in this country. The frail elder is cer-
tainly not the only one affected by abuse or violence in the
environment. Spouses, parents, and significant others are
all considerations in cases of domestic violence. In fact, es-
timates are that almost 15 percent of women and 4 percent
of men have been injured as a result of intimate partner
violence that included rape, physical violence, and/or
stalking (National Domestic Violence Hotline, 2014).
If you suspect that an older person is being abused or
neglected, you must call the adult protective services of
the state where the elder is located. Proof is not required,
and calls are confidential. Some states have separate 
reporting lines for domestic versus institutional elder abuse.
Access the agency to contact in your state at http://www
.thehotline.org/help/resources/#tab-id-1
MINORITY HEALTH
In pursuit of the goal to eliminate health disparities, Healthy
People 2010 identified the following demographic groups
within which health disparities occur: gender, race or eth-
nicity, education or income, disability, geographic location,
and sexual orientation. In the area of race or ethnicity,
Healthy People proposed that the identified disparities were
“the result of the complex interaction among genetic varia-
tions, environmental factors, and specific health behaviors”
(USDHHS, 2000a, p. 12). The following disparities be-
tween white and minority populations were documented:
●Higher infant mortality rates for African Americans,
Native Americans, and Alaskan Natives
●A higher incidence of cancer and heart disease for
African Americans
●Higher mortality from HIV/AIDS for African 
Americans
●Increased diabetes-related deaths for Hispanic 
Americans and a higher incidence of diabetes for 
Native Americans and Alaskan Natives
●A higher incidence of hypertension and obesity in 
Hispanic Americans
●High death rates from unintentional injuries and 
suicide for Native Americans and Alaskan Natives
●High rates of tuberculosis in Hispanics, Asians, and
Pacific Islanders
●High rates of hepatitis in Asians and Pacific Islanders.
(USDHHS, 2000a, p. 12)
Health disparities continued despite the goal for elim-
ination in the Healthy People 2010 goal. The Healthy Peo-
ple 2020 goal directed in this area is to “achieve health
equity, eliminate disparities, and improve the health of all
groups” (UDHHS, 2014a, 1). Clearly, the reasons for the
occurrence of the health disparities among ethnic groups
are multifaceted and complex and the focus of many dif-
ferent initiatives to address the national goals. A large focus
of minority health is on the special needs of groups char-
acterized by race or ethnicity. The Office of Minority
Health and Health Equity of the CDC (2014) classifies
racial or ethnic minority populations as follows:
●American Indian and Alaskan Native
●Asian
●Black or African American
●Hispanic or Latino
●Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander
CHAPTER 14 Population Health     ●
247
ON LIN E CON SULT 
Administration on Aging: What is elder abuse? at 
http://www.aoa.gov/AoA_programs/elder_rights
/EA_prevention/whatisEA.aspx
National Family Caregiver Support Program at
http://www.aoa.gov/AoA_programs/HCLTC
/Caregiver/index.aspx
National Center on Elder Abuse at
http://www.ncea.aoa.gov/
National Domestic Violence Hotline at 
http://www.thehotline.org

During Healthy People 2010, a 2001 study con-
ducted by the Commonwealth Fund documented racial
and ethnic disparities in the areas of insurance coverage,
health perceptions, incidence of and mortality from
chronic conditions, and higher utilization of emergency
services and no source of regular care (Collins et al.,
2002, p. 39). In a further study on racial and ethnic
data-collection processes, the researchers concluded,
“minority data collection and reporting was inconsistent
and sometimes contradictory” (Perot & Youdelman,
2001, p. 24). Stabilization was recommended. And we
continue to investigate the issues and differences among
population groups and the needs of the members. The
Commonwealth Fund identified that racial and ethnic
disparities exist in numerous areas of diagnosis, treat-
ment, and preventive care (even when income, insurance
status, and other socioeconomic factors are held con-
stant). California, Florida, and Louisiana have been 
active in dealing with minority health issues through
statutes (Gamble et al., 2006, p. 2) to address their large
diverse populations.
Addressing the Disparities
Plans are ongoing to address current and emerging mi-
nority issues in order to achieve the goal of elimination
of disparities. Federal, state, and local initiatives are ac-
tively focusing on the needs of the nation. In 1999, Con-
gress (Public Law 106–129) directed the Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) to examine
priority populations, including minority groups, low-in-
come groups, women, children, the  elderly, individuals
with special needs, and rural residents. In 2000, Congress
passed the Minority Health and Health Disparities Re-
search and Education Act (Public Law 106–525), estab-
lishing the National Center on Minority Health and
Health Disparities under the National Institutes of
Health (NIH). The NIH, along with its Specialty Insti-
tutes and Centers, integrated this initiative to eliminate
health disparities into the strategic plans for the various
agencies, including the National Institute of Nursing 
Research. Initiatives continue to address not only health
habits and access to care but also provider-patient inter-
actions in their research support.
In 2003, the Kaiser Family Foundation, the Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation, and national heart organiza-
tions, in response to a meta-analysis research on  disparities
in cardiac care in different population groups, led a na-
tional initiative for physician outreach about racial and
ethnic disparities in medical care. This research reviewed
prior rigorous studies in the literature and documented ev-
idence of racial or ethnic differences in cardiac care, with
African Americans less likely to receive certain procedures
and care than their white counterparts despite similar 
patient characteristics (Lillie-Blanton, Rushing, Ruiz,
Mayberry, & Boone, 2002). Mixed findings were reported
for Hispanic patients.
Then, in their 2005 report, the AHRQ (2005) noted
four major themes: disparities still exist, some disparities
are diminishing, opportunities remain for improvement,
and the information on disparities is improving (p. 3). In
2011, the Offices of Minority Health were established
within the following six governmental agencies as a 
requirement of the Affordable Care Act:
●Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)
●Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
●Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
●Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
●Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA)
●Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Adminis-
tration (SAMHSA)
At this time, the CDC Office was renamed from the
Office of Minority Health and Health Disparities to the
Office of Minority Health and Health Equity (OMHHE)
in response to “compelling evidence that race and ethnic-
ity correlate with persistent, and often increasing, health
disparities among US . . . and to advance the science 
and practice of health equity”(p. 2). “Health equity is
achieved when every person has the opportunity to attain
his or her full health potential and no one is disadvan-
taged from achieving this potential because of social po-
sition or other socially determined circumstances” (CDC,
2013a, p. 1). However, the AHRQ (2012) identified that
minority populations continued to lag behind whites in
areas including quality of care, access to care, timeliness,
and outcomes of care and that other problems dispropor-
tionally affect minorities such as provider bases, poor
communication, and health literacy issues (p. 1). Three
new themes were subsequently identified in this report
published in 2012 (Box 14.3). As a leading health indi-
cator, social determinants of health are vital considera-
tions. Social determinants of health have been defined
by the World Health Organization (WHO, 2015) as “the
conditions in which people are born, grow, live, work and
age; these circumstances are shaped by the distribution of
money, power and resources at global, national and local
levels” (p. 1). Social determinants of health are a leading
health indicator in Healthy People 2020 (USDHHS,
2014c) and are described as “in part responsible for the
unequal and avoidable differences in health status within
and between communities” (p. 1). 
Providers and communities must address the docu-
mented disparities. Doing so requires an understanding of
248
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
BOX 14.3
Themes from National Health 
Disparities Report (AHRQ, 2012)
●Health care quality and access are suboptimal, espe-
cially for minority and low-income groups.
●Overall quality is improving, access is getting worse,
and disparities are not changing.
●Urgent attention is warranted to ensure continued
improvements in: 
●Quality of diabetes care, maternal and child health
care, and adverse events
●Disparities in cancer care
●Quality of care among states in the South 
Source: Agency for Health Care Research and Quality (AHRQ).
(2012). 2012 National Healthcare Disparities Report. Rockville,
MD. Retrieved from http://www.ahrq.gov/research/findings/
nhqrdr/nhdr12/index.html 

the evidence and the people. Under the U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services, a national partnership 
was created “to mobilize and connect individuals and 
organizations across the country to create a nation free 
of health disparities, with quality health outcomes for all
people” with the following aims:
●Increase awareness of the significance of health disparities
●Strengthen and broaden leadership for addressing
health disparities at all levels
●Improve health and healthcare outcomes for racial,
ethnic, and underserved populations
●Improve cultural and linguistic competency and the
diversity of the health-related workforce 
●Improve data availability and coordination, utilization,
and diffusion of research and evaluation outcomes
(DHHS National Partnership for Action, 2011, p. 1).
Resources for health professionals and consumers are
available through these governmental agencies (see Online
Consult).
Nevertheless, delivery of services to specific minority
populations such as the Alaskan Native and Hispanic/
Latino groups is influenced by the availability, accessibility,
and acceptability of services. Difficulty with communica-
tion and other problems may hamper acceptance of early
care or access. Acceptability of services may be limited by
the patient’s healthcare beliefs and practices or other fac-
tors. Continuing development in cultural competence is
essential for the nurse to address minority disparities. A
major resource for professionals can be the faith commu-
nity specific to the particular minority population.
The projection for an increase in minority popula-
tions necessitates immediate action for the health of the
nation. Improved data collection has been designed for
enhanced practice based on better evidence. Initiatives
for cultural competence in the current system, improved
communication, and greater diversity of providers are
designed to address existing disparities and perceived
quality of care and health status. And these initiatives
must be reflective of and driven by their local commu-
nities. Collaborative efforts are growing at the national,
state, and local levels. However, the lack of data on cer-
tain populations was noted as a persistent barrier by the
CDC (2013c) in their annual report that called for the
ongoing need to identify disparities and monitor them
over time as a necessary first step toward the develop-
ment and evaluation of evidence-based interventions
that can reduce disparities (p. 186).
RURAL HEALTH
Geographic location has also been identified as a demo-
graphic characteristic for which definable health disparities
exist. Geographic location, both urban and rural, has also
been identified as an area for documenting and addressing
health disparities in the plan for Healthy People 2020. The
National Rural Health Association (NRHA, 2014) identifies
the issues with rural Americans facing a unique combination
of factors that create disparities in healthcare not found in
urban areas, including economic factors, cultural and social
differences, educational shortcomings, lack of recognition by
legislators, and the sheer isolation of living in remote areas
(p. 1). Rural areas have been defined in several ways in the
literature and at the federal level. These divergent definitions
impeded research and policy-making. Most definitions have
been based on population or population density of a speci-
fied area. In 2013, criteria based on the 2010 census were
released, defining an urbanized area with a populated sur-
rounding area of 50,000 or more people, urban clusters with
at least 2,500 and less than 50,000 people, and no explicit
definition of rural or areas with less than 2,500 people. At
the same time, the White House Office of Management and
Budget designates counties as metropolitan (area with a pop-
ulation of 50,000 or more people), micropolitan (areas with
a population between 10,000 and less than 50,000 people),
or neither, with all counties not considered a metropolitan
statistical area designated as rural (HRSA, 2014). However,
the National Rural Health Association (NRHA, 2014a)
“recommends that definitions of rural be specific to the pur-
poses of the programs in which they are used and that these
are referred to as programmatic designations and not as 
definitions” (p. 1).
Certain health problems have been identified as
 particular to people living in rural areas. In fact, Healthy
People 2010 characterized rural health issues as follows:
Twenty-five percent of Americans live in rural areas,
that are with fewer than 2500 residents. Injury-related
death rates are 40 percent higher in rural populations
than in urban populations. Heart disease, cancer, and
diabetes rates exceed those for urban areas. People living
in rural areas are less likely to use preventative screening
services, exercise regularly, or wear seat belts. Timely 
access to emergency services and the availability of 
specialty care are other issues for this population group.
(USDHHS, 2000a, p. 16)
According to 2008 population estimates, 70.5 million
people (23% of the population) in the United States lived
in rural areas compared with the 233.5 million in urban
CHAPTER 14 Population Health     ●
249
O N L I NE  C ONSULT  
USDHHS OMH at 
http://minorityhealth.hhs.gov/ 
AHRQ at 
https://innovations.ahrq.gov/qualitytools/office
-minority-health-resource-center
CCD OMHHE at 
http://www.cdc.gov/minorityhealth/OMHHE.html 
CMS at  
http://www.cms.gov/About-CMS/Agency
-Information/CMSLeadership/Office_OMH.html 
FDA at 
http://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/CentersOffices
/OC/OfficeofMinorityHealth/default.htm
HRSA at 
http://www.hrsa.gov/culturalcompetence
/index.html
SAMHSA at 
http://www.samhsa.gov/minorityfellowship/

areas. And, with Healthy People 2020, the term rural was
replaced with geography to better reflect disparities in the
population for people in both rural and urban areas.
Further complicating matters is the fact that rural com-
munities may share some features but are not all the same.
For example, characteristics and problems of rural resi-
dents in South Georgia may be quite different from those
of rural residents in Montana or New Mexico. It is impor-
tant to be aware that the large majority of rural residents
are not farmers. But for those who are, agriculture is a 
dangerous occupation with great risk of injury and illness,
even for children.
The National Rural Health Association (2014b) char-
acterized the health issues and care for the nearly one-fourth
of the population who live in rural areas as follows:
●Death and serious accidents account for 60 percent of
total rural accidents compared with 48 percent of
urban accidents related to delayed emergency response
times (estimated as 8 minutes longer in rural areas).
●Only about 10 percent of physicians practice in rural
America.
●Rural residents are less likely to have employer-
 provided healthcare coverage or prescription drug 
coverage, and the rural poor are less likely to be 
covered by Medicaid benefits. 
●Rural residents are nearly twice as likely to die from
unintentional injuries other than motor vehicle acci-
dents, with a significantly higher risk for death by 
gunshot.
●Rural residents tend to be poorer, and nearly 24 percent
of rural children live in poverty.
●People who live in rural America rely more heavily on
the federal food stamp program.
●Abuse of alcohol and use of smokeless tobacco is a 
significant problem among rural youth. 
●The majority of first responders in rural areas are 
volunteers.
●There are 60 dentists per 100,000 population in urban
areas, versus 40 per 100,000 in rural areas.
●Dental care and mental health services are less available
in rural areas.
●The incidence of hypertension is higher in rural areas,
as well as the incidence of suicide, particularly among
adult men and children. 
●Medicare payments to rural hospitals and physicians
are dramatically less than those to their urban counter-
parts for equivalent services. 
●Medicare patients with acute myocardial infarction
(AMI) who were treated in rural hospitals were less
likely than those treated in urban hospitals to receive
recommended treatments and had significantly higher
post-AMI death. 
●Rural residents have greater transportation difficulties
reaching healthcare providers and hospitals.
The urban setting features a high volume of patients
with an emphasis on technology-intensive and inpatient
services. The rural setting focuses more on ambulatory care
and features a much lower patient volume, usually more
elderly patients or those with advanced and chronic illnesses. 
The rural health literature addresses a variety of problems.
Two recurring concerns seem to predominate: chronic illness
(particularly in the elderly) and inadequate prenatal care. Just
consider the issue of access in rural areas, especially with chal-
lenges related to reliable transportation, limitations in activ-
ities of daily living secondary to a chronic illness, and cost
factors with additional childcare or loss of income from time
off work. Census data indicates a growth in minority popu-
lations in rural areas, particularly Hispanic or Latino. Not
surprisingly, rural growth is also higher in the more temper-
ate climate areas of the South and the West. Demographic
factors such as age, gender, race and ethnicity, socioeconomic
status, and educational level are all considerations when rural
geography and health status are investigated.
Delivery of services in rural communities is heavily in-
fluenced by the availability, accessibility, and acceptability
of services. Rural communities have fewer resources. Dis-
tance, lack of communication, and other problems may
hamper access. Acceptability of services may be limited by
the patients’ beliefs and practices or other factors. In addi-
tion, the rural community health nurse may well be the
only health professional in the community, working with
very limited resources. Rural residents tend to be religiously
and politically conservative, self-sufficient, and wary of out-
siders (especially urbanites). Thus, the community health
nurse cannot expect to rush eagerly into a rural community
with good intentions and gain immediate acceptance.
Building rapport with residents of a rural community takes
time, and showing respect for their values and beliefs is im-
perative. In other words, the nurse must be sensitive and
must demonstrate cultural competence. A further challenge
is presented when the rural residents are also members of
an ethnic group that is different from that of the nurse.
The rural community health nurse must beware of assum-
ing that these patients (and their problems) are the same as
those of their urban counterparts. Their ruralism may be
as significant as their ethnic identity.
RURAL HEALTH CLINICS
Under Public Law 95-210, rural health clinics (RHCs)
were established in 1977 to provide primary care  services
for residents of medically underserved areas. Under
budget reconciliation acts, requirements for these clinics
have resulted in some changes during their inception.
250
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
ON LIN E CON SULT 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality: Rural
Health at 
http://www.ahrq.gov/research/ruralix.htm
CDC Office of Minority Health and Health 
Equity at 
http://www.cdc.gov/minorityhealth/populations
/atrisk.html#Geography
Health Resources and Services Administration:
Rural Health at
http://www.hrsa.gov/ruralhealth/index.html
National Rural Health Association at 
http://www.ruralhealthweb.org/
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services:
Office of Minority Health at 
http://minorityhealth.hhs.gov/

These clinics are located as permanent facilities or mobile
units throughout the nation with most staffed with ad-
vanced practice nurses (APRNs). To be certified as a
RHC, two general requirements must be met: be located
in a nonurban area and be in a designated shortage area.
There are certain exceptions that may be applied for to
continue as a RHC and receive Medicare designation and
payment for services. One of the newer requirements is
that the RHC employ a nurse practitioner or physician
assistant and have a nurse practitioner, physician assistant,
or certified nurse midwife staffing the clinic at least 
50 percent of the time that services are provided (DHHS
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 2013, p. 5).
In addition to this staffing requirement, the clinics are
certified by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
(CMS) and have specified service and reimbursement
components. Federal legislation has also created the Fed-
erally Qualified Health Center (FQHC) program, which
includes the Migrant Health Center (MHC) and Com-
munity Health Center (CHC) programs funded under
the Public Health Service Act to provide primary care for
medically underserved rural populations. Agencies receiv-
ing funding under the FQHC program must provide pri-
mary services for all age groups including diagnostic and
lab, pharmacy, preventive health and dental, transporta-
tion, case management after hours care, hospital/specialty
care, and emergency medical services either onsite or
through provider arrangements. The RHC program re-
quires similar primary services.
Reimbursement
Reimbursement policy is a major issue for providers 
of rural healthcare. Although some improvements have 
occurred, especially in designated health professional
shortage areas, urban providers are reimbursed by
Medicare at a higher rate than rural providers. Individ-
ual states direct Medicaid reimbursements, so these vary.
An important consideration is economy of scale, in that
certain key services must be available despite the low 
volume of service in rural agencies compared with their
urban counterparts. Home healthcare is also more costly
in the rural area because of low volume and longer travel
distances.
In 2000, reimbursement for care was changed from
cost-based to a prospective payment system (PPS). In ad-
dition, there are specific requirements for payments by
the patients or their secondary insurance. Each year the
allowable payment may change since the per-visit limit is
established by Congress based on the Medicare Economic
Index. Further information on payment systems is pro-
vided in Chapter 16. 
Telecommunication
The use of telecommunications technology in healthcare
(telemedicine or telehealth) has greatly increased in recent
years. It is being used extensively in some areas to en-
hance care of rural residents, as with a specialist at an
urban medical center consulting on a patient in a remote
rural area via telecommunications. This is also occurring
globally, providing consultations, preparation of imaging,
or interpretation of findings. There is a tremendous po-
tential for greater access with telemedicine, but it is not
without problems. Issues such as reimbursement, 
liability, patient privacy, and credentials and licensure
must be addressed.
Based on pilot programs to provide telehealth to rural
areas, the Rural Healthcare Connect Fund was established
in 2013 to expand healthcare provider access to broadband
services and to encourage the formation of state and re-
gional broadband networks linking healthcare providers.
The Rural Healthcare program (FCC, 2014) received fed-
eral funding capped at $400 million dollars annually with
the following goals:
●Increase access to broadband for healthcare providers
(HCPs), especially those serving rural areas.
●Foster development and deployment of broadband
healthcare networks.
●Maximize impact of the FCC universal service health-
care funding.
This available funding to healthcare providers includes
hospitals, rural health clinics, local health departments,
community health centers or health centers providing
healthcare to migrant workers and postsecondary educa-
tional institutions offering heathcare instruction, teaching
hospitals, and medical schools. Linkages to the rural com-
munities are designed to improve both the quality and
quantity of healthcare. As with the national Healthy Peo-
ple 2020 initiative, initiatives with this program will pro-
vide greater outreach and improved health for the rural
population.
COMMUNITY NURSING 
IN THE CONTEXT OF 
HEALTHY PEOPLE
The nature of nursing practice in the community is 
different, dynamic, and responsive. Community health
nursing crosses age, demographic, and specialty groups.
Community health nursing is built upon the principles
CHAPTER 14 Population Health     ●
251
ON LIN E CON SULT 
National Rural Health Association at 
http://www.ruralhealthweb.org/
Rural Health Research Gateway at 
http://www.ruralhealthresearch.org/
Rural Healthy People 2020 at
http://sph.tamhsc.edu/srhrc/rhp2020.html
HRSA: Rural Health Centers at 
http://www.hrsa.gov/healthit/toolbox/
RuralHealthITtoolbox/Introduction/ruralclinics.
html
HRSA: Telehealth at 
http://www.hrsa.gov/ruralhealth/about/telehealth/
telehealth.html
USDA Rural Economy and Population at 
http://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/rural-economy-
population/rural-classifications/what-is-rural.aspx

of nursing and public health, with the broader focus on
the patient in the context of his environment for health
promotion and illness treatment and prevention. Com-
munity health nursing crosses many traditional bound-
aries, is holistic, and is not limited to a particular age
group, diagnostic category, or narrow set of specialized
skills. Although patients include individuals and families,
community health nursing may have a group or even an
entire community as a client. Patients may be well or ill.
Their health risks or needs may be either physical or 
mental in nature. In addition, spiritual needs are also 
a consideration, especially with parish- or faith-based 
nursing care.
Several factors determine the roles, activities, and in-
tervention strategies of an individual community health
nurse, working in the context of Healthy People:
●Mission, philosophy, and priorities of the employing
agency
●Level of prevention at which intervention is aimed
●Definition of patient/client
The mission, philosophy, and priorities of a private agency
or a faith-based organization can be quite different from
those of an official government agency. The level of fund-
ing influences how well the agency is able to implement
its priorities, which should be based on identified health
needs in the community.
Another factor that influences the functions for the
community health nurse is the agency’s level of prevention
focus. Community health nurses are involved in all three
levels of prevention. However, historically these nurses
have played a key role in primary prevention efforts. For
more than 100 years they have been involved in health
promotion and disease prevention. Over the past years,
and despite initiatives like Healthy People, these traditional
services have suffered under-reimbursement, with health
departments compelled to provide more direct clinical
services. Consequently, many public health nurses have
taken on a role that is more illness-oriented. Nevertheless,
Healthy People priorities clearly reflect a need for commu-
nity health nurses, especially those in public health agen-
cies, to renew and strengthen their role in primary
prevention.
Community health nursing is frequently described
in the literature as a synthesis of nursing and public
health. Public health is unique because it broadens con-
cerns to the “public” with a population and collaborative
focus. The mission of the Public Health Nursing Sec-
tion of the American Public Health Association (APHA,
2014) is to “advance the health of the population in
partnership with the community through evidence-
based practice, education, and research” (p. 1). They
further state that “in any setting, the role of public
health nurses focuses on the prevention of illness, injury
or disability, the promotion of health, and maintenance
of the health of populations” (American Public Health
Association, 2014, p. 2).
In published standards of public health, the American
Nurses Association (2013), in collaboration with other
public health nursing organizations, identified six stan-
dards of public health nursing practice consistent with 
the nursing process (assessment, population diagnosis and
priorities, outcomes identification, planning, implemen-
tation, and evaluation) and 10 standards of professional
performance (ethics, education, evidence-based practice
and research, quality of practice, communication, lead-
ership, collaboration, professional practice evaluation,
resource utilization, environmental health, and advo-
cacy). The focus is on promoting and protecting the
health of populations. Clearly, an interdisciplinary
focus is necessary to address the health of the commu-
nity and the people who make up that community. 
An important consideration, as mentioned in Healthy
People, is the environmental concerns that affect the
health of the community. This includes population
threats as well as the promotion of health of individuals
and groups and a healthier environment for the popu-
lation. In addition to Healthy People 2020, the National
Prevention Strategy released in 2011 with the annual
report in 2013 documented progress across governmen-
tal agencies to address the following four strategic 
directions: 
●Healthy and Safe Community Environments
●Clinical and Community Preventive Services
●Empowered People 
●Elimination of Health Disparities (National Preven-
tion, Health Promotion, and Public Health Council,
2013)
The documented multiagency involvement is appar-
ent with interprofessional collaboration vital to advance
the health of the public. As noted by Teutsch, Chokshi,
Stine, and Fielding (2013), “the public health orientation
toward geographic populations and the clinical focus on
individuals engaged in care can be difficult to unite in
shared accountability’” (p. 1). However, “the aim of pop-
ulation health as a discipline is virtually synonymous with
public health: to maintain and improve the health of a
defined human population, correct deviations from good
health, and reduce health inequities across population
groups” (White, Stallones, and Last, 2013, pp. 106–107).
These are shared values for clinicians, politicians, policy
analysts, and consumers. And nurses practicing in public
health or community health settings are a vital part of this
initiative to improve the health and environment of the
public. Population-focused nursing is fundamental to
baccalaureate generalist practice focused on population
health and clinical prevention (AACN, 2008), described
more specifically in the supplement, Public Health: Recom-
mended Baccalaureate Competencies and Curricular Guide-
lines for Public Health Nursing (AACN, 2013), which
requires “an ecological perspective in health assessment,
planning, and interventions with individuals, families, and
groups” (AACN, 2013, p. 25). 
Challenges exist in many areas for professional nurs-
ing practice as we address the health needs of national
and global populations. Whether talking about the aging
member of a minority population, the well elder in the
community, the rural child with asthma, or the individual
with diabetes, health professionals focus on high-quality
lives free of preventable disease, health equity and the elim-
ination of health disparities, environments that promote
good health, and quality of life and healthy development
as stated in the goals for Healthy People 2020.
252
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

CHAPTER 14 Population Health     ●
253
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ, 2014) reported that Americans in 2011 made
about 421 visits to the emergency department (ED) for every 1,000 individuals in the population, and more
than five times as many individuals who visited an ED were discharged as were admitted to the same hospital.
In addition, for patients younger than 18 years, the most common reasons for admission to the hospital after
an ED visit were acute bronchitis (infants younger than 1 year), asthma (patients aged 1 to 17 years), and
pneumonia (infants and patients aged 1 to 17 years); in adults aged 45 to 84 years, septicemia was the most
frequent reason for admission to the hospital after an ED visit (AHRQ, 2014, p. 1). They also found that ED
visits were potentially preventable in that access to high-quality community-based healthcare can prevent the
need for a portion of the ED visits (AHRQ, 2014, p.1).
You are working as a nurse manager in the emergency department in a rural hospital and have noticed an
increased number of low-income elderly patients who have been diagnosed with hip  fractures.
Question: What are the characteristics of your patient population? What health promotion activities 
will you discuss at your next staff meeting? And how can these activities be implemented in your emergency
department?
Source: Agency for Quality and Research (AHRQ). (2014). Overview of emergency department visits in the United States, 2011: Statistical brief #174.
Retrieved from http://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/reports/statbriefs/sb174-Emergency-Department-Visits-Overview.jsp. Retrieved from
http://www.ahrq.gov/news/nn/nn111810.htm 
K E Y  P O I N T S
●Public health focuses on protection of the public from health threats.
●Population health is an area of inquiry measured by health indicators, such as social, economic, and physi-
cal environments, personal health practices, individual capacity and coping skills, human biology, individual
development, health services, and demographic forces that shape the composition of populations (White,
Stallones, and Last, 2013, p. 106).
●Healthy People 2010 built upon the information from the prior decade but was developed with the two
major goals of increasing the quality and years of healthy life and eliminating health disparities. It uses a
framework of 28 focus areas, 467 objectives, and 10 leading health indicators.
●Leading health indicators reflected the major public health concerns in the nation.
●Healthy People 2020 builds on the work of the 2010 initiative but is guided by a vision, mission, and four
goals to address the health of the nation. Objectives under 42 topical areas were developed based on the
data from 2010, specific criteria, and input from the public. In addition, four foundation health measures
were specified to monitor the health of the nation for both progress and in terms of quality of life issues.
●Proportional increases in the population of aging adults are predicted, with the greatest increase in those
85 years and older. Women currently account for a large proportion of this group. Predictions include an
increase in minority groups represented in our aging population.
●Chronic illnesses and increasing frailty are the major causes of morbidity in aging adults. Disability is the
inability to do something because of a physical or mental impairment. Chronicity is related to duration or
recurrence of a condition.
●Aging adults face physical, environmental, psychosocial, and chemical risk factors. The risks commonly af-
fect many aging adults, creating conditions that interfere with activity. Health-promotion activities are vital
in this area to maintain functional ability and reduce the incidence of frailty and disability.
●Evidence that health disparities exist among ethnic groups of all ages has been documented; however,
reasons for their occurrence are multifaceted and complex. Minority health is an important initiative for
the health of the nation.
●The Office of Minority Health and Health Equity of the CDC (2014) classifies racial or ethnic minority
populations as American Indian and Alaskan Native, Asian, Black or African American, Hispanic or Latino,
and Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander.
Continued

254
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
K E Y  P O I N T S—cont’d
●Health equity is achieved when every person has the opportunity to attain his or her full health potential
and no one is disadvantaged from achieving this potential because of social position or other socially de-
termined circumstances (CDC, 2013a, p. 1).
●Social determinants of health are the conditions in which people are born, grow, live, work, and age and
are shaped by the distribution of money, power, and resources at global, national, and local levels
(WHO, 2015).
●In 2013, new criteria based on the 2010 census were released, defining an urbanized area as a central city
with a densely populated surrounding area of 50,000 or more. Rural areas are generally defined as areas
with a population of less than 2,500. However, the White House Office of Management and Budget 
designates counties as metropolitan (area with a population of 50,000 or more people),  micropolitan
(area with a population between 10,000 and less than 50,000 people), or neither, with all counties not
considered a metropolitan statistical area designated as rural (HRSA, 2014). 
●Rural health clinics (RHCs) have been established to provide primary care services for residents of under-
served areas. Federal legislation has also created the Community Health Center (CHC) and Migrant
Health Center (MHC) programs to provide primary care for medically underserved rural populations. 
●Community health nursing is frequently described in the literature as a synthesis of nursing and public
health. The mission of the Public Health Nursing Section of the APHA has as its mission “advance the
health of the population in partnership with the community through evidence-based practice, education,
and research” (American Public Health Association, 2014, p. 1).
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Consider one of the goals of Healthy People 2020: “attain high-quality, longer lives free of preventable disease, 
disability, injury, and premature death” (USDHHS, 2014a). Be prepared to share your impressions on achievement
of this national goal in a discussion to be scheduled by your instructor.
2. Another goal of Healthy People 2020 is to “promote quality of life, healthy development, and healthy behaviors
across all life stages” (USDHHS, 2014a). Select one objective in Healthy People 2020 from one of the following
topical areas: Adolescent Health; Early and Middle Childhood; Maternal, Infant and Child Health; and Older Adults.
Be prepared to share your impressions on the targets set for this goal and how it is or could be addressed in your
community in a discussion to be scheduled by your instructor.
3. What initiatives and training materials are available in your hospital or agency for the recognition and reporting of
domestic or child abuse?
4. Determine whether your community is a metropolitan statistical area (MSA), a micropolitan area, or a rural popu-
lation area. Investigate what public/community health clinics are available to residents in your community. 
5. Review the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter and discuss it in the context of this chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.
REFERENCES
Administration on Aging (AOA). (2010). A profile of older
Americans: 2010. Retrieved from http://www.aoa.gov/
aoaroot/aging_statistics/profile/2010/docs/2010profile.pdf
Administration on Aging (AOA). (2014a). Elder rights protec-
tion. Retrieved from http://www.aoa.gov/AoARoot/
AoA_Programs/Elder_Rights/index.aspx
Administration on Aging (AOA). (2014b). Prevention of elder
abuse, neglect, and exploitation (Title VII-A3). Retrieved
from http://www.aoa.gov/AoARoot/AoA_Programs/
Elder_Rights/EA_Prevention/index.aspx
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). (2009).
Health care in urban and rural areas, combined years 2004–
2006. Retrieved from http://www.ahrq.gov/policymakers/
health-initiatives/meps/chbook13up.html 

Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). (2011).
Rates of hospital emergency department use greater among
women and low-income, older, and rural Americans. 
Retrieved from http://www.ahrq.gov/news/newsletters
/research-activities/jan11/0111RA23.html 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). 
(2012). 2012 National disparities report. Retrieved from
http://www.ahrq.gov/research/findings/nhqrdr/nhdr12
/index.html#
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ).
(2013a). 2012 National Healthcare Disparities Report.
Rockville, MD. Retrieved from http://www.ahrq.gov
/research/findings/nhqrdr/nhdr12/index.html 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ).
(2013b). Minority health: Recent findings. Retrieved from
http://www.ahrq.gov/research/minorfind.pdf 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). (2014).
Overview of emergency department visits in the United States,
2011: Statistical brief #174. Retrieved from http://www
.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/reports/statbriefs/sb174-Emergency
-Department-Visits-Overview.jsp
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2008).
The essentials of baccalaureate education for professional 
nursing practice. Washington, DC: Author.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2013).
Public health: Recommended baccalaureate competencies and
curricular guidelines for public health nursing. Washington,
DC: Author.
American Nurses Association. (2013). Public health nursing:
Scope and standards of practice 2nd ed. Silver Spring, MD:
Nursebooks.org.
American Public Health Association (APHA). (1991). Healthy
communities 2000: Model standards: Guidelines for commu-
nity attainment of the year 2000 objectives. Washington, DC:
American Public Health Association.
American Public Health Association (APHA). (2014). Public
health nursing section. Retrieved from http://www.apha
.org/membergroups/sections/aphasections/phn/about/
Aspden, P., Wolcott, J., Bootman, J. L., & Cronenwett, L. R.
(Eds.). (2006). Preventing medication errors. Washington,
DC: National Academies Press.
Bolin, J. N., & Bellamy, G. (2014). Rural healthy people 2020.
Retrieved from http://sph.tamhsc.edu/centers/srhrc
/images/rhp2020
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2010a).
Data2010 focus area 01—access to quality health services:
The Healthy People 2010 Database, January, 2010 ed. 
Retrieved from http://wonder.cdc.gov/data2010/
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2011a).
Mean physically unhealthy days in last 30 by demographic
characteristics, chronic disease conditions, and risk factors,
adults >=18 years, BRFSS 2009. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/hrqol/data/tables/table4a.htm
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2011b).
Mean recent activity limitation days in last 30 by demographic
characteristics, chronic disease conditions, and risk factors,
adults >=18 years, BRFSS 2009. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/hrqol/data/tables/table2a.htm
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2012).
Health-related quality of life: Nationwide trend. 
Retrieved from http://apps.nccd.cdc.gov/HRQOL
/TrendV.asp?State=1&Category=3&Measure=2
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013a). Health
equity. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease
/healthequity/index.htm 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013b). Healthy
people targets. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/aging
/help/DPH-Aging/healthy-people.html 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013c). Conclu-
sion and future directions: CDC health disparities and in-
equalities report—United States, 2013. Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report, Supplements 62(03), 184–186. 
Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview
/mmwrhtml/su6203a32.htm?s_cid=su6203a32_w
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013d). The 
state of aging and health in America. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/aging/help/DPH-Aging
/state-aging-health.html
Centers for Disease Control and Protection Office of Minority
Health and Health Equity (CDCOMHHE). (2014). 
Minority health. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov
/minorityhealth/populations.html#REMP
CDC National Center for Health Statistics (CDCNCHS).
(2014). NCHS data on health insurance and access to care.
Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/
health-insurance.htm
CDC Office of Minority Health and Health Equity (CDC
OMHHE). (2013). About OMHHE. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/minorityhealth/OMHHE.html
CDC Office of Minority Health and Health Equity. (2013).
CDC health disparities and inequalities report. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/minorityhealth/CHDIReport.html
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid (CMS). (2013). 
Medicare benefit policy manual Chapter 13 - Rural Health
Clinic (RHC) and Federally Qualified Health Center
(FQHC) services. Retrieved from http://www.cms.gov
/Regulations-and-Guidance/Guidance/Manuals/
Downloads/bp102c13.pdf
Collins, K. S., Hughes, D. L., Doty, M. M., Ives, B. L., Edwards,
J. N., & Tenney, K. (2002). Diverse communities, common
concerns: Assessing health-care quality for minority Americans.
New York: The Commonwealth Fund.
DHHS National Partnership for Action. (2011). Learn about
the NPA. Retrieved from http://minorityhealth.hhs.gov
/npa/templates/browse.aspx?lvl=1&lvlid=11#mis
Federal Communications Commission (FCC). (2014). Rural
health care program. Retrieved from http://www.fcc.gov
/encyclopedia/rural-health-care
Federal Interagency Forum on Aging-Related Statistics. (2012).
Older Americans 2012: Key indicators of well-being. Retrieved
from http://www.agingstats.gov/agingstatsdotnet/Main
_Site/Data/2012_Documents/Docs/EntireChartbook.pdf
Gamble, V. N., Stone, D., Ladenheim, K., Gibbs, B. K., et al.
(2006). Special Issue: Comparative perspectives on health 
disparities. Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law, 
31(1), 1–9.
Health Resources Services Administration (HRSA). (2014).
Defining the rural population. Retrieved from http://
www.hrsa.gov/ruralhealth/policy/definition_of_rural.html 
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2014). Population health implica-
tions and the Affordable Care Act: Workshop summary. 
Washington, DC: National Academy Press. 
Kindig, D., & Stoddart, G. (2003). What is population health?
American Journal of Public Health, 93, 380–383. 
CHAPTER 14 Population Health     ●
255

National Center on Elder Abuse. (2014). Elder abuse prevalence
and incidence. Retrieved from http://www.ncea.aoa.gov/
Main_Site/pdf/publication/FinalStatistics050331.pdf
National Domestic Violence Hotline. (2014). The hotline.
Retrieved from http://www.thehotline.org/is-this-abuse
/statistics/
National Institute on Aging. (2009). Aging in the United States:
Past, present, and future. Washington, DC: U.S. Department
of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration, 
Bureau of the Census.
National Institute on Aging. (2011). Global health and 
aging (NIH Pub. No. 111-7737). Retrieved from
http://www.nia.nih.gov/sites/default/files
/global_health_and_aging.pdf
National Prevention, Health Promotion, and Public Health
Council. (2013). Annual status report. Retrieved from
http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/initiatives/prevention
/about/annual_status_reports.html
National Rural Health Association (NRHA). (2014a). How is
rural defined? Retrieved from http://www.ruralhealthweb.org
/go/left/about-rural-health/how-is-rural-defined
National Rural Health Association (NRHA). (2014b). 
What’s different about rural health care? Retrieved from
http://www.ruralhealthweb.org/go/left/about-rural-health
/what-s-different-about-rural-health-care
Perot, R. T., & Youdelman, M. (2001). Racial, ethnic, and 
primary language data collection in the health care system: An
assessment of federal policies and practices. New York: The
Commonwealth Fund.
President’s Advisory Commission on Consumer Protection and
Quality in the Health Care Industry. (1998). Quality first:
Better health care for all Americans (Final report to the 
President of the United States). Columbia, MD: Consumer
Bill of Rights.
Rowe, J. W., & Kahn, R. L. (1987). Human aging: Usual and
successful. Science, 237, 143–149.
Secretary’s Advisory Committee on the National Health 
Promotion and Disease Prevention Objectives for 2020.
(2008). Phase I report: Recommendations for the framework
and format of Healthy People 2020. Washington, DC: 
Author.
Teutsch, S. M., Chokshi, D. A., Stine, N. W., & Fielding, J. E.
(2013). HALE—unificaion theory or clinical medicine and
population health. Washington, DC: Institute of Medicine.
Retrieved from http://iom.edu/~/media/Files/Perspectives
-Files/2013/Discussion-Papers/BPH-HALE.pdf
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2000a). Healthy People 2010: Volume 1 (2nd ed.). 
Washington, DC: Author
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2000b). Healthy People 2010: Volume 2 (2nd ed.). 
Washington, DC: Author.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2006a). Objective 24–5 school or work days lost, asthma.
Healthy People Midcourse Review. Washington, DC: Author.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2006b). Objective 25–5 human papillomavirus infection,
viral STD illness and disability. Healthy People Midcourse 
Review. Washington, DC: Author.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (USDHHS,
2008). The secretary’s advisory committee on national 
health promotion and disease prevention objectives for 
2020: Phase I report recommendations for the framework
and format of Healthy People 2020. Washington, DC: 
Author. 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2014a). About Healthy People. Retrieved from http://
www.healthypeople.gov/2020/about/default.aspx 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2014b). Disparities. Retrieved from http://www.healthy
people.gov/2020/about/disparitiesAbout.aspx
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2014d). Healthy People 2020 leading health indicators:
Social determinants. Retrieved from http://www.healthy
people.gov/2020/LHI/HP2020_LHI_Soc_Determ.pdf 
U. S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2014e). Healthy People 2020 leading health indicators: Progress
update. Retrieved from http://www.healthypeople.gov
/2020/LHI/progressUpdate.aspx
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2014f). Leading health indicators. Retrieved from
http://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/about/default.aspx 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2014g). Objective development and selection process. Re-
trieved from http://healthypeople.gov/2020/about
/objectiveDevelopment.aspx
White, F., Stallones, L., & Last, J. (2013). Global public health.
New York: Oxford University Press.
World Health Organization. (2015). Social determinants of
health. Retrieved from http://www.who.int/topics/
social_determinants/en/
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). 
(2013). Minority health: Recent findings. Retrieved from
http://www.ahrq.gov/research/findings/factsheets
/minority/minorfind/index.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2000).
Measuring healthy days: Population assessment of health-
related quality of life. Atlanta, GA: Author. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/hrqol/pdfs/mhd.pdf 
Federal Interagency Forum on Child and Family Statistics.
(2013). America’s children in brief: Key national indicators 
of well-being, 2013. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office. Retrieved from http://www.childstats.gov
/americaschildren/
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA). (2014).
The Affordable Care Act and Health Centers. Retrieved from
http://www.bphc.hrsa.gov/about/healthcenterfactsheet.pdf
Koh, H. K., Graham, G., & Glied, S. A. (2011). Reducing
racial and ethnic disparities: The action plan from the 
Department of Health and Human Services. Health Affairs,
30, 1822–1829. 
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2009). Race, ethnicity, and 
language data: Standardization for health care quality im-
provement. Washington, DC: National Academies Press. 
National Center for Health Statistics. (NCHS). (1999). Healthy
People 2000 review, 1998–99. Hyattsville, MD: Public
Health Service.
National Center for Health Statistics.  (2012).  Healthy People
2010 final review. Hyattsville, MD. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/healthy_people/hp2010
/hp2010_final_review.htm
256
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

Niew, M.A., & McEwen, M. (2015). Community health nursing:
Promoting the health of populations (6th ed.).  St. Louis, MO:
Elsevier Saunders.
Public Health Agency of Canada. What is the population health
approach? Retrieved from http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca
/ph-sp/approach-approche/index-eng.php
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2011). 
HHS action plan to reduce racial and ethnic health disparities:
A nation free of disparities in health and health care.
Retrieved from http://www.minorityhealth.hhs.gov
/npa/templates/content.aspx?lvl=1&lvlid=33&ID=285
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of
Public Health and Science, Office of Disease Prevention
and Health Promotion (USDHHS, OPHS). (2001).
Healthy people in healthy communities: A community 
planning guide using Healthy People 2010. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
ONLINE RESOURCES
AARP: Caregiving
http://www.aarp.org/relationships/caregiving/ 
AHRQ
http://www.ahrq.gov/research/ruralix.htm
Administration on Aging
http://www.aoa.gov/ 
Administration for Community Living at
http://www.acl.gov/Index.aspx
CDC: Family Caregiving—The Facts
http://www.cdc.gov/aging/caregiving/facts.htm
CDC Office of Minority Health and Health Disparities
http://www.cdc.gov/omhd/
http://www.cdc.gov/minorityhealth/populations/atrisk.html
#Geography
CDC Healthy Aging
http://www.cdc.gov/aging/
http://wonder.cdc.gov/
http://www.cdc.gov/features/agingandhealth/state_of_aging
_and_health_in_america_2013.pdf
Family Caregiver Alliance
https://caregiver.org/about-fca
U.S. Department of Labor Family and Medical Leave Act at
http://www.dol.gov/whd/fmla/index.htm
Health Resources and Services Administration
http://www.hrsa.gov/ruralhealth/index.html
Healthy People 2020
http://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/about/default.aspx
Rural Health Centers 
http://www.hrsa.gov/healthit/toolbox/RuralHealthI
Ttoolbox/Introduction/ruralclinics.html
National Alliance for Caregiving 
http://www.caregiving.org/ 
National Domestic Violence Hotline
http://www.thehotline.org
Home and Community Based Long-Term Care
http://www.aoa.acl.gov/AoA_Programs/HCLTC/Caregiver
/index.aspx
Rural Health 
http://www.ruralhealthweb.org/
http://ers.usda.gov/publications/eb-economic
-brief/eb24.aspx
Rural Health Research Gateway database
http://www.ruralhealthresearch.org/
Rural Healthy People 2020
http://sph.tamhsc.edu/srhrc/rhp2020.html
USDHHS Office of Minority Health
http://minorityhealth.hhs.gov/
CHAPTER 14 Population Health     ●
257

Informatics and
Documenting 
Outcomes
258
Nursing Informatics
Health Information Systems
Electronic Health Record (EHR)
Standardized Nursing Language
Taxonomies
Nursing Management 
Minimum Data Set 
(NMMDS)
Electronic Prescribing (CPOE)
Office Applications
Handheld PCs
Telehealth
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
“There is a better way to do it; find it.”
Thomas A. Edison
Key Terms
15
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Describe computer and informatics applications used in nursing practice, education, and research.
2. Define the basic terminology used in nursing informatics.
3. Describe the relationship between healthcare provision and health management information systems.
4. Define the specialty practice of nursing informatics and the integration of that role into the nursing
services of a healthcare institution.
5. Identify opportunities for interdisciplinary collaboration from an informatics perspective.
6. Explain telehealth applications and their effect on patients and providers.
7. Describe nursing career opportunities in informatics.

CHAPTER 15 Informatics and Documenting Outcomes     ●
259
“Nursing informatics (NI) is a specialty that integrates
nursing science with multiple information and analytical
sciences to identify, define, manage, and communicate
data, information, knowledge, and wisdom in nursing
practice” (American Nurses Association [ANA], 2015b,
pp. 1–2). Graves and Corcoran (1989) promoted nursing
informatics as a specialty area, and it was quickly sup-
ported by several nursing graduate programs of study.
Nursing informatics was recognized as a specialty for reg-
istered nurses by the American Nurses Association in 1992
and earned credibility through the offering of a certifica-
tion examination by the American Nurses Credentialing
Center. NI as a specialty grows and changes as quickly as
the computer industry and the technology we use in daily
life. This chapter addresses the use of informatics in prac-
tice, education, and research, as well as computer applica-
tions that support nursing activities.
OVERVIEW OF NURSING
INFORMATICS
The primary interest of nursing informatics is to expand how
data, information, and knowledge are used within practice.
Those conducting research on informatics issues seek to iden-
tify and explain relationships between healthcare data and
nursing care. However, as described by ANA (2015b), the
definition of nursing informatics as a specialty was expanded
from the science of information and knowledge acquisition
to include the provision of wisdom. “Wisdom is defined as
the appropriate use of knowledge to manage and solve human
problems . . . . and an appreciation of the consequences of se-
lected actions” (ANA, 2015b, p. 3). The actual work of in-
formatics specialists varies with settings, according to
organizational needs, individual practice interests, and specific
research questions. The common element in all functions
within informatics practice is the transformation of data to
information and knowledge and, ultimately, to provide the
wisdom that supports and advances nursing practice.
The common element in all functions within 
the informatics practice is the transformation 
of data to information and knowledge and, 
ultimately, to provide the wisdom that 
supports and advances nursing practice.
Within healthcare delivery institutions such as hospitals,
long-term care facilities, and home health agencies, the NI
specialist could be involved with both the tasks of nursing
and improvement of the quality of care. Carrington and
Tiase (2013) describe nursing informatics as a “subdiscipline
of health informatics that applies information technology to
the skills and work of nurses in health care” (p. 136). Task-
related NI activities include staffing and scheduling systems,
effective implementation of the electronic health record,
safety monitoring, real-time retrieval of patient information,
and use of evidence-based practice information, telehealth
applications, and interpretation of nursing needs for the 
interdisciplinary informatics team. Clinical performance
measures initiatives as required and certification programs as
promoted by the Joint Commission (2014a, 2014b) and the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS, 2013,
n.d.) require the input and retrieval of data demonstrating
use of evidence-based practice guidelines. These guidelines
are also available electronically (Box 15.1). The NI specialist
is instrumental in creating communication standards and
pathways to provide ease in accessing necessary information
for reporting to these and other organizations. National
benchmarking and accreditation databases and agencies now
accept and return information only in electronic format.
Nursing informatics applications in academic settings
have grown to include both the use of tech nology in the
teaching process and the teaching of an informatics-focused
curriculum. Many schools of nursing use a learning content
management system (LCMS), such as BlackBoard or
eCollege, to provide Web-enhanced or totally Web-based
courses that include discussion boards, chat rooms, assign-
ment drop boxes, online testing, and grade books, as well
as areas to post interactive exercises and graphics presen-
tations. Nursing and health science programs and ori-
entation and residency programs in the practice setting
are also using simulation activities in live classroom and
laboratory settings. These activities include the use of
human simulators like SimMan or MetiMan or the 
virtual patient in teaching simulations. The human sim-
ulators are programmed to present a variety of case sce-
narios and respond to the students’ interventions in
planned ways. Information can be downloaded from the
simulators or video-recorded to provide feedback and de-
briefing opportunities on time management, decision
making, and nursing competence. Students participate
as active participants with the human simulators and as
observers to the interventions of others. In a virtual pa-
tient situation, actors adhere to scripts in a class situation.
Following the simulation, a group debriefing provides an
opportunity for reflection and vicarious learning prior to
the live patient situation. Both of these types of teaching
activities enhance the learning process in a safe, simulated
environment as a result of technological advances.
In addition to technology projects conducted within
schools and colleges, electronic journals have made articles
available online. These publications have gone through the
peer review process of their print counterparts but are
more accessible for readers. The Online Journal of Nursing
Informatics and the Online Journal of Issues in Nursing were
the first for nursing pro fessionals. Because they are exclu-
sively online, these journals differ from the electronically
accessible versions of printed journals that may be accessed
BOX 15.1
Evidence-Based Practice Electronic
Resources
National Guideline Clearinghouse
http://www.guidelines.gov/
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
http://www.cdc.gov
Nursing Knowledge International
http://www.nursingknowledge.org
The Cochrane Collaboration
http://www.cochrane.org/
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
http://www.ahrq.gov

through major publishers, association Web sites, and sub-
scribers to health science libraries. Online journals can give
nurses an electronic format to share findings, experiences,
perceptions, knowledge, and wisdom with nursing col-
leagues involved in all facets of their specialties. The intent
is to exercise the power of technology to create an elec-
tronic nursing community that provides both virtually 
accessible and timely information about nursing globally.
Online journals may also enhance the speed of peer review
and communications through an expedited editorial
process that provides rapid turnaround, publication, and
availabilty of information. Downloading one copy of these
electronically accessible articles is permitted for scholarly
work, but proper citation is required. Other selected titles
of electronic journals are listed in Box 15.2.
E-books, electronic versions of printed reports and books,
are also now available both in libraries and for purchase. 
E-books and pdfs of national reports are convenient ways to
access reference material. In addition, e-textbooks are avail-
able for purchase for a negotiated period of time and down-
loaded to your computer. Additional study resources may
also accompany selected e-books. Many printed textbooks
also come with electronic support in the form of a Web site
(for access to additional learning resources, as with the site
for this text) or DVDs to supplement the materials.
Given these advances in informatics, one might think
that nursing is well evolved in the specialty. However, recall
that the Institute of Medicine (IOM) formally identified
utilizing informatics as one of the five competencies for all
health professionals (Greiner & Kneibel, 2003).“Utilizing
informatics” encompasses the responsibility to communi-
cate, manage knowledge, mitigate error, and support deci-
sion making through the use of information technology. 
Essential nursing informatics content in nursing edu-
cation is a consideration as we address this imperative for
safe and effective patient care. In a descriptive study of in-
formatics competencies of both baccalaureate and graduate
nursing students, Choi and DeMartinis (2013) found that
students in both programs did not perceive themselves
competent in applied computer skills and clinical infor-
matics roles (p. 1974). However, in an earlier study, com-
pared with prelicensure baccalaureate nursing students,
both RN and BSN students perceived themselves as more
competent in these roles, which the researcher attributed
to experience in clinical practice (Choi, 2012, p. 7). To 
address competencies in undergraduate nursing education,
the Canadian Association of Schools of Nursing (2012)
identified specific nursing informatics competencies, with
the overarching competency of “uses information and com-
munication technologies to support information synthesis
in accordance with professional and regulatory standards
in the delivery of patient/client care” (p. 5). In the Essentials
of Baccalaureate Education for Professional Nursing Practice
(AACN, 2008), “baccalaureate graduates are expected to
ethically manage data, information, knowledge, and tech-
nology to communicate effectively; provide safe and effec-
tive patient care; and use research and clinical evidence to
inform practice decisions” (p. 18).
Competencies in informatics and information technol-
ogy are further supported in the American Association of
Colleges of Nursing (AACN) in their Essentials for Bac-
calaureate, Master’s and Doctoral Education in Nursing
(AACN, 2008, 2011, 2006). The applications of informat-
ics discussed in this chapter are derived from the specific in-
formatics competencies described in the IOM reports and
in the professional scope and standards of practice (ANA,
2015b). In addition, all nurses are expected to utilize infor-
matics, whether beginning nurse, expert nurse, or specialty
practitioner. Consider the informatics competencies for
nurses identified in Box 15.3 that were part of the prior
scope or practice (ANA, 2008). Since that time, a role de-
lineation study by the American Nurses Credentialing Cen-
ter (2013) resulted in refinements to the credentialing exam
for the informatics nurse with baccalaureate preparation on
current professional practice. However, with rapid enhance-
ments to technology, including the implementation of the
electronic health record across multiple settings and evi-
dence of meaningful use, informatics competencies evolve
and become expectations in practice. In the newly revised
scope and standards of practice, basic computer competen-
cies are an expectation for all nurses, including the novice
nurse. However, a pathway from novice nurse, to aspiring
informatics nurse with a minimum of 5 years in practice is
recommended with graduate preparation for advanced spe-
cialty practice in nursing (ANA, 2015). In addition, the
ANA (2015b) has identified further specialist competencies
for the NI Specialist in practice areas of outcome identifi-
cation, implementation, and evaluation and in standards of
professional performance (ethics, education, evidence-based
practice and research, quality of practice, leadership, collab-
oration, professional practice evaluation, resource utiliza-
tion, and environmental health. 
Nursing informatics is an evolving specialty area. Infor-
matics and evolving technology are changing how nurses
teach, deliver, communicate, and improve nursing care.
Students and practitioners are able to learn more from
home, creating new opportunities for formal and continu-
ing education. Updating professional skills for those resid-
ing in isolated areas and accessing expert consultation from
clinicians in distant geographic areas are two more reasons
to embrace technology in nursing and healthcare.
TRANSFORMATION OF
DATA TO INFORMATION,
KNOWLEDGE, AND WISDOM
The transformation of data into information, knowledge,
and wisdom is essential in important informatics practice. A
datum is a value placed on a variable. It exists without mean-
ing or explanation. An example is the blood pressure (BP)
measurement. The value of the BP, such as 90/54, is the
datum for the BP. This value has little meaning until it is
put into some context along with other data. For instance,
260
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
BOX 15.2
Selected Online Journals
The Online Journal of Issues in Nursing
http://www.nursingworld.org/ojin/
Online Journal of Nursing Informatics
http://ojni.org/
Online Journal of Rural Nursing and Health Care
http://rnojournal.binghamton.edu/index.php/RNO
Online Brazilian Journal of Nursing
http://www.objnursing.uﬀ.br/index.php/nursing

if this were a 35-year-old adult, the BP might have one in-
terpretation, but for a 10-year-old child, 90/54 would mean
something very different. Age and BP may not be enough
data to offer much information. You may also want to know
the person’s pulse and weight, which would allow you to un-
derstand the BP’s significance better. Data viewed in associ-
ation with one another provide meaning. Knowledge arises
from using information, often from combined sources, to
determine new meanings, make new discoveries, or expand
understanding as wisdom. For example, patient diagnoses
arise through the transformation of combined laboratory
data, radiology data, symptomatology, and other informa-
tion into a whole, the outcome of which is knowledge. Then,
wisdom is the appropriate understanding and application of
this knowledge to solve human problems (ANA, 2015b).
An informatics nurse is someone who has a 
specialty practice in nursing, not simply a 
computer expert who happens to be 
working on a nursing-related problem.
Informatics nurses seek to create new knowledge and  then
wisdom by working first with data and then with information.
Informatics specialists work as an integral part of an interdis-
ciplinary team to support, promote, and advance the delivery
of nursing care. They work toward informatics solutions,
which may be an application, product, method, tool, work-
flow change, or other recommendation with competencies in
both information literacy and management (ANA, 2015b, 
p. 46). Indeed, an informatics nurse is someone who has a spe-
cialty practice in nursing, not simply a computer expert who
happens to be working on a nursing-related problem. Further,
information nurse specialists with master’s preparation analyze
information for risk reduction and improvements in delivery
and policy in practice while informatics specialists prepared at
the doctoral level lead in the design, section and integration
of technology systems (ANA, 2015b, p. 46).
In the past, nonintegrated health management systems
were seen in larger health information management systems
that hospitals, clinics, home health agencies, nursing homes,
and health maintenance organizations to manage their various
functions (Fig. 15.1). These systems often operated as sepa-
rate, noncommunicating units, creating frustrations in the
workplace and with the efficiency of care delivery. The goal
is for these systems to operate seamlessly as we move toward
full implementation of a totally computerized health record
that allows for information capture, retrieval, and exchange.
It is vital that nurses recognize that they are contributing data
every time they carry out a nursing function. These data have
the potential of providing powerful information when they
are well understood within the environment of healthcare de-
livery (Hebda, Czar, & Mascara, 2008).
HEALTH INFORMATION
SYSTEMS
Because few systems can address every component of health-
care and organizational management, there is generally 
an overriding information system with both clinical and ad-
ministrative components, known as the health information
system. Clinical systems include those functions that di-
rectly support patient care—documentation, order entry,
and diagnostic reporting. Administrative systems address
the financial, personnel, and managerial functions of the fa-
cility. Together, these systems use technology to process data
into information for multiple uses.
Currently, no one health information system fits all or-
ganizations. However, the current use of certified electronic
health records and the goals for portability have created the
need for more common functioning. In 2010, the Depart-
ment of Health and Human Services issued a regulation with
standards and certification criteria that the electronic health
record must meet (Blumenthal & Tavenner, 2010, p. 504).
The information system should accomplish two goals.
First, it should support the way that nurses operate, giving
them flexibility and permitting app ropriate documentation.
Second, the system should support and improve nursing prac-
tice through access to information and tools (Hebda et al.,
CHAPTER 15 Informatics and Documenting Outcomes     ●
261
BOX 15.3
Informatics Competencies For Nurses
Beginning nurses:
●Computer literacy skills for administration, communication, data access, documentation, education, monitoring,
and basic desktop software
●Informatics knowledge on impact, privacy and security, and systems, and for patient safety
Experienced nurses:
●Computer literacy skills for communication, documentation, education, monitoring, basic desktop software, 
and systems
●Information literacy on evaluation, roles, and system maintenance
●Informatics knowledge on impact, privacy and security, systems, research, and organizational change management,
and for patient safety
Informatics nurse specialists:
●Computer literacy for monitoring, desktop software, systems, quality improvement, research, and project management
●Informatics skills for evaluation, roles, system maintenance, analysis, data structures, design and development, 
implementation, management (including ﬁscal), programming, and system, agency, and agency requirements
●Informatics skills and knowledge for system, selection, testing and training, knowledge on impact, privacy and 
security, systems, regulations, usability, education, theoretical structures, taxonomies and classiﬁcation systems, 
systems theory and operational change, and promotion of patient safety
●In addition, speciﬁc functional specialty areas have other expected competencies for those functional areas.
Source: Adapted from American Nurses Association. (2008). Nursing informatics: Scope and standards of practice. Silver
Spring, MD: Nursesbooks.org.

2008). It is essential in an evidence-based practice environ-
ment to expect easy access to healthcare databases. Addition-
ally, Intranet service often includes access to drug guides,
policy and procedures, and patient teaching information. 
Box 15.4 describes how the integration of systems can help
reduce medication errors.
Electronic Health Record
A major national effort to develop an electronic health
record (EHR) has been under way for a number of years,
and institutions have had challenges and some success in
this area. The EHR is an electronic version of the patient
record. As described in a report on the usability of the EHR
for the Agency for Healthcare Research Quality (AHRQ),
“EHRs are clinical support tools with the potential to 
reduce strains on clinician memory and cognition while
improving efficiency in workflow and effectiveness in care
quality and coordination (Armijo, McDonnell, & Werner,
2009, p. 2). Benefits of a fully functional and integrated
EHR are listed in Box 15.5.
The purposes of creating EHRs are to improve the abil-
ity to share patient-specific information, create permanent
lifelong health records, and have ready access to additional
262
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
Healthcare Information Management System
Clinical Systems
Nursing System
Physician Order Entry System
Pharmacy System
Imaging System
Laboratory System
Ancillary Systems
Administrative Systems
Registration System
Financial System
Human Resources System
Risk Management System
Performance Management System
Purchasing/Supplies System
Monitoring Systems
Scheduling Systems
Figure 15.1 The Healthcare Information Management System.
BOX 15.4
System Integration to Reduce Medication Errors
1. The provider enters a medication order into the order entry system, eliminating confusion from handwriting 
and providing clinical decision support.
2. This information is transmitted to the pharmacy.
3. The pharmacy system checks for dosage, allergies, and potential interactions. Alerts are generated.
4. The medication order is ﬁlled by the pharmacy, using a barcode or robotic system.
5. The nurse checks the order against the electronic medication administration record and is alerted to administra-
tion times as well as any special considerations.
6. The nurse documents that the medication has been administered and notes the patient’s response.
7. Reminders for reorders and 24-hour chart checks are generated automatically.
Adapted from: Cohen, M. R. (Ed.). (2007). Medication errors (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: American Pharmacists Association.

the specified service. However, there were just reporting 
requirements on the quality measures in Stage 1.
The first stage began in 2011 with specific criteria to
electronically capture health information to track key clin-
ical conditions. Although this information could be used
for care coordination for individual patients, the ultimate
aim has also been to address population health with the
reporting of clinical quality measures and public health in-
formation. Eligible providers and eligible hospitals could
apply for the CMS Initiative Program if they could meet
the requirements presented in core objectives (Table 15.1).
CMS (2014b) reported that “between 2009 and 2012,
EHR adoption nearly doubled among physicians and
more than tripled among hospitals [and] nine in 10 eligi-
ble hospitals and eight in 10 eligible professionals had
taken the initial step of registering for the Medicare or
Medicaid EHR Incentive Programs as of October 2013”
(p. 1). This program made more than $15.5 billion eligible
to providers and hospitals (JASON, 2014, p. 2).
In Stage 2, most objectives were retained, with in-
creased thresholds expected. Some objectives were com-
bined or eliminated, as illustrated in Table 15.1. CMS
(2012) expected that providers who reached Stage 2 would
be able to demonstrate meaningful use of their EHR tech-
nology for an even larger portion of their patient popula-
tion. Some new objectives were also introduced as menu
objectives. However, as in Stage 1, exclusions could be
claimed on some objective measures by certain providers
who did not provide the specified service.
Stage 3 will be developed further based on data from
Stage 2 but will focus on improvements in quality, safety,
and efficiency; providing decision support for national high
priority conditions; and improving population health. The
IOM (2014) was charged with convening a committee to
identify domains and measures that capture the social de-
terminants of health to inform the development of recom-
mendations for Stage 3 (p. S-2). The IOM addressed this
charge in two phases; the Phase 1 report was issued in 2014
with the identification of sociodemographic, psychological,
behavioral, individual social relationship, and neighbor-
hood/community domains for inclusion in the EHR. 
Advances in the development of large data repositories
held within hospitals and other healthcare institutions allow
linkages between an electronic patient record and adminis-
trative, bibliographic, clinical expertise, and research data-
bases. Through these large data sets using common language
and data values, trends and the basis for evidence-based
practice can occur more readily. The domains identified
were based on areas in which evidence was available on their
association with health outcomes, with the goal of identify-
ing measures in Phase 2 to develop strategies for improving
health status of Americans (IOM, 2014, p. S-6). 
Creating an EHR is far more difficult than may at first
be apparent. Standardized language, data collection, record
format, access, confidentiality, cost, and other ethical issues
are but a few of the perceived barriers. To build an EHR
that can be shared among institutions and providers, data
must be collected and coded in a similar fashion. With the
new certification requirements for EHRs, compatibility
among systems and standards for vendors is the goal.
JASON (2014), a research and advisory group for the 
federal government, reported that “the current inoperability
among the data resources for EHRs is a major impediment
CHAPTER 15 Informatics and Documenting Outcomes     ●
263
BOX 15.5
Benefits of a Fully Functional 
Electronic Health Record
●Patient access to own health information
●Better access to patient records by healthcare
providers
●Decreased errors in health records
●Decreased unnecessary diagnostic testing and 
procedures
●More complete and accurate health records and data
●Improved longitudinal tracking of patients and pa-
tient groups
●Improved standards of care; reduction in medical errors
●Provision of research data to better inform clinical
care, public health, and biomedical research
●Facilitation of better communication among pa-
tients and healthcare providers
●Facilitation of detection of healthcare fraud
●Improved tracking of healthcare costs and beneﬁts
for improvement in healthcare delivery and 
economics
Adapted from: JASON. (2014). A robust health data infrastructure.
(AHRQ Publication No. 14-0041-EF). Retrieved from http://www
.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/ptp13-700hhs_white.pdf
BOX 15.6
Stages of Meaningful Use 
Stage 1 (2011-2012): Data capture and sharing
Stage 2 (2014): Advanced clinical processes
Stage 3 (2017): Improved outcomes
Source: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2014a). EHR in-
centive programs. Retrieved from http://www.cms.gov/Regulations
-and-Guidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms/
information that will improve the quality and safety of pa-
tient care. In 2009, passage of the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act provided major funding incentives to
hospitals and eligible practitioners over the next several
years to encourage the adoption and meaningful use 
of EHRs. CMS reported the identification of the “mean-
ingful use” goals and standards, planned in three stages 
(Box 15.6). This incentive program could provide maxi-
mum payments over 5 years in excess of $43,000 for eligi-
ble providers that began participation in 2011 or 2012,
with a reduction for starting in 2013 and no incentive pay-
ments for those starting after 2014. Eligible hospitals were
similarly incentivized. The incentive payment is 75% of
their Medicare-allowed charges up to a maximum annual
cap, as long as their meaningful use requirements are met
in their data reporting. Eligible providers included physi-
cians, advanced practice registered nurses, dentists, thera-
pists, and other qualified professionals who were not
hospital based, with greater than 90% of services provided.
And the program was with the individual provider, not a
group practice. There were 90-day reporting periods, and
the certified EHR provided the data for the objectives that
had to meet a specified threshold. Reporting was required
on core objectives, five menu objectives, and selected qual-
ity measures. Some exclusions could be claimed on some
objective measures by certain providers who did not provide

264
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
TABLE 15.1
Stage 1 Meaningful Use Requirements for Eligible Providers and Hospitals
Eligible Provider Core Objectives                            Eligible Hospital Core Objectives 
Source: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2014b). EHR incentive programs. Retrieved from http://www.cms.gov/
Regulations-and-Guidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms/
• Implement CPOE
• Perform drug-drug and drug-allergy checks
• Record demographics
• Maintain an up-to-date problem list of current and 
active diagnoses
• Maintain active medication list
• Maintain active medication allergy list
• Record and chart changes in vital signs, including body
mass index and growth charts for children 2 to 
20 years of age
• Record smoking status for patients 13 years or older
• Implement clinical decision support 
• Report ambulatory clinical quality measures to CMS
and states
• Provide patients with an electronic copy of their
health information, on request
• Provide patients with an electronic copy of their dis-
charge instructions at time of discharge (eliminated in
2014; not in Stage 2)
• Allow exchange of key clinical information among
providers electronically (eliminated in 2013; not in
Stage 2)
• Protect electronic health information
• Implement drug-formulary checks
• Incorporate clinical laboratory test results as struc-
tured data
• Generate lists of patients by specific condition for
quality improvement
• Identify specific patient education resources and pro-
vide these to the patient, if relevant
• Perform medication reconciliation if patient received
from another setting or provider, if appropriate
• When transitioning patient to another care setting or
provider, provide a summary of care record for each
transition
• Submit electronic data to immunization registries of
systems
• Submit electronic data on reportable laboratory test
results to public health agencies and actual submission
• Implement computerized provider order entry
(CPOE)
• Perform drug-drug and drug-allergy checks
• Allow E-prescribing (eRx)
• Record demographics
• Maintain an up-to-date problem list of current and 
active diagnoses
• Maintain active medication list
• Maintain active medication allergy list
• Record and chart changes in vital signs
• Record smoking status for patients 13 years or older
• Implement clinical decision support
• Report ambulatory clinical quality measures to 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
and states
• Provide patients with an electronic copy of their
health information, on request
• Provide clinical summaries for patients for each office
visit
• Allow exchange of key clinical information electroni-
cally (eliminated in 2013; not in Stage 2)
• Protect electronic health information
• Implement drug-formulary checks
• Incorporate clinical laboratory test results as struc-
tured data
• Generate lists of patients by specific condition for
quality improvement
• Send reminders to patients for preventative and 
follow-up care
• Provide patients with timely electronic access to their
health information (eliminated in 2014; not in Stage 2)
• Identify specific patient education resources and pro-
vide these to the patient, if relevant
• Perform medication reconciliation if patient received
from another setting or provider, if appropriate
• When transitioning patient to another care setting or
provider, provide a summary of care record for each
transition
• Submit electronic data to immunization registries of
systems
• Submit electronic data on reportable laboratory test
results to public health agencies
for the effective exchange of health care information” (p. 3).
This group has made recommendations on the software ar-
chitecture required for the effective exchange of health in-
formation among EHRs and systems. JASON (2014) also
recommended the principle that the patient is the ultimate
owner of the health record and that privacy issues be
mapped into well-defined architectural elements in the data
infrastructure (p. 4).
One issue regarding the EHR that will continue to be
addressed is patient confidentiality. Fortunately, the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) was
implemented in 2003 in an effort to eliminate unnecessary,
unwarranted, and inappropriate sharing of individual 
and personal information. In addition, one of the core re-
quirements for meaningful use by eligible providers or hos-
pitals is the protection of patient information in the EHR.

There are clear guidelines for when information can and
cannot be shared and how to handle electronic communi-
cation (CMS, 2013a). Password protection for facility and
personal computers is recommended for any patient, in-
cluding name, age, gender, and Social Security number.
However, consumers still have concerns, owing to the fear
of identity fraud, that their records are not going to be pro-
tected, and that other personal information will be accessed.
Encryption, passwords, audit trails, workstation security,
and firewalls all serve to preserve the integrity of the
EHR. Information for consumers on privacy and security
is available at http://www.healthit.gov/patients-families
/protecting-your-privacy-security.
Another consideration for implementation is the lead-
ership required for the change. Getting people in the or-
ganization “on board” for the project requires committed
and strong leadership. Various successful EHR implemen-
tation projects have been reported. Adler (2007) reported
on an early successful implementation that required the
three Ts: “team refers to people and organizational issues,
tactics to specific techniques and choices made in design
and setup, and technology to the software” (p. 33). Quality
improvements, ease of communication, assistance with de-
cision support, and enhanced safety are a few of the ben-
efits with a successful implementation of an EHR.
The issue becomes the need for a common language
to create a standard for the exchange, management, and
integration of healthcare information. The goal is to create
seamless systems that exchange information between and
among each other to increase accessibility and safety for
the healthcare patients.
Standardized Nursing Language
Common vocabulary, terminology, and usage are require-
ment for consistent understanding and application across
nursing settings and practice environments with a stan-
dardized nursing language. A standardized nursing lan-
guage benefits the profession and nursing practitioners,
other colleagues, reimbursement practices, and patients. It
provides a common basis and understanding. Rutherford
(2008) has identified the following advantages of a stan-
dardized nursing language for the clinical nurse:
●Improved communication among nurses and other
healthcare providers
●Increased visibility of nursing interventions
●Improved care for healthcare consumers
●Enhanced classification of data to evaluate nursing
outcomes
●Greater adherence to standards of practice and care
●Facilitated assessment of nursing competency (p. 8)
The goal is for a common understanding and commu-
nication of what nurses do to affect patients’ care and health
outcomes. As a result, the profession has generated several
taxonomies, or classification systems, for this common un-
derstanding and usage of terminology. 
In 2012, the ANA recognized 12 terminologies or tax-
onomies that supported nursing practice. Subsequently, the
ANA (2015a) focused further on the need for standardized
terminologies to support the EHR. Perhaps the most widely
known is the North America Nursing Diagnosis Association
(NANDA), which expanded to an international taxonomy
with NANDA-I. Almost 30 years of experience in the identi-
fication and refinement of this classification system have been
described by the president-elect of NANDA-I as follows:
The NANDA-I concepts support nurses in a clinical 
reasoning process to evaluate the holistic needs of patients,
families, or communities, to make accurate decisions
about care, and to document the health requests, patient
safety risks, and the actual problems as “succinct” diag-
nostic concepts in the electronic health records and 
available for exchange between settings. (Brokel, 2010,
pp. 184–185)
NANDA-I terminology and nursing diagnoses provide
a standardized language that is evidence-based and that
undergoes continual revision on a biannual basis based
upon evidence in current practice. “The NANDA-I con-
cepts include culturally sensitive concepts that have been
translated into 10 languages—Spanish, German, Japanese,
Portuguese, French, and others including third world
countries” (Brokel, 2010, p. 185). Especially useful with
this taxonomy is the identification of defining character-
istics and related factors in addition to the diagnostic labels
used to identify nursing diagnostic statements. This tax-
onomy is consistent with nursing’s focus on functional
health patterns as well as other nursing taxonomies. Thede
and Schwiren (2011) discovered through survey research
that most nurses are familiar with the NANDA taxonomy
and less familiar with others. 
The Center for Nursing Classification and Clinical Ef-
fectiveness (CNCCE), housed at the University of Iowa,
has taken on the challenge of developing standardized
nursing language and has published nursing interventions
and outcomes (Appendix B) with definitions to be used
in documentation systems. The Center also has collabo-
rated with the NANDA-I to integrate these interventions
and outcomes with nursing diagnosis language.
In the pursuit of comparability of data using common
terminology, other classification systems have evolved over
time, some specific to practice settings or expanded to other
practice settings. A long-standing taxonomy used in nursing
is the Omaha System (2013). This system was originally de-
veloped for home care but is now applicable to a wide range
of settings with comparable data and language. SNOMED
CT (Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine—Clinical
Terms) is an interdisciplinary and international terminology
system. In SNOMED CT each concept had a code for
identification and a unique meaning used by more than 
25 countries that are members of the International Health
Terminology Standards Organisation (2014).
Another example of a taxonomy specific to nursing was
developed and validated in the perioperative area. The Pe-
rioperative Nursing Data Set (PNDS) was developed by
nurses to document the perioperative patient experience
from preadmission through discharge, is recognized by the
ANA, and is incorporated into SNOMED (AORN,
2013). This data set provides a platform for the evaluation
of patient outcomes and also is the basis for evidence-based
practices present and opportunities for further evaluation
and research. (AORN, 2013).
For many years, we have also had the Nursing Man-
agement Minimum Data Set (NMMDS) in long-term
care to categorize nursing care and patient care needs.
Long-term care facilities are required to make electronic 
CHAPTER 15 Informatics and Documenting Outcomes     ●
265

reports of the nursing MDS to CMS. Nurses must both
assess residents on an ongoing basis and report this infor-
mation using the electronic tools and standardized lan-
guage. More than 16,000 long-term care facilities in the
United States are required to comply with this reporting
using this taxonomy.
The International Council of Nurses (ICN) has also
been working on a language and taxonomy to improve
 communication of nursing activities across the globe as
the International Classification for Nursing Practice
(ICNP®). The vision for this classification system is fo-
cused on nursing to provide an infrastructure informing
healthcare practice and policy to improve patient care
worldwide (ICN, 2013).
Each of these classification systems must be useful in the
identification and comparison of practice and be fully func-
tional with the electronic health record. The critical concern
for nursing is the con sistent application of a terminology or
classification system that is sensitive to measure and demon-
strates the effectiveness of nursing care.
Electronic Prescribing
An important component in the EHR for patient safety
is electronic prescribing or computerized physician order
entry (CPOE). The most sophisticated level of this tech-
nology is full integration with the EHR, has been shown
to provide the highest degree of patient safety and the
largest return on investment (AHRQ, 2013). Nursing per-
sonnel have found both positive and negative attributes of
electronic prescribing. On the positive side, the provider
must take responsibility for the patient care order and
not rely upon the nurse for interpretation, assistance, or
completion. The system cues the provider with correct
spellings, dosages, and evidence-based guidelines, and
alerts the provider to potential and known contraindica-
tions and interactions. The provider can view the pa-
tient’s diagnostic results and initiate appropriate orders
from home, office, or other Web-based settings. An elec-
tronic flag will appear in the patient’s record, which in-
dicates that a new electronic order has been entered for
the patient; it has simultaneously been sent to the diag-
nostic or therapeutic department for processing. If a
nurse does not acknowledge this electronic flag in a
timely manner, the patient may have labs drawn before
the nurse has time to inform the patient. The intent is
to provide timely communication and intervention for
the healthcare consumer through direct entry of orders,
to eliminate careless errors, to improve efficiency in
processes, and to reduce adverse events through medica-
tion management and an alert system for dosages, inter-
actions, and contraindications. Providers who engage in
this system generally become reliant upon this electronic
tool as an adjunct for decisional support and for real-time
modifications to the patient’s plan of care. Cowan (2013)
reports two human factors associated with errors and
CPOE, namely work-arounds for the alerts generated and
altered communication patterns between physicians and
nurses due to the reliance on the technology. These be-
come additional safety considerations.
In addition, medication reconciliation as another pa-
tient safety practice is now a requirement for all hospitals
and other settings accredited by the Joint Commission.
Medication histories must be current for each transition
made by the patient, whether from the emergency depart-
ment, to the intensive care unit, to the acute care unit, to
home, or to a skilled care facility.
Computer Applications
Common office applications—word processing, spread-
sheet, database, and presentation graphics—are useful in
nursing practice, education, and research. Students in
nursing programs are expected to submit papers using
word processing, and sometimes electronically as attach-
ments or in assignment drop boxes in Web-based courses.
Oral or group presentations are accompanied with presen-
tation graphics as a background. Spreadsheet and database
management become increasingly important as nurses
share in decision making and must understand the per-
formance improvement data in order to contribute ideas
to improve practice. Specialized applications have been
created to improve management and dissemination of
nursing information. In practice, nurses most commonly
266
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
O N L I NE  C ONSULT  
ANA Recognized Terminologies at
http://www.nursingworld.org/MainMenu
Categories/Policy-Advocacy/Positions-and
-Resolutions/ANAPositionStatements/Position
-Statements-Alphabetically/Inclusion-of
-Recognized-Terminologies-within-EHRs.html
International Council of Nurses Classification
for Nursing Practice at
http://www.icn.ch/pillarsprograms/international
-classification-for-nursing-practice-icnpr/
NANDA-I at
http://www.nanda.org/
Nursing Interventions Classifications (NIC) at
http://www.nursing.uiowa.edu/cncce/nursing
-interventions-classification-overview
Nursing Outcomes Classifications (NOC) at
http://www.nursing.uiowa.edu/cncce/nursing
-outcomes-classification-overview
Minimum Data Set (MDS) at
http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality-Initiatives
-Patient-Assessment-Instruments/NursingHome
QualityInits/NHQIQualityMeasures.html
OMAHA System at
http://www.omahasystem.org
Perioperative Nursing Data Set (PNDS) at
http://www.aorn.org/syntegrity/
SNOMED CT at
www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct/
O N L I NE  C ONSULT  
AHRQ Health Information Technology at
http://healthit.ahrq.gov/
CMS EHR Incentive Program at
https://www.cms.gov/EHRIncentivePrograms/

use computers to document care and access patient data.
Documentation often involves selection of interventions
and outcomes from a prepared list of appropriate terms,
with little need for lengthy narrative comments. However,
with a fully integrated EHR, there will be greater access
to records and data files for a complete patient profile in
the digital format.
Handheld Devices
Increasingly, reference materials accessible through the
computer have become a necessary adjunct to effective
care. Handheld computer devices in the form of smart
phones and handheld PCs (personal computers) are quite
 popular with direct care providers since textbook publish-
ers now provide many common references in this elec-
tronic format. Nursing students now have an array of
reference materials electronically in the clinical setting.
Clinical nurses no longer need to return to the nurse’s sta-
tion to review a drug guide or laboratory reference and are
able to scroll through an electronic resources on a hand-
held PC in the patient’s presence and answer his or her
questions with confidence and competence. Password pro-
tection helps the nurse maintain confidentiality and com-
pliance with HIPAA regulations. However, a word of
caution when using the applications on a smart phone;
consumers, observers, and colleagues may misinterpret
that the smart phone is being used for personal commu-
nication. Use of a smart phone may be restricted to certain
areas in some clinical settings.
Independent Learning Activities
Computers have become a popular way for nursing pro-
grams to provide independent learning activities; computer-
assisted instruction (CAI) replaced the video, which
replaced the audio-film strip. CAI consists of text, graphics,
vignettes, and self-assessment quizzes. These can be loaded
onto computers in a lab, played from a DVD, or down-
loaded from an account over the Internet. Although dis-
tance learning has been available since the first continuing
education was provided by radio and then on special televi-
sion stations, it has become now evolved into digital media
and become a convenient way to complete continuing 
education requirements and for degree-seeking nurses.
For students, classes can be delivered via the Internet
from a server on a campus or from a business through a
LCMS. Students can access courses at times convenient to
their individual schedules and have access to numerous re-
sources linked to the course and real-time results through
online assessments. A paperless system is  created for the
submission of reflective journals and assignments, group
discussion can be  conducted in a synchronous (live) or
asynchronous (everyone at a different time) format.
Searching for information on new medications and treat-
ments, current information on obscure conditions, and
national standards and guidelines can be easily accom-
plished using search engines. Registration for courses,
records of educational compliance, and transcripts are
managed by the college’s learning management system.
Many students are likely using a learning content manage-
ment system to access information for the course sup-
ported by this textbook.
Noncredit continuing education activities are now
readily available to assist active practitioners, whether for
relicensure or recertification requirements or to enhance
personal lifelong learning. These Web-based programs are
available through various companies,  professionals organ-
izations, and select membership groups. There are also
companies that assist professional by documenting their
continuing education hours. However, hard copies of 
certificates of completion should be maintained through-
out the licensure or certification period for audit purposes.
Some nurses may also be required to enter this informa-
tion electronically in the database of their respective state
to renew their license.
Generally, nurses select to complete continuing educa-
tion hours in their interest or specialty area. Some states
have required as well as open content hours to meet the 
renewal requirements. Currency of content is a considera-
tion, as well as the specific content. Some programs are
time-limited for receiving credit. Remaining current in the
area of nursing informatics is an option using this medium.
However, in a study by Kleib, Sales, Lima, and Andrea-
Baylon (2010), relatively low proportions of nurses re-
ported continuing education in informatics, especially
those working outside of hospitals or providing direct 
patient care (p. 329).
Evidence-Based Practice
As described in Chapter 5, evidence-based practice implies
that nursing care is delivered on the basis of knowledge
generated from research and documented evidence of ef-
ficacy. Demonstration of evidence-based practice is now
a requirement in hospitals and other agencies for accredi-
tations. Practicing nurses have access to this growing body
knowledge and practice guidelines—and can enhance their
practice using this knowledge—by simply searching for it.
The National Guideline Clearinghouse is a product of the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; nurses
can search directly at its Web site or through their profes-
sional association Web sites to find the latest guidelines
on topics such as pain management, continence care, and
teaching protocols for congestive heart  failure, to mention
just a few. The Sigma Theta Tau product Nursing Knowl-
edge International serves as a repository for clinical, re-
search, career, and con tinuing education resources. This
is a huge managed database with links to published, pro-
prietary, and  government resources. Using the speed and
power of computer search engines, this database places 
accurate and current information in the hands of practi-
tioners. Several evidence based practice resources are listed
in Box 15.1.
Database Management
Access to data and databases has become increasingly im-
portant, especially in our global and electronic society. We
search the Web for information on a question of interest
when in the past we would wait until we could get to the
library. In addition to e-commerce, online auctions, live
chats, listservs, and other computer-based services, data-
base management and access is a growing application for
computers. A special tracking system through the Cen-
ters for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) allows
CHAPTER 15 Informatics and Documenting Outcomes     ●
267

tracking of environmental effects (e.g., air and water
quality) and specific conditions (e.g., asthma and can-
cers) in the different states. States can be compared on
these measures as a result of this  massive governmental
database.
The National Healthy People initiative has progressed
from identification of objectives and reports at the middle
and end of the 10-year cycle to a searchable database of
findings at any point in time. This database is provided
by the CDC and the National Center for Health Statistics
(NCHS) and provides practitioners, educators, planners,
and the general public with current information on the
state of the health of the nation and select groups and 
populations.
The National Database for Nursing Quality Indicators
(NDNQI) is an example of an analysis and storage unit
for nursing quality information. This is a proprietary data-
base, and members can get reports comparing perform-
ance of their units to those of other similar facilities and
can use the data about falls, skin breakdown, and nurse
satisfaction to make decisions about organizational im-
provements (NDNQI, 2014).
These are just a few examples of the use of databases
containing current information that provides opportuni-
ties for proactive decisions that cannot wait for published
reports. But do make sure you verify the date of the last
update to the database, which will  probably be indicated
at the top or bottom of the Web page.
Telehealth
Telehealth ranges from patient education television in a
hospital room to analysis of urine in a smart toilet and
transmission of the finding to a monitoring organization.
In this age of healthcare provider shortages, the time it
takes to travel to remote locations suggests that specialists
such as mental health providers might better serve groups
by hosting a net meeting where all participants can view
each other and engage in the therapeutic discussion via a
computer. One of the oldest telehealth applications is the
transmission of pacemaker function via the telephone. By
definition, telehealth is “the use of electronic information
and telecommunications technologies to support long-
distance clinical health care, patient and professional
health-related education, public health and health admin-
istration [through] . . . videoconferencing, the Internet,
store-and-forward imaging, streaming media, and terres-
trial and wireless communications” (Health Resources
and Services Administration [HRSA], 2014, p. 1).
HRSA wants to provide access to the underserved
populations through telehealth in the following ways:
●Foster partnerships within HRSA, and with other 
federal agencies, states, and private sector groups to
create telehealth projects.
●Administer telehealth grant programs.
●Provide technical assistance.
●Evaluate the use of telehealth technologies and
 programs.
●Develop telehealth policy initiatives to improve access
to quality health services.
●Promote knowledge exchange about “best telehealth
practices.” (HRSA, 2014, p. 1)
The underserved populations are also those addressed in
the Healthy People inititives, including the uninsured, 
underinsured, low-income, rural, and remote groups.
Telehealth best practices can reach out to these groups
with both primary and specialty care services. For example,
an initiative in Ontario, Canada, has 24-hour access to a
nurse using telehealth.
The National Council of State Boards of Nursing has
recognized the challenges that practicing across state lines
present and embarked upon a multistate regulation ini-
tiative called the Mutual Recognition Compact. In order
to support telehealth and other interstate nursing prac-
tices, 24 states have joined the Compact, allowing regis-
tered nurses and licensed practical/vocational nurses to
practice in all the listed states and thus provide long-
distance services to patients (National Council of State
Boards of Nursing, 2014). And pending legislation is
present in additional states. However, the nurse must
have a residence in a home state that is a member of the
Compact and be granted a multi-state license and practice
in accordance with the respective party states where he or
she is granted the privilege to practice. There is also a
compact for APRNs, but currently only two states are
members of this APRN compact, given the current nature
of the variability of practice regulations in advanced prac-
tice among the states.
Technologies currently in use include home monitor-
ing with otoscopes, stethoscopes, and EKG monitors,
which can transmit data to a home health agency. A digital
image of a radiograph or ultrasound image can be con-
veyed to a radiologist or disease specialist in another loca-
tion, even across the globe. Robotics can be used to
perform skilled procedures when the skilled surgeon is in
another location. The electronic ICU allows for experi-
enced critical care nurses to monitor patients in partner-
ship with remotely located critical care nurses. It is
interesting to think about the monitoring that is provided
through Homeland Security and the possibilities of know-
ing that an older adult has fallen or hasn’t gotten out of
bed for several days through previously surreptitious sur-
veillance modes.
NURSING INFORMATICS: THE
SPECIALTY
ANA (2015b) has identified that “the nursing informatics
specialty and its constituent members contribute to
achieving the goal of improving the health of populations,
communities, groups, families, and individuals . . .
[through] the identification of issues and the design, de-
velopment, and implementation of effective informatics
solutions and technologies within the clinical, adminis-
trative, educational, and research domains of practice”
(p. 2). It is not unusual to see implementation of new tech-
nology and computer applications in the healthcare setting
nearly every day. Without the aid of NI specialists, these ap-
plications might offer little improvement in patient care and
create inefficiencies and errors. NI specialists can guide the
collection, documentation, analysis, and aggregation of
data with the intent of improving patient care, eliminating
errors, and developing a body of knowledge based on evi-
dence, as the wisdom we seek from their specialty practice.
268
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

Educators skilled in teaching informatics or NI specialists
skilled in nursing applications are the best people to teach
nurses how to use computer applications and other inte-
grated technology. NI specialists possess the characteristics
of a specialty (Box 15.7). The functional areas of NI prac-
tice include the following:
●Administration, leadership, and management
●Systems analysis and design
●Compliance and integrity management
●Consultation
●Coordination, facilitation, and integration
●Development of systems, products, and resources
●Educational and professional development
●Genetics and genomics
●Information management and operational architecture
●Quality and performance improvement
●Policy development and advocacy
●Research and evaluation
●Safety, security, and environmental health
●Telehealth and informatics (ANA, 2015b, pp. 18–36).
Nursing informatics is interested in phenomena of
nursing: human beings, health, the environment, and
nursing. However, interdisciplinary collaboration is a ne-
cessity to effectively provide knowledge and wisdom in in-
formatics solutions that must be highly integrated for
functionality. Nurses in clinical specialties tend to focus
on the content of data and information. Currently, NI
specialists are working to refine nursing’s language, imple-
ment efficient telehealth systems, propagate NI educa-
tional programs, expand the use of NI in research, and
address new and emerging technologies.
The standards of Nursing Informatics Practice were re-
vised in 2015. As with the current scope and standards of
nursing (ANA, 2010) described in Chapter 1, the Infor-
matics Standards of Practice also contain standards of prac-
tice and standards of professional performance with
measurement criteria. The standards of practice are also
aligned with the nursing process, as follows:
●Assessment: skillful needs assessment toward the goal
of informatics solutions using analytical models and
standardized data measures
●Problem and issues identification: careful analysis and
validation of the data with multiple stakeholders in the
interdisciplinary environment
●Outcomes identification: the expected outcomes with
additional criteria for the informatics nurse specialist,
who is expected to provide further wisdom as evolving
evidence-based practice with clinical guidelines
●Planning and implementation: customization with the
multiple stakeholders with consideration of regulatory
requirements, financial implications, standardization,
effective change strategies, safety, and continuous 
quality improvement
●Evaluation: informatics solutions (ANA, 2015)
Note that for this area of specialty practice, further im-
plementation standards are specified with measurement
criteria and additional measurement criteria for the NI
specialist. The additional categories of implementation
standards include coordination of activities; health teach-
ing and health promotion, and consultation (ANA,
2015b). The evaluation standard contains two additional
measurement criteria for the NI specialist and their lead-
ership that will provide informatics solutions for further
innovation and practice protocols and policy changes.
There are 10 standards of professional performance for
the informatics nurse and the NI specialist, again similar
roles to that of general nursing:
●Ethics
●Education
●Evidence-based practice and research
●Quality of practice
●Communication
●Leadership
●Collaboration
●Professional practice evaluation
●Resource utilization
●Environmental health (ANA, 2015b).
Within these role expectations, we see specialty practice
emerge with directions for the future. Additional measure-
ment criteria for the NI specialist are included with the stan-
dards for all of the performance areas listed above with the
exception of communication. Again, the NI specialist is
charged with taking a lead in development of innovative and
interdisciplinary practices and the creation and promotion
of evidence-based practices. As noted by Murphy (2010), as
the practice of the NI specialist evolves, NI will not only sup-
port the process of care delivery, but also promote better pa-
tient outcomes and improvements in health (p. 205).
The NI specialty is represented by several professional
associations, such as the American Nursing Informatics As-
sociation, a working group of the American Medical Infor-
matics Association (AMIA), a group of the International
Medical Informatics Association, and other international,
regional, and local organizations. Although baccalaureate
programs may have a requirement for competency in com-
puters, some offer an elective in informatics. Specialization,
however, is at the graduate level, with a master’s degree in
NI being offered first at the Universities of Maryland,
Utah, and Colorado, and now by others, such as the Uni-
versity of Michigan, University of Iowa, and Excelsior Uni-
versity. Educa tional preparation for this specialty area can
start with a nursing elective in a baccalaureate program to
targeted continuing education opportunities to graduate
preparation in either a degree or certificate program.
The American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC,
2014) offers certification in Nursing Informatics, with a
baccalaureate in nursing or a related field and documented
CHAPTER 15 Informatics and Documenting Outcomes     ●
269
BOX 15.7
Attributes of a Specialty in Nursing
Informatics
●A diﬀerentiated practice
●A deﬁned research program
●Organizational representation
●Educational programs
●A credentialing mechanism
Source: From Panniers, T. L., & Gassert, C. A. (1996). Standards of
practice and preparation for certification. In M. E. Mills, C. A. 
Romano, and B. R. Heller (Eds.), Information management in 
nursing and health care. Philadelphia: Springhouse.

education and practice in NI. The designation reads RN-
BC once awarded. Informatics nurses may also elect to pur-
sue additional interdisciplinary certifications. When more
candidates have been prepared at the specialty level of mas-
ter’s, an advanced practice test may be developed. Since a
graduate degree is not yet a requirement for this certifica-
tion opportunity, experience and education are required
for the ANCC examination, which covers systems, er-
gonomics, technologies, information technology, manage-
ment and generation of knowledge, theories, roles, and
practice trends.
CAREERS IN NURSING
INFORMATICS
The diversity of informatics projects and programs has led
to tremendous professional career opportunities. Managers
in the rapidly changing healthcare environment demand
more and more information, patients receive care in many
settings, and organizations have redesigned their services
and care models. These changes mean continued growth
for nursing and general health information systems and
the creation of new positions in nursing informatics. In
addition, a recent report by the Institute of Medicine
(IOM, 2010) on the Future of Nursing: Leading Change,
Advancing Health has the potential for the creation of fu-
ture opportunities for NI specialists. Although the findings
from this report will be discussed in greater detail in Chap-
ter 19, one of the key messages was that “effective work-
force planning and policy making require better data
collection and an improved information infrastructure”
(IOM, 2010, p. S-3). To this end, increased NI specialists
will be needed in healthcare organizations, educational in-
stitutions, charitable organizations, and governmental and
regulatory agencies.
Many of the future informatics jobs are yet to be de-
fined. As the technology changes, so too will the work
necessary to maintain and further the acquisition of in-
formation, knowledge, and wisdom for practice improve-
ments. Currently, informatics nurses are working in
healthcare organizations, for software and hardware ven-
dors, in educational settings, and for insurance compa-
nies, to name only a few. In any position, the informatics
specialist works closely with professionals from all other
healthcare disciplines.
Positions in Healthcare
Organizations
A variety of roles exist for the specialist in nursing infor-
matics within hospitals, home health agencies, long-term
care facilities, and other healthcare facilities. As organi-
zations fully implement EHR, informatics nurses serve
an important function in assessing the institution’s in-
formation needs, evaluating available products and ven-
dors, and assisting with product installations. The NI
specialist may also serve to assist the organization in 
development and implementation of competency assess-
ments and quality improvement initiatives. As commu-
nicator and interpreter, the NI specialist serves as a
liaison between the nursing staff and the information 
systems people. When a system is ready for use (to “go
live”), the NI specialist remains on site; later, the special-
ist is on call to provide expert assistance to staff, as coach
and mentor. Once the system has been installed, modi-
fications are made on the basis of user feedback, and the
NI specialist is on to the next project. Informatics is a
specialty that changes rapidly.
Electronic reporting is required in most regulated or-
ganizations in contemporary society. And the informatics
nurse will be involved, if not leading this project, especially
for data identification, coding, harvesting, and analysis.
For example, long-term care facilities are required to
make electronic reports to CMS of the MDS, an assess-
ment tool for residents of long-term care facilities in
which nurses must both assess residents on an ongoing
basis and report this information using the electronic
tools and standardized language. The vast numbers of
these long-term care facilities that are required to comply
with this reporting create many job opportunities for reg-
istered nurses. Quality improvement activities need NI
competencies to navigate through the myriad of systems,
reports, and guidelines that direct and document these
improvement activities. Compliance offices require access
to all the systems in a facility. The annual National 
Patient Safety Goals have created requirements for train-
ing staff for enhanced patient safety by improving, in part,
data retrieval, management, and reporting. Performance
improvement is  concerned with national safety goals, clin-
ical indicators of quality, and evidence-based practice
guidelines. Informatics supports the achievement of these
safety goals through providing information retrieval to
support medication reconciliation, safe patient handoff,
prevention of recording sound-alike/look-alike drugs, and
accurately recording patient identifiers.
From safety reporting to reimbursement opportuni-
ties, informatics skills are necessary. And with the IOM
(2010) recommendations for effective workforce plan-
ning and an improved information infrastructure, NI
specialists will be essential to the success of this ambitious
initiative.
Positions with Systems and
Software Vendors
Producers of software and information systems seek to
hire NI specialists. Nurses work to develop new products,
market products and services, and install systems. Expe-
rience with documentation and standardized nursing lan-
guage is an asset. Clinicians with enough patient care
experience to predict barriers to implementation are ex-
tremely useful. NI experts serve as liaisons between the
vendor and the healthcare organization, because they are
able to comprehend and articulate the issues for both par-
ties. Increasingly nurses with expertise are sought for these
positions.
Positions in Educational Settings
With the expectation that beginning and experienced
nurses must possess informatics competencies, the 
270
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

responsibilities of educators have grown. Whether it is
expertise in instructional design to create a new and ef-
fective Web-based or Web-enhanced course or DVD, the
effective use of electronic resources like e-books and
handheld devices, or the effective use of simulation ac-
tivities in the laboratory setting, this area presents many
opportunities. While these are areas for the experienced
nurse educator with a specialty in instructional design,
the NI specialist is often consulted. The NI specialist can
be an invaluable asset in the campus skills lab in imple-
menting and revising scenarios to assist with the use of
human simulator experiences. These laboratory experi-
ences often require a faculty member to be working with
the student group while another technician or lab assis-
tant is running and revising the scenario for an effective
learning experience. Part of the debriefing may also in-
volve reviewing tapes of the student experience for review
and commentary. In addition, recommendation of any
required remediation activities may often require expert-
ise in electronic resources and documentation of these
activities.
Lifelong learning, changes in educational preparation,
residency programs, interdisciplinary education, and work-
force planning were important components of the IOM
(2010) report on The Future of Nursing: Leading Change,
Advancing Health. NI specialists will be of enormous as-
sistance in all phases of analysis, planning, and reporting
to address this national mandate.
Positions in Managed Care
Organizations and Insurance
Companies
As forms of managed care continue to develop, the demand
for data and information will grow, as will the opportuni-
ties for informatics specialists. Informatics nurses are now
working directly with care delivery institutions in develop-
ing data and information systems, as well as with the mech-
anisms involved in the internal reporting processes. New roles
are emerging continuously, many of which have been de-
signed and articulated by NI specialists as this new specialty
continues to evolve.
For more information, search the various informatics
association Web sites and read the Online Journal of Nurs-
ing Informatics. As with many nursing specialties, nurses
should look for opportunities and then create the position
that will best serve the organization.
DOCUMENTING OUTCOMES
We have looked at the evolving specialty practice in nurs-
ing informatics. These talented practitioners help us or-
ganize and make sense of the data and give us the wisdom
to make changes in practice. They help us focus on the
outcomes of care through standardized languages to avoid
misunderstanding and to see the commonalities that create
the evidence for quality practice. In doing so, they are as-
sisting in the documentation of outcomes, whether on 
an EHR for a specific patient situation or in a database
provided to a regulatory or accrediting agency. Their role
in workforce analysis and monitoring is also critical for 
addressing the challenges posed by the IOM (2011) on
The Future of Nursing: Leading Change, Advancing Health.
Consider for a moment informatics nurses’ focus on out-
comes of health care:
●Assist clinicians to “speak” the same language in 
documentation
●Assist students in understanding consistent language
unique to the healthcare setting
●Analyze stated outcomes to ensure that they are meas-
urable and reflect the clinical situation
●Work with interdisciplinary colleagues to ensure that
there is a common understanding on the outcome that
nurses wish to accomplish in collaboration with the
patient
●Make sure that the databases have consistent and 
valid data
●Guarantee that administrative reports for regulatory and
accrediting bodies have sufficient and quality data
●Monitor patient acuity and care requirements and
workforce supply and demand considerations
●Provide valid databases for researchers who seek 
answers to questions of clinical concern
●Provide informatics solutions to new, novel, and 
complex technology issues ensuring that outcomes 
are documented in a retrievable format
And the list goes on.
What is apparent is the focus on documenting outcomes.
The documentation of outcomes must be understandable to
all, through the use of a common vocabulary. This vocabu-
lary must be applicable to the various taxonomies to build
on the body of knowledge and improve care for healthcare
consumers. In the process, informatics solutions ensure effi-
cient workflow and effective outcomes. The body of knowl-
edge can be built on firm, comparable evidence. They do
provide the wisdom to improve care through the evidence
as documented outcomes of efficacy. So, it’s all about quality
outcomes.
CHAPTER 15 Informatics and Documenting Outcomes     ●
271
ON LIN E CON SULT 
American Medical Informatics Association at
http://www.amia.org
American Nursing Informatics Association-Caring at
http://www.ania-caring.org
Alliance for Nursing Informatics at
http://www.allianceni.org/
Canadian Nursing Informatics Association at
http://www.cnia.ca/
Informatics Nurse Certification at
http://www.nursecredentialing.org
/NurseSpecialties/Informatics.aspx
Healthcare Information and Management
Systems Society at
http://himss.org
International Medical Informatics Association, 
Nursing Informatics Special Interest Group at
http://www.imiani.org

272
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
You have noticed that the nurses on your unit are increasingly focused on the computer workstations, espe-
cially after you read last month’s results from the patient satisfaction survey. You are searching for guidance on
increasing effective nurse-patient interactions. You have just read a commentary that in their visits to health-
care institutions identified for leadership in the use of technology, Stead and Lin (2010) found that in one insti-
tution nurses reported only half of their time spent in direct patient care, with the rest of their time spent in
documentation reportedly for regulatory or legal purposes rather than for improvements in care. In your role
as the nurse manager for your unit, you consult with the nurse informatics specialist your hospital to increase
both patient and nurse satisfaction with the use of electronic charting. Based on his recommendation, you
both come up with a plan for a unit conference on documentation, standardized languages, and goals for im-
proving quality of care that include patient involvement.
Question: How will you structure this clinical conference to encourage a focus on electronic documenta-
tion as a means or tool for improved patient care with both nurses and patients collaborating further on the
content for documentation to allow further time for interaction and focus on care improvements?
Source: Stead, W. W., & Lin, H. S. (2010). New directions for health care information technology. National Quality Measures
Clearinghouse. Retrieved from http://qualitymeasures.ahrq.gov/expert/expert-commentary.aspx?id=16453&search=health+
care+information+technology
K E Y  P O I N T S
●“Nursing informatics (NI) is a specialty that integrates nursing science with multiple information and ana-
lytical sciences to identify, define, manage, and communicate data, information, knowledge, and wisdom in
nursing practice” (ANA, 2015b, p. 1–2).
●Nursing informatics as a specialty grows and changes as quickly as telecommunications technologies.
●Few systems can address every component of healthcare, so there is generally an overriding information
system with both clinical and administrative components.
●The EHR is an electronic version of the patient record used as a clinical support tool to assist clinicians
and improving efficiency in workflow and effectiveness in care quality.
●Standardized languages offer common vocabulary, terminology, and usage and are a requirement for con-
sistent understanding and application across nursing settings and practice environments.
●The Nursing Management Minimum Data Set (MDS) is used in long-term care to categorize nursing care
and patient care needs.
●An important component in the EHR for patient safety is electronic prescribing. Full integration of e-prescribing
with the EHR has been shown to promote patient safety and a return on investment (AHRQ, 2010).
●Telehealth has begun to explore the possible applications and innovations that could advance the provi-
sion of healthcare.
●Common office applications—word processing, spreadsheet, database, and presentation graphics—
are useful in nursing practice, education, and research.
●The ANA (2015b) has identified that “the nursing informatics specialty and its constituent members con-
tribute to achieving the goal of improving the health of populations, communities, groups, families, and in-
dividuals . . . [through] the identification of issues and the design, development, and implementation of
effective informatics solutions and technologies within the clinical, administrative, educational, and re-
search domains of practice” (p. 2).
●The NI specialty is represented by several professional associations, is supported by advanced education,
and is credentialed through certification.
●The primary interest of nursing informatics is to expand how data, information, and knowledge are used
to create wisdom within nursing practice.
●In practice, nurses most commonly use computers to document care and to access patient data. Yet,
there are many applications for education and research.
●The diversity of informatics projects and programs has led to tremendous professional career and inter-
disciplinary opportunities.

REFERENCES
Adler, K. G. (2007). How to Successfully Navigate Your EHR
Implementation. Family Practice Management, 14(2), 33–39. 
Agency for Healthcare Research Quality (AHRQ). (2013). 
Electronic prescribing. Retrieved from http://healthit.ahrq
.gov/key-topics/electronic-prescribing
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2006).
The essentials of doctoral education for advanced nursing 
practice. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu
/publications/position/DNPEssentials.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2008).
The essentials of baccalaureate education for professional nursing
practice. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu
/education-resources/BaccEssentials08.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN, 2011).
The essentials of master’s education in nursing. Retrieved 
from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/education-resources
/MastersEssentials11.pdf
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2008). Nursing informat-
ics: Scope and standards of practice. Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursesbooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2010). Nursing: Scope and 
standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursesbooks.org.
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2015a). Inclusion of rec-
ognized terminologies within EHRs and other health informa-
tion technology solutions. Retrieved from http://www
.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/Policy-Advocacy
/Positions-and-Resolutions/ANAPositionStatements
/Position-Statements-Alphabetically/Inclusion-of
-Recognized-Terminologies-within-EHRs.html
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2015b). Nursing infor-
matics: Scope and standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver
Spring, MD: Nursesbooks.org.
American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC). (2013). Nurs-
ing informatics role delineation study: National survey results.
Retrieved from http://www.nursecredentialing.org
/Certification/NurseSpecialties/Informatics/RELATED
-LINKS/Informatics-2013RDS.pdf
American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC). (2014). Infor-
matics nursing certification eligibility criteria. Retrieved 
from http://www.nursecredentialing.org/Informatics
-Eligibility.aspx
AORN. 2013 AORN SYNTEGRITY (R) framework. Retrieved
from http://www.aorn.org/syntegrity/
Blumenthal, D., & Tavenner, M. (2010). The “meaningful
use” regulation for electronic health records. New England
Journal of Medicine, 363(56), 501–504. doi: 10.1056
/NEJMp1006114. Retrieved from http://www.nejm.org
/doi/pdf/10.1056/NEJMp1006114
Brokel, L. (2010). Moving forward with NANDA-I nursing 
diagnoses with Health Information Technology for 
Economic and Clinical (HITECH) Act legislation: News
updates. International Journal of Nursing Terminologies 
and Classifications, 21, 182–185.
Carrington, J. M., & Tiase, V. L. (2013). Nursing informatics year
in review. Nursing Administration Quarterly, 37, 136–143.
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2012).
Stage 2 overall tipsheet. Retrieved from http://www
.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Legislation
/EHRIncentivePrograms/Downloads/Stage2Overview
_Tipsheet.pdf
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2013a).
HIPAA General Information: Overview. Retrieved from
http://www.cms.hhs.gov/HIPAAGenInfo/
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid. (2013b). Progress on 
adoption of electronic health records. Retrieved from http://
www.cms.gov/eHealth/ListServ_Stage3Implementation
.html
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2014a).
2014 definition stage 1 of meaningful use. Retrieved from
http://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Legislation
/EHRIncentivePrograms/Meaningful_Use.html
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2014b). EHR in-
centive program: Stage 2. Retrieved from http://www.cms
.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Legislation/EHRIncentive
Programs/Stage_2.html
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (n.d.a). An introduc-
tion to the Medicare EHR Incentive Program for Eligible 
CHAPTER 15 Informatics and Documenting Outcomes     ●
273
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Since you were initially licensed as an RN, identify some of the technological advances and changes you have ob-
served in nursing practice and healthcare.
2. What would happen in your agency if the computer system “went down”? How would the failure affect patient
care? What are the backup and redundant systems?
3. What is the representation of NI nurses in your facility?
4. How can handheld technology improve care for healthcare consumers?
5. What telehealth application would you like to invent to improve access to healthcare?
6. How would you explain the EHR and privacy to your patients? Be prepared to participate in an in-class or online
discussion to be scheduled by your instructor.
7. Review the Chapter Thought on the first page of the chapter, and be prepared to discuss it online or in class.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the exercises provided for this chapter.

Professionals. Retrieved from http://www.cms.gov/Regulations
-and-Guidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms/
downloads/Beginners_Guide.pdf
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (n.d.b). Research,
statistics, data, and systems. Retrieved from http://www
.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Research-
Statistics-Data-and-Systems.html
Cohen, M. R. (Ed.) (2007). Medication errors (2nd ed.). 
Washington, DC: American Pharmacists Association. 
Cowan, L. (2013). Literature review and risk mitigation strat-
egy for unintended consequences of computer order entry.
Nursing Economic$, 31(1), 27-31, 11.
Graves, J. R., & Corcoran, S. (1989). The study of nursing in-
formatics. Image: The Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 21,
227–231.
Greiner, A. C., & Knebel, E. (Eds.). (2003). Health professions
education: A bridge to quality. Washington, DC: Institute of
Medicine.
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA). (2014).
Telehealth. Retrieved from http://www.hrsa.gov/telehealth/
Hebda, T., Czar, P., & Mascara, C. (2008). Handbook of infor-
matics for nurses and health care professionals (4th ed.). Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2011). The future of nursing:
Leading change, advancing health. Retrieved from http://
www.nap.edu/catalog/12956.html
Institute of Medicine. (2014). Capturing social and behavioral
domains in electronic health records: Phase 1. Retrieved from
http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=18709 
International Council of Nurses (ICN). (2013). About ICPN®.
Retrieved from http://www.icn.ch/what-we-do
/international-classification-for-nursing-practice-icnpr/
International Health Terminology Organisation. (2014).
SNOMED CT: Adding value to electronic health records. 
Retrieved from www.ihtsdo.org/resource/resource/
16/SNOMED_CT/SnomedCt_Benefits_20140219.pdf
JASON. (April, 2014). A robust health data infrastructure (AHRQ
Publication No. 14-0041-EF). Retrieved from http://healthit
.gov/sites/default/files/ptp13-700hhs_white.pdf
Joint Commission. (2014a). Improving America’s hospitals: 
The Joint Commission’s annual report on quality and safety.
Retrieved from http://www.jointcommission.org
/annualreport.aspx
Joint Commission. (2014b). Top performance on key quality
measures (R). Retrieved from http://www.jointcommission
.org/accreditation/top_performers.aspx
Kleib, M., Sales, A. E., Lima, I., Andrea-Baylon, M., & Beaith,
A. (2010). Continuing education in informatics among regis-
tered nurses in the United States in 2000. The Journal of
Continuing Education in Nursing, 41, 329–336.
Lustig, T. A. (2012). The role of telehealth in an evolving health
care environment: Workshop summary. Retrieved from
http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=13466
Murphy, J. (2010). Nursing informatics: The intersection of
nursing, computer, and information sciences. Nursing 
Economic$, 28, 204–207.
National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN).
(2014). About Nurse Licensure Compact (NLC). Retrieved
from https://www.ncsbn.org/nlc.htm
National Database of Nursing Quality Indicators (NDNQI).
(2014). About NDNQI.  Retrieved from http://pressganey
.com/ourSolutions/performance-and-advanced-analytics
/clinical-business-performance/nursing-quality-ndnqi
Omaha System. (2013). The Omaha System ICPN. Retrieved from
http://www.omahasystem.org/overview.html
Rutherford, M. A. (2013). Standardized nursing language: What
does it mean for nursing practice? Online Journal for Issues in
Nursing, 28(1). doi: 10.3912/OJIN.Vol13No01PPT05 
Retrieved from http://www.nursingworld.org/Main
MenuCategories/ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN
/TableofContents/vol132008/No1Jan08/ArticlePrevious
Topic/StandardizedNursingLanguage.html
Thede, L., & Schwiran, P. (February 25, 2011). Informatics:
The standardized nursing terminologies: A national survey
of  nurses’ experiences and attitudes–survey. OJIN: The 
Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 16(2). doi: 10.3912
/OJIN.Vol16No02InfoCol01. Retrieved from http://www
.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/ANAMarketplace
/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/TableofContents/Vol-16-2011
/No2-May-2011/Standardized-Nursing-Terminologies.html
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (n.d.). An introduc-
tion to the Medicare EHR Incentive Program for Eligible Pro-
fessionals. Retrieved from http://www.cms.gov/Regulations
-and-Guidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms
/downloads/Beginners_Guide.pdf
Eichner, J., & Dullabh, P. (2007). Accessible health information
technology (IT) for populations with limited literacy: A guide
for developers and purchasers of health IT (AHRQ Pub. No.
08-0010-EF). Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Re-
search and Quality. Retrieved from http://healthit.ahrq.gov
/sites/default/files/docs/page/LiteracyGuide_0.pdf
Health Level 7 (2014). About HL7. Retrieved from http://www
.hl7.org/about/index.cfm?ref=nav
Herdman, T. H., & Kamitsuru, S. (Ed.). (2014). Nursing diag-
noses: Definitions and classifications 2015-2017 (10th ed.).
Oxford, UK: Wiley Blackwell.
Institute of Medicine. (2012). The role of telehealth in an evolv-
ing health care environment: Workshop summary. Retrieved
from http://www.nap.edu/download.php?record_id=13466
Moorhead, S., Johnson, M., Maas, M. L., & Swanson, E.
(eds.). (2008). Nursing Outcomes Classification (NOC)
(4th ed.). St. Louis: Mosby Elsevier.
Murphy, J. (2010). The journey to meaningful use of electronic
health records. Nursing Economic$, 28, 283–286.
Topaz, M. (2013). The hitchhiker’s guide to nursing informat-
ics theory: Using the data-knowledge-wisdom framework 
to guide informatics research. Online Journal of Nursing 
Informatics, 17(3). Retrieved from http://ojni.org/issues
/?p=2852
University of Iowa College of Nursing Centers (2014). Center
for Nursing Classification and Clinical Effectiveness. Retrieved
from http: //www.nursing.uiowa.edu/center-for-nursing
-classification-and-clinical-effectiveness
ONLINE RESOURCES
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
http://healthit.ahrq.gov/
American Medical Informatics Association
http://www.amia.org/
ANA Recognized Terminologies
http://www.nursingworld.org/Terminologies 
274
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

http://www.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/Policy
-Advocacy/Positions-and-Resolutions/ANAPosition
Statements/Position-Statements-Alphabetically
/Inclusion-of-Recognized-Terminologies-within
-EHRs.html
American Nursing Informatics Association
http://www.ania.org
British Computer Society: Health Informatics (Nursing) 
Specialty Group
http://www.bcs.org/server.php?show=conWebDoc.1220
Canadian Nursing Informatics Association
http://www.cnia.ca/
CMS: EHR Incentive Program
https://www.cms.gov/EHRIncentivePrograms/
Informatics Nursing Certification
http://www.nursecredentialing.org/InformaticsNursing
International Council of Nurses Classification for Nursing
Practice at
http://www.icn.ch/icnp.htm
NANDA-I
http://www.nanda.org/NursingDiagnosisFAQ.aspx
Nursing Interventions Classifications (NIC)
http://www.nursing.uiowa.edu/cncce/nursing-interventions
-classification-overview
Nursing Outcomes Classifications (NOC) at
http://www.nursing.uiowa.edu/cncce/nursing-outcomes
-classification-overview
Omaha System
http://www.omahasystem.org
Online Brazilian Journal of Nursing
http://www.objnursing.uff.br/index.php/nursing
Online Journal of Issues in Nursing
http://www.nursingworld.org/ojin/
Online Journal of Nursing Informatics
http://ojni.org/
Online Journal of Rural Nursing and Health Care
http://rnojournal.binghamton.edu/index.php/RNO
Perioperative Nursing Data Set (PNDS)
http://www.aorn.org/syntegrity/
SNOMED CT
http://www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct/
CHAPTER 15 Informatics and Documenting Outcomes     ●
275

Economics and
Healthcare Policy
276
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery  ●William Himmelsbach
16
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Demonstrate an understanding of the basic principles in healthcare economics and financing.
2. Characterize the history and processes used to provide healthcare to individuals and groups in the
United States along with solutions proposed with the ACA.
3. Examine the major payment systems and access to healthcare coverage.
4. Discuss the major issues that nursing managers and leaders confront when healthcare coverage issues
are addressed.
5. Evaluate policy issues and the role of professionals in clinical practice settings.
Economics
Healthcare Economics
Gross National Product (GNP)
Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act (ACA)
Cost of Healthcare
Reimbursement
Payers
Prospective Payment System (PPS)
Fee-for-Service (FFS) Plan
Managed Care
Point-of-Service (POS) Plan
Preferred Provider Organization
(PPO)
Medical Savings Account (MSA)
Accountable Care Organization
(ACO)
Medicare
Health Maintenance Organization
(HMO)
Medicaid
Children’s Health Insurance Program
(CHIP)
Health Equity
Fiscal Responsibility
“I am an optimist. It does not seem too much use
being anything else.”
Winston Churchill, 1874–1965
Key Terms

CHAPTER 16 Economics and Healthcare Policy     ●
277
We talk about the economy on a daily basis, whether com-
paring prices that have risen or the effect on people strug-
gling to make mortgage payments or maintain business
operations. However, consider the term economics, which
is the study of production of a product or service along with
issues of supply and demand and distribution of that prod-
uct or service for the continuity or well-being of some en-
tity. You may have taken courses in macroeconomics
focusing on the decisions for national or global entities or
microeconomics considering decisions of individuals or busi-
nesses on supply and demand in a defined marketplace.
Healthcare economics has been defined as a specialty area
of economics that analyzes how the different parts of the
healthcare system work to supply and deliver healthcare
services for patients (Miller, Chang, & Pfoutz, 2012, 
p. 309). This is not a simple issue of supplying services to
meet the ongoing and increasingly complex health needs
of individuals, families, and groups. Leaders and managers
in the healthcare industry are challenged on a daily basis
with regulatory requirements and restrictions, reimburse-
ment considerations for continuity, professional boundary
issues for service delivery, and ethical concerns for efficacy,
equity, quality, and safety of patient outcomes. The health-
care leader using skills of vision, commitment, and empow-
erment or the manager focused on coordinating and
directing resources for effective outcomes for both the or-
ganization and the patient are challenged far beyond the
production of a discrete item to meet the demand of the
consumer in a marketplace. Economic trends and the 
financing of healthcare are major considerations.
TRENDS IN HEALTHCARE
ECOMOMICS
Everyone recognizes that healthcare is a big business and
is viewed as costly. However, consider the trends in
healthcare services and costs and the changes in the sys-
tem that have occurred over time. The gross national
product (GNP) is the goods and services produced in a
nation and is measured on an annual basis. Alternately,
you will see comparisons on the gross domestic product
(GDP), which is restricted to the goods and services pro-
duced within the nation, thus excluding business not 
located in the particular nation.
Annual per capital expenditures for healthcare in the
United States is the highest in the world (Thomson, Os-
born, Squires, & Jun, 2013, p. 134). Figure 16.1 illustrates
healthcare expenditures by nation in 2011 and documents
$8,507.60 per capita spending in the United States. We
see the GDP used in comparisons on the rising costs of
healthcare. Consider the trends in healthcare costs for the
United States compared with other selected countries iden-
tified in Figure 16.1. As reported by the Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD, 2013),
in 2011, the United States spent 17.7 percent of its GDP
on healthcare, nearly twice the average amount spent by
other countries and significantly more than comparable in-
dustrial nations (Table 16.1). Consider the trends identi-
fied in Table 16.2. These costs include not only the
provision of care to patients as goods and services but also
physical resources, the preparation of practitioners across
disciplines, research and development, and methods of 
financing all of these. In 2010, spending on healthcare in
the United States was reported as $2.6 trillion, equating to
$8,402 per person (Martin, Lassman, Washington, Catlin,
& the National Health Expenditure Accounts Team, 2012,
p. 208). And the upward trend has continued, although at
a slower pace during the economic decline. Consider some
of the differences in costs of healthcare for some of these
countries illustrated in Table 16.3. For example, the United
States and Canada have similar expenditures on inpatient
care, with differences in percentage of expenditures for 
$0
$2,000
$4,000
$6,000
$8,000
$10,000
U.S.
Norway
Switzerland
Canada
Austria
Germany
France
United Kingdom
Sweden
Spain
Italy
Israel
Korea
Czech Republic
Chile
Figure 16.1 Total health expenditure per capita, United States and selected countries, 2011. (Adapted 
from Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development [OECD]. [2013]. Health at a glance 2013: OECD indica-
tors. Retrieved from http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/social-issues-migration-health/health-at-a-glance_19991312;jsessionid=
612e179lbg8ul.x-oecd-live-01; and OECD [2013]. Total expenditure on health per capita, Health: Key tables from OECD,
no. 2. doi: 10.1787/hlthxp-cap-table-2013-2-en)

outpatient and long-term care. The United States spends
almost twice the amount on healthcare insurance and ad-
ministration compared with Canada and more than the
other nations listed except for France. However, the United
States and France, as some of the highest spenders on
healthcare, also see households financing a relatively small
share of the healthcare costs directly, with most spending
made through public or private third-party arrangements
(OECD, 2011a, p. 158). 
An atypical trend has started to occur in the United
States. Healthcare inflation has declined over the past 
10 years from 10% to 4%. This line has gotten close to
the overall inflation rate. If such a trend continues, or even
flattens out, the implications are significant. For example,
the Medicare Trust Fund projections may improve. In ad-
dition, state tax resources to fund the state’s share of Med-
icaid may not be such a burden as it has been in the past.
As reported in a 2014 poll conducted by the Kaiser Family
Foundation (Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, 2014b)
on the decline in healthcare expenditures trend, “when
asked their perceptions of the cost of health care in the na-
tion, half of the public says that over the past few years,
costs have been going up faster than usual (50 percent),
and only 8 percent say costs have been going up slower
than usual” (p. 1). In addition for this period, researchers
reported that “out-of pocket medical spending did not de-
cline, which suggests that consumers began to bear more
of the burden for medical care directly” (Herrera, Gaynor,
Newman, Town, & Parente, 2013, p. 1721). The poten-
tial effect on the private insurance market (payers, employ-
ees, and individuals) is unsettled because implementation
of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA)
is not occurring as prescribed in the Act. Some of the de-
cline in expenditures has been attributed to the downturn
in the economy, with people delaying healthcare expendi-
tures, especially preventative services. Nonetheless, future
use of healthcare services is a factor as demand increases.
This increased demand could be significant.
Financing healthcare in the United States, however,
is more than simply a supply-and-demand equation.
The four major factors driving healthcare costs are tech-
nology and prescription drugs, chronic disease, aging of
the population, and administrative costs (Kimbuende,
Ranji, Lundy, & Salganicoff, 2013, p. 550). Technology
is increasing at a speed we can barely keep pace with, yet
278
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
TABLE 14.2
Expenditures on Health as a
Percentage of Gross Domestic
Product, 2005 versus 2011
Country
2005 (%)
2011 (%)
United States 
Norway 
Switzerland 
Canada 
Austria 
Germany 
France 
Sweden
United Kingdom 
Spain 
Italy 
Israel 
Korea 
Czech Republic 
Chile
Source: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). (2013). Total expenditure on health. Health: Key tables
from OECD, no. 1. doi: 10.1787/hlthxp-total-table-2013-2-en.
TABLE 16.1
15.8
9.0
10.9
9.8
10.4
10.8
11.0
9.1
8.3
8.3
8.7
7.9
5.6
6.9
6.6
17.7
9.3
11.0 
11.2
10.8
11.3
11.6
9.5
9.4
9.3
9.2
7.7
7.4
7.5
7.5
TABLE 16.2
Differences in Healthcare Expenditures for Selected Countries, 1990–2011
OECD 
United 
United 
Countries
States
Ireland
Kingdom 
Netherlands 
France
Mexico 
China 
Average 
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
1990
2000
2009
2010/
2011
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). (2013). Health at a glance 2013: OECD indica-
tors. Retrieved from http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/social-issues-migration-health/health-at-a-glance_19991312;jsessionid=
612e179lbg8ul.x-oecd-live-01; and Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). (2011). Health at 
a glance 2011: OECD indicators. Retrieved from http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/social-issues-migration-health/health-at-a-
glance-2011_health_glance-2011-en;jsessionid=60v7lrkqqook1.x-oecd-live-01.
9.6
9.5
4.0
4.5
<7.0
6.2
NA
4.6
4.6
5.1
8.4
10.1
11.8
11.6
8.0
8.0
12.0
12.0
5.9
7.0
9.8
9.6
6.0
6.1
9.5
9.2
12.4
13.7
17.4
17.6

CHAPTER 16 Economics and Healthcare Policy     ●
279
afford. Prescription drugs are similarly multiplying as
we chemically attempt to treat conditions as unique as
the individuals themselves. And consumers are exposed
to these new prescription drug options in the media on
a daily basis. Chronic diseases and the aging of the pop-
ulation are well-documented trends as we now attempt
to address population health and health promotion. And
it is estimated that at least 7 percent of healthcare ex-
penditures are for administrative costs, like marketing
and billing (Kimbuende et al., 2013, p. 550). Financing
healthcare has become a major challenge for consumers,
employers, and payers.
HEALTHCARE FINANCING: 
A HISTORICAL CONTEXT
To address healthcare financing, we first consider the con-
trol of the money and resources to cover the cost of health-
care. Healthcare costs are generally covered in one of four
ways: through health insurance, governmental healthcare
coverage, individual or family assets, or charitable coverage. 
As noted by Kovner and Knickman (2011), in the
United States, the healthcare financing system has evolved
continuously since the middle of the 20th century when
health insurance began to be marketed (p. 49). Health in-
surance is obtained in two ways: through employer cover-
age or individual contracts. Employer coverage occurs as
a component of a worker’s compensation or benefit pack-
age as part of employment to provide for individual or
family coverage. As part of a group plan, an economy of
scale provides for coverage of a defined group. Risk-
to-benefit ratios are an important part of this process, hop-
ing for an employee population that uses a predictable
amount of resources that is covered through premiums.
However, increased costs to employers are considered as
business and employee costs, with employers transferring
some of this cost liability to employees through increased
individual employee premiums, copays, and deductibles.
This cost shifting has affected individuals and families as
usable income declines, even in a time of a stable income.
Insurance companies address the issue of individuals using
more healthcare services when covered than if they were
not provided by insurance through deductibles and copay-
ments. Unruh and Spetz (2012) describe this situation as
a moral hazard that leads to greater demand for services
and increased cost with use (p. 155).
As noted by Cowan and Hartman (2005), an increase
in premiums resulted from increased costs and use, as well
as the decline in manufacturing jobs and a resultant in-
crease in service sector jobs, which occurred earlier in this
decade and impacted worker benefits because service sector
jobs are less likely to provide health insurance (p. 11). Em-
ployers contract through insurers to provide coverage for
their employees. However, in recent years some major em-
ployers became their own insurers as the cost of group in-
surance premiums rose and coverage was questioned for
cost-effectiveness or safety. Health insurance can also be
obtained through personal funds, but this has often been
cost prohibitive and has caused individuals and families to
delay preventive healthcare when costs are considered part
of the family monthly budget. Another coverage compo-
nent is when a worker leaves, loses a position, or has a
qualified event that allows for legal continuation of health
insurance for a specified period of time through a group
plan according to the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Rec-
onciliation Act of 1985 (COBRA). However, this could
still be a costly individual or family expense at a time with
perhaps limited assets. As we will later see with the ACA,
a focus on prevention, health promotion, and the devel-
opment of insurance exchanges was the basis to address
some of these issues.
Governmental healthcare coverage occurs through na-
tional, federal, or state provisions and entitlements. In the
United States, federal programs are in place for special
populations like active or retired members of the military
TABLE 16.3
Differences in Healthcare Expenditures for Selected Countries, 2009
Healthcare 
Healthcare 
Healthcare 
Expenditures on 
Expenditures 
Expenditures on 
Expenditures on
Healthcare Insurance
on Inpatient 
Outpatient 
Long-Term 
and Administration
Country
Care (%)
Care (%)
Care (%)
(%)
United States
Canada
Norway
Sweden
France
Germany
Japan
Source: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). (2013). Health at a glance 2013: OECD indicators.
Retrieved from http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/social-issues-migration-health/health-at-a-glance_19991312;jsessionid=
612e179lbg8ul.x-oecd-live-01.
7.0
3.7
0.8
1.4
7.0
5.4
1.9
51
33
26
42
23
29
34
6
15
27
8
12
12
9
19
20
32
28
36
29
32

or their dependents and the aging population. Other pro-
grams for children or disabled individuals are shared
through federal, state, and local governments. We have
seen how changes in plans and coverage have established
reimbursement and coding plans that provide direction to
reimbursement from the other sources. Further details on
the initiatives associated with Medicare and Medicaid in
the United States are presented in a later section.
Individual or family assets may be used to provide for
healthcare, whether for insurance, copays, care, or private
pay. In the past, individuals could seek private insurance
or payment plans, but often at an increased cost without
the purchasing power of numbers that occurs with a
group plan. The Insurance Exchanges called for by the
ACA were envisioned as a means to promote private in-
surance coverage through a federal or state “group” plan
or insurance exchange.
Charitable coverage may be available in secular or re-
ligious communities by virtue of membership. Charitable
coverage as uncompensated care may also occur on an
episodic basis when an organization or institution “writes
off” selected charges as a component of their contribution
to the community, a tax liability, or an operational agree-
ment, especially in the situation of uninsured or underin-
sured patients. 
PRICE, COST, AND
REIMBURSEMENT
The price and cost of healthcare are not the same when
the issue of reimbursement is considered. The actual cost
of healthcare is the price or the monetary amount of goods
and services to cover the episode of care. On the other
hand, reimbursement is the amount of money provided
to pay for that particular episode of care based on an
agreed or approved process. In healthcare, we have seen
several accounting systems used for reimbursement be-
cause we are generally dealing with third-party payers.
Providers usually do not know the true cost of providing
their services.
Consider the payers for healthcare as first, second, and
third parties. First-party payers are those seeking the
healthcare service, whether an individual who is a private
payer or a member of a group plan with specified copays
or minimums to be met. The second-party payers are the
providers, plan administrators, or employer who collects
premiums, pays, or copays for a group of individuals.
Third-party payers are the insurers who collect the premi-
ums, assess and accept the risk of the group, and reimburse
the providers for the service. 
To pay for the healthcare service, several methodolo-
gies are used and have evolved as healthcare costs are ad-
dressed, whether in advance of the service, through prior
anticipation or negotiation for the service, or after the
service. 
Retrospective payment plans were predominant before
the middle 1980s and the introduction of diagnostic-
related groups (DRGs). With the retrospective systems,
hospitals and other providers were paid after services and
treatments were performed through a complicated “cost-
based” formula. Leading to the implementation of DRGs,
a technical review committee noted that “until 1982,
Medicare employed a retrospective cost-based reimburse-
ment approach whereby hospitals could recover from
Medicare most of what they spent on Medicare benefici-
aries . . . [with] little incentive to contain costs” and en-
couraged additional capacity, technologies, and complex
services (Office of Technology Assessment, 1983, p. 3).
DRGs were developed to address case load, costs, and re-
ward structures for cost savings.
The prospective payment system (PPS) is a fixed pay-
ment method that is based on a predetermined amount
for the usual care needed for a patient with a specific con-
dition. If the care is more expensive, the provider must ab-
sorb the additional costs. If the cost of the patient care
comes in at a lesser amount, the provider benefits.
Providers would like to come in under budget to use the
funds for systems maintenance and reinvestment, but
safety and quality are vital and ethical considerations. Clin-
ical or critical pathways and care maps have been used to
standardize care for patients along expected trajectories
and in line with evidence-based protocols and practice.
Monitoring and evaluation are important components of
this process that is alert for variations in patient conditions
and care provisions.
Fee-for-service (FFS) plans are the traditional payment
methods in which each service is charged separately, as
with provider visits, laboratory tests, and supplies. Unin-
sured individuals are billed separately for each of these
services. As a member of a group plan, individuals pay a
premium based on risk assessments and historical use of
services (typically 3 years), along with plan-associated de-
ductibles and copays.
Managed care covers a variety of treatment and pay-
ment options. As noted by Chang, Price, and Pfoutz
(2001), managed care combines the financing and delivery
of services into a single entity (p. 88). Several forms of
managed care have evolved and continue to address this
concept, as with provider networks and selected plans.
However, the ultimate goals are to maintain health and
prevent disease and disability, thus reducing healthcare
costs. A major concept in managed care is capitated pay-
ments, in which each enrollee is entered into the plan with
a payment based on a risk ratio. The goal is to reduce the
risk for high healthcare costs and to promote savings.
Point-of-service (POS) plans generally occur through
a specified network of providers. The patient selects a pri-
mary care provider from this network. The primary care
provider serves as a gatekeeper, and consultations with
others must have prior approval for reimbursement. The
patient may elect to go to providers outside the network,
but that is a choice, and care can be more costly. Health,
wellness, and illness prevention are goals for these plans
to limit cost.
A preferred provider organization (PPO) is a provider
or provider agency included as part of a network and
agrees to negotiated rates for patients who use the PPOs
listed. If the patient goes out of the network to another
provider, additional and non-reimbursed patient charges
will be incurred for that preference. An important consid-
eration is the menu of negotiated rates and what may re-
sult in additional charges.
A medical savings account (MSA) is a federal tax in-
centive program used by employers or Medicare recipi-
ents in which a high deductible is agreed on with an
280
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

CHAPTER 16 Economics and Healthcare Policy     ●
281
amount provided in a nontaxable savings account to pay
for initial care. Self-management of healthcare cost is a
key feature, with payments made to the plan rather than
insurance premiums. Money in the account will earn in-
terest and can accumulate over the years until needed for
a major medical expense. Tax liabilities are a considera-
tion if the account funds are not used for approved ex-
penses that reduce the deductible amount. After the
deductible is met, services are provided without addi-
tional cost to the patient.
The accountable care organization (ACO) has
evolved as a component of the ACA as a shared savings
organization designed to promote accountability, risk
management, and coordinated care. Beginning with pilot
programs in 2012, care for minimum groups of Medicare
FFS beneficiaries under Parts A, B, and D would be pro-
vided by selected groups of providers of services and care.
The goals of these high-quality, efficient care coordina-
tion provider groups are to keep the Medicare recipients
out of hospitals and encourage investment in infrastruc-
ture and redesigned care processes with quality reporting.
As further described by the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS, 2013a), a provider that be-
comes an ACO “succeeds in both delivering high-quality
care and spending health care dollars more wisely [and]
will share in the savings it achieves for the Medicare pro-
gram” (p. 1). However, of the 32 original ACOs selected
to participate in this program, a significant number sub-
sequently withdrew from the program by 2014 based on
the financials of the initiative.
MEDICARE, MEDICAID, AND
THE CHILDREN’S HEALTH
INSURANCE PROGRAM
In the United States, Medicare, Medicaid, and state 
Children’s Health Insurance Programs (CHIP) are major
governmental entities that provide healthcare for select
populations. Medicare was the first program, beginning
in 1965 with the Social Security Act under Title XVIII.
Refer to Table 16.4 for major timelines for these federal
programs.
As a refresher, consider the four parts of Medicare:
A, B, C, and D. Recall that Medicare is available for
Americans aged 65 years or older, those with certain dis-
abilities, and those with end-stage renal disease. Medicare
Part A provides for inpatient hospital, skilled rehabilita-
tive, hospice, and home care services for enrolled indi-
viduals. Payment for this coverage occurred while
working as employment taxes or may be provided
through enrollment in Part B or through a documented
disability. Coverage of charges depends on hospital ad-
mission and specific treatment orders. Medicare Part B
TABLE 16.4
Timelines on Medicare, Medicaid, and Children’s Health Insurance
Program
Medicare
In excess of 19 million Americans 65 years and older to receive health-
care coverage
Medicare eligibility extended to selected individuals with disabilities
Home health services broadened and Medicare supplemental insurance
available
Diagnostic-related groups (DRGs) implemented for all Medicare-
participating hospitals
Emergency departments to provide screening and treatment stabilization
(EMTALA)
Protections for nursing home residents (Omnibus Reconciliation Act)
Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act (MCAA) for hospital/skilled facilities
Spousal impoverishment costing with institutional and community living
MCCA repealed and new schedule of fees implemented
Managed care plan choices established to slow spending
Increased payments for some Medicare providers
Improved coverage for managed care
Prescription drug discounts and prevention coverage 
Part D voluntary drug benefit and subsidies to retiree programs
Part D premium differentials depending on incomes of beneficiaries
Establishment of Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs) and payments
linked to quality outcomes as part of the Patient Protection and Afford-
able Care Act (ACA)
1966
1972
1980
1983
1985
1987
1988
1989
1997
1999
2000
2003
2006
2009
Continued

covers approved outpatient care, necessary and selected
preventive services, and equipment, usually by virtue of
an additional premium based on a prior year’s annual in-
come paid with Social Security. Medicare Part C is a se-
lected “Advantage Plan” in which Part A and Part B
services are provided by a FFS, PPO, health maintenance
organization (HMO), or a special plan selected by the
participant, who follows the rules of the selected health-
care organization and pays the required premium.
Medicare Part D is the optional prescription drug cov-
erage plan. Monthly Part D premiums are based on the
drug plan and the prior year’s annual income and may
be deducted from the monthly Social Security check.
The provision of Medicare Part D through the
Medicare prescription Drug Improvement and Modern-
ization Act of 2003 has been noted as the “the most signif-
icant improvement to senior health care in nearly 40 years”
(CMS, 2013c, p. 1). In excess of 50 million Americans are
covered by Medicare, but not all are enrolled in the op-
tional Part D. As reported by the Henry J. Kaiser Family
Foundation (2013a), at least 10 percent of Medicare ben-
eficiaries do not have credible drug coverage despite the
fact that 39 million Medicare beneficiaries were enrolled
in Medicare Part D, a Medicare Advantage Drug Plan, or
an employee-sponsored retiree drug plan (p. 2). Subsidies
are available and can be applied for, but outreach is an im-
portant consideration. One of the main issues with Part D
is the “donut hole” that occurs when high users reach the
maximum allowable amount and then must use personal
resources to pay for medication until the next plateau for
coverage is reached. Reducing this cost is one of the features
of the ACA, which started in 2011 as a small rebate and
then in 2014 became a reduction in the program feature.
Many Medicare recipients, however, carry supplemen-
tal insurance to pay for needed inpatient and outpatient
expenses. “Due to Medicare’s relatively high cost-sharing
requirements, the vast majority of beneficiaries have some
source of coverage that supplements Medicare, including
nine million Medicare beneficiaries who purchase Medi-
gap policies” (Jacobson, Huang, & Neuman, 2014, p. 1).
This “Medigap” market has seen similar economic
scrutiny as healthcare costs have escalated and measures
have been directed at controlling Medicare spending for
recipients, many of whom are on limited or fixed incomes
282
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
TABLE 16.4
Timelines on Medicare, Medicaid, and Children’s Health Insurance
Program—cont’d
Medicaid
State Children’s 
Health Insurance 
Program
(CHIP)
Source: Adapted from: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2005). Key milestones in Medicare and Medicaid
history, selected years: 1965–2003. Health Care Financing Review, 27(2). Retrieved from http://www.cms.gov/Research-
Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Research/HealthCareFinancingReview/downloads/05-06Winpg1.pdf 
State phase-in process for children without parental support and their
caregivers, and low-income individuals and individuals with disabilities
Eligibility extended for individuals with disabilities
Hospitals with high percentage of low-income patients received additional
state support [Disproportionate share hospitals (DSH)]
State optional Medicaid coverage for pregnant women and infants
Mandated coverage for pregnant women and infants at 100% federal
poverty level (FPL)
Coverage of pregnant women and children <6 years under 133% of FPL
with expanded screening and treatment 
Expanded coverage of children 6–16 years under 100% FPL and Medicaid
Prescription Drug Rebate program established
Medicaid controls established
Welfare link to Medicaid reformed
Work incentives for Medicaid recipients and improved funding to 
hospitals and women’s health services
Federal health and rural health clinics established
Exanded eligibility and funding as part of the ACA with specific 
requirements from 2014–2019
Program establishment under the Balanced Budget Act as Title XXI of the
Social Security Act for uninsured children not eligible for Medicaid
Program extended through March 2009; Reauthorized in 2009
States required to maintain eligibility through September 30, 2019 with
funding increases from 2014–2019 under the ACA of 2009
1966
1972
1981
1986
1988
1989
1990 
1991
1996
1999
2000
2009
1997
2007–2009
2009

CHAPTER 16 Economics and Healthcare Policy     ●
283
and some who have additional supplementary retiree or
federal coverage.
The Medicaid program was authorized under Title
XIX of the Social Security Act in 1965 but was designed
to be phased in as a joint program between federal, state,
and local governments. Medicaid funding and programs
at the state and local levels are provided by some federal
funding and regulated through eligibility requirements.
Primary recipients of Medicaid are pregnant women, chil-
dren, parents and caregivers, seniors, and people with dis-
abilities. However, Medicaid is the primary payer for
long-term care services, with $257 billion spent in 2011
for long-term care for elders in nursing homes, for com-
munity diversion programs, and for assistance in payment
of Medicare premiums (Henry J. Kaiser Family Founda-
tion, 2013c, 2014c). 
States address both federally mandated eligibility groups
and other optional populations. For some groups, man-
dated eligibility requirements are based on 100 percent of
the federal poverty level (FPL). The FPL is updated on an
annual basis. For 2014, the FPL for a family of four was
an annual income of between $23,850 and $27,430, 
depending on state of residence. Low income is only one
test for Medicaid eligibility, and other financial resources
have threshold levels determined by each state within the
federal guidelines (Klees & Wolfe, 2013, p. 22). States can
apply to increase the eligibility level, and many states pro-
vide benefits and care for pregnant women significantly
above the minimum level. Additional eligibility require-
ments include state residency, immigration status, and doc-
umentation of citizenship. Optional populations include
the medically needy, as identified by the state, and selected
groups who earn above the minimum income requirement.
In addition, the state can assess premiums or copayments
to optional groups. The ACA provides additional eligibility
for adults with the standard of 133 percent of the FPL be-
ginning in 2014. 
As noted by Cowan and Hartman (2005), “Medicaid
accounts for the largest portion of State and local govern-
ments’ health care expenditures” (p. 17). And this burden
is increasing, especially given the additional eligibility with
the ACA. But as these researchers continue to point out
regarding the burden at the state and local levels, “unlike
the Federal Government that can support deficit spending,
almost all State governments must balance their budgets
each year, making the pressure they face from rising State
healthcare costs particularly acute” (Cowan & Hartman,
2005, p. 23). Promoting health and keeping residents
healthy are less costly than chronic care, but this is still a
controversial issue in many state governments. The ACA
of 2009 gave states the option of expanding Medicaid el-
igibility in 2014 to 138 percent of the FPL. However,
states were allowed to opt out of this requirement follow-
ing a Supreme Court decision in 2012. 
The Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP)
was originally enacted in 1997 as Title XXI of the Social
Security Act for a 10-year period as SCHIP to provide
health coverage for uninsured children who were not eli-
gible for Medicaid. The program provides federal match-
ing funds to states to provide this coverage. After the
original 10-year period, it was extended for another 2 years
and then reauthorized in April 2009 and renamed the
CHIP program. To encourage state participation and to
provide enhanced coverage for this program, the federal
annual matching funds rate is higher than the Medicaid
program. The CHIP program was further enhanced and
extended through the ACA with funding to continue
through fiscal year (FY) 2019 at increased levels, for ex-
ample as follows:
FY 2012: $14,982,000,000
FY 2013: $17,406,000,000
FY 2014: $19,147,000,000
FY 2015: $18,211,000,000 (CHIP, 2011)
Further special CHIP initiatives are provided through
the ACA. Although this program is jointly funded by the
federal government and the individual states, the District
of Columbia, and the territories, it is designed and deliv-
ered by the individual states in accordance with guidelines
from the CMS. Some states, territories, and the District
of Columbia use the federal program as an expansion of
their Medicaid program, whereas other states treat CHIP
as a separate program or a combination of the two. In ad-
ditional to healthcare and health promotion services, ben-
efits of the program include early detection and screening
programs and dental care.
ON LIN E CON SULT 
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services at:
http://www.medicare.gov/
http://www.medicaid.gov/ 
The Children’s Health Insurance Program at
http://www.medicaid.gov/CHIP/CHIP-Program-
Information.html 
Coding and Comparisons
An important consideration for reimbursement is the cod-
ing of care for reimbursement or payment. As mentioned
previously, the introduction of DRGs in 1982 provided a
system of prospective reimbursement based on a typical
case scenario in response to rapidly escalating hospital costs
for Medicare recipients. Lack of cost controls with reim-
bursement methods and the expanding technology were
blamed for dramatically increasing costs between 1967
(covering 19.5 million recipients at a cost of $4.7 million
as 9.2 percent of healthcare expenditures) and 1985 (with
31.1 million Medicare recipients at a cost of $72.3 billion
16.9 percent of healthcare expenditures) (Office of 
Inspector General Office of Evaluation and Inspections
Region IX, 2001, p. 2). In 1983, Medicare payments were
capped, based on the diagnostic category on a per case
basis. The effects of this system were not restricted to
Medicare; private insurance reimbursements rapidly fol-
lowed the lead with a PPS rather than a retrospective cost-
based system or formula. 
DRG categories “bundle” costs on a per case basis and
include operating and delivery costs, such as care delivery,
supplies, diagnostic studies, and equipment and technol-
ogy. DRGs set the payment for a particular diagnosis, not
for the costs of the actual services and care to the patient.

In the current DRG structure, more than 700 DRGs are
identified and weighted. Claims for reimbursement for
Medicare Part A inpatients were coded in accordance with
International Classification of Diseases, initially under the
ninth revision (ICD-9). DRGs are reimbursed for services
considering certain “weighted” factors, such as case com-
plexity as with case “outliers,” geography (urban versus
rural), labor costs, and special functions as with teaching
hospitals and those hospitals caring for a larger proportion
of low-income patients. In 2011, the three most fre-
quently billed DRGs related to joint replacements, psy-
choses, and severe infection (Modern Healthcare, 2013).
DRG classifications and weights and Medicare Part B
premiums and deductibles are evaluated by CMS on an
annual (calendar year [CY]) basis for reimbursement con-
siderations. For example, the Medicare Part A inpatient
deductible was $1,184 in 2013 and $1,216 in 2014
(Medicare Program, 2013). 
Approved IDC codes lead to reimbursement for ser -
vices and date back to their origin in 1899 when the focus
was on causes of death. The first revision was IDC-1 and
was in use from 1900 to 1909. With implementation of
DRGs in the 1980s, IDC-9 codes were used from 1995
to 2011. In 2012, the ICD-9 system began the transition
to ICD-10 with the deadline of October 1, 2015 for all
diagnoses and inpatient procedures. There were nearly
5,000 classifications of disease in IDC-9, but this expands
to nearly 8,000 in IDC-10, with increased details and
focus on causes of morbidity (Moriyama et al., 2011).
The IDC-10 uses three- to seven-digit codes and affects
all diagnosis and inpatient coding for everyone covered
by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act (HIPAA).
In the case of coding for Medicare Part B (outpatient
services), Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes
are used. The CPT coding system is maintained by the
American Medical Association and updated on an annual
basis. The CPT coding system is used by practitioners to
identify services and procedures provided for which they
will bill private and public health insurance programs. To
provide more transparency on this complex system, CMS
(2014c) began providing a public data set on Medicare
FFS beneficiaries, with information on services and pro-
cedures provided to Medicare beneficiaries by physicians
and other healthcare professionals, including payment and
submitted charges organized by the National Provider
Identifier (NPI) and the Healthcare Common Procedure
Coding System.
Coding and the use of the electronic health record have
allowed for better data collection and comparison infor-
mation. For example, the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services Office of Inspector General (USDHHS;
2014) reported that Medicare beneficiaries paid higher co-
payments for outpatient services at critical access hospitals
(CAHs). CAHs are certified to provide essential services
to residents in rural areas and are reimbursed at higher
rates for the provision of these needed services. However,
it was found that Medicare beneficiaries paid between two
and six times the amount in coinsurance than they would
have paid for comparable services in acute care hospitals
and with a demonstrated increase from 2009 to 2012
without this CAH designation (USDHHS, 2014). This
report resulted in a recommendation for reform in the 
calculation of coinsurance for Medicare recipients.
HEALTHCARE POLICY 
AND REFORM 
Healthcare reform efforts are not new. When Florence
Nightingale transformed care for soldiers in the Crimea in
the middle of the 19th century, her actions and initiatives
transformed healthcare there and around the globe. Many
examples, before and after, of her influence on the envi-
ronment and hygiene can be identified as a reform initia-
tive. More recent efforts in the Unites Stated include the
initiation of Medicare in 1965 and DRGs in the 1980s.
Political leaders have endeavored to address the needs of
their constituents through attempts at legislation, some
limited, with many efforts “dying” in committee. 
Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act
The ACA was passed in 2010 with regulations and legal
challenges that continued for several years, including a
Supreme Court ruling in 2012. The legislation is wide-
spread and far reaching and was designed for a phased-in
implementation. The overall goals of the law were to ex-
pand healthcare coverage and improve the system, includ-
ing attempts to control escalating costs. The law addresses
quality, safe, and affordable care for people in the United
States. Quality and accountability are key ingredients of
the legislation that is designed to transform healthcare and
stem the rising numbers of uninsured and underinsured
individuals and families. 
The text of the law is more than 1,200 pages in length
and includes 10 sections. Benefits of the ACA have been
categorized in three areas:
●Care and Access
• Preventive care
• Drug discounts for seniors
• Choice of providers and access to emergency services
●Coverage and Costs
• Coverage of adults younger than 26 years under
patent’s policy
• Health insurance marketplace 
• Fraud protection 
• Tax credits for small businesses
●Consumer Protections
• Elimination of exclusion for preexisting conditions
• Consumer assistance
• Removal of lifetime limits
• Protection from unjustified premium increases 
(USDHHS, 2014.)
Initial provisions of the legislation began in 2011 with
the insurance reforms, including the coverage of depend-
ent children up to age 26 years and protections from can-
cellation of policies. Care coordination for individuals
eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid was also a goal
to make care more efficient. The “donut hole” for
Medicare Part D was also a focus, with beginning plans to
first offer a small rebate and then to slowly reduce the costs
284
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

CHAPTER 16 Economics and Healthcare Policy     ●
285
for high use of medications. Beginning in 2014, health in-
surance exchanges were implemented to assist individuals
and employers to obtain insurance coverage. As noted pre-
viously, Medicaid coverage will be expanded for adults and
families and especially for children thorough the CHIP
program, depending on state policies. 
Another key feature of the law is the encouragement
of coordinated care models. New healthcare delivery
models and projects began in 2012 with a focus on co-
ordinated care linked to reportable outcomes with a focus
on quality and safety. According to CMS (2013a), ACOs
are groups of doctors, hospitals, and other healthcare
providers that give coordinated high-quality care to
Medicare patients. CMS further delineates three models
of ACOs (Table 16.5). 
As noted by Colpas (2013) on the analysis for the pro-
posed ACO regulation, “Medicare could potentially save
$960 million over three years” (p. 6). The efficacy of these
models will depend on the data obtained to document
the results of their innovations in care coordination and
any resultant cost savings. “The high cost of being able
to report the requisite quality metrics and to institute the
information system plus clinical and financial manage-
ment tools to improve performance over time were some
of the main reasons many organizations decided not to
become ACOs” (Nichols, 2012, pp. 711–712). Anderson
and Hogan (2013) even address the concept of a “super
ACO” for large systems that can expand geographic cov-
erage, reduce competition, and garner the effects of
economies of scale that smaller organizations could not
address (p. 88). However, not all organizations can rein-
vent themselves as an ACO. As discussed by Hayen, van
den Berg, Meijboom, and Westert (2013), “ACOs need
to reconsider their provider configuration and make it ca-
pable of managing clinical and financial risk” (p. 517).
The financial considerations being the reason for some
ACO withdrawals in 2014. Further, Berry and Beckham
(2014) emphasize the importance of a team-based model
and of changing the culture for this emphasis. 
Health promotion and prevention activities are high-
lighted with an enhanced focus on access, evidence-based
practices, and system integrity and transparency through
ACOs. Improved technology and system improvements
for healthcare insurers and providers are key features. In
the Report to Congress: National Strategy for Quality Im-
provements in Health Care, the national aims were specified
as better care, healthy people/healthy communities, and
affordable care (Healthcare.gov, 2011, p. 2). However, the
effectiveness of ACOs has not yet been fully demonstrated,
both clinically and in terms of cost. 
In the inaugural year (2013–2014), health insurance
exchanges received much attention and criticism. The U.S.
Supreme Court upheld the regulation requiring health in-
surance coverage or the imposition of a penalty. The initial
individual penalty would initially be applied on the 2015
income taxes, but this would increase in subsequent years.
The penalty for those not covered in 2014 was $95 per
adult and $47.50 per child, or 1 percent of the family in-
come, whichever was higher. However, the penalty in-
creases each year, as from $95 for a noncovered adult in
2014 to $325 in 2015, or 2 percent of the income, and
higher in 2016. Insurance exchanges were either the fed-
erally facilitated marketplace for 26 states or the state-
based marketplace. The accessibility of online access to the
federal exchange was a major barrier because the original
online system was not designed to handle the volume.
Variable reports on registration goals were reported at the
closing of the first enrollment period. 
Initially, individual perception of “sticker shock” was
reported, with consumers not expecting the cost required
for the basic coverage. The exchanges provide basic, essen-
tial coverage but also have different levels of coverage
(bronze, silver, gold, and platinum coverage). Although the
exchanges were designed for “purchasing power,” as op-
posed to the individual in the past attempting to obtain
high-cost private health insurance, there is not an employer
contribution to the cost of the premium. In addition, both
individual risk scores (based on age, gender, and diagnoses)
TABLE 16.5
Accountable Care Organizations 
Medicare Shared 
Advanced Payment 
Savings 
Model
Pioneer Model
FFS for coordinated care, accountability, 
and encouraging investment in 
infrastructure and redesigned care 
processes. “The Shared Savings 
Program will reward ACOs that lower 
their growth in healthcare costs while 
meeting performance standards on 
quality of care and putting patients 
first” (CMS, 2013a, p. 1).
Source: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2013a). Accountable care organizations. Retrieved from
http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-Payment/ACO/
Project involved 23 experi-
enced, coordinated care health-
care organizations and providers
to move to a population-based
payment model. This model is
designed to work in coordina-
tion with private payers by 
aligning provider incentives to
improve quality and health out-
comes and achieve cost savings.
Upfront and monthly payments
are made for coordinated care
and investments in infrastructure
for small and rural practices in
an effort to demonstrate
whether these advanced pay-
ments result in increased partici-
pation, improved care, and
demonstrated Medicare savings. 

and average risk scores for the individual plans are consid-
erations. However, also consider the new ACA requirement
that individuals could not be excluded for preexisting con-
ditions. Insurance policies consider the “risk pool” and do
not want to be at the higher end, resulting in more costs
paid out. The ACA has another provision to encourage
program participation and address the nonexclusion clause
for prior existing conditions. The “temporary risk corridor
program is intended to promote accurate premiums in the
early years of the exchanges (2014 through 2016) by dis-
couraging insurers from setting them high in response 
to uncertainty about who will enroll and what they will
cost . . . by cushioning insurers participating in exchanges
and marketplaces from extreme gains and losses” (Henry
J. Kaiser Family Foundation, 2014a, pp. 7–8). With this
program, targets were set for insurers at 80 percent of costs
of healthcare and quality improvement. If the insurers fell
below or above the allowable range, they would either be
reimbursed or be required to reimburse the risk pool pro-
gram. Note that this program targets both allowable costs
and quality improvement initiatives. All of this requires a
focus on access, quality improvement, and equity.
One of the goals of healthcare reform is to provide
health equity and to promote population health. Health
equity has been defined by the National Partnership for
Action to End Health Disparities (2011) as follows:
[T]he attainment of the highest level of health for all
people. Achieving health equity requires valuing everyone
equally with focused and ongoing societal efforts to ad-
dress avoidable inequalities, historical and contemporary
injustices, and the elimination of health and healthcare
disparities. (p. 1)
The issue of health equity has an important role in
healthcare reform and cost containment. Each organiza-
tion will address this in its mission, policies, and proce-
dures. Shared governance in nursing will also be a major
contributor in this process.
286
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
ON LIN E CON SULT 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act at
http://www.hhs.gov/healthcare/rights/law/
Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Reform at
http://kff.org/health-reform/ 
Supreme Court Ruling at
http://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/11pdf/
11-393c3a2.pdf
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
Consider the issue of healthcare resources and the ability to benefit. The cost of healthcare services has esca-
lated, with cost controls sought on a daily basis by both users and providers. Think about the amounts paid
through the Medicaid program for long-term care. These costs include covering the elderly in both nursing
homes and in the community. The goal is to keep elders in the community, and some states have imple-
mented “diversion programs” to keep frail elders in the community rather than in nursing home settings. 
Review the conditions and eligibility for one Medicaid Diversion Program at http://elderaffairs.state.fl.us/doea/
cares.php
Question: What are your thoughts about safety, cost-effectiveness, and health equity?
We discussed accountability and responsibility in
Chapter 10 with delegation skills. Both of those con-
cepts are also critical in terms of economics and health-
care policy. Accountability and responsibility mean we
are answerable to our patients and the healthcare system
for quality, cost-effective outcomes. The demonstration
of these moral and ethical imperatives is provided in
our commitment to evidence-based practices and the
metrics we use to analyze and evaluate these practices.
With the current initiative for transparency, this ac-
countability is apparent to consumers, professionals,
and society. Fiscal responsibility involves being answer-
able to our patients, our colleagues, and the healthcare
system for quality, cost-effective outcomes. As Levine
(2009) has observed on the topic of healthcare reform,
“great savings could be achieved in two areas: adminis-
trative costs and unnecessary care” (pp. e16(1)–e16(2)).
To do this requires ethical collaborative practice and
involvement in healthcare policy and change. The
American Nurses Association (2010) Standards of Pro-
fessional Performance are particularly applicable here,
especially evidence-based practice, quality of practice,
communication, leadership, collaboration, and resource
utilization. Involvement of nurses in policy making and
politics is an imperative for professional practice, as we
will discuss in Chapter 17.
K E Y  P O I N T S
●Economics is the study of production of a product or service, along with issues of supply and demand
and distribution of that product or service for the continuity or well-being of some entity. Healthcare
economics is a specialty area of economics focused on the different parts of the healthcare system that
supply and deliver services.

CHAPTER 16 Economics and Healthcare Policy     ●
287
K E Y  P O I N T S —cont’d
●The gross national product (GNP) is the goods and services produced in a nation and is measured on an
annual basis. The gross domestic product (GDP) is restricted to the goods and services produced within
the nation.
●The cost of healthcare is the price or the monetary amount of goods and services to cover the episode
of care.
●Reimbursement is the amount of money provided to pay for that particular episode of care based on an
agreed or approved process. 
●First-party payers are the individuals; second-party payers are the providers, plan administrators, or em-
ployers who collect the premiums; and third-party payers are the insurers who assess and assume the
risks of the group and reimburse the healthcare providers for their services.
●The prospective payment system (PPS) is a fixed payment method that is based on a predetermined
amount as the usual care needed for a patient with a specific condition.
●Fee-for-service (FFS) plans are the traditional payment methods in which each service is charged sepa-
rately, as with provider visits, laboratory tests, and supplies. 
●Managed care covers a variety of treatment and payment options, with the ultimate goals to maintain
health and prevent disease and disability, thus reducing healthcare costs. 
●Point-of-service (POS) plans generally occur through a specified network of providers, whereby the pri-
mary care provider serves as a gatekeeper and consultations with others must have prior approval for 
reimbursement. 
●Preferred provider organizations (PPOs) are providers and provider agencies that are included as part of
a network and agree to negotiated rates for patients who use the PPOs listed in the network.
●Health maintenance organizations (HMOs) are focused on managed care within a specified system, keep-
ing capitated members healthy, and avoiding costs of expensive diagnostic and medical procedures. 
●A medical savings account (MSA) is a federal tax incentive program used by employers or Medicare 
recipients for self-management of healthcare in which a high deductible is agreed on with an amount 
provided in a savings account to pay for initial care. 
●Accountable care organizations (ACOs) have evolved as a component of the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act (ACA) as shared savings organizations designed to promote accountability, risk 
management, and coordinated care. 
●In the United States, Medicare, Medicaid, and state Children’s Health Insurance Programs (CHIP) are
major governmental entities that provide healthcare for select populations. Medicare was the first pro-
gram, beginning in 1965 with the Social Security Act under Title XVIII. Refer to Table 16.4 for major
timelines for these federal programs.
●Medicare is available for Americans aged 65 years or older, those with certain disabilities, and those with
end-stage renal disease. Medicare Part A provides for inpatient hospital, skilled rehabilitative, hospice, 
and home care services. Medicare Part B covers approved outpatient care, necessary and selected pre-
ventive services, and equipment, usually by virtue of an additional premium. Medicare Part C is a selected
“Advantage Plan” in which Part A and Part B services are provided by an FFS, PPO, HMO, or a special
plan. Medicare Part D is the optional prescription drug coverage plan. 
●The Medicaid program was authorized in 1965 under Title XIX of the Social Security Act with programs
at the state and local levels provided by some federal funding and regulated through eligibility 
requirements. 
●The Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP), originally enacted in 1997 as Title XXI of the Social 
Security Act, provides health coverage for uninsured children who are not eligible for Medicaid. 
●Health equity has been defined as “the attainment of the highest level of health for all people” (National
Partnership for Action to End Health Disparities, 2011, p. 1).
●Fiscal responsibility involves being answerable to our patients, our colleagues, and the healthcare system
for quality, cost-effective outcomes.

REFERENCES 
American Nurses Association. (2010). Nursing: Scope and 
standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursesbooks.org.
Anderson, D., & Hogan, N. (2013). Emerging ’super ACOs’
fill unique needs. Healthcare Financial Management, 67(10),
88–94.
Berry, L. L., & Beckham, D. (2014). Team-based care at 
Mayo Clinic: A model for ACOs. Journal of Healthcare 
Management, 59(1), 9–13.
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2005).
Key milestones in Medicare and Medicaid history, selected
years: 1965-2003. Health Care Financing Review, 27(2). 
Retrieved from http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-
Data-and-Systems/Research/HealthCareFinancingReview
/downloads/05-06Winpg1.pdf 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2013a).
Accountable care organizations. Retrieved from http://www
.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-Payment/
ACO/ 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2013b).
The IDC-10 transition: An introduction. Retrieved from
http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Coding/ICD10/Downloads
/ICD10Introduction20140819.pdf
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2013c).
Prescription drug coverage: General information. Retrieved
from https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Prescription-Drug
-Coverage/PrescriptionDrugCovGenIn/index.html
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2014).
Medicare provider utilization and payment data. Retrieved from
https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems
/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/Medicare-Provider-Charge
-Data/
Chang, C. F., Price, S. A., & Pfoutz, S. K. (2001). Economics and
nursing: Critical professional issues. Philadelphia: F. A. Davis. 
Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP). (2011). Allot-
ment methodology and states’ fiscal years 2009 through
2015 CHIP allotments. 42 CFR § 457. 
Colpas, P. (2013). Accountable care organizations help to coor-
dinate care. Health Management Technology, 34(7), 6–9.
Cowan, C. A., & Hartman, M. B. (2005). Financing health
care: Businesses, households, and governments, 1987–2003.
Health Care Financing Review Web Exclusive, 1(2). Retrieved
from https://www.cms.gov/HealthCareFinancingReview
/Downloads/Cowan2.pdf. 
Hayen, A. P., van den Berg, M. J., Meijboom, B. R., &
Westert, G. P. (2013). Accountable care organizations:
How to dress for success. American Journal of Managed
Care, 19(6), 517–519.
Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. (2013a). Fact sheet: The
Medicare Part D prescription drug benefit. Retrieved from
http://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2013/11
/7044-14-medicare-part-d-fact-sheet.pdf 
Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. (2013b). Medicaid and its 
role in state/federal budgets and health reform. Retrieved from
http://kff.org/health-reform/fact-sheet/five-key-questions-and
-answers-about-medicaid/ 
Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. (2013c). Medicaid and the
uninsured. Retrieved from http://kaiserfamilyfoundation
.files.wordpress.com/2012/05/8139-03.pdf 
Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. (2014a). Explaining health
care reform: Risk adjustment, reinsurance, and risk corridors.
Retrieved from http://kff.org/health-reform/issue-brief
/explaining-health-care-reform-risk-adjustment-reinsurance
-and-risk-corridors/
Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. (2014b). Kaiser health pol-
icy news index: January 2014. Retrieved from http://kff.org
288
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
Thought and Discussion Questions 
1. Discuss the values and demands for healthcare from the perspectives of:
• An employer who is trying to choose a health plan
• An employee who will be using the services of the health plan
• An uninsured family who is seeking coverage through the state insurance exchange
2. From a public policy standpoint, can the U.S. healthcare system continue to reduce the number of uninsured while
controlling demand and limiting overall costs with the current fragmented insurance structure? Would a single-
payer system be better?
3. Describe how you would evaluate the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of strategies designed to limit
costs. Provide examples of nursing-sensitive patient outcomes.
4. Discuss the financial implications of providing the following services in your community:
• Ambulatory services
• Hospital care
• Preventative services
• Rehabilitation
5. Review the Chapter Thought at the beginning of the chapter and be prepared to discuss its meaning in the 
context of the chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter. 

CHAPTER 16 Economics and Healthcare Policy     ●
289
/health-reform/poll-finding/kaiser-health-policy-news-index
-january-2014/ 
Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. (2014c). Visualizing health
policy: A short look at long-term care for seniors. Retrieved
from http://kff.org/infographic/visualizing-health-policy-a
-short-look-at-long-term-care-for-seniors/ 
Herrera, C-N., Gaynor, M., Newman, M., Town, R. J., 
& Parente, S. T. (2013). Trends underlying employer-
sponsored health insurance growth for Americans younger
than age sixty-five. Health Affairs, 32(10), 1715–1722.
Jacobson, G., Huang, J., & Neuman, T. (2014). Medigap 
reform: Setting the context for understanding recent 
proposals. Kaiser Family Foundation Issue Brief. Retrieved
from http://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com
/2014/01/8235-02-medigap-reform-setting-the-context
-for-understanding-recent-proposals1.pdf 
Kimbuende, E., Ranji, U., Lundy, J., & Salganicoff, A. (2013).
U.S. health care costs. In C. L. Estes, S. A. Chapman, C.
Dodd, B. Hollister, & C. Harrington (Eds.), Health policy
crisis and reform (6th ed., pp. 548–553). Burlington, MA:
Jones & Bartlett.
Klees, B. S., & Wolfe, C. J. (2013). Brief summaries of Medicare
& Medicaid: Title XVIII and Title XIX of the Social Security
Act as of November 1, 2013. Washington, DC: Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid. Retrieved from http://www.cms
.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends
-and-Reports/MedicareProgramRatesStats/Downloads
/MedicareMedicaidSummaries2013.pdf 
Kovner, A. R., & Knickman, J. R. (Ed.). (2011). Health care
delivery in the United States (10th ed.). New York: Springer.
Levine, R. A. (2009). Fiscal responsibility and health care re-
form. New England Journal of Medicine, 361, e16(1)–e16(3).
Martin, A. B., Lassman, D., Washington, B., Catlin, A., & the
National Health Expenditure Accounts Team. (2012).
Growth in US health spending remained slow in 2010;
health share of gross domestic product was unchanged from
2009. Health Affairs, 31(1), 208–219. Retrieved from
http://content.healthaffairs.org/content/31/1/208 
Medicare Program (2013). Inpatient Hospital Deductible 
and Hospital and Extended Care Services Coinsurance
Amounts for CY 2014, 78 Fed. Reg. 2013-25595 (filed 
10-28-13). Retrieved from http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg
/FR-2013-10-30/pdf/2013-25595.pdf
Miller, L. M. P., Chang, C. F., & Pfoutz, S. K. (2012). Health-
care economics. In R. Kearney-Nunnery (Ed.), Advancing
your career: Concepts for professional nursing (5th ed., 
pp. 309–334). Philadelphia, PA: F.A. Davis.
Modern Healthcare (2013, October). Most frequently billed
DRGs ranked by 2011 Medicare patient discharges. Modern
Healthcare, 32.
Moriyama, I. M., Loy, R. M., Robb-Smith, A. H. T., 
Rosenberg, H. M., & Hoyert, D. L. (2011). History 
of the statistical classification of diseases and causes of death.
Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/misc
/classification_diseases2011.pdf 
National Partnership for Action to End Health Disparities.
(2011). Health equity and disparities. Retrieved from http://
www.minorityhealth.hhs.gov/npa/templates/browse.aspx?lvl
=1&lvlid=34
Nichols, L. (2012). Accountable care organization pathways: 
Diverse but ultimately parallel. Mayo Clinic Proceedings,
87(8), 710–713.
Office of Inspector General Office of Evaluation and Inspec-
tions Region IX. (August 2001). Medicare Hospital
Prospective Payment System How DRG Rates Are 
Calculated and Updated (OEI-09-00-00200). Retrieved
from https://oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/oei-09-00-00200.pdf
Office of Technology Assessment. (1983). Diagnostic related
groups (DRGs) and the Medicare program: Implications for
medical technology–a technical memorandum. Retrieved
from http://www.fas.org/ota/reports/8306.pdf
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). (2011a). Health at a glance 2011: OECD indica-
tors. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/health
_glance-2011-en 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). (2013). Total expenditure on health, Health: Key
tables from OECD, no. 1. doi: 10.1787/hlthxp-total-table-
2013-2-en; http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/social-issues
-migration-health/health-at-a-glance_19991312;jsessionid
=612e179lbg8ul.x-oecd-live-01 
Thomson, S., Osborn, R, & Jun, M. (Eds.). (2013). International
profiles of health care systems, 2013. The Commonwealth
Fund. Retrieved from http://www.commonwealthfund.
org/~/media/Files/Publications/Fund%20Report/2013/Nov
/1717_Thomson_intl_profiles_hlt_care_sys_2013_v2.pdf
Unruh, L., & Spetz, J. (2012). A primer on health economics.
In D. J. Mason, J. K. Leavitt, & M. W. Chaffee (Eds.), 
Policy and politics in nursing and health care (pp. 153–161).
St. Louis, MO: Elsevier/Saunders.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2011). 
Report to congress: National strategy for quality improvement
in health care. Retrieved from http://www.ahrq.gov
/workingforquality/nqs/nqs2011annlrpt.htma
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Office of In-
spector General. (2014). Medicare beneficiaries paid nearly
half of the costs for outpatient services at Critical Access Hospi-
tals. Retrieved from http://oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/oei
-05-12-00085.pdf
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). (2015).
Fact Sheet: Healthcare cost and utilization project (HCUP).
Retrieved from http://www.ahrq.gov/research/data/hcup/
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2012).
Your guide to Medicare medical savings account (MSA) plans.
Retrieved from http://www.medicare.gov/Publications
/Pubs/pdf/11206.pdf
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2013).
Critical access hospitals. Retrieved from http://www.cms
.gov/Medicare/Provider-Enrollment-and-Certification
/CertificationandComplianc/CAHs.html
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2013).
PPS overview. Retrieved from http://www.cms.gov
/ProspMedicareFeeSvcPmtGen/
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2013).
Premiums, deductible, and coinsurance amounts. Retrieved
from http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data
-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/Medicare
ProgramRatesStats/PremiumsDeductiblesCoinsurance.html 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). 
(2013). Prospective payment systems general information:

Overview. Retrieved from http://www.cms.gov/
ProspMedicareFeeSvcPmtGen/ 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2014).
HIPPA general information: Overview. Retrieved from
https://www.cms.gov/MedHCPCSGenInfo/
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2014).
Medicare and you. Retrieved from http://www.medicare
.gov/medicare-and-you/medicare-and-you.html
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2014).
Medicare coverage general information: Overview. Retrieved
http://www.cms.gov/CoverageGenInfo/ 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (n.d.). In-
patient prospective payment system hospital and long term care
hospital review and measurement fact sheet. Retrieved from
http://www.cms.gov/AcuteInpatientPPS/Downloads
/InpatientReviewFactSheet.pdf
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (n.d.). The
Affordable Care Act: Helping providers help patients—a menu
of options for improving care. Retrieved from http://www
.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-Payment
/ACO/Downloads/ACO-Menu-Of-Options.pdf
Democratic Policy Committee (DPC) Reports. (2009). Legisla-
tive bulletin: H.R. 3590, the legislative vehicle for the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2009. Retrieved from
http://dpc.senate.gov/dpcdoc.cfm?doc_name=lb-111-1-151 
Hogan, C., Lunney, J., Gabel, J., & Lynn, J. (2012). Medicare
beneficiaries’ costs of care in the last year of life. Health 
Affairs, 20(4), 188–195. Retrieved from http://content
.healthaffairs.org/content/20/4/188.full 
Hussey, P. S., Ridgely, M. S., & Rosenthal, M. B. (2011). The
PROMETHEUS bundled payment experiment: Slow start
shows problems in implementing new payment models.
Health Affairs, 30(11), 2116–2124. Retrieved from http://
content.healthaffairs.org/content/30/11/2116.full.html 
Kaiser Family Foundation. (2014). Many Medicare outpatients
pay more at rural hospitals, Federal report says. KHN Kaiser
Health News. Retrieved from http://www.kaiserhealthnews
.org/Stories/2014/October/08/Report-Finds-Higher
-Outpatient-Costs-For-Many-Medicare-Patients-At
-Rural-Hospitals.aspx 
Martin, A. B., Hartman, M., Whittle, L., Catlin, A., & the 
National Health Expenditure Accounts Team. (2014). 
National health spending in 2012: Rate of health spending
growth remained low for the fourth consecutive year.
Health Affairs, 33(1), 67–77.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). (2011b). Why is health spending in the United
States so high? Retrieved from http://www.oecd.org
/dataoecd/12/16/49084355.pdf
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2009. Retrieved
from http://democrats.senate.gov/pdfs/reform/patient
-protection-affordable-care-act-as-passed.pdf 
State Health Access Data Assistance Center. (2014). For kids’
sake: State-level trends in children’s health insurance. A state-
by-state analysis. Retrieved from http://www.rwjf.org
/content/dam/farm/reports/reports/2014/rwjf412274
Supreme Court of the United States. (2012). National Federa-
tion of Independent Business et al. v. Sebelius, Secretary of
Health and Human Services, et al. No. 11–393. Retrieved
from http://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/11pdf
/11-393c3a2.pdf
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2014). Read
the law. Retrieved from http://www.hhs.gov/healthcare
/rights/law/index.html 
ONLINE RESOURCES 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
http://cms.gov
COBRA Insurance
http://cobrainsurance.com
The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation
http://kff.org/
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
http://www.oecd.org/ 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
http://www.hhs.gov/healthcare/rights/law/index.html 
290
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Explain why it is important for nurses to possess political efficacy.
2. Discuss the process for the enactment of laws and associated regulations.
3. Identify the major committees at the federal and state levels, especially those that influence health
policy.
4. Identify how nurses can influence the passing of legislation.
5. Analyze statutes and regulations governing nursing practice.
6. Examine the roles and activities of nurses and professional associations in influencing health policy
decisions.
7. Demonstrate political involvement on a current health policy issue.
Political Efficacy
Government
Law
Bill
Committee Structure
Conference Committee
Regulations
Precedent 
Nurse Practice Acts 
Title Protection
Lobbying
Grassroots Effort
Political Action Committees (PACs)
Workplace Issues
Community or Civic Involvement
Professional Organizations
Voice of Agency
291
“There are risks and costs to a program of action, 
but they are far less than the long range risks 
and costs of comfortable inaction.”
John F. Kennedy, 1917–1963
Key Terms
The Politically Active
Nurse: An Imperative 
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
17

292
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
Hillary Rodam Clinton (2003) once observed, 
A political life, I’ve often said, is a continuing education
in human nature, including one’s own. . . . In each place
[of my involvement], I met someone or saw something
that caused me to open my mind and my heart and
deepen my understanding of the universal concerns that
most of humanity share. (p. x)
Politics is a process for finding solutions to these uni-
versal concerns of humanity, one being the concern for
public health and safety. Nurses likewise are engaged in
finding solutions to problems of humanity on a daily basis.
These problems are not restricted to a location or practice
area. The nursing professional advocates for the health of
people and policies aimed at health protection and pro-
motion. This imperative for change requires a broader
view of what is involved in making changes in public 
policy at the local, state, and national levels. Nurses have
become increasingly interested in public policy, realizing
that both their personal and their professional lives are 
significantly influenced by governmental policy and 
programs.
Nurses are effective in the political process when they
understand the sources of power and are willing to be in-
volved and make a difference. Interestingly, Wilson and
Dilulio (2004) have defined political efficacy as having
two components: internal political efficacy and external
political advocacy. Internal political efficacy is personal
competence or the “ability to understand and take part
in political affairs” (Wilson & Dilulio, 2004, p. 93). Ex-
ternal political advocacy is the “ability to make the sys-
tem respond to the citizenry” (Wilson & Dilulio, 2004,
p. 93). Nurses must develop their internal political effi-
cacy by being increasingly able to take part in the polit-
ical process. This will further the external political
efficacy of the nursing profession. These two compo-
nents are the political imperative of the profession. Ex-
ternal political efficacy is possible by virtue of the
number of nurses in the  profession who are skillful in
promoting change. In addition, we see the active involve-
ment of nursing organizations in political initiatives to
effect change in health policy. As described by Leininger
(2002), “political aspects of nursing are now a dominant
and frequent topic in hospitals and schools of nursing in
the current era” (p. 189).
Both internal efficacy and external political efficacy are
growing with the increasing involvement of nurses. As
noted by Mason, Leavitt, and Chaffee (2011), healthcare
is a political endeavor at all levels of government and in-
fluenced by healthcare institutions in the private  sector.
This is one area of influence for nursing professionals and
their political efficacy. The first step in the development
of political efficacy is understanding the political process
in government.
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION
OF GOVERNMENT
When we think of the term government, different images
may come to mind. We may be thinking of the federal
structure with its three components, executive, legislative,
and judicial. Or, at the local level, we may be envisioning
the organizational, local, and state influences on the 
operation of the healthcare unit. Government is merely
the controlling entity that has the authority to make deci-
sions and regulations for the public good. Milstead (2013)
describes government as an “iron triangle” of members of
Congress, bureaucratic staff, and interest groups. Nursing
has the responsibility to contribute to this process by pro-
viding the information needed and offering support for
wise policy decisions that protect the public and the pro-
fession. To participate most effectively in the political
process, one must understand the structure of government
at each level. Because government structures do vary, it 
is essential to be familiar with your own local and state
governing bodies. 
Branches of Government
Each branch of government plays a significant role in the
development and implementation of health policy. The
federal government and most state governments have three
branches: legislative, executive, and judicial. The powers
of the three federal branches are vested in accordance with
the U.S. Constitution.
Executive Branch
At the federal level, the executive branch consists of the
president, the cabinet-level departments, and regulatory
agencies. The executive branch is responsible for the ad-
ministration of government and the laws enacted. The
president sets the legislative agenda for Congress and the
annual budget for the nation. The president’s budget 
influences the funding available for healthcare programs,
reimbursement, and education. In addition, the agenda
set by the president determines what programs have a high
priority for the administration. The president can recom-
mend legislation and can approve or veto legislation passed
by Congress. It is also the executive branch that makes 
appointments to government departments, courts, boards,
and committees, as with the appointment of the surgeon
general or the secretary of health and human services. The
Constitution mandates that certain executive appoint-
ments be confirmed by the legislative branch.
Legislative Branch
The legislative branch comprises the two houses or cham-
bers of the U.S. Congress, the Senate and the House of
Representatives. Congress is responsible for lawmaking,
representation, and administrative oversight, including
oversight of the agencies of the executive branch. Congress
also provides the operational funding for the administra-
tive agencies. The composition of and qualifications for
the U.S. Congress are listed in Table 17.1. Compare these
qualifications with those for the president. Also consider
the reelection cycle and how the priorities, policies, and
laws can be influenced by executive and legislative agendas
and majority control.
Judicial Branch
The judicial branch includes the Supreme Court, which
interprets laws and, through its judicial review process, can

CHAPTER 17 The Politically Active Nurse: An Imperative
●
293
TABLE 17.1
Qualifications for Service in the U.S. Congress or Executive Office
Senate
House of Representatives
Presidency
Number
Term
Reelection
Qualifications
100 senators (two 
from each state) Equal
representation 
Senior senator (elected
first) and junior senator
Elected for a term of 
six years, on alternate
schedules
Every two years, one
third of senators face 
reelection
At least 30 years of age
Citizen of United States
for nine years
Resident of the state
represented when
elected
435 members 
Representation based on state popu-
lation; minimum of one from each
state with reapportionment every 
10 years based on the U.S. census
The House also includes delegates
from the District of Columbia, Guam,
the Virgin Islands, American Samoa,
and Puerto Rico, who have voting 
rights in committees but not in 
matters before the full House
Elected for a term of two years
Entire membership is up for 
reelection every two years 
At least 25 years of age Citizen of
United States for seven years
Resident of the state represented
when elected
One; In the case of the inability
of the president to fulfill his or
her role, succession of power
occurs as follows: vice presi-
dent as second in line, then
speaker of the house, and then
president pro tempore of the
Senate
Elected for a term of four years
Eligible for reelection once 
(two-term limit)
At least 35 years of age
A natural-born citizen of the 
United States and a resident 
for at least 14 years
declare an act of Congress or the president unconstitu-
tional. The nine federal Supreme Court Justices are ap-
pointed for life by the president after their selection has
been confirmed by the Senate. The federal system also
comprises lower courts and appellate or circuit courts. Fed-
eral judges are nominated by the executive branch and
confirmed by the Senate. This system of checks and bal-
ances is designed to create equilibrium, vesting limited
power in each branch with oversight by another branch.
State and Local Systems
State government structures are similar to those described
at the federal level. They also receive their mandates from
the U.S. Constitution, with which their respective state
constitutions must abide. Like the president, the governor
can sign legislation into law and use the power of the veto.
State legislatures can also override a governor’s veto. In
some states, members of the state board of nursing, or
other important health commissioners, are appointed by
the governor. As with the federal government, some leg-
islative branches must confirm selected executive appoint-
ments. State supreme courts and lower courts interpret
the law and make decisions under their power of judicial
review.
County government generally entails a board of super-
visors or an elected board of commissioners and a county
executive or county manager. Cities, towns, and villages
also have a variety of elected officials similar to those of
county government. Local health policies and politics
must be consistent with state and federal law but can also
have a profound influence on the health and welfare of a
community, as with public utilities and local programs.
Although nurses are most often involved with the leg-
islative branch of government, the executive branch and
the judicial branch can also be of great importance to nurs-
ing and healthcare. It is essential that nurses understand
the functions of the different branches of government and
how laws and regulations are enacted and implemented.
HOW LAWS ARE MADE
A law is a mandate of prescribed conduct, grants  certain
rights, requires certain responsibilities, or a combination
of these attributes. A law can come from a constitution,
from the legislature, or from the courts. Administrative
agencies promulgate regulations, which supplement and
further interpret the laws. Consider the types of laws and
regulations identified in Table 17.2.
The idea for a law may originate with an individual, a
professional group, a legislator, or the executive branch.
Statutory law is legislation that has been approved by both
legislative houses of Congress and signed by the executive
branch. The legislation starts as a bill or a proposal for a law
authored or sponsored by either a representative or a senator,
who introduces it after it has been written in appropriate 

294
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
TABLE 17.2
Types of Law
Type                  Description                                                              Example
Constitutional
Statutory
Administrative
Court, case, or 
common law
Specific guarantees granted by the U.S. Constitution
Formal laws enacted by federal, state, and local 
legislative branches of government
Regulations created by administrative agencies under
the direction of the executive branch of government
Laws created from judicial decisions Judgments 
create a precedent on which future decisions are
based
Freedom of speech
Nurse practice acts
Regulations associated with nurse prac-
tice acts to assist with implementation
“Miranda Rights” must be read to an
arrestee before he or she is taken into
custody
language by the legislative counsel of either the House or the
Senate. A bill may also be introduced from a legislative com-
mittee. A bill proposed in the Senate is designated “S.” 
followed by a number, and a bill introduced in the House of
Representatives is designated “H.R.” followed by a number.
Congressional Committees
At the federal level, bills are referred to full committee and
sometimes to a subcommittee, because of the thousands of
bills introduced each year. The U.S. Senate has standing
committees, with a variable number of associated subcom-
mittees, depending on the scope and work of the committee,
and select or special committees. The House of Representa-
tives also has standing committees and additional special or
select committees. There are also joint committees, staffed
by both houses that focus on common oversight functions
for taxation and economics.
It is within the committee structure that most of the
work of Congress takes place, at both the federal and
state levels. Committee action is perhaps the most im-
portant phase of the congressional process because it is
at this phase that proposed measures are given the most
intensive consideration and people have an opportunity
to provide testimony for consideration and incorpora-
tion into the record. The committee or subcommittee
level is where nursing can have a powerful impact. The
subcommittee studies the issues contained in each bill
carefully, holds hearings, and reports back to the full
committee with recommendations. Each committee has
jurisdiction over certain subjects. Some of the commit-
tees identified in Table 17.3 focus specifically on health-
related issues.
Committee action is perhaps the most important
phase of the congressional process, because it is
at this phase that proposed measures are given
the most intensive consideration.
States operate much like the federal government. In a
particular state, there are also specific committees and
subcommittees that handle selected topics. For example,
in South Carolina, the Medical, Military, Public, and
Municipal Affairs Committee for the House and the Med-
ical Committee of the Senate generally handle the topics
of concern to nursing and healthcare. But state structures
differ, and it is important to be aware of the differences and
to know the committees in which the issues of major con-
cern to nursing arise. Appointment to the committees is
often based on congressional seniority or priority. Members
often have special interests in an area. Because these mem-
bers represent their constituents, it is important to know
on which committees your congressperson serves and that
they have valid information, resources, and background to
address your concerns. Testimony, either written or in per-
son, provides valuable information to the committee mem-
ber, whether information from constituents, special interest
groups, experts, or other public officials.
And visit your own state legislature online.
How a Bill Becomes a Law
Consider a bill, for instance, that has been sponsored by
your legislator, a member of the House of Repre sentatives.
It has been sent to the applicable subcommittee or com-
mittee for review. After consideration by the full commit-
tee, several things may happen to this bill:
●It may be reported out of committee favorably and be
scheduled for debate by the full House.
●It may be reported out favorably, but with amend-
ments or “markups” to the bill.
●It may be reported out unfavorably or not acted upon
at all; thus, it is “killed” or “dies in committee.”
ON LIN E CON SULT 
American Nurses Association at
http://nursingworld.org/MainMenu
Categories/Policy-Advocacy
U.S. Government Web Portal at
http://firstgov.gov
THOMAS, U.S. Congress on the Internet at
http://thomas.loc.gov/home/thomas.php

Generally, once the bill has been reported favorably
out of a House committee, it goes to the Rules Committee,
which schedules bills and determines (1) how much time
will be spent on debate, and (2) whether amendments will
be allowed. A written report is drafted, including a summary
of the bill, along with impact statements. Impact statements
are provided to project how the proposed legislation would
affect existing laws and present and future resources. Bills
are then placed on the calendar and scheduled for action.
After a bill is debated under the procedural rules of the
House, possibly amended, voted upon, and passed, it is sent
to the Senate, where it goes through the same procedure. If
the bill also passes the Senate without any changes, it is sent
to the president or governor for signature. If minor changes
were made in the Senate, it is referred back to the originat-
ing chamber (in this case the House of Representatives) 
for concurrence before submission to the executive branch.
If significant changes were made to the bill in the Senate,
the bill is sent to a conference committee, composed of 
representatives of both chambers, who reconcile differences
and prepare a conference report for approval by both cham-
bers. If it does not get approved, the bill dies. After the con-
ference report, the bill must be accepted or rejected, because
no further amendments can be made.
If the bill is approved in both houses, it goes to the
executive branch. If the president or governor signs the bill,
it becomes law, and Congress is notified. If the bill is ve-
toed, it is referred back to the House and Senate. A two-
thirds vote by both chambers is required to override the
veto. The bill may also become law if the president or gov-
ernor fails to veto or return the bill to Congress with ob-
jections within a specified time. See Figure 17.1 for a
description of the legislative process.
Once the bill is signed or passed, it becomes an act,
and is enacted into law. Laws are enforceable if they do not
violate the Constitution. Once a law is passed, it is as-
signed to the appropriate department of the executive
branch of government, where the process of developing
CHAPTER 17 The Politically Active Nurse: An Imperative
●
295
TABLE 17.3
Major Committees of the 114th U.S. Congress 
House
Standing 
Agriculture
committees
Appropriations*
(20)
Armed Services
Budget*
Education and Workforce
Energy & Commerce
Ethics 
Financial Services
Foreign Affairs
Homeland Security*
House Administration
Judiciary
Natural Resources
Oversight and Government Reform
Rules
Science, Space, and Technology
Small Business 
Transportation and Infrastructure
Veteran’s Affairs*
Ways and Means*
Select, special, &
other 
committees (2)
Intelligence
Special/Select event
Senate
Standing 
Agriculture, Nutrition, and 
committees (16)
Forestry
Appropriations*
Armed Services 
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
Budget*
Commerce, Science, and 
Transportation
Energy & Natural Resources
Environment & Public Works*
Finance*
Foreign Relations 
Health, Education, Labor, & 
Pensions*
Homeland Security and 
Governmental Affairs
Judiciary
Rules & Administration
Small Business & Entrepreneurship 
Veteran’s Affairs*
Select or special Aging*
committees (4)
Ethics
Indian Affairs*
Intelligence
*Frequently address health-related matters.
Joint or Bicameral Congressional 
Committees
Economic
Library
Printing
Taxation

regulations to interpret the law takes place. The depart-
ment studies the law and drafts the regulations for imple-
mentation. Administrative agencies, governed by the
executive branch, promulgate regulations or rules, which
serve the purpose of detailing and applying the laws. For
example, the Health Insurance Portability and Accounta-
bility Act (HIPAA) was enacted as Public Law 104–191
in 1996. The Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS) published a final Privacy Rule in December 2000
with a general compliance date of April 14, 2003, and a
compliance date of April 14, 2004, for small health plans.
All of this activity involved detailing regulations for appli-
cation of the law.
The legislative process can seem endless, especially
when the bill stays in committee, perhaps during a recess
or between legislative sessions. In addition, proposed reg-
ulations from the executive branch may require public
hearings for input prior to finalization and enforcement.
In the United States Congress, a legislative session spans a
two-year period, with the 114th Congressional session
running from January 1, 2015, through December 31,
2016. Variable legislative sessions occur in the different
states; however, special sessions may be called for special
circumstances.
Impact of Laws
Laws and regulations govern behavior and relationships
with others in society. Consider the impact of laws that
have been passed and their effect on nursing. When the
federal government implemented diagnosis-related
groups (DRGs) for Medicare reimbursement, patients
began to be discharged from hospitals “sicker and
quicker.” Although this law applied only to Medicare pa-
tients, it set a precedent that other insurance carriers fol-
lowed. In law, a precedent is a decision or verdict from
a prior case that becomes the principle to follow in future
cases. A precedent is more than an everyday custom to
follow. If the precedent is set in a superior court, like the
Supreme Court, it may become mandatory in lower
court decisions.
Awareness of laws and regulations governing healthcare
is essential in professional nursing practice so that nurses
can help to influence the making of policy and laws.
Nurses can and do play a significant role at several points
in the legislative process, whether through lobbying or
providing testimony or information to legislators and reg-
ulatory bodies (Box 17.1).
REGULATING NURSING
PRACTICE
Nursing practice and education are directly regulated by
law. Nurse practice acts are contained in state statute
(laws) and associated regulations that dictate practice pa-
rameters. As part of the statute, nursing education pro-
grams in different forms are regulated. For example, most
states require a new, beginning nursing program to re-
ceive approval from the board of nursing according to
specified standards before it can open. These standards
ensure that the organization, curriculum, faculty, and
296
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
  1.  Concerned party contacts legislator, bill drafted
  2.  Sponsors obtained, introduced to House and/or Senate
  3.  To committees for recommendation/amendments
  4.  Debate on floor
  5.  Vote and recommendation to other chamber
  6.  Consideration in a similar manner by the other chamber
  7.  Passage or to Conference Committee
  8.  Back to both houses for concurrence
  9.  If agreement by both chambers, to president or governor for signature
10.  If executive veto, back to chambers for potential override with a 2/3 vote of Congress or the legislature
Figure 17.1 The legislative process.
BOX 17.1
Nurses’ Involvement in the Legislative
Process
●Meeting with legislators, their aides or staﬀ to
inﬂuence the introduction of a bill as private
citizens or as members of a professional organization 
●Providing information to assist in drafting the bill
and gathering support for legislators or bill sponsors
on the proposed legislation
●Providing testimony in committee or subcommittee
hearings about their position on the bill
●Contacting legislators to support or not support 
proposed legislation, both in the home district and
the capitol
●Contacting either the president or the governor to
sign or veto the proposed legislation 
●Responding to requests for comments, either written
or verbal testimony, by regulatory agencies or 
committees
●Submission of an amicus curiae (friend of the court)
brief for consideration by the court

services are appropriate for preparation of students and
protection of the public. Nursing education is further reg-
ulated indirectly through the accrediting bodies that are
authorized by the Department of Education.
The state boards of nursing and their
associated practice acts define the scope of
practice; establish the requirements for licensure, 
entry into practice, continuing competency, 
and advanced practice; create and empower 
a board of nursing; and identify grounds 
for disciplinary action.
Nurse Practice Acts
Nurse practice acts are developed by each state to protect
the public health, safety, and welfare by regulating and
overseeing nursing practice. The various state boards of
nursing and their associated practice acts define the scope
of practice; establish the requirements for licensure, entry
into practice, continuing competency and advanced prac-
tice; create and empower a board of nursing; and identify
grounds for disciplinary action. An important component
in many practice acts is title protection. This is a part of
the law that maintains the use of the title nurse only for
the licensee authorized by the board. The term nurse is
used in some contexts outside of professional practice, and
more states are moving to protect the integrity and identity
of this title.
Nurse practice acts can be revised or completely elim-
inated through a single legislative action, so the prospect
of “opening the practice act” in the legislature can cause
great anxiety. Although state practice acts (statute and
regulations) are specific to the state, there is general con-
tent common to many state acts. For example, the Na-
tional Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN) has
a model act and model rules that illustrate standard con-
tents of the legislation and associated regulations for im-
plementation (Box 17.2). In addition, in 1998 a mutual
recognition model for interstate practice among the
“compact states” was introduced. This mutual recogni-
tion model requires further specific language to be incor-
porated into state law to allow a nurse to have one license
(in the state of residency) and to have practice privilieges
in other states that are members of the compact. The
nurse is required to practice in accordance with each
state’s specific practice law and regulations. There is also
a national initiative for consensus to assist states in align-
ing their APRN regulation with the major elements of the
Consensus Model for APRN Regulation within the four
roles (clinical nurse specialist, nurse practitioner, nurse
midwife, and nurse anesthetist) to include graduation
from an accredited graduate nursing program, advanced
certification, recognition of the four APRN roles, includ-
ing by title and license, independent practice, and inde-
pendent prescribing (NCSBN, 2014).
Appointments to a state board of nursing are often
made by the governor. The state board should be com-
posed of a variety of members who represent practice
throughout all areas of nursing. In four states, there are
separate boards for licensed practical nurses/licensed 
vocational nurses (LPNs/LVNs) and registered nurses
(RNs), but the boards are combined in the remaining ju-
risdictions. RN boards generally address both professional
nursing and advanced practice nurses (APRNs), although
one state currently has separate RN and APRN Boards.
APRN regulations may also be addressed in the respective
practice acts of other health professions such as the board
of medicine. In addition, boards of nursing may have ad-
visory committees or practice committees that research is-
sues for recommendations to the board on practice or
policy issues. Review your state’s practice act for the com-
position of members on the board or perhaps seek a seat
on the board. In many cases, serving on a board of nursing
is both a humbling and an enlightening experience, and
allows you to serve your state and your profession. 
Because changes proposed by a state board can lead to
laws and rules that have the same force as laws, it is im-
perative for nurses to remain aware of the activities of the
board that regulates practice within their state. The American
Nurses Association (ANA) provides recent updates to
practice acts and the status of proposed legislation on its
Web site under the section on policy and advocacy.
Trends in legislation are also tracked, for example, in the
areas of title protection and staffing levels. In addition,
some states issue advisory opinions; although such opin-
ions do not have the same impact as law, they do guide
acceptable standards of practice. Nurses are often unaware
that changes are even being proposed. Some states distrib-
ute the state nurses association newsletter to all registered
nurses, whether or not they hold membership in the ANA
or the state association. Many of the newsletter issues
(print or online) contain periodic informational alerts con-
cerning changes in or interpretations to the statute or ad-
visory opinions by the board. 
State boards and their respective members are con-
cerned about nurses’ current understanding of their re-
spective state law. To encourage and increase nurses’
knowledge about their respective practice acts, some states
award continuing education credits for specific courses. It
CHAPTER 17 The Politically Active Nurse: An Imperative
●
297
BOX 17.2
Nurse Practice Acts
General content for both statute and regulations:
●Title and purpose
●Deﬁnitions, scope, and standards of practice
●Board of nursing—authority and how it functions
●Application of other state statutes and the state’s 
administrative law act 
●Licensure
●Titles and abbreviations
●Nursing assistive personnel
●Approval of nursing education programs 
●Violations and penalties
●Discipline and proceedings
●Emergency relief for public protection
●Reporting requirements 
●Exemptions
●Revenue and fees
●Implementation of the statute and regulations
And if applicable to the particular state:
●Nurse licensure compact
●APRN scope of practice and APRN compact

is vital that nurses understand the content of their respec-
tive practice acts. This understanding must be ongoing,
beyond the point of original licensure or title recognition.
Put a bookmark in your computer’s Internet browser with
the Web site of your nursing board(s) to give yourself
quick information and links to related resources.
Additional State and Federal Laws
Affecting Nursing Practice
Laws have been passed on nursing practice issues, for exam-
ple, allowing nurses to be directly reimbursed by patients or
insurers. Legislation varies from state to state, but APRNs,
particularly nurse anesthetists, nurse practitioners, and nurse
midwives, are most commonly covered. The Bureau of
Labor Statistics (2014) reported that there were 151,400
nurse anesthetists, nurse midwives, and nurse practitioners
in practice in 2012, with more than 47,000 additional jobs
projected by 2022. And these figures do not include the
fourth APRN role of clinical nurse specialist. 
State laws that affect practice can be passed with the
support of nursing. Some states have passed laws to allow
registered nurses to pronounce death. Others are addressing
safe practice through staffing requirements, title protection,
tort reform, environmental safety, and prohibitions on
mandatory overtime. Still others are addressing delegation
to assistive personnel. Public protection is a concern at all
levels of government. In the area of advanced practice, for
example, states differ in level of supervision or collaboration
and prescriptive authority for advanced practice nurses.
Several states allow independent APRN practice with pro-
posals pending in other states. Nurses must be politically
astute and must continue to develop their internal political
efficacy and the external efficacy of the profession.
Also look for governmental affairs on Web sites of
nursing specialty organizations.
INFLUENCING LEGISLATION
As mentioned previously, the idea for a law may originate
from a concerned citizen or special interest group, a legis-
lator, a professional group, or the executive branch to ad-
dress a community problem or a public  policy issue. Many
laws originate from the legislature itself, which is composed
of individuals who are elected by constituents with specific
interests, needs, and concerns. Legislators’ knowledge and
recognition of particular needs and concerns come about
through influence. For instance, special interest groups rep-
resenting large numbers of the voting public can have a lot
of influence on legislators. Special interest groups have 
become more politically savvy at influencing the creation
of public policy, and more controls have emerged, as with
campaign financing reforms. Special interest groups influ-
ence legislators through lobbying activities, professional
lobbyists, professional organizations, political action com-
mittees, and grassroots efforts. Each of these groups repre-
sents the dollars and votes of a particular special interest
group, and each group uses expert communication and 
interpersonal skills to influence change.
Lobbying
Activities to influence legislators vary from formal to infor-
mal and often take the form of lobbying. Lobbying may
be defined as attempting to persuade a legislator or legisla-
tive aide of the merits of your viewpoint in order to influ-
ence legislation. Individuals may lobby through face-to-face
interviews, letter writing, telephone calls, faxes, e-mails, let-
ters to the editor, and testimony (verbal or written). Valu-
able clues on and guidelines for letter writing are provided
by professional associations that recognize the value of in-
dividual constituents’ contacting their elected legislators.
These professional organizations often provide special alerts
or suggestions to the members to assist with lobbying ac-
tivities. For example, some professional organizations pro-
vide an alert when members of Congress are on recess and
should be contacted in their home states. Other organiza-
tions may include lobbying tips on their Web sites, along
with background issues and talking points to assist in lob-
bying activities.
But there is definitely an art to getting your point
across. The bottom line is that numbers mean something
to the legislative aide or legislator, especially from con-
stituents. There are other considerations, however, such as
time. The impact of a well-composed, factual, meaningful,
and succinct letter or e-mail far outweighs the form letter
that has less impact or a letter that rambles on. Another
consideration is the form of the correspondence. Postal de-
lays or screenings cannot compete with the immediacy of
e-mail, for instance. For a personal appointment, be aware
of the congressional calendar, and do not be disappointed
if you meet with a legislative aide. The aide may be more
knowledgeable about your issue and can be persuaded to
communicate the information to the legislator.
The professional lobbyist is a person on the staff of a
professional association or hired consultant who has out-
standing skills in persuasion, in-depth knowledge of the or-
ganization, and an acute sense of the intricacies of the
political system. These professionals understand the legis-
lators and their political agendas. The professional lobbyist
is present at the appropriate time with the correct message,
especially in the case of the undecided legislator. The role
of the professional lobbyist is to  provide the facts and the
support base to persuade the legislator. The ANA has sev-
eral professional lobbyists working at the federal level. A
significant number of constituent state associations (CNAs)
and specialty professional organizations also hire profes-
sional lobbyists.
Lobbying is especially effective when there is an asso-
ciated strong grassroots effort that responds with mobi-
lization of a group to provide additional correspondence
and support on the position presented to the legislator or
legislative aide. This approach has been used effectively by
298
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
O N L I NE  C ONSULT  
ANA at 
http://nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/
Policy-Advocacy
American Association of Colleges of Nursing: 
Government Affairs at
http://www.aacn.nche.edu/Government
/index.htm

many professional organizations to influence public policy.
Various nursing and other grassroots networks have been
established to lobby in support of the legislative goals and
objectives of the state nurses associations. There are spe-
cific channels of communication for response to a key
issue. Key contacts for each legislator or legislative district
must be active and ongoing.
Professional Organizations
Nurses have always had a great deal of potential power by
virtue of numbers, but have now begun to use their power
collectively. This is one important reason to join profes-
sional organizations. Only through united efforts will
nurses be seen as a powerful group and will their voices be
recognized in the policy arena. This has been demon-
strated continually by many vocal and powerful organiza-
tions readily visible on Capitol Hill, on surrounding streets
in Washington, DC, or in your state capitol, such as the
American Medical Asso ciation (AMA) and the American
Hospital Association (AHA). The ANA is also a visible
and vocal organization in Washington, monitoring legis-
lation and the initiatives of federal agencies, and presenting
testimony to Congress or congressional committees on be-
half of the nursing profession. And consider the number
of professional nursing organizations with headquarters
located in the Washington area (refer to the professional
organizations listed on the Intranet site).
The ANA and its constituent state members are also
associated with the Washington-area organizational affil-
iate members. The legislative or political arm of the ANA
is known as its department of governmental affairs. It ac-
tively advocates for legislation and works with administra-
tive agencies on regulations for implementation of laws
and health policy. The ANA regularly monitors the work
of more than a dozen federal agencies that affects health-
care policy. It monitors agencies like the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) and the Agency
for Health Research and Quality (AHRQ). The ANA De-
partment of Governmental Affairs also publishes legislative
and regulatory priorities and initiatives for each legislative
session. Along with these priorities are informational doc-
uments on the issues. For example, for the 113th Con-
gress, the ANA specified an advocacy agenda for nurses
that focused on APRN practice, safe staffing, workplace
health and safety, quality measures, patient safety and ad-
vocacy, mental health care, and the nursing shortage
(ANA, 2014). These are broad-based initiatives with well-
developed statements of the issue, background, and the
ANA position.
The ANA’s Department of Government Affairs also
contains the political action unit N-STAT, made up of
the grassroots lobbying network (Box 17.3) that functions
through the activities of congressional district coordina-
tors, Senate coordinators, and the ANA’s political action
committee (ANA-PAC).
Political Action Committees
As a result of campaign reform in the 1970s, restrictions
were placed on contributions made by individuals or 
organizations to a candidate for a federal office. This 
campaign financing reform also allowed for the creation
of political action committees (PACs), through which or-
ganizations could make openly reported contributions. Al-
though any organization can form a PAC, most PACs are
sponsored by corporations, labor groups, and special in-
terest groups who want their message heard and promoted.
It is a political reality that legislators are more likely to see
and listen to a group of people who have contributed
money to their campaign.
The ANA formed a PAC more than three decades ago
to create power and influence for the nursing profession.
Contributions to the ANA-PAC support candidates, cur-
rent legislators, and legislation aligned with the ANA leg-
islative agenda. It is bipartisan, supporting candidates of
both national parties. The PAC is focused on the public
office and the candidate for that office, whether incum-
bent or opponent. Endorsements and financial contribu-
tions are based on the candidates’ support for the ANA
legislative agenda and stance on health policy. In addition,
some state constituents of ANA have separate state-asso-
ciated PACs working on behalf of nursing issues in their
particular states and at the federal level. Other specialty
professional nursing organizations have PACs as well, rep-
resenting issues critical to their respective missions.
GAINING SKILL IN
POLITICAL EFFICACY
The initial step in developing political efficacy is under-
standing the process and having the willingness to be in-
volved. But even more basic is possessing an understanding
of people and policy needed for public health and welfare.
This understanding of people and their healthcare needs is
basic to nursing practice. The next prerequisite to political
efficacy is an understanding of the issues involved. It is vital
that nurses use their voices and individual power to em-
power nurses and nursing. As Abood (2007) observed, “as
nurses interact with patients and families, they are often
CHAPTER 17 The Politically Active Nurse: An Imperative
●
299
BOX 17.3
ANA Grassroots Political Action
ANA creates political action through grassroots eﬀorts
and successful lobbying. ANA’s N-STAT is an exam-
ple of this grassroots lobbying system. Established in
1993, N-STAT continues to grow, with more nurses
providing a rapid response on legislative and policy is-
sues. Information is provided on current topics as they
move through Congress. Then, when the time to speak
out on an issue will be most beneﬁcial, nurses are as-
sisted with electronic contact information and content
for contacting their senators and representatives.
Nurses can register online, receive periodic alerts,
and take an active step toward political eﬃcacy. 
Sign up today, or periodically refer to the ANA Web
site for particular national and state initiatives and 
legislative alerts at http://www.nursingworld.org 
(go to the Policy and Advocacy link or at http://
www.rnaction.org/site/PageServer?pagename=nstat_
take_action_home).

the first providers to see clearly when and how the health-
care system is not effectively meeting patient needs” (p. 1).
This is your imperative for action. Nurses, particularly with
their focus on health issues, can influence change in the
workplace and health policy, in their communities, in pro-
fessional organizations, and in government.
Workplace Issues
As illustrated with management in the organizational set-
ting, the workplace is a significant area for nurses to pro-
mote policy changes, particularly regarding workplace
advocacy and patient safety and advocacy. Nurses are
highly regarded by patients and the public. In addition,
they have the five general bases of power identified by
Mintzberg (1983): control of resources, control of a tech-
nical skill, control of a body of knowledge, exclusive rights
or privileges to impose choices (legal prerogatives), and ac-
cess to people who have and can be relied on for the other
four. To be influential, nurses must take an active role in
institutional decision making, either at the unit level or 
by volunteering to serve on various committees. These 
opportunities are available in many hospital settings, es-
pecially those organizations demonstrating structural em-
powerment as a component for Magnet Recognition
status. To  contribute to policy decisions, nurses must re-
main current on health policy issues and must provide fac-
tual information. This involvement with workplace issues
provides the basis for the improvements needed in the de-
livery of care and positive outcomes for both patients and
the profession.
Community or Civic Involvement
A prime responsibility for all citizens is to be part of the
electorate—to be registered and to vote in local, state, and
national elections. Nurses have traditionally been in-
volved in the community, whether serving on committees
like the local school or hospital board or helping out with
a local health fair. These activities constitute community
or civic involvement. In the community, nurses can iden-
tify potential health hazards that require the attention of
local officials or businesspersons, and can intervene in the
case of health risks or hazards. Nurses are adept at under-
standing community issues, and active involvement of
professional nurses in community or civic activities is
truly an imperative.
Professional Organizations
Active involvement in professional organizations  provides
both constant development and valuable information. As
illustrated with the governmental functions of the ANA,
professional organizations offer  policy analysis and up-
dates, and they can lead effective campaigns to influence
policy change. As already described, in their federal gov-
ernmental affairs and state initiatives, ANA (2014b) ad-
dresses many policy areas that the ANA and the other
professional organizations are committed to addressing.
Nurses should remain knowledgeable about the positions
of the  professional organizations on issues that are likely
to come before Congress. This awareness can assist with
needed action on health policies and legislation through
participation in grassroots efforts of the organization. 
It can also lead to service in elected and appointed posi-
tions or opportunities to provide testimony on behalf of
the organization.
Government
Be aware of who your legislators and other elected or ap-
pointed officials are, at local, state, and national levels. Keep
yourself informed on how they support the issues, especially
those related to health policy. Communicate with these of-
ficials. Nurses have the expertise in the care for patients and
they witness the impact of health policy on a daily basis.
Legislators want to hear the concerns of their nurse con-
stituents and will appreciate the information you provide
to help address the concerns of all their constituents. Often,
legislators’ only view of the healthcare arena is through the
care they or a family member receives and the views im-
parted to them by their legislative aides and constituents.
At times, this perspective can be narrow and very personal.
The issues being confronted by federal, state, and local 
legislators on health policy can have long-term and wide-
ranging effects on both the profession and care of patients.
Nurses are serving in growing numbers in important roles
to assist with the passage of health policy for the good of
both the public and the profession.
At the state level, nurses have successfully lobbied to
enact legislation that allows them to bill insurance com-
panies directly for the care they provide. Prescriptive au-
thority, interstate practice, amendments or revisions to
practice acts, and safe staffing requirements are current is-
sues in many state legislatures. To have legislation enacted,
individual nurses or a nursing organization can seek a
sponsor and cosponsors to introduce it. Once the legisla-
tion is introduced, nurses must lobby legislators to provide
information on how passage of the bill will benefit the 
legislator’s constituents. Nurses elected to leadership po-
sitions and appointed to serve on boards at the state gov-
ernment level are becoming more common, but there is a
great need to increase the numbers who are willing and
prepared to serve in these roles. Often it is through in-
volvement at the local level that nurses gain the experience
and confidence to move on to state positions. 
To effectively influence policy, nurses must establish
a relationship with legislators and their legislative aides
whenever possible. These officials are elected to serve—
and are concerned about the needs of their constituents.
They expect constituents to inform them of their con-
cerns. Watch the interactions that occur at your next
community or state function attended by a legislator. It
may not be an election year, but the legislator is present
because the particular function is of importance to a
group the legislator represents. A nurse’s offer to serve as
a personal resource is frequently welcomed by the legisla-
tor and his or her staff. This is particularly true at the local
and state levels, at which legislators may not have exten-
sive staff to assist with legislation involving health policy.
Nurses can also be valuable in providing testimony for
regulatory change. Practice and preparation are needed
for developing proficiency, effectiveness, and ease in these
activities, particularly in dealing with the media. Being
knowledgeable and articulate in both subject matter and
presentation is essential.
300
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

CHAPTER 17 The Politically Active Nurse: An Imperative
●
301
BOX 17.4
Tips for Talking to Legislators
●Before meeting with your legislator, get to know as much as possible about his or her background, special
interests or initiatives, voting record, committee assignments, and involvement with health policy issues.
●Prepare your position, including a list of talking points to assist you during the discussion.
●Investigate both sides of the issue but stay focused on the facts.
●Request a meeting of at least 15 to 30 minutes.
●Practice your presentation with a friend or colleague to gain comfort with the content and to anticipate questions
that may arise.
●If the legislator is not available, meet with the legislative aide or a staﬀ member who has a good knowledge of the
issues.
●Be on time, and be professional.
●Introduce yourself and thank the legislator or legislative aide for his or her time and interest.
●Be prepared to explain what you do as a nurse, your philosophy of care, and the impact of pending legislation on
healthcare and care delivery for the legislator’s constituents.
●Use concise and explicit examples from your practice to illustrate your position.
●Be prepared to oﬀer additional information or solutions, but stick to the facts.
●If the legislator or legislative aide indicates support for your position, ask what you can do to reach other
legislators or sponsors.
●Provide an opportunity to answer any questions and oﬀer any additional assistance on the circumstances of the
proposed legislation or regulation.
●Send a follow-up thank you note for the time spent, in which you restate your position.
●And you may even want to follow your interview with a well-worded letter on your position to the editor of the
local newspaper—and perhaps gain further support among other constituents.
BOX 17.5
Tips for Presenting Testimony
●Be prepared, with:
●A full, well-developed written statement and talking points.
●An understanding of the committee process and regulatory structure.
●An anticipation of any follow-up questions that may be asked of you.
●Be on time.
●Be conﬁdent in your abilities and knowledge base, and remain calm.
●Be ﬂexible; you may not have the time for your presentation that you were told you would.
●Recognize the members of the body (“Mr./Madam Chairperson and members of the _____ Committee”) and
thank them for allowing you the opportunity to address them.
●Introduce yourself and be respectful.
●Do not read your written testimony; ask to have it placed in the record.
●Use the talking points to present your case and focus on the facts.
●Try to use concise and explicit examples from your practice to illustrate your position.
●Do not go over your allocated time.
●Leave time at the end of your presentation for any questions from the members.
●Thank the committee for the opportunity to present your testimony at the end.
Nurses must be part of the process, whether pro viding
needed facts and background on the issues or serving in
an office. Buresh and Gordon (2006) have described this
as the voice of agency, a strong and authentic voice talking
about what you do as a nurse and being more visible and
vocal as individuals and as members of organizations 
(p. 25). It is being the “agent” for both nursing and the
consumer of nursing services. Nurses must increasingly be
involved in advocating beyond the hospital or healthcare
unit environment. We have unique insights and the
knowledge base to effect change and improve healthcare
and health policy. This is the political imperative: Be in-
formed, be involved, be active, continue to develop inter-
personal and political skills, and continue to understand
the evolving needs of people and the profession. As noted
by Dodd (2013), “be polite, be persistent, be persuasive,
and be polite” (p. 46). The issues for action with public
policy are further discussed in Chapter 19. However, act
now on current legislation and consider the information
provided in Box 17.4 on tips for communicating with
your legislator and Box 17.5 on tips for presenting testi-
mony before a committee or regulatory body.

302
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
The American Association of Critical Care Nurses (AACN) issued a practice alert on family presence during
CPR and invasive procedures.
You are the nurse manager in an emergency department (ED).  The vice president for patient care has
come to you with a problem. Last night, a city council member complained that one of his constituents called
him yesterday because she was not allowed to be with her spouse during CPR in the ED. Currently, the 
patient is in the intensive care unit (ICU) following a myocardial infarction in guarded condition. You are
aware of the practice alert and have been trying to establish a policy in the ED and ICU.  The vice president
for patient care has asked that you meet with the council member and his constituent on this issue.
Question: Consider your plan for meeting with the council member and his constituent.
Source: American Association of Critical-Care Nurses. (AACN). (2014). Family presence during CPR and invasive procedures. 
Retrieved from http://www.aacn.org/wd/practice/content/family-presence-practice-alert.pcms?menu=practice
K E Y  P O I N T S
●Internal political efficacy is personal competence or the “ability to understand and take part in political 
affairs,” and external political advocacy is the “ability to make the system respond to the citizenry” 
(Wilson & Dilulio, 2004, p. 93).
●Laws are mandates based on the Constitution, enacted by federal or state legislatures, and interpreted by
the courts. Administrative agencies, governed by the executive branch, promulgate regulations or rules,
which serve the purpose of detailing and applying the laws.
●In the United States, the enactment of a law begins with introduction of the bill by the sponsoring legisla-
tor to either the House or the Senate. Then, it is referred to committee for recommendations and
amendments.
●Common law is created by judicial decisions that form a precedent upon which future decisions are
based.
●Nurse practice acts are statutory law with associated administrative regulations developed by each state
to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. They define the scope of practice; establish requirements
for licensure, entry into practice, continuing competency and advanced practice; create and empower a
board of nursing to oversee licensees; and identify grounds for disciplinary action.
●Title protection is the part of the nursing practice act that protects and restricts the use of the term nurse
to the licensee authorized to practice by the board.
●Activities to influence legislators vary from formal to informal. Lobbying may be defined as attempting to
persuade a legislator or legislative aide of the merits of your viewpoint and to influence legislation.
●Lobbying is especially effective when there is an associated strong grassroots effort that provides addi-
tional correspondence and support on the issues.
●Special interest groups have become more politically savvy at influencing the creation of public policy, and
more controls have emerged, as with campaign financing reforms. One form of a special interest group is
the political action committee (PAC).
●Buresh and Gordon (2006) define a voice of agency as a strong and authentic voice talking about what
you do as a nurse and being more visible and vocal as individuals and as members of organizations 
(p. 25). Nurses can influence change in the workplace, the community, professional organizations, and
government. 

REFERENCES
Abood, S. (2007). Influencing health care in the legislative
arena. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 12(1). Retrieved
from http://nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/
ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/TableofContents/
Volume122007/No1Jan07/tpc32_216091.aspx
American Nurses Association. (2014a). American Nurses Associ-
ation Political Action Committee (ANA-PAC). Retrieved
from http://www.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories
/PoliticalPower/ANAPAC.aspx 
American Nurses Association. (2014b). Federal governmental af-
fairs. http://www.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories
/Policy-Advocacy/Federal 
American Nurses Association. (2014c). 113th Congress 
federal legislative agenda. Retrieved from http://www.
nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/Policy-Advocacy
/Federal/113th-Congress-Federal-Legislative-Agenda
Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2014). Nurse anesthetists, nurse 
midwives, and nurse practitioners. Retrieved from http://
www.bls.gov/ooh/healthcare/nurse-anesthetists-nurse
-midwives-and-nurse-practitioners.htm
Buresh, B., & Gordon, S. (2006). From silence to voice: What
nurses know and must communicate to the public (2nd ed.).
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Clinton, H. R. (2003). Living history. New York: Simon 
& Schuster.
Dodd, C. J. (2013). Passing legislation requires more than good
ideas and prayers. In C. L. Estes, S. A. Chapman, C. Dodd,
B. Hollister, & C. Harrington, (Eds.), Health policy: Crisis
and reform (pp. 39-54). Burlington, MA: Jones & Bartlett.
Leininger, M. (2002). Cultures and tribes of nursing, hospi-
tals, and the medical culture. In M. Leininger & M. R.
McFarland, Transcultural nursing: Concepts, theories, re-
search, and practice (3rd ed.) (pp. 181–204). New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Mason, D. J., Chaffee, M. W., & Leavitt, J. K. (2011). Policy and
politics in nursing and health care (6th ed.). Philadelphia, PA:
Elsevier/Saunders.
Milstead, J. A. (2013). Health policy and politics: A nurse’s guide
(4th ed.). Boston, MA: Jones & Bartlett.
Mintzberg, H. (1983). Power in and around organizations. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Wilson, J. Q., & Dilulio, J. J. (2004). American government: Insti-
tutions and policies (9th ed.). Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Estes, C. L., Chapman, S.A., Dodd, C., Hollister, B., & 
Harrington, C. (2013). Health policy: Crisis and reform.
Burlington, MA: Jones & Bartlett.
Federal Election Commission. (2014). Administering and 
enforcing federal campaign finance laws. Retrieved from
http://www.fec.gov 
Johnson, C. W. (2007). How our laws are made. Retrieved from
http://thomas.loc.gov/home/lawsmade.toc.html
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2003). 
Summary of the HIPAA Privacy Rule. Retrieved from http://
www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/understanding/summary/
White, P., Olsan, T. H., Bianchi, C., Glessner, T., & Mapstone,
P. (2010). Legislative: Searching for health policy informa-
tion in the Internet: An essential advocacy skill. Online Jour-
nal of Issues in Nursing, 15(2). Retrieved from http://www.
nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/ANAMarketplace
/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/Columns/Legislative/Health-Policy
-Information-on-the-Internet.aspx
ONLINE RESOURCES
American Association of Colleges of Nursing: Government Affairs
http://www.aacn.nche.edu/Government/index.htm
American Nurses Association
http://nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/Policy
-Advocacy/State
THOMAS, U.S. Congress on the Internet
http://thomas.loc.gov/home/thomas.php
U.S. Constitution
http://thomas.loc.gov/teachers/constitution.html
U.S. Government Web Portal
http://firstgov.gov
CHAPTER 17 The Politically Active Nurse: An Imperative
●
303
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Consider the campaign for consensus on the practice of APRNs at https://www.ncsbn.org/aprn.htm. This initiative in-
volves the changes in state laws (nursing practice acts). Discuss the processes that are required for changes in state laws.
2. Identify how you will demonstrate both internal and external political efficacy. Be prepared to participate in a 
discussion in class or online to be scheduled by your instructor.
3. Select a current issue of concern and develop an action plan to present your views to a legislator.
4. Review the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter, and discuss it in the context of the contents
of the chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.

Healthcare Reform 
and Global Issues 
304
●Sister Rosemary Donley
18
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Describe the global and domestic issues that affect healthcare policy, healthcare delivery, and nursing
education and practice.
2. Analyze three goals of the ACA that directly affect nursing education and practice.
3. Discuss how nurses’ active participation in policy formulation can strengthen the profession and patient
care outcomes.
Global Health
Health Policy
Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act (ACA)
Newly Insured Persons
Nursing Shortage
The 3 Ds: Workforce Diversity,
Health Disparities, and Social
Determinants of Health 
Clinical Nurse Leader (CNL)
Doctor of Nursing Practice (DNP)
Social Justice
Evidence-Based Practice
Cost-Benefit-Burden Ratios
Market Justice
www.Healthcare.gov
Health Disparities
“Nursing in its broadest sense may be defined as
an art and a science which involves the whole
patient—body, mind, and spirit; promotes his
spiritual, mental, and physical health by teaching
and by example; stresses health education and
health preservation, as well as ministration to the
sick; involves the care of the patients’
environment—social and spiritual as well as
physical; and gives health service to the family
and community as well as to the individual.”
Sr. M. Olivia Gowan, founding Dean, The Catholic University of America School of Nursing, June 1944
Key Terms

CHAPTER 18 Healthcare Reform and Global Issues      ●
305
GLOBAL HEALTH, NURSING,
AND THE NEW MILLENNIUM
Nursing, like all the health professions, faces exciting
challenges in the 21st century because the world is inter-
connected and many factors other than disease affect
global health. Demography, urbanization, migration, the
economy, war, and terrorism influence well-being and
human flourishing. What do students of nursing and
nurses need to know about these significant health indi-
cators? The American population is aging, becoming
more diverse and more mobile. These demographic
changes are not unique to the United States; they are the
faces and patterns of people around the world. For ex-
ample, Japan and many countries in Western Europe are
seeing an increase in the number of people older than 
65 years, whereas young people compose the populations
in Iraq, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Colombia, Gaza, and
Yemen, a phenomenon described as the youth bulge. Yet
even with this youth bulge, it is estimated that by 2050,
the global population older than 65 years will increase
from 6.9 percent in 2000 to 16.3 percent (Central Intel-
ligence Agency [CIA], 2001). This demographic picture
has implications for healthcare, for the economy, and for
world peace. In the future, the world’s population will
be less white and more urban. In 2015, for the first time
in history, more people will live in some city in the
world. Globally, people are also on the move. Internal
and external migration has been stimulated by war, nat-
ural disasters, unstable currencies, and lack of work. Low
fertility and the aging of local populations also stimulate
migration. Illegal immigration is more common than
legal entry into many countries; today one in every 
40 persons is an immigrant living somewhere in the
world (CIA, 2001). It is recognized that the economy
plays a major role in health status.
People in the United States are slowly recovering from
the crises in the housing and financial markets. The stock
market has rebounded, and there are fewer foreclosures
and public auctions of family homes. This stabilization is
reflected in the world’s economy, although experts say that
debt and unemployment are still too high and economic
growth is too low both in the United States and around
the world (Boccia, 2013). In the United States, unskilled,
blue-collar, and white-collar workers have lost jobs and
their benefits because the companies for which they
worked declared bankruptcy, contracted for work outside
the country, downsized, or went out of business. Long-
term unemployment has caused some American workers
to give up searching for jobs (Hollander, 2014). Some ob-
servers consider this phenomenon a response to the recent
economic recession; others say it is a structural problem
brought on by a mismatch between worker skills and job
demands (Mitchell, 2013). Although technological devel-
opment requires a more educated workforce, degrees no
longer assure employment in the job of one’s dreams after
graduation. In the United States, it may be necessary to
leave home to find work. There have been long and costly
wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. Everywhere in the world,
there is palpable fear of violence and terrorism. Worldwide
travel coupled with technological innovation and instant
communication via television, the Internet, and social
media blur the distance between countries and peoples.
The global nature of the workforce influences health; old
assumptions about the geography of disease lack validity
(CIA, 2001).
Communicable diseases once found only in develop-
ing countries are spread rapidly by air travel and immi-
gration. Chronic illnesses occur everywhere in the world.
The World Health Organization Kampala Declaration
and Agenda for Global Action (Global Health Workforce
Alliance, 2008), recognizing the worldwide effects of
HIV/AIDS, the burdens of chronic and communicable
diseases, accidents, and injuries, asserts that health issues
have delayed progress in meeting the Millennium Devel-
opment Goals (Global Health Workforce Alliance, 2008).
Any factor that influences health and human develop-
ment, taken alone, has the potential to alter health status
in a person or a community. Together, these influences
pose threats to global health and challenge nurses and
other health professionals to work collegially and cooper-
atively at the bedside and at policy tables around the
world. Preparing nurses to practice in the 21st century is
a sacred trust. Teaching students to become engaged in
the policy process is a primary responsibility of educators,
leaders in nursing, professional organizations, and prac-
ticing nurses.
NURSING AND HEALTH POLICY
Nurses want seats at the policy tables. Nursing’s efforts
to prepare health system advocates and policymakers are
bearing fruit. During the past 40 years, American nurses
have been educated about health policy and have become
interested and more engaged in policy decisions, espe-
cially those that affect their patients and their practices.
Schools of nursing teach courses in health policy and
arrange trips to lobby members of state or federal govern-
ments. Some schools of nursing offer semester-long in-
ternships with state legislators or members of Congress.
Professional and specialty nursing organizations monitor
federal and state legislation and regulations, provide in-
formation to legislators, give testimony about health and
nursing issues, lobby, make financial contributions to
candidates, join political action committees (PACs), par-
ticipate in get-out-the-vote campaigns, and educate their
own members and the public about nursing’s legislative
and policy agenda (Abood, 2007).
One example of a professional effort to influence
health policy is the Nurse in Washington Internship
(NIWI) program. NIWI brings leaders from professional
and specialty organizations to an immersion experience on
Capitol Hill. Prepared by briefings and discussions with
health policy experts, nurse leaders bring the perspectives
of their organizations and the views of their patients to
members of Congress (Nursing Organizations Alliance,
2014). It is also affirming that six nurses currently serve
in the Congress of the United States (American Nurses
Association, 2014). Not only have nurses been elected to
positions that determine policy, they have also been 
appointed to direct important work in federal and state
governments. Most notable is Mary Wakefield’s 2009 ap-
pointment as the Director of the Health Resources and
Services Administration (HRSA, 2014b).

Despite progress, however, organized nursing is per-
ceived to yield little influence on health policy. The valid-
ity of the decade-old observations of Mechanic and
Reinhard (2002) about the influence of American physi-
cians in policy literature and policy making prevails. That
nurses’ voices are not heard in American halls of power is
also conveyed by quips. One familiar saying is that al-
though nurses are underrepresented at policy tables, nurs-
ing is on the menu. It is too soon to tell whether major
changes in federal health priorities and the Patient Pro-
tection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) efforts to empha-
size prevention as well as treatment will shift the balance
of power. The irony and injustice of excluding nurses from
meaningful policy debates is astonishing because registered
nurses are the largest group of health professionals, now
numbering about 3.1 million (USDHHS, 2010a). Beyond
these impressive statistical data, the overwhelming major-
ity of registered nurses are on the ground, at the bedside,
and in the community. Anyone who has been ill, especially
patients treated in acute care hospitals, can provide testi-
mony that nurses positively influence their healthcare out-
comes (Aiken, Clarke, & Sloan, 2002; Aiken et al., 2014;
DeCuccio, 2014).
Unfortunately, these positive findings about nursing
are threatened by the nursing shortage and poor staffing
ratios. Studies, especially in acute care hospitals, report
that the quality of care varies across the country and the
world (Aiken et al., 2014; Kalish, Tshannen, Lee, &
Friese, 2011). These data also highlight the impact of in-
adequate staffing and the limited education of registered
nurses on patient care outcomes; these issues must be ad-
dressed not only in local institutions but also through na-
tional policy and political venues. All nurses need to
engage directly or indirectly in health policy.
American nurses are watching the implementation of
the ACA. They express concern about their ability to care
for the growing number of senior citizens and chronically
ill persons, their availability to work aggressively to pre-
vent illness as well as treat it, and their capacity to address
the healthcare needs of newly insured persons (Abrams,
Nuzum, Mika, & Lawlor, 2011; Benner, Sutphen,
Leonard, & Day, 2010; Smedley, Stith, & Nelson, 2003;
The Future of Nursing, 2010). At a micro level, nurses
are affected by the impact of the staffing crisis on safety
and patient expectations. Another recurring theme is the
lack of respect that nurses experience in the workplace
(Wong, 2012). Although advanced practice registered
nurses applaud the ACA’s recognition of their capabilities,
they are very aware of resistance to expanding their roles
in care management (Brassard & Smolenski, 2011). Some
medical groups continue to influence state legislators to
block expansion of nurse practice acts (The Future of
Nursing, 2010). 
Global issues such as war, terrorism, trade agreements,
the economy, and immigration have been added to nurs-
ing’s policy agenda. These complex and far-reaching is-
sues overshadow and compete for funding with the issues
that have dominated nursing’s policy agenda. Yet global
issues evoke new awareness and interest in intraprofes-
sional collaboration and reveal the force that world events
and global governments exert on health status and on
health professionals. Knowledge of health policy also calls
attention to the lack of diversity in the American nurse
workforce and healthcare team (Aiken et al., 2014). In
the 21st century, policy competence is increasingly iden-
tified as an essential behavior of professional nurses. 
Illustrative of this goal is the American Association of
Colleges of Nursing (AACN, 2004b) description of 
advanced practice:
Any form of nursing intervention that influences health
care outcomes for individuals or populations, including
the direct care of individual patients, management of
care for individuals and populations, administration 
of nursing and health care organizations, and the 
development and implementation of health policy. (p. 2)
How can nurses be savvy representatives of their pro-
fession and contribute meaningfully to policy debates?
This chapter examines nursing’s policy agenda, particu-
larly issues of workforce shortage and role transformation
and the changing delivery system. It also presents the im-
pact of the ACA on the uninsured, unsafe healthcare prac-
tices, and health disparities. If nurses are to be recognized
as citizens of the world, they must be grounded in how
health policies affect them, their practices, their patients,
and the health system.
THE NURSING SHORTAGE 
AND CHANGING WORKFORCE
Nursing is an exciting, meaningful, and socially relevant
profession. The U.S. Department of Labor (USDL,
2012) data indicate that nursing will remain the top oc-
cupation for job growth until 2020. Yet American nurs-
ing has failed to sustain a relevant image of professional
practice and career opportunities (Nurses for a Healthier
Tomorrow, n.d.). Consequently, stereotypes and myths
about nursing are passed on: nursing is too demanding,
too dangerous, and too undervalued. In the United
States, the nursing shortage represents a recurring para-
dox of failures and successes in recruitment and retention
(Donley et al., 2002). This suggests that factors other
than the value of the profession influence decisions to
become or remain a nurse. The shortage of nurses is de-
scribed by the International Council of Nurses (ICN) as
a global crisis (Oulton, 2006). Yet in the face of a world-
wide nursing shortage, the United States continues to re-
cruit nurses from other countries by promises of good
salaries and opportunities for them and their families, an
action that is observed, sometimes negatively, around the
world. One positive effort to stabilize the global nurse
force is the European Union’s plan to enhance graduate
education and research across Europe (Carney, 2005;
Chaguturu & Vallabhaneni, 2005; Davies, 2008). The
American nursing community has increased its enrol-
ment in 4-year programs and designed accelerated BSN
degree programs and bridge programs as RN to BSN,
RN to MSN, or BSN to PhD or DNP (AACN, 2010a).
It has also created new online and hybrid nursing pro-
grams. However, nursing has not successfully addressed
the faculty shortage, inadequate faculty salaries, and lim-
ited clinical space for additional students (AACN,
2010b, 2014c). Although the global demand for nurses
is fueled by the economy, aging populations, and urban-
ization, American nurses have new responsibilities, care
of newly insured persons (AACN, 2010b). Even the most
306
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

CHAPTER 18 Healthcare Reform and Global Issues      ●
307
optimistic observer does not expect nursing to meet its
manpower projections.
Recognizing that good will does not resolve projected
shortage, federal and state governments have allocated ad-
ditional funding to stimulate enrollment and to encourage
more nurses to go back to school (Juraschek, Zhang, 
Ranganathan, & Lin, 2011). The ACA also supports ex-
panding the nursing workforce by providing new funds
for program development and scholarships, low-interest
loans, and loan-forgiveness programs for graduate students
who prepare to be teachers or nurse practitioners (Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act [ACA], 2010). The
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA)
initiatives also emphasize programs that address the 
“3 Ds”: workforce diversity, health disparities, and social
determinants of health (White, Zangaro, Kepley, & 
Camacho, 2014). HRSA funds demonstration projects to
support nurse practitioners’ collaborative engagement in
primary care teams and in the development of more nurse-
managed clinics (Affordable Care Act bolters, 2010; HRSA,
2014a). The Veterans Administration has partnered with
the HRSA to improve the care of returning veterans and
also provide career opportunities for veterans. They are
funding schools of nursing to recruit, retain, and support
veterans in accelerated BSN programs (Bureau of Health
Professions, 2013). Recently there has been another call
for the Veterans Administration Health Services to form
new partnerships with schools of nursing and to develop
new Veterans Affairs Nursing Academies (U.S. Depart-
ment of Veterans Affairs, 2013). The federal government
provides scholarships and loans for students who agree to
work in underserved areas after graduation. These funds
also support the education of disadvantaged or minority
students and help educate more teachers of nursing and
advanced practice registered nurses, especially nurse prac-
titioners (AACN, 2014c; ACA, 2010). Other programs
offer loan forgiveness of up to 60% of the loan if new RN
or NP graduates work for a period of time (usually 2 years)
within the state or, in the case of federal grants, in some
critical shortage facility (NURSECORPS, 2014). States
have also joined the federal government in addressing the
nursing shortage. Maryland, Illinois, and Kansas have
awarded grants to schools of nursing to increase the nurse
workforce in their states. Some state legislatures in 
Massachusetts, Kansas, Connecticut, and Pennsylvania
have initiated special initiatives to encourage nurses to re-
turn to school and become teachers (AACN, 2006).
There is renewed private sector emphasis on the reten-
tion of practicing nurses. Nurse leaders are actively collab-
orating with the the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation,
the American Association of Retired Persons, and the
Johnson & Johnson Foundation to advance the public
image of nursing and to promote leadership and advanced
practice (The Future of Nursing, 2014). 
EVOLVING NURSING ROLES
Another response to the shortage of nurses is the creation
of new career pathways. Almost a decade ago, The American
Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN, 2004b) pro-
posed new roles: clinical nurse leader (CNL) and doctor 
of nursing practice (DNP). The CNL, prepared at the 
master’s level, is educated to assume clinical, managerial,
and leadership roles, particularly in hospitals. These students
are not educated for advanced practice registered nurse roles
as clinical specialist, nurse practitioner, midwife, or nurse
anesthetist. Rather, their preparation is directed toward 
improving the quality of patient care (AACN, 2011).
Although the CNL degree has evoked less attention
than the DNP, the AACN reports that 104 CLN pro-
grams exist in 38 states (AACN, 2014b).
The DNP program educates nurses who seek a practice
rather than a research-oriented degree, a DNP rather than
a PhD. The AACN envisions that by 2015, the DNP will
be the standard educational preparation for nurses in ad-
vanced practice roles. The 2014 AACN data show that
241 DNP programs of study are available in 49 states and
the District of Columbia (AACN, 2014a). Supporters of
practice doctorates argue that clinical care is increasingly
complex and that advanced practice registered nurses are
disenfranchised because they lack the education and the
credentials enjoyed by other health team practitioners:
physicians, pharmacists, physical therapists, and social
workers (AACN, 2014a). Opponents think that the new
doctoral degree will contribute to an already confusing
pattern of academic credentialing and weaken research-
oriented PhD degrees (Meleis & Dracup, 2005).
Although the DNP was proposed as an academic path-
way to advanced practice, faculty members now conceptu-
alize the DNP degree as preparation for advanced practice,
management of patients and health systems, policy devel-
opment, and clinical teaching. This conceptualization bet-
ter reflects the AACN description of advanced practice:
Any form of nursing intervention that influences health-
care outcomes for individuals or populations, including
the direct care of individual patients, management of
care for individuals and populations, administration of
nursing and healthcare organizations, and the develop-
ment and implementation of health policy. Preparation
at the practice doctorate level includes advanced prepara-
tion in nursing, based on nursing science, and is at the
highest level of nursing practice. (p. 3)
The American Medical Association (AMA) has been a
vocal opponent of the practice doctorate, a position 
expressed in 2006 by Resolution 211 (AMA, 2015). 
Organized medicine has argued that patients will confuse
the DNP with the doctor of medicine degree.
As noted, major campaigns encourage RNs to earn
baccalaureate degrees and remain competitive in the work-
force. Nursing promotes baccalaureate education with the
slogan, “80% by 2020” as it increases program offerings
and enrollment in traditional, hybrid, and online pro-
grams (The Future of Nursing, 2010). 
THE HEALTHCARE DELIVERY
SYSTEM: PRIVATIZATION,
MARKET JUSTICE, AND THE
BUSINESS OF HEALTHCARE
Privatization of Health Care 
In the United States, healthcare is more than human service.
It contributes significantly to the economic well-being 
of the country. America has developed a unique model of

private and public (government) collaboration around
healthcare delivery, the education of health professionals,
and the licensing and accrediting of health institutions. This
unique American model enables people whose care or edu-
cation is paid for by the government to receive healthcare
or education in the private sector. In the case of healthcare,
doctors and nurses, who are not employees of the govern-
ment, provide this care. Students of nursing earn degrees in
schools operated by state and county governments or by pri-
vate institutions, some of which are for-profit enterprises.
Federal government scholarships and loans are given to all
students in the private and public sector. This public-private
model is different from the way that other nations provide
or pay for health or education. Global health systems and
health education programs operate from a political philos-
ophy that supports governments’ responsibility to provide
and pay for healthcare and education of health professionals.
These different philosophies around healthcare delivery and
manpower development invite comparisons of cost and out-
comes, discussions that are informative, are provocative, and
produce evidence. For example, the United States spent
more than 17.7 percent of its gross domestic product
(GDP) on healthcare in 2011; American health spending
almost doubled the spending of countries such as France
and Sweden and was two and one half times greater than
the average spending of Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) countries in 2011
(OECD, 2013b). The worldwide recession caused many
countries to lessen or slow their spending on healthcare; the
2011 data show no immediate change in healthcare indica-
tors in these OECD countries (OECD, 2013a). Significant
public health indicators, especially mortality, the burden of
disease, and infant mortality, still show that U.S. outcomes
fall behind those of countries in Western Europe and
Canada that spend less money on healthcare (Rubenstein,
2013). These data embarrass and distress American public
health experts and policymakers.
Even with these findings, supporters of private sector
involvement in healthcare observe that the U.S. healthcare
system not only contributes to the economy but also is the
envy of the world. America’s innovative technology is ex-
ported to many countries; its medical and nursing schools
and hospitals are training sites for multinationals. The
United States is also a major developer of new drugs and
technologies; its biomedical researchers collaborate with
and contribute to scientific advancement throughout the
world. Closer to home, hospitals, colleges, and universities
are large employers in their communities, providing jobs
to workers with wide-ranging educational backgrounds
and skills. The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics reported
that health careers compose 12 of the 20 fastest-growing
occupations in the United States (USDL, 2012). Health
careers are sought after; places in nursing, medical, and
pharmacy schools are coveted; and jobs in the healthcare
sector remain stable even in periods of recession (Ten 
recession-proof jobs, 2014). Hospitals and universities are
also major purchasers of goods and contribute to the eco-
nomic and political development in their communities.
Influence of Business on Healthcare
The goal of the private health and educational sectors is to
make these enterprises financially viable, competitive, and
attractive to patients, doctors, insurers, students, donors,
and investors. However, both profit and nonprofit health
and education sectors find that a focus on business can tran-
scend or filter out other values. The influence of business
on healthcare is evident in the language of the health com-
munity. It is not uncommon for patients to be described as
consumers, market shares, or covered lives and for nursing
service to be labeled a product line. Some schools view their
students as customers. Writers label this transformation in
the conceptualization of contemporary nursing, medicine,
and healthcare as the commoditization of healthcare (Budetti,
2008, p. 93). This commoditization creates a market in
which any vendor can provide health services or education
and in which decisions about where to purchase services or
where to attend school are based on convenience, cost, and
response to successful marketing of programs. Nurses have
experienced the influence of business in their practices, lan-
guage, and education. Some nurses have learned or adapted
to the market model. Nurses have also joined unions or ad-
vocated through professional organizations for legislation to
mandate safer practices, such as establishing staffing ratios
in acute care hospitals (Buerhaus & Needleman, 2000; 
Wallis, 2013). Others practice what they believe is impor-
tant to patients and more reflective of caring behavior and
social justice (Donley, 2010). A positive impact of market
forces on American healthcare and professional education
is visible in evidence-based practice, insistence that out-
comes are more important than processes, and in renewed
emphasis on success in the NCLEX and advanced practice
certification examinations.
Social justice principles are also integrated into cost-
benefit-burden ratios (Shi & Singh, 2010). These prin-
ciples emphasize the importance of patients’ perceptions
and wishes about diagnostic testing and therapeutic in-
terventions. Social justice puts patients and their well-
being at the center of clinical decision making. Advocates
of both market and social justice want healthcare out-
comes to show demonstrable benefits to patients and
positive cost-benefit ratios to society. Both modes of
practice are concerned about the rising costs of education
and healthcare. The United States invests about 18 per-
cent of its GDP on healthcare and spends on average
$8,233 per person for healthcare each year (Kane, 2012).
As noted previously, this is twice what is spent in Euro-
pean countries. It is not surprising that one major goal
of the ACA is cost reduction. However, lowering health
costs will require major changes in payment and delivery
modes. Current payment incentives in both fee-for-
service and managed care methodologies encourage
overtreatment. Both the federal government and private
insurers are considering new payment methodologies
based on performance and outcomes rather than pay-
ment based on the number of diagnostic or treatment
modalities. Payment for performance and value relies on
evidence-based practice and rewards positive outcomes
of care. Malpractice claims also influence the cost of
healthcare by raising insurance premiums, threatening
professional reputations, and triggering more diagnostic
procedures and treatment. Defensive medicine is rare in
other countries because patients and families do not sue
their healthcare providers. On the delivery side, the ACA
encourages providers to be cost conscious in their use of
treatment sites. Preference is given to ambulatory or
308
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

CHAPTER 18 Healthcare Reform and Global Issues      ●
309
community settings. Providers are asked to watch and
wait rather than to intervene, to prevent illness, and to
avoid or minimize complications. 
As noted, the U.S. health system is characterized by
competition among and between physicians, nurses 
(especially advanced practice registered nurses), hospitals,
healthcare systems, and insurers. Today, pharmacies, 
supermarkets, and ambulatory clinics also compete for in-
surance contracts, healthcare professionals (especially
nurse practitioners), and the right to practice primary
care. Hospitals and physician groups have opened neigh-
borhood clinics and surgi-centers and urgi-centers in
shopping malls. The availability of diagnostic and infor-
mational technology, changes in reimbursement (which
will be accelerated after ACA is fully implemented), and
the pressure to limit admissions and lengths of stay in 
hospitals favor primary care settings. Hospitals have
downsized, merged, and closed. Kodner and Spreeuwen-
berg (2002) describe another delivery system, called an
integrated delivery system, that brings together diagnostic
and primary care services in women’s health, geriatric
care, or sports medicine. The medical home is another ef-
fort to assure continuity and cost-effective care for persons
with limited incomes, providing comprehensive care to
children, adults, and families (Fisher, 2008). Integrated
systems and medical homes bring together a range of ser -
vices under one operating network. In true marketplaces,
competition drives down prices and allows the most com-
petent and efficient institutions and providers to prosper
(Feldstein, 2011). Yet no one engaged in American-style
healthcare notices that healthcare is not the best example
of a competitive marketplace. Illness is the decision
maker; lack of information and uncertainty about insur-
ance benefits interfere with free market choices. It is dif-
ficult to assess the “best buy” in gallbladder surgery or to
select the most qualified and experienced surgeon, even
for well-informed and Internet-savvy patients and fami-
lies. Regulation, originally designed to ensure patient
safety, also restricts competition. For example, mandated
nurse-patient staffing ratios in California limit hospitals’
ability to market and use their nurse-to-patient ratios to
attract patients and nurses. Political influences inhibit
competition. As noted, medical societies oppose revisions
of state nurse practice acts when studies continue to
demonstrate the competence, cost-effectiveness, and pos-
itive outcomes of care given by nurse practitioners (ACA,
2010; Adams, 2001; Laurent et al., 2005). 
Market justice is the term used to name the individu-
alism, self-interest, and profit orientation of healthcare in
the United States. Market forces can overshadow concern
for the common good and blur public responsibility for
the underserved (Budetti, 2008). 
The Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act of 2010
The latest effort to transform healthcare delivery and re-
duce rising health costs became law in 2010. The ACA or
“Obama Care” is designed to make health insurance acces-
sible and affordable. Its entry in the marketplace was
slowed because software glitches delayed online enrollment.
Although the law has supporters and opponents, it will
be at least 5 to 10 years before anyone will know if the
ACA achieves its ambitious goals: reductions in the num-
ber of uninsured people; control over healthcare costs;
improved access to health services; more favorable health-
care outcomes; increased use of preventive health services;
and a more effective primary care workforce (Preventive
care under the Affordable Care Act, 2014). Significant
questions revolve around the real cost of implementing
the ACA. It is unusual that any large federal program con-
forms to it early budget projections; the affordability of
ACA will be discussed for many years. Members of Con-
gress and the public have expressed their unwillingness to
extend governmental investment in healthcare. They fear
that more governmental intervention will affect their in-
terests, diminish their insurance coverage, and increase
their insurance premiums and taxes. Americans are also
wary of a single-payer system, like that found in Canada,
or any insurance system that can be labeled socialized med-
icine. Yet people like and depend on Medicare, Medicaid,
the state Children’s Health Insurance Programs (CHIPs),
and the military and veterans healthcare systems. Whether
the ACA will achieve a place on the list of valued govern-
ment health programs is an open question. In the interim,
energy, money, and time have been dedicated to encour-
age people, especially the young and those who are un-
derinsured or uninsured, to go online and explore
www.healthcare.gov. This Web site brings users into a
healthcare exchange in which they can view and compare
benefits and costs of various insurance products in their
state. They can also sign up for the insurance program
that meets their healthcare needs and their budget. If they
cannot afford to purchase an insurance policy, govern-
ment subsidies are available to them (Healthcare.gov,
2013). Several options embedded in the ACA make en-
rollment attractive: Young adults can remain covered
under their parents’ health plans until they are 26 years
old; persons with preexisting conditions can obtain health
coverage and not be charged extraordinary rates; preven-
tive health services are part of each plan; and the poverty
index under Medicaid has been raised to 133 percent of
the poverty level (ACA, 2010). The least attractive pro-
vision of ACA mandates that uninsured individuals and
employers with more than 50 workers must purchase
health insurance or pay fines. When the enrollment period
ended on March 31, 2014, 7.5 million people had signed up
for health insurance. Even with this positive response, the Con-
gressional Budget Office estimates that by 2020, 30 million
nonelderly Americans will still be uninsured (Bier, 2013).
This group will include those who are in the United States
without proper documents and people who did not sign up
for programs for which they or their children are eligible.
Although healthcare reform is the cornerstone of the
Obama Administration, lack of insurance is only one bar-
rier to receiving healthcare. Persons with health insurance
face cultural, linguistic, informational, and bureaucratic
hurdles that limit their access to care. The Institute of
Medicine (IOM) 2004 report on being without insurance
describes the consequences of lack of access to healthcare
services. More than 30 million working-age people, one
in seven workers, received too little medical care; received
it too late; were sicker; died sooner; and received poorer
care even when hospitalized for trauma (Committee on
the Consequences of Uninsurance, 2004).

Health Disparities
Health disparities is a term that describes one consequence
of inadequate access to healthcare. The Surgeon General’s
Report, Healthy People 2020, highlights health disparities
associated with age and developmental states, quality and
safety, and preparedness for natural and manmade disas-
ters and terrorism (USDHHS, 2010b). The importance
of addressing global health is emphasized in this report by
naming infections associated with well-recognized illnesses
as health disparities: tuberculosis, malaria, HIV/AIDs, and
vaccine-preventable diseases. The Surgeon General’s list
also includes emergent infectious diseases, SARS, H1N1
virus, influenza virus, and foodborne illnesses (Healthy
People 2020, 2011; USDHHS, 2010b). 
Safety
Almost 15 years ago, a trilogy of studies by the IOM
alerted the public, Congress, and providers about the fre-
quency, seriousness, and cost of medical error. Failure to
protect sick people, especially those who are hospitalized,
imposes unnecessary burdens on individuals and costs 
to the entire health system. Medical error can be classified
as a health disparity. The first IOM study, To Err Is
Human: Building a Safer Health System (Kohn, Corrigan,
& Donaldson, 2000), addressed the importance of devel-
oping a culture of safety in contemporary healthcare sys-
tems. The second IOM study, Crossing the Quality Chasm:
A New Health System for the 21st Century (Committee on
Quality Health Care, 2001), presented recommendations
to reduce error and enhance quality. The third study in
the series, Patient Safety: Achieving a New Standard of Care
(Committee on Data Standards for Patient Safety, 2004),
endorsed the need for a national infrastructure on patient
safety information. The government, accreditors, and
health systems have directed dollars and written standards
to improve patient safety and decrease error, especially
medication and transcription errors (The Joint Commis-
sion, 2014). However, more than a decade after the IOM
published its last study, medical error continues to increase
the burden of illness and healthcare costs. 
310
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
Review the Medicaid CHIP enrollments in your state at State at www.Medicaid.gov. and  at http://www
.medicaid.gov/Medicaid-CHIP-Program-Information/By-State/By-State.html. 
Question: What is the current Medicaid enrollment in your state, and how has your state responded to the
ACA provision to increase eligibility for Medicaid?
Source: State Medicaid and CHIP policies for 2014. Medicaid.gov. Retrieved from  www.medicaid.gov and http://www.
medicaid.gov/Medicaid-CHIP-Program-Information/By-State/By-State.html.
K E Y  P O I N T S
●Healthcare in the United States is a partnership between the public and private sectors and is a model of
collaboration around health delivery, finance, and professional educators.
●American-style healthcare emphasizes expensive acute care rather than cheaper prevention or primary
care. 
●The influence of business is evident in the language and ethics of healthcare. Two positive influences 
from the business community are a focus on outcomes rather than processes and the value placed on
evidence-based practice.
●Some critics of the public/private American plan blame rising healthcare costs and the failures to achieve
good outcomes on the involvement of business in healthcare and the desire for efficiency and economic
gain above the care of patients.
●Hospitals have merged and formed systems to ensure economies of scale, access to capital for 
expansion, and acquisition of physician practices.
●The simplicity and availability of technology, changed reimbursement, and the pressure to lower 
healthcare costs encourage surgi-centers, urgi-centers, and community-based clinics. 
●Medicare, a federal health insurance program that serves the elderly and disabled people who receive
Supplemental Social Security, has four Parts (A, B, C, and D), each offering different benefits and financing
mechanisms. 
●Medicaid is a means-tested federal/state health program that pays for medical and long-term care for 
five indigent groups: pregnant women, adults in families with dependent children, children, persons with
disabilities, and the poor elderly. Under the ACA, Medicaid will be expanded.

CHAPTER 18 Healthcare Reform and Global Issues      ●
311
REFERENCES
Abood, S. (2007). Influencing health care in the legislative
arena. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 12(1):3. 
Abrams, M., Nuzum, S., Mika, S., & Lawlor, G. (2011, January).
Realizing health reform’s potential: How the Affordable Care Act
will strengthen primary care and benefit patients, providers and
payers. New York: Commonwealth Fund. Retrieved from
http://www.commonwealthfund.org/Publications/Issue
-Briefs/2011/Jan/Strengthen-Primary-Care.aspx
Adams, D. (2001, October 15). Maryland examines doctors’ in-
fluence. AMA MedEd Update. Affordable Care Act bolsters the
primary care workforce in medically underserved communities,
2010. Retrieved from http://www.businesswire.com/news
/home/20101122006098/en/Affordable-Care-Act-Bolsters
-Primary-Care-Workforce#.VUUiPflViko
Aiken, L. H., Clarke, S., & Sloane, D. (2002). Hospital
staffing, organization and quality of care: Cross national
findings. Nursing Outlook, 50(5), 187–194.
Aiken, L. H., Sloane, D. M., Bruyneel, L., Van den Heede, K.,
Griffiths, P., Busse, R., Diomidous, M., Kinunen, J., Kozka,
M., Lesaffre, E., McHugh, M. D., Moreno-Casbas, 
M. T., Rafferty, A. M., Schwendimann, R., Scott, P. A., 
Tishelman, C., van Achterberg, T., & Sermeus, W. (2014).
Nurse staffing and education and hospital mortality in nine 
European countries: A retrospective observational study. 
The Lancet, 383(9931), 1824–1830. doi:10.1016/
50140-6736(13)62631-8.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2004a).
Leading initiatives: CLN programs. Retrieved from http://
www.aacn.nche.edu/cnl/about/cnl-programs 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2004b).
Position statement on the practice doctorate in nursing. 
Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/publications/
position/DNP positiontatement.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2006).
State legislative initiatives to address the nursing shortage. Re-
trieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/aacn-publications/
issue-bulletin/state-legislative 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2010a).
New AACN data show that enrollment in baccalaureate nurs-
ing programs expands for the 10th consecutive year. Retrieved
K E Y  P O I N T S — c o n t ’ d
●CHIP is a federal health insurance program designed for children who live in working-class families above
the federal poverty level.
●The nursing shortage represents a failure in both recruitment and retention. The shortage of nurses,
nurse practitioners, and nurse educators prompted Congress to integrate provisions from the Nurse
Reinvestment Act into the ACA.
●Legislation to mandate staffing ratios has been introduced in the Congress and several states to ensure
that a sufficient number of nurses are available to care for patients.
●The AACN has promoted new educational pathways, the clinical nurse leader (CNL) and the doctor of
nursing practice (DNP), and has encouraged schools of nursing to build and bridge programs from RN to
BSN or MSN and from BSN to PhD or DNP.
●Uninsured or underinsured Americans have limited access to care and suffer greater health disparities.
●Competence in health policy is within the reach of each nurse and student of nursing.
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. A student, who is not a nursing major, asks you whether she should buy health insurance from the government’s
healthcare Web site or pay a fine that is less costly than the insurance premium. She is 24 years old and is healthy.
Everyone in her family is healthy.
• How would you advise the student?
• Give reasons for your advice, citing the benefits of the ACA.
2. What populations are most at risk for health disparities? Is your fellow student at risk?
3. How do health disparities affect access, outcomes, and cost?
4. Identify three factors associated with recruitment and retention in nursing.
5. Discuss two advantages and two disadvantages of new educational pathways for nurses.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.

from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/news/articles/2010/
bacc-growth 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2010b).
Nursing faculty shortage. Retrieved from http://www.aacn
.nche.edu/media-relations/Faculty ShortageFS.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2011).
CNL programs. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu
/cnl/about/cnl-programs
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2014a).
DNP fact sheet. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/
media-relations/fact-sheets/dnp 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN).
(2014b). Leading initiatives. Retrieved from http://www
.aacn.nche.edu/cnl/about/cnl-programs 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2014c).
Special survey on vacant faculty positions for academic year
2013–2014. Retrieved from www.aacn.nche.edu
American Medical Association (AMA). (2006). Need to expose and
counter nurse doctoral programs (NDP) misrepresentation. Reso-
lution 211(A-06). Retrieved from https://www.ama-assn.org
/ssl3/ecomm/PolicyFinderForm.pl?site=www.ama-assn
.org&uri=/resources/html/PolicyFinder/policyfiles/HnE
/H-35.972.HTM
American Nurses Association. (2014). Nurses currently serving in
Congress. Retrieved from http://www.nursingworld.org
/MainMenuCategories/Policy-Advocacy/
Benner, P., Sutphen, M., Leonard, V., & Day, L. (2010). 
Educating nurses: A call for radical transformation. San 
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Bier, J. P. (2013, June 4). CBO: Obamacare will leave 30 million
uninsured. Retrieved from http://cnsnews.com/news/article/
cbo-obamacare-will-leave-30-million-uninsured 
Boccia, R. (2013, February 12). How the United States’ high
debt will weaken the economy and hurt Americans. The Her-
itage Foundation. Retrieved from http://www.heritage.org
/research/reports/2013/02/how-the-united-states-high-debt
-will-weaken-the-economy-and-hurt-americans 
Brassard, A., & Smolenski, M. (2011, September). Remov-
ing barriers to advanced practice registered nurse care:
Hospital privileges. AARP Public Institute Insight on 
the Issues. Retrieved from http://www.aarp.org/health
/doctors-hospitals/info-10-2011/Removing-Barriers-to
-Advanced-Practice-Registered-Nurse-Care-Hospital
-Privileges.html
Budetti, P. (2008). Market justice and US health care. Journal
of the American Medical Association, 299(1), 92–94.
Buerhaus, P., & Needleman, J. (2000). Policy implications of
research on nurse staffing and quality of patient care. Policy,
Politics, & Nursing Practice, 1(1), 5–15.
Bureau of Health Professions (BHP). (2013). Helping veterans 
become nurses. Retrieved from http://bhpr.hrsa.gov/veterans
/nurses.html.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2012). Fastest growing occupations.
Occupational Outlook Handbook. Retrieved from http://
www.bls.gov/ooh/fastest-growing.htm
Carney, B. (2005, November–December). The ethics of re-
cruiting foreign nurses. Health Progress, 86(6), 31–35. 
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). (2001, July). Long term
global demographic trends: Reshaping the geopolitical landscape.
Retrieved from https://www.cia.gov/library/reports/general
-reports-1/Demo_Trends_For_Web.pdf
Chaguturu, S., & Vallabhaneni, S. (2005). Aiding and abetting:
Nursing crisis at home and abroad. New England Journal of
Medicine, 553, 1761–1763.
Committee on Data Standards for Patient Safety. (2004). 
Patient safety: Achieving a new standard of care. Washington,
DC: National Academies Press. 
Committee on Quality Health Care. (2001). Crossing the quality
chasm: A new health system for the 21st century. Washington,
DC: National Academies Press.
Committee on the Consequences of Uninsurance (CCU).
(2004). Insuring America’s health: Principles and recommen-
dations. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Davies, R. (2008). The Bologna process: The quiet revolution
in nursing higher education. Nurse Education Today, 28,
935–942.
DeCuccio, M. H. (2014, March). The relationship between 
patient safety culture and patient outcomes: A systematic
review. Journal of Patient Safety, 1–8. 
Donley, R. (2010). Nursing, social justice and the marketplace.
Health Progress, 91(5), 35–37.
Donley, R., Flaherty, M. J., Sarsfield, E., Taylor, L., Maloni,
H., & Flanagan, E. (2002). The nursing shortage: What
does the Nurse Reinvestment Act mean to you? Online
Journal of Issues in Nursing, 8(1), Manuscript 5. Retrieved
from http://nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories
/ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/TableofContents
/Volume82003/No1Jan2003/ArticlesPreviousTopics
/NurseReinvestmentAct.html
Feldstein, P. (2011). Health care economics (7th ed.). New York:
Delmar.
Fisher, E. B. (2008). Building a medical neighborhood for the
medical home. New England Journal of Medicine, 359,
1202–1205. 
Global Health Workforce Alliance, World Health Organiza-
tion. (2008). The Kampala Declaration and Agenda for
Global Action. Retrieved from http://www.who.int
/workforcealliance/knowledge/resources/kampala
_declaration/en/ 
Healthcare.gov. (2013). Retrieved from www.healthcare.gov
/families/
Healthy People 2020. (2011). Retrieved from http://
healthypeople.gov/2020/default.aspx
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA).
(2014a). Advanced nursing education.Retrieved from http://
bhpr.hrsa.gov/nursing/grants/ane.html
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA).
(2014b). Mary Wakefield biography. (2014). Retrieved 
April 3, 2014, from http://www.hrsa.gov/about/
organization/biowakefield.html 
Hollander, C. (2014, March 20). Study: Long-term unemployed,
if they get a job, more likely to leave than settle into labor
force. National Journal. Retrieved from http://www
.nationaljournal.com/economy/study-long-term-unemployed
-if-they-get-a-job-more-likely-to-leave-than-settle-into-labor
-force-20140320
Juraschek, S. P., Zhang, X., Ranganathan, V., & Lin, V. (2011,
November 19). United States registered nurse workforce 
report card and shortage forecast. American Journal of 
Medical Quality. doi: 10.1177/1062860611416634.
Kalisch, B. J., Tschannen, D., Lee, H., & Friese, C. R. (2011).
Hospital variation in missed nursing care. American Journal
of Medical Quality, 26(4), 291–299. 
Kane, J. (2012, October 22). Health costs: How the U.S. compares
with other countries. PBS NewsHour. Retrieved from
http://www.pbs.org/newshour/rundown/health-costs-how
-the-us-compares-with-other-countries/?utm_source=UCSF+
Center+for+Healthcare+Value+List&utm_campaign=7be2f6f4
312
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

CHAPTER 18 Healthcare Reform and Global Issues      ●
313
Shi, L., & Singh, D. (2010). Essentials of the U.S. health system
(2nd ed.). Sudbury, MA: Jones & Bartlett. 
Smedley, B. D., Stith, A. Y., & Nelson, A. R. (Eds.). (2003).
Unequal treatment: Confronting racial and ethnic disparities
in health care. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Ten recession-proof jobs. (2014). Retrieved from http://www
.salary.com/Articles/ArticleDetail.asp?part=par1098
The Future of Nursing. (2010). Leading change, advancing
health. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
The Future of Nursing. (2014). Campaign for action. Retrieved
from http://campaignforaction.org/
The Joint Commission. (2014). Infection control. Retrieved
from http://www.jointcommission.org/topics/patient
_safety.aspx
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2010a). Registered nurse population: Findings from the 2008
National Sample of Registered Nurses. Rockville, MD: Health
Resources and Services Administration, Bureau of Health
Professions, Division of Nursing.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS).
(2010b). Healthy People 2020. Retrieved from http://www
.healthypeople.gov
U.S. Department of Labor (USDL). (2012). Bureau of Labor
Statistics’ employment projections, 2010–2020. Retrieved
from http://www.bls.gov/news.release/ecopro.t06.htm
U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs (USDVA). (2013). VA
nursing academic partnerships. Retrieved from http://www
.va.gov/oaa/vanap/default.asp
Wallis, L. (2013, August). Nurse-patient staffing ratios. 
American Journal of Nursing, 113(8), 222. 
White, K. M., Zangaro, G., Kepley, H. O., & Camacho, A.
(2014). The Health Resources and Services Administration
Data Collection. Public Health Reports Supplement 2: Nurs-
ing in 3D: Workforce diversity, health disparities, social deter-
minants of health increase. Retrieved from http://www
.publichealthreports.org/issueopen.cfm?articleID=3082
Wong, M. (2012, July 11). 3 big problems facing nursing
today. Health Careers. Retrieved from www.healthcareers
.com/article/3-big-problems-facing-nursing-today/170629
ONLINE RESOURCES
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
www.hhs.gov/healthcare/rights
Medicaid and Children’s Health Insurance Program
http://www.medicaid.gov/Medicaid-CHIP-Program-
Information/By-State/By-State.html
American Association of Colleges of Nursing
http://www.aacn.nche.edu
Healthy People 2010 and Healthy People 2020
http://www.healthypeople.gov
9b-Center+for+Healthcare+Value+-+Aug+Update&utm_
medium=email
Kodner, D. L., & Spreeuwenberg, C. (2002). Integrated care:
Meaning, logic, applications and implications, a discussion
paper. International Journal of Integrated Care. Retrieved
from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC1480401
Kohn, L., Corrigan, J., & Donaldson, M. (Eds.). (2000). To err
is human: Building a safer health system. Washington, DC:
National Academies Press.
Laurent, M., Reeves, D., Hermans, R., Braspenning, J., Grol,
R., & Sibbald, B. (2004). Substitution of doctors by nurses
in primary care. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,
July 2005, Issue 3.
Mechanic, D., & Reinhard, S. C. (2002). Contributions of
nurses to health policy: Challenges and opportunities. 
Nursing and Health Policy Review, 1(1), 7–15. 
Meleis, A., & Dracup, K. (2005). The case against the DNP: 
History, timing, substance, and marginalization. Retrieved
from http://www.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories
/ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/TableofContents
/Volume102005/No3Sept05/tpc28_216026.html
Mitchell, J. (2013). Who are the long-term unemployed? The
Urban Institute. Retrieved from http://www.urban.org
/uploadedpdf/412885-who-are-the-long-term-unemployed.pdf
NURSECORPS. (2014). Loan Repayment program. Retrieved
from http://www.hrsa.gov/loanscholarships/repayment
/nursing/nursecorpsloanrepaymentfactsheet.pdf
Nurses for a Healthier Tomorrow. (n.d.). Campaign news. Re-
trieved from http://www.nursesource.org/campaign_news
.html
Nursing Organizations Alliance. (2014). Nurse in Washington
Internship (NIWI). Retrieved from http://www.nann.org
/advocacy/content/niwi.html 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OCED). (2013a). Health at a glance 2013. Retrieved 
from http://www.oecd.org/els/health-systems/Health-at-a
-Glance-2013.pdf
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OCED). (2013b). OCED Health Data 2013. How does the
United States compare? Retrieved from http://www.oecd.
org/unitedstates/Briefing-Note-USA-2014.pdf
Oulton, J. J. (2006). The global nursing shortage: An overview
of issues and actions. Policy Politics Nursing Practice, 7, 34S.
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 (ACA).
(2010). Retrieved from http://burgess.house.gov
/UploadedFiles/hr3590_health_care_law_2010.pdf
Preventive care under the Affordable Care Act/HealthCare (2014).
Retrieved from https://www.healthcare.gov/preventive-care
-benefits/ 
Rubenstein, G. (2013, January). New health rankings: Of 17
nations, U.S. is dead last. The Atlantic. Retrieved from
http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2013/01
/new-health-rankings-of-17-nations-us-is-dead-last/267045

Expanding the Vision
314
Chapter Objectives
On completion of this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Evaluate trends in professional practice.
2. Continue to evaluate her or his personal philosophy.
3. Envision personal competencies in professional nursing practice.
4. Develop personal strategic initiatives for future contributions to professional 
nursing practice.
Competencies
Collaboration
Continued Competence
Involvement
●Rose Kearney-Nunnery
“Success comes to those who are 
too busy to be looking for it.”
Henry David Thoreau, 1817–1862
Key Terms
19

CHAPTER 19 Expanding the Vision     ●
315
We have seen nursing and healthcare change radically in
recent years. With restructuring of healthcare, nursing pro-
fessionals have responded with refinements, advance-
ments, and innovations. Nursing has moved from the
functional service mode of the mid-1900s to a cost-, 
community-, quality-, evidence-based–, and consumer-
focused orientation. It is no longer the nursing care plan for
the patient, but is now the collaborative care plan of the pa-
tient. And this care must be framed in the context of safety
and patient involvement in an environment with shortages
of healthcare providers in increasingly diverse settings.
To address the health of people, all health pro fessions
are now faced with the challenges of trans formation, in-
novation, and collaboration. We have opportunities and
challenges ahead. Collaboration must extend beyond the
structural walls of a single institution or the boundaries of
a community. In a global society, we can reach out to col-
leagues and patients physically or electronically. Shared
best practices are no longer restricted by geography. 
Evidence-based practices are a mandate limited only by
the needs of the patient population. Critical components
of professional practice continue to expand and be en-
hanced through technology. And we continually strive to
envision the challenges ahead. It is now time to expand
the vision and address these challenges.
HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS
IN THE 21ST CENTURY
Several initiatives have led to the changes in practice, in
the nursing profession, and throughout the health profes-
sions during the last decades that frame the opportunities
we face.
The Pew Health Professions
Commission
The Pew Charitable Trust Foundation established the
Pew Health Professions Commission, which worked
from 1989 to 1999 to address issues of healthcare re-
form and health policy across the professions. At that
time, the healthcare industry was in the midst of re-
designing services and roles and containing costs with
declining resources. The commission identified 21 spe-
cific competencies for health professionals for the year
2005. These competencies addressed ethics, critical
thinking and evidence-based practice, primary and pre-
ventative healthcare, access, diversity and health dispar-
ities,  consumer empowerment and outcomes, the use of
informatics and interdisciplinary practice, quality and
continuous improvement, leadership and public pol-
icy, and continued learning. Competencies are those
qualities that illustrate effectiveness and appropriateness
in our respective professional roles. In 1995, reports from
the commission produced strong reactions and responses
throughout the professional communities, with predic-
tions for redesign needed in education and healthcare
and for a rapid transformation in the health professions
workforce. The four r’s were redesign, re-regulate, right-
size, and restructure. The view of the healthcare system
presented by the commission was market-driven and 
integrated with more managed and primary care. In 
addition, this healthcare system and its professionals
would be more accountable to the public and responsive
to consumers. Recommendations directed at the profession
of nursing involved public accountability, recognition of
our assets, the need for clarity in our roles and functions,
and the need to meet the demands of the marketplace.
As a result of the findings of the commission and the as-
sociated reactions from different professional groups, O’Neil
(1998) identified strategic directions for nursing that in-
cluded addressing differentiated practice,  curricula changes,
core competencies, a commitment to research, the creation
of strategic partnerships, and enhanced leadership. Later that
year, however, the focus changed from the future competen-
cies of health professionals to a call for immediate attention
to patient safety.
The Institute of Medicine
Quality Chasm
As we have discussed previously, the health professions
came under fire with the release of reports from the Insti-
tute of Medicine (IOM) of the National Academies on the
high incidence of medical errors, changing the focus from
the future of healthcare to the current need to improve
safety for patients and healthcare consumers. The IOM is
a nonprofit organization designed to provide science-based
advice as a public service. Its reports, whether self-initiated
or as mandated from the U.S. Congress, are published
after rigorous research, careful deliberation from profes-
sionals from healthcare and other scientific and profes-
sional disciplines, and a peer review process (IOM, 2013,
p. 1). The 2001 report from the IOM, Crossing the Quality
Chasm, proposed rules for the health system in the 
21st century for quality healthcare that were the basis for
six overall aims—that care should be safe, effective, pa-
tient-centered, timely, efficient, and equitable (IOM,
2001). A further report after a Health Professions Educa-
tion Summit led to the identification of the five core com-
petencies for all health professionals:
●Provide patient-centered care.
●Work in interdisciplinary teams.
●Employ evidence-based practice.
●Apply quality improvement.
●Utilize informatics. (Greiner & Knebel, 2003)
Patient safety and effectiveness of outcomes became
major national objectives and directed additional atten-
tion to nursing. Research by the Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality (AHRQ) focused on expanding the
knowledge base on how the quality of the healthcare
workplace affects the quality of healthcare provided, es-
pecially in the areas of workload and working conditions,
effects of stress and fatigue, reducing adverse events, and
the organizational climate and culture. Patient outcomes
were now being investigated, along with nursing-sensitive
indicators and factors that promote safe and effective
practice.
In late 2003, nursing itself was the focus of the IOM
in their report, Keeping Patients Safe: Transforming the
Work Environment of Nurses. The IOM’s Committee on
the Work Environment and Patient Safety provided spe-
cific recommendations to both acute care and long-term

care organizations on issues of management practices,
workforce capability, work design, and the organizational
safety culture (Page, 2004, p. 3). The following risk fac-
tors were identified for patient safety in nursing work 
environments:
●More acutely ill patients
●Shorter hospital stays
●Redesigned work
●Frequent patient turnover
●High staff turnover
●Long work hours
●Rapid increases in new knowledge and technology
●Increased interruptions and demands on nurses’ time
(Page, 2004, pp. 37–45)
Although these facts were no surprise, their identifica-
tion as risk factors to patients was significant. Nurses have
been reporting these factors, but now they were included
in a major national report. This committee also docu-
mented the national shortages of both nurses and nursing
assistants. Recommendations to nursing leadership and
management on how to address the deficiencies in the
documented work environments called attention to the
following areas:
●Leadership, communication skills, collaborative 
decision making, and resources
●Emphasis on safety goals along with productivity and
financial goals
●Management practices promoting safety, trust, change,
engagement, and learning collaboratives
●External support for evidence-based management 
practices
In addition, at the staff level, the committee found
“strong evidence that nurse staffing levels, the knowledge
and skills level of nursing staff, and the extent to which
workers collaborate in sharing their knowledge and skills
affect patient outcomes and safety” (Page, 2004, p. 161).
This finding provides further support for the need to in-
corporate the five core competencies into professional
nursing practice on a consistent basis. Nurses consistently
strive to provide patient-centered care, but, for positive
patient outcomes, this must also be done in light of the
other core competencies, given the nature of the healthcare
environment. Evolving technologies, evidence-based col-
laborative practice, and continued competence are essen-
tial components for quality improvement in the delivery
of healthcare to consumers.
In subsequent years, the IOM investigated health dis-
parities, the role of the government (including Medicare),
rural health, healthcare reimbursement practices, and
mental health conditions among other quality improve-
ment initiatives, including the objectives for Healthy Peo-
ple 2020. Of particular note were two studies mandated
by the United States Congress, on insurance and reim-
bursements and preventing medication errors. In July
2006, the IOM report on Preventing Medication Errors
presented information available on the incidence of med-
ication errors in acute care settings, long-term care, and
in ambulatory care—including errors in the homes of
consumers—in an effort to develop an agenda for the na-
tion to reduce preventable errors and adverse drug events
and enhance medication safety. Although the incidence
rates were approximated based on the data, the report did
emphasize that these rates were most likely underesti-
mates, based on available and reportable data and the in-
cidence of adverse events. It was reported, however, that
at least 25 percent of all harmful adverse drug events are
preventable (Aspden, Wolcott, Bootman, & Cronenwett,
2006, p. 4). 
Based on the rules from the earlier Quality Chasm
Report in 2001, the IOM (Aspden et al., 2006) recom-
mended the transformation of the entire system to a 
patient-centered, integrated-use system with specific action
agendas to support consumer-provider partnership. The
seven recommendations provided by the IOM (Aspden 
et al., 2006) focused further on:
●Consumer empowerment for self-medication
 management
●Improvement and standardization of resources by 
governmental agencies
●Implementation of patient-information and  
decision-support technologies nationwide
●Improved labeling, packaging, and distribution, 
including studies on use of samples
●Establishment of standards for drug information
technologies, including design and alert systems
●Broad, federally funded research on safe and appropri-
ate medication use across settings, focused on error
prevention
●Use of legislation, regulation, accreditation, payment
mechanisms, and the media for adoption of practices,
technologies, and professional behaviors focused on
safety and error reduction
Collaborative efforts among professionals, governmen-
tal agencies, suppliers, educators, and regulators with the
consumer involved in the process were a mandate. The
IOM Committee on the Work Environment and Patient
Safety (Page, 2004) identified necessary patient safeguards in
the environment (Box 19.1). 
However, in a report 10 years later on these recom-
mendations (RWJF, 2014), the following areas were noted
316
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
BOX 19.1
Necessary Patient Safeguards in the
Work Environment
●Governing boards that focus on safety
●Leadership and evidence-based management 
structures and processes
●Eﬀective nursing leadership
●Adequate staﬃng
●Organizational support for ongoing learning and 
decision support
●Mechanisms that promote interdisciplinary
 collaboration
●Work design that promotes safety
●Organizational culture that continually strengthens
patient safety
Source: Page, A. (Ed.). (2004). Keeping patients safe: Transforming the work
environment of nurses. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.

with positive progress but also with recommendations for
further transformation in the workplace:
●Creating work environments that promote patient
safety
●Ensuring adequate nurse staffing
●Curbing unprofessional and disruptive behaviors
●Harnessing nurse leadership
●Fostering interprofessional collaboration (p. 2)
Evidence-based practice is the standard, with a focus
on safety, positive patient outcomes, and the used of
known and evolving technologies. Changes in the practice
environment have received serious attention, with the
focus on safety and patient outcomes.
A Call for Change and Leadership
by Nursing
In 2008, a two-year collaborative initiative between the IOM
and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (RWJF) started
looking at the nursing profession and the need for more than
change, but transformation. The report by the committee was
released in October 2010 with four key messages and eight
recommendations (Table 19.1). However, as voiced in one
of the follow-up briefings to the public, this was not to be a
report to sit on a shelf but rather a call to action.
The key messages focus on more consistency of ad-
vanced practice nurse (APRN) practice among the states
and licensing jurisdictions, the development of residency
programs across settings and practice areas, seamless and on-
going education for nurses, active nursing involvement in
redesign of the healthcare system, and better workforce data
systems. Their report also supported implementation of the
APRN Consensus Model (APRN Consensus Work Group &
the National Council of State Boards of Nursing APRN
Advisory Committee, 2008) and the National Council of
State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN) Nurse Licensure Compact
(NCSBN, 2014). The recommendations provide directives
to the federal and state governments, regulatory bodies, 
accrediting agencies, healthcare providers, funding agencies,
educational programs, and individual nurses. As stated by
the IOM (2011), “together, these groups have the power to
transform the healthcare system to provide seamless, afford-
able, quality care that is accessible to all, patient-centered,
and evidence-based and leads to improved health outcomes”
(p. S-13). These recommendations call for leadership, col-
laboration, and action.
The Professional Nursing Practice
Environment
Leadership, collaboration, and action in the practice envi-
ronment are essential for patient safety but also for the sat-
isfaction, involvement, and commitment of dedicated
healthcare professionals. One area that is receiving serious
consideration at the national and state levels is adequacy of
staffing. In addition, the American Nurses Association
(ANA) has been actively looking at the roles of both the
employer and the nurse to promote healthy work hours
and consider the effect of fatigue on safety for both patients
and nurses. The focus on productivity and appropriate
staffing has led to a renewed emphasis on quality outcomes.
Indicators that are nursing sensitive, such as infection rates,
patient satisfaction, and nursing hours per patient day, are
being studied in relation to staffing. As noted by Clark 
et al. (2005), we cannot simply tell staff to do more,
“rather, we need to create systems that support staff in their
CHAPTER 19 Expanding the Vision     ●
317
ON LIN E CON SULT 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 
(AHRQ) at
http://www.ahrq.gov
Institute of Medicine (IOM) at
http://www.iom.edu
TABLE 19.1
IOM and RWJF Report on the Future of Nursing
Key Messages
Committee Recommendations
Source: Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2011). The future of nursing: Leading change, advancing health. Retrieved from http://www
.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=12956
1. Nurses should practice to the full extent of their
education.
2. Nurses should achieve higher levels of education
and training through an improved education 
system that promotes seamless academic 
progression.
3. Nurses should be full partners, with physicians
and other healthcare professionals, in redesigning
healthcare in the United States.
4. Effective workforce planning and policy-making
require better data collection and an improved
information infrastructure.
1. Remove scope of practice barriers.
2. Expand opportunities for nurses to lead and diffuse
 collaborative improvement efforts.
3. Implement nurse residency programs.
4. Increase the proportion of nurses with a baccalaureate
degree to 80 percent by 2020.
5. Double the nurses with a doctorate by 2020.
6. Ensure that nurses engage in lifelong learning.
7. Prepare and enable nurses to lead change to advance
health.
8. Build an infrastructure for the collection and analysis of 
interprofessional healthcare workforce data.

efforts and set them up for success” (p. 8). In addition to
staffing numbers, a body of research has evolved from
Linda Aiken and her associates and others on educational
preparation and patient complexity and nurse sensitive
measures. The complexity of the environment, the acuity
of the patients, and the distractions nurses face are serious
factors in contemporary healthcare settings. In ad dition
to current concerns on adequacy of staffing to meet the
patient acuity needs are the projections of nursing short-
ages in the future with deferred retirements taking place
along with an increased demand for nursing professionals.
In addition, in the 10-year follow-up report to Keeping
Patients Safe, ensuring adequate nurse staffing was one of
the areas identified for further transformation, and the re-
port stated that “staffing adequacy is a function of the
composition as well as the size of the nursing workforce
and concerted efforts are now underway to increase the
education level of nurses” (RWJF, 2014, p. 4). An in-
crease in baccalaureate-prepared nurses is further sup-
ported by the American Association of College of Nursing
(AACN, 2014a), which has documented “the unique
value that baccalaureate-prepared nurses bring to the
practice setting” (p. 1).
The American Association of Colleges of Nursing
(AACN) has identified selected characteristics of work en-
vironments that support professional nursing practice
(AACN, 2002):
●Magnet status
●Preceptorships and residencies
●Differentiated practice
●Interdisciplinary collaboration
Recognition as a Magnet hospital requires that applicant
healthcare organizations meet specific eligibility criteria, in-
cluding strong nursing leadership in line with national stan-
dards of practice. From the original model that identified
14 forces of magnetism, a revised model for the Magnet
Recognition Program® was introduced in 2008 and con-
tained the following five components:
●Transformational Leadership 
●Structural Empowerment 
●Exemplary Professional Practice
●New Knowledge, Innovation, and Improvements 
●Empirical Quality Results (ANCC, 2014)
These five components contain the 14 Forces of Mag-
netism and guide the self-assessment requirement for the
institution applying for Magnet recognition Retention
and appropriate staffing are characteristics of Magnet 
organizations. The Joint Commission (2013) identified
that its accreditation standards, the Baldrige quality stan-
dards, and the AACN Magnet Recognition Model com-
ponents contain many parallels that share the following
characteristics:
●Were developed using a consensus-building approach
●Are built on a set of core values and principles
●Use a framework of important functions that cross 
internal organizational structures
●Recognize organizations as systems
●Focus on continuous improvement in outcomes and
organization performance
●Do not prescribe specific structures
●Promote the use of organization self-assessment (p. 1)
Retention is enhanced when professionals have had an
opportunity to expand their knowledge base and skills
with a rapidly changing practice environment through
preceptorships for students and residencies for graduates.
The implementation of residency programs for new
nurses from prelicensure programs and advanced practice
programs, as well as when transitioning to a new clinical
practice area, was one of the recommendations from the
IOM (2011). Finkelman and Kenner (2012) describe ef-
fective residency programs with “graduated patient care
responsibilities, additional educational experiences and
competency development, professional socialization, and
support for the critical transition during the first post
graduation year” (pp. 72–73). Mentorship is also an im-
portant component to advance the skills of the neophyte
and of the seasoned clinician. Matching the knowledge
and skills of the professionals with the requirements of
the position is an ongoing consideration. This can be pro-
moted through mentorship programs and activities for
continuing education, competency, and differentiated
practice.
Differentiated nursing practice, the third charac teristic
identified by AACN in the supportive practice environ-
ment, is illustrated through advancement structures in the
organization based on experience, additional education,
certification, or other identified indicators of excellence
(AACN, 2002, pp. 6–7). Implementation of differentiated
practice has historically been difficult; the combination of
skills matched to the position requirements must be de-
lineated. As Nelson (2002) proposed more than a decade
ago, it is not feasible to try to differentiate practice along
current educational points of entry when the roles have
not been translated into the practice setting (p. 7). And
this remains the case, as clinical ladders are inconsistent
and diverse. However, the need for lifelong learning and
a seamless educational system have been highlighted by
the IOM (2011).
Interdisciplinary collaboration, illustrated through
teamwork, trust, shared responsibility, and respect, also
enhances patient outcomes. The AACN (2002) pro-
posed eight hallmarks of excellence in the professional
nursing practice environment. Consider how these hall-
marks for the practice environment (Table 19.2) also
address the core competencies for all health professionals
identified by the IOM. Note the focus on quality care
for patients, collaboration, competency, and leadership
throughout. Again, we see collaboration and leadership
in collaborative improvement efforts in healthcare set-
tings in the recent recommendations from the IOM
(2011).
COLLABORATION
Essential activities of contemporary practice include
strategic partnerships, leadership, and collaboration. As
stated by the AACN (2011), “in a redesigned health sys-
tem a greater emphasis will be placed on cooperation,
communication, and collaboration among all health pro-
fessionals in order to integrate care in teams and assure
that care is continuous and reliable” (p. 22). However,
collaboration and collegiality must both occur within the
profession and be interdisciplinary. The initial step in col-
laboration and collegiality is valuing our colleagues who
318
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

provide clinical nursing care, medical care, specialty care,
advanced clinical practice, education, administration, or
research. Collaboration and collegiality are both intradis-
ciplinary, within the discipline of nursing, and interdis-
ciplinary, among other healthcare professionals.
The healthcare team should be an ideal example
of collaboration, especially for effective communication
(see Chapter 6). Collaboration involves actively working
together to meet some identified goal, such as the pa-
tient’s treatment goals. Within the discipline, nurses from
each area of nursing would contribute to that goal—the
admission nurse or discharge planner, the student in a
clinical rotation, the operative nurse, the acute care nurse
practitioner, and other professional nurses providing care
to raise the patient’s level of well-being. However, as
noted by Weston (2006), this sense of teamwork may be
particularly challenging for the four different generations
of nurses in practice—veterans, baby boomers, generation
Xers, and millennials—with their different characteristics
and perspectives that can either enhance or traumatize the
practice environment. And the complexity increases with
the addition of clinicians from other healthcare disci-
plines. Collaboration must also extend beyond the disci-
ple of nursing for effective, efficient, and patient-centered
care. In times of limited staffing and growing responsi-
bilities, seeing the broader picture with collaboration is
necessary to ensure effective patient outcomes. As noted
by the IOM (2013), “healthcare delivery organizations
should develop organizational cultures that encourage
continuous improvement by incentivizing the incorpora-
tion of best practices, transparency, open communication,
staff empowerment, coordination, teamwork, and mutual
respect” (p. 6).
A cooperative spirit with collaboration will bring more
efficient achievement of goals and greater personal reward
for both colleagues and patients. Questions of authority
and responsibility arise with this cooperative or collabo-
rative spirit, such as who is the leader of the team and
who is responsible for ensuring quality patient outcomes.
This ownership of responsibility must be shared in a true
CHAPTER 19 Expanding the Vision     ●
319
TABLE 19.2
Hallmarks of Professional Practice and Core Competencies
Core Competencies for Health Professionals†
Hallmarks of the Professional 
Work in 
Employ 
Apply Quality 
Nursing Practice 
Provide Patient-
Interdisciplinary 
Evidence-Based 
Improvement
Environment*
Centered Care
Practice Teams
Practice 
Manifest a philosophy of clinical 
✓
✓
✓
✓
care emphasizing quality, safety, 
interdisciplinary collaboration, 
continuity of care, and 
professional accountability.
Recognize contributions of 
✓
✓
✓
✓
nurses’ knowledge and 
expertise to clinical care quality 
and patient outcomes.
Empower nurses’ participation 
✓
✓
✓
✓
in clinical decision making and 
organization of clinical care 
systems.
Promote executive-level 
✓
✓
✓
✓
nursing leadership.
Maintain clinical advancement 
✓
✓
✓
✓
programs based on education, 
certification, and advanced 
preparation.
Demonstrate professional 
✓
✓
✓
✓
development support for nurses.
Create collaborative relationships 
✓
✓
✓
✓
among members of the healthcare 
provider team. 
*Source: American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2002). Hallmarks of the professional nursing practice environment.
Washington, DC: Author.
†Source: Greiner, A. C., & Knebel, E. (Eds.). (2003). Health professions education: A bridge to quality. Washington, DC: Institute
of Medicine.

collaborative relationship rather than create “turf” issues
in a more competitive environment. The goal is the 
effectiveness of the patient outcomes with collaboration
as the means to reach the goal. Effective communication
and clinical skills, along with trust, leadership, and colle-
giality, are important attributes of the healthcare profes-
sional collaborating with other healthcare professionals.
Consider the lessons for collaboration described by 
Gardner (2005) that are listed in Box 19.2.
Suppose that you are on an acute care unit one morn-
ing when the pulmonologist arrives to see his patient
with COPD hospitalized with respiratory complications.
You know that the respiratory therapist is currently
working with the patient on a treatment. How will you
capitalize on this opportunity for interdisciplinary col-
laboration for home care since you know all parties in-
volved, the patient’s wife is present but concerned about
at-home compliance, and there is a need for good 
follow-up and discharge teaching? How can you get all
parties involved and create a win-win situation for all,
focused on the efficacy of treatment for this patient?
These skills are critical for the efficient use of scarce
human and physical resources in a consumer environ-
ment that must be focused on effectiveness of patient
outcomes and overall safety.
Although collaboration involves actively working to-
gether to meet some identified goal, collegiality is sharing
responsibility and authority to achieve a goal or prescribed
outcome. Power and responsibility for outcomes related
to patients’ health and well-being are invested in more
than one person. Mutual respect and collaboration are
important components of a collegial relationship. All col-
leagues contribute to the intended goals and are account-
able for the outcomes.
Collaboration is specified by the American Nurses As-
sociation as a standard of professional performance in its
document Nursing: Scope and Standards of Practice. Recall
that this document contains six standards of practice 
reflective of the nursing process and ten  standards of pro-
fessional performance as expected professional behaviors,
with objectives and measurement criteria for all of the
standards (ANA, 2010a). Collaboration is demonstrated
by virtue of partnerships with the healthcare consumer
along with other healthcare providers for positive patient
outcomes and includes effective communication, consul-
tation, group process, negotiation and conflict manage-
ment skills, documentation, referrals within and outside
the nursing discipline, and effective teamwork. Additional
measurement criteria have been added for the advanced
practice nurse and specialty nurse to accommodate the ad-
ditional expectations in their respective leadership roles in
interdisciplinary practice.
Nursing professionals are responsible for promoting col-
laboration and collegiality among the professions. As de-
scribed throughout this text, healthcare delivery systems are
becoming more and more integrated and interdisciplinary.
In our present multidisciplinary healthcare system, collabo-
ration must be effective among all members of the various
health professions and care disciplines. 
Almost 20 years ago, the President’s Advisory Com-
mission on Consumer Protection and Quality in the
Healthcare Industry (1998) reported that “the challenge
for industry leaders is to harness the tremendous talent,
energy, and commitment of the 10 million people who
have been drawn to work in the healthcare industry be-
cause of its strong sense of mission” (p. 197). Since then,
the IOM report Keeping Patients Safe has recommended
that healthcare organizations “should take action to sup-
port interdisciplinary collaboration by adopting such in-
terdisciplinary practice mechanisms as interdisciplinary
rounds, and by providing ongoing formal education and
training in interdisciplinary collaboration for all healthcare
professionals on a regularly scheduled, continuous basis”
(Page, 2004, p. 216). Then, in 2010, the IOM recom-
mendations for nursing went even further:
Private and public funders, healthcare organizations,
nursing education programs, and nursing associations
should expand opportunities for nurses to lead and man-
age collaborative efforts with physicians and other mem-
bers of the healthcare team to conduct research and to
redesign and improve practice environments and health-
care  systems. (IOM, 2011, p. S-9)
Following this recommendation from the IOM in the
Future of Nursing: Leading Change, Advancing Health has
been the call for educational revisions and enhanced inter-
professional education and collaboration. The American
Association of Colleges of Nursing and the American Or-
ganization of Nurse Executives (2012) developed guiding
principles for academic-practice relationships to include
nursing and other professions, corporations, governmental
entities, and foundations (p. 1). Mutual goals, shared vi-
sion, joint efforts, transparency, commitment, communi-
cation, and lifelong learning were common threads in the
eight principles. Thibault (2013) further identifies the fol-
lowing six areas for reform in the education of all health
professionals:
●Increased interprofessional education
●Clinical education that is longitudinal and community
based
320
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
BOX 19.2
Characteristics for Collaboration 
●Know yourself—your biases, values, and goals.
●Value and manage diversity.
●Develop constructive conﬂict resolution skills.
●Create win-win situations.
●Demonstrate clinical competence, cooperation, and
ﬂexibility.
●Allow time and practice for skills in collaboration
●Use all multidisciplinary opportunities for  building
partnerships.
●Appreciate that collaboration can occurspontaneously.
●Be reﬂective, seek feedback, and admit mistakes for
autonomy and unity.
●Understand that collaboration is not required in all
situations.
Source: Adapted from Gardner, D. B. (2005). Ten lessons in collabora-
tion. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing. Retrieved from http://www
.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/ANAMarketplace/ANAPe
riodicals/OJIN/TableofContents/Volume102005/No1Jan05/tpc26
_116008.html

●In addition to biological sciences, greater awareness of
systems, quality improvement, safety, economics, and
population health
●Competency-based education and ensuring lifelong
learning
●Greater incorporation of new educational technologies
including online and simulation experiences
●Faculty development for educational innovation 
(pp. 1929–1931)
Previously, the IOM also identified two necessary pre-
cursors to collaboration—individual clinical competence
and mutual trust and respect—and the following four
characteristics of collaboration:
●Shared understanding of goals and roles
●Effective communication
●Shared decision making
●Conflict management. (Page, 2004, pp. 212–213)
In addition to these characteristics is the necessary in-
gredient of continued competence to maintain safety and
quality care for the patient and effective interdisciplinary
practice.
COMPETENCE
The issue of competence is vital to all professionals. Al-
though not restricted to nursing, professional competence
has received greater attention after the reports from both
the Pew Health Professions Commission and the IOM.
Professional competence is of great concern to health pro-
fessionals, their regulatory bodies, and consumers. It is an
issue of definition, ownership, policy development, and
demonstration. Regulatory bodies are required to assure
the public of safe and competent professional practice by
the professionals they regulate. But definitions vary by
statute, and measurement issues are complex. Consider
two different ways in which competence can be measured:
by continuing practice and through continuing educa-
tion. But then the following question arises: Is the con-
tinuing practice safe and effective in meeting appropriate
patient outcomes using evidence-based practice? Or, in
the case of continuing education, are the programs or ses-
sions directed at the area of practice to improve and en-
hance practice or merely counting hours toward license
renewal without a focus on patients and responsible pro-
fessional practice? For registered nurses, some states or ju-
risdictions require continuing education in the nurses’
practice area, and some specify required content in addi-
tion to self-selected topical areas. Other states or jurisdic-
tions provide a selection of options that can be pursued
in a selected time frame. And still other states are silent
on the demonstration of competence in the renewal re-
quirement. In fact, measurement issues are further com-
plicated by the different levels of practice that must be
regulated—new graduate, continued practice, and ad-
vanced practice.
Entry into practice occurs through licensure on the basis
of performance on a psychometrically sound instrument,
the National Council Licensure Exam (NCLEX-RN®). Ad-
vanced practice is regulated differently but often through
advanced education and the certification process. But 
how should the regulators monitor continued professional
competence for the clinician not governed by specialty prac-
tice certification, and what about variable requirements 
for recertification? And consider the role of both the nurse
and the employer in monitoring continued professional
competence.
The issue of continued competence is not restricted to
state and federal regulatory bodies. As described in Nurs-
ing’s Social Policy Statement (ANA, 2010b), regulation of
practice also includes the following:
●Professional regulation, including a professional code
of ethics, standards of practice, educational and spe-
cialty certification requirements, and a defined scope
of practice
●Legal regulation, through statutory and regulatory 
requirements
●Institutional policies and procedures for safe,  effective,
and evidence-based practice
●Self-regulation, in terms of personal accountability and
demonstration of continued competence
Continued competence is an issue of both a profes-
sional responsibility within each of the core competencies
and one of patient safety. In 1996, the National Council
of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN) illustrated a collab-
orative model for continued competence that included the
individual nurse, the employer, the regulatory body, the
educator, and the consumer of nursing care (NCSBN,
2005a), but further work and understanding of best prac-
tices continues for a system that is reliable, valid, and fea-
sible. In some Canadian provinces and in other countries
like New Zealand, a portfolio system to document their
continued competence has been required of individual
nurses. This system requires critical reflection and assess-
ment of continued competence by the nurse with docu-
mentation of evidence in a portfolio, often including some
form of peer review in the process. The International
Council of Nurses (2006) encourages reflective practice
and believes that individual nurses are responsible and ac-
countable for their practice and for maintaining continued
competence but also identifies the following key stake-
holders as contributing to the continued competence of
the nurse:
●Public and patients 
●Government 
●Regulatory bodies
●The individual nurse
●The employer
●The education community
●National nursing associations (pp. 1–2)
Although continued competence is ultimately the pro-
fessional responsibility of the individual clinician, the pro-
fessional education level must be appropriate to the
defined scope of practice and professional standards, the
healthcare employer must ensure the com petence in the
practice setting, and the patients must be assured (and
should assure themselves) of safe and effective practice. As
noted by the NCSBN (2005b), “responsibility for inter-
preting and enforcing nursing scopes of practice, including
the determination of the appropriate education, training
and experience necessary to support a given scope of prac-
tice, rests solely with the boards of nursing” (p. 1). How-
ever, in the case of advanced practice with disparities of
CHAPTER 19 Expanding the Vision     ●
321

scope and supervision requirements among the states, the
IOM (2011) has recommended that “states with unduly
restrictive regulations should be urged to amend them to
allow advanced practice registered nurses to provide care
to patients in all circumstances in which they are qualified
to do so” (p. S-9). Still, there will be concerns raised as to
continued competence. 
The professional performance standard of education
of the Scope and Standards of Practice states that for con-
tinued competence, “the nurse attains knowledge and
competency that reflects current nursing practice”
(ANA, 2010a, p. 49). In addition, nurses are expected
to perform appropriate to the situation, setting, re-
sources, and the person, along with engagement in life-
long learning and ongoing assessment of competencies
(ANA, 2010b, p. 13). Ongoing educational activities
occur through continuing education (CE)—formal,
noncredit, and on-the-job. Interestingly, in research con-
ducted by the NCSBN, respondents “rated contribu-
tions of work experience, initial professional education,
and mentors above the contributions of CE in assisting
them to their current levels of ability” (Smith, 2003, 
p. 25). Concerning continued learning in the work en-
vironment, the IOM report Keeping Patients Safe recom-
mended that healthcare organizations should “dedicate
budgetary resources equal to a defined percentage of the
nursing payroll to support nursing staff in their ongoing
acquisition and maintenance of knowledge and skills”
(Page, 2004, p. 210). Further, the concept of a learning
environment is extended beyond its start in an educa-
tional setting to one that is encouraged in the practice
setting and that must address interdisciplinary practice.
But budgetary considerations have resulted in associated
cuts in funding education departments and programs in
some agencies. A learning environment in the practice
setting supports the core competencies and ongoing pro-
fessional competence. The individual professional must
determine, seek, request, and utilize resources to main-
tain his or her continued competence in the safe and ef-
fective performance of nursing practice activities. In
addition, the IOM (2011) recently recommended an 
increase in the proportion of nurses with both baccalau-
reate and doctoral degrees, along with a separate recom-
mendation on “lifelong learning to gain the competencies
needed to provide care for diverse populations across the
lifespan” (p. S-11).
Although continued competence is ultimately 
the professional responsibility of the individual 
clinician, the professional education level must be
appropriate to the defined scope of practice 
and professional standards, the healthcare
employer must ensure the competence in 
the practice setting, and the patient must be
assured of safe and effective practice.
Competent practice in the unique environment ad-
dresses the metaparadigm concepts of nursing: human be-
ings, health, environment, and nursing. The individual
nurse is responsible and accountable for the demonstration
of competent practice. However, assurance of this compe-
tence to the consumer is a shared responsibility. As stated
in their Position Statement on Professional Role Compe-
tence, the ANA (2008) has stated:
Assurance of competence is the shared responsibility of
the profession, individual nurses, professional organiza-
tions, credentialing and certification entities, regulatory
agencies, employers, and other key stakeholders. (p. 1)
The demonstration of competence requires skillful, ef-
fective, and evidence-based practice in both nursing and
interdisciplinary endeavors, with a view of the core com-
petencies and the challenges ahead.
Both professional and personal contributions are the
ingredients of your professional career. Skills, though,
which are the ingredients of professional nursing prac-
tice, require ongoing refinement. The International
Council of Nurses (ICN, 2007) states that “individual
nurses have a responsibility to plan and develop their ca-
reers through continuous self-assessment and goal set-
ting” (p. 1). This includes personal and professional
development to remain flexible, analytical, reflective, and
innovative. As noted by the ICN (2013), nurses need ap-
propriate ongoing education as well as lifelong learning
to practice competently within their scope of practice 
(p. 2). Your skills and abilities will be enhanced through
ongoing knowledge development for evidence-based
practice and by your views on practice, human beings,
the environment, health, and nursing.
TAKING THE LEAD
The recommendations and changes in the healthcare 
environment present all nurses with additional career 
opportunities and responsibilities, whether they are in
acute, ambulatory, home, or long-term care settings or
in a nontraditional setting as a clinician, case manager,
researcher, administrator, consultant, educator, advanced
practice nurse, or nurse entrepreneur.
The AACN (2008a) Essentials of Baccalaureate Educa-
tion for Professional Nursing Practice are designed to pre-
pare the generalist nurse with a broad preparation to
address many of these career opportunities. From a firm
foundation in liberal education, experiences throughout 
a baccalaureate nursing curriculum focus on patient-
centered care that addresses quality improvement, safety,
322
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
ON LIN E CON SULT 
American Nurses Association (ANA) at
http://www.nursingworld.org
American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC)
http://www.nursecredentialing.org
/default.aspx
IOM at
http://iom.edu/Reports/2010/The-Future-of
-Nursing-Leading-Change-Advancing-Health
.aspx
International Council of Nurses at
http://www.icn.ch/publications/position
-statements/
NCSBN at
https://www.ncsbn.org/index.htm

ethical principles, leadership and management, and 
evidence-based practice within a complex and changing
healthcare system. Leadership development and a focus on
health promotion and disease prevention for individuals
and groups prepare the nurse for practice challenges. As
described by AACN (2008a), the baccalaureate-prepared
nurse understands and respects the variations of care, the
increased complexity, and the increased use of healthcare
resources inherent in caring for patients (AACN, 2008a).
Building on the baccalaturate, the AACN (2011) Essentials
of Master’s Education in Nursing provide graduates with an
advanced level of understanding of nursing and relevant
sciences, so that they can then integrate this knowledge
into practice in both direct and indirect care components
in our evolving healthcare systems (pp. 1–2). And even
further leadership in nursing science and practice is pro-
vided by nurses prepared at the doctoral level through cur-
riculum guides by the AACN (2006) Essentials of Doctoral
Education for Advanced Nursing Practice through programs
offering the practice (Doctor of Nursing Practice [DNP])
doctorate. There are two types of doctorates in nursing.
As described by AACN (2006), the research-focused doc-
torate (DNS, DSN, or DNSc) is designed to prepare nurse
scientists and scholars, whereas the practice-focused doc-
torate (DNP) places greater emphasis on practice that is
innovative and evidence-based, reflecting the application
of credible research findings (p.3).
The challenges in your future are dynamic and evolve
daily as we address the themes of safety, quality outcomes,
evolving technology, and interdisciplinary practice. Con-
sider the implications of the following challenges in the
workforce or in a specific delivery setting:
●A culture supportive of safe and quality patient outcomes
●Appropriate staffing patterns and skill mixes
●Appropriate delegation activities
●Training and supervision of unlicensed assistive 
personnel
●Competencies and continued knowledge development
of professionals
●Ongoing education and skill attainment and refinement
●Coordination of care across practice settings
●Changes in populations and healthcare needs
●Strategies to improve health and eliminate health 
disparities
●Cost containment
●Evidence-based interdisciplinary practice
●Consumer satisfaction
●Using information technologies and quality-based 
indicators
●Providing leadership on system change and redesign
The challenges in your future truly depend on you, your
practice environment, colleagues, and future initiatives.
Consider how individual colleagues and groups can chal-
lenge the status quo for positive change.
Nursing Education
The majority of baccalaureate and graduate programs
in nursing are guided by the three Essentials documents pub-
lished by AACN (2006, 2008a, 2010). Generalist prac-
tice occurs following baccalaureate program completion. 
Advanced generalist or specialty practice is the outcome of
graduate education in nursing. And then there is the oppor-
tunity for specialty practice as an advanced practice nurse
(APRN). Consider the APRN practice roles of nurse practi-
tioner, clinical nurse  specialist, nurse anesthetist, or nurse
midwife. As the knowledge base grows, evidence-based prac-
tice is guided by the specialty area. Nevertheless, while we
are experiencing an uneven shortage of nurses active in gen-
eralist staff practice settings, there have been predictions that
shortages will increase drastically as retirements in the current
workforce occur. Even more significant is the critical short-
age of nursing faculty. Although we have seen an increase in
the numbers of nurses prepared at the master’s and doctoral
levels, graduate education in the 1990s was directed at
APRN clinical practice in four areas: nurse practitioner, clin-
ical nurse specialist, nurse anesthetist, and nurse midwife.
Since the 1980s, education tracks in graduate programs
declined with nurses pursuing APRN roles, and the average
age of nursing faculty continues to rise. And impending re-
tirements of nurse educators looms to create an even greater
shortage of educators. The AACN (2011) recognizes the
preparation of clinical educators at the master’s level but has
endorsed the Carnegie Foundation Report recommending
the preparation of the clinical educator in both a clinical spe-
cialty and in principles of education, including curriculum
design and teaching and evaluation methods. “Consistent
with academy expectations, faculty with primary responsi-
bility for the oversight of courses in baccalaureate, master’s,
and doctoral nursing programs will have doctoral prepara-
tion [and] doctoral graduates who will be involved in an ac-
ademic role will have preparation in educational methods
and pedagogies” (AACN, 2008b, p. 1). The shortage of
nursing faculty has been documented. For several years,
AACN (2014b) has documented that faculty shortages are
limiting student capacity in nursing programs related to
budget constraints, an aging faculty, a limited pool of faculty,
and noncompetitive salaries compared with positions in
practice settings. So, in addition to an area of specialization
and clinical skill, skills in curriculum development and eval-
uation, teaching and learning, and interdisciplinary educa-
tion are required in the nurse educator role. Although the
AACN (2005) reported on the demographics, stressors, and
competing demands along with the changes in the student
population, it was observed that the “faculty shortage offers
nurse educators an unique opportunity to challenge past
norms and think collaboratively and nontraditionally to
meet the future” (p. 12). However, doctoral education is the
expected level of preparation for the full academic role and
preparation of nurse researchers and scientists. The IOM
(2011) has further recommended that the number of nurses
with doctoral degree be doubled by 2020 (p. S-11).
The overriding challenges ahead in professional practice
are ongoing professional development and involvement for
engagement in the delivery of patient-centered care with a
focus on safety, efficacy, and quality through the use of in-
formatics, and evidence-based practice and leadership in
the interdisciplinary practice setting. This involvement 
reflects the core competencies of health professionals and
advances practice, patient outcomes, and the profession.
INVOLVEMENT
When we think of involvement, we often think of our
function as advocates and healthcare providers for our
CHAPTER 19 Expanding the Vision     ●
323

patients. These functions represent one form of involve-
ment. Our professional involvement focuses on the indi-
vidual attributes of, needs of, and outcomes for our
patients, the consumers of nursing and healthcare. This
involvement, as individual professionals with the patients
and families who are the consumers of evidence-based,
quality nursing care, must address all core competencies.
Our involvement is also as members of the  healthcare
team. Collaboration and collegiality have been described
in relation to nursing and interdisci plinary practice. This
book also discussed the importance of group dynamics and
group skills, and the art of negotiation in leading and man-
aging. All of these functions relate to active involvement
with a defined group to attain specified goals for the con-
sumers of healthcare.
A third form of professional involvement is as a member
of the professional group. This form of involvement requires
time and commitment for advancement of the profession.
Professional contributions result from participation in pro-
fessional organizations, research, publications, theory eval-
uation, and promotion of the further development of the
profession. Personal contributions in professional practice
occur through your education, competency, ethical behav-
iors, use of theory and evidence-based interventions, and
communication, political efficacy, patient advocacy, and
leadership.
REVISITING YOUR
PHILOSOPHY OF NURSING
Now is the time to reflect on your personal contributions
to and philosophy of nursing. Nurses are talented, creative,
and visionary—when they allow themselves to be. They are
frequently viewed as leaders and risk takers as they advocate
for the perceived good of their patients. But what skills re-
quired of professionals do we need to refine? Step back and
think of the vital and basic skills needed to demonstrate our
professional competencies. These skills are what we contin-
ually strive to refine:
●Knowledge base
●Critical thinking skills
●Technical skills
●Interpersonal skills
●Articulation skills
●Leadership skills
●Policy and advocacy skills
Clinical practice requires these skills for provision of
patient-centered care, involvement in interdisci plinary
and evidence-based practice, and the use of informatics
and emerging technologies for quality improvement and
effective patient outcomes. These skills are enhanced
through the professional attributes of collaboration,
 collegiality, continued competence, and leadership in the
health promotion of society. Concern for the health of
people, whether individual patients, families, communi-
ties, or groups in their  environment, is the core of pro-
fessional nursing. Individuals like you are dedicated and
exemplify those characteristics of a professional described
here. Your philosophy of nursing will evolve and develop,
just as you do as a professional.
EMBRACING CHANGE
The recent focus on the health professions and the evident
shortages of professionals has had the beneficial effect of
opening up the discussion for needed changes in the
healthcare system and the professions. Discussions have
been held at national, state, and local meetings, and debate
and discussion on the issues continue in professional
newsletters and journals as well as online. And the calling
to action became even more resounding with the recent
IOM (2011) report calling for more leadership by nursing
in healthcare reform. Communication and critical think-
ing are taking place. The restraining and driving forces of
change are present. We see that practice and education can
no longer serve the needs of the consumers without
change. Interdisciplinary collaboration and practice are es-
sential. All professionals are shareholders in the process of
improving the health of the population.
Technology continues to expand our horizons and
challenge our practice. Improved equipment and tech-
nologies are developing at a rapid pace. Information is
available immediately. Colleagues readily communicate
at a distance using e-mail, instant messaging, listservs,
and news groups. Computer-adaptive testing for licen-
sure and certification is a given. Reengineering has be-
come a common occurrence in practice settings, as have
cost containment, measurement of patient outcomes, 
evidence-based practice, care coordination, and a focus
on consumer satisfaction.
The topics that you have embraced through this book
have presented you with some of the issues involved in
this time of rapid change in the profession and in prac-
tice. Facing the responsibilities inherent in professional
practice is a way of revisiting our present roles and con-
sidering how they meet the needs of our patients and
contribute to the future of our profession. The student
role provides the setting for analyzing information re-
lated to current practices. Theories that guide practice
continue to be tested and refined as appropriate to their
utility in practice, education, and research. Communi-
cation and critical thinking are vital components of this
activity as we operate as leaders, managers, and care
providers in organizations, communities, and globally.
We function as change agents, teachers, coordinators,
and group leaders in practice settings. Evidence-based
practices must be used in all situations, provision of di-
rect and indirect care, administration, and education.
Knowledge of research and the political process give us
direction, as change agents, for addressing policy changes
needed for a healthier society. The focus remains on
healthcare consumers, their safety, needs, and healthful
outcomes.
Current healthcare initiatives must be evaluated for ap-
plicability, acceptability, and appropriateness for meeting
the needs of the population, with due consideration given
to economic, linguistic, cultural, and quality indicators.
All of these issues are addressed within the ethical param-
eters of professional nursing practice.
The information presented here has been designed to
address the challenge of the book’s title, Advancing Your
Career: Concepts of Professional Nursing. We are all chal-
lenged to advance our professional practice.
324
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

CHAPTER 19 Expanding the Vision     ●
325
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE: Consider this....
As your hospital is preparing for application for the Magnet Recognition Program®, you notice that one of the
five components of the Magnet Recognition Model is new knowledge, innovation, and improvements:
Magnet organizations have an ethical and professional responsibility to contribute to patient care, the or-
ganization, and the profession in terms of new knowledge, innovations, and improvements . . . [which] 
includes new models of care, application of existing evidence, new evidence, and visible contributions to
the science of nursing (ANCC, 2014).
Question: Considering your career development and career path, what contributions can be identified to
you or your unit to provide evidence of this component? What are your plans for the future?
Source: American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC). (2014). Magnet Recognition Program® Model. Retrieved from
http://nursecredentialing.org/Magnet/ProgramOverview/New-Magnet-Model
K E Y  P O I N T S
●Competencies are those qualities that illustrate effectiveness and appropriateness in our respective 
professional roles. The Health Professions Education Summit led to the identification of five core compe-
tencies for all health professionals:
●Provide patient-centered care.
●Work in interdisciplinary teams.
●Employ evidence-based practice.
●Apply quality improvement.
●Utilize informatics. (Greiner & Knebel, 2003)
●The IOM’s Committee on the Work Environment and Patient Safety identified the following necessary
patient safeguards in the practice environment (Page, 2004):
●Governing boards that focus on safety
●Effective nursing leadership
●Adequate staffing
●Organizational support for ongoing learning and decision support
●Mechanisms that promote interdisciplinary collaboration
●Work design that promotes safety
●Organizational culture that continually strengthens patient safety
●The IOM (2011) recommended transformation and leadership by nursing with the identification of four
key messages and eight recommendation directed at government, regulation, education, administration,
and practice including the statement that nurses should practice to the full extent of their education and
continue with the necessity for lifelong learning. 
●The AACN (2002) has proposed hallmarks of excellence in the professional nursing practice
environment based on selected characteristics of work environments that support professional nursing
practice.
●Collaboration involves actively working together to meet some identified goal, such as the patient’s treat-
ment goals, while collegiality is the sharing of responsibility and authority to achieve a goal or prescribed
outcome.
●Continued competence is of great concern to health professionals, their regulatory bodies, employers,
and consumers. As described in their Position Statement on Professional Role Competence the ANA
(2008) assurance of competence is the shared responsibility. 
Continued

326
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups
K E Y  P O I N T S—cont’d
●A nurse’s involvement as a professional takes three forms:
●As an individual professional with patients, families, and communities who are the consumers of 
nursing care
●As a group member or leader of an interdisciplinary healthcare team
●As an active member of the professional group
●Professional contributions result from participation in professional organizations, research, publications,
theory evaluation, and promotion of the further development of the profession.
●Vital and basic skills needed and continually refined by professionals include expanding one’s knowledge
base, critical thinking, and technical, interpersonal, articulation, leadership, and policy and advocacy skills.
Thought and Discussion Questions
1. Identify three additional challenges for improvements in the delivery of quality healthcare.
2. Design a nurse residency program for a new graduate with yourself in the role of the mentor. Now, design a resi-
dency program for yourself if you were changing practice area, for example from an acute care surgical unit to an
intensive care unit or hospice setting.
3. Describe your plans for two specific personal contributions to professional nursing practice that you will accom-
plish during the next 10 years.
4. Develop three personal goals to be met in your professional nursing practice during the next five years.
5. Think about the characteristics you would desire in a mentor to assist in the development of your career. List
these characteristics and describe how you would identify and request the assistance of a mentor. Be prepared
to participate in a class or online discussion to be scheduled by your instructor.
6. Review the Chapter Thought located on the first page of the chapter, and discuss it in the context of the
contents of the chapter.
Interactive Exercises
Go to the Intranet site and complete the interactive exercises provided for this chapter.
REFERENCES
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2002).
Hallmarks of the professional nursing practice environment.
Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/publications/
white-papers/hallmarks-practice-environment
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2005).
Faculty shortages in baccalaureate and graduate nursing 
programs: Scope of the problem and strategies for expanding 
the supply. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu
/publications/white-papers/faculty-shortages
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2006).
The essentials of doctoral education for advanced nursing prac-
tice. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/DNP/pdf
/Essentials.pdf 
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2008a).
The essentials of baccalaureate education for professional nurs-
ing practice. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu
/education/pdf/BaccEssentials08.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2008b).
Preferred vision for the professoriate in baccalaureate and grad-
uate nursing programs. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche
.edu/publications/position/preferred-vision
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2011).
The essentials of master’s education in nursing. Retrieved 
from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/education-resources
/MastersEssentials11.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2014a).
Fact sheet: The impact of education on nursing practice. 
Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/media-relations
/EdImpact.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2014b).
Fact sheet: Nursing faculty shortage. Retrieved from http://www
.aacn.nche.edu/media-relations/FacultyShortageFS.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN) and the
American Organization of Nurse Executives (AONE).
(2012). AACN-AONE Task Force on Academic-Practice
Partnerships: Guiding principles. Retrieved from

http://www.aacn.nche.edu/leading-initiatives/academic
-practice-partnerships/GuidingPrinciples.pdf 
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2008). Position statement:
Professional role competence. Retrieved from http://gm6
.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/Policy-Advocacy
/Positions-and-Resolutions/ANAPositionStatements
/Position-Statements-Alphabetically/Professional-Role
-Competence.html
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2010a). Nursing: Scope
and standards of practice (2nd ed.). Silver Spring, MD:
Nursesbooks.org. 
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2010b). Nursing’s 
social policy statement (2010 ed.). Silver Spring, MD: 
Nursesbooks.org
American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC). (2014). 
The Magnet recognition program® model. Retrieved from
http://nursecredentialing.org/Magnet/ProgramOverview
/New-Magnet-Model
APRN Consensus Work Group & the National Council of
State Boards of Nursing APRN Advisory Committee.
(2008). Consensus model for APRN regulation: Licensure, 
accreditation, certification & education. Retrieved from
https://www.ncsbn.org/Consensus_Model_for_APRN_
Regulation_July_2008.pdf
Aspden, P., Wolcott, J., Bootman, L., & Cronenwett, L. R.
(eds.). (2006). Preventing medication errors. Washington,
DC: National Academies Press. 
Clark, P. A., Davis, M., Drevs, K., Fuerbringer, P., Gloss, M.,
& Spite, D. (2005). The healthcare landscape. In P. A.
Clark and M. P. Malone, Making it right: Healthcare service
recovery tools, techniques, and best practices. Marblehead,
MA: HCPro.
Finkelman, A., & Kenner, C. (2012). Teaching IPM: Implica-
tions of the Institute of Medicine reports for nursing education
(3rd ed.). Silver Spring, MD: Nursesbooks.org.
Gardner, D. B. (2005). Ten lessons in collaboration. 
Online Journal of Issues in Nursing. Retrieved from http://
nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/ANAMarketplace
/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/TableofContents/Volume102005
/No1Jan05/tpc26_116008.aspx
Greiner, A. C., & Knebel, E. (Eds.). (2003). Health professions
education: A bridge to quality. Washington, DC: Institute of
Medicine.
Haas, S., Swan, B. A., & Haynes, T. (2013). Developing ambu-
latory care registered nurse competencies for care coordina-
tion and transition management. Nursing Economic$, 31(1),
43–49. 
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2001). Crossing the quality chasm:
A new health system for the 21st century. Retrieved from
http://www.iom.edu/Reports/2001/Crossing-the-Quality
-Chasm-A-New-Health-System-for-the-21st-Century.aspx
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2011). The future of nursing: Lead-
ing change, advancing health. Retrieved from http://www.nap
.edu/catalog/12956.html 
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2013). Informing the future: Crit-
ical issues in health (7th ed.). Retrieved from http://www
.iom.edu/About-IOM/~/media/Files/About%20the%
20IOM/ITF_seventh.pdf
International Council of Nurses. (2006). Position statement:
Continuing competence as a professional responsibility and
public right. Retrieved from http://www.icn.ch/images
/stories/documents/publications/position_statements
/B02_Continuing_Competence.pdf
International Council of Nurses. (2007). Position statement: Career
development in nursing. Retrieved from http://www.icn.ch
/images/stories/documents/publications/position_statements
/C02_Career_Development_Nsg.pdf 
International Council of Nurses. (2013). Position statement:
Scope of nursing practice. Retrieved from http://www.icn.ch
/images/stories/documents/publications/position
_statements/B07_Scope_Nsg_Practice.pdf 
Joint Commission. (2013). Comparison between Joint Commission
standards, Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award Criteria,
and Magnet Recognition Program components. Retrieved from
http://www.jointcommission.org/assets/1/6/Comparison
_Document2013.pdf 
National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN). (2005).
Meeting the ongoing challenge of continued competence. 2005 con-
tinued competence concept paper. Retrieved from https://www
.ncsbn.org/Continued_Comp_Paper_TestingServices.pdf
National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN). (2014).
Nurse Licensure Compact (NLC). Retrieved from https://www
.ncsbn.org/nlc.htm 
Nelson, M. A. (2002). Education for professional nursing prac-
tice: Looking backward into the future. Online Journal of 
Issues in Nursing (Manuscript 3), 7(3), 1–13. Retrieved
from http://nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/
ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/TableofContents
/Volume72002/No2May2002/EducationforProfessional
NursingPractice.html
O’Neil, E. (1998). Nursing in the next century. In E. O’Neil 
& J. Coffman (Eds.), Strategies for the future of nursing
(pp. 211–224). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Page, A. (ed.). (2004). Keeping patients safe: Transforming the
work environment of nurses. Washington, DC: National
Academies Press.
President’s Advisory Commission on Consumer Protection and
Quality in the Health Care Industry. (1998). Quality first:
Better health care for all Americans [Final report to the Presi-
dent of the United States]. Columbia, MD: Consumer Bill
of Rights.
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (RWJF). (2014). Ten years
after keeping patients safe: Have nurses’ work environments
been transformed? Charting Nursing's Future: Reports on
Policies That Can Transform Patient Care. Retrieved from
http://www.rwjf.org/content/dam/farm/reports/issue_briefs
/2014/rwjf411417
Smith, J. (2003). Report of findings: Exploring the value of con-
tinuing education mandates. Chicago, IL: National Council
of State Boards of Nursing.
Thibault, G.E. (2013). Reforming health professions education
will require culture change and closer ties between class-
room and practice. Health Affairs, 32, 1928–1932. doi:
10.1377/hlthaff.2013.0827
Weston, M. J. (2006). Integrating generational perspectives in
nursing. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing. Retrieved 
from http://nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories
/ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/TableofContents
/Volume112006/No2May06/tpc30_216074.html
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aiken, L. H., Clarke, S. P., Cheung, R. B., Sloane, D. M., &
Sibler, J. H. (2003). Education levels of hospital nurses and
surgical patient mortality. Journal of the American Medical
Association, 290, 1617–1623.
CHAPTER 19 Expanding the Vision     ●
327

Aiken, L. H., Clarke, S. P., Sloane, D. M., Lake, E. T., & 
Cheney, T. (2008). Effects of hospital care environment on 
patient mortality and nurse outcomes. Journal of Nursing
Administration, 38, 223–229.
Aiken, L. H., Sloane, D. M., Bruyneel, L., Van den Heede, K.,
Griffiths, P., Busse, R., . . . Sermeus, W. (2014). Nurse
staffing and education and hospital mortality in nine 
European countries: A retrospective observational study.
Lancet, 383, 1824–1830. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org
/10.1016./S0140-6736(13)62631-8 
Amer, K. S. (2013). Quality and safety for transformational 
nursing: Core competencies. Boston, MA: Pearson.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (1999).
Position statement on defining scholarship for the discipline 
of nursing. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/
Publications/positions/scholar.htm
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2004).
Position statement on the practice doctorate in nursing. 
Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/publications
/position/DNPpositionstatement.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN). (2006).
AACN statement of support for clinical nurse specialists. 
Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu/publications
/position/DNPpositionstatement.pdf
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses. (2005). AACN
standards for establishing and sustaining healthy work environ-
ments. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.org/WD/HWE/
Content/hwehome.content?menu=hwe
American Nurses Association (ANA). (2014). The national
database for nursing quality indicators (NDNQI). Retrieved
from http://www.nursingquality.org/
Benner, P., Stuphen, M., Leonard, V., & Day, L. (2009). 
Educating nurses: A call for radical transformation. 
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Corrigan, M. S., Donaldson, M. S., Kohn, L. T., Maguire,
S. K., & Pike, K. C. (2001). Crossing the quality chasm: 
A new health system for the 21st century. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press.
Donley, R. (2005). Challenges for nursing in the 21st  century.
Nursing Economics, 23, 312–318. 
Federal Trade Commission. (2014). Policy perspective: Competi-
tion and the regulation of advanced practice nurses. Retrieved
from http://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/reports
/policy-perspectives-competition-regulation-advanced
-practice-nurses/140307aprnpolicypaper.pdf 
Lamb, G. (Ed.). (2014). Care coordination. The game changer:
How nursing is revolutionizing quality care. Silver Spring,
MD: Nursebooks.org.
National Council of State Boards of Nursing. (2009). Changes in
healthcare professions’ scope of practice: Legislative considerations.
Retrieved from https://www.ncsbn.org/ScopeofPractice
_09.pdf 
National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN).
(2011). Fact sheet: Licensure of nurses and state boards 
of nursing. Retrieved from https://www.ncsbn.org/Fact
_Sheet_Licensure_of_Nurses_and_State_Boards_of
_Nursing.pdf
North Carolina Board of Nursing. (2014). Continued compe-
tence requirements. Retrieved from https://www.ncbon.com
/dcp/i/licensurelisting-renewalreinstatement-continuing
-competence-requirements
Nursing Council of New Zealand. (2014). Continuing compe-
tence. Retrieved from http://nursingcouncil.org.nz/Nurses
/Continuing-competence
O’Neil, E. H., & Pew Health Professions Commission. (1998).
Recreating health professions practice for a new century: 
Fourth report of the Pew Health Professions Commission. 
San Francisco: Pew Health Professions Commission.
Pew Health Professions Commission. (1995). Critical chal-
lenges: Revitalizing the health professions for the twenty-
first century. San Francisco: UCSF Center for the Health
Professions.
Registered Nurses Association of Northwest Territories and
Nunavat. (2003). Continuing competence (PDP). Retrieved
from http://www.rnantnu.ca/?page_id=28 
Safriet, B .J. (2002). Closing the gap between can and may 
in health care providers’ scopes of practice: A primer 
for policy makers. Yale Journal on Regulation, 19(2), 
301–334.
Texas Board of Nursing. (2013). Education: Continuing nursing
education and competency. Retrieved from http://www.bon
.texas.gov/education_continuing_education.asp
Virginia Board of Nursing. (2014). Regulations governing the
practice of nursing, 18 VAC 90-20-10 et seq. Retrieved
from https://www.dhp.virginia.gov/nursing/ 
Washington State Board of Nursing and Washington State
Nurses Association. (2010). Position paper: Continuing 
competence in nursing. Retrieved from http://www.wsna
.org/practice/publications/documents/pp.continuing
competence.pdf
Washington State Nurses Association. (2014). Continuing 
competency. Retrieved from http://www.wsna.org/Topics
/Continuing-Competency/
Weinberg, D. B., Cooney-Miner, D., & Perloff, J. N. (2012).
Analyzing the relationship between nursing education 
and patient outcomes. Journal of Nursing Regulation, 3(2),
4–10.
ONLINE RESOURCES
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) 
http://www.ahrq.gov
American Nurses Association (ANA) 
http://www.nursingworld.org
American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC)
http://www.nursecredentialing.org/default.aspx
Institute of Medicine
http://iom.edu
http://books.nap.edu/catalog/12956.html
International Council of Nurses
http://www.icn.ch/publications/position-statements/
National Council of State Boards of Nursing
https://www.ncsbn.org/index.htm
328
●
SECTION III Quality Care for Individuals, Families, and Groups

329
329
Professional Nursing
Organizations
Academy of Medical-Surgical Nurses (AMSN)
https://www.amsn.org/practice-resources
Academy of Spinal of Spinal Cord Injury 
Professionals, Inc. (ASCIP)
http://www.academyscipro.org/
Accreditation Commission for Education 
in Nursing (ACEN)
http://www.acenursing.org/
Air & Surface Transport Nurses Association
(ASTNA)
http://www.astna.org
American Academy of Ambulatory Care 
Nursing (AAACN)
http://www.aaacn.org 
American Academy of Nurse Practitioners
(AANP)
http://www.aanp.org
American Academy of Nursing (AAN)
http://www.aannet.org  
American Assembly for Men in Nursing
(AAMN)
http://www.aamn.org
American Association of Colleges of Nursing
(AACN)
http://www.aacn.nche.edu 
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses
(AACN)
http://www.aacn.org 
American Association for the History of 
Nursing (AAHN)
http://www.aahn.org  
American Association of Legal Nurse 
Consultants (AALNC)
http://www.aalnc.org 
American Association of Managed Care
Nurses (AAMCN)
http://www.aamcn.org 
American Association of Neuroscience Nurses
(AANN)
http://www.aann.org 
American Association of Nurse Anesthetists
(AANA)
http://www.aana.com 
American Association of Nurse Attorneys
(TAANA)
http://www.taana.org 
American Association of Occupational Health
Nurses (AAOHN)
http://www.aaohn.org 
American College of Healthcare Executives
(ACHE)
http://www.ache.org 
American College of Nurse-Midwives (ACNM)
http://www.midwife.org/ 
American Holistic Nurses Association (AHNA)
http://www.ahna.org 
American Medical Informatics Association
(AMIA)
http://www.amia.org
American Nephrology Nurses’ Association
(ANNA)
http://www.annanurse.org 
American Nurses Association (ANA)
http://www.nursingworld.org
American Nurses Credentialing Center
(ANCC)
http://www.nursecredentialing.org 
Certification Center
http://www.nursecredentialing.org/Certification
Magnet Recognition Program
http://www.nursecredentialing.org/Magnet
Pathway to Excellence Program
http://www.nursecredentialing.org/Pathway
A P P E N D I X
A

American Nurses Foundation (ANF)
http://www.anfonline.org
American Nursing Informatics Association
(ANIA)
https://www.ania-caring.org
American Organization of Nurse Executives
(AONE)
http://www.aone.org
American Psychiatric Nurses Association
(APNA)
http://www.apna.org 
American Society for Parenteral and Enteral
Nutrition (ASPEN)
http://www.nutritioncare.org
American Society of PeriAnesthesia Nurses
(ASPAN)
http://www.aspan.org 
American Thoracic Society (ATS): Nursing 
Assembly
http://www.thoracic.org/assemblies/nur/
index.php 
https://www.ania.org/
Association of Camp Nurses (ACN)
http://www.acn.org 
Association of Nurses in AIDS 
Care (ANAC)
http://www.nursesinaidscare.org
Association for Nursing Professional 
Development
http://www.anpd.org/
Association of periOperative Registered
Nurses (AORN) 
http://www.aorn.org 
Association of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology
Nurses (APHON)
http://www.aphon.org 
Association for Professionals in Infection 
Control and Epidemiology (APIC)
http://www.apic.org 
Association for Radiologic and Imaging 
Nursing (ARIN)
http://www.arinursing.org/
Association of Rehabilitation Nurses (ARN)
http://www.rehabnurse.org 
Commission on Collegiate Nursing 
Education (CCNE)
http://www.aacn.nche.edu/accreditation
Commission on Graduates of Foreign 
Nursing Schools (CGFNS)
http://www.cgfns.org 
Dermatology Nurses’ Association (DNA)
http://www.dnanurse.org
Developmental Disabilities Nurses
Association (DDNA)
http://www.ddna.org 
Emergency Nurses Association (ENA)
http://www.ena.org 
Gerontological Advanced Practice Nurses 
Association (GAPNA)
https://www.gapna.org
Health Ministries Association (HMA)
http://www.hmassoc.org 
Home Healthcare Nurses Association (HHNA)
http://www.hhna.org 
Hospice and Palliative Nurses Association
(HPNA)
http://hpna.advancingexpertcare.org/
Infusion Nurses Society (INS)
http://www.ins1.org 
International Association of Forensic Nurses
(IAFN)
http://www.iafn.org 
International Council of Nurses (ICN)
http://www.icn.ch 
International Nurses Society on Addictions
(INTNSA)
http://intnsa.org 
International Society of Nurses in Genetics
(ISONG)
http://www.isong.org 
International Society of Psychiatric-Mental
Health Nurses (ISPN)
http://www.ispn-psych.org  
International Transplant Nurses Society
(ITNS)
http://www.itns.org
National Association of Clinical Nurse 
Specialists (NACNS)
http://www.nacns.org 
National Association of Directors of Nursing
Administration in Long Term Care
(NADONA/LTC)
http://www.nadona.org 
National Association of Hispanic Nurses
(NAHN)
http://www.thehispanicnurses.org 
National Association of Neonatal Nurses
(NANN)
http://www.nann.org 
330
●
APPENDIX A  Professional Nursing Organizations

National Association of Nurse Massage 
Therapists (NANMT)
http://www.nanmt.org 
National Association of Orthopaedic Nurses
(NAON)
http://www.orthonurse.org 
National Association of Pediatric Nurse 
Practitioners (NAPNAP)
http://www.napnap.org 
National Association of School Nurses
(NASN)
http://www.nasn.org 
National Black Nurses Association (NBNA)
http://www.nbna.org
National Council of State Boards of Nursing
(NCSBN)
http://www.ncsbn.org 
National League for Nursing (NLN)
http://www.nln.org 
National Organization of Nurse Practitioner
Faculties (NONPF)
http://www.nonpf.com 
North American Nursing Diagnosis Association
International (NANDA-I)
http://www.nanda.org 
Nurses Organization of Veterans Affairs
(NOVA)
http://www.vanurse.org 
Nurse Practitioner Associates for Continuing
Education (NPACE)
http://www.npace.org 
Nurse Practitioners in Women’s Health
(NPWH)
http://www.npwh.org
Oncology Nursing Society (ONS)
http://www.ons.org 
Pediatric Endocrinology Nursing Society
(PENS)
http://www.pens.org
Philippine Nurses Association (PNA)
http://www.pna-ph.org 
Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association
(PCNA)
http://www.pcna.net 
Respiratory Nursing Society (RNS)
http://www.respiratorynursingsociety.org 
Sigma Theta Tau International (STTI)
http://www.nursingsociety.org 
Society of Gastroenterology Nurses and 
Associates (SGNA)
http://www.sgna.org 
Society of Trauma Nurses (STN)
http://www.traumanurses.org 
Society of Urologic Nurses and Associates
(SUNA)
http://www.suna.org 
Society for Vascular Nursing (SVN)
http://www.svnnet.org 
Transcultural Nursing Society (TCNS)
http://www.tcns.org 
Wound, Ostomy, and Continence Nurses 
Society (WOCN)
http://www.wocn.org
APPENDIX A Professional Nursing Organizations
●
331

Nursing Interventions
Classification (NIC) and
Nursing Outcomes
Classification (NOC) Systems
332
NURSING INTERVENTIONS
CLASSIFICATION (NIC)
Abuse Protection Support
Child
Domestic Partner
Elder
Religious
Acid-Base Management
Metabolic Acidosis
Metabolic Alkalosis
Respiratory Acidosis
Respiratory Alkalosis
Acid-Base Monitoring
Active Listening
Activity Therapy
Acupressure
Admission Care
Airway Insertion and Stabilization
Airway Management
Airway Suctioning
Allergy Management
Amnioinfusion
Amputation Care
Analgesic Administration
Intraspinal
Anaphylaxis Management
Anesthesia Administration
Anger Control Assistance
Animal-Assisted Therapy
Anticipatory Guidance
Anxiety Reduction
Area Restriction
Aromatherapy
Art Therapy
Artificial Airway Management
Aspiration Precautions
Assertiveness Training
Asthma Management
Attachment Promotion
Autogenic Training
Autotransfusion
Bathing
Bed Rest Care
Bedside Laboratory Testing
Behavior Management
Overactivity/Inattention
Self-Harm
Sexual
Behavior Modification
Social Skills
Bibliotherapy
Biofeedback
Bioterrorism Preparedness
Birthing
Bladder Irrigation
Bleeding Precautions
Bleeding Reduction
Antepartum Uterus
Gastrointestinal
Nasal
Postpartum Uterus
Wound
Blood Products Administration
Body Image Enhancement
Body Mechanics Promotion
Bottle Feeding
Bowel Incontinence Care
Encopresis
Bowel Irrigation
Bowel Management
Bowel Training
Breast Examination
Breastfeeding Assistance
Calming Technique
Capillary Blood Sample
Cardiac Care
Acute 
Rehabilitative
Cardiac Precautions
Caregiver Support
Case Management
Cast Care
Maintenance
Wet
Cerebral Edema Management
Cerebral Perfusion Promotion
Cesarean Section Care
Chemical Restraint
Chemotherapy Management
Chest Physiotherapy
Childbirth Preparation
Circulatory Care
Arterial Insufficiency
Mechanical Assist Device
Venous Insufficiency
Circulatory Precautions
Circumcision Care
A P P E N D I XB

Code Management
Cognitive Restructuring
Cognitive Stimulation
Communicable Disease Management
Communication Enhancement
Hearing Deficit
Speech Deficit
Vision Deficit
Community Disaster Preparedness
Community Health Development
Complex Relationship Building
Conflict Mediation
Constipation/Impaction Management
Consultation
Contact Lens Care
Controlled Substance Checking
Coping Enhancement
Cost Containment
Cough Enhancement
Counseling
Crisis Intervention
Critical Path Development
Culture Brokerage
Cutaneous Stimulation
Decision-Making Support
Defibrillator Management
External
Internal
Delegation
Delirium Management
Delusion Management 
Dementia Management
Bathing
Deposition/Testimony
Developmental Care
Developmental Enhancement
Adolescent
Child
Dialysis Access Maintenance
Diarrhea Management
Diet Staging
Discharge Planning
Distraction
Documentation
Dressing
Dying Care
Dysreflexia Management
Dysrhythmia Management 
Ear Care
Eating Disorders Management
Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT) Management
Electrolyte Management
Hypercalcemia
Hyperkalemia
Hypermagnesemia
Hypernatremia
Hyperphosphatemia
Electrolyte Monitoring
Electronic Fetal Monitoring
Antepartum
Intrapartum
Elopement Precautions
Embolus Care
Peripheral
Pulmonary
Embolus Precautions
Emergency Care
Emergency Cart Checking
Emotional Support
Endotracheal Extubation
Energy Management
Enteral Tube Feeding
Environmental Management
Attachment Process
Comfort
Community
Home Preparation
Safety
Violence Prevention
Worker Safety
Environmental Risk Protection
Examination Assistance
Exercise Promotion
Strength Training
Stretching
Exercise Therapy
Ambulation
Balance
Joint Mobility
Muscle Control
Eye Care
Fall Prevention
Family Integrity Promotion
Childbearing Family
Family Involvement Promotion
Family Mobilization
Family Planning
Contraception
Infertility
Unplanned Pregnancy
Family Presence Facilitation
Family Process Maintenance
Family Support
Family Therapy
Feeding
Fertility Preservation
Fever Treatment
Financial Resource Assistance
Fire-Setting Precautions
First Aid
Fiscal Resource Management
Flatulence Reduction
Fluid/Electrolyte Management
Fluid Management
Fluid Monitoring
Fluid Resuscitation
Foot Care
Forensic Data Collection
Forgiveness Facilitation
Gastrointestinal Intubation
Genetic Counseling
Grief Work Facilitation
Perinatal Death
Guided Imagery
APPENDIX B NIC and NOC Systems
●
333

Guilt Work Facilitation
Hair Care
Hallucination Management
Health Care Information Exchange
Health Education
Health Literacy Enhancement
Health Policy Monitoring
Health Screening
Health System Guidance
Heat/Cold Application
Heat Exposure Treatment
Hemodialysis Therapy
Hemodynamic Regulation
Hemofiltration Therapy
Hemorrhage Control
High-Risk Pregnancy Care
Home Maintenance Assistance
Hope Inspiration
Hormone Replacement Therapy
Humor
Hyperglycemia Management
Hypervolemia Management
Hypnosis
Hypoglycemia Management
Hypothermia Induction
Hypothermia Treatment
Hypovolemia Management
Immunization/Vaccination Management
Impulse Control Training
Incident Reporting
Incision Site Care
Infant Care
Infection Control
Intraoperative
Infection Protection
Insurance Authorization
Intracranial Pressure (ICP) Monitoring
Intrapartal Care
High-Risk Delivery
Intravenous (IV) Insertion
Intravenous (IV) Therapy
Invasive Hemodynamic Monitoring
Journaling
Kangaroo Care
Labor Induction
Labor Suppression
Laboratory Data Interpretation
Lactation Counseling
Lactation Suppression
Laser Precautions
Latex Precautions
Learning Facilitation
Learning Readiness Enhancement
Leech Therapy
Limit Setting
Lower Extremity Monitoring
Malignant Hyperthermia Precautions
Massage
Mechanical Ventilation Management
Invasive
Noninvasive
Mechanical Ventilator Weaning
Medication Administration
Ear
Enteral
Eye
Inhalation
Interpleural
Intradermal
Intramuscular
Intraosseous
Intraspinal
Intravenous
Nasal
Oral
Rectal
Skin
Subcutaneous
Vaginal
Ventricular Reservoir
Medication Management
Medication Prescribing
Medication Reconciliation
Medication Facilitation
Memory Training
Milieu Therapy
Mood Management
Multidisciplinary Care Conference
Music Therapy
Mutual Goal Setting
Nail Care
Nausea Management
Neurologic Monitoring
Newborn Care
Newborn Monitoring
Nonnutritive Sucking
Normalization Promotion
Nutrition Management
Nutrition Therapy
Nutritional Counseling 
Nutritional Monitoring
Oral Health Maintenance
Oral Health Promotion
Oral Health Restoration
Order Transcription
Organ Procurement
Ostomy Care
Oxygen Therapy
Pacemaker Management
Temporary
Permanent
Pain Management
Parent Education
Adolescent
Childrearing Family
Infant
Parenting Promotion
Pass Facilitation 
Patient Contracting
Patient-Controlled Analgesia (PCA) Assistance
Patient Rights Assistance
Peer Review
Pelvic Muscle Exercise
Perineal Care
334
●
APPENDIX B  NIC and NOC Systems

Peripheral Sensation Management
Peripherally Inserted Central (PIC) Catheter Care
Peritoneal Dialysis Therapy
Pessary Management
Phlebotomy
Arterial Blood Sample
Blood Unit Acquisition
Cannulated Vessel
Venous Blood Sample
Phototherapy
Mood/Sleep Regulation
Neonate
Physical Restraint
Physician Support
Pneumatic Tourniquet Precautions
Positioning
Intraoperative
Neurologic
Wheelchair 
Postanesthesia Care
Postmortem Care
Postpartal Care
Preceptor
Employee
Student
Preconception Counseling
Pregnancy Termination Care
Premenstrual Syndrome (PMS) Management
Prenatal Care
Preoperative Coordination
Preparatory Sensory Information 
Presence
Pressure Management
Pressure Ulcer Care
Pressure Ulcer Prevention
Product Evaluation
Program Development
Progressive Muscle Relaxation
Prompted Voiding
Prosthesis Care
Pruritus Management
Quality Monitoring
Radiation Therapy Management
Rape-Trauma Treatment
Reality Orientation
Recreation Therapy
Rectal Prolapse Management
Referral
Relaxation Therapy
Religious Addiction Prevention
Religious Ritual Enhancement
Relocation Stress Reduction
Reminiscence Therapy
Reproductive Technology Management
Research Data Collection
Resiliency Promotion
Respiratory Monitoring
Respite Care
Resuscitation
Fetus
Neonate
Risk Identification
Childbearing Family
Genetic
Role Enhancement
Seclusion
Security Enhancement
Sedation Management
Seizure Management
Seizure Precautions
Self-Awareness Enhancement
Self-Care Assistance
Bathing/Hygiene
Dressing/Grooming
Feeding
Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADL)
Toileting
Transfer
Self-Efficacy Enhancement
Self-Esteem Enhancement
Self-Hypnosis Facilitation
Self-Modification Assistance
Self-Responsibility Facilitation
Sexual Counseling
Shift Report
Shock Management
Cardiac
Vasogenic
Volume
Shock Prevention
Sibling Support
Skin Care
Donor Site
Graft Site
Topical Treatments
Skin Surveillance
Sleep Enhancement
Smoking Cessation Assistance
Social Marketing
Socialization Enhancement
Specimen Management
Spiritual Growth Facilitation 
Spiritual Support
Splinting
Sports Injury Prevention: Youth
Staff Development
Staff Supervision
Subarachnoid Hemorrhage Precautions
Substance Use Prevention
Substance Use Treatment
Alcohol Withdrawal
Drug Withdrawal
Overdose
Suicide Prevention
Supply Management
Support Group 
Support System Enhancement
Surgical Assistance
Surgical Precautions
Surgical Preparation
Surveillance
Community
APPENDIX B NIC and NOC Systems
●
335

Late Pregnancy
Remote Electronic
Safety
Sustenance Support
Suturing
Swallowing Therapy
Teaching
Disease Process
Foot Care
Group
Individual
Infant Nutrition 0–3 Months
Infant Nutrition 4–6 Months
Infant Nutrition 7–9 Months
Infant Nutrition 10–12 Months
Infant Safety 0–3 Months
Infant Safety 4–6 Months
Infant Safety 7–9 Months
Infant Safety 10–12 Months
Infant Stimulation 0–4 Months
Infant Stimulation 5–8 Months
Infant Stimulation 9–12 Months
Preoperative
Prescribed Activity/Exercise
Prescribed Diet
Prescribed Medication
Procedure/Treatment
Psychomotor Skill
Safe Sex
Sexuality
Toddler Nutrition 13–18 Months
Toddler Nutrition 19–24 Months
Toddler Nutrition 25–36 Months
Toddler Safety 13–18 Months
Toddler Safety 19–24 Months
Toddler Safety 25–36 Months
Toilet Training
Technology Management
Telephone Consultation
Telephone Follow-Up
Temperature Regulation
Intraoperative
Therapeutic Play
Therapeutic Touch
Therapy Group
Thrombolytic Therapy Management
Total Parenteral Nutrition (TPN) Administration
Touch
Traction/Immobilization Care
Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulation (TENS) 
Transfer
Transport
Interfacility
Intrafacility
Trauma Therapy: Child
Triage
Disaster
Emergency Center
Telephone
Truth Telling
Tube Care
Chest
Gastrointestinal
Umbilical Line
Urinary
Ventriculostomy/Lumbar Drain
Ultrasonography: Limited Obstetric
Unilateral Neglect Management
Urinary Bladder Training
Urinary Catheterization
Intermittent
Urinary Elimination Management
Urinary Habit Training
Urinary Incontinence Care
Enuresis
Urinary Retention Care
Validation Therapy
Values Clarification
Vehicle Safety Promotion
Venous Access Device (VAD) Maintenance
Ventilation Assistance
Visitation Facilitation
Vital Signs Monitoring
Vomiting Management
Weight Gain Assistance
Weight Management
Weight Reduction Assistance
Wound Care
Burns
Closed Drainage
Wound Irrigation
Nursing Specialty Core
Interventions Areas
Additions Nursing
Ambulatory Nursing
Anesthesia Nursing
Chemical Dependency Nursing
Child/Adolescent Psychiatric Nursing
College Health Nursing
Community Public Health Nursing
Correctional Nursing
Critical Care Nursing
Dermatology Nursing
Developmental Disability Nursing
Emergency Nursing
End-of-Life Care Nursing
Flight Nursing
Forensic Nursing
Gastroenterological Nursing
Genetics Nursing
Gerontological Nursing
Holistic Nursing
Infection Control/Epidemiological Nursing
Intravenous Nursing
Medical-Surgical Nursing
Midwifery Nursing
Neonatal Nursing
Nephrology Nursing
Neuroscience Nursing
Obstetric Nursing
Occupational Health Nursing
Oncology Nursing
Ophthalmic Nursing
Orthopedic Nursing
Otorhinolaryngology and Head/Neck Nursing
336
●
APPENDIX B  NIC and NOC Systems

Pain Management Nursing
Parish Nursing
Pediatric Nursing
Pediatric Oncology Nursing
Perioperative Nursing
Psychiatric/Mental Health Nursing
Radiological Nursing
Rehabilitation Nursing
School Nursing
Spinal Cord Injury Nursing
Urologic Nursing
Vascular Nursing
Women’s Health Nursing
Source: Bulechek, G. M., Butcher, H. K., Dochterman, 
J. M., & Wagner, C. (Eds.). (2013). Nursing Interventions
Classification (NIC) (6th ed.). St. Louis: Mosby Elsevier.
Reprinted with permission.
NURSING OUTCOMES
CLASSIFICATION (NOC) 
Abuse Cessation
Abuse Protection
Abuse Recovery
Emotional
Financial
Physical
Sexual
Abusive Behavior: Self-Restraint
Acceptance: Health Status
Activity Tolerance
Acute Confusion Level
Adaptation to Physical Disability
Adherence Behavior
Healthy Diet
Aggression Self-Control
Agitation Level
Alcohol Abuse Cessation Behavior
Allergic Response
Localized
Systemic
Ambulation
Wheelchair
Anxiety Level
Anxiety Self-Control
Appetite
Aspiration Prevention
Asthma Self-Management
Balance
Blood Coagulation
Blood Glucose Level
Blood Loss Severity
Blood Transfusion Reaction
Body Image
Body Mechanics Performance
Body Positioning: Self-Initiated
Bone Healing
Bowel Continence
Bowel Elimination
Breast Feeding Establishment
Infant
Maternal
Breastfeeding Maintenance
Breastfeeding Weaning
Burn Healing
Burn Recovery
Cardiac Disease Self-Management
Cardiac Pump Effectiveness
Cardiopulmonary Status
Caregiver Adaptation to Patient Institutionalization
Caregiver Emotional Health
Caregiver Home Care Readiness
Caregiver Lifestyle Disruption
Caregiver-Patient Relationship
Caregiver Performance
Direct Care
Indirect Care
Caregiver Physical Health
Caregiver Role Endurance
Caregiver Stressors
Caregiver Well-Being
Child Adaptation to Hospitalization
Child Development
1 Month
2 Months
4 Months
6 Months
12 Months
2 Years
3 Years
4 Years
5 Years
Middle Childhood
Adolescence
Circulation Status
Client Satisfaction
Access to Care Resources
Caring
Care Management
Communication
Continuity of Care
Cultural Needs Fulfillment
Functional Assistance
Pain Management
Physical Care
Physical Environment
Protection of Rights
Psychological Care
Safety
Symptom Control
Teaching
Technical Aspects of Care
Cognition
Cognitive Orientation
Comfort Status
Environment
Physical
Psychospiritual
Sociocultural
Comfortable Death
Communication
Expressive
Receptive
Community Competence
Community Disaster Readiness
APPENDIX B NIC and NOC Systems
●
337

Community Disaster Response
Community Health Status
Immunity
Community Risk Control
Chronic Disease
Communicable Disease
Lead Exposure
Violence
Community Violence Level
Compliance Behavior
Prescribed Diet
Prescribed Medication
Concentration
Coordinated Movement
Coping
Decision Making
Depression Level
Depression Self-Control
Development
Late Adulthood
Middle Adulthood
Young Adulthood
Diabetes Self-Management
Dignified Life Closure
Discharge Readiness
Independent Living
Supported Living
Discomfort Level
Distorted Thought Self-Control
Drug-Abuse Cessation Behavior
Electrolyte and Acid/Base Balance
Elopement Occurrence
Elopement Propensity Risk
Endurance
Energy Conservation
Fall Prevention Behavior
Falls Occurrence 
Family Coping
Family Functioning
Family Health Status
Family Integrity
Family Normalization
Family Participation in Professional Care
Family Resiliency 
Family Social Climate
Family Support During Treatment
Fatigue Level
Fear Level
Child
Fear Self-Control
Fetal Status
Antepartum
Intrapartum
Fluid Balance
Fluid Overload Severity
Gastrointestinal Function
Grief Resolution
Growth
Health Beliefs
Perceived Ability to Perform
Perceived Control
Perceived Resources
Perceived Threat
Health Orientation
Health Promoting Behavior
Health Seeking Behavior
Hearing Compensation Behavior
Heedfulness of Affected Side
Hemodialysis Access
Hope
Hydration
Hyperactivity Level
Identity
Immobility Consequences
Physiological
Psycho-Cognitive
Immune Hypersensitivity Response
Immune Status
Immunization Behavior
Impulse Self-Control
Infection Severity
Newborn
Information Processing
Joint Movement
Ankle
Elbow
Fingers
Hip
Knee
Neck
Passive
Shoulder
Spine
Wrist
Kidney Function
Knowledge
Arthritis Management
Asthma Management
Body Mechanics
Breastfeeding
Cancer Management
Cancer Threat Reduction
Cardiac Disease Management
Child Physical Safety
Conception Prevention
Congestive Heart Failure Management
Depression Management
Diabetes Management
Diet
Disease Process
Energy Conservation
Fall Prevention
Fertility Promotion
Health Behavior
Health Promotion
Health Resources
Hypertension Management
Illness Care
Infant Care
Infection Management
Labor and Delivery
Medication
Multiple Sclerosis Management
Ostomy Care
Pain Management
Parenting
338
●
APPENDIX B  NIC and NOC Systems

Personal Safety
Postpartum Maternal Health
Preconception Maternal Health
Pregnancy
Pregnancy and Postpartum Sexual Functioning
Prescribed Activity
Preterm Infant Care
Sexual Functioning
Substance Use Control
Treatment Procedure
Treatment Regimen
Weight Management
Leisure Participation
Loneliness Severity
Maternal Status
Antepartum
Intrapartum
Postpartum
Mechanical Ventilation Response: Adult
Mechanical Ventilation Weaning Response: Adult
Medication Response
Memory
Mobility
Mood Equilibrium
Motivation
Multiple Sclerosis: Self-Management
Nausea and Vomiting Control
Nausea and Vomiting: Disruptive Effects
Nausea and Vomiting Severity
Neglect Cessation
Neglect Recovery
Neurological Status
Autonomic
Central Motor Control
Consciousness
Cranial Sensory/Motor Function
Peripheral
Spinal Sensory/Motor Function
Newborn Adaptation
Nutritional Status
Biochemical Measures
Energy
Food and Fluid Intake
Nutrient Intake
Oral Hygiene
Ostomy Self-Care
Pain: Adverse Psychological Response
Pain Control
Pain: Disruptive Effects
Pain Level
Parent-Infant Attachment
Parenting
Adolescent Physical Safety
Early/Middle Childhood Physical Safety
Infant/Toddler Physical Safety
Parenting Performance
Parenting: Psychosocial Safety
Participation in Healthcare Decisions
Personal Autonomy
Personal Health Status
Personal Resiliency
Personal Safety Behavior
Personal Well-Being
Physical Aging
Physical Fitness
Physical Injury Severity
Physical Maturation
Female
Male
Play Participation
Postpartum Maternal Health Behavior
Post-Procedure Recovery
Prenatal Health Behavior
Pre-Procedure Readiness
Preterm Infant Organization
Psychomotor Energy
Psychosocial Adjustment: Life Change
Quality of Life
Respiratory Status
Airway Patency
Gas Exchange
Ventilation
Rest
Risk Control
Alcohol Use
Cancer
Cardiovascular Health
Drug Use
Hearing Impairment
Hyperthermia
Hypothermia
Infectious Process
Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STDs)
Sun Exposure
Tobacco Use
Unintended Pregnancy
Visual Impairment
Risk Detection
Role Performance
Safe Home Environment
Safe Wandering
Seizure Control
Self-Care Status
Self-Care
Activities of Daily Living (ADL)
Bathing
Dressing
Eating 
Hygiene
Instrumental Activities of Daily Living 
(IADL)
Non-Parenteral Medication
Oral Hygiene
Parenteral Medication
Toileting
Self-Direction of Care
Self-Esteem
Self-Mutilation Restraint
Sensory Function
Cutaneous
Hearing
Proprioception
Taste and Smell
Vision
APPENDIX B NIC and NOC Systems
●
339

Sexual Functioning
Sexual Identity
Skeletal Function 
Sleep
Smoking Cessation Behavior
Social Interaction Skills
Social Involvement
Social Support
Spiritual Health
Stress Level
Student Health Status
Substance Addiction Consequences
Substance Withdrawal Severity
Suffering Severity
Suicide Self-Restraint
Swallowing Status
Esophageal Phase
Oral Phase
Pharyngeal Phase 
Symptom Control
Symptom Severity
Perimenopause
Premenstrual Syndrome (PMS)
Systemic Toxin Clearance: Dialysis
Thermoregulation
Newborn
Tissue Integrity: Skin and Mucous Membranes
Tissue Perfusion
Abdominal Organs
Cardiac
Cellular
Cerebral
Peripheral
Pulmonary
Transfer Performance
Treatment Behavior: Illness or Injury
Urinary Continence
Urinary Elimination
Vision Compensation Behavior
Vital Signs
Weight: Body Mass
Weight Gain Behavior
Weight Loss Behavior
Weight Maintenance Behavior
Will to Live
Wound Healing
Primary Intention
Secondary Intention
Core Outcomes for Nursing
Specialty Areas
Air and Surface Transport 
Ambulatory Care
Anesthesia
Cardiac Rehabilitation
Chemical Dependency 
Community Health
Critical Care
Dermatology
Emergency Care
Gastroenterology
Genetics
Gerontology
Home Healthcare
Hospice and Palliative Care
Intravenous Therapy 
Medical-Surgical
Neonatology
Nephrology
Neuroscience
Nurse Practitioner
Oncology
Operating Room
Ophthalmology
Orthopaedics
Otorhinolaryngology and Head-Neck
Pain Management
Parish Nursing
Pediatrics
Pediatric Oncology
Perianesthesia
Postoperative Care 
Psychiatric-Mental Health 
Radiology 
Rehabilitation 
School Health
Spinal Cord Injury 
Urology
Vascular 
Women’s Health and Obstetrics
Source: Moorhead, S., Johnson, M., Maas, M. L., &
Swanson, E. (Eds.). (2013). Nursing Outcomes
Classification (NOC) (5th ed.). St. Louis: Mosby 
Elsevier. Reprinted with permission. 
340
●
APPENDIX B  NIC and NOC Systems
REFERENCES
Bulechek, G. M., Butcher, H. K., Dochterman, J. M., & 
Wagner, C. (eds.). (2013). Nursing Interventions Classifica-
tion (NIC) (6th ed.). St. Louis: Mosby Elsevier.
Moorhead, S., Johnson, M., Maas, M. L., & Swanson, E.
(eds.). (2013). Nursing Outcomes Classification (NOC) 
(5th ed.). St. Louis: Mosby Elsevier.

A
Abilities, 12
ACA. See Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA)
Academic Center for Evidence-Based Practice (ACE) 
Star Model, 86, 86f
Acceptability, in readiness to learn, 147
Access to services
of aging adults, 243
as health indicator, 241
of minorities, 249
in rural populations, 250
Accommodation
in cognitive development, 26
in cognitive learning, 140, 145
Accountability measures, criteria for, 221–222
Accountable care organization (ACO), 281, 285, 285t
Accreditation, goals of, 221–222
Achievement subsystem, in Johnson’s Behavioral System 
Model, 35
Act deontology, 203
Act utilitarianism, 203
Action
in critical thinking, 116
in Johnson’s Behavioral System Model, 35
in King’s Conceptual System, 37
in Transtheoretical Approach, 187–189, 188t
Active listening, 104
Activities of daily life (ADLs), in healthy life, 243
Adaptation, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 42–44
Addiction, in colleagues, 208–209
Adhocracy. See Organic organizational structures
Adjourning stage, in group development, 130
Administrative costs, in healthcare costs, 279
Administrative health information systems, 261
Adult learning theories, 141–142
Advance directives, ethic decisions about, 205–206
Advanced practice nurses (APRNs), roles of, 11
Advice, 106, 106b, 131
Affective domain, 145, 149, 153
Affective learning, 12
Affirming personal becoming, in Parse’s Theory of 
Humanbecoming, 49
Affordable Care Act (ACA). See Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act (ACA)
Age groups, in Healthy People, 239, 241–242
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), 10, 86–87
Aggressive subsystem, in Johnson’s Behavioral System 
Model, 35
Aggressor role, 133
Aging
theories on, 244
types of, 244
Aging adults
abuse of, 247
characterizing, 244–246, 245b
increase in population, 242–247
major health problems of, 245–246
needs of, 246–247
Alternatives, in therapeutic communication, 105
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN), 5
characteristics of, 6, 7t
on cultural care competencies, 68, 69t
educational standards of, 5b
on holistic nursing, 67
on organizational culture, 172
on research, 79–80
on roles of nurses, 11
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses, on evidence-based
practice, 87
American Nurses Association (ANA)
characteristics of, 6, 7t
code of ethics of, 5, 6–8, 203–204, 206, 210
on delegation, 177
on essentials of professional nursing, 15
on genetics, 208
on Just Culture, 225
on research, 79, 82–83, 86
on safety, 226
taxonomies of, 265
American Nurses Association (ANA) standards
on collaboration, 10
on education, 322
ethics in, 204, 204b
on holistic nursing, 67
on nursing informatics, 269
on professional practice evaluation, 10
on resource utilization, 10
on specialties, 11
American Organization of Nurse Executives (AONE), 170–171
ANA. See American Nurses Association (ANA)
Analysis
in behavioral objectives, 148
in critical thinking, 116
in empirical research, 84
Andragogical model of learning, 141–142
Appearance, in nonverbal communication, 104
Applicability, in readiness to learn, 147
Application, in behavioral objectives, 148
Approval
in communication, 131
in empirical research, 84
APRNs (advanced practice nurses), roles of, 11
Assessment
in critical thinking, 120, 120b
in delegation, 177
in Health Patterning Practice Method, 42
in learning, 149–150
in negotiation, 175–176
in nursing informatics, 269
in teaching-learning process, 139
in unfreezing, 196–197
Assignments, preparing, 14–15
Assimilation
in cognitive development, 26
in cognitive learning, 140, 145
Attachment or affiliative subsystem, in Johnson’s Behavioral System
Model, 34
Attendance, in effective groups, 128
Attention, management of, 170
Attitudes, in critical thinking, 119
Auditory learning style, 14, 146
Authentic Leadership Approach, 169t
Authority
in King’s Conceptual System, 36
in nursing profession, 4
Autocratic leadership style, 130
Autonomy
definition of, 202
in professionalism, 8
Awareness
in critical thinking, 118
in negotiation, 176
B
Basic conditioning factors, in Orem’s Self-Care Framework, 40
Basic human rights
definition of, 202
in research, 81
341
INDEX
Note: Page numbers followed by an “f” indicate a figure, page numbers followed by a “b” indicate a box, and page numbers followed by a “t” indicate a
table.

Behavior(s)
in health promotion model, 62–64, 63f
in health-belief model, 62
modeling by leaders, 171
Behavior modification, 140
Behavioral objectives, in teaching, 147–149
Behavioral Systems model, 28–29, 34–36, 35b
Behaviorism
classical conditioning, 139–140
operant conditioning, 140
Belmont Report, 81
Belongingness, in hierarchy of needs, 24–25, 24f
Benchmarking, 222
Beneficence
definition of, 202
in research, 81
Benefit-burden ratios, 308
Bills, laws from, 293–296
Blaming, 131
Blocker role, 133
Body image, in King’s Conceptual System, 36
Body language, in nonverbal communication, 103
Boundary, in systems, 28, 28f
Briefs-Huddles-Debriefs, 109
Bureaucratic leadership, 169–170
Bureaucratic organizations, 160–161, 160f, 161f, 162f
Business, in healthcare, 308–309
C
Care, in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and
Universality, 45
Care systems, in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and
Universality, 45–46
Caregivers, for aging adults, 246
Caring, in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and
Universality, 45
Case management, in Continuous Quality 
Improvement, 231
Case management operations, in Professional-Technological Operations
of Nursing, 40–41, 40b
Case studies, for critical thinking, 120, 121b–122b
Cause-and-effect diagrams, in quality improvement, 227–228, 228f
CCNE (Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education), 4
Centralized organizational structures, 165
Change
definition of, 183
Diffusion of Innovations model of, 186–187
embracing, 324, 324
external sources of, 194–195
in families, 193–194
four quadrants of, 190, 190b
in groups, 193–194
Havelock’s theory of, 185–186
in individuals, 193–194
internal sources of, 194
Lewin’s theory of, 183–184, 184f
Lippitt’s seven stages of, 184–185, 184f
planned, 183
resistance to, 193
suggestions for, 196–198
theories of, 183–189, 191t
Transtheoretical Approach to, 187–189, 188t
Change agents
definition of, 183
in Diffusion of Innovations model, 187
in Four Quadrants of Change, 190
in Havelock’s theory of change, 186
in Lippitt’s model of change, 185
in moving, 191, 192t
in organizational change, 195–196
in refreezing, 191–193, 192t
in Transtheoretical Approach, 189
in unfreezing, 190–191, 192t
Change quotient, 197
Changing the subject, 106, 106b
Channel, in communication models, 98
Charitable era of healthcare, 215
Check sheets, 228, 229f
Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP), 282t, 283
Choice, in Johnson’s Behavioral System Model, 35
Chronic disease, in healthcare costs, 279
Chronic illness model, 64–66, 66t
Chronic Illness Trajectory Framework, 64–65
Chronicity, in aging adults, 245–246
Circular questions, 105
Circumstances, in delegation, 177
Civic involvement, 300
Clarity, in verbal communication, 101–102
Classical conditioning, 139–140
Client system, in Neuman’s Systems Model, 38–39, 39b
Clients, in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and
Universality, 46
Clinical care
formalized measures of, 215
as measure of quality, 215
Clinical health information systems, 261
Clinical nurse leaders (CNLs), roles of, 11, 307
Clinical protocols, in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and
Universality, 46–47
Close-ended questions, 105
Closure, in groups, 131–132
Code of ethics
of ANA, 5, 6–8
in nursing profession, 5, 203–204
Coding, for reimbursements, 283–284
Cognator coping subsystem, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 43
Cognitive development theory, 26
Cognitive domain, 145, 153
Cognitive learning, 12
Cognitive learning styles, 145–146
Cognitive learning theories, 140–141
Cognitive level, in readiness to learn, 146
Cognitive processes, in behavioral objectives, 148–149
Cognitive processes dimension, 148–149
Cohesiveness, in effective groups, 128, 131
Collaboration
communication in, 107
definition of, 107
encouraging, 171
in evidence-based practice, 90
in management theory, 167
in nursing environment, 318–321, 320b
in organizational culture, 173
in professionalism, 10
in public health, 252
Colleagues
communication with, 106–109
impaired/incompetent, 208–209
Collegiality, 320
Coming-to-be-present, in Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming, 49
Commanding, in nursing management, 168
Commoditization of healthcare, 308
Common-cause variation, 230
Communicable diseases, spread of, 305
Communication
barriers to, 105–106, 107
with colleagues, 106–109
definition of, 98
in delegation, 177
in effective groups, 128, 131
in Havelock’s theory of change, 185–186
improving, 106–109
in King’s Conceptual System, 36
by leaders, 171
metacommunication, 100–101
methods in organizations, 174
in negotiation, 175
nonverbal, 102–104
in organizational culture, 173
in organizational groups, 134–135
in professionalism, 9
as skill, 98
standardized nursing language in, 265–266
strategies for, 107–109
technology in, 98
342
●
Index

therapeutic, 104–106, 104b
verbal, 101–102
Communication models
components of, 98
health communication model, 99–100, 99f
source-message-channel-receiver (SMCR) model, 98–99
Communication systems, in organizational structure, 159
Community
leadership positions in, 9
in organizational culture, 174
Community involvement, 300
Community nursing, Healthy People and, 251–252
Community sanction, in nursing profession, 4
Compensatory life process, in Roy’s Adaptation 
Model, 43
Competence, in nursing, 321–322
Competencies
Institute of Medicine on, 315
in leadership, 170, 170b, 171
in nursing informatics, 260, 261b
Pew Health Professions Commission on, 315
for quality improvement, 217
in Synergy Model, 44
Compliance, in learning, 146
Compromised life process, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 43
Computer, as learning resource, 14
Computer applications, in health information management 
systems, 266–267
Computerized physician order entry (CPOE), 266
Concept, definition of, 21
Concept formation, in critical thinking, 119
Concept mapping, 114–115
Conceptual environment, in Levine’s Conservation 
Model, 38
Conceptual models
advantages of using, 52–53
Chronic Illness Trajectory Framework, 64–65
definition of, 20, 34
function of, 20–21, 34
Johnson’s Behavioral Systems Model, 28–29, 34–36, 35b
King’s Conceptual System, 36–37, 36b
Levine’s Conservation Model, 37–38, 38b
Neuman’s Systems Model, 38–39, 39b
of nursing, 34–44
Orem’s Self-Care Framework, 39–41, 40b
paradigms and, 3
risks of using, 53
Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human Beings, 42, 42b
Roy’s Adaptation Model, 42–44, 44b
selecting, 54
in structural hierarchy of contemporary nursing, 20–21, 20f
Synergy Model, 44
using, 54
Conceptual skills, of leaders, 170
Conceptual System, 36–37, 36b
Concrete operations stages of cognitive development, 26
Confidentiality
definition of, 202
in research, 81–82
Confirmation, in Diffusion of Innovations model, 187
Conflict Resolution Network, 131, 131b
Congressional committees, 294, 295t
Consciousness, in Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding
Consciousness, 47
Consensus taker role, 132, 133t
Conservation, Levine’s Conservation Model, 38, 38b
Conservation Model, 37–38, 38b
Construct, definition of, 21
Consultants, change agents as, 185
Consumer needs, in organizational change, 166
Contemplation, in Transtheoretical Approach, 
187–189, 188t
Contemporary nursing knowledge, structural hierarchy of, 
20–21, 20f
Contexts
in critical thinking, 118
in health communication model, 100
Contextual stimuli, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 42
Contingency Approach, 169t
Continued competence, 321
Continuing education, 11–13
in competence, 321
resources for, 14–15
time management in, 13–14
Continuous Quality Improvement (CQI), 222–224
Continuum of standardization for organizations, 160, 160f
Control, in King’s Conceptual System, 36
Control operations, in Professional-Technological Operations of
Nursing, 40b, 41
Controlling, in nursing management, 168
Conventional morality, moral development theory, 26, 27t
Coordinating, in nursing management, 168
Coordinators
change agents as, 185
in groups, 132, 132t
Coping, in King’s Conceptual System, 36
Core measures, standardization of, 216
Costs
of continuing education, 13
of healthcare, 280
CPOE (computerized physician order entry), 266
CPT (Current Procedural Terminology), 284
CQI. See Continuous Quality Improvement (CQI)
Created environment, in Neuman’s Systems Model, 39
Creation, in behavioral objectives, 148
Creative imagining, in Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming, 49
Creativity, in effective groups, 128
Crew Resource Management (CRM), 225
Critical analysis, 22–23
Critical care, conceptual model for, 44
Critical reflection, 22, 142–143
Critical thinking
definition of, 114, 116, 117t
descriptions of role of, 116–118, 117t
developing skills, 118–119
factors in, 115
measures of, 118
in nursing, 119–120, 120b, 121b–122b
Critiques, of research, 87–90, 87b
CRM (Crew Resource Management), 225
Cultural care
Culture Care Diversity and Universality, 69–70
Giger and Davidhizar Transcultural Assessment Model, 70
Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and 
Universality, 45, 73
models of, 69–71
nurse’s role in, 71–73
Purnell Model for Cultural Competence, 71, 72f
Spector’s Health Traditions Model, 70–71
Cultural competence, 68, 71, 72f
Cultural variations
in nonverbal communication, 102–103
in therapeutic communication, 105
Cultural-congruent nursing care, in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care
Diversity and Universality, 45–46
Culturally unique individual, 70
Culturalogical assessment, in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care
Diversity and Universality, 46
Culture
in health perceptions, 67–71
in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and Universality, 45
Culture Care Diversity and Universality, 69–70
Current Procedural Terminology (CPT), 284
CUS words, 109
Customers, in organizational change, 195
D
Data. See also Nursing informatics (NI)
analysis tools for, 228, 230f
in critical thinking, 119
definition of, 260–261
in empirical research, 84
in Healthy People, 242
in qualitative research, 85
in research critique, 88–89
Index     ●
343

tools for collecting, 228, 229f
transformation of, 260–261
Data sheets, 228, 229f
Database management, 267–268
Debrief, 109
Decentralized organizational structures, 165
Decision making
critical thinking in, 120
in Diffusion of Innovations model, 187
in effective groups, 128
ethical, 204–209
in King’s Conceptual System, 36
model for, 204–205
in organizational culture, 173
Decision trees, 115
Declaration of Helsinki, 80–81
Decoder, in communication models, 98
Defensive medicine, 308–309
Delegation, in nursing, 176–178, 177b
Deming’s principles for transformation, 217–219
Democratic leadership style, 130, 170
Deontology, 203
Dependency subsystem, in Johnson’s Behavioral System Model, 35
Descriptive statistics, in research critique, 88–89
Descriptive theories, 22
Determinants of health, 239
Developmental theories, 25–29, 27t
Developmental variable, in Neuman’s Systems Model, 38
Diagnoser role, 132, 133t
Diagnosis
in Adaptation Model Nursing Process, 43
critical thinking in, 120, 120b
in Nursing Process Format, 39
in teaching-learning process, 139
Diagnostic operations, in Professional-Technological Operations of
Nursing, 40b, 41
Diagnostic-related groups (DRGs), 280, 283–284
Diagram, in Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding
Consciousness, 48
Differentiated nursing practice, 318
Diffusion of Innovations model, 186–187
Direction, in delegation, 177
Disabilities
in aging adults, 245–246
in Healthy People, 239
Disagreer role, 132, 132t
Disturbance, in King’s Conceptual System, 37
Doctor of nursing practice (DNP), 307, 323
Domains
in behavioral objective development, 148
in teaching-learning process, 145
Dominator role, 133
DRGs (diagnostic-related groups), 280, 283–284, 281t
Drive, in Johnson’s Behavioral System Model, 35
Driving forces
in Lewin’s theory of change, 183, 184
in organizational change, 196
Drucker, Peter, 167
Drug dependency, in colleagues, 208–209
Durable power of attorney, 205–206
E
E-books, for nursing informatics, 260
Economic era of healthcare, 216
Education
in community sanction, 4–5, 5b
in competence, 321–322
continuing, 11–13
essential, 322–323
for holistic nursing, 67
nurse educators in, 323
nursing informatics careers in, 270–271
nursing informatics in, 259
in professional culture, 6
in professionalism, 8–9
research in, 79–80
Educational groups, focus of, 127
Effective groups, 127–128
Efficacy, in professional practice, 9
Efficiency
in management theory, 166
in professional practice, 9
Eight ages of man, 25–26, 26f
Elaborator role, 132, 132t
Elder abuse, 247
Electronic health record (EHR), 262–265
benefits of, 263b
meaningful use of, 262–263, 263b, 264t
purposes of, 263–264
Electronic prescribing, 266
Eliminative subsystem, in Johnson’s Behavioral System 
Model, 35
Embedded organizational structures, 165
Emerging populations, 70
Empirical research, 83–84, 85t
Empirical-rational change philosophies, 183, 193
Employers, in health insurance financing, 279
Employment, in United States, 305
Encoder, in communication models, 98
Encourager role, 132, 133t
Encouraging elaboration, in therapeutic communication, 105
Endurance, in negotiation, 176
Energizer role, 132, 132t
Energy, conservation of, 38
Energy fields, in Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human Beings, 42
Environment
in adult teaching and learning, 142
in change process, 193–194
collaboration in, 318–321, 320b
in communication models, 98
for effective groups, 127
in learning, 145
in Levine’s Conservation Model, 37–38, 38b
in metaparadigm of nursing, 3–4
in Neuman’s Systems Model, 39
nursing practice supported by, 318
in organizational change, 166, 194–195
in organizational culture, 172
in organizational structure, 159–160
in root cause analysis, 225–226
for studying, 14
in systems, 28, 28f
Environmental context, in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity
and Universality, 45
Environmental health, in professionalism, 10–11
Environmental quality, as health indicator, 241
Equifinality, in systems, 28
Equipment, in root cause analysis, 225–226
Esteem, in hierarchy of needs, 24f, 25
Ethical decisions, 204–209
Ethics
principles of, 202–203
in professionalism, 6–8
in research, 80–83, 81b
systems of, 203
Ethnicity, in health perceptions, 67–71
Ethnohistory, in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and
Universality, 45
Euthanasia, 206
Evaluation
in Adaptation Model Nursing Process, 43
in behavioral objectives, 148
critical thinking in, 120, 120b
in delegation, 177
as goal of accreditation, 221–222
in Health Patterning Practice Method, 42
in learning, 149
in nursing informatics, 269b
in organizational change, 195–196
in teaching-learning process, 139, 152–153
Evidence-based practice
barriers to, 90–91
computer applications in, 267
definition of, 79
electronic resources for, 259, 259b
evolution of, 86–87, 86f
importance of, 79
344
●
Index

incorporating research into, 89–90
market forces in, 308
in professionalism, 9
Examinations, 15
Executive branch, 292
Explanatory theories, 22
Expresser role, 132, 133t
External criticism, 22
External environment, in Neuman’s Systems Model, 39
Eye contact, in nonverbal communication, 103
F
Face-to-face discussions, in Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming, 49
Facial expressions, in nonverbal communication, 103–104
Fact finders, change agents as, 185
False reassurance, 105, 106b
Families
advance directives and, 206
of aging adults, 246
change in, 193–194
Fault-finding, in critical thinking, 118
Federal government, structure and function of, 292–293
Feedback
in communication models, 98
in delegation, 177
in systems, 28, 28f
Fee-for-service (FFS) plans, 280
Feelings, in critical thinking, 117–118, 119
Fidelity, definition of, 202
Field studies, 84
Field Theory, 183–184, 184f
Findings, in empirical research, 84
Fiscal responsibility, 286
Five-column format, critical thinking and, 114
Flat organizational structures, 161f, 165
Flexible line of defense, in Neuman’s Systems Model, 38–39
Flow charts, in quality improvement, 227, 227f
Focal stimuli, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 42
Focusing, in therapeutic communication, 105
Follower role, 132, 133t
Follow-up, in Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding 
Consciousness, 48
Formal goals, of organizations, 165
Formal groups
in professional culture, 5–6
structure of, 126
Formal nursing knowledge. See also Conceptual models; Nursing 
theory
advantages of, 52–53
components of, 34
risks of using, 53
Formal operations stages of cognitive development, 26
Formal organizational functions, 166
Forming stage, for groups, 129, 129t
Foundation health measures, 241
Four Quadrants of Change, 190, 190b
14 Points for Management, 217–219, 217b
Framework
Chronic Illness Trajectory Framework, 64–65
definition of, 20
selecting, 29–30
Full disclosure
definition of, 202
in research, 81
Functional group roles, 132–133, 132t, 133t
Functional health patterns, 66, 66b
Functional organizational structure, 162, 163f
Future, addressing, 197–198, 198b
Future study hypotheses, in qualitative research, 85
G
Gatekeeper role, 132, 133t
GDP (gross domestic product), 277
General system theory, 28–29, 28f
Generalist nurses, roles of, 11
Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act 
(GINA), 208
Genomics, ethical decisions about, 207–208
Gestalt theory, 140
Gestures, in nonverbal communication, 102–103
Giger and Davidhizar Transcultural Assessment Model, 70, 70b
Glimpsing the paradoxical, in Parse’s Theory of 
Humanbecoming, 49
Global health
definition of, 305
health disparities in, 310
Global issues, in health policy, 306
GNP (gross national product), 277
Goal(s)
in Adaptation Model Nursing Process, 43
communicating, 174
in effective groups, 128, 131
in Johnson’s Behavioral System Model, 35
in learning, 146
in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and 
Universality, 46
in Nursing Process Format, 39
of organizations, 158, 165–166
Goal achievement, in King’s Conceptual System, 37
Government
influencing, 300
structure and function of, 292–293
Grand theories, 22, 45–49
Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and Universality, 
45–47, 46b
Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding Consciousness, 
47–48, 47b
Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming, 48–49, 49b
selecting, 54
using, 54
Grassroots efforts, 298–299, 299b
Great Man Approach, 169t
Gross domestic product (GDP), 277
Gross national product (GNP), 277
Group(s)
change in, 193–194
characteristics of, 126–127
composition of, 126–127
definition of, 126
difficult people in, 134, 134b
effective, 127–128
evaluating effectiveness of, 128–129
ineffective, 128–129
leadership in, 127, 128, 130–132
in learning, 150–152, 151t
organizational, 134–135
orienting members of, 130
process teams as, 227
roles in, 127, 132–134, 132t, 133t
size of, 127
stages of development, 129–130, 129t
virtual meetings, 135
Group assignments, 15
Group focus, 127
Group identity mode, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 43
Group process, 126
basics of, 129–134
Group structure, 126
establishing, 130
Growth and development, in King’s Conceptual System, 36
H
Habit, critical thinking as, 118
Havelock’s theory of change, 185–186
HCM (health communication model), 99–100, 99f
Healing from Childhood Maltreatment, 52
Health
definition of, 59
in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and 
Universality, 45
in metaparadigm of nursing, 3–4
in research, 81–82
social determinants of, 248
theories of, 60–67
Health communication model (HCM), 99–100, 99f
Index     ●
345

Health disparities
addressing, 248–249
in global health, 310
in Healthy People, 239
in minorities, 247–249, 248b
nursing shortage and, 307
Health equity, 248, 286
Health indicators, 240, 240b
of aging adults, 245, 245b
in Healthy People, 240, 240b
Health information management systems
computer applications in, 266–267
electronic health record in, 262–265
electronic prescribing in, 266
goals of, 261
integration of, 261, 262b
nonintegrated, 261, 262f
overview of, 261–270
standardized nursing language in, 265–266
Health insurance
in healthcare economics, 279–280
under Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, 284–286, 285t
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), 
81–82, 203
Health maintenance organizations (HMOs), in Medicare, 282
Health Patterning Practice Method, 42, 42b
Health perceptions, cultural influences on, 67–71
Health policy, and nursing, 305–306. See also Laws
Health professional, in health communication model (HCM), 
99–100
Health promotion model, 62–64, 65t
Health promotion strategies, 59, 237–239, 238t, 240
Health protection strategies, 59, 237–239, 238t
Health Traditions Model, 70–71
Health-belief model, 61–62, 63f, 65t
Healthcare
business in, 308–309
privatization of, 307–308
Healthcare economics
cost in, 280
definition of, 277
expenditures per capita, 277–278, 277f, 278t
historical context for, 279–280
price, 280
reimbursement in, 280
trends in, 277–279
Healthcare organizations, nursing informatics careers in, 270
Healthcare proxies, 205–206
Healthy Communities
focus of, 237
objectives of, 239
Healthy People, 237–242, 240b
on aging adults, 242–247
community nursing and, 251–252
focus of, 237, 241–242
goals and objectives of, 237, 238t, 239, 241–242
on minority health, 247–249
priority areas of, 237–239, 238t
on rural health, 249–250
Helicy, in Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human Beings, 42
Henderson, Virginia, 15, 34
Heterogeneous groups, 126–127
Hierarchical order, in systems, 28
Hierarchical structure, of organizations, 158–160
Hierarchy of needs, 23–25, 24f, 146, 167
High-level wellness, 60–61, 61f
HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act), 
81–82, 203
Historical perspectives, on quality, 215–217
History
in organizational change, 195
in organizational culture, 173
HMOs (health maintenance organizations), in Medicare, 282
Holism, 66–67, 114
Holistic view, 68
Home health care, resources for, 10
Homogenous groups, 126–127
Hospitalizations, of aging adults, 243–244
Hostile role, 133
Huddle, 109
Human beings
in metaparadigm of nursing, 3–4
in root cause analysis, 225–226
Human genome, 207–208
Human nature, in management theories, 167
Human skills, of leaders, 170
Humanbecoming, in Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming, 48–49
Humanism, 141
Hygiene factors, in management theories, 167
Hypotheses
in empirical research, 83
in qualitative research, 85
in research critique, 88
I
“I PASS the BATON,” 108
ICD (International Classification of Diseases) codes, 284
ICN (International Council of Nurses), characteristics of, 6, 7t
ICNP (International Classification for Nursing Practice), 266
Ideologic goals, of organizations, 165
Illness, theories of, 60–67
Impaired/incompetent colleagues, 208–209
Implementation
critical thinking in, 120, 120b
in Diffusion of Innovations model, 187
in nursing informatics, 269
in teaching-learning process, 139
Income, of aging adults, 243
Independent learning activities, 267
Indicators for measurement, 229–230
Individual, change in, 193–194
Individual perceptions, in health-belief model, 62
Ineffective groups, 128–129
Infectious diseases, as health indicator, 241
Inferential statistics, in research critique, 88–89
Informal groups
in professional culture, 6
structure of, 126
Informal organizational functions, 166
Informal power, 175
Information giver role, 132, 132t
Information links, change agents as, 185
Information seeker role, 132, 132t
Informed consent
decisions about, 205
definition of, 202
Ingestive subsystem, in Johnson’s Behavioral System Model, 35
Initiator/contributor role, 132, 132t
Injury, as health indicator, 241
Innovation
definition of, 186
steps for, 196, 196b
Innovator subsystem control process, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 43
Input, in systems, 28, 28f
Institute for Healthcare Improvement, 226
Institute of Medicine (IOM)
on nursing, 315–316, 317t, 320, 322–325
on quality chasm, 315–317
reports on medical errors by, 10, 224, 315
Institutional arrangements, in organizational culture, 174
Institutional Review Board (IRB), 82
Instruments, in research critique, 88–89
Insurance companies, nursing informatics careers in, 271
Integrality, in Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human Beings, 42
Integrated delivery systems, 309
Integrated life process, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 43
Intelligences, 143, 143t
Interaction, in King’s Conceptual System, 36
Interaction-Transaction Process, in King’s Conceptual System, 
36–37, 36b
Interdependence mode, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 43
Interdisciplinary relationships, in organizational culture, 173
Internal criticism, 22
Internal environment, in Neuman’s Systems Model, 39
International Classification for Nursing Practice (ICNP), 266
International Classification of Diseases (ICD) codes, 284
International Council of Nurses (ICN), characteristics of, 6, 7t
346
●
Index

Interpersonal communication, 98
Interpersonal skills
in Havelock’s theory of change, 185–186
in negotiation, 175
Interpersonal systems
in King’s Conceptual System, 36
in organizational structure, 159
Interpersonal variables, in communication models, 98
Interpretation, in empirical research, 84
Intershift Report, 108
Intervention
in Adaptation Model Nursing Process, 43
in community nursing, 252
Intervention/action, 38
Interview, in Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding
Consciousness, 47
Intonation, in verbal communication, 101
Intraorganizational groups, 134
Involvement
in nursing profession, 323–324
resistance to change and, 193
IOM. See Institute of Medicine (IOM)
ISHAPED, 108
Issues
in critical thinking, 118
in nursing informatics, 269
J
Jargon, 106, 106b
Jewish Chronic Disease Hospital study, 81, 81b
Johnson’s Behavioral Systems model, 28–29, 34–36, 35b
Judgment, in King’s Conceptual System, 37
Judicial branch, 292–293
Juran Trilogy, 219–221, 220b
Just Culture, 225
Justice, definition of, 202
Just-in-time learning, 222–224
K
Kant, Immanuel, 203
Kinesics, in nonverbal communication, 103
Kinesthetic learning style, 14, 146
King’s Conceptual System, 36–37, 36b
King’s Theory of Goal Attainment, 73
Know-it-all role, 133
Knowledge
in behavioral objectives, 148–149
building, 12–13
in critical thinking, 117, 120
definition of, 12
in Diffusion of Innovations model, 187
from nursing informatics, 261
Knowledge base, as characteristic of profession, 3–4
Knowledge transformation, 86
Knowledge workers, managers as, 167
L
Laissez-faire leadership style, 130, 170
Language
in critical thinking, 118
in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and 
Universality, 45
in readiness to learn, 146
Laws
by congressional committee, 294, 295t
definition of, 293
impact of, 296
influencing, 298–299
on nursing practice, 298
statutory, 293–296
types of, 294t
Lay caregivers, 246
Leadership
challenges to, 171
and collaboration, 107
competencies in, 170, 170b, 171
definition of, 168
in electronic health record implementation, 265
in evidence-based practice, 91
in groups, 127, 128, 130–132
in nursing, 170–172
in organizational culture, 172–173
in organizational structure, 159, 165
in professionalism, 9
in quality, 221–222
styles of, 130, 169–170
theories of, 168–169, 169t
Leading health indicators, in Healthy People, 240, 240b
Leapfrog group, 226
Learning. See also Teaching; Teaching-learning process
categories of, 12
definition of, 12, 144
as empowerment, 12
environment in, 145
in King’s Conceptual System, 36
planning for, 149–150
readiness for, 146–147
resources for, 14–15
thriving in, 15
Learning organization, 222
Learning styles, 13–14
cognitive, 145–146
in teaching strategies, 150–151
Learning theories. See Teaching-learning process
Legislative branch, 292
Legislative process, 296b, 296f
Legitimate power, 175
Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and Universality, 45–47,
46b, 73
Lesson plans, 149
Letting Go stage of transition, 189, 189b
Levine’s Conservation Model, 37–38, 38b
Lewin, Kurt, 183–184
Librarians, as learning resources, 14–15
Licensing, 321
Life expectancy, 243t
Likelihood of action, in health-belief model, 62
Limited theories, 22
Lines of resistance, in Neuman’s Systems Model, 39
Lingering presence, in Parse’s Theory of 
Humanbecoming, 49
Literacy, in readiness to learn, 146
Literature
in empirical research, 83
in qualitative research, 84–85
in research critique, 88
Living wills, 205–206
Lobbying, 298–299
Local government, 293
Longevity, factors in, 246
Loudmouth role, 133
Love, in hierarchy of needs, 24–25, 24f
Low-income groups, in Healthy People, 239
M
Magico-religious view, 68
Magnet status, 318
Maintenance, in Transtheoretical Approach, 187–189, 188t
Malpractice, 308–309
Managed care
nursing informatics careers in, 271
payment for, 280
Management
definition of, 166
14 Points for Management, 217–219, 217b
in nursing, 168
in organizational culture, 173
in organizational structure, 159, 165
theories of, 166–168
Management by objectives (MBO), 167–168
Managers
roles of, 166–167
skills of, 168
Market forces, in healthcare, 308
Index     ●
347

Market justice, 309
Maslow’s theory of human motivation, 23–25, 24f, 146, 167
Matrix organizational structure, 163–165, 164f
Maturity, in critical thinking, 117
Meaning
management of, 170
in Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming, 48–49
in verbal communication, 101
Measurement programs, for quality improvement, 228–231
Medicaid, 282t, 283
Medical errors
miscommunication in, 106
prevalence of, 310
reports on, 10–11, 316
Medical home, 309
Medical savings account (MSA), 280–281
Medicare, 281–283, 281t
Member participation, in effective groups, 128
Membership, in effective groups, 127
Men’s Healing from Childhood Maltreatment, 52
Mental health, as health indicator, 240–241
Message, in communication models, 98
Metacommunication, 100–101
Metaparadigm
definition of, 3
in structural hierarchy of contemporary nursing, 20–21, 20f
Middle-range theories, 49–52, 50t–52t
definition of, 22, 49
Orlando’s Theory of the Deliberative Nursing Process, 49–50
Peplau’s Theory of Interpersonal Relations, 49
in structural hierarchy of contemporary nursing, 20–21, 20f
Transitions Theory, 52
Watson’s Theory of Human Caring, 49–50
Minimal risk, in research, 81
Minority health, 247–249
Mission
in community nursing, 252
in organizational culture, 173–174
of organizations, 165
Mixed organizational structures, 165
Model, definition of, 20
Model for Cultural Competence, 71, 72f
Modifying factors, in health-belief model, 62
Monitoring, as goal of accreditation, 221–222
Monopolizer role, 133
Moral development theory, 26–28, 27t
Motivation
Maslow’s theory of, 23–25, 24f, 146, 167
in readiness to learn, 146–147
Motivational management theories, 167
Moving
change agents in, 191, 192t
in Diffusion of Innovations model, 187
in Havelock’s theory of change, 186
in Lewin’s theory of change, 184
in Lippitt’s model of change, 185
in organizational change, 195–196
in Transtheoretical Approach, 189
MSA (medical savings account), 280–281
Multiple intelligences theory, 143, 143t, 146
Mutual goal setting, in King’s Conceptual System, 37
Mutual Recognition Compact, 268
Myers-Briggs Inventory, 14b, 145–146
N
NANDA-I taxonomy, 265
Narrative, in Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding Consciousness,
47–48
National Center for Nursing Research (NCNR), 80
National Council of State Boards of Nursing, 6, 7t
National Database of Nursing Quality Indicators (NDNQI), 
217, 268
National Hospital Quality Measures, 216, 217b
National Institute of Nursing Research (NINR), 80
National League for Nursing (NLN), characteristics of, 6, 7t
National Patient Safety Goals, 216
National Quality Forum (NQF), 226
NCNR (National Center for Nursing Research), 80
NDNQI (National Database of Nursing Quality Indicators), 217
Negotiation, in nursing, 175–176
Neuman’s Systems Model, 38–39, 39b
Neutral Zone stage of transition, 189, 189b
New Beginning stage of transition, 189, 189b
Newly insured persons, 306
Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding Consciousness, 47–48, 47b
Newtonian physics, 29
NI. See Nursing informatics (NI)
NIC (Nursing Interventions Classification), 265–266, 332–337
Nightingale, Florence, 79, 170
NINR (National Institute of Nursing Research), 80
NLN (National League for Nursing), characteristics of, 6, 7t
NMMDS (Nursing Management Minimum Data Set), 265–266
NOC (Nursing Outcomes Classification), 265–266, 337–340
Noncompliance, learning and, 146
Nonfunctional group roles, 133
Nonmaleficence, definition of, 202
Nonverbal communication, 102–104
Normal line of defense, in Neuman’s Systems Model, 39
Normative-reeducative change philosophies, 183, 193
Norming stage, in group development, 129–130
NQF (National Quality Forum), 226
Nurse educators, 323
Nurse in Washington Internship (NWI), 305
Nurse practice acts, 296–298, 297b
Nurse-patient relationship
authority in, 4
collaboration in, 10
Nursing
as boundary discipline, 115
changing workforce in, 306–307
characteristics of profession, 3–6
collaboration in, 318–321, 320b
competence in, 321–322
conceptual models of, 34–44
critical thinking in, 114–118, 119–120, 120b, 121b–122b
definition of, 34
delegation in, 176–178, 177b
evolving roles in, 307
future of, 317–318, 317t
global health and, 305
health policy and, 305–306
involvement in, 323–324
leadership in, 170–172
in metaparadigm of nursing, 3–4
negotiation in, 175–176
patient safety risk factors in, 316
philosophy of. see Philosophy of nursing
political influence of, 292, 298–299, 305–306
professionalism in, 6–11
in quality care, 215
staffing adequacy in, 317–318
Nursing agency, in Orem’s Self-Care Framework, 40
Nursing associations, practice standards of, 4
Nursing Diagnostic and Treatment Process, 35, 35b
Nursing informatics (NI)
careers in, 270–271
data transformation in, 260–261
definition of, 259
health information management systems in, 261–270
overview of, 259–260
as specialty, 268–270
Nursing Interventions Classification (NIC), 265–266, 332–337
Nursing management, 168
Nursing Management Minimum Data Set (NMMDS), 265–266
Nursing Outcomes Classification (NOC), 265–266, 337–340
Nursing Process Format, 39, 39b
Nursing shortage, 306–307
Nursing theory
advantages of using, 52–53
challenges to, 29
definition of, 45
function of, 45
grand theories, 45–49
impact on practice, 29–30
King’s Theory of Goal Attainment, 73
348
●
Index

Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and Universality, 
45–47, 46b
levels of, 21–22, 21b
middle-range, 49–52
Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding Consciousness, 
47–48, 47b
Orlando’s Theory of the Deliberative Nursing Process, 49–50
paradigm shift in, 29
Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming, 48–49, 49b
Peplau’s Theory of Interpersonal Relations, 49
risks of using, 53
selecting, 54
situation-specific, 52
Transitions Theory, 52
using, 54
Watson’s Theory of Human Caring, 49–50
Nurturance, in Johnson’s Behavioral System Model, 35
O
Obama Care. See Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA)
Object permanence, in cognitive development, 26
Open-ended questions, 105
Openness
in Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human Beings, 42
in systems, 28
Operant conditioning, 140
Operational definitions, in research critique, 88
Operational environment, in Levine’s Conservation Model, 37
Opinion giver/seeker role, 132, 132t
Option rights, 205–206
Orem’s Self-Care Framework, 39–41, 40b
Organ procurement/donation, ethical decisions about, 207
Organic organizational structures, 161–165
Organization(s)
change in, 194–198
characteristics of, 158
communication channels in, 174
definition of, 158
functions of, 165–166
goal of, 165–166
hierarchical structure of, 158–160
intricacies of, 158
in King’s Conceptual System, 36
mission of, 165
professional. see also Professional organizations
in quality, 221–222
suggestions for change, 196–198
as system, 158–160, 159t
Organizational culture, 172
Organizational groups, 134–135
Organizational structures, 160–165
bureaucratic, 160–161, 160f, 161f, 162f
definition of, 160
organic, 161–165
Organizing, in nursing management, 168
Orlando’s Theory of the Deliberative Nursing 
Process, 49–50
Outcome(s)
critical thinking about, 115
documenting, 271
formalized measures of, 215
in nursing informatics, 269
in Nursing Process Format, 39
professional focus on, 10–11
in Synergy Model, 44
in teaching-learning process, 139, 152–153
Outcome indicators, 229
Output, in systems, 28, 28f
P
PAC (political action committees), 299
Pacing
in critical thinking, 119–120
in verbal communication, 101–102
Pandimensionality, in Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human 
Beings, 42
Paradigm
definition of, 3
metaparadigm, 3
purposes of, 20
Pareto diagrams, 228, 230f
Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming, 48–49, 49b
Participation
in effective groups, 128
in organizational culture, 173
Pathological aging, 244
Patient(s)
collaboration with, 10
in community nursing, 252
evaluating as learners, 152–153
Patient characteristics
in health communication model, 99–100
in Synergy Model, 44
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), 278, 284–286, 285t,
306, 309
Patient safety
focus on, 237
in professionalism, 10–11
Patient system, in organizational change, 194
Pattern
in gestalt theory, 140
in Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding 
Consciousness, 47
in Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human Beings, 42
Pattern recognition, in Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding
Consciousness, 47–48
Payers, for healthcare, 280
Peer review, in professionalism, 10
Peplau’s Theory of Interpersonal Relations, 49
Perception, in King’s Conceptual System, 36, 37
Perceptual environment, in Levine’s Conservation Model, 37
Performing stage, in group development, 130
Persistent vegetative state, ethical decisions about, 206
Personal health information (PHI), in research, 81–82
Personal health traditions, 70–71
Personal integrity, conservation of, 38
Personal space, in King’s Conceptual System, 36
Personal systems, in King’s Conceptual System, 36
Personality development theory, 25–26, 26f
Persuasion, in Diffusion of Innovations model, 187
Pew Health Professions Commission, 315
Phenomenology, 60
Phenomenon of interest, in Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding
Consciousness, 47
Philosophies
in community nursing, 252
in structural hierarchy of contemporary nursing, 
20–21, 20f
Philosophy of nursing, 15–16, 324
Physical appearance, in nonverbal communication, 104
Physical health, of aging adults, 244–245
Physical mode, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 43
Physiologic needs, in hierarchy of needs, 24, 24f
Physiological mode, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 43
Physiological variable, in Neuman’s Systems 
Model, 38
Planned change
definition of, 183
seven stages of, 184–185, 184f
Planning
critical thinking in, 120, 120b
in delegation, 177
in nursing informatics, 269
in nursing management, 168
in teaching-learning process, 139
Point-of-service (POS) plans, 280
Political action committees (PAC), 299
Politics
efficacy in, 299–301, 301b
nurses in, 292, 298–299, 305–306
Population
aging of, 242–247
in empirical research, 83
in organizational change, 195
Index     ●
349

Population health, definition of, 237
Postconventional morality, moral development theory, 26, 27t
Power
bases of, 175
definition of, 175
in effective groups, 128
in King’s Conceptual System, 36
Power components, in Orem’s Self-Care Framework, 40
Power-coercive change philosophies, 193
PPS (prospective payment systems), 280
Practice indicators, 229–230
Practice standards. See also American Nurses Association (ANA)
standards
on collaboration, 10
community sanction and, 4
in education, 5
on holistic nursing, 67
Preceptorships, 318
Precontemplation, in Transtheoretical Approach, 187–189, 188t
Preconventional morality, moral development theory, 26, 27t
Preferred provider organization (PPO), 280
Pregroup phase, 127
Preoperational thought stages of cognitive development, 26
Prescription drugs, in healthcare costs, 279
Prescriptive operations, in Professional-Technological Operations of
Nursing, 40b, 41
Presentations, in teaching, 151, 152b
Preventative services, 237–239, 238t
Prevention
in health indicators, 240
levels of, 59–60
in Nursing Process Format, 39
Price, of healthcare, 280
Primary prevention
definition of, 59
in Nursing Process Format, 39
Principles, applying in critical thinking, 119
Priorities, in community nursing, 252
Privacy
definition of, 202
electronic health record and, 264–265
in research, 81–82
Privatization, of healthcare, 307–308
Probing, 106, 106b
Problem
in empirical research, 83
in nursing informatics, 269
in qualitative research, 84
in research critique, 88
Procedural technician role, 132, 132t
Process description tools, 227–228
Process indicators, 229
Process teams, in quality improvement, 226–227
Product organizational structure, 162–163, 163f
Productivity, in management theory, 166
Profession, characteristics of, 3–6
Professional culture, in nursing profession paradigm, 5–6
Professional development, in professional culture, 6
Professional groups, focus of, 127
Professional organizations
involvement in, 300
list of, 329–331
for nursing informatics, 269–270
political power of, 299
in professional culture, 6, 7t
Professional practice evaluation, in professionalism, 10
Professionalism
continuing education in, 11–13
involvement in, 323–324
in nursing, 6–11
philosophy of nursing in, 15–16
time management in, 13–14
Professional-Technological Operations of Nursing, 40–41, 40b
Progressive differentiation, in systems, 28
Proposition, definition of, 21
Prospective payment systems (PPS), 280
Protection, in Johnson’s Behavioral System Model, 35
Provider systems, in organizational change, 166
Proxemics, in nonverbal communication, 102
Psychological variable, in Neuman’s Systems Model, 38
Psychomotor domain, 145, 148–149, 153
Psychomotor learning, 12
Psychomotor skills demonstrations, 141, 153
Public health
community nursing in, 252
mission of, 237
Public-private model of healthcare, 307–308
Purnell Model for Cultural Competence, 71, 72f
Purpose
in effective groups, 127
in empirical research, 83
in qualitative research, 84
Q
QSEN (Quality and Safety Education for Nurses), 217
Qualitative research, 84–85, 85t
Quality
clinical care as measure of, 215
definition of, 215
evaluation in, 221–222
historical perspectives on, 215–217
monitoring in, 221–222
standardized measures of, 216
as strategy, 222
theoretical models for, 217–222
transformation model for, 217–219, 217b
Quality and Safety Education for Nurses (QSEN), 217
Quality assurance
characteristics of, 223t
transitioning to Continuous Quality Improvement, 222–223
Quality chasm, 315–317
Quality control, steps in, 220, 220b
Quality healthcare, rules for, 10, 11b
Quality improvement
characteristics of, 223t
competency for, 217
continuous, 222–224
data collection in, 228, 229f
measurement programs for, 228–231
process description tools for, 227–228
process teams in, 226–227
steps in, 220–221, 220b
Quality of practice, in professionalism, 9
Quality planning
as cost-effective, 216
steps in, 219–220, 220b
Quantum theory, 29
Questions, in therapeutic communication, 105
R
Race, in health perceptions, 67–71
Reaction, in King’s Conceptual System, 37
Readiness, in learning, 146–147
Receiver, in communication models, 98
Recognition seeker role, 133
Recommendations, in empirical research, 84
Recorder role, 132, 133t
Reflection
in active listening, 104, 105
in critical thinking, 118
in nursing practice, 115
Refreezing, 184
change agents in, 191–193, 192t
in Diffusion of Innovations model, 187
in Havelock’s theory of change, 186
in Lewin’s theory of change, 184
in Lippitt’s model of change, 185
in organizational change, 196
in Transtheoretical Approach, 189
Regionalization, in community hospitals, 166
Regulator coping subsystem, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 42
Regulatory agencies, in quality assurance, 231
Regulatory operations, in Professional-Technological Operations of
Nursing, 40b, 41
350
●
Index

Reimbursement
for healthcare, 280, 283–284
in rural healthcare, 251
Relationships
in health communication model, 99–100
in organizational culture, 173
Relevance, in verbal communication, 101–102
Research
approval for, 82
choosing method, 85–86
critiquing, 87–90, 87b
empirical, 83–84, 85t
ethical considerations in, 80–83, 81b
evolution of, 79–80
guidelines for, 82–83, 86
implementation of, 90
legal considerations in, 80–83
objective evaluation of, 87–90
process of, 83–86
in professionalism, 9
qualitative, 84–85, 85t
significance of, 80
subjective evaluation of, 89–90
theory in, 21b
Research design, in research critique, 88
Research reports, components of, 87–88, 87b
Residencies, 318
Residential arrangements, of aging adults, 244
Residual stimuli, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 42
Resonancy, in Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human 
Beings, 42
Resource utilization, in professionalism, 10
Resources
definition of, 14
for learning, 14–15
in organizational structure, 159
for process teams, 227
Respect, in collaboration, 107
Respite care, 246
Responsibility, delegation of, 176–178
Restatement, in active listening, 104, 105
Restraining forces
in Lewin’s theory of change, 183, 184
in organizational change, 196
Review, in continuing education, 13
RHCs (rural health clinics), 250–251
Rhythmicity, in Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming, 
48–49
Right, definition of, 202
Risk(s), in aging adults, 245–246
Risk management, 223, 223t
Rogers’ Science of Unitary Human Beings, 42, 42b
Role(s)
competing, 11–12, 12b
in cultural care, 71–73
definition of, 11
evolving, 307
functional, 132–133, 132t, 133t
of group leaders, 130–132
in groups, 127
in King’s Conceptual System, 36
nonfunctional, 133
Role function mode, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 43
Room arrangement, for effective groups, 127
Root cause analysis, 225–226
Roy’s Adaptation Model, 42–44, 44b
Rule deontology, 203
Rule utilitarianism, 203
Rural health, 249–250
Rural health clinics (RHCs), 250–251
S
Safety
culture of, 224–226
in hierarchy of needs, 24, 24f
initiatives for, 225–226
medical errors, 10–11, 106, 310
recommendations for, 224, 316–317, 316b
in research, 81–82
risk factors in nursing, 316
Sample
in empirical research, 83–84
in research critique, 88–89
SBAR (Situation-Background-Assessment-Recommendation), 107–108
Scapegoating, 131
Schema, in cognitive development, 26
Scientific view, 68
Secondary prevention
definition of, 59–60
in Nursing Process Format, 39
Self
in King’s Conceptual System, 36
management of, 170
Self-actualization, in hierarchy of needs, 24f, 25
Self-care, in Orem’s Self-Care Framework, 39
Self-care agency, in Orem’s Self-Care Framework, 40
Self-care deficit, in Orem’s Self-Care Framework, 40
Self-Care Framework, 39–41, 40b
Self-concept mode, in Roy’s Adaptation Model, 43
Self-determination
definition of, 202
in research, 81
Self-efficacy
in mastery, 149
in social cognitive theory, 141
Self-regulation, in professionalism, 8, 10
Sensorimotor stages of cognitive development, 26, 27t
Sentinel events, 225, 225b
Sequencing, in critical thinking, 119–120
Set, in Johnson’s Behavioral System Model, 35
Sexual subsystem, in Johnson’s Behavioral System Model, 35
Sexually transmitted diseases, as health indicator, 240
Shared goals, of organizations, 165
Sigma Theta Tau, 6, 7t, 79, 80
Silence, in therapeutic communication, 105
Silent immersion, in Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming, 49
Situational Approach, 169t
Situation-Background-Assessment-Recommendation (SBAR), 107–108
Situation-specific theories, 52
Skills
building, 12–13
in critical thinking, 117
definition of, 12
of group leaders, 130–132, 131b
of leaders, 170
of managers, 168
mastery of, 149
in negotiation, 175–176
Skills and Abilities Approach, 169t
Skinner, B. F., 140
SMCR (source-message-channel-receiver) model, 98–99
SNOMED CT (Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine—Clinical
Terms), 265
Social cognitive theory, 141
Social comment, 106, 106b
Social determinants of health, 248, 307
Social integrity, conservation of, 38
Social justice, 308
Social systems
groups as, 126
in King’s Conceptual System, 36
Socialized medicine, 309
Societal needs, of aging adults, 246–247
Sociocultural variable, in Neuman’s Systems Model, 38
Software vendors, nursing informatics careers in, 270
Source, in communication models, 98
Source-message-channel-receiver (SMCR) model, 98–99
Special populations, in Healthy People, 239
Special-cause variation, 230
Specialists, change agents as, 185
Specialties
attributes of, 269b
nursing informatics as, 268–270
philosophies of nursing and, 15
practice standards for, 4
Index     ●
351

professional organizations for, 6
regionalization of, 166
roles in, 11
Spector’s Health Traditions Model, 70–71
Spiritual variable, in Neuman’s Systems Model, 38
Stabilizer subsystem control process, in Roy’s Adaptation 
Model, 43
Staffing, adequacy of, 317–318
Standard setter role, 132, 133t
Standardized nursing language, 265–266
Standards of care, 204
State boards, nurse practice under, 297–298
State government, 293
State lines, practicing across, 268
Statistics, in research critique, 88–89
Status, in King’s Conceptual System, 36
Statutory law, 293–296
Stereotyping, 106, 106b
Stimulation, in Johnson’s Behavioral System 
Model, 35
Stimuli assessment, in Adaptation Model Nursing 
Process, 43
Storming stage, in group development, 129–130
Stress, in King’s Conceptual System, 36
Structural integrity, conservation of, 38
Structure, of organizations, 158–160
Structure indicators, 229
Structured communication tools, 107–109
Study groups, 14
Subcultures, 69–70
Substance abuse, as health indicator, 240
Successful aging, 244
Summarizer role, 132, 132t
Supervision, in delegation, 177
Suppliers, in organizational change, 195
Support systems, in continuing education, 13
Surveillance, in delegation, 177
Surveys, in quality improvement, 228
Synergy Model, 44
System(s), organizations as, 158–160, 159t
System goals, of organizations, 166
Systematic theory, as characteristic of profession, 3–4
Systems Model, 38–39, 39b
Systems theory
in nursing theory, 28–29, 28f
organizations and, 159t
Systems vendors, nursing informatics careers in, 270
T
Tall organizational structures, 162f, 165
Task, in delegation, 177
Taxonomies, 265–266
Taylor, Frederick, 166
Teaching. See also Learning
behavioral objectives in, 147–149
definition of, 144
strategies and methods, 150–152, 151t, 152t
Teaching-learning process
adult learners, 141–142
domains in, 145
nursing process applied to, 139
principles of, 143–145
theories of, 139–143, 139b
TeamSTEPPS, 106–107
Technical skills, of leaders, 170
Technology
changes in, 324
in healthcare costs, 278–279
in organizational communication, 174
in organizational structure, 159
Telecommunication, in rural healthcare, 251
Telehealth, 268
Teleology, in systems, 28, 159
Tension reliever role, 132, 133t
Terminology
in health information management systems, 265
in qualitative research, 85
Tertiary prevention
definition of, 60
in Nursing Process Format, 39
Theoretical framework, in empirical research, 83
Theory. See also Teaching-learning process
analysis of, 22–23
classifying by scope, 22
components of, 21
critical reflection on, 22
definition of, 3, 20
describing, 22–23
evaluation of, 22–23
function of, 20–21
outside nursing, 23–29, 24f, 26f, 27t
in qualitative research, 85
in structural hierarchy of contemporary nursing, 
20–21, 20f
Theory of Culture Care Diversity and Universality, 
45–47, 46b, 73
Theory of Goal Attainment, 73
Theory of Health as Expanding Consciousness, 47–48, 47b
Theory of Human Caring, 49–50
Theory of human motivation, 23–25, 24f
Theory of Humanbecoming, 48–49, 49b
Theory of Interpersonal Relations, 49
Theory of the Deliberative Nursing Process, 49–50
Theory X, 167
Theory Y, 167
Theory Z, 167
Therapeutic communication, 104–106, 104b
Therapeutic groups, focus of, 127
Therapeutic self-care demand, in Orem’s Self-Care 
Framework, 40
3 Ds, 307
Time management, in learning, 13–14, 13b
Timeline
for continuing education, 12–13
in King’s Conceptual System, 36
Timing, in verbal communication, 101–102
Title protection, 297
Tobacco use, as health indicator, 240
Topical areas, of Healthy People, 241
Total quality management (TQM), 222
Touching, in nonverbal communication, 103
Trait Approach, 169t
Transaction
in health communication model, 100
in King’s Conceptual System, 36, 37
Transcendence, in Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming, 
48–49
Transcription, in Newman’s Theory of Health as Expanding
Consciousness, 47
Transcultural Assessment Model, 70, 70b
Transformation theory, 142–143
Transformational Leadership Approach, 169t
Transitions, 189–190
Transitions Theory, 52
Translational research, 87
Transtheoretical Approach, 187–189, 188t
Triangulation, 85
Trophicognosis, 38, 38b
True presence, in Parse’s Theory of Humanbecoming, 49
Trust, management of, 170
Trustworthiness, in negotiation, 176
Tuskegee syphilis study, 81, 81b
U
Understanding, in behavioral objectives, 148
Unfreezing
assessment in, 196–197
change agents in, 190–191, 192t
in Diffusion of Innovations model, 187
in Havelock’s theory of change, 186
in Lewin’s theory of change, 183–184
in Lippitt’s model of change, 184–185
in organizational change, 195
in Transtheoretical Approach, 189
352
●
Index

United States
economy of, 305
healthcare expenditures per capita in, 277–278, 277f, 278t
privatization of healthcare in, 307–309
Urbanized areas, 249–250
Usual aging, 244
Utilitarianism, 203
V
Values
communicating, 174
in critical thinking, 119
of organizations, 158
Variables
definition of, 21
in empirical research, 83
in research critique, 88–89
Variation, understanding, 230–231
Veracity, definition of, 202
Verbal communication, 101–102
Violence, as health indicator, 241
Vision
in negotiation, 176
sharing, 171
Visual learning style, 14, 146
Vocabulary, in verbal communication, 101
Voice of agency, 300
Voluntary mutual patterning, in Health Patterning Practice 
Method, 42
W
Watson’s Theory of Human Caring, 49–50
Welfare, in research, 81–82
Wellness, high-level, 60–61, 61f
Wholeness, in systems, 28
Willowbrook hepatitis study, 81, 81b
Work groups, focus of, 127
Work redesign, 231
Workforce, global nature of, 305
Workforce diversity, 307
Workplace, policy changes in, 300
Worldview
definition of, 20
in Leininger’s Theory of Culture Care Diversity and 
Universality, 45
Index     ●
353

