 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis 
Bonus Transcript Manual 
                   With Commentary  
 
 
By Igor Ledochowski 
©  S T R E E T  H Y P N O S I S    A L L  R I G H T S  R E S E R V E D  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
2 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Bonus DVD #1 – Hypnosis Demonstrations With Strangers On The Streets Of London – 
With Commentary – Part One ......................................................................................... 4 
Demonstration #1 ........................................................................................................ 4 
Demonstration #2 ...................................................................................................... 26 
Demonstration #3 ...................................................................................................... 32 
Demonstration #4 ...................................................................................................... 40 
Bonus DVD #2 – Hypnosis Demonstrations With Strangers On The Streets Of London – 
With Commentary – Part Two ...................................................................................... 50 
Demonstration #5 ...................................................................................................... 50 
Demonstration #6 ...................................................................................................... 57 
Demonstration #7 ...................................................................................................... 64 
Demonstration #8 ...................................................................................................... 73 
Demonstration #9 ...................................................................................................... 78 
Demonstration #10 .................................................................................................... 83 
Demonstration #11 .................................................................................................... 86 
Demonstration #12 .................................................................................................... 96 
Bonus DVD #3 – Hypnosis Demonstrations With Strangers On The Streets Of Las Vegas 
– With Commentary – Part One .................................................................................... 99 
Demonstration #1 ...................................................................................................... 99 
Demonstration #2 .................................................................................................... 129 
Demonstration #3 .................................................................................................... 139 
Demonstration #4 .................................................................................................... 152 
Bonus DVD #4 –Hypnosis Demonstrations With Strangers On The Streets Of Las Vegas 
– With Commentary – Part Two.................................................................................. 163 
Demonstration #5 .................................................................................................... 163 
Demonstration #6 .................................................................................................... 168 
Demonstration #7 .................................................................................................... 171 
Demonstration #8 .................................................................................................... 175 
Demonstration #9 .................................................................................................... 190 
Demonstration #10 .................................................................................................. 194 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
3 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Demonstration #11 .................................................................................................. 197 
Demonstration #12 .................................................................................................. 202 
Demonstration #13 .................................................................................................. 216 
Demonstration #14 .................................................................................................. 219 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis is the sole property of Street Hypnosis Publishing (including, but 
not limited to text, content, graphics, video and audio) and is protected by copyright as a collective 
work or compilation under U.S. copyright and other laws. You must abide by all additional copyright 
notices or restrictions contained in this law. 
YOU MAY NOT POST ON A WEB SITE OR CREATE A WEB FRAME AROUND ANY PART OF THIS SERVICE 
(INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, TEXT, CONTENT, PHOTOGRAPHS, VIDEO AND AUDIO). 
YOU MAY NOT COPY, REPRODUCE, DISTRIBUTE, PUBLISH, DISPLAY, PERFORM, MODIFY, CREATE 
DERIVATIVE WORKS, TRANSMIT, OR IN ANY WAY EXPLOIT ANY PART OF THIS SERVICE, EXCEPT 
THAT YOU MAY DOWNLOAD MATERIAL FROM THIS SERVICE FOR YOUR OWN PERSONAL, 
NONCOMMERCIAL USE AS FOLLOWS: YOU MAY MAKE ONE MACHINE READABLE COPY AND/OR ONE 
PRINT COPY THAT IS LIMITED TO OCCASIONAL ARTICLES OF PERSONAL INTEREST ONLY. 
WITHOUT LIMITING THE GENERALITY OF THE FOREGOING, YOU MAY NOT DISTRIBUTE ANY PART OF 
THIS SERVICE OVER ANY NETWORK, INCLUDING A LOCAL AREA NETWORK, NOR SELL NOR OFFER IT 
FOR SALE. IN ADDITION, THESE FILES MAY NOT BE USED TO CONSTRUCT ANY KIND OF DATABASE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
4 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Bonus DVD #1 – Hypnosis Demonstrations With 
Strangers On The Streets Of London – With 
Commentary – Part One 
 
 
Demonstration #1 
 
Hello and welcome to the Advanced Walk-Up Street Hypnosis Bonus DVD. On this DVD, 
I’m going to focus on the demonstrations you saw happen on the streets of London. 
Please remember what you’re about to hear are my comments on what students are 
doing both well and what they could be doing to improve whatever performance 
they’re doing at that point in time. 
 
I want to make sure that when you see these, you don’t judge the students unduly 
harshly. Some of these people have had no experience. They may have had only two or 
three hours of training in hypnosis before being unleashed on the streets of London to 
do this thing for the very first time.  
 
Please do not take anything that I say in the following presentation as being any kind of 
criticism or judgment on the skill of the student. This is purely for your educational 
purposes to see what kinds of things can happen in a live environment, where things 
can go wrong a little bit and how to fix those things, and to actually when someone’s 
doing something very right so that you can emulate it and copy those things for 
yourselves. 
 
Without further ado, let’s launch into the first demonstration. 
 
Stand right up. I’ll show it to you real quick. This is all you’re going to do. Put your 
feet together. 
 
I want to jump in here and get the ball rolling with what we’re doing here. You’ll notice 
that the first person volunteering for the street demonstration is a little bit hesitant, a 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
5 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
little bit nervous. She’s sitting down and she’s kind of half getting up and half sitting 
down.  
 
She’s interested, but as many people are, because it’s something very new and of 
course they’re being approach by a stranger on the street, they’re going to be a little bit 
nervous and a little bit hesitant.  
 
What the student does here – and this is a phenomenal thing – is he actually takes 
control of the situation. He takes control in a very friendly fashion. He keeps 
encouraging her, telling her this is very simple and this is very easy, and notice his 
gesture. Notice his mannerisms are actually enhancing his own suggestions as well. 
 
Come over here – his hand’s waving. Stand on up – the person stands up. He moves his 
feet first. Stand with your feet together. He’s physically demonstrating what the other 
person is supposed to copy.  
 
This begins a pattern going, so that later on when he sticks his hands out and all the rest 
of it, the person’s already used to following his responses, first nonverbally and then of 
course later on verbally as well. 
 
 
See, I’ve got my fancy hypnotic shoes on. The process has already begun. Look at 
me. Hold your hands out in front of you, and just clap your hands together just 
like that. Interlock your fingers and then just bring your elbows up and look there 
at your thumb.  
 
Now take your fingers and spread them about an inch apart, and just concentrate 
on that space… 
 
I’d like to jump in here very quickly again and just show what he’s doing here. Notice 
how he’s already set the scene very nicely. He’s got her fingers clasped together. I really 
like the point where he gets her to stare at her own thumbs. Why is he doing this? 
Because constantly he’s testing for her attention. Where is her attention?  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
6 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
At first he gets her to focus on him. Then he gets her to follow his actual example by 
putting her hands out and by clasping her hands together. These are all simple 
compliance tests. 
 
Notice how simply and smoothly she does these things. The more she hesitates, the 
more he knows that he’s got to wait a little bit longer before he starts doing his actual 
experiment with her. 
 
Right now he’s good to go. He’s got her attention focused, first on her thumbs. He opens 
his fingers up, and then notice how there’s actually a physical strain in those fingers. 
He’s going to start using this by the suggestion that it’s going to come together. 
 
When he does this little circular gesture about the fingers, that’s kind of an indirect 
suggestion that something is going to happen, it’s kind of a winding motion. He’ll 
develop this idea a little more in a moment’s time but for the moment, however, just 
notice how he’s setting it up very nicely, very smoothly and, importantly, look at the 
subject’s face. Look how concentrated she is, how she’s involved in this whole thing. 
 
It’s almost like there are no other thoughts going on inside her mind, other than the 
novelty of the situation. That’s a wonderful place to have a client or a subject in because 
it tells you that their hypnotic focus is in the right place.  
 
Watch on to see how that idea gets developed. 
 
… in between and let the power of your magnetic personality pull them together 
closer and closer, closer and closer, deeper and deeper. As they go together, 
you’re just going to feel a wonderful sense of peace and comfort, and allow them 
to touch. 
 
This is another great place to pause and reflect on what’s just happened here. There are 
a couple of things to note. 
 
1. Once again notice the deepening attention that the subject or the volunteer has 
here. Notice how her attention gets drawn more and more into this experience, 
and it seems like she’s paying less and less attention to the outside world. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
7 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
This is an excellent sign of a great hypnotic subject.  
 
2. The next thing to note here is how the hypnotist was doing this sort of screwing 
motions on the outsides of her hands.  
 
That’s kind of an indirect suggestion showing something like a finger vise or something 
screwing those hands together. The bit that the hypnotist missed or the opportunity 
that he missed out on at this point is to add those suggestions. Those ideas were clearly 
inside his mind, and it’s a great way to enhance the kinds of suggestions that he’s giving 
here.  
 
However, he didn’t actually make that kind of imagery very explicit to the subject. 
Because he didn’t make it as explicit to the subject, only half the idea gets transferred 
with that sort of winding motion of his hands.  
 
If he had said something along the lines of imagine those fingers are inside a vise and 
they’re being screwed tighter and tighter together, screwing more closely and closely 
together, suddenly that hand turning gesture makes more sense.  
 
It’s that screwing motion, and we all have experience over our lifetime of playing with 
screws or tools like that, and that it means that things are going to start getting closer 
and closer together, so the gesture would make a lot more sense. 
 
However, the fact that he didn’t do this didn’t really impact on the session very much 
because it’s still working tremendously well. At the end of the sequence, the student 
comes up with a stroke of genius. It’s a beautiful thing that he does here. 
 
He tells the subject to allow those hands to come together, which is nice simple 
hypnotic language. However, watch what he does at the same time. He presses his own 
hands together. This again becomes a nonverbal suggestion for those fingers to come 
together as well.  
 
Notice how he started this whole induction sequence, this whole hypnotic suggestion 
experiment, or test or whatever you want to call it by actually physically demonstrating 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
8 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
what she is to do. Stand up here – waving hands. Put your feet together like this – 
putting his own feet together. Hands out like this – his own hands come out. 
 
That idea is a pattern that’s set inside the mind, and he’s using that pattern by putting 
his own palms together to tell the unconscious mind what to do in a very physical sense. 
She’s followed the previous patterns, and the chances are she’ll follow these patterns as 
well. 
 
Because she’s so consciously focused on what’s happening right now with her fingers, 
the situation and so on, that she’s not consciously paying attention to any of that. This 
becomes a purely nonverbal unconscious suggestion. It’s a wonderful little device, and I 
encourage all of you to play with it too. 
 
That was easy, wasn’t it? That’s hypnosis. Do you want to try something else? Do 
you want to try something else? 
 
This is a great point to jump in again. Notice what just happened. The student has 
completed a complete cycle of one demonstration. He’s actually wowed his audience, 
and in particularly wowed his subject.  
 
Notice how much this girl is smiling, laughing and is pretty much amazed by it. What 
triggered it? Sure, this was an interesting experiment. Her fingers came together and 
she goes wow this is pretty amazing. A lot of people at that point alone will already be 
pretty impressed. 
 
However, he’s treating this as a magic moment, and he’s brought all the focus to bear 
on a single point. He tells her this is hypnosis. She doesn’t know what it is. She doesn’t 
know what she’s done. She just followed his example and followed his ideas, 
suggestions and so on. 
 
As far as she’s concerned, it’s a warm-up routine and that’s how it’s often presented by 
people. By saying to her this is hypnosis, what he’s done are several things and at 
multiple different levels. 
 
1. He’s praising her. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
9 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
He’s saying you’re a great hypnotic subject. You succeeded at doing hypnosis, and she’s 
feeling good or proud of herself because she never thought or knew that she could 
succeed at something like this. She’s done something new. I have successfully 
completed a hypnotic task. That’s one of the reasons she’s laughing. She’s impressed 
with herself and, therefore, impressed with the hypnotist. 
 
2. He’s also suggested that going forward if we’re going to do more hypnosis; 
you’ll be just as successful as you were a moment ago.  
 
Again notice that the praise comes after the success. He’s set her up for success, and 
once she’s succeeded he praises that, which puts a great mindset in place for her to 
succeed even further. This, of course, is a great point in time to escalate. In other words 
to say great, we’ve done the warm-up act. This was taking the fear out of things. Notice 
how much fun you’re having.  
 
• Do you want to do something else?  
• Do you want to do something more? 
• Do you want to take the next step? 
 
It’s very rare that someone will say no at this point, especially if they’re having such a 
good time because at some level, they’re doing a lot of learning about themselves.  
 
Please never forget this. If someone feels like they’re learning about themselves, like 
they’re discovering something important about themselves, they’re going to be riveted 
by that. They’re going to be highly motivated. We are hugely motivated by this idea of 
growing stronger, growing smarter and becoming more of who we are and so on.  
 
This is a fundamental human trait. He’s plugged right into that motivation, and he used 
it as leverage to motivate her to keep going down the process, of course, as he goes 
down that process to become more and more successful with it as well.  
 
This is even more fun. This will get even more fun. Are you ready? Okay, hold your 
hands out and we’ll do it bigger this time. Not just with your fingers, something a 
whole lot bigger. Hold your hands out, not quite that far apart, just there. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
10 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Now I want you to just to imagine – and you can do this with your eyes closed. 
Use the power of your imagination, so go ahead and close your eyes, and with the 
power of your imagination imagine big powerful magnets here… 
 
This is a great place to jump in again. He’s done one successful routine. He’s motivated 
the subject to keep going, and now he’s using the motivation for the next suggestion 
experiment, which of course is hypnotic in nature. 
 
Notice a couple of things he’s done that are very nice here. 
 
1. He’s amped up the whole range of things. 
 
He says we’re going to go bigger this time. We’re going to use your whole hand. The 
suggestion here is that something more dramatic is going to happen, and that she’s 
going to respond even better than before. 
 
Basically he’s gone from a small test to a larger test, which sets the scene for something 
even larger, which is going to be even more impressive hypnotic phenomena. 
 
He’s getting her to close her eyes, which can be a very useful point because as soon as 
someone closes their eyes, they’re cutting out about 60% of their distractions. Visually 
people are orienting themselves in space, and about 60% of our attention is being used 
up by processing that visual dimension. 
 
By closing her eyes, it not only internalizes her focus but by cutting out that visual 
proportion of stuff, the attention gets focused more and more on what she’s doing. At 
the same time, he’s also prodding her fingers outwards. Why is he doing this?  
 
Well, her hands are in a particular position. By pushing on those hands lightly, it 
basically forces her unconsciously to maintain that position that she’s in. It’s forcing her 
to push inwards. That already gives her arms or her muscles an impetus to start moving 
inwards. It’s already a subtle suggestion – move your hands inwards.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
11 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Right now he’s putting a little bit of light pressure on there to make sure that her hands 
stay in the same place so that when he releases, her hands automatically will start 
moving inwards. It’s kind of like when someone’s leaning on you and they suddenly 
disappear, you suddenly fall over because all your weight, all your pressure and all your 
muscles are pushing in that direction already. 
 
This is an important point because what happens if instead of keeping the hands there 
when he starts pushing out gently and lightly that her hands start moving outwards with 
those prods? That tells him that her mind’s not quite in the right place. She’s being very 
compliant, that’s true, but he’s not setting up the right conditions for this sort of 
induction to work as smoothly or as easily. 
 
It can still work, absolutely. What you could do at that point is the opposite. One thing 
you could try is to tap the outside of the hands as a suggestion for them to move 
inwards. The other thing you can do is to just correct them. Say no just keep your hands 
here for now.  
 
You don’t want to say keep your hands here because that’s an instruction, a suggestion 
for them not to move. Keep your hands here for now. When we begin, they’ll start 
moving together again. Again it sets that expectation going.  
 
Then again you prod those hands outwards slightly and if she keeps her hands this time 
in the right position, then not only has she been paying attention to your suggestion as 
she corrected her behavior, which is great because it means she’s being very responsive 
to you, but on top of that you’ve once again set the right conditions so that when you 
let go, when your fingers move away, those hands naturally start jumping together just 
a little bit. 
 
All you want to do is prime the pump to get things going a little bit so that the chances 
of them continuing down that road are better and better and better.  
 
… pulling your hands together, closer and closer together. Feel the energy as it 
starts to pull and bring your hands closer together. There it goes. You’re doing 
great. Getting closer and closer together. Feel them come together closer. Closer 
and closer. Feel the power as that energy grows. Just allow your fingers and your 
hands to come closer and closer together.  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
12 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Let’s have a look at what’s going on here. The hypnotist has now gone into his routine 
and he’s saying closer and closer. Of course he’s repeating his suggestions to really 
reinforce this. 
 
Notice there’s a lot of hand waving going around this as well. This is useful for two 
reasons.  
 
1. It’s useful for the hypnotist.  
 
By doing these gestures, it puts his own mind in the right place so that when he presents 
a suggestion to the subject, the tone, the conviction, the idea is transferred much more 
clearly and lucidly because his tonality and rhythm and all that sort of stuff is in sync 
with what he’s doing. 
 
His gestures help him get in sync with the suggestions to be in harmony with his own 
suggestions and, therefore, making them more potent the way they come out. 
 
2. You’ll notice that from time to time he touches the back of her hand slightly. 
Again this is the equivalent suggestion of those hands moving again. It’s just a 
little tap saying keep going in this direction.  
 
Of course, whenever there’s a movement – again a very important thing – that’s right. 
The magic words – that’s right. You’re reinforcing that they’re doing a good job. You 
don’t want to leave it hanging out there. You want to constantly reinforce things.  
 
You’re going to shape their behavior with reinforcement to say this is a good job. You’re 
doing the right thing. Keep going down that path. In this way, you’re again tapping into 
that motivation and giving them feedback. You’re creating a feedback loop that says 
that’s the direction. Keep going with it. 
 
What about the other hand-waving gestures? What is the use of that? Well, this can be 
useful in two different ways: 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
13 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
1. If the subject’s eyes are open, all that sort of subtle pressing the hand towards 
her hands is again a nonverbal suggestion for movement in a particular 
direction, which can be very useful. 
 
What about when her eyes are closed? Depending on the sensitivity of the subject – and 
remember in hypnosis people get much more sensitive – they may well be able to feel a 
kind of slight wind from the hand movement against the side of their hand. They might 
even be able to feel a bit of temperature. Try this for yourself.  
 
Close your eyes and have a friend, or maybe use your own hand and hover it about an 
inch or so above your own skin. You should be able to feel the temperature of your own 
hand warming very gently the back of your hand.  
 
2. What he’s doing there is by holding his hand just on the outside there, once 
again reinforces through heat this time or through the movement of air when 
he’s actually moving his hands that there’s a direction. There’s a movement in a 
certain direction for the hands to go, and he’s keeping that reinforced. 
 
You’re doing fantastic. Just let that energy go. Let them guide your hands closer 
and closer. They’re getting very close now. Feel that energy starts to grow as your 
hands get closer and closer. They’re also ready to touch. Allow them to touch, and 
when they go together boom. Now just look up at me real quick, and now close 
your eyes. 
 
This is another great place to jump in. Notice how up until this point, he’s been doing 
pretty much the same stuff – again waving his hand, using the heat of his hands coupled 
with the idea of energy, and of course she’s feeling energy. It’s heat energy, so of course 
there’s already a sensation there that will justify the suggestion for her too. 
 
Once she’s successfully brought her hands together, notice how she’s very focused and 
she’s already very internalized. In fact she’s already in a trance without the word 
hypnosis ever being present.  
 
You can tell this because when he says look up at me for a moment, her eyes open, she 
looks a little bit dazed and she’s struggling to focus on him because her reality is so 
internally organized. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
14 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
This is a great point at which to do an instant induction, which is exactly what this 
hypnotist does, and does a great job at it. At this point, success is absolutely guaranteed 
because really she’s already there.  
 
The first two little experiments they have done together have honed her attention and 
has reflected it inwards, has fed back the suggestions and so on to the point where she’s 
already in a trance. 
 
At this point, you can do a dramatic or as he’s doing a much gentler version of an instant 
induction, and it will work like a charm because she’s already been in it twice. Notice 
how smoothly it works. Notice how quickly she closes her eyes and she sort of melts 
into the suggestion.  
 
This is going to be a great hypnotic subject, someone you can do amazing things with 
because she’s being so responsive. Really everything is in place right now to go into an 
instant induction and make it succeed in a wonderful way. 
 
If you missed it the first time, please rewind this section a little bit and watch that facial 
expression that pretty much said it all. When you see someone who looks at you in that 
particular way, your instant induction is guaranteed to succeed, so memorize that look. 
You will love it when you see it more often, and you will see it more often when you do 
these kinds of street hypnosis inductions.  
 
And sleep, deeper and deeper, more relaxed. Let all the tension go from your 
body, deeper and deeper, more relaxed. Every breath you take, just allow the 
tension to go out of your body, and allow good healing energy to come in there.  
 
You know what? You’re going to have more fun tonight than you’ve ever had 
because you’re going to be so relaxed. All the stress of your day, all of the stress 
of everything that’s going on is just melting away with every breath you take. 
You’re allowing yourself to go more and more relaxed. Let all the tension go out 
of your body, deeper and deeper and more relaxed. 
 
Let’s jump in here once again. I’d like to point out a couple of features of what he’s 
doing here. Of course, in terms of the language you can clearly hear that he’s doing a 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
15 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
simple induction, just a relaxation induction. He’s throwing in some motivators around 
feeling great, about letting stresses go and so on.  
 
These are generally good motivators for them to want to be in trance and want to be 
more responsive. It feels good. Therefore, I want to do more of what you’re giving me 
right now. 
 
Shaking their hands in the way that he does is a test for how relaxed this person’s 
getting. It’s also an indirect suggestion to loosen up even further, which again can just 
reinforce the kinds of suggestions he’s using. 
 
Now remember, in order to do street hypnosis or any kind of hypnosis, you do not have 
to have relaxation. However, relaxation does tend to feel very good and it can be very 
useful. Because he’s suggested relaxation here, he’s reinforcing it with those little 
shakes of the arm to both test how relaxed she is and to suggest even further relaxation.  
 
All of that aside, I want you to notice a little bit about his performance element. Right 
now the hypnotist is performing to one person, and that’s his volunteer, the subject that 
he’s hypnotizing.  
 
Of course, the camera is picking up his voice nicely because we’ve attached a 
microphone to his shirt. Notice how there’s about four or five other people standing 
there around him casually watching what he’s doing.  
 
These people have no idea what’s going on. They can’t hear the hypnotist because he’s 
talking into the subject’s ear. They can see some funky stuff is going on. The person’s 
got her eyes closed. She’s kind of zoned out a little bit. She’s a little zombie like, so 
clearly something must be going on, but what is it? 
 
Some people are actually almost moving on. They watch a bit and they walk away again. 
As a street hypnotist, as a performer, you want to capture everyone’s attention. You’re 
actually playing to an audience. Right now this hypnotist is playing to an audience of one 
– the volunteer. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
16 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
What could he do differently at this point? Remember, this is his first time at doing 
street hypnosis, so it’s not a big deal. What he could do differently is really to start 
looking at the other people and making eye contact with them. 
 
Look up at them and smile friendly. Maybe even wave them across and say come closer 
so that you can hear this stuff, so that the other people feel invited into the 
performance.  
 
Another thing he can do is project his voice. Instead of talking into the subject’s ear, he 
could look up and direct his voice at other people. The subject will still hear you and will 
still respond to you.  
 
In fact if you have any doubts, you can always make the suggestion. And as I talk around 
the room, you’ll notice that you can still hear me and still respond to my voice. Then you 
can actually move your voice to the left and move your voice to the right as you speak to 
various people. This becomes proof to the subject that she can still hear you, and hear 
you just fine.  
 
This is a little performance tip.  
 
→ Don’t just perform to your volunteer, to your subject. Perform to the whole 
group. 
 
Once you’ve finished with your volunteer and done some amazing things with them, you 
may well want to move on and do something else in the group, and everything that 
they’ve seen and heard happen with the first person will have become a suggestion for 
them to be even better hypnotic subjects for you, so it’s well worth your while doing 
this. 
 
Now in a second, I want to increase the good feelings that you’re going to have 
tonight, and your legs are going to support you. I’m going to support you. You’re 
safe. You’ve got your friends about you. You’re well. You’re feeling good, and that 
feeling of goodness is just going to get more and more profound, deeper and 
deeper. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
17 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
In fact in a second, I’m going to reach down there and I’m going to touch the back 
of your right hand, and when I do that you’re going to feel your right hand just 
get light and want to come up. Coming up now. Just allow that to start to come 
up. Bring your hand up. Imagine that there’s a wire to the back of it or balloons.  
 
 
There it goes. It’s starting to come up. More balloons. Just imagine that your hand 
is coming up. That’s it. You’re doing phenomenally well, and as your hand comes 
up you’re feeling better and better, more relaxed, deeper and deeper. 
 
Allow that good feeling to continue to grow, and as it continues to grow know 
that the intensity of the joy that you’re going to experience tonight being with 
your friends is just going to grow with it.  
 
Allow it to keep growing up, up, up, up and when it’s there, you can just leave 
your hand out like that. 
 
So our hypnotist is doing a pretty good job right now. He’s clearly into his third routine. 
He’s done the finger vise. He’s done magnetic hands. Now he’s doing arm levitation 
again as an experiment to see how well she’s responding to him, and with even more 
dramatic flair. That hand’s coming up very nicely.  
 
Notice a couple of things that he’s doing with suggestions. He’s running through a whole 
bunch, a barrage of them. He’s going with safety, and the hand’s coming up. Then he’s 
putting in imagery about the hand and a wire lifting it up in order to encourage her 
doing that. Then he’s tying even more motivation into that by saying the more than 
hand floats up, the more you’ll enjoy yourself, the more you’ll have joy tonight with 
your friends.  
 
It’s very tremendously motivating to the unconscious mind saying great, I’ll play along 
with you because there’s a payoff for me here as well. Those are all wonderful things. 
However, also notice the performance point that we talked about earlier, which is 
playing to a crowd and not just an audience of one. 
 
Because of that, the four or five people that were watching him earlier on have all 
moved on. They’re no longer watching him and he’s back to being on his own. It’s not a 
big deal here just notice what happens. If you ignore your audience, the audience will 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
18 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
end up ignoring you and your street hypnosis in effect will be that much less dramatic 
because of it. 
 
That aside, as a hypnosis demonstration he’s doing a tremendous job and moving things 
forward constantly in a very nice way. 
 
And now let’s increase your strength and your personal power. So I want you to 
just hold your hand there. It doesn’t need to go any higher than it is right now. In 
fact what I’d like you to do is just take your arm and make it nice and straight. 
Make it strong and straight. Feel the power. Get into some internal power.  
 
Tap into some very strong powers that you’ve got, and just close your fist. Make 
your fist nice and strong, your arms together. It’s nice and strong. You’re very 
strong. It’s almost like it’s a steel beam very, very strong. In fact your friend is 
going to come over in just a second – or maybe he’s not. Your friend is not going 
to come over in a second. I’ll do it in just a second. 
 
You’re feeling nice and strong. Your arm is a beam. It is nice and strong. You’re 
powerful. You’re in touch with some very strong inner powers, many powers that 
you didn’t even know that you had before.  
 
In a second, I’m going to try to push your arm down but I’m not going to be able 
to do that because the strength is there. It’s so strong. Feel the strength in that 
arm. That’s unbelievable. No matter how much I push, I can’t push it down. 
What’s up with that? Did you have any idea that you could do that before?  
 
Okay now in a second, I’m going to just grab it and you can just let it relax and 
allow your intensity to go even deeper. Relax deeper and deeper, more relaxed. 
Deeper and deeper, more relaxed. 
 
Let’s have a little chat about what happened here. He’s now going into his fourth 
routine. He’s done the arm levitation and notice how smoothly and how logically he 
transitions from one idea to the next. Arm lifts up, now the arm becomes strong. It’s just 
another physical test for him. 
 
In terms of the imagery and all that sort of stuff, really he’s doing the same sort of stuff 
again as before. He’s testing her. He’s making the position of the arm is in the right 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
19 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
place. He’s moving it around a little bit to make sure that it’s in a relatively rigid and 
solid position, and even when he’s testing it notice how he’s testing it relatively lightly. 
The hand goes down and he allows it to bounce up again. 
 
He’s not testing too hard because we don’t know what the makeup of this person is. 
She’s a girl obviously. She may not be very much in touch with her ability to resist 
strength and so on, so he doesn’t want to make it too harsh a test so that she ends up 
failing it. He wants her to pass every test so that he can take her to the next step. 
 
One thing he could have done at this point to make it even more dramatic for her is to 
try to get her to try to bend the arm, her to lower the arm and fail. At this point, he’s 
only testing himself. I’m going to push down; you will resist. That’s something that is 
very straightforward. 
 
With more experience, he would probably get her to test it herself to be more dramatic. 
This is something that by the end of this course, of course, this student is no doubt 
doing. He’s very good at that sort of stuff. Right now he’s starting and he’s learning the 
ropes, so of course a couple of missed opportunities will be there. 
 
The final thing I want you to notice is how well he handled the unexpected. He was 
trying to get the audience member involved. Again remember this is his very first 
demonstration of street hypnosis, so there’s not as much experience there yet. Because 
he hadn’t involved the audience enough at the beginning, the audience has drifted 
away. Even her friends have drifted away, and they’re not paying attention to him 
anymore. 
 
Whilst he’s trying to get the audience involved and get them to push it down and this 
would be a great involvement point, he’s already lost them by paying attention to 
something else for five minutes. They got bored and they’ve moved onto something 
else, so he’s got to do the test himself.  
 
It would have been tremendously powerful if he had been able to get that friend to 
come in and do the test for themselves because then they’re getting wowed, which of 
course reinforces the subject that they’re doing a great job. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
20 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
With all these things in place, this hypnotist is pretty much ready to start taking a risk to 
go to the next place. Notice that up this point, he’s done all suggestion experiments. 
He’s done the finger vise, the hand magnets, the arm levitation and now the stiff arm or 
the moveable arm sort of experiment. 
 
The problem here is that right now he’s working on the same level. They’re all 
movement based, they’re all motion based and they’re all physical tests. He needs to 
start breaking out of that box and doing something else.  
 
He played with this idea of breaking out of that box a little bit with the idea of her 
having joy – you’ll have more joy with your friends and so on – but he hasn’t tested the 
joy right here right now in front of himself. It’s still stuck at the physical level, and if he 
keeps going down this route the problem he’ll have is he’ll set a pattern inside her mind 
that she’ll only respond to physical suggestions.  
 
That’s not something he wants to do. He wants her to respond physically, emotionally 
and mentally – in other words change the way she feels, the way she thinks and the way 
she acts as part of the demonstrations that he’s doing.  
 
This is a good point at which he needs to start taking a risk and move onto something 
else, maybe an emotional phenomenon, maybe a mental phenomenon.  
 
Now in a second, we’re going to do something that’s really fun and you’re really 
going to enjoy this, a lot. In a second, you’re going to forget the number three but 
just for a time. You’re going to remember all of the other numbers. You’re going 
to be able to count, but for some reason the number three is not going to be there 
anymore. 
 
The number three will be gone, but it will only be gone temporarily, just for a 
moment. In a moment I’m going to count up to two, I’m going to snap my fingers, 
your eyes will be wide-awake but you’ll still be deeply into trance. 
 
One, two, eyes open wide-awake. How are you doing? How was that so far? Well, 
we’re not done yet. We’ve got one more fun thing to do. In fact could you hold 
out your hand for me, just like that? Could you count? 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
21 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
One, two… One, two… 
 
What’s the next one? 
 
One, two three. 
 
I want to jump in here again and just point out something that I think is very exciting. 
Recall that this is the first time the student’s been out on the street doing street 
hypnosis. Sure, he may have had some hypnotic experience beforehand, and he’s doing 
a very, very good job but it’s only really the first afternoon of the first day, and already 
he’s getting some pretty good phenomena coming out of this. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, the risk he’s running is that he’s sticking too much on the 
physical level. He needs to switch it up a little bit so that he can get other phenomena – 
in this case mental phenomena – coming out as well. 
 
The number amnesia or name amnesia are some classic mental phenomena. If he can 
get amnesia, really the doors to some of the higher-level sensation changes and so on – 
hallucinations, visual changes, feeling changes and so on – are much easier to get. 
 
At this point, you might think he’s failed because the lady can count her fingers, but the 
fact is he’s succeeded. If you watch the segment again, you’ll notice the lady is going 
one, two and then a blank look comes across her mind. One, two and another blank look 
comes across her mind. 
 
It’s only on the third attempt that she manages to find the numbers again. What’s going 
on here? The amnesic seal was working, but because she’s searching for the number 
and she’s search very hard, and the hypnotist is doing nothing to reinforce success of 
the amnesia, she breaks the seal and has access to the number again, at which point the 
whole thing collapses and he has to move on again. 
 
It’s not a big deal. He’s already had all-powerful successes with the physical phenomena. 
However, this is a make or break moment that’s going on here. If he had jumped in at 
this point and suggested isn’t that weird, do you normally forget that number, it would 
reinforce the suggestion. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
22 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
She’s sitting there going one, two – blank look. At that point, the hypnotist wants to 
smile and go what’s happening? That is an indirect suggestion that you will continue to 
forget. She goes one, two – blank look again. Isn’t that strange? Notice again that you’re 
reinforcing the suggestion indirectly by saying that’s strange, that’s weird, what’s 
happening, what could this mean, does this normally happen? 
 
This is kind of a Non-awareness Set tactic where you’re reinforcing the fact that 
something unconscious is going on because something out of the ordinary has 
happened.  
 
Another thing to note here is the literalness of response. Notice how the hypnotist 
suggested that the number three would be gone – you’ll forget the number three. She’s 
literally doing that – one, two, blank look. If he had wanted her to no longer have the 
number three, the number three doesn’t exist. In other words to count one, two, four, 
five, six and so on, which is another way of doing number amnesia – he would have to 
give her that suggestion.  
 
You will no longer have the number three. The number three does not exist. As far 
you’re concerned, you’re counting goes one, two, four, five and six. He’s actually giving 
the pattern to her ahead of time. Doing that gives her something that is going to make it 
even easier to succeed because you’re filling a void.  
 
There’s an old saying “nature abhors a vacuum.” Just giving number amnesia on its own 
can be very powerful, but because there’s a vacuum, there’s an empty space in her mind 
somewhere, her mind’s got somewhere to go and look for it. I know it should be here 
somewhere. It’s on the tip of my tongue somewhere. 
 
If on the other hand, he said you’ll count one, two, four, five, six, it fills the void. The 
number three no longer exists. It’s out of the mind and it feels natural to count one, 
two, four, five, six, and so on.  
 
Then of course you can get to some fun and games where she can count six fingers on 
one hand and six fingers on the other hand. That’s gives you 12. Did you know you had 
12 fingers? No. Count all the way through– one, two, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, 
ten, eleven and so on. It can create a natural problem with her counting, which can be 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
23 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
even more confusing to her, but because he’s given her that sequence, at this point the 
mind has nothing to look for to try to fill in because it already feels natural.  
 
Those are two different ways you can handle the same situation. Either you delete that 
empty space by telling them how they will count, or you leave it there for dramatic 
effect. You leave the confusion.  
 
You leave that sense of I can’t find the number in place; however, at that point you 
would have jumped in and reinforced as early as you can the fact that the number’s not 
there, the fact that it’s strange, that it’s weird and so on, so that encourages her to stop 
looking for it. It’s okay to not look for it. It’s okay what’s happening. This is strange. It’s 
supposed to be strange; therefore, allow it to happen and so on. 
 
As it happens, he didn’t do that. He didn’t reinforce it. The amnesic seal was a little bit 
too weak, and so she burst right through it and the number came back. It’s not a big 
deal. Watch how he handles it. He re-induces trance, he congratulates her and then of 
course finishes on a nice high note. 
 
Close your eyes again. Close your eyes again, deeper and deeper. Relax; go down 
deeper and deeper and more relaxed. Deeper and deeper go down. Go down 
deeper, deeper and deeper, more relaxed. Let all the tension go. Let all the 
tension go. 
 
Now in a second, we’re going to open our eyes again, and that number three is 
going to be completely gone. You’re not going to remember the three anymore, 
but just for a time, just for fun, and you’re going to find that it’s funny.  
 
You’ll try to think about it, but you’ll just automatically skip over to the very next 
number. You cannot remember the number three anymore. Eyes open, wide-
awake. How are you doing? How’s this feeling. This feels really crazy.  
 
I’ll tell you what. Could you do me a favor – he’s run away. Could you count my 
fingers?  
 
One, two… One, two, three. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
24 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Let’s jump in here again. The hypnotist has done something very good and something I 
really like, which is even though he kind of failed a little bit the first time around – he 
actually succeeded; it just didn’t reinforce the suggestion – he gives it another go. 
 
He re-induces trance, he recreates the suggestion and this time he goes a little bit 
further towards what we talked about in terms of amnesia – you’ll just skip over that 
number – and he tries it again. 
 
I really admire his courage for doing that. That’s a wonderful thing to do. Very often 
when you re-induce trance and redo something, it starts working. Let’s find out why it 
didn’t work again this time. 
 
There are a couple of reasons for it. 
 
1. He re-induced trance, he re-suggested it and she comes back out. So far so good. 
Notice however that when she starts counting, once again the very first time she 
does it one, two, she hesitates. She stops and once again he didn’t fill the gap for 
her by encouraging a different direction for her to go. 
 
The second when she does a rerun of it, it basically is a repeat of what she did before. 
She’s repeating the cycle she already knows. Why? Because she’s done this exact thing 
before. As a rule, the idea of wash, rinse and repeat means you don’t just wash – which 
is to re-induce trance – and repeat – which is to re-suggest the same thing, there’s a bit 
of rinsing in between. The rinsing is you want to give them some kind of hypnotic 
success. 
 
In other words, go back to something that they can already succeed at. That could be 
something like the stiff arm. Arm out here, nice and stiff, you can’t move it, that’s right, 
isn’t this strange? As strange as this arm feels right now, that’s how strange it will feel 
when the number three is gone. You’ll just say one, two and blank. You just won’t be 
able to get it. You’ll know the number four, the number five and the number six, but 
one, two and blank. 
 
Notice once again that I am acting out the suggestion. I myself am going blank. I myself 
am being silent for a while. I myself am saying the word blank to reinforce the idea that 
there’s going to be a blankness. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
25 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
This is a very different experience, especially based on the piggyback of succeeding with 
the stiff arm or an arm levitation or any of the other things she’s already done, so that 
coming back into it again she has a moment of success under her belt. She’s going from 
point of success to point of success. 
 
The old pattern has been mixed up, and I have strengthened my suggestion around the 
number three being gone by acting it out, by telling her how she’s going to feel, how 
she’s going to talk and what she’s going to be saying. I’m actually spelling out all the 
behaviors for her as closely as I can in order to get a success. 
 
Once I get a success with the number block, then of course we can do name block, 
amnesia for bigger and bigger things, and suddenly we can do many more dramatic 
effects. As it happens here, that’s not what happens. The hypnotist keeps his cool. He 
re-induces trance and ends things. 
 
Remember as a rule, especially when you’re doing these kinds of things, whether or not 
something has failed, you always want to make sure that you cancel any suggestions 
you’ve given. The arm is back to normal if you’ve been using the arms. The hands and 
fingers are back to normal if you’re using the fingers and the hands.  
 
All the numbers are back in your head nice and clear – one, two, three, four, five, and 
six. I’m counting out loud for them to know the sequence again because you never know 
how a suggestion will take effect. It could be that it’s sitting there in the background and 
later on she’s got to count something, and suddenly that number’s not going to be there 
and it’s going to be frustrating for her.  
 
It can happen. All kinds of different things can happen when you’re not there, so to be 
sure make sure you cancel all suggestions you’ve presented to someone when you’ve 
finished with them in terms of hypnotic demonstrations. 
 
Back to three again. Go down. We’ll just take you down one last time, deeper and 
deeper, more relaxed. Let all the tension go out of your body. Now in a moment, 
I’m just going to count you back up and you’ll be returned to the joy of your 
friends. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
26 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
You’ve been a very, very wonderful subject tonight. You’re going to have an 
absolutely phenomenal time, and you’re in touch with some really, really powerful 
resources that maybe you didn’t even know that you have. 
 
In a second, I’m going to count to five and when I do, you’ll be wide-awake and 
you’ll feel the equivalent of having had a three-hour nap. You’ll be ready to greet 
the night. You’ll be ready to go out and have a massive amount of fun, more fun 
than you’ve had in a very long time. 
 
One, becoming aware of the sounds of everybody around you. Two, feeling the 
energy come back into your body. Three, having all of those silly suggestions that 
I made before just go away, keeping only the ones that are really, really useful for 
you. Four, having all the strength come back to your shoulders. Five, eyes open 
wide-awake, feeling really great. 
 
How are you doing? Brilliant. You were wonderful. Thank you very much for 
playing along. My name’s Bob.  
 
It was nice to meet you Bob. 
 
It was good to meet you as well. Thanks for playing along. Bye-bye. 
 
Demonstration #2 
 
I’m Kristy. You’re wonderful. I’m Fiona. And you’re Fiona okay, my name’s Steve 
and I’m a street performer, and hypnosis is what I do. It’s all about good fun. 
What we’re going to do is just a couple of simple tests with hypnosis, just to see 
about suggestibility. Who’s all done this before? 
 
Welcome back. This is our second demonstration and so far the student’s just kind of 
warming up his audience. This is great. He’s got two subjects and he’s actually going to 
try to work with both of them, or maybe just with one of them. We’ll see in a moment. 
 
The important thing to note here is his body language. Watch his mannerisms. What 
how he talks to these people. He starts off really friendly, really confident and he sucks 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
27 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
them in. They’re really happy to be meeting him. You can see it. He tells them he’s a 
performer, he’s a hypnotist, he’s doing stuff here and already their eyes are lighting up.  
 
She’s set an expectation there. There’s a little bit of nervousness there. You can see a 
little bit of hand wringing, a little bit of hand touching. It’s fine. It’s the first time he’s 
done this, so kudos to him for keeping his cool so nicely. Overall, if you have 100% of 
signals coming out, 80% of them are confident, they’re friendly, they’re relaxed and 
they’re giving them the sense that this will be fun and so on.  
 
Maybe 20% a little bit of nerves, but you can have a bit of nerves. It’s not a big deal. 
Notice how despite all that they actually are still responding in a very useful and very 
friendly way back to him. That’s a good rule of thumb for you to remember.  
 
How you approach your audience will be the way that they respond to you.  
 
→ If you’re nervous, if you’re hesitant or if you’re aggressive they’ll be nervous, 
they’ll be hesitant and they’ll be aggressive. If you’re relaxed, if you’re friendly 
and if you’re kind they’ll be relaxed, they’ll be friendly and they’ll be kind to you 
also. 
 
That’s a nice general of thumb to keep in the back of your mind whenever you do any 
kind of hypnotic performance.  
 
Okay, so what we’re going to do first of all, just stand here with your legs apart 
just slightly so that you’re nice and well balanced on your own weight. What I 
want you to do is just put your arms out in front of you like so. That’s it. Put your 
bags on the floor. That’s always useful. That’s it. Just put your arms out like that, 
absolutely fantastic.  
 
Let’s jump in here and talk a little bit about what he’s doing. So far you can see the 
setup and both ladies are responding very nicely. They’re putting their handbags down 
so that it’s nice and safe. 
 
It would be useful for him to suggest that by the way – put your bags on the floor so 
that they’re nice and safe and then concentrate up here. Why? 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
28 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
1. First, it shows them that you’re taking care of them.  
 
2. Second, you’re suggesting something that they’re going to do anyway. You’re 
basically piggybacking off a natural response, and it creates a kind of mental yes 
set for them to want to follow along. 
 
You’ll notice that there’s a little mismatch here. The hypnotist has his hands out in front 
of him, his elbows slightly bent and his palms facing into each other. The women on the 
other hand have their hands stretched fully outwards and their palms are facing down 
to the ground. 
 
They don’t know that they’re doing this incorrectly, which is fine, and he actually 
manages quite smoothly to just go through that. However, they are not following his 
physical gestures automatically. They’re not doing exactly what he’s doing.  
 
At this point, in order to really hedge your bets and get a better response from people 
later down the line, this would be a good place to pause and correct them. Say no, 
hands up like this, to make sure that they follow exactly your gestures. 
 
Because he’s facing one of the ladies directly face-on, square on square, he hasn’t got 
enough space to get his arms out straight for her to get her arms out straight. Either he 
needs to take a step back so that he can lock his arms out straight, which will make 
doing the magnets and all that stuff much better; or he needs to get her to bend her 
arms so that he’s mirroring his position.  
 
This is a crucial moment here. You want to make sure that your subjects, your 
volunteers are following what you ask them to do and what you are physically doing as 
literally as possible because a literal interpretation of your suggestions is a classic 
example of hypnotic logic in action. 
 
In this case you don’t have it completely, so you pause things and you correct them. You 
just say no this way, put your hands like this exactly as I’m doing now. When they get it, 
you heap praise on them. You say that’s right. That’s exactly it. You guys are going to do 
great with this. They’re now following in the program 100%, rather than just 99% or 
98%. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
29 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
What I want you to do is just clasp your hands together. I want you to make sure 
that your palms are right together and your thumbs are locked over the top. 
That’s it, absolutely fantastic. What I’m going to ask you to do now is just pull 
them slightly back towards you. Brilliant. 
 
The next thing we’re going to do is you’re just going to take your two fingers and 
we’re going to stretch them apart about an inch or so. Is that an inch? Fantastic. 
That’s almost an inch.  
 
Let’s take a look at what he’s been doing so far. The hypnotist is doing a pretty good job. 
He’s got their fingers out. The finger magnets are there. He’s created the visual imagery 
– there are magnets on your fingers, pulling closer and closer together.  
 
Another thing that he’s doing that I really like is he’s touching the outsides of their 
fingers as a suggestion for those fingers to come together, which is again a very nice 
nonverbal suggestion.  
 
He has taken a slight risk here. Remember, the finger magnets or the finger vise is 
created or designed to put stress on the fingers because they naturally want to come 
together anyway. 
 
He’s spent so much time with their fingers apart joking and laughing with them that you 
may have noticed their palms loosen slightly, and those fingers are more naturally apart.  
 
As a rule once those fingers stretch open, I want to jump straight in with a suggestion 
that in a moment those fingers will come together because for most people they will 
start doing that already and they’re not unconsciously then fighting the urge for those 
fingers to come together, creating an opposite suggestion inside of them.  
 
As it happens this works out just being, but it takes a bit longer for him to get the result 
that he wants because he let those fingers be more naturally apart for a bit too long. 
Notice how when they’re commenting back with him, at that point they’re taking 
control of the situation a little bit more, and so of course they’re going back to their 
daily reality. As soon as their focus is entirely on those fingers, this starts working like a 
dream.  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
30 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Once again the hypnotist is new. He’s only done this for the first time, so he’s a little 
nervous, which is just fine. Despite all these disadvantages, he’s still doing a great job. 
He’s still going to get those fingers to come together and get a great success, which for 
the volunteers is going to be a very dramatic thing and they’re going to enjoy it a great 
deal. 
 
What I want you to do now is focus on that gap between your fingers. It’s very, 
very important that you focus and focus because there are magnets on your 
fingers, and they’re starting to pull together. Focus on the gap between your 
fingers and away we go. 
 
They’re starting to move. Just focus on the gap. Just feel nice about what’s 
happening between your fingers. That’s right. Just focus your attention right 
between the middle. That’s right. They’re slowing starting to move together, and 
you see your fingers both at the same time starting to move. That’s it, absolutely 
fantastic. That’s right. 
 
Your fingers are starting to shake. That’s right. You can feel the tension. Don’t 
resist it. Just let your mind pull those fingers together. That’s right. Focus your 
attention. We’re almost there. We’re almost there. Just let your attention focus 
on the space between your fingers. You’re not moving at all. That’s right. 
 
Don’t resist. Just let your mind look at your fingers and they start to pull together, 
and close your eyes. That’s it. Just put your hands down for a moment. That’s 
brilliant. Just hold it right there and just focus yourself now. Relax. Take a deep 
breath in and a deep breath out. That’s right. 
 
Focus on that between. Okay, I’m just going to push those together at the 
moment. You’re working really well for me. Thank you very much. 
 
Let’s jump in here again and notice what’s happened here. This hypnotist is working 
with two volunteers at the same time. That’s a wonderful thing to do. He has more 
chance of success that way because if one person fails, the other person still succeeds. 
That’s exactly what happens here.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
31 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Notice how the dark-haired lady succeeds instantly. Her fingers come together, she’s 
very impressed and he does a wonderful thing by putting her hands down and getting 
her to close her eyes. Already her attention is internalizing, so she’s getting into a mild 
hypnotic state. She’s rehearsing what it will be like later one when he starts escalating 
into other things that he wants to do. 
 
The second lady on the other hand, she’s not quite there. She’s maybe trying too hard 
or maybe thinking too much. Her fingers aren’t really coming together that much. They 
moved a little bit, so there’s a small success but not a huge success. 
 
This tells the hypnotist who to work with more. The dark-haired lady will be a much 
easier subject to work with in street hypnosis, although you can still work with the 
blonde lady. You just have to set the conditions up a little differently.  
 
Something the hypnotist does here is very, very nice. Even though technically speaking 
the blonde lady has failed, he then pushes those fingers together artificially, creating an 
artificial success and he congratulates her anyway. It takes the sting out of the tail for 
her having “failed.” It still keeps her inside of the warm fuzzy glow of success, of being 
part of the show and part of the game. 
 
Even though it didn’t quite work out the way he wanted it to, her friend still succeeded 
and he’s going to turn his attention towards her, and she still had a semi-success 
although it was artificially gained, which at the unconscious level puts a very nice 
message in place and actually makes her somewhat grateful to have had an out. She can 
get out of the situation having completed the cycle without having to leave having 
“failed.” 
 
It’s a really nice touch. By the way, if he’d had a larger crowd and had more people to 
work with and then came back to this lady after maybe 10 minutes of working with 
someone else, the chances are that she would succeed beautifully at this and other 
suggestion experiments, precisely because of that artificial success and allowing her to 
bask in the afterglow of some form of success, rather than standing there ashamed of 
having failed. 
 
It’s a wonderful thing he’s done. I strongly encourage all of you to do the same if 
something’s not working out 100% with your own hypnotic subjects. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
32 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Okay, that’s all about concentration. Just put your hands down for a moment and 
relax. That’s all we’ve done at the moment. We’ve used your attention, checking 
your attention, checking your concentration. 
 
 
Demonstration #3 
 
Hello there. We’re making a film today on hypnosis. Have you ever experienced 
hypnosis before? 
 
Yes, once. 
 
This is our third clip. I’d like to pause things here for a bit because I want to take a look 
at how this hypnotist approached his subject. This is a really elegant demonstration of 
how to do it.  
 
The first thing you’ll notice is that he calls across a slightly longer divide in space. He 
doesn’t wait until the woman’s right next to him before he tries to grab her and to scare 
her. He makes sure that she sees him from quite a ways off. Especially with a female 
subject this is important because women have to be more cautious when they’re on the 
streets with men, but men also tend to be a little bit more cautious when a stranger 
approaches them. 
 
1. Ideally he approaches them from a distance.  
 
It’s fantastic. His body language is open, it’s relaxed, and he projects his voice so that 
she can hear him clearly. These are all very good nonverbal signals that this is all on the 
up and up, everything that’s going on here is good, it’s decent, nothing bad is going to 
happen and so on.  
 
2. Another thing that he does is he introduces himself.  
 
He says what he’s doing and intrigues her with the idea of hypnosis. In this particular 
instance, he says we’re doing a film about hypnosis.  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
33 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
You might ask yourself how the heck am I going to do that if I don’t’ have a camera?  
 
• The first thing is anyone can have a camera.  
 
Cameras nowadays are so cheap, that you can just have a friend filming you and that 
gives you an instant excuse to do these sorts of demonstrations. That’s one way to do it. 
 
• The other way to do it is to simply change your language.  
 
You can’t say that you’re doing a film about hypnosis, but what you can do is you can 
we’re doing some research about hypnosis, or we’re doing some hypnotic 
demonstrations here, or the classic one is we’re performing here today with hypnosis. 
Would you like to see what it’s all about? 
 
The language is not too important. You just make it fit whatever environment you 
happen to be in. In this case, we have a great opening gambit. The lady stops and she’ll 
happily start talking to me, so far so good. 
 
Notice because he doesn’t follow up with this idea of has she ever seen hypnosis or has 
she ever been hypnotized before, the lady’s body language begins to move away from 
him again. In other words she’s getting ready to move on after having had that brief 
two-second little interaction with him.  
 
At this point it’s very important for him to turn around and hook her back in again, 
intrigue her, entice her to want to stay a little bit longer and to actually give this a go for 
herself.  
 
Watch John, and watch how this novice hypnotist does that in actually a very eloquent 
sort of way. 
 
We’re with a gang of people of street hypnotists, and what we’re doing is we just 
want to show people some interesting things that you might not have seen 
before. I’m going to take two minutes of your time. Is that all right? 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
34 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Yes. 
 
Let’s jump in here again. You’ve just seen a really nice example of why we have this little 
pre-talk, this introductory patter to hook people in. In this instance he talks about being 
with a group of people doing demonstrations and so on, but honestly even if you’re on 
your own you can very easily say I’m a hypnotist, I am performing hypnosis here, and I 
want to show people what it’s all about so that they can enjoy it as much as I do. Would 
you like to get an experience of it now? 
 
• The other thing that he does – and this is very important – is he puts a time 
limit on what he’s doing here.  
 
The lady thinks well I haven’t got half an hour to do this. If she’s going to a 
hypnotherapist, that may take a half an hour or an hour to do some hypnosis with her 
and that might be inside her mind.  
 
Even if it’s not, people are still concerned about how much time it’s going to take 
because they’ve got their busy lives to get on with and so on, unless of course you’re 
doing it in a public venue like a bar or something like that, in which case they might 
think will I be taken away from my friends for too long? 
 
These are concerns that you have to be able to address. In this case it’s very simple. It 
will just take a couple of minutes, you’ll have a great and enjoyable experience within 
that time, and then you’ll be on your merry way having had a better experience, or 
words to that effect. 
 
Always keep in mind what concerns these people have in terms of their time, in terms of 
how they’ll be in front of friends and so on, and neutralize them right up front. Then 
always have a really low-key approach saying it’s just some quick experiments and quick 
things for a fast experience of this, just to give them the idea that they won’t be there 
forever.  
 
Watch on how he continues with the rest of the induction. For the moment just notice 
how his body language and opening were just a beautiful example of how to do it well. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
35 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
What we’re going to do is we just want to show you a couple of things that are 
interesting that you can take away to your family and show them as well. In a 
moment I’m going to put you under 00:56:27 a little bit of fun for a moment.  
 
Just put your bag between your legs. This is my cameraman here. What we’re 
doing is we’re on a course, which is Friday, Saturday and Sunday. We’re all 
hypnotherapists, but we’re also learning the art of street hypnosis, which is a 
totally different kettle of fish.  
 
We’re making people just have a bit of fun, experience hypnosis in this lifetime. I 
just want to show you a couple of interesting things that are hypnotically 
involved, but they don’t take you under or anything like that. Okay? 
 
Now we’ve got some interesting things going on here. The lady of course is curious 
about why you’re doing this, and this is not very uncommon. People are often curious 
about your motivation. Why? Well, let’s face it, why are you doing this stuff for free? 
Are you getting paid for it? Are you trying to take advantage of them in some way? Are 
you going to actually make them do something, etc.? 
 
These are some of the concerns that you may have to put to rest as well. In this case the 
student does something interesting. He just comes out and says I’m in a course and I’m 
learning this stuff, and that’s what we’re doing. She seems to be amenable to that idea.  
 
The thing that he’s done well of course is to say that we’re all already hypnotherapists, 
which has nothing to do with street hypnosis, and that makes him a little bit more of an 
expert, which makes his life easier again. 
 
One of the nice things that he does is he talks a lot of pressure off himself by saying 
these are just some simple demonstrations you can do with your friends. This is not 
really hypnosis yet. The reason this is really useful to him is because very little is 
expected of him when he’s just doing a quick demonstration of some sort, like a 
suggestibility test for example, and then gets to move on with his life afterwards. 
 
He’s taking the pressure off of himself, creating some curiosity in her and giving some 
reasons for motivation as to why he’s doing this. Personally, I would recommend if 
someone asks you why you’re doing this, absolutely be upfront but also give them a 
more inspiration reason for taking part in the show with you. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
36 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
For example, my personal reason for doing street hypnosis to just show people the 
power of hypnosis so that people can see what it’s really like, that it’s nothing to be 
scared of, that it’s a lot of fun and that they have an amazingly powerful mind that they 
can access anytime they wish. 
 
I always emphasize this idea that they have an amazingly powerful mind. Why? Because 
it counteracts a lot of the misconceptions around hypnosis out there, whilst at the same 
time imbibing them with some kind of motivation. This is something about your mind. 
It’s showing you how it’s powerful. They’ll get curious. I have a powerful mind? I never 
knew that. Show me more. 
 
It’s flattering, it’s motivating and it corrects some historical mistakes around hypnosis. 
Hence, that’s the kind of approach I want to take, although in this case what the student 
said of course worked phenomenally well, just as well. 
 
What’s your name? 
 
Ira. 
 
Ira. This is Ira on camera here. Fantastic. Okay Ira, what I want you to do is just 
stand with your hands beside you and just shake your hands for a minute just to 
get yourself nice and relaxed. Take a deep breath in and a deep breath out. That’s 
fantastic. 
 
What I’d like you to do now is put your hands in front of you and clasp your hands 
together. That’s it, fantastic. Just make sure that your palms are touching and 
thumbs are over the top. I always forget what the name of that piece of body is. 
 
Then what I want you to do is lift your two forefingers up like so without an inch 
gap apart for them, and I want you to focus now on that gap, and just look at 
that gap because there are two magnets on your fingers, which are starting to 
drive those fingers together. 
 
Just pull your hands out here. That’s right. Just lift them up that way and just look 
at that gap now. That’s it. Nice and comfortable. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
37 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Just a very quick pause here again and let’s just have a look at what he’s just done there. 
He’s of course setting up for the first test – the suggestibility experiment called finger 
vise.  
 
I’d like you to notice when you watch this clip again that he’s done some very nice 
things here. First of all, he’s involved the person. He’s asked her name so they’re getting 
engaged and so on. Then he’s asking for a series of relatively small tasks that gets the 
ball rolling – shake your hands, take a deep breath, nice and relaxed and so on. 
 
Does he need to do any of these? No, but these are great compliance tests. He’s finding 
out how willing the person is responding. The next thing you notice is that when she’s 
putting her hands up in the right position for the finger vise and so on, he’s not afraid to 
reach in and correct her and say put your hands like this, fingers up like that, perfect. 
 
This serves two purposes. 
 
1. He’s angling her hands into the right position, which is going to make it more 
likely for her fingers to touch. He puts a bit of strain on those fingers so that 
they’re more likely to come together. 
 
2. The second thing he’s doing is he’s starting to take control of her body 
physically.  
 
He’s moving her hands for her. He’s correcting her movements, which means she’s 
going to look to him more and more for guidance as to (a) am I doing this right; and (b) 
what it is that’s expected of her.  
 
That kind of attention where you’re looking at someone else, waiting for instructions, 
waiting to make sure that you’re doing it correctly, that you’re doing it the way that 
you’re intended to be doing it, that’s a great mindset for hypnosis to occur.  
 
Never be afraid of reaching and touching a person, especially in a public demonstration 
of street hypnosis, where touch is actually invited and expected. I know that some 
hypnotherapists are a little bit sketchy about should I touch someone or shouldn’t I 
touch someone?  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
38 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
In street hypnosis, you really do want to be touching people, and of course in 
appropriate places like the arms, the shoulders and so on. Not inappropriate places like 
thighs, buttocks, etc. You’re smart enough to realize that, but I do have to spell that out 
for you just to make sure that you understand what I’m talking about here. 
 
We’re talking about simple touches that enhance the experience for the person, and it’s 
usually best when it’s done in a covert manner when it’s correcting someone’s 
movement and so on because it just becomes a natural part of what you’re doing with 
them. 
 
Deep breath in, deep breath out, and they’re slowly going to touch completely on 
their own accord. That’s right, nearly there, nearly there, fantastic and relax. 
Okay, nothing hypnotic about that but do you know what that tells me? That tells 
me you’ve absolutely got the attention and the focus for what we’re doing today. 
 
I’m going to try one more thing now. Is that okay? Okay, what I want to do now 
then is a very similar thing, and I’ll just explain this first of all. We’re going to put 
our arms out in front of us, and on the palm of our hand we’ve got a great big 
magnet. We’ve got a great big magnet on the palm of our hand, and we’re going 
to focus on this energy that’s between our hands. 
 
As I talk, slowly but surely those hands are going to come together and as they do 
they’re going to drop down, the difference this time is we’re going to shut your 
eyes while we do it. Is that okay?  
 
All right. 
 
Just put your arms out in front again. That’s right. No problem at all. We’ll keep 
an eye on that. 
 
Let’s check in here again. Notice how he’s doing the setup for the second experiment. 
This is of course magnetic hands. He’s done a nice successful first step. Now he’s going 
to escalate it to the next step as part of the set piece.  
 
What I like about what he’s doing here though is because this lady’s just a little bit 
nervous on the streets and so on he’s giving her a complete cycle, a rehearsal of what’s 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
39 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
going to happen. Here’s what’s going to happen. Here’s what you’ll imagine. Here’s 
what you’ll feel, and this is what’s going to happen to your hands.  
 
He models it with his own hands so that she can see it happening when her hands come 
together, and this basically pre-frames the unconscious mind. It sets a pattern in the 
unconscious mind, an expectation that she’s more likely to act out on when she does it 
herself.  
 
Creating that kind of expectation is a wonderful thing. Then when he’s doing that as an 
explanation sort of thing, he kind of slips in I’m going to ask you to close your eyes, is 
that okay with you? She of course says yes, but the reason this is really nice is because 
first of all: 
 
1. He’s asking for permission for something to make her feel safer. 
2. He places that in after having created a small future memory. 
 
You’re going to do this and experience this. This is going to happen at the end of it all. 
I’m going to ask you to close your eyes to make it easier. Is that okay with you? 
 
There’s a bit of a yes set, there’s a memory of it having happened at some level because 
she’s had to imagine it inside her mind, and by agree to it again it’s a nice simple 
compliance test to see how ready is this person to really go into this hypnosis and 
experience some of the more crazy stuff later on maybe. 
 
Just hold it out there about six inches apart. That’s great. Just remember that 
you’ve got a magnet just there and a magnet just there. Now, just focus now on 
that energy. That’s right. Just focus on the energy that’s in between your hands, 
and slowly but surely you’ll start to feel them moving together. 
 
You can’t see it at the moment, but that’s right. It is starting to move. They’re 
starting to come together. That’s right. It’s moving. That’s right. That’s absolutely 
perfect. We’re just a few inches away now. Take a deep breath and breathe out 
nice and slowly. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
40 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Those hands have got a great big magnet. They’re coming right together, and 
you’re almost going to touch. Just one inch together now, almost there, 
absolutely fantastic, and they touch, and relax. Fantastic. 
 
 
Demonstration #4 
 
So we’ve finished the third demonstration and now we’re onto the fourth one. This is 
one that we luckily caught Anthony doing right in the middle of a set. We’ve missed the 
opening sequence and so on.  
 
What happened here was whilst everyone was milling around doing their things and we 
were taping someone else, Anthony was in the middle of a particular routine and 
someone had the presence of mind to turn one of the cameras on and record him. 
 
Even though we didn’t have proper audio because the microphone was on someone 
else, you’ll still get a nice example of what it looks like when someone as masterful as 
Anthony Jacquin does the street hypnosis sets. 
 
As we go into this, I’d like you to notice a couple of things, especially in contrast with the 
first three or so demonstrations that you’ve seen so far.  
 
1. The first thing I want you to notice is just how natural and relaxed his body 
mannerisms are.  
 
He’s done this a lot, which means all the things he’s asking people to do in all the 
demonstrations he’s doing himself, he’s so familiar with that he’s really not giving it a 
second thought. 
 
That creates a natural ease to what he’s doing. This is something you’ll just good at with 
practice. If you want to get good at that before you go out in the streets, then just get a 
friend to come in and rehearse that with you and do it over and over again until it’s 
really easy for you to say the words and do the gestures. Then you can go out on the 
street and practice it. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
41 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Your friend doesn’t necessarily have to go into trance or even succeed with any of the 
tests. It’s just for you to get glib and smooth with what you’re doing so that you start 
looking more and more like Anthony does there. 
 
2. The second thing I want you to notice is how natural and familiar he is with his 
subject. 
 
It’s a lady he’s never seen before, yet there he is with one hand on her shoulder 
constantly. Why is that useful? Well, it’s in a public setting. Having the hand on the 
shoulder gets your attention and focuses on him more and more. She is less likely to 
turn around and look at her friends. She’s less likely to think about embarrassing things. 
She’s less likely to focus outside on distractions. 
 
Those things can still happen, but because the hand on the shoulder is also grabbing her 
attention, and the person at the other end of that hand is the hypnotist, it’s grabbing 
her attention in a more natural sort of way that really absorbs the attention very easily. 
 
Let’s jump in here. I don’t know if you could hear what Anthony was saying. I know it’s a 
little bit unclear given the circumstances. We were in a public setting, the microphones 
weren’t on him. It’s actually on someone else at the moment, but you can still see a lot 
of what’s going on right now.  
 
Essentially, what Anthony’s doing is kind of a confusion or overload induction. You’ll 
notice that he has his hand out and has her focus on his finger, and he’s moving it 
around. What he’s doing is, is he’s spotting her attention. Is her attention tracking his 
fingers? Is it following it constantly? By moving it, it forces her to keep up with him 
constantly. She doesn’t quite know what’s going to happen next. Then it gets her more 
and more absorbed in the task while trying to figure out where the finger is. 
 
He’s also throwing in some distractions. Don’t look at my rings. I know I have a lot of 
rings on my hands. He’s touching her shoulder and moving it around a little bit. All these 
things are giving her stuff to think about other than anyone else. In the meantime, he’s 
noticing how her attention is being more and more zeroed in on his hands. Watch that 
segment again and you’ll see her facial expression changing from okay I’m looking at 
that hand and trying to track it, and it becomes more engrossing and more absorbing. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
42 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
That’s what you really want. The next thing he does is as the hands come closer towards 
her face, he tells her what’s going to happen. It’s always I’m going to tell you what’s 
going to happen, I’m going to do it and then you’re going to experience it. Here he’s 
telling her as my finger comes close to your eyes, your eyes will get heavy and sleepy 
and closed, and you’ll go into a trance, etc. 
 
One of the tricks he’s using there as well is as her hand comes closer to the eyes, a 
couple of things will happen. 
 
1. The eyes start defocusing. It’s very difficult for them to keep their focus the 
closer it gets.  
 
2. The blink reflex will naturally increase because the closer something gets to 
your eyes, the more uncertain your eyes become and they’ll want to close to 
protect them. It’s a built-in mechanism. 
 
 
3. The third thing that he does is once he gets to a certain point, he moves his 
finger down.  
 
Remember, she’s tracking his finger, so her eyes will naturally follow it. Try this for 
yourself. As your eyes track something that’s going down, your eyelids start coming 
down as well to protect the upper part of the eyeball. The only thing that needs to be 
open of course is the iris, the part where the lens is which focuses the light in. 
 
It’s already causing the eyes to close just by making her track this. She’s not aware of 
this, but because her eyelids are already starting to close, it’s a very small step to 
continue that motion for them to be all the way closed. 
 
Again it’s a very elegant way of getting eye closure as part of the induction coupled with 
everything else that he’s doing. 
 
Can’t hear what being said. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
43 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
We’re at an interesting point here. He’s induced the trance and he’s not following his 
typical sort of set procedure that we’ve created – the finger vise, hands and so on.  
 
Partly because that’s probably already happened earlier on and he’s now in the 
induction phase, but partly because one of the things that Anthony likes to do – and I 
think this is a great trait – is to just work with what you’ve got, whatever is there. 
 
In this case when the lady was going through the induction procedure – heavier and 
deeper sleep and comfortable and so on – notice how her head started bowing forward 
more and more, which is very dramatic of course for the people watching. 
 
Because the head’s already bowed forward in a heavy and relaxed position, he’s going 
to utilize this. Think about it this way. Try this for yourself. Bend your head forward and 
just let it dangle for a bit, and you’ll notice that your head’s actually a pretty heavy part 
of your body. It feels heavy in that position because it’s an awkward position to hold it 
in. 
 
By suggesting that your head is very heavy when it already feels very heavy, you’re 
basically just reaffirming something that’s already there. It makes the suggestion much 
more likely to take.  
 
Then he can piggyback another suggestion onto it, which is that it’s too heavy to lift. It’s 
too relaxed to lift. It’s too heavy. It’s like lead. He’s using imagery, he’s using direct 
suggestion and he’s using additional support suggestions, like your muscles are too 
relaxed and they can’t lift the head anymore, as part of the whole process. 
 
This is his next test in the sequence. We haven’t seen what’s happened before but that’s 
okay. It’s actually a very eloquent use of what’s already going on and it’s got a very high 
likelihood of succeeding just because it’s tapping into what’s already there.  
 
Please watch as we continue this clip how Anthony continues that utilization principle 
and continues to build off that effect. It started off that we have a natural response – 
the head bows forward. Then he uses that by suggesting that the head’s going to stay 
there and that it’s too heavy to lift. There’s already an extra little response there.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
44 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Going forwards now, he’s going to do the same thing but make more of it. Every time I 
click my fingers, your head’s going to feel 10 times heavier or 100 times heavier, and 
he’s constantly clicking his fingers. 
 
How can he do this? Really what’s going on here is he’s doing exactly the same test 
again. Your head’s too heavy to lift, and it’s still too heavy to lift. To say to someone 
your head’s still too heavy to lift and you still can’t lift it and you still can’t lift it, that 
gets a little bit boring after a while, especially for the audience watching it. 
 
This is a nice dramatic piece where he says it’s getting 10 times heavier, 100 times 
heavier and then 1,000 times heavier. You just can’t lift that head. He’s constantly 
clicking his fingers. He’s really milking the same effect in a much more dramatic way so 
that the audience is much more entertained by it. 
 
You can see the two guys in the background that are friends of this lady that he’s 
working with just kind of laughing away and thinking my God, I can’t believe what’s 
going on right now. 
 
 
Can’t hear what’s being said. 
 
What’s happened here? We had the head bow. We’ve now had him relaxing the arm as 
well so that she can’t lift her arm. That’s a natural progression. The head is relaxed, the 
arm’s now relaxed and that relaxation feels heavy and you can’t lift it. 
 
Now that he’s got that as a suggestion effect, he’s going to reverse the suggestion of the 
arm and do essentially an arm levitation. The arm’s lifting up. You can’t help it lifting up. 
Compare that to one of the first arm levitations you saw on demo number one. There 
it’s just lifting up, it’s coming up naturally and so on and so forth, and that’s a great 
effect. 
 
Here, he’s going a step forwards. Not only is the hand coming up and he’s watching for 
it to come up – that’s right, lifting more and more – but in the next step he’s going to 
reverse it and say to her you can’t even put it down, not even if you wanted to. The 
hand’s already lifting.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
45 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
There’s already a mental impulse for it to go in one direction, and now he’s suggesting 
that it couldn’t even go in the opposite direction, which makes it even more dramatic 
for people watching.  
 
Does the lady actually test it? Who knows? All that matters is the audience is very 
entertained by this, and if she does try to test it and it continues lifting up anyway, it 
creates a very powerful conscious-unconscious dissociation. It’s split between what she 
thinks should be happening and what she normally makes happen, and what’s 
happening right now.  
 
It’s very clearly out of her conscious control at that point. Then Anthony just capitalizes 
on that moment by grabbing the hand and sticking it to her face, and now we have the 
first sticking event.  
 
Notice the sticking isn’t just saying your hand’s stuck to your face. It is following a 
sequence – first the tracking of the finger, then the induction, then the head is heavy, 
then the arm’s really heavy and now the hand is coming up on its own, and now you 
can’t resist the hand coming up on its own, and now it’s stuck to your face. 
 
This only happens after about six or seven successful suggestions being presented. It’s 
not the one he does straight out of the gate. Could he do that? Of course he could go 
straight for sticking something to her head. It happens all the time. However, by making 
it follow this sequence of escalated suggestions, by the time he gets to her head she’s 
already succeeded with some of the other suggestions and this one is even more likely 
to take effect. 
 
It’s stuck. Glued together, stuck together. Imagine there’s Super Glue all over your 
fingers and your head. When you try and pull it off, it’s going to seem ridiculous to 
you. It will seem funny. It’s stuck. It’s glued, it’s stuck fast.   
 
I know it’s a weird feeling but this time when I click my fingers, your hand will 
come unstuck and your name will just drop out of your mind. It will be gone, 
forgotten. Just for a time, it is gone. You can no longer remember, say, think – it’s 
gone completely.  
 
Eyes open, wide-awake. That’s a lovely dress you’re wearing. What’s your name? 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
46 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
There are a whole bunch of interesting things that have happened here. We’ve had a 
rapidly escalating set of effects, leading up to the hand being stuck to the face and very 
successfully so. He’s asked her to test it. She’s failed, so already he’s done a brilliant 
performance that is very entertaining, mind blowing and so on and so forth. 
 
Now Anthony is going to go for the big effect. Remember, up until this point all the 
effects have been based around the idea of motion – your hand can’t move, your hand 
can move. When the hand’s dangling down there, it can’t move. Now when your hand is 
on your head it can’t move.  
 
It’s the same essential effect. It’s just that a different pseudo reason is being given to 
her at that point. Now he needs to switch tracks and he needs to go for a mental effect. 
Why? Because otherwise he gets stuck in a rut again.  
 
Now that he’s had a nice success with the physical effects, we’re going to go for a 
mental one. The classic one is amnesia because once you get amnesia, doing a lot of 
other stuff becomes a lot easier to do. 
 
How does he do this? Once again he’s following a sequence. He’s attaching everything 
to everything else. That hand is stuck to your face right now. In a moment I’ll click my 
fingers and your hand will come off your head; however, you won’t be able to 
remember your name. It will be gone, completely forgotten, out of your memory and 
you won’t be able to say it. 
 
This is the kind of language he’s using to create a name, amnesia or a name block, but 
notice how he’s attached to the releasing of the hand. It’s a conditional suggestion. The 
hand releases only when the name goes, so he’s swapping effects out one for the other. 
 
Another thing that he does – and this is a really nice little trick for amnesia in general – 
to make it more likely to get an amnesia from someone, all you have to do is distract 
them right at the point of immersion from trance. Erickson used to love doing this. In 
this case he says open your eyes and the hand comes down and then he says that’s a 
lovely dress you have on. That idea of the dress is a complete non sequitur. It has 
nothing to do with anything that’s happened. It surprises here and she goes thank you.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
47 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
It pulls her into more of a social context and stops her mind thinking about what just 
happened. Because she’s not consciously thinking about what just happened, it makes it 
much more likely that the suggestion around amnesia will take effect at the unconscious 
level.  
 
Just watch what happens as he does all this. 
 
 
Can’t hear what’s being said. 
 
Let’s pause it here and just watch what just happened here again. We’ve gone all the 
way successful through to the name amnesia. She can’t say the name, and Anthony’s 
getting ready to either exit the whole set to let someone else have a go or to just kind of 
leave it there or to add some other effects afterwards. 
 
What matters is the transition once again. Her name is out of her memory. He’s giving 
her some emotional reaction to go with it – that’s kind of weird, that’s not very usual, 
that feels kind of weird but it’s okay. 
 
He’s giving her language – he’s giving her mind ways to think about the effect rather 
than thinking of ways to reverse the effect. The next thing he does is distracts her again. 
He does another classic induction, which is the pressing on the palm induction. He 
pushes on the palm and he’s looking for a very dramatic instant induction, which this 
can be. 
 
You’ll notice that when he does this, because of the setting that he’s in people are 
watching, her friends are there and things are a little bit awkward in some respects 
because she doesn’t know what just happened and what’s going on. You’ll notice the 
instant induction failing to a small degree. 
 
It doesn’t actually fail. She actually goes into a trance slightly, but because she’s feeling 
a little bit unsafe, she starts giggling. Laughter is generally an example of a defense 
mechanism. When someone is emotionally or intellectually challenged in some way, 
they might laugh to de-potentiate that fear that’s coming up. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
48 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
She starts laughing a little bit, and she starts trying to pull herself out of the trance by 
lifting her head up and opening her eyes again. This is kind of a dicey moment in the 
whole process. He needs to be able to clear the instructions out. She’s just broken the 
whole transitional work he’s been doing. Up until this point she’s been a great subject. 
All he does is he insists that she closes her eyes. Why? Because we’ve got a lifetime of 
memories of opening your eyes in the morning after a nice good night’s rest. It’s 
another way of capitalizing on a natural phenomenon. We sleep, we open our eyes and 
we’re awake.  
 
He’s going to get her to sleep again by symbolically closing her eyes, so he can cancel 
the suggestions out so that when they’re open again, this time it’s with everything 
cleared out. Her name is back, her arm feels fine, her head feels fine and so on and so 
forth. 
 
Please do your best to notice that as Anthony does the emergence induction – the ex-
duction, if you like, he is also giving her a hypnotic gift. He’s going to make her feel 
refreshed. He’s going to make her feel great. He’s going to get rid of any negativity in 
her mindset. He’s going to make sure that she’s relaxed and de-stressed. He’s going to 
make sure that she has a great time. The weekend’s coming up and she’s going to have 
a wonderful weekend hanging out with her friends and so on. 
 
These are all examples of hypnotic gifts. This leaves a very positive impression on the 
person who’s actually experiencing the trance. It’s a very positive impression for those 
people watching because they’re thinking wow what a nice thing to do for someone, 
and it creates more motivation that someone else who’s watching is likely to want to 
volunteer to try it out for themselves as well.  
 
It’s also a nice little piece of marketing for our hypnosis profession in general. Now 
people are going to leave thinking how amazing and how positive hypnosis is, rather 
than thinking about how scary it is because someone can make you do stuff. 
 
Now having these weird experiences becomes reframed as a very positive thing because 
at the end of it, you’re feeling more positive, less negative, happier, and you get to have 
more fun in your life. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
49 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Also notice that at the end of this whole ex-duction sequence, you’ll see Anthony asking 
this lady’s friends to give her a round of applause. This is a very nice simple way of giving 
the audience an applause cue. All everyone else in the square is hearing is a bunch of 
people cheering and applauding, so as far as they’re concerned it’s for the hypnotist.  
 
It kind of is for the hypnotist too, but by saying give your friend a nice round of 
applause, it’s less egotistical for starters, and secondly it gives the audience more 
motivation to want to applaud and want to cheer because now they’re cheering for one 
of their own. They’ve kind of imagined themselves being in that lady’s shoes and 
enjoying the applause themselves. It’s a much easier way to motivate someone for that. 
 
Please notice how Anthony is a real consummate professional through and through so 
that his ex-duction sequence is ending the whole trance and the whole demonstration 
maneuver is just as detailed and just as elaborate as all the stuff he did before. It’s not 
just like okay you’re out of trance and you’re done now.  
 
It’s a very smooth ending. Some gifts are thrown in, some nice applause to wrap it all 
up, everyone feels good and there’s a nice positive vibe in the air. It means he can move 
onto the next group, and they’ll be curious about what just happened, so they’re more 
likely to want to do it for themselves; or if he turns to one of her friends and invites him 
to have a go too, he’s much likely to have a go now because he knows that he’s going to 
be treated with respect, and it’s all going to work out well.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
50 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Bonus DVD #2 – Hypnosis Demonstrations With 
Strangers On The Streets Of London – With 
Commentary – Part Two 
 
 
Demonstration #5 
 
 
I never got your name. Hi, William I’m Gary. How are you doing? Nice to meet 
you, I’m a hypnotist and you’re the victim.  
 
We’re now into demonstration number five. This one happened right after Anthony’s 
demonstration with the lady. You’ll notice that the gentleman that this hypnotist is 
working with is one of the friends of the lady that was actually in the background 
watching as his friend was going through the whole trance process.  
 
Then one of the students capitalized on this idea. Because Anthony did such a wonderful 
job and everyone felt so good, it makes it a lot easier for her friends to want to 
volunteer.  
 
This is one of the reasons why of course treating your audience with so much respect 
and putting such a nice spin on that ending is very important. Other than to make 
hypnosis look good, it makes you look good and it makes it more likely that you’ll get 
more volunteers going on.  
 
You’ll notice this student is a little bit more nervous. He attempts to make a joke – I’m 
the hypnotist, you’re the victim. That can work very well, but you want to be very 
careful about making those kinds of jokes. 
 
The reason is that whenever you use certain words, especially if there’s a heightened 
state of arousal and someone’s a little bit uncertain about what’s going to happen, if 
you use a word like victim or attack or anything like that, these things might trigger a set 
of associations and ideas that you don’t necessarily want them to have.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
51 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
In this case the person’s already a little bit cautious, and when he makes the joke that 
cautiousness comes out a little bit more. You can hear it coming out. It’s okay to makes 
just, but just be very careful about the kind of humor that you use because you don’t 
want to accentuate any fear component the person might have and motivate them to 
protect themselves, rather than let themselves go into the experience. 
 
Are you sure you’re okay with this? 
 
I’m fine, yes. I’m a bit of a skeptic, but we’ll see how it goes. 
 
Let’s just play for a little bit then. 
 
Let’s jump in here. Something very interesting has just happened. We have our 
hypnotist offering to do some hypnosis with this person. He’s somewhat motivated 
because he saw his friend doing this whole thing, but now he let something interesting 
slip – I’m a bit of a skeptic. 
 
The hypnotist does something very nice with this, which is to downplay it and say just 
play with it and see what happens. We’ll just play a little bit. That play idea is actually a 
very, very useful one to give to people, especially if they’re nervous. 
However, what you have here right now is a skeptic, and he’s a self-proclaimed skeptic – 
I don’t think this stuff can work on me. This puts you on notice that you need to change 
your frame somewhat. Before I work with someone who’s a skeptic, I might put a 
challenge out there to make him want to succeed. 
 
For example, let’s just play with this idea is fantastic. Let’s just play with this. How might 
you go further than that? I might say something along the lines of okay you’re a skeptic. 
Let’s just play with it. Let’s just see how well you can concentrate first of all before we 
do any of this hypnosis stuff. 
 
Notice how I placed a challenge out, which is to say let’s see how good you can 
concentrate before I’ll allow you to do any hypnosis. This puts him on notice that he has 
to perform. He’s the one who’s got to succeed; not me. He’s no longer a skeptic judging 
how good I am at what I’m doing. It’s now reversing the tables a bit, and he now has to 
prove to me how well he’s doing before I will allow him to continue down that road. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
52 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Another approach might be to get him to justify himself to you. Get him to actually ask 
you to be a volunteer. If the context is appropriate for this, you might say I’m curious, 
how come you just volunteered to do a hypnosis demonstration if you’re a skeptic and 
you don’t think it can work? 
 
Something interesting will come out of this. It might be him saying I know it won’t work, 
so I just want to prove it. If things like that start coming out, it puts on more and more 
notice not to work with the individual because they’re in a challenge frame. Can that 
sort of stuff be turned around? Absolutely it can. You can motivate them to want to 
succeed – for example with the concentration thing. Let’s not do hypnosis. Let’s test 
your concentration first. Let’s test your imagination first.  
 
This once again reverses the frame. He now has to prove something to me, rather than 
standing there trying to judge me or evaluate how good I am as a hypnotist because he 
the skeptic can resist whatever I’m doing.  
 
→ A very important note is never engage in street hypnosis or any other kind of 
hypnosis when there’s a challenge saying that you can’t do it. 
 
Figure out a way to switch the script and flip it around, putting them on the spot and 
saying I’m going to test you out and let you do something, or better still have him come 
back to you and say I really want to try this. Can I try this? 
 
Then of course, you get them to justify it. Why do you want to try it? I think it will be a 
great experience. Really? How do you think it will feel? I think it would be like this and 
I’ll be able to achieve that. Now they’re justifying themselves to you, and now is a good 
time to jump into it. 
 
Once again let me emphasize that working with someone who thinks their job is to 
challenge you and to resist you is a very bad position to be in, and either move on from 
that person and use someone else if you don’t know how to turn it around, or if you can 
turn it around then find a way to turn it around so that they’re asking permission or 
trying to prove to you how good a subject they really are.  
 
We’ll just play for a little bit, okay? Go ahead and step right over here. Put your 
feet together for me. Good. We’ll do very similar to what he did over there. I want 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
53 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
you to stick your arms straight out like this, and go ahead and interlace your 
fingers, and go ahead and bend your arms just like that. Excellent, you’re doing 
real well. 
 
I want you to bring your fingers up, your index fingers up and separate them 
about an inch or so. Excellent, you’re doing real good. Now I want you to focus on 
this spot right in between those two fingers, and you’re going to notice that the 
fingers are going to start to come together. 
 
Just as they start to come together, as soon as they do come together, your eyes 
are going to close and you’re going to want to drop. Okay? As soon as they 
touch... You’re good; you’re good, okay excellent. Go ahead and bring your arms 
back down. Relax. You’re doing good. You’re doing fine, all right? 
 
Let’s jump in here again and notice what’s happening here. The first thing you want to 
realize is that even with a skeptic, notice the importance of doing some of these slightly 
more loaded suggestibility tests at the beginning because you gets successes early on. 
 
This person thought he couldn’t be hypnotized. He thought this wouldn’t work on him. 
He’s a skeptic and yet, notice how he gets all excited like my God this is working. This is 
moving. The problem is his mind is not entirely on the thing yet. Notice how he’s turning 
to his friends and saying my God this is working. He’s getting distracted away from the 
hypnotist.  
 
The hypnotist has to fight now to keep control. He’s doing a decent job of it, but he still 
has to fight for it, and his voice gets a little strained whilst he’s doing that. Instead what 
you want to be doing is see if you can recruit those friends to bring them in on this. Say 
hey, does this normally happen? Do these fingers normally move that way? Did you 
expect this to happen? 
 
Because he’s told me he’s a skeptic and now he’s all lit up like a kid at Christmas going 
my God I can’t believe this is really happening, I’d probably want to stop there and 
actually this as part of a belief change around whether or not he should be a skeptic. Did 
you expect that to happen? No. It happened anyway, didn’t it? Yes. How do you feel 
about that? That’s kind of freaky. That’s kind of amazing. 
 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
54 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
At that point alone you could already stop. If you wanted to continue, you can still 
challenge him further and say if you could do that, how much further do you think you 
can go? I don’t know. Can you really concentrate on this next thing and see how much 
further you can go with this? 
 
Notice the challenge. He’s already excited that it’s working. He’s feeling good about that 
fact. Now you can challenge him and say let’s see how much further we can take you 
with this, but I’ll need more concentration from you this time. You can’t talk to your 
friends. You can’t turn around. You must be 100% focused on this. Do you think you 
have what it takes? 
 
If he says no, by all means let him go. You’ve already done a successful demonstration. If 
he says yes, then say great, put your attention here please. This makes it much more 
likely to succeed in a very amazing and demonstrative way so that everyone else gets 
excited by it too.  
 
Let’s do another. Put your arms straight out like this about this far apart. Keep 
your arms straight, hands straight. Excellent. I want you to imagine, just picture in 
your mind that you’ve got a big magnet here and here, both of these, and in these 
hands are magnets that are just going to pull themselves together. 
 
All right, so I want you to focus your eyes right here, and picture a magnet, a 
magnet. They’re going to bring your hands together. Go ahead and close your 
eyes. Excellent.  
 
As you do that, you’re going to begin to notice, you’re going to begin to 
experience your hands are starting to come together. You can try to keep them 
apart, but you cannot. They’re going to start to come. That’s it. Just like that. Just 
like that. You’re doing great. Just like that. 
 
They’re going to magically and magnetically come together. Just as if I tied a big 
rubber band around your wrists here, those magnets are pulling closer together, 
closer, closer and closer, closer and closer and as they touch, sleep. Deeper, 
deeper, deeper down, deeper relaxed. 
 
The deeper you relax the deeper you’ll go. The deeper you relax the better you’ll 
feel. The better you feel the more you relax. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
55 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Notice what just happened in those segments. You saw a really successful magnetic 
hands induction there as well, and again this so-called skeptic is totally amazed with his 
hands coming together.  
 
Please be aware of just how amazed he is, and how much you could play that up. Just 
those two simple effects can very often blow people’s minds. The average person with 
just those two things alone will be deeply impressed.  
 
I know as a hypnotist you want to be able to go further than that, but just bear in mind 
that that on its own is a very entertaining mini show that you can use and then move on. 
The one thing I want to show here is what happens – and this is something that you can 
never really tell ahead of time. The student very correctly notices that he’s done very 
well with the first two little test pieces, and he decides to go for a conversion induction. 
 
You convert the trance that’s already beginning to happen into a full-blown trance by 
doing an instant induction. In this sense he’s using the one where he’s pulling the 
person forwards, and you’ll notice there’s some resistance with the person. 
 
He’s pulling him in and at first he kind of holds back and he’s a little bit awkward with it. 
You can still get away with doing an instant induction with him. You just have to make 
sure that you realize that this is a break of rapport. He’s resisting somewhat, so you can 
kind of back off a little bit and then just use some general language with him.  
 
That’s right, just keep your eyes closed, relax and drift further down. Remember how 
good it felt with those hands coming together. Now your brain can take you even 
further down this journey. 
 
What you don’t want to be doing is – and this is happening a little bit here with the 
student. He learns after a few seconds and he backs off a little bit, which is great, but 
you don’t want to be getting into is a tossing match. I’m pulling, you’re pulling back, I’m 
pulling back, you’re pulling further.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
56 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
That’s a challenge. That’s a resistance. That’s me against you, rather than us both 
together. You never can tell if someone’s going to resist in that particular way. Who 
knows?  
 
Maybe they feel delicate about their neck or maybe they have trust issues. It doesn’t 
really matter too much. The point is if you do get something like that, then just let go 
and back off, but continue with verbal instructions to keep those eyes closed, and 
continue to deepen the trance.  
 
Then maybe throw in another little effect so that you can continue to snowball it. Just 
remember, there’s that wash-rinse-repeat cycle, which is to say when something fails, 
you just go back, forget about whatever just happened and you wash your hands clean 
of it. You rinse – you do something else that is going to be successful. 
 
Typically you’ll go back to the previous suggestion that was successful. In this case it 
might be the hands coming together. You might put those hands together and say that’s 
right, keep your eyes closed and feel those hands together, and remember how good it 
felt for them to come together. In the same way, let those hands come apart only as 
slowly as you continue back into trance, etc. 
 
Basically you’re just washing your hands clean of the problem. You’re giving them 
suggestions that you know will be successful, and then if you want to repeat something 
you can repeat it.  
 
Only this time if you are going to do something like an instant induction, preframe it. I’m 
going to touch you on the back of the neck. I’m going to give you a slight jolt. Just go 
with it. It will be a very comfortable trance experience and so on. It’s just a way of 
getting rid of problems before they can even arise. 
 
All said and done however, this student did fantastically well. He converted a skeptic. He 
had two great successes. His instant induction was a semi-success, and he does a very 
good job of rescuing it. Even though it is on the edge of teetering, he doesn’t let it fall 
apart. He rescues it, pulls it back together again and ends on a high note.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
57 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
This is a great example of what you can also be doing when things happen on the street 
that is unexpected.  
 
Excellent. You’re doing real well. In fact just look at your hand. Focus on the lines 
of your hand. Take a look at just that little spot right there and focus on it, and 
notice as your eyes get closer, the focus changes and just sleep. Deeper down, 
deeper and deeper, more relaxed. Go all the way down. Let everything go this 
time. 
 
 
Demonstration #6 
 
Welcome back again. We’re now on demonstration number six. You’ll notice that in the 
last 20 seconds or so, the hypnotist did a very nice job of doing a very nice instant 
induction. This is a variation of the Bandler handshake induction. This is the variation 
that Anthony Jacquin likes to use.  
 
What I want you to notice here is how even very dramatic instant inductions can be 
done very gently and very softly but still be very fast. The entire induction from start to 
finish was around about 20 seconds or so in duration, and still he gets a very nice 
dramatic thing. The person comes forward. 
 
It’s very dramatic for people to watch, especially with the hand positioned where it is 
and so on and it’s still very fast, so you get to have a two for one. The induction is there, 
people are watching and so on. 
 
Please don’t think that in order to do a dramatic instant induction that’s it’s got to be 
less than a second, it’s got to be violent, people are going to jerk around the place and 
flop down like bunny rabbits. It’s not necessary. If you do it and you pull it off well, 
great, that’s very dramatic.  
 
However, this softer gentler style can be equally dramatic and is very, very useful with 
people who are maybe a little bit more cautious, a little more hesitant or are feeling a 
little less safe around you or the environment that they’re in. It gives you a nice 
alternative pacing and rhythm to doing this sort of stuff. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
58 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
You can go so much deeper this time. You did phenomenal last time around. That 
was so impressive, but this time you’re going to go even deeper, and you’re going 
to have more fun and you will never forget your last night in London, and neither 
will your friends. It’s going to be an amazing experience for absolutely everybody. 
 
So let’s just go deeper and deeper. Very deep, that’s excellent, more relaxed, 
deeper and deeper, deeper and deeper. Your legs can support you as you go 
deeper and deeper and more relaxed. 
 
Let’s jump in here for a quick second and notice what the hypnotist is doing here. This is 
a really, really nice touch. What he’s doing is he’s motivating the subject to want to take 
part in the whole experimental street hypnosis and become a great subject.  
 
How is he doing this? He’s doing it by preloading it with a gift. If you do all this, you’re 
going to have an amazing time and if you do all this, I’m going to suggest to you at the 
end of it that you’re going to have the best time with your friends. This is your last night 
out in London. You’re going to go away on whatever holiday or trip you’re going to go 
onto, and you’re going to have the best time with your friends ever, a memory worth 
having. 
 
That’s going to be tremendously motivating for him. He now is one the same page with 
the hypnotist. The better he does the better night he’s going to have, and the better 
memory he’s going to have of that night in the future. 
 
This is a very eloquent way of tapping into a person’s motivation to make sure that you 
have a better demonstration of street hypnosis when it happens.  
 
Deeper and deeper and more relaxed. Okay, stand back up and you can feel 
yourself feeling really good, eyes still closed. You can support yourself. 
 
Let’s break in here very briefly to just point out what he’s doing here. Notice how a lot 
of the instant inductions require him to pull the subject into his shoulder to kind of get 
his balance and so on. It’s not the only way to do an instant induction, but it’s a 
particular way that I like because it shows you how much trust an individual has for you 
by being willing to give you their balance, by being willing to rest on your shoulder and 
so on.  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
59 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
You can’t have a person stand up there all the time because first of all it looks a little 
strange – two guys hugging on the streets. It may not be the exact kind of 
demonstration you’ll be doing.  
 
Also you want to make sure that the subject starts taking control of the hypnotic 
experience enough that they’re taking responsibility for what they’re doing. All you 
need to do at that point is realize that someone in trance will stay in trance if you tell 
them to. 
 
So he just tips him back on his feet and says you’ll be on your own balance. You’ll 
support yourself as you go deeper and deeper. You can feel this good but keep your 
own balance. 
 
Once again this frees up the hypnotist to have more range to talk to the audience in 
general. It puts the subject in a position where he’s maintaining his own balance so that 
future suggestions can be given and the person doesn’t have to just roll awkwardly on 
the person’s shoulder.  
 
It also takes care of any kind of social issues there might be with people giggling or 
looking around going that’s a little awkward, two men hugging in the streets. What are 
they up to? 
 
It takes care of anything like that that might be happening, which means the person in 
trance won’t necessarily pick up on the audience reacting in an inappropriate way and 
then feeling embarrassed themselves.  
 
Just remember, a hypnotic subject is actually very aware. They’re very able to sense 
what other people around them are doing and how they’re expressing themselves in 
terms of their tones and so on, so if there’s any kind of negative vibe in the audience, 
you do not want that to be transmitted to the subject.  
 
Again this is a nice way of doing it, putting that subject on full responsibility. It also frees 
up your shoulder to be able to move around a bit more and be more engaging with the 
audience.  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
60 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Now in a second we’re going to bring this arm back up again, but we’re going to 
do something even neater and much more powerful than we did last time. In fact 
I’m going to ask one of your friends to help us out, but not yet, in a moment.  
 
Feel this arm just start to begin to rise, and just feel a light feeling coming from 
this hand as it gets higher and higher. The higher it goes the better you feel, and 
just straighten it out, nice and straight and strong. Your legs are going to support 
you. I’m going to support you. 
 
As it goes out, straighten it all the way out nice and strong, as though it’s an iron 
bar… 
 
This is a nice little piece here again. Mostly what you’re watching right now should be of 
no surprise. The arm levitation – we’ve discussed it several times already. There’s no 
magic in the language. What’s really nice to see here though is a hypnotist who’s not 
afraid to touch his subject and correct him when he’s responding to a suggestion very 
literally but in the way the hypnotist would like for him to. 
 
What did the hypnotist want to do? He wanted the guy to lift his hand up to the side. 
That’s what he was demonstration. Of course the subject has his eyes closed, so he can’t 
see any of this stuff happening, which means that he responds to the arm levitation 
suggestions in a way that most people do, which is very literally to lift the arm going 
forwards. That’s the most natural way of lifting it up. 
 
The hypnotist realizes the mistake, he sees that the subject didn’t quite understand 
what he meant – he just did what he said – and all he does is he just very casually 
touches the arm and starts moving it to the side where he wants it to go, and tells him 
with a suggestion to continue it in that particular direction, in that particular path. 
 
Never be afraid of correcting a subject or changing your suggestions to get more of what 
you want. You’re the performer and you can get exactly what you want. You just have to 
describe it accurately or assist the person by correcting them in subtle sorts of ways like 
this to help them get into the kind of movements that you want from them. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
61 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
… as though it’s something that’s amazingly powerful, unbelievable inner strength 
that you’ve been able to tap into here. Make yourself a fist. Make a nice strong 
fist. Tap into that, an iron bar. Tap into inner strength, amazingly strong. Feel the 
strength. As you tap into the inner strength, it’s as though you can shoot the 
power out to the buildings on the other side of the street. (You can just come get 
the mic.) 
 
It’s as though you can tap into the buildings on the other side of the street and 
create an unbelievable strength. Feel how strong it is. It’s amazing. No matter 
how hard I try to push down, you just get stronger. Your arm is stronger and it’s 
stiff. That’s the inner power. 
 
Now in a second I’m going to reach up and I’m going to touch your hand, and 
you’re just going to relax and go deeper, and deeper, more relaxed, deeper and 
deeper, more relaxed, deeper and deeper, more relaxed. 
 
Now in a second we’re going to have an absolute amazing amount of fun because 
in a second I’m going to count to three, and when I count to three you’re going to 
be wide awake, eyes open, but you’ll still be in trance.  
 
One of the things that you’re going to find is you’re completely and totally able to 
support yourself, but you’re only able to move on a pogo stick, which conveniently 
your legs have turned into. You cannot walk. No matter how hard you try, you 
cannot walk but you can balance on your pogo stick.  
 
You’ll be safe. You’ll be secure. 
 
Let’s pause it here again and just talk a little bit about what’s happened. In fact the arm 
levitation and the stiff arm are very standard things. We’ve already talked about them, 
so there’s no need to address them any further at this point. 
What I really like is the creativity this hypnotist is showing. He’s doing a very novel 
suggestion – you’ll only be able to move on a pogo stick, your legs will become a pogo 
stick. There are a couple of things I want to point out in terms of how he’s suggesting 
these things, which are very, very good.  
 
1. He is emphasizing the safety at all times. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
62 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Remember that hypnotic subjects can express things very literally. If someone’s on a 
pogo stick, I don’t know if you’ve ever had a chance to play with one of those as a child 
or even as an adult, but most people end up at the ground at some point. They jump a 
few times and then they lose their balance and fall over.  
 
If this subject takes him literally, he might try to pogo along in some way and after two 
or three bounces, fall over and hurt himself just as he may have done as a kid. He’s 
making very sure that he’s safe, he’s balanced and he’s supporting himself.  
 
All these things are thinking ahead to what might go wrong if the suggestion is acted out 
literally and taking care of that. 
 
2. His suggestions are also giving him a very clear path of how to respond. 
 
You can only bounce up and down. Your legs are the pogo stick. You have to say the 
word boing and you’ll go even higher. You’ll have a good time with it. We’re not leaving 
it to much to his imagination and how to translate it.  
 
He’s actually giving the subject some very clear directions on how to express it and 
making sure that it’s very visual so that people around him can be entertained by it, that 
he’s having fun with it so that internally he’s interpreting it in a positive way, that it’s 
safe of course, as we already talked about, and that he’s actually doing it in a way that 
the hypnotist wants him to do.  
 
The alternative might be that the person just stands there and imagines being in it or he 
stands there and refuses to move around because he doesn’t want to pogo or 
something like that. Again the hypnotist is taking care of these situations by telling him 
exactly what to do and how to do it. 
 
3. Finally, what I want you to notice is that this is the first time that we’ve had a 
physical effect – the jumping up and down – performed with eyes wide open. 
 
As a rule unless you suggestion otherwise, when someone opens their eyes there’s an 
implicit suggestion that the trance is over and we’re finishing now. The way to 
counterman this is to suggest this. You’ll open your eyes, you will seem wide awake, or 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
63 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
you’ll feel wide awake or you’ll think you’re wide awake – there’s a suggestion there 
that they’re not – but you’ll still be deep in trance, you’ll still have these strange effects 
and you’ll still experience these things.  
 
This is a halfway house to a post-hypnotic suggestion, where they come out of trance 
and do it anyway. In this case he’s kind of still in the trance, so it’s a semi post-hypnotic 
suggestion, but it doesn’t matter. The point is it looks the same to everyone else. He 
seems to be out of trance and yet he’s still bouncing everywhere as though he were on 
a pogo stick. 
 
And when you move, you’ll go boing and that will allow you to jump higher, and 
the higher you jump the more fun it’s going to be, but you will be safe and secure 
at all times, able to control yourself. 
 
On the count of three, you’re going to open your eyes wide-open, wide-awake. 
You will not be able to walk. On the count of three – one, two, three boom, wake 
up. How are you doing? How did that feel? How’s it going? Can you move 
around? How do you move around? 
 
You’ve got the power of the pogo stick. How do we move with the pogo stick? 
Boing, boing, boing. It feels great, doesn’t it? Boing, boing, boing. It’s funny. 
 
Let’s jump in here once again and notice that we’ve just seen the suggestion taking 
effect. It’s very dramatic. It’s very interesting. What I what to point out here is 
something again that the hypnotist is doing great.  
 
When the person comes out, he’s a little confused. He doesn’t know quite what to make 
of this experience, and he’s really got no impetus, no reason for putting the suggestion 
into action, so the hypnotist has to do a couple of things. 
 
First he’s got to ask him, can you move around? The answer really is yes he can move 
around, but then he actually encourages him to do so. One of the things I really like that 
he’s doing is not only is he suggesting movement now so that you can actually see the 
boing-ing going into effect, but he’s actually demonstrating it as well. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
64 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
He kind of does a couple of little skip jumps. He does a couple of jumps on his own, and 
you can see the subject doing a very careful test. He just jumps once and then he kind of 
looks around a little confused. He does it again and it’s like what’s going on here?  
 
Once again the hypnotist is reinforcing every successful step as he’s kind of on that 
teetering edge where it’s starting to work, but he’s not quite sure. He could still maybe 
break through it. Then eventually the whole suggestion kicks in. After two or three 
boings or bounces, you see the subject’s face light up. He’s having a great time and 
suddenly he’s bouncing up and down three or four times in a row just for the fun of it. 
 
That’s a classic example of what’s called backwards rationalizing a suggestion. He’s been 
told to bounce around. He’s started doing it just for the suggestion’s sake and it feels a 
little strange, but suddenly the full effect kicks in and he has a reason to do it. The 
reason is he thinks he’s having fun with it, which of course he is, but underneath it all 
the suggestion is taking effect. This is just a rational for him to keep doing it.  
 
Of course he’s entertained, the hypnotist is entertained, the crowd is entertained and 
everyone has a great time with it. 
 
It feels so good, doesn’t it? It’s an incredible experience. 
 
 
Demonstration #7 
 
Just relax. This is going to be a really good time. I’d like you to put your hands like 
this. Excellent. That’s right. Now bend it out, excellent. Now put your fingers right 
there. I want you to use full imagination. 
 
Welcome to demonstration number seven. This is a very nice demonstration. This was a 
group of girls out on a hen night. Someone was getting married. There are a couple of 
things going on here. 
 
First, you didn’t see the setup, which could have been done slightly better. There are 
about seven or eight girls already having a great time. That is a fantastic group of people 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
65 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
to do street hypnosis with because their mindset is already there to have fun and to do 
some crazy stuff. 
 
The hypnotist unfortunately, because he’s just new to it and he’s getting used to this 
whole idea, ignores about six or seven of the girls, so they’re all kind of hanging around 
quietly and getting a little bit bored maybe, and he focuses entirely on the one person. 
 
It’s understandable because he’s still getting used to his skills. He’s trying to focus on 
what he’s trying to do, but it alienates the girls. Whenever you have a large group of 
people together, especially when they’re out for fun, if you alienate one of them from 
the rest of the group, they’re going to start having a group dynamic going on where the 
group gets bored.  
 
They’ll want to drag the person back, or the person that you’re working with might think 
hang on a second, what’s happening with the rest of my crowd? What’s happened to my 
group of people? This is another reason why you want to be a consummate showman. If 
you’re working with groups like this, you want to pull the whole group in because then 
the whole emotional energy of the group helps you make an even better performance. 
 
The next thing that he’s doing that he’s doing very nice is the setup of the finger vise 
induction. We’ve seen this a few times already. However, because he’s spending too 
much time explaining what’s going to happen – use your imagination, don’t try to help it 
and so on – all that instruction should occur before he gets to the point where the 
fingers are extended and are opened up. 
 
Why? Because this girl’s already opened her fingers up, and whilst he’s talking that 
natural effect of the fingers coming together has already happened. He’s missed his 
chance. He’s missed the chance of making this really dramatic because those fingers 
already came together, and he has to pry them apart again. 
 
What would have been much more eloquent for him to do is to give the suggestion that 
in a moment you’re going to put your fingers up like this, and when that happens I’m 
going to suggest that they’ll come together like magnets.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
66 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
They’re going to draw them together and very quickly they’ll touch just like that, and 
then you’ll have a wonderful time – or whatever he wants to say. Now let’s do this. 
Open your fingers up and just like I’ve suggested, those fingers are coming together. 
Feel those magnets. There they go touching already very quickly.  
 
It means that the effect is more dramatic because it’s never happened before. They 
haven’t seen it. She’s already done it once unconsciously just because her fingers come 
together. Now it seems less dramatic because she already did it without suggestion, so 
it’s not such a big deal anymore.  
 
You can still milk it. You can still make something of it, but it’s just less dramatic. Hence, 
give your suggestions or instructions before you open the fingers up. That way, you’re 
not going to miss that very first closing of the fingers, and you can make much more of 
novel situation than you can otherwise do. 
 
Don’t force anything. Just enjoy and use your imagination. Excellent. Now I want 
you to focus on this space between those two fingers. As you focus you’ll see that 
those two fingers are coming together, closer. Excellent. Closer. Now they’re 
coming together faster, and when they touch, that’s right, take a deep breath and 
relax. Yes, relax deep. 
 
Let’s have a look at what just happened there. The hypnotist has reset the finger vise 
again. He’s done the whole thing again, and he did a pretty good job. Please notice how 
the second time around, it took a little longer for those fingers to come together 
because there are two sets of suggestions going on. 
 
The hypnotist is fiddling with the fingers to keep them apart, which is an indirect 
suggestion to keep the fingers open, whilst his language is saying those fingers will come 
together, so there’s a slight conflict of suggestions going on, which slowed things down 
a little bit. Not a tremendous amount. It’s just something worth noticing. 
 
This girl’s still a little bit hesitant. You can tell in terms of responsiveness. She’s there but 
there’s a little bit of guardedness. You can tell in her mannerisms somewhat. When the 
hypnotist goes for an instant induction to convert the finger vise into an instant 
induction, it might be a little bit too soon. She’s not fully in the program yet. She hasn’t 
quite absorbed all the attention on what’s she’s doing. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
67 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
She’s still going along with it, but you’ll notice there’s a bit of hesitation. Part of the 
hesitation of course is that she’s a girl on her own, standing in front of a man with a 
group of guys watching. Her friends are away from her. They’re not supporting her at 
this point because the hypnotist is kind of ignoring them. 
 
You can see them in the background talking to each other, but they’re not observing. 
They’re not watching, so they’re not providing that sense of safety. The hypnotist hasn’t 
said anything about being safe, about going along with the experience and so on, as a 
result of which there’s some hesitation there still. 
 
Of course he could still do the conversion induction, but rather than the more dramatic 
pulling the person in version, he can do a much softer gentler version as you saw in one 
of the earlier demonstrations – where in 10 seconds, that’s it, close your eyes, go 
deeper into trance, let those hands drop down and so on – so that the language 
becomes a little gentler.  
 
It takes care of the person more and emphasizes the safety element more, and really 
respects the kind of environment dynamic that’s going on right in front of him at that 
point in time.  
 
Still, despite that particular problem, please notice how the hypnotist rescues it really 
nicely. He just converts the induction. He backs off a little bit. He does a lot more 
deepening, good feelings all around, and then finally he brings her back and reframes 
the whole experience as that wasn’t really hypnosis. That was just learning how well you 
can focus. 
 
He does a really nice job of handling the situation. What I hope you’ll realize when you 
see this clip again in action is how forgiving people will be. Provided you’re working 
competently, you can make a mistake, rescue the mistake and then carry on smoothly 
despite it all.  
 
Go deeper, deeper. Now, one, two, three open your eyes. Excellent. See, you 
showed me that you can focus. Excellent. Now we’re going to do another exercise 
using your imagination. I’d like you to get closer, closer together. I want you to 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
68 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
focus on this. That’s right. Maybe you can feel the space between… as those two 
thumbs come together you can relax.  
 
It’s fun to know that those hands are coming together closer and closer as they 
become more and more relaxed. Excellent. Those two thumbs are going to clasp. 
You can take a deep breath and relax. That’s right, almost there. Yes, that’s right. 
That’s right. Excellent. Deep breath in, relax down deeper and deeper.  
 
Let’s jump in again and have a little chat about what’s happened there. The hypnotist 
has done a very good job. So far he did the finger vise, he kind of missed the first setup 
but then he rescued it and then he converted it into an instant induction, which was a 
little bit awkward but he rescued that again. 
 
He then does the magnet hands, which is a nice dramatic demo, and once again kudos 
to the hypnotist. He goes for the instant induction once again. Notice however that he 
goes for the same induction in the same sort of sequence. As a result, he gets the same 
kind of resistance all over again. 
 
He once again hasn’t told her what to expect, and because she doesn’t know what to 
expect, she doesn’t know how to react. She’s reacting in exactly the same way as she 
reacted the previous time.  
 
What could he do to improve on this? There are two roads he can take once again. 
 
1. He could change the induction and go for the gentler instant induction to 
convert that process in a more gentle way so that there’s no resistance there. 
 
2. With her hands right there palms touching, she’s already kind of in a mild 
trance, so he can suggest it. 
 
In a moment, I’ll do something a little surprising. However, rest assured you’ll be safe at 
all times. Your friends are watching you. You’re safe. Just go with the experience and 
you can have a fantastic time. 
 
He’s emphasizing safety and he’s giving a motivational cue that she should go along with 
this because she’ll have a fantastic time, because she’ll learn something, something 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
69 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
really cool is going to happen and so on. You want to give them an expectation to go 
along with it, to melt that resistance away a bit more.  
 
Those are the two things he could have done at that point. Instead by choosing to 
repeat the exact same cycle he had before, he gets a very similar response as before. 
Again the hesitation comes back up and it kind of blocks his performance a little bit. 
 
Of course this error does not kill his performance. These are just things you can do to 
improve on the things that you’re doing, and as you get more experienced with people, 
and as you get more experienced with street hypnosis, this sort of stuff will come easier 
and more naturally to you. 
 
Now open your eyes. Excellent. Thank you. Now look at the palms, look at the 
lines. As this keeps coming to your face, you’ll have to change the focus of your 
eyes.   
 
Let’s jump in here again. We’re now onto the third routine. He’s done the finger vise. 
He’s done the magnet hands. He’s attempted an instant induction at the end of each of 
those that kind of semi worked, but he did a good job of rescuing it with the suggestions 
that came right afterwards with the deepening stuff.  
 
Now he does something very interesting and I really like what he’s doing. I really like the 
fact that he’s taking risks with this stuff and really pushing the envelope. It’s really good 
to see. What he’s doing is he pretends that this thing is over. He’s about to shake her 
hand and thank her, but then he does a classic handshake interrupt. Richard Bandler 
came up with this one first.  
 
He lifts her hand right up and throws her some nice suggestions about trance in here. 
Notice how this works so much better than the instant inductions he did before because 
it’s more respectful of her space. Clearly this person’s has more of an issue around her 
space and doesn’t like being dragged into it by a stranger. 
 
She goes on with this much more smoothly. Whilst you might not be able to hear his 
language because his mouth is faced away from the camera so that you can’t hear his 
language as smoothly, it doesn’t really matter. It’s just general suggestions about feeling 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
70 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
and around the arm moving in. All of that kind of stuff you can really pick up in terms of 
the language on the DVDs and the training tapes, but the language is not important. 
 
What’s important is how he’s putting it into action in that social grouping, and he does a 
very nice elegant job of that. 
 
You can’t hear what he’s saying. 
 
Once again he’s gone for the instant induction. Notice a couple of things here. Because 
he’s done the other inductions so nicely, she responds a little bit better in the instant 
induction. However, that concern still is there, so there’s still a little bit of resistance 
with this woman. 
 
Why is this of interest to us? Because the hypnotist is going through a constant cycle of 
success, success, slight failure and the rescues it, success, success, slight failure and 
rescues it. 
 
That cycle creates a broken rhythm. The problem here is that if he wants to go for a 
bigger effect, there’s no smooth transition. It’s not success, success, success, success, 
success, success and then a big effect. 
 
It’s small effect, small effect, then a slight failure but it gets rescued so it’s a small effect 
again, another small effect and then another slight failure. Those slight failures 
constantly reset the charge. It makes it difficult for him to get her totally absorbed in it. 
You can see that she’s still clearly resisting ever so slightly. Whilst it’s still worth trying a 
more dramatic effect, the chances of failing are that much greater.  
 
Remember, in hypnosis you’re trying to get people to act as thoughtlessly as possible, to 
go on instinct, to do things so that they’re surprised like oh where did that come from? 
How did that happen? Everything that streamlines that and makes it more effortless, 
smoother, they just go along with the flow of it, and they kind of lose themselves in it is 
a good thing.  
 
Anything that breaks that flow is going to make it a little bit more difficult. These 
attempts at the instant induction with the actual head pull, which have proven to be not 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
71 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
as successful as they could be – although he’s still doing pretty decently – there’s 
enough of a break in the flow of things that he’s practically starting from scratch again. 
He’s still doing that wash-rinse-repeat cycle again.  
 
However, what he wants to be doing is to have some strong successes, tailing one on 
top of the other so that he can move from the physical phenomenon onto some of the 
more mental or emotional phenomena, and have that transition be as smooth as 
possible.  
 
Now in a moment I’m going to touch the back of your right hand and when I do 
the right hand, this hand is going to become so light it will come up in the sky. 
Now I’m going to – yes – touch this hand, and this hand becomes so light it comes 
up. That’s right. All the sensation you’re feeling in this hand. As this hand comes 
up, you can feel real good inside yourself.  
 
Actually, as long as you’re feeling so good about yourself, this hand is going to go 
up, up – yes that’s right. Just let yourself go. Enjoy the feeling inside yourself. Yes, 
just let yourself go. Use your imagination and as long as this hand is coming up, 
the better you’ll feel inside yourself, and the better you feel inside yourself it will 
make this hand go up, up. That’s right. 
 
What a strange feeling in your right hand coming up. It makes you feel and enjoy 
inside yourself. That’s right. Excellent. Now in a moment I’m going to take this 
right hand like this. Yes, now make a tight fist, really tight. That’s right. Lock in all 
those joints, elbows. That’s right. Make it really, really hard. Yes, and now 
imagine.  
 
Use your imagination and make this arm a steel bar. Imagine this hand is a steel 
bar. That’s right. Now it’s a steel bar. You cannot move. That’s right. You cannot 
bend the steel bar, but this hand now – that hand becomes a steel bar, tighter, 
tighter, tighter, tighter. Yes, that’s right, tighter. That’s right.  
 
Now you can see this hand becomes a steel bar. You can try to bend it and you’ll 
see you cannot bend this arm. Now try it. See, you cannot bend this arm. Try, try, 
try, try. That’s right, and now you can stop trying. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
72 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
We have a very nice thing going on here. Notice how we have that cycle of flow and 
break, flow and break, flow and break. The latest cycle of that, was finished with a nice 
deepening trance again, which rescued that slight break of the instant induction, and he 
does a very nice sort of hand levitation here. 
 
The reason we paused here is not because of the hand levitation. We’ve seen that 
happen before. That’s very straightforward. What’s really nice is what he’s doing with it. 
He’s now finally tapping into this lady’s motivational response.  
 
He’s giving her a reason for succeeding. The higher that hand lifts the better you’ll feel. 
The better you feel the more it lifts. What he’s doing right now believe it or not is he’s 
transitioning from a physical phenomenon – the movement of the hand – to an 
emotional phenomenon – you will feel good. 
 
Look at the lady’s face. Look how much she lights up. You’ll also notice that before he 
made these suggestions and right afterwards after that cycle begins, her involvement is 
different. She’s more absorbed in the experience as soon as the motivational and the 
emotional aspects kick in because it gives her mental energy more things to do with it.  
 
It gives her more motivation. It gives her more of something to pay attention to other 
than just the weirdness of the hand lifting up, so she gets more and more involved with 
this. This is a great point at which he’s again starting to accelerate the process of 
responsiveness, which is going to allow him to be more creative and take more risks 
with more mental phenomenon later on. 
 
As you continue to watch, notice how the hypnotist goes back to a physical 
phenomenon – the stiff arm – in a moment’s time. The reason I’m pointing this out to 
you is not so much that there’s a problem with him doing that. There’s an effectiveness 
that happens there.  
 
He’s started a very nice transition from physical phenomena – the arm lifting – to 
emotional phenomena, but when he goes back to just pure physical phenomena – the 
stiff-arm being stuck – he’s losing that emotional connection that’s really working for 
this woman. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
73 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
The emotional experiences that he’s starting to suggest suddenly evaporate and it again 
lightens the trance a little bit. It goes back to the idea of just now that’s just five physical 
effects with just a small starting point of an emotional effect.  
 
You’ll notice right at the end of the whole clip as well there’s this little segment where 
he goes for that instant induction one more time, but this time the problem is because 
he’s going through the exact same induction that failed so many times before, he’s 
really trained her to fail at it. She now knows how to respond to that, which is by 
resisting slightly and popping out of trance somewhat.  
 
If you’ve done something two or three times in a row and it’s not quite working out, 
drop it and go in a completely different direction so that the mind does not think about 
that anymore. It’s especially important doing this at the end of a particular set. Why? 
Because the things that people remember the most are the first things they did and the 
last things they did. 
 
You want the last thing you did with someone in an induction to be as positive and as 
successful as possible because that’s what they’ll take away. That’s the story they’ll tell 
your friends years from now. 
 
And sleep. Excellent job. 
 
 
Demonstration #8 
 
 That’s right, and as your arms draw together – that’s right – I want you to clasp 
your hands now. Clasp your hands together. That’s right. Just relax your arms and 
then just relax again and close your eyes. That’s it. Keep your eyes closed. You’re 
doing absolutely fantastic.  
 
I want you to know at any time you can go into this state of relaxation no matter 
where you are. You’re in the middle of a crowded street in London, a crowded 
street in London and yet you feel a sense of profound relaxation.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
74 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
We’re now on our eighth demonstration. The beginning of it is pretty straightforward. 
You’ve seen this happen pretty much nine times already, so there’s no real magic in the 
actual thing he’s doing. 
 
There was a very nice point at which the subject put his hands up in the wrong place. 
The hypnotist just casually corrected him and made the induction work really well. The 
reason I’m jumping in here though is because something very interesting happened that 
I want to point out to you. 
 
You’ll notice that when he did his instant induction, it was nice and gentle. The person 
went with it, but for a moment because he wasn’t sure what was going to happen as 
this is kind of new, his eyes popped open. At that point the hypnotist did exactly the 
right thing. 
 
Without skipping a heartbeat, he just said that’s it, close your eyes. Maybe he moved his 
hand in front of the eyes to help eye closure, so it goes right back to a point of success 
and then he starts pacing in with his language. This is a really nice thing to do. 
 
He’s giving them motivation to succeed and he’s actually just basically talking about 
what’s already happening. You can relax anywhere like in a busy street in London. He is 
on a busy street and he is in London, so this kind of lets him know that I know where 
you’re at, I know there’s stuff going on around you, I know you’re on a busy city street, 
and I’ll take care of you so that you can continue relaxing because your mind will do 
that. 
 
Basically he’s indirectly telling him that he’s going to take responsibility for his safety so 
that he can keep his eyes closed without having to look around himself to know that 
everything’s going well. That’s a very, very nice touch that this hypnotist came up with 
there. 
 
Peacefulness and you can relax and start feeling at peace at any time in the 
future when you clasp your hands together like they are now. So now what I want 
you to do is just to unclasp your hands. Just relax. I’m going to count from 1-3, 
and on the count of three you’re going to open your eyes, wide-awake, back with 
me.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
75 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
One, two, three here you are back now. How did that feel? 
 
It’s time for another pause here. Again he’s doing something really nice, something we 
haven’t seen happening before and I really like this. He’s done his induction and he’s 
done a little successful thing. 
 
1. Then he’s given the subject a hypnotic gift.  
 
That’s a wonderful thing to do anyway. It’s something that he can take away for himself 
for the future. This time it’s to be able to relax anytime his hands clasp together. It’s a 
nice simple hypnotic gift.  
 
2. The other thing he does that is really nice is just when the person comes back, 
he asks them how did that feel, how did that go?  
 
Essentially he’s finding points of motivation. As the subject starts talking about how cool 
it was, how unusual it was and how much he’s enjoying himself, he’s giving the 
hypnotist permission or fuel to say if you enjoyed it that much, do you fancy doing 
something more, something extra? 
 
He’s allowing the hypnotist to escalate by talking about how positive that experience 
was for him. It’s a wonderful opportunity that the hypnotist has created by talking to 
the subject about the experience that he’s just had. 
 
How did that feel? 
 
That’s really weird. 
 
Yes, you’re not trying to force it, are you? Okay, do you want to try something 
else? This is another good one. It’s a really good one. This will make you feel so 
good that you’re going to want to do it again and again. It’s something that you 
can then do in the future, which will continue to make you feel good. It’s 
something Paul McKenna does all the time, so it’s a really good one. It’s a really 
good trick of the mind.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
76 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Okay, so this time what I want you to do is close your eyes again. That’s right. 
What I want you to do now is open your eyes and look at my hand. Look at my 
hand. Look at my finger and as it draws closer towards you, you can feel yourself 
becoming more and more relaxed, more and more relaxed, a deeper sense of 
relaxation, concentration and focus.  
 
 
When I touch your forehead, you’re just going to close your eyes and go even 
deeper still now into relaxation, deeper still. That’s it. Just relax all the way down, 
all the way down. Relax those arms. That’s right. You’re standing there. You’re 
doing absolutely wonderful. Just continue to relax now.  
 
What I want you to do is do another test now, and this one’s going to make you 
feel absolutely wonderful. So what I want you to do is to think of somebody in 
your life, somebody in your love who you love and somebody in your life who 
loves and respects you. 
 
As you continue to think of that person, I’m going to touch your hand there. As 
you continue to think of that love and respect that person has, you’re just going to 
find your hand’s just going to irresistibly rise up because of all the love that 
person has for you, and all the love that you have for them is going into that arm, 
making it by an invisible wire rise up, rise up, rising, rising, just feeling that love. 
 
I want you to think of that person. As that hand continues to rise, continue to 
think of that person, all that love, that respect, those good feelings that they give 
you, that you give them and it’s filling your arm up. 
 
Let’s jump in here again and just point out something that I really loved that the 
hypnotist is doing right now. Remember, a lot of hypnosis has to do with motivation. If 
you can motivate someone for something, then the unconscious mind will basically 
move heaven and earth to make it happen.  
 
This is another classic example right here. The hypnotist is attaching the feeling of love 
to the action of the hand lifting up. There are a couple of things going on at the same 
time.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
77 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
1. The first thing that’s happening is he’s tapping into the person’s motivation to 
succeed, so he’s more likely to succeed.  
 
I love doing this whole idea of love or respect or something like that and tying it into 
something dramatic like sticking a hand to a wall or to a chair or something like that. It’s 
just a really nice way of using inner motivation to cement the suggestions in further.  
 
2. The other thing that he’s doing is he’s moving again away from the physical 
phenomena and he’s beginning the idea of emotional phenomena.  
 
Because the person’s focusing so much on the arm lifting, the emotions which, is feeling 
the love and so on – those things will arise automatically. Think about it. They’re 
suggested again, so he’s getting an emotional response when he suggests it along with a 
physical response when he suggests it. All the attention is on the physical response, so 
the emotional response is free to spontaneously manifest. 
 
This is a very eloquent way of transitioning from the physical to the emotional and then 
later on of course the mental as well. 
 
And I want you to imagine there that you have some helium balloons tied to your 
wrist and it’s going to make your hand go up even faster and be full of all that 
love, and those balloons just pulling your hand up towards your face. 
 
It’s moving now towards your face – that hand all the way now. That’s right, 
towards your face and all that love is just continuing to flow through your arm all 
the way, all the way and just really allow yourself to feel what you were feeling, 
see what you were seeing, hear what you hear, and as you think of that person, 
that hand continues faster now, faster now to come towards your face, towards 
your forehead. That’s right. That’s right. 
 
And as it touches, you’re going to experience a profound sense of deep relaxation. 
That’s right, and now you can just relax your arm and go even deeper now, 
deeper now into relaxation and that wonderful feeling. 
 
And you remember that wonderful feeling that you had in your arm. I want it now 
to just spread all the way through your body from your head all the way down to 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
78 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
your toes, all the way, that good feeling all the way down, all the way, spreading 
through every fiber, every nerve of your body, feeling absolutely wonderful.  
 
Just let it fill you up, fill you up with that sense of completeness, of thankfulness, 
of gratitude, all those positive feelings just continuing to fill you up all the way. 
Now what I want you to do is to just squeeze your thumb and forefinger together 
as you think of that. That’s right, as you think of all those positive feelings, and 
now just relax your thumb and forefinger.  
 
Three, two, one come back to me. How are you feeling?  
 
Pretty good. 
 
What I want you to do is just squeeze your thumb and forefinger. Now just 
recapture that feeling, those feelings, those really positive feelings. Can you do 
that? 
 
Yes. 
 
Fantastic. Okay, now sleep down, all the way down, all the way. That’s right. 
 
 
Demonstration #9 
 
… feet together. You’re here. You’re focused on me. Good. Now you can extend 
your arms just like this. Okay, put them together, cross your fingers just like that. 
More pressure, more pressure. Do you feel the pressure? Feel the pressure just 
like that over here. 
 
Now we’re on demonstration number nine. So far everything is very straightforward. It’s 
the finger vise being set up nicely. What I want you to notice here is how the hypnotist 
is once again starting to correct the subject. 
 
If the subject doesn’t respond 100% the way he wants them to, he corrects them to 
make sure that they understand that they have to give 100% response. In this case the 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
79 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
person isn’t squeezing her hands together fully. Maybe it’s because she’s not totally 
invested. Maybe she’s not used to using the strength in her hand. Who knows? 
 
However, the hypnotist comes in, he pauses the proceedings because it’s not to his 
satisfaction yet. He shows her what to do by squeezing his own hands harder, and then 
he makes her feel what to do by squeezing her hands together for her. Only when she 
responds 100% in the way that he wants her to is he willing to move on.  
 
This is a great mindset for you to get yourself into. Make sure the subjects are giving you 
100% all the time, and your demonstrations will be that much smoother and that much 
better for it. 
 
And relax it now, all the way. That’s right. What I’d like you to do is just extend 
your fingers just like that. Keep a space about half an inch to an inch apart in 
between and focus all your attention on the space in between the fingers. All your 
attention, just keep focusing and focusing. Imagine that these are two little 
magnets that are pulling those fingers together. That’s right. Just like that. 
 
As soon as they touch, you’re going to relax. Relax. That’s right. Just drop your 
hands. Relax your hands. 
 
Let’s jump in here very quickly again. I want to just point out something that this 
hypnotist is doing. A lot of novice street hypnotists do this, and it’s useful for you to get 
yourself out of this habit.  
 
So far he’s done the instant induction. She comes into his shoulder and this is great. It’s 
a nice demonstration of trust, but you only need to have that for a second or two so 
that you’ve know you’ve got it, and then place them back on their balance. 
 
The problem here is that basically he’s there with a girl who’s on her own. If she were a 
little less trusting with the environment that they’re in and so on, she might feel a little 
hesitant having a strange male essentially hugging her into his chest.  
 
As it is, she’s actually very trusting, which is fantastic. He knows that part, but the 
problem now is that he’s got no audience to talk to. Street hypnosis is not about one 
person that you’re performing to. You’re performing to an entire audience, the whole 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
80 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
street, the whole bar, a whole nightclub or wherever you happened to be doing your 
thing.  
 
If the hypnotist is leaning in like this and essentially whispering in the subject’s ear, we 
can hear him okay because he’s got a microphone on him. If the microphone wasn’t 
there, all we’d see is two people hugging on the street and that’s not very exciting for 
starters. 
 
Secondly passersby are not going to wonder too much what’s going on, which means 
they’re less likely to stop and watch.  
 
Thirdly her friends get bored because they’re just seeing nothing really going on and 
they’re not hearing anything. 
 
All in all, he’s only performing to that one person. Instead get in the habit of after doing 
this for a second or two if you’re going to do that at all, put them back on their own 
balance, step away from the subject slightly and project your voice. Turn around and 
watch the people watching. 
 
Speak to them even though you’re speaking to the subject. Make sure they can hear 
what you’re saying so that they can get some of the magic juice or the magic formula of 
your words as well. People love to be included, so you must start to include them.  
 
Back away from the subject a little bit and make the suggestions more broad-based. 
Broadcast them so that everyone can hear it and can anticipate something interesting 
happening in a moment’s time when the suggestion is actually taking effect. 
 
Relax. Your hands are relaxing, relaxing. That’s right. They’re getting loose, limp 
and relaxed, very heavy. That’s right. That’s right. Now you’re going to find this 
nice and peaceful place inside of you where you feel very tranquil, very peaceful, 
and very happy. 
 
This warm and fuzzy feeling is growing inside of you, and as this feeling grows you 
feel that something really strange is happening to your left hand. As this warm 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
81 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
and fuzzy pleasant feeling is growing somewhere inside of you, you feel that your 
left arm wants to start some movement, but you don’t really know what it is. 
 
As soon as I touch your left arm, the back of your left palm, your left arm will 
slowly start lifting, very slowly, very slowly. You don’t need to do any effort but it 
will just start lifting by itself. You don’t need to do anything. You’re just focusing 
on this warm and fuzzy feeling inside of you, and as it’s growing your left hand is 
starting to lift higher and higher, and as the feeling of peace and tranquility 
grows, your hand is lifting up, and it’s actually getting stiffer at the same time. 
 
It’s getting stiffer and stiffer, stronger and stronger. You’re making a fist – that’s 
right – and it’s getting stiffer, stiffer, stiffer here, stiffer here. Just turn around a 
little bit just like that. That’s right, and it’s very stiff. Your shoulder is very stiff.  
 
You feel that some steel is running through your hand just like that, just like that, 
becoming stiffer, stiffer, much stiffer. Feel the stiffness. Feel the steel. It’s like an 
iron bar. That’s right. Your hand is very, very stiff. As you focus on how stiff this 
hand is, your relaxation over the rest of your body is growing. That’s right. You’re 
relaxing and your hand is getting stiffer, even stiffer.  
 
The steel is running through your veins right here, through your muscles. You’re 
focusing all your attention on how stiff your hand is, and as the feeling of 
wellbeing is growing inside of you, the hand is getting even stiffer. As you’re 
focusing on this feeling of growing wellbeing inside of you, your hand is getting 
very, very stiff and you’re trying to bend it right now, but you feel that you can’t. 
 
Just try to bend it as you focus on this feeling of relaxation in the rest of your 
body, and you can’t even bend it. That’s right. Now relax. That’s right. Your hand 
is relaxing and you’re doing very well by the way, very relaxed, very happy, very 
tranquil, and you can go back to this place inside of you and swim in the ocean. 
It’s very peaceful, very tranquil and you can always access this place at peace at 
anytime in the future whenever you want. 
 
In a moment I would like you to come back and feel awake, but not fully awake. 
When I count from one to three, you’re going to feel awake, and when I tell you to 
go back to sleep, you’re going to go back to this state once again but five times 
deeper. That’s right.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
82 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
One, two, three, awake. Sleep. 
 
This would be a nice place to pause. So far everything you’ve seen is very 
straightforward. We’ve seen it being done by other people already in the previous 
demonstrations, so there’s not much to comment on.  
 
What I’d like to point out here is that this hypnotist does something new. He’s starting 
to fractionate as a deepening process. Fractionation is where you re-induce trance over 
and over again. The main reason I’m stopping here is because I want you to take a little 
leaf out of this hypnotist’s book if you are practicing street hypnosis for yourself. 
 
What he’s actually doing with this fractionation process is he’s getting a two for one. 
He’s not only fractionating her, which means she’s going deeper into trance and being 
more responsive, but he’s also getting a chance for himself to practice doing instant 
inductions. 
 
The way he does it is very nicely. He’s telling her what’s going to happen. In a moment 
I’ll click my fingers, I’ll say the word sleep and you’ll got back into a deeper trance. You’ll 
come out and you’ll come back in 10 times deeper. I’ll click my fingers and say sleep. 
You’ll come back in 10 times deeper.  
 
This is a really easy way for you to practice doing instant inductions so that later on 
when you have a little bit more courage and a little bit more confidence, you can then 
just go there and go up to people and say look at me, focus your eyes and sleep. You can 
go straight into it and do it totally congruently.  
 
This is a great way of doing it as a halfway house while of course getting a double 
benefit because you’re deepening the trance as well, which means you can do better 
effects afterwards too. 
 
That’s right. You’re going wonderfully. That’s right. Both hands are feeling very, 
very relaxed, very loose, limp, heavy, relaxing, relaxing. That’s right. That’s right. 
You can balance on your own feet but the rest of your body is very relaxed. You 
cannot fall because you’re still in control.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
83 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Your unconscious mind is doing the job, but you’re fully relaxed and you’re going 
back to this feeling. As soon as I touch your neck you’re going to relax again and 
go back to sleep. That’s right, and you’re fully relaxed. You know exactly what it 
feels like already. It’s so easy for you to relax. 
 
 
Demonstration #10 
 
That left arm will start rising very, very, very slowly. As you’re focusing your 
attention on the rising, and as it rises you feel that while the rest of your body is 
very, very relaxed, tranquil and peaceful, your left hand is becoming stiffer, much 
stiffer and it’s now making a fist over here, fist. That’s right, and you feel that 
your hand is growing stronger. 
 
Your palm, your hand is getting stronger. Your arm’s growing stronger as well. 
You feel that your shoulder here in the elbow area is like steel running through 
your veins. Just imagine that your hand is becoming like an iron bar, steel running 
through your muscles, your veins.  
 
You feel the pressure inside. It’s getting stronger and stronger, absolutely strong. 
As you focus on your wellbeing and this warm and fuzzy place inside of you, the 
heat is growing even stronger.  
 
As the feeling of wellbeing is growing, the hand, the pressure inside of your hand 
is growing and growing. That’s right, and you even want to test it and try to bend 
the hand while you experience this feeling inside of you and this pressure, and you 
can’t bend it. 
 
Try to bend it while feeling the pressure inside of you, and you can’t bend it. 
That’s right, now you’re relaxed, fully relaxed. That’s right. You’re doing 
absolutely great.  
 
Just remember that what you’re experiencing right now is the power of your 
subconscious mind, and all the resources you’re accessing right now, all the 
powers you’re tapping right now, you will be easily able to access those resources 
at anytime in the future. That’s right. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
84 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
In a moment’s time I would like you to come back. On the count of three – one, 
two, three – you’re going to feel awake. You’ll not be fully awake. Remember 
you’re going to be very consciously aware of the situation around you, but as 
soon as I say the word sleep again, you’re going to go back into this nice and 
warm and fuzzy state inside of you five times deeper. That’s right. I’m going to 
count from one to three and you are coming back.  
 
One, two, three, awake. Sleep. That’s right. You’re doing absolutely great. You’re 
going deeper, and the deeper you go the better you feel. The better you feel the 
deeper you go. Your hands are relaxing. Your arms are loose, limp, relaxed. That’s 
right, loose, limp, relaxed. That’s right, and you’re feeling absolutely great.  
 
I hope you enjoyed watching that demonstration again. I haven’t given too many 
comments on this so far just because really he’s repeating pretty much everything we’ve 
talked about so far. The mistake of not paying attention to your audience and so on is 
still pretty much prevalent there.  
 
Everything else he’s doing is beautiful. It’s smooth. It’s eloquent. He’s a very competent 
hypnotist at this stage and getting some great results.  
 
What I want you to pay attention to is something that’s going to happen in a few 
moments. In about a second or so, if you watch the right-hand side of the screen – in 
other words watch what’s happening right behind the back of the lady in the black T-
shirt that’s being hypnotized right now – you’ll see that a couple of women are coming 
down the road and they turn around. They stop for a moment and they look to see 
what’s happening. What is this hypnotist guy doing? 
 
That curiosity only lasts for about a second or so, at which point you’ll see them turn 
away again and carry on with their day. Why am I point this out maneuver? When you 
see it in a moment, you’ll recognize it. The reason I want you to recognize it is because 
this is going to happen to you over and over and over again when you do performances.  
 
There will be other people in the audience, if it’s in a bar or a street or wherever it is, 
there will be strangers who see you do this stuff. They want to be included. They want 
to be your audience.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
85 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
They might even want to volunteer to be your next subject, but because they’re not 
included, because you haven’t given them the permission to carry on watching, the 
social privacy rule kicks in, they feel a little embarrassed and they go oh maybe I 
shouldn’t be watching this, and they move on. 
 
This is why it’s so important for you as a performer not to just whisper into the ear of 
your subject and ignore the rest of the world, but to take a little bit of a step back. Stand 
back a little bit and project your voice at the subject. Then your eyes will be open to see 
people like this walking by, and when they do walk by like this you can catch their eye, 
smile and wave them over, or maybe even talk to them. 
 
It’s okay to talk to your audience and say hey guys we’re just doing some hypnosis. 
Come in close and you can see some amazing things happen. Then of course you turn 
back to your subject and say that’s right, and no matter what else you’re going to have a 
great time here. It doesn’t matter who is watching because inside everything is going so 
fantastically well. 
 
It doesn’t really matter too much what you’re saying. You’re just putting them on notice 
that even though someone else might be watching, they’ll still be safe and they’ll still 
have a good time. 
 
This is a great way to build up a large crowd, but you have to be able to see it happening 
to catch it. Enough of my talking for a little while; go ahead and watch as the next 
couple of seconds unfold. See that blonde lady walking by, stop and look with curiosity 
and then turn away again and move off, which is another potential subject and of 
course a growing crowd that has been lost because the hypnotist wasn’t paying 
attention at that point.  
 
Your feeling this growing sense of wellbeing inside of you, and on the count of 
three – one, two, three, you’re going to go back again. That’s right. One, two, 
three. 
 
 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
86 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Demonstration #11 
 
Focus on the gap. It’s getting smaller and smaller and smaller and smaller and 
smaller and smaller until they touch on your own. Smaller, smaller, smaller, 
smaller. That’s right. Touching. That’s right, all the way down. All the way down.  
 
You are doing so well. You’re doing so well. That’s right. Relaxing. That’s right. 
Your hand’s like a limp ragdoll, like a ragdoll. Look at that. Just relaxing. That’s 
right. The ragdoll. Relaxing. That’s right. Just relaxing. You’re doing so well. Relax. 
 
This is our 11th demonstration now, and I want to point out a couple of things out that 
this hypnotist is doing great. We didn’t catch the setup just because the camera wasn’t 
ready for it yet, but now that we catch him in the middle of the demonstration, notice 
how he was moving his hands around the arms, once again giving a nonverbal 
suggestion for those hands to close. 
 
In this case the subject had his eyes open, so this is fantastic. He saw those nonverbal 
cues and responded very nicely. 
 
The next thing I want you to notice to watch the expression on the subject’s face. Notice 
the concentration, how deeply focused he is. It’s almost as though you can see his mind 
going a little bit vacant. He’s not having any thoughts going on in there. He’s only 
focusing on the experience he’s having. 
 
That’s a telltale sign of a fantastic hypnotic subject, and you get to see it very clearly 
here. This hypnotist spotted that, which is fantastic because as soon as his hands came 
together, he converts it with a conversion induction, an instant induction, and turns it 
straight into an instant induction, brings him to mask at his chest. The person gives him 
enough trust to go there. 
 
Now as good as all this was, unfortunately this hypnotist is making a slight mistake as a 
performer once again. This is a very common thing in the beginning, and not at all a 
judgment on this hypnotist’s skill. It’s just that he’s very new to this game, so these are 
the kinds of errors you want to be looking out for in your own game too. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
87 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Once he has the person pulled in, he spends a fair bit of time just with that person alone 
very close to him and ignoring the audience. You’ll notice on the left-hand side of the 
screen are two girls with a camera videotaping this. They’re clearly this guy’s friends, 
and they’re having a whale of a time. They’re giggling away and having a great time with 
this. 
 
This would be the perfect opportunity to take a step back and start playing to the 
audience, talking to the girls, and hypnotize the guy even further while he’s looking at 
the girls and smiling or something like that. Maybe shaking the arm out to make sure 
that it’s nicely relaxed and maybe including the audience a little bit there to come in. 
 
This hypnotist is smart enough to do this later on. He does have an audience 
participation, but this could happen much sooner in the game because let’s face it the 
guy he’s working with right now is a great hypnotic subject, and he’s responding 
fantastically well. There’s no need to spend a long time with him one on one. Start 
performing to the audience as soon as you get a chance. 
 
That’s it. Just take that relaxation. That’s right. Relaxing. It’s like a limp ragdoll. 
Look at that. It’s so relaxed. It’s relaxing. That’s brilliant. That’s right. Now in a 
minute what I’m going to do is I’m going to take this hand, and this hand I’m 
going to stick it out here. Now as I stick this hand out here, it’s going to get tighter 
and tighter and tighter.  
 
I’m sticking this hand out, sticking it out, sticking, sticking it out. It’s getting 
tighter and tighter and make that into a fist, a nice tight fist, a nice tight fist. 
That’s right. It’s getting like an iron bar, an iron bar, an iron bar. It’s stiff; it’s 
getting stiffer and stiffer and stiffer and stiffer. It’s so stiff that you can’t move it. 
It’s getting stiff and stiff, stiff. That’s right. 
 
It’s so stiff that no matter what you do, you just cannot move that arm. In fact the 
more I push down on his hand, the stiffer it gets. The more I push down on it, the 
stiffer it gets. Just notice how stiff it’s getting. That’s right. You’re doing so well. 
It’s getting stiffer and stiffer and stiffer.  
 
The more I push down on it; it’s getting stiffer and stiffer and stiffer. Just notice 
how stiff it’s getting. That’s right. That’s right. That’s right. It’s getting stiffer and 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
88 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
stiffer and stiffer. You can look at that arm and realize it’s getting stiffer. That’s 
right. 
 
The more you look at it the stiffer it gets. The more you look at it the stiffer it gets. 
Brilliant. Just imagine how stiff that’s getting. It’s unbelievably stiff. Just cannot 
believe how… 
 
Let’s jump in here again. The good news is that the hypnotist is starting to move away 
from the subject. This is kind of partly dictated by the fact that he’s doing a stiff-arm sort 
of suggestion test, which is great.  
 
What I want you to notice once again is the audience reaction. The hypnosis itself is very 
straightforward. He’s doing a good job. He’s a solid performer. This is nice. What I want 
you to notice is the girl on the left-hand side in the blue top, and the other girls that you 
can’t see are doing pretty much the same thing. 
 
They’re leaning in to see what’s happening, and they’re trying desperately to hear what 
the hypnotist is saying. Remember, he’s out in a loud venue in a big public square with 
hundreds of people running around the place. There’s a lot of noise out there.  
 
The best thing this hypnotist could do as a performer is to learn to project his voice, turn 
towards his left slightly so that he’s looking at the subject, or rather past the subject at 
his audience so that all of them are getting included, and to really shout out those 
instructions in a nice loud voice so that the audience can feel included.  
 
It’s like oh my God, I’m getting part of the secret formula. I can hear the words, and yes I 
can see the person responding as well. It keeps them much more involved in the game. 
 
As the clip continues in a few moments’ time, what I want you to notice is that there’s a 
nice little innovation that this hypnotist comes up with here, which I really like. Once 
he’s tested for the stiff arm and to his satisfaction, he then escalates the stiff arm. He 
gets the subject to open his eyes and continue the trance with the arm still being stiff. 
 
This is a great thing because you’ve now shifted the ballgame dramatically. He’s now in 
trance with eyes wide open, which is different from being in trance with eyes 
completely closed. This also has the effect of deepening the hypnotic experience. It is 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
89 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
the equivalent of doing a completely separate dramatic effect on top of what you’re 
doing. 
 
This is a very smooth escalation, and it actually begins the mental part of the 
phenomena because he’s learning how to be in a trance with eyes wide open, which is 
even more difficult or different from being in a trance with the eyes shut. It’s a very nice 
touch.  
 
Watch as the hypnotist makes the most of that in a moment’s time. 
 
It’s getting stiffer and stiffer. That’s right. That’s right. Okay, relax.  
 
I’m very excited right now to jump in here because I believe this is the first time in all 
the demonstrations we’ve seen so far where we actually have a genuine piece of 
audience participation. The hypnotist has remembered himself enough, he’s had some 
fun with this, the girls are fascinated with what’s going on, so now the hypnotist has 
enough confidence to say come in girls, try it for yourself.  
 
Think of it this way. These people have never seen hypnosis before chances are, unless 
it’s been on TV. They’ve never been up close and personal with a hypnotic subject. Now 
they actually get to touch a hypnotic subject whilst he’s deep in trance, and do the 
experiment right along with you. 
 
This is huge. The three or four girls there are giggling away because they’re having a 
great time. If you look towards the left-hand side of the screen, you’ll see two guys who 
have got nothing to do with this group once again being sucked in by the rest of the 
audience. The girls’ reactions are sucking the guys in, and they’re going what is this? This 
is amazing. 
 
This would be a great opportunity for the hypnotist to wave them over and offer for 
them to do the same thing also. It doesn’t matter that he didn’t do it. The fact that he’s 
actually called the girls over and he’s letting them touch a hypnotized subject and letting 
them be part of the test by actually pulling down on the arm and feeling the resistance, 
that is huge. That is tremendous.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
90 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
That is an event they will never forget for the rest of their lives, so kudos to this 
hypnotist. When you’re out there doing your own street inductions, remember this 
moment. It will be a dramatic and really powerful demonstration for you and something 
your audience will take away with them for the rest of their lives. 
 
You’re doing really, really well. Now let’s shake some relaxation inside. That’s 
right getting relaxed, relaxing, relaxing. It’s going to relax down. When it relaxes 
down, your eyes are going to close, and you’re just going to relax straight onto 
my shoulder- one, two, three, relax. 
 
You’re doing so well. You’re doing so well. That’s right. That’s right. You’re doing 
really, really well. Okay, in a minute what I’m going to ask you to do is I’m going 
to ask you to open your eyes, and then look at my finger. One, two, three, open 
your eyes. Up they go. Up, up, up. Come down, come down, come down, sleep all 
the way down. 
 
That’s right. That’s right, and every time you relax, you’ll go deeper still. Every 
time I ask you to close your eyes and sleep, you’ll go deeper still. In fact you’ll be 
10 times relaxed. The more I ask you to relax, the more relaxed you’ll become, 
and when I say sleep you’ll relax. Your body becomes more and more relaxed, 
more and more relaxed. Okay one, two, three, open your eyes. 
 
That’s was really good. Actually look at your hand. Look at your hand. Look at the 
lines in the hand. The more you look at the lines in that hand and the dot in that 
hand, the hand will automatically come to your face. It comes to your face 
automatically on its own sweet time. 
 
It starts to come to your face and when it comes up to your face, you will close 
your eyes and go into a nice relaxing trance. All the way down, all the way down, 
all the way. Sleep. 
 
You’re doing really well. You’re doing really, really well. Relax. You’re so relaxed. 
Look at that. Just relaxing, relaxed. You are doing so, so well. That’s it, relax. Nice 
and relaxed. Beautifully relaxed. That’s right. Okay, one, two, three… in a minute 
we’re going to go straight out. 
 
It’s going straight out, stiff. It’s so stiff. It’s getting stiffer and stiffer and stiffer, 
stiffer, stiffer, stiffer, stiffer, stiffer, stiffer. In fact the more I push down on this 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
91 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
hand the stiffer it gets. That’s it. You’re doing really well. Stiff like a fist. Stiff like a 
fist. Stiff like a fist. That’s right. 
 
Pushing on it, it can’t go down. Right. Now what I’m going to do is this hand’s 
going to go out as well staying out like that. That’s right. No matter who says 
anything, these hands will stay out like this and you just won’t know why they’re 
sticking out like that. It’s so, so strong, stiff, stiff, stiff, stiff, stiff, stiff, stiff, stiff. 
Not moving. Stiff, stiff, stiff. 
 
Let’s jump in here a second and just point out something nice that this guy’s doing. He’s 
changed traditional stiff-arm test from one arm to a double arm, which again is even 
more dramatic and pulls people in. 
 
This in itself is very useful. It’s a great escalation from the previous one where it had the 
arm just up on its own. The only problem here is that he’s doing this after having 
changed from one stiff arm, gone through a couple of other inductions, and then he’s 
back to the stiff arm again.  
 
In other words he’s going full circle. While this is not necessarily a problem right now – 
the audience is still engaged and still excited by this whole thing – the risk that he’s 
running is that he can bore people. 
 
If you keep doing the same thing over and over and over again, the audience will start 
getting restlessly and going what’s going to happen next? What else is there? What else 
can you do? 
 
The other problem is if all he’s doing is relaxing the client by making the hands nice and 
floppy or putting them in trance and then stiffening his arms, the problem is he’s 
creating a pattern here, which is to say all that hypnosis can do is relax your arms and 
stiffen them, so that it stays on a very physical level. 
 
You want to be moving out of the physical level as soon as you can into the emotional or 
the mental phenomena to be able to do the more dramatic effects from amnesia to 
invisibility to really anything that your imagination can come up with. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
92 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Those things don’t occur at the physical level. They have a partially physical response, 
but they occur mostly on the mental level. Those physical routines are there as a 
starting point because they’re easy to get into, they’re easy to get results and they’re 
dramatic to see, but move on from them and do something more mental as soon as you 
can to keep things fresh, alive and interesting and experimental for you too. 
 
To sum up, whilst this hypnotist is doing a great job and he’s getting great results, he’s 
obviously engaging his audience but he’s running a risk right now that he’s sticking to 
much to the same trick and ends up becoming a one-trick pony, which will ultimately 
become boring to the audience if he sticks with it too much. 
 
If you can’t think of anything else to do with someone, by all means just end the session 
there and leave it on a high note. Leave it on something that they’ll remember forever.  
 
You are doing so well, Alex. In fact Alex you’re doing so well that the more I talk to 
you, the stiffer your hands get 01:23:28. The more I talk to you, I’ll call your name, 
the stiffer they get, don’t they Alex? Don’t they Alex. Move your head if you 
understand.  
 
All right, keep your eyes open Alex. Can you understand why your arms are 
getting stiff, because I don’t know? Look at that. Look. Why are they getting so 
stiff? Look at it. Oh look. 
 
Let’s jump in here again and point out some really nice things he’s doing. Sure, he’s 
going back to the old trick of the stiff arm as before. However, what I want to point out 
is just how beautifully this hypnotist is milking it. He’s gone from one stiff arm to two 
stiff arms. He’s brought the audience in to touch the stiff arm.  
 
Now he’s gone from the stiff arm to actually talking to the audience again by asking a 
name that actually involves the audience. Even if you remember the name, asking an 
audience member for the name again keeps them engaged, which is a wonderful thing 
to do.  
 
Now he’s going into kind of a non-awareness set sort of thing. He’s doing a conscious-
unconscious dissociation by asking the actual subject consciously what’s going on. Why 
are these arms stiff? I have no idea. That’s right, you have no idea, yet here they are 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
93 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
being nice and stiff. Do they normally do that? Do you normally run around like this? No, 
I don’t.  
 
These are the kinds of questions that again heighten the dramatic effect. Anytime that 
you have a client admit the fact that what they’re doing is bizarre and out of the 
ordinary, it creates a tremendous effect for the audience because they are seeing the 
conscious-unconscious dissociation in action.  
 
They can tell this guy’s no longer acting. He’s not just putting his arms out there because 
you’re asking him to. They’re up there because the unconscious mind decided to, 
because you suggested for them to be there. He has no conscious direction over it, and 
that is again a very powerful piece of theatre or performance if you like.  
 
This is a wonderful thing, and this hypnotist really is milking this particular performance, 
this particular routine very, very nicely. 
 
Aren’t you getting stiffer and stiffer? Isn’t that the weirdest thing? Why are you 
sticking your arms out for? It’s weird, isn’t it? Okay, what we’ll do is this hand’s 
going to get stiff again. There you go. You are spot on. Stiff, stiff, stiff, stiff, stiff, 
stiff, stiff, stiff, stiff, stiff, stiff. 
 
Okay, now the good thing about it is the more you look at this hand the stiffer it 
gets. The more you look at this hand the stiffer it gets. One thing something, 
range will happen in just a moment. The strange thing that will happen in a 
moment is when I touch that hand, the hand will start to lower very slowly, but as 
it slowly lowers you’ll find it the funniest thing on earth. The slower it lowers, the 
funnier it gets.  
 
I’d like to jump in here because we have now seen a really nice piece again. It took us a 
little while to get here. The stiff arm has been pretty much the main theme of the whole 
performance, which is great, which is fine. He’s done a great job of milking it. 
 
What I really like seeing right now is how he’s milking it one-step further. He’s finally 
transitioning from the physical phenomena – the stiff arm – through to the emotional 
phenomena – as that arm descends you’ll find it really funny. The slower it descends the 
funnier it gets.  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
94 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
This is a breaking point. This is where he’s moving from physical to emotional. With the 
emotional in place, the mental comes in next and it really opens the door to all kinds of 
things. 
 
Notice how simple and smooth the transition was. It’s great that he played with the 
physical effects for so long, and I’m really glad to see that he’s now doing the emotional 
aspects as well because that’s really where the range as a hypnotist starts kicking in. 
 
Please notice also how this hypnotist is very smart to change his voice when he’s talking 
about the emotional aspect. He’s going there first. He’s having a bit of giggle in his own 
voice like something funny is about to happen, which indirectly suggests to the person 
the emotion to have as well. Both his tonality and his language are pulling the subject in 
the same direction, which is to have an emotional experience of laughter. 
 
The slower it lowers the funnier it gets. That’s it. Just watch. What’s going on? 
Brilliant. That’s right. Relax. You are so good. Only one more thing with you. 
Getting that relaxation it’s almost like your body popped isn’t it? Sleep, hand out, 
sleep, hand out, sleep, hand out. That’s right. Sleep, hand out, sleep, sleep, sleep. 
 
Now I’m going to leave you with something very, very, very special. It’s something 
I don’t normally do but I’m going to do it for you because you’ve been so good.  
 
I want to jump in here again and point out some really great things this hypnotist is 
doing. First of all, please notice his playful attitude. Notice how he’s kind of shaking the 
guy’s arm out and then it starts flopping around like he’s doing one of those bounce 
movements. 
 
From that he gets the idea to convert that into a stiff arm and an instant induction. 
Notice how creative his instant induction was. Since that stiff arm has been such a 
theme of his performance, he then uses the stiff-arm as the induction, so stiff and sleep, 
stiff and sleep.  
 
That is one of the most creative uses of the stiff arm that I’ve ever seen before. No one’s 
actually taught him to do that. It’s part of his own creative repertoire. That’s really good 
to see him coming up with that in the moment of the game.  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
95 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
The next thing you’re about to see is how he’s going to give him a hypnotic gift. This is 
one of my favorite ways of finishing any kind of demonstration of hypnosis. It’s a way of 
thanking and respecting the unconscious mind by giving them a gift to take home with 
them as a thank you for taking part. 
 
Once again this is a tremendous way of becoming an ambassador for hypnosis. That 
person will go around and brag about how good the experience was, and the people 
watching will talk about how good the experience was. Nothing but positive impressions 
are what’s left with anyone that’s witnessed this particular performance. 
 
It’s good for our profession, but it’s also good for you as a hypnotist on the streets 
because other people who watched this are more likely to want to volunteer now to be 
your subject and have the same experience as well. 
 
Stiff, stiff, stiff, stiff, stiff, stiff, stiff, stiff, stiff, stiff. Not moving, an iron bar, an 
iron bar, stiff, stiff, iron bar, stiff, iron bar, stiff, iron bar, stiff. You’re doing really, 
really well.  
 
What I want to let you know Alex is that this hand is a very special hand. It’s 
connected to a very special arm. The arm is connected to a very special person. 
The reason why that arm is so special is because the more I speak to you, as I 
speak to you, anything that you know you want to do, everything that you’ve ever 
wanted is contained in this hand.  
 
Every dream that you’ve ever had is contained in this hand, and as you open your 
eyes – and I’ll ask you to open your eyes in a minute – you’re going to look at that 
hand and all the dreams that you’ve ever dreamed, the best dreams that you’ve 
ever had in your life, all the things that you want to do are contained on the end 
of this fist.  
 
When you open your eyes, every dream that you’ve ever had, all the things you’ve 
always wanted to do are contained in this fist here. So open your eyes and just see 
all your dreams right out there. Just look right out there. All the things you 
wanted to do, everything you wanted to be is just at the end of your wrist.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
96 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
It’s that close, and as you look at it, I want you to sleep. That’s right. That’s right. 
All the way down, all the way down. That’s right. That’s right. Oh so relaxed. Oh 
you are so good. That’s right, nice and relaxed. Look at that. Okay, that’s it, nice 
like a ragdoll, like a ragdoll.  
 
Alex I just want you to know you’ve been absolutely brilliant today, and what I 
want to do is make sure that when I wake you up in a minute, you’re going to 
wake up to such a great feeling. In fact you’re going to feel better than you’ve 
ever felt in such a long time. 
 
In fact the more I wiggle your wrist the better you feel. The more I wiggle your 
write the better you feel. That’s right. Okay. In a minute I’m going to wake you up 
and that good feeling is going to stay with you for the rest of the evening. In fact 
it’s going to stay with you for the rest of your life. 
 
As long as you concentrate, that feeling will return whenever you want. One, two, 
three, open your eyes. You’ve been brilliant. 
 
 
Demonstration #12 
 
Is it okay if I touch you? 
 
Yes. 
 
Take a step forward and put your feet together. Now I’d like you to look at me 
and focus. Could you stretch your arms out like this? Like this, okay, these hands. 
In a moment you will start to feel like a magnetic force is pulling these hands 
together.  
 
Welcome back. This is demonstration 12 in the series of the London demonstrations, 
and there’s some great stuff this hypnotist is doing.  
 
1. First, notice her body language.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
97 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
It’s just wonderful throughout. She’s confident, she’s relaxed, she’s taking control of the 
client, she’s demonstrating her feet and she’s grabbing attention.  
 
This person was a little bit ADD. He was looking around at the place a little bit distracted 
at first, but she manages to capture his attention and really suck it in, which is 
wonderful. 
 
2. The next thing I want you to notice is how she’s also getting creative with the 
magnetic hands induction. 
 
Remember, the magnetic hands are about imagining there’s a magnet there. One of the 
cheats that we showed you was to tap the insides of the hands to creative a bit of 
outward pressure so that they want to bounce in again. 
 
What this lady is doing now is she’s actually holding onto the wrist and doing the same 
thing. It’s still creating that pressure with the hands with the wrist; however, if he starts 
moving in too much she’s pulling it out, so it’s creating kind of a dynamic tension, which 
is telling the arms to become more cataleptic and to start moving inwards but only 
when she releases it. 
 
It’s a really nice way of getting the pump primed whilst still taking control of the subject.  
 
3. You’ll also notice right at the start of the whole clip that she asks permission to 
touch the people during the performance. 
 
 
If you have any reservations about that sort of thing, this is a great thing to do. Ask 
permission and if they give it, which pretty much everyone will on the streets or in a bar 
situation because they’re there to have fun, then you can utilize it. It puts you at east 
and it shows that you’re going to be respectful throughout the performance. 
 
It’s not a must. You don’t have to do it all the time, but it’s a very nice thing and it 
worked very well with this lady and her personality as well. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
98 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Watch on as we continue the tape again, and pay attention to her hand movements. 
Once again, she does that very light tapping on the outside of the arms to reinforce the 
suggestion of movements. Again it’s a very nice way of doing it and creates a very nice 
cycle. 
 
She’s set the potential up ahead of time, and in a moment as she starts it up again you’ll 
notice her tapping and continuing to reinforce it with the suggestions and encouraging 
the person to succeed. 
 
A strong magnetic force pulling them together. They’re starting to get pulled 
together, and you focus. Look at the space in between your hands. Don’t look at 
me now. Look at the space in between your hands. This is where you look, okay? 
 
So your eyes will go to the space. Look at the space in between your hands, and 
feel the sensation of those hands coming together more and more. Feel the 
magnetic force. Can you feel like a tingling sensation in your hands? No? Not yet? 
Not yet? 
 
They are coming together, aren’t they? 
 
Yes. 
 
You feel it happening, don’t you? That’s right. You’re doing good. That’s great. It’s 
doing great. That’s really, really great. Those hands are coming together. It’s 
happening all by itself, isn’t it? You’re not helping at all. It’s just happening all by 
itself.  
 
Yes. 
 
That’s right. That’s right. They’re coming closer, coming closer, and when these 
hands come closer, you will relax. Put your arms down. How was that? That was 
amazing. 
 
 
 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
99 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Bonus DVD #3 – Hypnosis Demonstrations With 
Strangers On The Streets Of Las Vegas – With 
Commentary – Part One 
 
 
Demonstration #1 
 
Welcome to the Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis DVDs. On this bonus DVD, I’m going 
to take the demonstrations that were done on the streets of Las Vegas, and break them 
down for you so that you can see blow by blow the kinds of things that people are doing 
right, the things they can improve upon, and the kinds of things that you may want to 
take away for yourself in your own performances of street hypnosis. 
 
Please remember when you’re watching these DVDs we are seeing people of all 
different skills and all different levels of experience before they came to the seminar. 
Don’t take anything that I say as any form of criticism of the individual hypnotist. All 
comments that I make are designed purely to help you learn more in your own practice 
of street hypnosis. 
 
With that thought in mind, let me give you a quick introduction to the first 
demonstration that you’ll be seeing. In this demonstration, one of the students called 
Johnny is out on the streets of Las Vegas. The reason I really like this demonstration is 
because Johnny is already an experienced hypnotist, albeit not a street hypnotist yet, 
and he has a great personality.  
 
He has a perfect performance personality, so you’ll be seeing a lot of really good things 
that he’s doing to pull the crowd in, to work with people and all the performance 
elements that will really give a bit of sparkle to your program. 
 
With that thought in mind, let’s go and take a look at what Johnny is doing. 
 
You cheeky bastard. Seriously, what are you training her? She just got all puffed 
out and red, so I’ve got to ask, are you over 18? 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
100 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Let’s jump in right at the beginning here and talk a little bit about what you’ve just seen 
so far. First of all, notice how the hypnotist here is very confident. He’s got a very playful 
way of speaking to people and interacting with them.  
 
Very importantly, right now he’s teasing his audience, and the reason for it is because by 
making these jokes – I think they were asking for hypnotic orgasm or something like that 
– these people are trying to take control of the situation away from him, and he has to 
be able to take that back from them so that he’s running the interaction. 
 
1. Notice how he keeps his cool. Notice how he’s being very playful and notice 
how he changes the topic again so that he’s always in control of the interaction. 
 
2. Another thing that he’s doing very nicely here now is he’s checking for ages. 
 
Of course, the lady he’s talking to right now is clearly over 18; however, it’s unclear 
whether both her daughters are. As a rule, you want to avoid doing street hypnosis with 
people who are under 18 years old just for legal reasons. In different countries the laws 
are a little different, but he keeps you out of hot water as we already talked about on 
the main DVD set. 
 
He’s doing a lot of good things here. He’s being playful. He’s getting control back and 
he’s checking their ages and also some other contradictions like if someone’s pregnant 
and so on, whether or not they should be involved in a hypnotic show. 
 
Do I have to card you? Okay, are you over 18?  
 
I’m 21. 
 
And… 
 
Twenty-three. 
 
Twenty-three. Good, then you guys are perfect. Do you guys mind being my little 
hypnotic subjects? Can I use you? You’re 49? You don’t look a day over like 20. 
Can I utilize you guys? 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
101 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Sure. 
 
Okay, everybody who’s standing around, good evening Las Vegas. My name is 
Johnny Dupree and I’m going to be doing some hypnosis for everybody today. If 
you guys would like to stop and watch the show, I’ll be doing my practicing with 
these lovely ladies. 
 
Let’s jump in here again. This is a wonderful little thing that the student has done. 
Notice how charismatic he is, how he’s willing to put his hands way up in the air. He’s 
going to shout out. This is a real performer right here. He’s turning around on the 
streets in Vegas and he’s encouraging the audience to come in and watch the show. 
 
1. He’s creating a lot of interest and because there are a lot of passersby, the 
chances of a bunch of them stopping and watching the show now are very, very 
high. 
 
2. Of course the other thing it does is notice how it amps up the excitement of the 
subjects, the people he’s about to work with. 
 
This is also a very good thing because now they’re on notice that they’re being watched, 
and if they’re being watched part of their mind is thinking I’d better do this right, I’d 
better do a good job with this, so it’s more likely that they’ll do well in the performance 
that’s going to come.  
 
They’re having fun. They’re on the spot a little bit, which is good, and the rest of the 
people in the crowd realize that this is a show that they’re allowed to stand by and 
watch and so on. This is great. 
 
Right from the get-go, he’s already starting his performance and he’s performing to an 
audience, which is exactly where he should be. 
 
No pregnancy, we don’t have to worry about any ex-boyfriends coming in? Okay, 
you have no asthma, no heart conditions or other crazy stuff? 
 
No. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
102 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
You guys are all good? 
 
We’re on Red Bull, does that count? 
 
Let’s dive in here again just briefly to point out how this hypnotist is really covering all 
his bases. He’s already asked about their ages. He’s pulled the crowd in a little bit now. 
Now he’s about to do the hypnosis, and once again he’s doing a very good job here of 
checking whether there are any reasons why these people shouldn’t be hypnotized. 
 
Already by these playful interactions for the last minute or so, he gets a sense of their 
personalities. Are they a little kooky, are they a little bit out of touch with reality, or are 
they perhaps a little too drunk to work with, which is not the case here. 
 
Just to be sure, he goes through a little list of things – are you pregnant, do you have a 
jealous boyfriend?  
 
By the way that in itself is a very important question to ask or to find out when you’re 
doing a performance especially with a female subject because hypnosis can be so 
misunderstood by the public. If you start randomly doing hypnosis with a female 
subject, you may well end up having a jealous boyfriend on your hands, which is a little 
more difficult to deal with. 
 
Again this is a very simple way of dealing with it. You ask the questions outright. It’s still 
playful and it’s still fun, so the vibe hasn’t changed and yet he still has all the 
information that he needs to make sure that he’s going to do a safe and good show with 
them. 
 
Will you guys do me a favor and step right over here. Not right there because we 
want to avoid the crowd. You’re so cute. You’re so sweet.  
 
Thank you. 
 
I want you guys to stand right here and go ahead and stand right next to her. I 
want you to put your feet faced forward. I’m going to move and you guys are 
going to stay right there. That’s exactly right. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
103 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Let’s jump in here again. This is a wonderful little piece he’s doing here. He’s set up the 
scene already. He’s checked whether it’s safe to do hypnosis with them, and he’s pulled 
an audience in. 
 
Now the hypnosis is about to begin. Remember with your set piece, you’re always going 
to begin with some form of compliance testing to see how response these people are 
being.  
 
What I really like about what this hypnotist is doing is he’s doing all his compliance 
testing very invisibly. Move over here. Don’t stand on the cracks. Move back a little bit. 
As he’s moving them around, he starts to take physical control of them. He grabs both 
girls by the wrist and swings them all the way around to the other side of him. He makes 
them stand just so. 
 
He’s really not afraid to correct his subjects to make sure that they’re standing exactly 
as he wants them to. Really very quickly they get this idea that they’ve got to follow 
directions precisely, if they don’t follow directions precisely they’re going to be 
corrected, and the hypnosis actually can’t start and the stuff they’re going to be doing 
won’t actually begin until they follow the directions they’ve been given. 
 
He does another nice little thing there where he begins to get them to really pay 
attention to his language. One of the ways he does that is once he’s physically moved 
them around and gets them used to their position and the idea that he can actually 
touch them and move them around quite comfortable, he is standing in the same 
direction with them and he says to them, I’m going to move and you’re going to stay 
right here. 
 
This is a really good thing to do. Why? Because now they’re listening to him as much as 
following his physical cues. The physical cues are great, but ultimately in hypnosis you 
want them to pay attention mostly to your verbal cues, your verbal instructions. 
 
Once again he’s taken charge of the situation. He’s breaking the pattern. He’s not 
getting stuck in the pattern of I’m going to do this all physical, whatever I do you do. It’s 
not a game of Simple Simon or anything like that. This is a game where they’re doing 
basically the suggestions that they’re being asked to carry out. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
104 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
1. By saying you’ll stay right there as I move away he’s breaking that pattern 
setup.  
 
2. Notice also that his language is following the basic structure of hypnotic 
suggestions. 
 
I’m going to tell you what’s going to happen, I’m going to tell you how you’re going to 
react to what’s going to happen, and then I’m going to do it. So he tells them I’m going 
to move – that’s going to happen. You’re going to stay – that’s how you’re going to 
respond. Then he does it. He moves away and starts facing them. 
 
It’s a beautiful way of pre-framing or preparing them to respond to the suggestion in 
exactly that same way. Everything the hypnotist says becomes your reality. In this case 
of course it is their reality because he’s the one who’s walking away and making the 
suggestion almost as if to himself. 
 
What I want you guys to do is take a deep breath in. Hypnosis is something that’s 
really going to be fun, so what I want you to do is put that hat. This is freaking Las 
Vegas and we’re going to have a blast party hat on. 
 
Here’s what we’re going to do. I want you guys to do me a favor. I’m going to 
show you guys a little hypnotic exercise. It’s very simple, pretty easy. 
 
Let’s jump in here again. Some great things are happening here. A few more compliance 
tests – take a deep breath. Within the compliance tests, he’s now starting to piggyback 
some suggestions about how the performance is going to go. 
 
In this case he’s talking about put your party hats on, we’re going to have a lot of fun, 
and this is going to be a great thing. Remember, we want to have motivation. We need 
motivation in the subject to carry out the suggestions so that we have a more dramatic 
show and a more interesting show, and so that you can take things a little bit further 
than someone hesitant might be willing to do. 
 
1. He’s using a lot of motivation.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
105 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
In this case he’s on the streets of Las Vegas and they’re there to have fun. He’s going to 
make sure that they’re going to have fun and he tells them that they’re going to have 
fun. It’s part of the suggestion game. 
 
2. The other thing that’s happening is he’s making sure to keep control of the 
situation. 
 
Both these girls are quite bubbly, they’re quite lively, they’re excited and they’re out for 
a party. The problem with that is although it’s actually a very good state to be in, the 
only danger of that is the hypnotist might lose control of the interaction. Remember, 
the hypnotist has to lead and the other people follow, especially in street hypnosis, so 
that the performance can work well. 
 
If they get so excited by what they’re doing that they’re just going off in their own little 
space or maybe just partying with each other and the hypnotist is not included in their 
reality, you can very quickly lose control of the situation and really become ineffective. 
 
3. Notice how calm the student is staying, notice how focused he is and notice 
how he’s using his voice to keep control of things.  
 
When they’re talking to each other, he carries on speaking but in a loud and 
commanding authoritative way, in a fun sort of way, so that both girls after a little bit of 
a giggle stop and pay attention to him again. 
 
Pay attention to their eye cues. Look at where the girls are looking most of the time. 
Every time the hypnotist loses some of the attention from them – they’re looking at 
each other, they’re looking around the place – he hasn’t got full control of them again.  
 
However, most of the time he keeps drawing them back into himself. The eye contact is 
directly with him. They’re constantly looking at him for direction of what to do, and 
that’s a fantastic place to be.  
 
As you look at this whole segment again, look at the first minute and a half to two 
minutes or so of the interaction. You will notice that the hypnotist is constantly getting 
the girls to focus on him and doing this indirectly with his voice, with his mannerisms 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
106 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
and so on, so that he can actually begin the hypnosis in a way that he’s actually in 
control of the situation.  
 
Finally this is a nice little pre-frame in terms of what he’s doing. He’s not saying we’re 
going to do some hypnosis right now. He doesn’t say we’re going to do something and I 
hope it works. What he says is we’re going to do a simple hypnotic exercise. It’s easy 
and fun to do. 
 
Why is he saying these things? Again these are great things to put out there.  
 
1. First of all it’s an exercise; it’s not hypnosis.  
 
Of course you and I know that what is about to come is hypnosis in one form or another, 
but by framing it as just an exercise it becomes a little bit friendlier to them. There’s less 
performance anxiety on their part, and also it’s less likely that they’ll resist the hypnosis 
to prove them better. It’s just an exercise after all. 
 
2. The second thing he’s doing is he’s giving them a challenge. 
 
It’s a simple exercise. It’s easy to do just to find out how well you can concentrate. This 
is a challenge to them. Can you concentrate? Can you do something simple? Can you do 
something that’s easy? 
 
Now they’re pride is at play. Now they have to prove to the hypnotist that they can 
succeed in this stuff, so they’re more likely to pay attention so that they can do it well 
and do it correctly.  
 
With just a few simple phrases, a few simple sentences, a little bit of charisma and a lot 
of authority, he’s in a very playful way managed to set the perfect scene to begin his 
first set and get a really good reaction out of it. 
 
Okay, I want you guys to take your arms and stick them out in front of you just 
like this. Shoot them out; stretch them out all the way. Bend those fingers. Let me 
see you wiggle them, and clap your hands together just like this. Clasp your 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
107 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
fingers all the way around like this. Squeeze them tight; squeeze them tight, tight, 
tight, tight, and tight like you’re going to squeeze a lump of coal into a diamond.  
 
This is another good place to pause and reflect on what’s just happened here. Of course 
the routine itself – he’s coming up with the finger vise, which is the classic starting piece 
that we teach as the opening set.  
 
It’s not so interesting what he’s doing. What’s more important is how he’s preparing. 
Notice how he’s shooting his own hands out, and he’s wiggling his fingers to check if 
they’re following his physical suggestions as much as his mental suggestions, his verbal 
suggestions.  
 
He’s clasping their hands together so far so good. Once again he’s demonstrating that as 
a hypnotist, he’s really not afraid to correct his subjects to make sure that they’re giving 
him 110%. In this case these are girls whose hands aren’t really clasped properly 
together. Maybe they’re not used to using their strength as much. Maybe they’re not 
quite in the program yet. 
 
It doesn’t really matter what the case is. All that matters is that they’re not squeezing 
their hands together enough for him, so he encourages them even further. He moves his 
hands over, he helps them squeeze even harder to encourage that, and he gives them a 
nice metaphor or a simile, like you’re squeezing a lump of coal into a diamond. 
 
That gives a nice picture inside their mind of how much pressure they should be putting 
together. Again using these imagination exercises, using imagery and metaphors and 
also going over and physically correcting them – these are all wonderful things you can 
do and actually enhances the whole experience. 
 
→ The main key that I want you to take away from this is to never be afraid to 
jump in and correct your subjects. 
 
As long as you’re doing it in a fun and friendly way, and as long as you’re using some 
interesting metaphors and so on to help put some flavor and nuance in what you’re 
doing, they will enjoy it and they will get a better result. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
108 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
He’s not moving forward until those hands are squeezing tightly because with those 
hands squeezed tightly the situation is set up to allow those fingers to naturally want to 
come together. In other words he’s already loaded for success before he’s even begun. 
 
It’s an excellent point and he did a very good job to not just accept and be okay with a 
response, but he took a full-blown response and made sure they gave him everything 
that he wanted.  
 
What I want you to do is I want you to take your arms and stick them up like 
you’re going please Johnny make me come. Next what I want you to do is I want 
you to take your fingers and I want you to spread them apart just like this. That’s 
right. I want you to take it and I want you to have them an inch apart, an inch 
apart, an inch apart. Squeeze those hands; squeeze those hands because in just a 
moment they’re going to begin to start closing on their own. Watch your hands. 
 
Let’s have a little jump in here again, just a very brief one. Notice how he’s already set 
them up. He’s got their fingers spread apart, and he’s encouraging once again in case 
they haven’t done so for those palms to squeeze because the secret here is the harder 
the palms squeeze together the more likely it is for those fingers to come together as 
well.  
 
1. He’s already setting the physical context up for the suggestions to work even 
better.  
 
The other thing that he’s doing – and I think this is a really nice point to notice – if you 
go back and look at the girl on the right-hand side, the one wearing glasses, as he starts 
doing this whole finger twirling and those hands coming together and so on, she’s 
looking at her sister for direction to see how her sister is doing it. 
 
In other words she’s lost her focus. She’s no longer focusing on the hypnotist, and she’s 
not really focusing completely on his words. She’s too busy looking at what’s my sister 
doing right now?  
 
The hypnotist without skipping a beat notices this and just gives her a very simple 
redirection. Watch your hands or watch your fingers. Look at your hands or look at your 
fingers. It doesn’t really matter what the phrase itself is.  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
109 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
2. The point is he redirects her attention to where it’s supposed to be.  
 
The girl’s head snaps back to where it’s supposed to be and the induction continues 
flawlessly, even though at that point he might have lost control and the whole thing 
might have derailed. 
 
It’s very smooth and it’s practically invisible, but the hypnotist spotted it just as his 
attention was being lost and brought her right back in again to carry on seamlessly. I 
doubt that anyone else, especially the audience, even noticed that it was happening. 
 
They’re going to begin to start closing. That’s right, and in just a moment as if 
magic is happening on your fingers, they’re going to begin to close, and when 
they touch, you’re going to relax and close your eyes. Good. Close your eyes and 
relax all the way down.  
 
Let’s just jump in here again and have a quick chat about what you saw there. He’s done 
the complete finger vise routine and it’s worked really well. Notice how the girls become 
a bit quieter now. They’re still having a lot of fun. The energy is still there, but they’re 
much more focused. Their attention is collected on what they’re doing.  
To help them do even more of that, the hypnotist is now putting in an induction. It’s a 
very simple instant induction. He’s converting the test – the finger magnets – into an 
induction.  
 
Please notice how gentle he is with them. He just taps them on the forehead and allows 
their heads to drop forward.  
 
1. He’s moving their heads side to side and forward a little bit and that gives them 
the idea to allow their heads to bend forwards so that they’re in that classic 
hypnotic relaxation posture.  
 
They’re still on balance, but as far as everyone in the audience is concerned this looks 
very dramatic. He’s doing some kind of a hypnotic thing.  
 
2. The other thing that he’s doing of course is he’s training the girls.  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
110 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Later on when he wants to do an instant induction again, they’re more likely to adopt 
this same pose, which is to say standing up straight on their own balance, heads bowed 
forward, internally focused, comfortable and relaxed. It’s a lot of fun, sort of hanging 
out in the background. 
 
He’s really preparing them to do an even more dramatic instant induction later on. This 
is simply a softer gentler introduction to it to prepare them for the more dramatic 
version later on. 
 
Go all the way down deeper. Relax deep breaths, relaxing all the way down, 
feeling phenomenal, and feeling so good. 
 
Remember, this is just an exercise just to see if you can listen to my voice and 
follow my instructions perfectly. In just a moment I’m going to count from one to 
three. That’s right. In just a moment I’m going to count from one to three, and 
you’re going to come back right into this moment fully awake, aware and – one, 
two and three – wide awake. 
 
Do you guys feel good? 
 
Yes. 
 
High five. High five. Behind the back. Loving that. Awesome. So are you guys 
ready for the next exercise? 
 
Yes. 
 
You guys are doing awesome.  
 
Let’s jump in here again. This is a really nice piece. The hypnotist has done his first set 
piece – the finger magnets – but notice how much he’s milking it. Even though he’s 
really only done about a minute or so of demonstration so far, he’s really going to milk 
this and get the best performance value out of it. 
 
The girls themselves are excited and they’re interested, but they’re not being very 
responsive. They’re not going oh my God this is amazing, this is the craziest thing that’s 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
111 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
ever happened to me, so nothing really dramatic has happened yet as far as they’re 
concerned. 
 
Instead, the hypnotist is now supplying the energy and the enthusiasm. He high fives 
them, he tells them how amazing they’ve done and he congratulates them, which is a 
very important thing to do. You’re constantly congratulating the audience. You’re 
constantly telling them they’re doing a good job. You’re praising them. 
 
This reinforces the fact that they want to do better. They want to have more praise as 
they go along and more reinforcement that they’re doing the right thing, but he’s also 
doing this in such a way that he’s supplying all the high energy. He’s supplying the good, 
happy vibe right now.  
 
As far as the audience is concerned, the only thing that they’re noticing is the emotional 
experience that they’re having, which is currently being supplied by the hypnotist 
because he’s the focal point of it all. 
 
In time the girls will have stronger reactions, and the audience will remember the entire 
emotional experience as coming directly from the girls, and they’ll forget that initially it 
was the hypnotist himself that brought the drama to bear, and later on the girls actually 
caught up and added the drama themselves. 
 
Right now all the girls are bringing this enthusiasm. The hypnotist is bringing some of 
the more showy aspects to it. The audience is still feeling like something important has 
just happened, but the hypnotist has basically supplied that. The girls haven’t done that 
yet. 
 
Now we go onto the second routine, the second part of the set piece, and more and 
more the girls’ reactions will be the ones that the audience is paying attention to 
because they’re being trained more and more to give the right kinds of reactions that 
are dramatic enough to be used. 
 
Awesome! Okay, take your arms and stick them straight out in front of you like 
this. I want you to look at the space. Just look at the space right in between your 
arms, right in here. The cool thing is, is that because your hands are here you can 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
112 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
feel the electricity shooting from your hands right now, can’t you? You can feel it, 
can’t you? 
 
Yes. 
What I want you to do is I want you to imagine that electricity is going between 
two super high-powered magnets, giant magnets.  
 
Oh my God. 
 
And as they are there, you’re going to start to notice your hands are coming 
together as if on their own. You don’t even have to pay attention. You can look 
right here but the hands are coming together. That’s right. They are, aren’t they? 
 
Let’s jump in here again and again some interesting things are happening. In terms of 
the actual magnetic hands, the actual process is straightforward. You know that already. 
What I want to point out are some really good performance pieces that this hypnotist is 
doing. 
 
1. The first thing I want you to notice is have you noticed how the hypnotist is 
actually cueing his volunteers for their responses. 
 
For example, he says now electricity is shooting through your hands, you can feel that, 
can’t you? Suddenly one of the girls enthusiastically goes yes oh my God I can feel that. 
Did she feel that before? Possibly. He suggested it and she might have felt it, but she’s 
not expressing that feeling. 
 
When he says you can feel that can’t you, then she gets emotive about it. It’s the same 
thing with the other girl when he says the electricity converts to magnets and those 
magnets are pulling together, the other girl now – the second sister who has heard her 
sister already being enthusiastic about the first thing –now comes up with oh my God I 
can feel this. 
 
She’s getting more verbal. She’s getting more dramatic. These are cues and responses 
that the hypnotist has fed to them. He’s prepared them to respond in this way to the 
questions that he’s asking and the interactions that he’s having with them.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
113 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
The next thing that he’s doing is once again putting his hands on the outside of their 
hands so that they can feel a little bit of his heat, but also in their periphery vision, 
which are the outside edges of their vision, see those hands hovering there. 
 
2. As he moves his hands closer together around their own hands, it’s a nonverbal 
cue for their hands to continue to move inwards as well. 
 
You can see this quite clearly on the girl on the left whose hands suddenly shoot 
together about an inch or so whilst he’s doing that very process. You can’t see it so well 
on the girl on the right because unfortunately the hypnotist has his back to us and he’s 
blocking the view of the camera, but essentially the same thing is happening. 
 
By moving his own hands inwards around their hands, it gives them a very clear 
suggestion to move those hands as well, and automatically they do exactly that. Then of 
course it’s up to the hypnotist to milk the responses, milk it when those hands do move 
to make it even more dramatic than just two girls standing there clapping their hands 
together. 
 
And as they come together, you’re going to get a good feeling inside of your body. 
Some really good feeling that starts in that spot. Yeah, that spot, and as your 
hands come together, you’re going to feel it all the way, and as they come closer 
and closer together, you’re going to take a deep breath in.  
 
When they touch, you’re going to close your eyes and relax altogether. When they 
touch, go ahead and close your eyes and sleep all the way down. Relax. Deep 
breath. Good. Relax. Sleep all the way down. Relax all the way down knowing that 
here in Las Vegas anything can happen. That’s right. For any of us, anything can 
happen. 
 
This is a great point at which to jump in again. He’s done his second set piece, and he’s 
doing his second induction again. There are a couple of things I want to point out here 
that’s happening to the girls, which would be very useful to spot as a hypnotist.  
 
The first thing I want you to notice is the girl on the right-hand side with the glasses. 
Look at the way she’s looking at the hypnotist, how she’s fixated on him. She’s 
practically already in a trance, looking at him, following his suggestions and so on. She’s 
totally mesmerized literally by the hypnotist.  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
114 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
When he reaches over and touches her head and tells her to go all the way down and 
relax into trance and so on, she responds very quickly.  
 
1. The thing I want to point out though is that look.  
 
Go back and observe it again. Whenever you see that look, especially if it’s focused on 
you as a hypnotist, that person is a ripe plum ready to be plucked and straight into 
hypnosis.  
 
2. The second thing that happens is he does an instant induction on that girl 
because he correctly notices that girl is really pretty much already gone. 
 
Notice what’s happened on the left-hand side. The sister, even though she’s kind of a 
little bit ignored, is still listening to his verbal instructions. Even though he never 
touched her head, she starts closing her eyes and going into trance as well because 
those were a literal interpretation of the words he was using. 
 
Once again the hypnotist is not satisfied with the response. While she’s going into a mild 
trance, she’s kind of closing her eyes and hanging out there, he wants her to know that 
he’s also paying attention to her, and that he wants more dramatic responses from her. 
How does he do this? 
 
3. He moves over and also touches her head as he did early on before and of 
course as she’s seen him do with her sister just a moment ago as well. 
 
Notice how her head shifts completely forward at this point, which is a more dramatic, 
classical hypnotic posture – head bowed and standing up straight in front of the crowd.  
 
He’s training both of these girls to give dramatic responses, now verbal responses, 
whilst going into trance as well and he’s training them so that they make sure to give 
110% each and every time so that they’re getting more and more dramatic each time a 
response comes out of them. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
115 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
That means later on, as the inductions continue, as the process continues, he gets better 
and better responses from them.  
 
4. The next thing that he’s doing is he’s also warming them up to do these wild 
and crazy things that a street hypnotist would like to do.  
 
How does he do that? He’s saying we’re in Vegas and in Vegas anything can happen. 
Everything can happen. We’re going to have a wild time, a great time. Notice how he’s 
constantly reinforcing: 
 
1. The motivation pieces – you’re going to have a great time, great stuff is going 
to happen and you’re going to enjoy yourself. 
 
2. This idea that pretty much anything whacky, bizarre and strange can happen, 
and it’s okay for it to happen. 
 
He’s setting the scene for later effects to occur smoothly and naturally. 
 
Here in Las Vegas we have an opportunity to experience new states of mind and 
new states of being. We can be anybody we want to be here. So while you are 
being here, you can experience total relaxation, letting your hands dangle, letting 
everything relax as if every muscle in your body is relaxing all the way around. 
 
Okay in just a moment I’m going to count from one to five, and you’re to come 
right back into this moment. One, two, three, four and five – wide awake. That 
was just an exercise. Everybody, give them a round of applause. Give them a 
round of applause. Good job. 
 
This is a great place to pause things again and have a little chat. Notice how he’s only 
done his second set piece, but already it feels like he’s done a whole mini show because 
in effect he has.  
 
The reason for this is because he really is milking every response of every step on the 
way. I’d like you to notice how he’s actually working the audience as well now. He’s not 
just leaning into the ear of one girl or the other girl and whispering to them so that no 
one can hear anything. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
116 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Notice how he stands firmly between the two girls and projects his voice outwards 
towards the camera, which is where the whole audience is sitting watching the show. 
 
When they come back out of trance, he gives them a round of applause and, 
importantly, he gets the audience to also give them a round of applause. The girls are 
whooping and whistling. They’re clapping for themselves. The audience is clapping for 
them. Everyone is excited and everyone’s having a good time. 
 
→ The key thing here is he’s starting to involve the audience, and he’s really 
making a show out of this. 
 
By involving the audience and getting them to applaud the efforts of the girls, a couple 
of things are happening here. 
 
1. These relatively simple pieces – the finger vise, the magnet hands – have 
become something dramatic, something worth applauding. 
 
The memories that the people have are being corrected. They’re being changed as to 
having seen something pretty dramatic. 
 
2. It puts the girls on notice that if they do something dramatic, if they perform 
well, they’re going to get more praise from the audience. They’re going to get 
more love from the audience. 
 
That again is something very enticing for someone who volunteers to do a show like 
this. He’s going to get better reactions from the women, which means that the audience 
is going to give better reactions back, which means they’re going to be motivated to do 
an even better job, and that whole cycle will continue throughout the place. 
 
3. Also notice that once again when he wasn’t 100% satisfied with the response – 
in this case it was the relaxation – he’s not afraid to reach in there and make 
the changes he wants to see from them. 
 
He reaches over and grabs the wrist and shakes it loosely a little bit to get more 
relaxation than she was showing. Always be there, always notice the response you’re 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
117 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
getting and if you don’t like them, then make sure that you amp them up with your own 
energy or by stepping in and correcting them physically as well, everything you can do 
to make sure it’s perfect as you want it to be. 
 
We haven’t even done hypnosis yet. This is just an exercise. Are you right-handed 
or left-handed? 
 
Right-handed. 
 
Can I borrow that hand? 
 
Yes, don’t take it off. 
 
I don’t plan on taking it off. I plan on using it in such a good way. 
 
This is another nice little teaching point here in terms of what the hypnotist is doing. 
He’s asking to borrow one of her arms. This is the classic induction that you’ve already 
learned on the DVDs. However, as he asks for this the girl interrupts his routine and tries 
to jibe back at him saying, oh please don’t cut it off. 
 
Of course she’s not afraid that he might cut it off, but she’s just basically taking control 
of the situation again. She’s attempting to wrestle control of the whole situation from 
the hypnotist back to herself, even though she may not be entirely aware of it. 
 
Watch how the hypnotist completely ignores the attempt and rolls along anyway. What 
does he do? He takes control back by saying oh no, I’m not going to take it off. I’m just 
going to use it. In other words this is my hand now. I get to use it in whatever way I see 
fit.  
 
He hasn’t really added any content to it. He hasn’t really explained anything or done 
anything like that. All he’s done is he’s indirectly suggested to her I’m in control, let me 
be in control, don’t worry about making any funny remarks, that’s my job. Your job is to 
focus and follow directions. 
 
He’s really corrected her in a very gentle sort of way, but also being very authoritative 
and not letting her take control of the situation. If he allowed her to take too much 
control of the situation, then he’s not directing the situation anymore. He’s no longer in 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
118 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
control of it, which means he’s less likely to get the more dramatic hypnotic effects that 
he wants to get. 
 
Oh good. 
 
What I want you to do is I want you to take your hand. What I want you to do is 
look right at your hand. I want you to look at the lines on your hand. I want you to 
look at a single point on your hand.  
 
In a moment you’re going to begin to notice that the hand is coming closer and 
closer to your face. As it does, you’re going to notice the changing focus in your 
eyes. In just one moment you’re going to notice that that happens.  
 
You’re going to close your eyes. Sleep. Relax all the way down. Relax. Take a deep 
breath all the way down. Watch her. Notice how relaxed she can be. She’s so 
calm, so relaxed. Good.  
 
This is a great place to jump in again. The hypnotist is doing something very interesting 
here, which is great when you’re working with more than one person at a time. I’ve 
mentioned on some of the other demonstrations, especially in the London 
demonstrations, how you can work with a person and if they’re not giving you great 
responses, you can leave them to one side for a little bit, work with someone else and 
then come back to them. 
 
This is a great way of doing exactly that. Notice how he’s putting one girl in trance, and 
he’s turning the other girl – the sister – and saying, watch her, see how relaxed she is, 
see how well she responds.  
 
This is a really interesting thing to be able to do. Why? First of all, when you’re watching 
a hypnotized subject, it primes your own unconscious mind to respond better as a 
hypnotized subject, so the chances of the other girl going into an instant trance like that 
go even higher.  
 
Because the girl who’s in trance is hearing these suggestions to the other girl, they’re 
indirect suggestions to her also to continue to do that, to continue to relax, to continue 
to do a good job relaxing and doing as the hypnotist says. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
119 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
1. He’s training both girls simultaneously to respond even better by getting one to 
look at the other, and of course one is already in trance and she’s actually 
listening to this, and these are suggestions to deeper her own trance too.  
 
It’s a really nice thing he’s doing there.  
 
2. Also notice that he’s doing the same induction for the third time but this time a 
little bit harder. 
 
The first two times he held their heads and put them forward in the right position. He 
had to correct them a little bit to get them to be in the position he wanted them to be. 
This third time, he snaps his finger and touches her head again, but because she’s 
already done this twice she knows what this means now, and her head instantly bows 
forward into that “hypnotic position.” 
 
Why does he get such a dramatic response? He’s already trained her twice previously to 
go to this position. She already knows where to go and what’s expected of her, so she 
just lets go into that rather than resisting it because she doesn’t quite know what’s 
going to happen or where to take things next. 
 
I’d like you to watch now as we continue this little segment, and watch exactly how this 
hypnotist utilizes this effect when he turns to the next girl. In particular, I want you to 
pay attention to the facial expression and the look that she has in her eyes as she looks 
at the hypnotist now. 
 
In a moment when we transfer from the girl that’s being hypnotized right now to her 
sister – the one with the glasses – you’ll see that she’s starts riveting her attention on 
the hypnotist, that sort of glassy-eyed look that is a telltale sign that they’re either 
already in a deep trance or on that borderline between waking suggestion and in a deep 
trance already. 
 
At that point, the hypnotist can do a very dramatic instant induction with just a click of 
the fingers and bringing the head forwards in exactly the same way as he did with her 
sister, only he doesn’t need to do any external focusing tricks like with the hand. It’s 
more dramatic because he can go straight into it.  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
120 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
However, you and I both know the reason he can do that is because he’s already set it 
up so smoothly by giving her two experiences of this already, and now seeing her sister 
doing it he’s really prepared her for this.  
 
Watch on and see how much of that you can spot as the hypnotist does those 
maneuvers.  
 
And every time you hear my voice, it’s going to help you to go deeper and deeper 
and deeper into total relaxation, relaxing all the way down. That’s right, relaxing 
all the way down. 
 
Go ahead and every time you hear my voice, it’s going to help you to get even 
more deep. What I want you to do is I want you to look at her. Do you notice how 
calm she can be? Even here in Vegas, even as exciting as this can be, we can calm 
down and feel really good. 
 
What I want you to do is look right into my eyes. Take a deep breath. Good. Relax 
all the way down. Sleep. Relax, calming your mind all the way down and your 
body all the way down, letting your entire day, any tension, any stress just melt 
out of your body right now all the way down. Relax all the way down. That’s right. 
 
Because in just a moment as you listen to the sound of my voice, an arm, one arm 
– I don’t know which arm that’s going to be, but an arm is going to begin to lift. I 
don’t know which arm is going to begin to lift because we both know that 
uplifting our hands into the sky can make us feel so much better.  
 
This is another nice little piece that the hypnotist is doing here. He’s doing the classic 
Ericksonian style of arm levitation – one arm will lift – and attaching that to an 
emotional response. Remember, the idea here is we start with simple physical 
responses that are easier to get, and then go to an emotional response and we end up 
with some kind of a mental response so that we can basically do the whole range of 
phenomena as we choose to. 
 
In this case he’s doing that transition now. He’s done two physical things already – the 
finger vise and the magnetic hands. Now he’s doing a third physical thing – the arm 
levitation – and if he had less experience as a hypnotist or if he had less sense as a 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
121 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
performer, he might just stick at that level of physical suggestion experiments and 
physical demonstrations, and do the whole show that way. 
 
It’s a decent show, but it gets stuck on a particular level.  
 
1. What he’s doing though is he’s breaking the pattern once again.  
 
He’s moving from the physical to the emotional, and using the physical as a mechanism 
to bridge the gap between the two. 
 
How does he do that?  
 
2. Very simply he attaches one response to the other.  
 
As the arm lifts, you’ll have a good memory. As the arm lifts you’ll have a good memory, 
which makes you feel good, so you can feel better and better. The more that arm lifts 
the better you feel.  
 
The language is less important at this point. What’s important is the idea here. You’re 
attaching the idea of feeling good to the lifting of the arm. Notice as the arm starts 
lifting, the girl on the left starts laughing and having a great time with it as well. 
 
Notice also that the girl that he’s paying the most attention to – the girl on the left – has 
the most dramatic response. The girl on the left and on the right – both of them – their 
arms start lifting at roughly the same time and roughly the same amount, but because 
the hypnotist is focusing on one and reinforcing and revalidating that response with that 
one particular girl, she has the strongest response right now. 
 
Then when he switches his attention to the other girl, she can have just as strong a 
response but when the attention is placed on her. This shows you as a hypnotist that 
you have a very complex task to perform, which is to give attention to your subject – or 
subjects if you’re working with more than one – whilst of course keeping the attention 
of the audience as well. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
122 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Notice how the hypnotist does that by project his voice to make sure that his audience 
can actually hear him and by giving a glance to his audience from time to time to make 
sure that they understand that he’s paying attention to them, and that it’s okay for 
them to watch and so on. 
 
As he gets more and more into his show, he’ll do more and more interaction with the 
audience too. 
 
I don’t know which hand is going to begin to lift up on its own, and yes you can 
feel good allowing that arm, whichever arm is that arm, it’s going to begin to lift. 
That’s great, and you can let that arm as it lifts make you feel better and better 
and better.  
 
It’s going to help you to recall a great memory, some really awesome experience, 
a really good feeling, and you can let that feeling crawl up inside of your body as 
that arm continues to lift. That’s right. Lifting and lifting and lifting all the way up.  
 
Yes, that’s right, and it can feel good, can’t it? Yes, it can. It can feel so good. 
Good, and as that hand continues to lift more and more and more, you can just 
let it lift like it’s got 1,000 balloons attached to it and those balloons are carrying 
your arm up into the sky.  
 
The more and more they lift the more calm and relaxed you can be letting that 
arm lift, and the more and more that arm – go ahead and let that lift just like it 
wants to. Yes, it does. The more and more it lifts, the more and better and better 
you can feel. 
 
In just a moment you’re going to feel a magnet just like before. You’re going to 
feel this high-powered magnet on that hand, and there’s another high-powered 
magnet located right here on your head. That’s right, right here on your head. 
 
In just a moment that hand is going to begin to move towards those as if those 
magnets were coming together on their own. That’s right. You can let those begin 
to come together now as if the magnets were just moving, as if it’s magic that 
hand can just move. That’s right. 
 
Just let it move. That’s right. Let it move all the way and all the way up and all the 
way up. You can carry it and take it all the way to the head. When that hand hits 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
123 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
the head and the two magnets come together, you’re going to relax completely 
10 times deeper, 20 times deeper, 100 times deeper all the way. Good. Sleep. 
Relax.  
 
Take a deep breath in and relax all the way down, feeling phenomenal, listening 
to the power and sound of my voice, letting your hand stay there and being 
completely calm.  
 
In just a moment that hand is going to stick right to your head but only in a 
moment. That’s right. This hand can go all the way up, all the way up, all the way 
up to your head as it gets magnetized, as if those magnets can do nothing but 
move together. That’s right. Good. Sleep. Relax all the way down 10 times deeper. 
All the way down. Relax. Completely relax. 
 
Your hands are now completely stuck to your head, stuck as if it is the most stuck 
thing you’ve ever seen in your whole life. Krazy Glue has fallen on your head and 
your hand can no longer leave your head at all. You can try.  
 
In fact right now try in vain. Try as hard as you can to move that hand, but it 
can’t. You just find that it can’t move. Try. Come on. Try, try harder than that but 
it can’t, can it? And the more you try, the better you feel, don’t you?  
 
This is a great place to stop again and have a little chat about what’s happened. So far 
you’ve seen the arm levitation. You’ve seen the hand being brought up to the head. It’s 
just a nice simple place to put it.  
 
The hypnotist has ridden that idea further to a classic sort of stuck hand, glued hand sort 
of phenomenon. Again it’s a physical phenomenon. What I want to point out here is 
something very important. Having your hand stuck somewhere can be pretty freaky for 
most people. 
 
The idea of the finger magnets, the hand magnets, the arm levitation – those are all 
wonderful things. They’re interesting things, but when you’re suddenly stuck 
somewhere, when you can’t move your hands anymore, when your body is no longer 
responding as you wish it to – in other words you try to remove your hand, but it’s 
failing – there’s a risk that for some people this could be frightening. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
124 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
This is what the hypnotist is doing a great job of here. It’s important to give them an 
emotional reaction to go with it. In other words your hand is stuck, you can’t move it, 
and the more stuck it is the better you feel. 
 
1. He’s giving them not just a physical response, but he’s giving them an 
emotional response.  
 
This serves two purposes: 
 
1. First, it’s to prevent them from selecting their own emotion, which might be 
something like fear or anxiety because their hands are no longer working 
properly. 
 
2. It’s continuing that train of pumping the emotional responses so that now he 
can work on a physical level, as well as an emotional level.  
 
The only level that needs to be addressed still is the mental level of responses. With 
those three categories in hand, he can pretty much do anything as far as street hypnosis 
is concerned.  
 
This is a great way of both warming them up for the emotional level and making sure 
that they have a good positive response to this effect, rather than a negative one. It also 
means generally speaking that the audience is going to be that much more excited by it 
too because remember the audience, if they can hear his words, are going to be mildly 
affected by his suggestions too.  
 
On occasion, you’ll find someone in the audience who’s a deep somnambulistic subject 
who will have just as strong a reaction as the people being hypnotized. If that does 
happen, please bear in mind that you have to treat that person as any other subject and 
ensure that they’re taken care of properly. 
 
You can take them out of trance and invite them to take part in the show. Always make 
sure that they’re conscious when you ask them to take part in the show and never 
unconscious.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
125 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
If they decide they don’t want to take part in the show, then make sure you give them a 
suggestion that they can watch without going into a trance so that they don’t 
accidentally go into a trance and act those things out. It just makes your life a lot easier 
that way.  
 
In this case it’s not happening. Right now he’s just passing the second of the three key 
doors of hypnosis from physical to emotional, and there’s still the mental one left to 
open up. 
 
Notice that that same feeling is doubling, isn’t it? It’s tripling. It’s starting in that 
spot right there and moving all the way up your spine. In just a moment I’m going 
to count and snap from one to three. When I do, what I want you guys to do is 
your hands are stuck so much that if you could actually move your hand to grab 
this $20, could you grab it?  
 
Can you get your hand – come on, come on, come on. You’re almost there. Sleep. 
Relax all the way down. Relax all the way down, all the way down. You’re staying 
there and finding yourself deep sleep deep, calm and relaxed all the way down. 
 
In a second I’m going to count from one to three. As soon as I count to three, that 
arm is going to drop by your side and you’re going to feel phenomenal. Ready? On 
the count of three – one, two, three, drop. Relax all the way down. Good, good. 
 
Okay in a moment I’m going to bring you guys back into this place, in this place 
and this time, okay? You will remember absolutely everything you experienced, 
absolutely everything, and that feeling that you guys created and helped to build 
together with each other and with me today can carry with you forward all the 
way into the future. 
 
Here we go, on the count of three. I’m going to count up bringing you back into 
this place and this time. On one, coming back to this place, feeling your feet 
underneath you. Two, feeling fantastic, taking a deep breath all the way in. 
Number three; come all the way back up wide-awake. 
 
Give them a big round of applause, ladies and gentlemen. High five. You girls are 
rock stars. Tell me where the feeling started. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
126 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Let’s pause it here again and have a look at what just happened here. Now the hypnotist 
has done a nice solid set of routines. He’s done his warm-up routines, which are the 
finger vise and the magnet hands. He’s done a couple of instant inductions. Actually he’s 
done a lot of them, which is also very dramatic for people to watch. 
 
He’s done an arm levitation that converted into the hand stuck phenomenon, and that 
converted into a more dramatic milking of that hand stuck phenomenon, which is try to 
take this twenty-dollar bill but you can’t. You can’t move your hands. 
 
Again these are very dramatic ways of milking the same response. When you think 
about it, not very much has happened right now, and yet a complete show has already 
taken place.  
 
When he finished a particular trance now, he’s remembering his audience. He could 
carry on with these guys adding effect and effect after effect after effect. The problem 
with that would be that all he’s doing is he’s just doing stuff, and eventually doing stuff 
gets boring. 
 
In order for it to be entertaining, you can’t just be doing stuff. The audience must have 
some kind of involvement. They need some kind of a message. They need to have some 
kind of interaction with what’s going on.  
 
In order to allow this to happen, the hypnotist again pauses proceedings, brings the girls 
out of trance and gets them a nice big round of applause. The applause does many 
things: 
 
1. It reinforces the girls’ responses. The chances that they’ll do more going even 
further are very high at this point. 
 
2. It gives the audience something to do. It gets them involved. I get to be part of 
the show. I’m the applauding part and they’re the performing part.  
 
3. It allows the audience to connect emotionally. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
127 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
When we applaud something, especially if it’s genuine applause, it’s our way of 
demonstrating the affection that we have for the performers because they made us feel 
good. Now we are showing those feelings and we’re communicating them in the form of 
our applause. That’s one of the reasons why we do it. 
 
He’s giving the audience an opportunity to applaud, which in other words is helping 
them to validate their emotional experience as well. Now as an audience, they feel more 
satisfied with the show because they’ve taken part in it and they’ve played their part, 
which is to feel good and to show that feeling of appreciation in the form of applause. 
 
Right now you’ve got an entire mini show in place. Once the audience has been involved 
for a little while, his next step is to go back to the girls again and get them to validate or 
ratify the trance they’ve just had.  
 
He starts asking about their experiences – what were their emotions, how did they 
grow, how did they build and so on – because remember right he’s making a transition 
from physical to emotional responses.  
 
By getting a sense of how those feelings began and how they moved and so on, not only 
does it validate the fact that it happened and ratify that more emotional trance 
experience, but it also sets the scene and primes the pump for more of that kind of stuff 
to occur if he decides to continue on. 
 
As it happens in this case, the hypnotist is just wrapping things up. He’s letting someone 
else have a chance to play with some stuff now, and he’s going to leave the girls with 
just some general good positive feelings about what they’ve done, which means that in 
the future going forwards they’re more likely to want to do more of this sort of stuff if 
some other street hypnotist decides to do something with them. 
 
He’s left them in a good place. He’s left the audience in a good place and he’s got a nice 
piece for the camera so that he’s got a nice dramatic demonstration for himself as well. 
 
Tell me where the feeling started. 
 
In my stomach. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
128 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Are you guy’s twins? 
 
Maybe. 
 
Twins. It started in the same place. Where did it move to? 
 
All over. My arms. From the bottom all over. 
 
Up and out. Look at you. See, mom, you’re raising a good one. She’s a little kinky 
for me but I like that. We are in Vegas. 
 
I am too! 
 
Are you? High five for mom. Very good. See you guys, this is a camera. This is for 
one of our shows, so if you could do me a favor and tell me what your experience 
of hypnosis was like. 
 
Awesome. 
 
Amazing. 
 
What’s that feeling feel like on a scale of 1-10? How good did that feel? 
 
A 12. 
 
 
A 12? 
 
I think I’m with her as well. 
 
Okay, good. That deserves two fives. Ladies, thank you very much. I really do 
appreciate it very much. You guys have a great night.  
 
 
 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
129 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Demonstration #2 
 
Do you want to try a little trick to start with? Just something to get started? Why 
don’t you put your hands out in front of you, hold them straight out like this and 
then clap them together real tight. Watch out for your rings because you don’t 
want your rings to get in the way of your hands. 
 
Now hold them tight like this. Cross your fingers and thumbs over and as you feel 
that pressure there, really hold that tight. Push them hard together. Are you 
pushing them hard? It doesn’t look very tight to me.  
 
Now bend your arms like you’re praying, praying for something amazing, and 
now take your two fingers and hold them up straight. You can relax. You can 
absolutely relax. These two index fingers, hold them up straight in front of you like 
this about an inch apart. 
 
Let’s dive into the second demonstration at this point. The first thing I want to point out 
is that in the first minute or so that you’ve watched so far, the hypnotist is doing a 
pretty good job. He’s doing his classic opening set.  
 
He’s doing the finger vise. He’s doing a great job with his hand extended. He’s getting it 
all together. He’s doing a nice little correction by squeezing the hand even further and 
asking her to squeeze it even more. 
 
All is going very well so far. The point at which he makes a slight mistake – it’s not an 
unrecoverable mistake, but it’s a slight mistake – is the point at which he’s asking the 
lady to extend her index fingers. 
 
The problem is his suggestions are a little bit imprecise. He just says extend your fingers. 
What does the lady do? She extends her thumbs instead. She doesn’t quite know what 
he’s doing, so she doesn’t know which fingers to extend. Because the hypnotist isn’t 
actually demonstrating it himself, she doesn’t know what to follow. 
 
Take this as a little bit of advice here, which is when you’re doing as physical as this, 
always show them exactly what’s going to happen piece by piece, which means you’re 
doing it right along with them.  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
130 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
They will copy you every step of the way, including if you want to actually show them 
how the whole thing’s going to conclude with those fingers coming together and so on. 
As the case happens to be, the hypnotist skipped that step. She got a little confused, but 
he rescues it by jumping in and demonstrating again, which gives her something to 
follow again. 
 
Now focus on the space between those two fingers, and as you’re focusing on 
that space start to feel yourself relaxing. Allow your arms and legs to relax. Feel 
your body beginning to relax.  
 
Now focus on that space, and as you focus on it more you’ll notice that those two 
fingers of yours start to move closer together, closer together. As you relax more, 
those fingers move even closer together. As your fingers move closer together, 
notice your mind starting to relax. 
 
When they touch, you’ll feel your eyes wanting to close. Allow them to close and 
allow your body to go into a state of relaxation. As you start to clasp your hands 
together tighter, you’ll notice that those fingers start to close.  
 
Let’s have a look at what’s going on here right now. So far the hypnotist is doing a pretty 
decent job. He’s set it up nicely and he’s getting a decent response. You may have 
noticed that the lady’s response whilst still decent is a little bit on the slow side. Why is 
that?  
 
Let’s think about the instructions he’s giving to her. They’re a little bit contradictory. The 
first thing he’s asking her to do is to relax her entire body, but recall that in order for this 
to work more quickly, we want those hands squeezing tighter together because that 
creates the kind of tension that brings the fingers together. 
 
You’ll notice that the lady’s hands are more than an inch apart. They’re actually quite a 
distance apart and they stay there quite comfortably for a while. Why is this? My best 
guess here is that the hypnotist has been suggesting all around relaxation – you’ll relax, 
your shoulder relaxes, your body relaxes. He’s talking quite a while about relaxation. 
 
That means unconsciously she’s starting to relax her own grip. When her grip relaxes, 
those fingers can very comfortably stay upright all on their own without coming 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
131 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
together. Luckily the hypnotist catches it just at this point. Just before I started speaking, 
you may have noticed that he said as those palms squeeze tightly together, those 
fingers will come together even more quickly. That is absolutely true. That’s exactly 
what happened. 
 
In the space of about a second or two, those fingers start coming back together about 
50% of the way. In other words they get much closer together than they’ve done in the 
entire other sequence because he’s remembered to put tension into her hands, which is 
where it belongs so that those fingers can come together more easily. 
 
It’s not necessarily a must. In other words would it mean that he would have failed with 
this experiment if he’d given her only relaxation throughout? No, it doesn’t mean that at 
all. He could have been very successful.  
 
In fact it was being very successful. The only difference is that it was being much slower 
because the unconscious mind would have had to do the whole work and it has to learn 
what is expected of it, rather than being set up for success in the first place.  
 
By putting that tension in the hands, the success is quicker and more easily achieved, 
and of course more people will get the result whether or not they know what’s going on 
or what is expected of them as well because it’s physiologically set up. 
 
Remember that whilst it’s great to have their minds relaxed and so on, you don’t 
necessarily want to use this as an induction. Put the tension to their hands, get a nice 
quick dramatic result with the fingers first, and then you can attach anything else you 
want to that, be it physical relaxation, mental relaxation, trance or whatever else, but 
only once those fingers have touched. 
 
As they closer and closer, notice your eyes starting to feel like they want to close. 
As your fingers touch, just close your eyes and relax and go deep into trance. 
That’s right. Just close your eyes and relax all the way down. Allow your fingers to 
touch. Allow your mind to relax. Close your eyes all the way down. That’s right. 
Nice and relaxed.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
132 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Let your hands fall down by your side. Take a deep breath. The more you relax the 
better you feel. The better you feel the more you relax. Feel that feeling and feel 
your right arm just dangling? 
 
The hypnotist is doing a great job here. He’s doing a nice little induction. Something that 
I want to point out here is what he’s doing with her right arm. Notice how he’s sort of 
swinging it backwards and forwards as he’s suggesting relaxation. This is a really nice 
way of: 
 
1. Testing how relaxed they are because if the arm is stiff and doesn’t move too 
much, the relaxation isn’t fully there. 
 
2. It’s also a nonverbal suggestion to relax even further because as you swing 
the arm around like a ragdoll, that shakes the shoulders and that means the 
shoulders are shaking a little bit, so they start relaxing a bit more. If the 
shoulders are shaking, the whole spine starts moving from side to side, so the 
whole body gets this message of relaxation as well.  
 
It’s a really nice simple way of suggesting relaxation whilst testing for it at the same time 
and it just enhances the whole experience. Once again it’s an example of a hypnotist 
who’s not afraid to touch his subject and interfere with them in some ways in order to 
get a better quality response than he was otherwise getting. 
 
This is a very nice little thing, and I recommend that you copy this in your own 
demonstrations as well. 
 
Allow your body to relax – your arms, your legs, your feet, all the way through 
your neck and shoulders. Allow your face to relax – your eyes, your cheeks, your 
lips. As you do that, start to feel your body relaxing. The more you relax the better 
you feel.  
 
In a moment I’m going to bring you out and we’re going to do a little bit of 
hypnosis. This was an experiment for you to see what it feels like. It feels good, 
right? Imagine this feeling and being able to take this feeling with you. 
 
In a moment I’m going to bring you out and we’re going to do some hypnosis. I’m 
going to count backwards from three. Three, starting to feel relaxed and coming 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
133 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
back into your consciousness. Two, noticing the sights and sounds around you. 
One, opening your eyes wide-awake. 
 
How do you feel? 
 
Okay. I feel like tingly. 
 
How so? 
 
A little tingly. 
 
Do you feel any warmth in your body? 
 
A little bit. 
 
Where would you point to that warmth? 
 
Here. 
 
Is that right? Do you want to do some more? 
 
Yeah, I’ll try it again. I’ll do it again. 
 
Is that right? Are you right-handed or left-handed? 
 
Right-handed. 
 
Do you mind if I touch your hand? Do you mind if I just hold that and put it up 
above your head? If you stare at your hand, just look at that closely and pay 
attention to your individual fingers. Feel that sensation as I push across them.  
 
Now notice the lines on your hands, and as you notice those lines find a spot on 
your hand you want to focus on. Focus your eyes on that spot. Pay attention to 
that. As your hand starts to move closer towards your face, you’ll notice that your 
eyes start to change focus. 
 
I just want you to notice something happening here. Notice the facial expression on this 
lady. The hypnotist is suggesting relaxation, that you’ll feel good and so on, so he’s 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
134 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
actually already doing some nice things. He’s already going towards the emotional 
responses coupled with the physical one, so he’s already going quite high or more 
advanced in terms of what he’s demonstrating. 
 
Right now he’s not done any very dramatic things for the audience yet. Right now all we 
see is a lady standing there with her eyes closed, so he needs to do something a bit 
more dramatic for the audience. 
 
However, what he is doing is he’s doing a really nice setup for better reactions to occur 
in the future. First of all notice how he said you’re feeling good right, aren’t you? Notice 
how when she’s nodding, her whole head, her whole facial expression is very peaceful. 
It’s kind of glowing almost, and she almost hesitates to move because she’s in that sort 
of trance, catatonic almost. 
 
This is a motivational piece. He’s motivating her to come out of trance so that she can 
go back into it next time, or want to go back into it next time, and do something else 
next time because it feels so good. By giving her the good feelings upfront and 
promising more of those good feelings down the line, she’s very motivated to take part 
and continue the experiment in the first place and secondly to expect a reward, which in 
this case is that good feeling that she’s experiencing right now.  
 
As your eyes start to change focus, you’ll notice that you start to relax. As you 
relax and your hand approaches your face even more, notice your eyes starting to 
want to close. As your hand gets closer to your face, close your eyes and relax. 
Now sleep. That’s right. Relax all the way down, deeper and deeper down. The 
deeper you go the more you relax. The more you relax the deeper you go.  
 
Let’s jump in here again and have a little chat about what’s happened here. So far what 
the hypnotist is doing is fantastic. He’s got great hypnosis, great language and he’s doing 
a really good thorough job.  
 
The only thing I want to point out to you here is if you compare this to the previous 
demonstration, notice how much longer everything takes here. This is more of a 
classical therapeutic approach to hypnosis, where you’re crossing every “t” and dotting 
every “I” as you go along the way, and you’re making sure that you’re slowly gently 
moving everything through all the paces. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
135 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
→ In street hypnosis, however, I would encourage you to see if you can work a 
little bit more quickly.  
 
The idea here is to be fast paced so that you have a nice zippy style. It’s more interesting 
for the audience, and it actually gets people into the kind of performance trances a bit 
more quickly.  
 
The reason for it is it prepares them to respond fast to you. If you speak slowly, if you 
move from one idea to the next very slowly, it basically indirectly suggests to them that 
they have to move slowly from one idea to the other too. On the other hand, if you 
move relatively quickly it tells your audience or your subject that they need to respond 
more quickly too. You’re better off doing lots of small fast mini trances than one long 
drawn out session.  
 
There’s nothing wrong with what he’s doing. It’s been a little entertaining and it’s still 
working out right, and he’s doing a great job out in public with people watching him. 
However, if he sped everything up and did everything that he was doing there in 20 
seconds or so, rather than a minute or two, then he’d have more time to do some more 
demonstration pieces, and his subject would be primed for quicker and faster 
responses.  
 
Faster responses are of course more dramatic responses too, which makes it more 
interesting for an audience to watch as well. This is a great piece of induction, and 
everything you’ve seen going on there, he can do the same piece in 20 seconds or less 
too and get just as good an impact, and be able to move forward with more dramatic 
effects.  
 
Please notice that as we continue with this video set how even though the hypnotist is 
doing everything right, and he’s getting all the responses that he wants to get, he’s 
taking a lot longer than some of the other sets, and it’s precisely because he’s the one 
that’s taking too long. It’s not the subjects that are responding slowly. It’s the hypnotist 
that’s slowing the subject’s responses down. 
 
Watch as we go on and ask yourself how could I speed up what I’m doing? It’s not 
necessarily by talking faster, although that might be part of it. It’s about getting the 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
136 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
ideas across more concisely so that you trust that one or two simple suggestions are as 
good as having to do a dozen repetitions of the same thing.  
 
You can just say the arm’s lifting, lifting, lifting, lifting. It’s a simple direct suggestion, and 
as opposed to I wonder if possibly one of those arms might at some point now start to 
lift, maybe now it’s lifting a little bit more. 
 
That kind of language is very useful and you can do it, but use it more sparingly. On the 
streets you can be much more direct with it, you can be more zippy with it, and you’ll 
get the responses a little bit faster as you go along as well.  
 
You will find your own balance point. When is it too much, when is it too little, and right 
in between those two extremes you’ll find the point at which you get nice zippy 
responses, you get good responses, fast responses and dramatic responses, whilst at the 
same time making sure that with the most of the people that you work with, you can 
actually get those results. You’re not rushing them too much ahead as well.  
 
As you start to relax your right arm, feel that same motion in your left arm. Allow 
it to just dangle down by your side. Allow your two shoulders to relax. As your 
shoulders relax, you’ll feel it working its way down your spine into your lower 
back. As you feel that in your lower back, you’re going to start to feel that all the 
way down to your feet. 
 
Notice that your body is relaxed but it’s supporting itself with its body weight. So 
just allow yourself to relax and rock back and forth a little bit using that weight. 
Now imagine that time that we talked about earlier, that time in your life when 
you had that amazing feel, when you felt like your life couldn’t be any better, 
where you had total confidence and total joy. 
 
Bring that feeling into your mind and imagine that scenario for a moment. Now 
as you’re doing that, notice your right hand starts to want to move. You’ll 
probably notice it as just a small twitch in your fingers, and as it starts to twitch 
your fingers feel that arm starting to relax. Allow it to do what it wants to do 
naturally. 
 
As you start relax, notice that you start to go deeper and deeper. The deeper you 
go the better you feel. The more you relax the deeper you go. Now you probably 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
137 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
notice as I tap on that right hand of yours, it will actually start moving up towards 
your face. 
 
As you notice that, notice that your arm starts to get weightlessness, like there’s a 
bunch of balloons attached to the top of that finger, to your index finger. It starts 
pulling your index finger. Your index finger starts coming closer and closer up 
towards your face. As it gets lighter, notice your hand is going to move on its own 
all the way to your face. 
 
Notice that there’s nothing you need to do, only to relax. The more you relax, the 
more that hand is going to want to start to move. It’s feeling lighter and lighter 
now. Feel that relaxation.  
 
As you start to relax, notice that hand starts to move. It starts to feel even lighter 
and more relaxed. Notice that feeling again. Notice that feeling and that passion, 
and that beautiful feeling that we discussed and feel that welling up inside of you. 
 
As you start to feel that, you can feel that arm start to move up towards your 
head. You’ll feel that that feeling starts to grow richer and richer, deeper and 
deeper, more and more relaxed. 
 
Now feel that arm starting to become weightless. It’s starting to move closer to 
your face. As you start to rock back and forth, find your body starting to relax. As 
your left arm starts to move, as it starts to tingle out by your side, notice that your 
body can relax. 
 
Now remember that emotion we talked about, that feeling from earlier. If you 
had to point to it on your body, where would you point to? Right here in your 
stomach? How does that feel when you put it on your stomach? Does it well up 
inside of you? Does it make you feel relaxed? 
 
If you feel that feeling and then take your right hand and put it out to your right 
hand side, let your body relax. Just allow your arms to dangle. Just allow them to 
dangle. That’s right, deeper and deeper down.  
 
In a moment I’m going to ask you to come back into the room. I’m going to count 
back from three – three, noticing the world around you, feeling your body coming 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
138 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
back to your consciousness; two, noticing the sights and sounds and your friends 
standing to your left-hand side; one, eyes open wide awake. 
 
Let’s jump in here and have another look at what’s going on. So far he’s had a nice little 
induction and he’s given her a nice hypnotic gift. There are some really good bits of 
street hypnosis going on there.  
 
Notice however that he spent maybe seven or eight minutes with this lady so far, and at 
no point has he looked at his audience. There are about a half a dozen or maybe a dozen 
people watching off the distance, and the hypnotist is spending all of his attention on 
the subject. 
 
There’s nothing wrong with paying attention to the subject. That’s actually a very useful 
and a very important thing to do. However, street hypnosis is a performance art, which 
means you’re performing to someone. The audience is your performance or the 
audience you’re performing to, so it’s important that you project your instructions so 
that they can hear as well, so that they can be included.  
 
You can turn your body and make eye contact with them, and invite them to take part in 
some way, whether it’s to touch the subject or to applaud or to shout out some 
suggestions. However you can involve them in the whole process, it’s going to make it 
more meaningful to them as well. Otherwise all they’ll see is a person standing there 
and having a good time.  
 
The really nice thing that I’d like you to see though is the reaction this lady is giving him. 
She’s having a great reaction. Her face is expressive, she’s emotional and she thinks this 
is a great experience. This is a fantastic moment to turn to your audience and say, didn’t 
she do a great job?  
 
Why? Because your subject is giving you a strong emotional reaction, and that’s very 
charming to see. The audience sees that and goes oh that’s so cool. They feel good for 
her for having had such a cool experience. She’s very expressive about that cool 
experience, so it’s time to reward her for that experience by giving her a round of 
applause. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
139 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
It also rewards the audience because you’re acknowledging the fact that they’ve 
witnessed something important and been moved by it. That applause is an opportunity 
for the audience to show their appreciation, and for them to be acknowledged that 
they’re having an emotional response as well.  
 
This would have been a great thing for him to have done at this point. He’s still doing a 
good performance here of course.  
 
• Just remember, you’ll have more than one audience. It’s not just the subject. It’s 
the people watching as well, so include them in what you’re doing. 
 
• Work a little bit faster with what you’re doing because you can get all those 
results very quickly. 
 
• Don’t be afraid to take some risks. If it doesn’t work out quite right, no big deal. 
Just put them back in trance and move onto something else. 
 
Just like I really wanted to like fall, like I just felt very relaxed. 
 
 
Demonstration #3 
 
Open your eyes. Every time you close your eyes, you’ll feel more relaxation 
throughout your body. You’re going to open your eyes, close your eyes now. Let 
the relaxation take your body all the way down. Excellent. We’re going to do it 
one more time. We’ll do it a couple more times.  
 
When I ask you to open your eyes and close your eyes, it sends a wave of 
relaxation throughout your whole body. Here we go. Now open your eyes. Close 
your eyes down, relaxing, staying in perfect balance. 
 
Here we go now. You’re going to open your eyes again. Open your eyes. Close 
your eyes way down, way down deep, way down deep. Sleep. Excellent. Now I’m 
going to lift your left arm just a few inches and when I drop it, you’re going to go 
even deeper now.  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
140 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Just go even deeper. Let it go. Loose and limp. Don’t you do it. Let me do it. Loose 
and limp like a rag doll. Let it go. Let it drop. There you go. Just let it drop. Let it 
drop. You’re almost there. I’m going to do it here, loose and limp. Loose and limp. 
Just let it go. You’re almost there. Loose and limp. You’re almost there. Absolutely 
great. 
 
Now I’m going to touch your left hand now. I’m going to touch your left hand 
because I want you to go deeper and deeper into a hypnotic state. No sounds 
disturb you. It doesn’t matter if someone yells right in your face. You’ll stay in this 
relaxed state of absolute wonderful hypnotic relaxation. It’s so relaxing and 
absolutely a wonderful feeling now. 
 
Now in a moment you’re going to notice something very unusual. You’re going to 
notice something really unusual about your left hand. You see, your left hand is 
actually tied to a bunch of helium balloons. Your left hand is actually tied to a 
bunch of helium balloons and it’s going to begin to float up in the air, float up in 
the air, and float up in the air. 
 
As it goes towards your face as if it’s drawn by an actual magnet, as if it’s 
magnetized, drawn in by an actual magnet, it’s going to begin to float right up 
toward your face, floating up toward your face, going right toward your face like 
a magnet. There it goes.  
 
It’s starting to lift up now. I’m going to tie 50 balloons onto that hand, 50 balloons 
onto that hand full of helium.  
 
This is demonstration number three. So far the hypnotist is doing a great job doing a 
classic induction, a simple fractionation with some relaxation and stuff like that. Now 
he’s into his first effect, or at least his first hypnotic effect.  
 
We didn’t catch the camera in time to see what he did beforehand. He probably did his 
finger vise and magnet hands as well, but he may not have done those. This might be 
the first thing he’s tried. 
 
In any event, he’s getting a nice arm levitation. There are a couple of things I want to 
point out that he’s done in the last few months, which are of interest.  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
141 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
The first thing is notice how there’s a very close audience. There are about three or four 
people standing next to him, they’re watching the show, and he’s keeping them 
engaged as well.  
 
1. It looks like one of the people might have started to lose attention and maybe 
turned away or was going away somewhere, so he just casually reaches over 
and calls that person back to watch what’s going on. 
 
This is a very nice piece because this is the first time he’s got the audience interaction 
going. It keeps their interest so that they know what’s going on and they keep 
interested in what’s happening in terms of the hypnosis.  
 
In some respects, he’s making a slight mistake because he’s just talking at the girl. He’s 
very close to the girl. You’ll notice that he’s a big man and he’s all hunched over. He’s 
making sure the girl can hear him, which is a good thing; however, he’s not projecting 
his voice towards his audience. They could be involved more if he turned to them more 
and let his words wash over the girl towards the audience so that everyone has a sense 
of what’s going on here. 
 
As it happens, it’s not a huge deal because everyone’s standing so close that they can 
probably hear him even though he’s talking directly to the girl.  
 
2. The other thing I want to point out is that nice little thing he did with the wrist 
in terms of the helium balloons that are lifting the hand up. It’s a nice classic bit 
of imagery for an arm levitation.  
 
3. Now what he’s also doing is he’s gently touching the wrist and plucking it 
upwards.  
 
He’s not actually lifting it himself. What he’s doing is he’s touching the sides of the wrist 
and letting those hands slide past the wrist upwards, which gives the sensation of 
moving upwards. It’s a nonverbal instruction to let that hand continue to lift upwards. 
It’s a very nice little piece that he’s added to it, and you’ll notice that it has a very nice 
effect. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
142 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
4. He’s also tapping the young lady on the forehead and telling her basically this is 
where the hand’s going to go. 
 
This is where it’s lifting – touching it up, and this is where it’s going to go – touching the 
forehead. He creates kind of a point-to-point contact so that the unconscious mind 
knows exactly what to do with this. 
 
One thing that he could do to improve his success with this girl is to change a little bit of 
how he’s suggesting the arm to lift. You’ll notice that the arm’s lifted to 90 degrees, and 
in a moment as you go onto the video, you’ll see that he has a little bit of difficulty 
getting that hand to lift even higher. 
 
He can still do it – and this is true of a lot of hypnosis subjects– once the arm gets to 90 
degrees, it becomes a little bit more difficult for the arm to bend. Even once you get to 
about a 45 degree bend in the arm, the arm doesn’t want to move very much more. 
 
5. At some point, if you want the hand to touch the head, you’ll have to have the 
elbow lifting up as well. 
 
Right now he’s talking about the arm or the hand lifting. In a very literal interpretation, 
people will very often just move the forearm or literally just move the hand up. To get 
the whole arm moving, you usually have to suggest that the elbow lifts as well. That’s a 
really nice simple shortcut that will speed this whole section up. 
 
Whilst just insisting that the hand will lift up and touch your face can do it, and you can 
add all the imagery – balloons lifting up, helium balloons, a magnet pulling it and so on, 
which is very nice imagery – at some point the simpler way to get at it is to say that 
elbow is free to move. That’s it. Watch as the elbow starts coming up as well, and that 
continuing the motion towards the head. 
 
That’s a really nice physiologically sound way of getting the response more quickly.  
 
What color are those balloons? There are 100 balloons now floating up in the air, 
floating way up in the air. Let that hand come right towards your face, and here’s 
the unusual thing. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
143 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
You get an unusually wonderful feeling as that hand begins to lift and rise right up 
toward your face. In fact it begins to get rather funny to you as it begins to lift 
and rise. I’m going to put 100 helium balloons on that hand now, and now I’m 
going to tie a pulley from the top of your hand through your shoulder. 
 
Now I have a pulley, and every time I pull the pulley – there you go – that hand’s 
going higher and lifting, lifting toward your face. Maybe it will rest on your cheek 
or maybe on your jaw and it becomes funnier and funnier the higher it goes.  
 
Now let’s get that hand to go right to your face, faster now. It’s moving towards 
your face and I want you to remember an unusually funny feeling as that hand 
begins to lift and rise. Excellent. 
 
Now let’s put 300 helium balloons and really pull on that pulley as that arm 
begins to lift and rise, to lift and rise right toward that face. A little grin now is 
starting to happen because you remember a very funny episode in the past. It 
makes no sense as to why you’d be thinking about this, but it’s funny as can be. 
 
In fact the higher that hand goes, the funnier it is. You can’t believe that you’re 
remembering this very funny episode and having some incredible unusual 
wellbeing, a feeling of wellbeing as that hand goes right towards your face. Get 
that hand to lift up faster and faster right towards your face. There you go. 
 
A little smile is starting to appear as I pull harder and harder and harder on that 
arm, way hard on that arm. Very interesting, very unusual feeling.  
 
Now in a moment I’m going to have you open your eyes. Not yet but in a moment. 
What you’re going to notice is this arm is no longer your arm. That arm is not 
your arm. In fact that arm is my arm. You’re going to take a look at that arm, and 
you’re going to see that that arm is actually not your arm. That arm actually 
belongs to me. 
 
You’re going to have a very unusual feeling when you open your eyes and look at 
that arm. That simply is not your arm. So I’m going to count to three and you’re 
going to open your eyes and take a look at that arm. It’s simply not your arm. It’s 
simply stuck on your body. It’s somebody else’s arm.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
144 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Go ahead and open your eyes now. Open your eyes and take a look at that arm. 
What do you think? Whose arm is that anyway?  
 
Let’s jump in here because the hypnotist has just done a really nice piece of street 
hypnosis. This is a wonderful performance tip, and I really want to emphasize what he’s 
doing here and encourage you to do this yourself.  
 
So far he’s got a simple effect, which is an arm levitation. He’s very smartly realized that 
the hand’s not going to go any further. It’s not getting closer to her head. It’s going to go 
about as high as that. In order to get it higher, you have to suggest the elbow will move. 
We’ve already talked about that. 
 
Rather than pushing the issue, rather than failing in front of everyone, he’s just going to 
go with the success he has. He leaves the hand there and changes tracks, which is a very 
smart performance thing to do because whilst he can probably get that hand to still 
touch the face, at this stage he’s spent enough time on that arm. He needs to move 
onto something else. Otherwise he risks boring people. 
 
What he’s doing here is a really nice conscious-unconscious dissociation. He’s basically 
saying that arm is no longer your arm; it’s now my arm, or that arm over there. His 
language is basically dissociating the arm from the rest of her. When she opens her eyes 
and looks at it, this is really dramatic. 
 
Notice how she bursts into a smile and laughs. It’s a very strange sensation for her. He 
handled the whole interact with her, the discussion with her very nicely so that it’s really 
dramatic.  
 
The reason it’s so dramatic for the audience is because she goes from a very blank facial 
expression to a very expressive face. You can see her laughing in disbelief, and suddenly 
the audience realizes that something strange is going on here. 
 
Anyone can lift their arm up, but very few people put their arm up, lock it in place and 
look at it and start laughing because they realize that they can’t control the arm 
anymore. This is a nice dramatic piece. On its own it can be enough to blow the 
audience away, and you could finish the whole street hypnosis piece right there. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
145 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
It’s also a good convincer for the girl who’s felt the arm going up to suddenly look at it in 
that weird position and go my God this is strange. I don’t normally have my arm this 
way. I guess more is happening than I realized.  
 
It’s a good convincer for the girl. It’s a good convincer for the audience. It’s dramatic and 
it creates a nice conscious-unconscious dissociation, which allows him actually to move 
forwards and do even more dramatic effects now that the wedge is in place between 
consciousness so that the unconscious mind is more primary. It takes more primacy over 
the responses. 
 
It’s my arm. What’s it doing on your body? That arm belongs to me. I want you to 
close your eyes. Sleep now, deep down, deep.  
 
Let’s jump in here again. There’s an extra nice piece of street hypnosis going on here. 
Recall that the last time we interrupted was when he created a conscious-unconscious 
dissociation. He had a look at her arm. It’s not her arm, it’s my arm now, and he sort of 
playfully asking her, what’s my arm doing on you? 
 
Of course the girl’s laughing at this idea. She’s seeing her hand and it feels a little 
strange to her. This is a very nice way of creating the dissociation. What I really like and 
what he does really nicely at this point is he rides that idea of dissociation a step further.  
 
1. He now dissociates her from her name.  
 
This is the analogy he’s doing. In the same way as you can dissociate your arm – it’s not 
your arm anymore – now you can dissociate from your name. It’s not your name 
anymore. In fact I can give you a new name to replace it. Your name is Aritha, or 
whatever that was. The reason that works so nicely here is because there’s a natural 
smooth transition. You move from the arm not being her arm, to her name not being 
her name, to another name being her name. There’s a nice bit of trance logic going 
along each step of the way. 
 
2. The other thing that he does, which is very nice here, is he again creates 
audience participation. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
146 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
This is so crucial. I can’t begin to tell you how important it is to involve the audience. In 
this case of course he gets someone in the audience to ask the girl what her name is, so 
she has the opportunity to say whatever the amusing name he gave her was. 
 
Again this is amusing to an audience because they can go my God I’m actually taking 
part in this. I’ve asked something, and in some respects I feel like a hypnotist now 
because I’ve caused the wrong name to come out.  
 
3. The third thing I want to point out is just how causally he does the reinduction.  
 
Just close your eyes and sleep. Bang, done just like that. There’s no need to spend 20 
minutes on deepening. There’s no reason to do another dramatic reinduction. Very 
often the casualness of the reinduction is the dramatic effect. They’ll go wow that was 
so quick, I can’t believe that.  
 
That’s kind of part of the show as well. So far there are some really nice dramatic 
performance points from this particular hypnotist.  
 
When I count to three, I’m going to take your name away just for a moment. I’ll 
give you your name back. I’ll give you your name back no problem, but just for a 
moment you’ve forgotten your name. I’m going to give you a new name. Very 
strange. Your name is going to be Aritha T Flopper. 
 
I know, but the thing is if anybody makes fun of your name, you get rather upset 
about it because after all that’s your name - Aritha T Flopper. Do you understand? 
Nod your head. Excellent.  
 
When I open your eyes I’m going to ask you your name. Your name is Aritha T 
Flopper. If anybody laughs at your name, you get a little upset. Not violent. You’re 
not going to say anything nasty to them, but it’s a rather weird thing because 
after all that’s your name. It’s been your name for generations.  
 
Okay one, two, three, open your eyes. Excellent. Could you just ask her, her name? 
 
What’s your name? 
 
Aritha T Flopper 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
147 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Excellent. That’s not very nice. That’s not very nice. Close your eyes. Go ahead and 
sleep. I’m going to take this hand gently now, gently now and I’m going to stick it 
right on your head. That hand is stuck on your head. That hand is stuck on your 
head, and you can’t get that hand off your head no matter how hard you try. 
 
In fact the harder you try, the more relaxed you become and the more difficult it 
becomes to actually get that hand off your head. This hand is actually part of your 
head. It’s an unusual thing. You just happened to be born with that hand stuck on 
your head. That’s just the way it is.  
 
No matter how hard you try, you can’t get that hand off your head. When I count 
to three you’re going to open your eyes and you’re going to go ahead and try to 
pull that hand off your head. One, two, three, open your eyes and get that hand 
off your head. 
 
It’s impossible. It’s part of your head. Go ahead and try harder now. Try hard. Oh, 
there you go. Oh, it sort of came off a little. Okay, close your eyes now and go 
back to sleep. 
 
Let’s jump in here and have a little chat about what just happened here. This is a very 
nice little demonstration here. He’s moved nicely from the name amnesia, changing her 
name, through to a classic phenomenon – sticking the hand to the head – and some 
very nice suggestions around the hand being stuck – there’s your hand. It’s always been 
stuck there and so on.  
 
There’s some very nice language there. He opens her eyes and asks her to try and get 
the hand off her head. There are a couple of things that you will have noticed here. First 
of all initially it starts to work. She smiles. She can’t get the hand off, and as he’s sort of 
bugging her – take your hand off your head, try to get your hand off your head – 
eventually her fingers start prying off, and then the whole hand comes off.  
 
I want you to notice that sequence. First of all, it’s stuck. Then her fingers come off and 
then the whole hand comes off, and she looks at him like oh it didn’t work out.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
148 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
What’s going on here? In part it could be the suggestion because he said you’re going to 
open your eyes, and you’re going to take your hand off your head, which already implies 
some degree of success there. 
 
He could go on and say something like you’re going to open your eyes and really try 
hard to take that hand off your head, but you’ll fail; or try in vain to take that hand off 
your head because the hand is stuck there. 
 
The next thing that you want to do is as he’s doing that, as she’s lifting the hand off her 
head, pause her actual attempts. So rather than her continuing to try, pause the 
attempts and say what’s going on? Does your hand normally get stuck like that? No. Can 
you move it? No. Are you sure? Yes. Well, try again.  
 
Now that little moment of her creating a belief around being stuck makes it more likely 
that it gets even further stuck. Then you pause again before she tries too hard and say 
what’s happening? Well, I can’t lift my hand. Does that normally happen? No. That’s 
really strange, isn’t it? Yes. Well, try really hard. You probably weren’t trying hard 
enough yet. Try it really hard and see if it gets stuck even more. 
 
Or the alternative is you can actually suggest that harder you try the more it gets stuck, 
so as she’s trying it – that’s right, try harder and it gets even further stuck, that’s it, the 
more you try the harder it gets stuck, the more you try the more it gets stuck, feel that 
hand sticking even more, as you pull your hand locks tightly to your head. 
 
You’re actually running a commentary as she’s trying to lift it that actually glues it even 
further to the head. Notice these are some of the things that the hypnotist wasn’t doing. 
He succeeded initially and then the spell broke and she managed to find again the 
neurology that allowed her to lift the hand, and as she remembered how to lift the hand 
of course got unstuck.  
 
It’s not a really big deal. It’s just some nice performance elements in terms of he 
succeeded, but he pushed too hard too soon, or he allowed things to continue according 
to her schedule a bit too much, rather than reinforcing his suggestions, and it ultimately 
failed, although it did succeed in the beginning.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
149 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
What I also want you to notice though is – and this is a great performance trick.  
 
→ Notice how completely unfazed this hypnotist is even though the hand comes 
unstuck. 
 
It’s doesn’t react. He doesn’t go oh my God I’m such a terrible hypnotist. He just smiles 
and goes that’s it, close your eyes and go into trace. In other words, wash rinse and 
repeat. If something doesn’t go right, clear it out and put them back in trance. That’s the 
washing cycle.  
 
Then you rinse it out. You start with something else to get a success with it, and then if 
you want to repeat that particular phenomenon, you repeat it. If you want to move onto 
something else, then you can move onto something else.  
 
That’s exactly what this hypnotist does. He handles it very nicely, and he had a nice 
partial success. With a little bit of fine-tuning in terms of what happens at the moment 
of testing, he can actually encourage that effect to grow even more powerful so that it’s 
fully stacked no matter how hard she tries to take it off.  
 
Before we move on, I’d like to point out a couple of other things that are going to 
happen in a moment, which are really interesting.  
 
1. The first thing I want you to notice is that although it seems like he failed with 
the hand being stuck, as soon as he reinduces trance, watch what happens to 
that hand.  
 
She drops it down by the side of her body, which would be normal if you think about it. 
If you have your hand on your head and you take it off, do you put it back on your head 
again afterwards? No, you let it drop to the side of your body. Yet this girl doesn’t do 
that. As soon as trance is re-induced – in other words as soon as that conscious thought 
process is bypassed – the original suggestion takes effect again. 
 
The hand goes right back to the head and remains stuck there. She’s not aware it’s stuck 
because she still thinks consciously that it’s failed. Yet unconsciously she’s still 
responding to the suggestion. All he needs to do is to create that split more harshly, so 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
150 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
more dramatically split the conscious and the unconscious, for her to have no control 
over that arm.  
 
It’s already happening, and it’s come right back to that happening, as soon as she’s 
distracted from the arm, going back into the trance again.  
 
2. The next thing that’s interesting here is this hypnotist is now going into the 
hypnotic gift. He’s finishing up a show with a nice hypnotic gift. This is a really 
nice way of distracting the audience as well as the subject from what’s 
happened.  
 
Remember, people remember most the beginning of something and the end of 
something. By ending with a nice dramatic powerful feel-good gift, she remembers how 
good it felt being in hypnosis, and even the minor blip of the hand popping off of her 
head, she may even forget that. She may actually have complete amnesia of that later 
on because he’s given her something else to focus on, which is the hypnotic gift. 
 
Of course the fact that it already worked a second time without even having to suggest 
it is just going to add even more credence to it, at least at the unconscious level. All in all 
this is a really nice performance.  
 
Watch those things happening. As he re-induces trance, watch the hand getting stuck 
back to the head again and watch him give her a nice hypnotic gift, distracting her 
attention from the semi failure that he had before, so that he can still finish he show off 
on a nice dramatic high note, rather than slinking away with his tail between his legs and 
people thinking that it didn’t quite work out. 
 
What they’ll remember are the things that did work out. It’s just part of human nature. 
If you are a good performer like this person is, you take everything that happens in your 
stride.  
 
 
 I think you’ve had enough. You’ve been an excellent subject, so I want to give you 
a gift. I’m going to give you a gift from your mind to yourself, okay? In a moment 
I’m going to get you out of this state, but before I do I want to give you something 
very nice that’s coming from you towards yourself, all right? 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
151 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
First of all I’m going to count to three, and your arm’s going to drop off your head 
and you’re just going to relax. One, two, three, get it off your head and let it drop 
down and just relax. 
 
I want you to think of a time when you’ve been incredibly successful, when you 
had an incredibly positive experience, when life was really good, when you 
achieved everything you wanted to achieve.  
 
When you have a picture of that, when you can see it, when you can hear it, when 
you can feel it, I want you to nod your head for me. A time when you had an 
incredible positive experience, when life was good, everything was going your 
way, it was a wonderful experience. Go ahead. Do you have it in your mind? 
Excellent. 
 
I want you to take your thumb and touch it to your little finger. Touch your left 
thumb to your little finger. Now I want you to think of that incredibly wonderful 
experience you had. See it. Step into it. When you were successful and powerful 
and achieved everything you ever wanted to achieve. 
 
From this moment forward whenever you touch that thumb to your little finger, 
that feeling is going to come back to you. You’re going to have a little smile on 
your face, and you’re going to know whatever challenges you face in life, 
whatever obstacles you face, all you need to do is touch those fingers and you’re 
going to get an incredibly positive feeling. Nod your head if that’s on board with 
you. Excellent. 
 
Let your fingers go now. I’m going to count you out of this. You’ve been a 
wonderful subject. You’ve been a wonderful person basically. We’re going to 
count from one to five. When I get to the number five, you’re going to be fully 
awake and alert, no longer hypnotized, back to normal in every way. 
 
When I say the number one, your less relaxed now. When I say the number two, 
you can feel the energy coming into your toes and into your hands. At number 
three, I want you to fill that chest up with life giving oxygen. 
 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
152 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Demonstration #4 
 
Do you want to try this?  
 
I’d love to. 
 
Nathan, Stephanie and Ethan. Great. Have you guys ever been hypnotized before? 
Well, really, it’s just about the power of the mind and the power of concentration, 
really just following my instructions, and everything is completely safe. I wouldn’t 
do anything to you guys that I wouldn’t do to my own mother, okay? So you’re 
absolutely safe. 
 
Now could you just take your glasses and put them in your purse there? So the 
first thing we’re going to do is warm up your hypnosis muscles, okay?  
 
We’re into the next demonstration – demonstration number four. This is an interesting 
one. This is on the streets of Vegas. I believe from the background that it must be right 
outside the Venetian Hotel. Of the three volunteers, one is actually a student from the 
course. It’s the person in the right-hand corner. 
 
The other two, the gentleman and lady are just complete strangers off the streets. Some 
of the nice things that the hypnotist is doing here are: 
 
1. He’s giving them a nice little pre-talk. 
 
He’s saying it’s going to be safe. We won’t do anything crazy. He’s basically allaying their 
fears to some extent. He’s got a nice performance personality. He’s nice and relaxed. 
He’s showing how much fun this is going to be.  
 
2. The other think I really like about he’s doing is he starts to take control and gets 
a little bit of compliance from them.  
 
He asked the lady to take her glasses off and put them in her purse. In part, it’s part of 
the show so that he can actually see her reactions and other people can see her 
reactions too, so that she’s less inhibited by it, but also it shows a little bit of 
compliance. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
153 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
In other words she’s showing that she’s willing to respond to his requests, and if she’s 
willing to respond to his requests easily enough, that can be converted into hypnotic 
suggestions relatively straightforwardly.  
 
The only thing that he can do to improve this whole segment is if you’ll notice the 
gentleman also has a pair of sunglasses, but they’re on the back of his head reversed 
away. It would be very useful for him if he spots that to ask the gentleman to also take 
his glasses off and put them somewhere safe.  
 
This is for two reasons: 
 
1. Just like with the lady, some compliance testing is going on there. 
 
2. If he takes the glasses off, then he’s less likely to think about keeping them 
safe. 
 
If they’re on the back of his head and he asks him to do something a little bit more 
whacky or just to do an instant induction where the head gets pulled forward or 
anything like that, there’s going to be a part of his mind that’s concerned about the 
safety of his glasses.  
 
If they’re expensive glasses especially, he doesn’t want to necessarily have them broken. 
By asking him to remove those glasses, he gets a two for one. He’s going to get 
compliance, plus he’s ensuring that all of his attention is on the performance and none 
of it is on the concern for the wellbeing of his glasses. 
 
Then he’s also going to prepare them for the actual induction process itself. It’s a nice 
little pre-frame. This is fun. We’ll do some exercises to see how you can get along with 
it. Again, it’s a very nice little pre-frame. It sets up the whole context of the show.  
 
Just rub your hands like this together, nice and fast. Now feel the warmth, all 
right? Now clasp them together like this, nice and tight. Nice and tight just like 
that, and make a steeple like that. Like this, nice and tight… 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
154 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Let’s jump in here again and have a look at some of the stuff that’s going on. I’m actually 
a little less interested right now in terms of what the hypnotist is doing because the 
routine is really straightforward. It’s the finger vise. You’ve seen it dozens of times by 
now. It’s really not a big deal anymore. 
 
→ What I want you to notice is the gathering crowd in front of him.  
 
We had about three or four or maybe five people him watching, and then in the last 
couple of seconds we’ve had one gentleman in the grey or brown shirt turning up, and 
then suddenly another gentleman in a white T-shirt comes up and just casually pauses 
and starts watching. 
 
This is exactly what happens in a crowd. As soon as you’re in a crowded place and start 
doing street hypnosis, people will begin to gather. As you become better as a hypnotist, 
as your performance skills grow, you’ll be able to pay more attention to your whole 
environment and not just the people in front of you. Doing something as simple as the 
finger vise experiment is so straightforward that you really don’t have to pay that much 
attention to it.  
 
The language will be smooth, and you’ll kind of check that everyone is doing the right 
things. That means some of your attention will be free to look around you at precisely 
this kind of dynamic. You see, this gentleman will be here for a while and chances are 
he’ll move on again in a few moments’ time unless the hypnotist does something to 
bring him back into the picture. 
 
He’s basically going to smile and nod, maybe a wave over, some form of 
acknowledgment that it’s okay for him to stop and watch the show for a while, that he’s 
not going to bite, he’s not going to ask for money, he’s not going to be roped into 
something difficult and he’s not going to be chased away. He’s allowed to stay and he’s 
allowed to watch and to have a good time with this. 
 
Watch that happening, especially in the place where the people are right now. There’s 
going to be a lot of interest. Some people will just glance at them as they walk past, and 
others will stop for a moment and then walk past. See if you can spot that happening 
and ask yourself the question, how would I invite those people in so that they would 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
155 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
stop and carry on watching the performance so that I can start building a bigger and 
bigger crowd around myself? 
 
… about an inch apart. Focus on the gap because in a moment they’re going to 
touch. Your fingers are going to touch just like magnets bringing them together 
using just the power of your imagination. That’s right. They’re millimeters away 
and then sleep. Relax. Perfect. 
 
Touch and then relax. Don’t resist and sleep. Relax all the way down. Just relax all 
the way down. Don’t resist it. Just allow the magnets to bring them together. 
You’re millimeters away, and when they touch just close your eyes and relax. 
Okay. That’s right. Just relax just all the way down. It’s really easy stuff.  
 
Okay one, two, wide-awake, wide-awake. One, two, wide-awake, wide-awake. 
That just tells me that you have the power to concentrate. It’s really easy, right? 
Let’s try another thing, all right? Just look at your hand here, right there. Just 
focus on the lines on the hand. Just focus on a spot and as the hand moves closer 
to your face, you’ll notice that it changes the focus in your eyes. 
 
When you’re aware of your eyes, just close your eyes. Just all the way down. 
That’s it, all the way down, deeper and deeper and deeper and deeper and 
deeper. The deeper you go the better you feel. The better you feel the deeper you 
go all the way down. 
 
You can hear noises outside. The noises are just going to make you more and 
more and more relaxed all the way down. I’m going to leave you here on your 
balance, and the more you feel the balance the deeper you’ll go. Nod your head if 
you understand me. Okay, just stay right there. 
 
I want to jump in here again and point out a couple of performance elements. As we 
discussed earlier on, you may notice in the background there are a couple of people – 
the lady in the grey T-shirt and the gentleman standing next to her – who just casually 
walk past and stop to watch the show. 
 
Again this would be an ideal time to invite them in to get closer, to listen in and be more 
of a part of the show so that more and more people are willing to stop and do the same 
thing.  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
156 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
The next thing I want to point out in terms of performance is the hypnotist is doing a 
really good job putting the lady into hypnosis again. There’s a second kind of induction 
going on right now. Again you know this one already, so no point spending time on that. 
 
What I do want to point out though is watch her friend – the gentleman standing right 
next to her. I don’t know if it’s a boyfriend, her husband or just a friend. Initially he 
starts watching her, which is great. After a while because the hypnotist ignored him, he 
kind of gets bored and goes off into his own little headspace. This is a great point at 
which the hypnotist can do something.  
 
If you know that you’re spending more time with one person – in this case it’s this lady – 
turn to the other subjects and say watch her responses, see how well she does, watch 
this carefully. Do your induction with it, and then keep going back every few seconds to 
the other people and saying, that’s right, watch how well she’s doing.  
 
Then when she goes into trance, you can go back and say now she’s feeling fantastic, 
look how good she’s feeling, look how relaxed she is, look how well she’s doing this. 
Then go back to the lady again. 
 
This does things on several levels: 
 
1. On the first level, the lady who you’re working with will be hearing everything 
you say to the other people, and realizing that she’s on the spot now is going to 
deepen her response because she’s now aware of being more and more under 
scrutiny, so she wants to do well. 
 
It’s a motivation piece there. She’s also hearing what he’s saying. Look how relaxed she 
is. That’s actually an indirect suggestion to become more relaxed. She’ll hear it and she’ll 
go yes I am relaxed. Maybe if I relax even more, I’ll get more praise. 
 
That’s kind of the background thinking that’s going on, and that’s going to basically 
reinforce what’s going on with her too. Meanwhile the other two volunteers who are 
watching this could very well go into a trance themselves while watching her go into a 
trance. It’s a natural reaction.  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
157 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
2. Typically you’ll choose your best volunteer first, put them into a deep trance, 
whilst getting the other volunteers to watch how well she’s doing, and that will 
educate them and prime them in terms of what is expected, so that when you go 
over to them, they’ll now give you a better response as well. 
 
Not only have you stopped them from being bored and drifting off – which means you 
may have to do a little bit more work to get them back on track later on – but you’ve 
also prepared them to respond to you even better as soon as you can have the time to 
pay attention to them, and that way you achieve many goals with exactly the same 
sequence of actions.  
 
Okay, we’re going to do the same thing. Can I borrow your hand for a second? 
Great. Just look at the lines on your hand. Just pick a spot and as the hand goes 
closer to your face like that, notice that it changes the focus in your eyes. When 
you’re aware of your eyes, just close your eyes and sleep all the way down, deeper 
and deeper and deeper, deeper and deeper and deeper down. 
 
The deeper you go the better you feel. The better you feel the deeper you go into 
a wonderful state of relaxation. Now feel your balance. The more you feel your 
balance the deeper you go. The more you feel your balance the deeper you go. 
Nod your head if you understand me. All right, just stay right there. 
 
Now sleep. All the way down deeper and deeper, deeper and deeper, all the way 
down, deeper and deeper and deeper and deeper. The deeper you go the better 
you feel. All the way down to a wonderful state of relaxation. Perfect. Stay right 
there. Nod your head if you understand. Just stay right there. Perfect. 
 
All right, Stephanie, now what we’re going to do is just offer you a little gift, 
okay? Now just find a balance point, all right? Just find a balance point. Perfect. 
Just right there. Perfect. Awesome. Just stay right there.  
 
Nathan, we’re just going to do the same thing. Just find a balance point. Just close 
your eyes. Just close your eyes deeper and deeper. That’s right. Very good, just 
allow the hand to just float in the air. Perfect. Awesome.  Nathan, the same thing, 
just find your balance point. Perfect. Awesome. 
 
Now all of you… 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
158 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
This is a really nice point at which to jump in again and point some things out. So far this 
hypnotist has done some very simple things. He’s done a simple demonstration – the 
finger magnets. He’s done a simple instant induction and look at what a crowd he’s 
already gathering.  
 
1. The secret to this of course is he’s in a very open plaza with a lot of traffic 
coming through.  
 
This is outside the Venetian Hotel, and so there are a lot of people going to and fro, and 
all of them are kind of curious as to what’s going on here. He’s picked a phenomenal 
location to do this stuff in, which is why a lot of people are gathering. 
 
2. One of the other secrets is the more people that gather, the more people that 
will gather. 
 
Notice how he started off with three or four people. That turned into five or six people, 
and that turned into about 10 people, and now he might have as many as 20 or 30 
people in a circle around him. 
 
This hypnotist is not doing a huge amount in terms of dramatic effects. He’s not doing 
any hand sticking. He’s not doing any name amnesia. He’s not doing any funny reactions 
or anything like that. He’s only done some very simple stuff – finger magnets so far, an 
instant induction and now he’s done a bit of arm catalepsy. 
 
However, everyone here is in a classic hypnotic pose. They’re standing up straight, head 
slightly bowed and they’ve got an arm in a funny position. Because of this, there is a 
telegraphing going on to the rest of the world saying something unusual is happening 
here, and for those who understand that sort of thing this is probably hypnotic, so 
people’s curiosity is already there. 
 
What this hypnotist is doing very nicely right now is because he’s working with all three 
people in the group, and they all have their hands up in the right place, he’s giving them 
all a hypnotic gift, but now he’s starting to project it more.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
159 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
He’s making sure that the circle of people watching can hear as well. This is much more 
of a show right now even though what he’s doing is maybe less dramatic than a lot of 
the other pieces you may have seen on some of the other demonstrations.  
 
It’s more powerful right now because he’s got a bigger crowd and because he’s talking 
to the crowd. By projecting his voice, they get to be part of what’s going on.  
 
→ The only thing he could do to improve this even further is to actually take a few 
moments right now as they’re nicely in trance and turn to the crowd and 
address them. 
 
Maybe he could give them a mini lecture about hypnosis and say we’re about to give 
them this wonderful gift. They’ve been great demonstration subjects and I want to give 
them something to take home, so come in close so that you can hear the hypnotic gift 
I’m about to give them. They will love it and I’m sure you’ll love it too. Now make sure 
to give them a nice round of applause when we’re all done. 
 
All this would set him up really nicely so that at the end of the whole sequence when 
he’s giving them the gift, he can finish with a nice big finale with a big cheering round of 
applause from everyone around him. 
 
He’s doing a great job so far. He’s got a great crowd building up, and if he just pays more 
attention to the crowd, not only can he get more of a crowd, but this crowd would be 
much more responsive and with minimal effort, with minimal effects he can have a very 
dramatic response.  
 
He could have a very engaging interaction because the response and the drama come 
from the people involved – the subjects and the people watching the subjects doing it. It 
doesn’t come from doing crazy effects.  
 
… pick a time in your life that you had an incredible memory, something that you 
made you feel warm and fuzzy inside, and nod your head when you have the 
memory for me. Very good.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
160 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Now would you like that memory to increase? Would you like that? Very good. Do 
you want to feel better, lock it into your memory so that you can bring that 
memory any time you want and feel incredible any time you want? 
 
What we’re going to do is just notice that your right hand will begin to float up 
just magically as that memory intensifies. As that memory intensifies, allow that 
right hand to float up, and notice that the higher it floats up, the more the 
memory intensifies, feeling better and better and better and better.  
 
Just allow that right hand to float up in the air just magically. You can imagine 
there’s a balloon tied to it, a helium balloon. Just allow that – that’s right, 
Nathan, you’re doing great. Allow that right hand to rise up in the air only as 
quickly though as you want to feel incredible. 
 
If you want to feel totally incredible, it will feel better and better – that’s right, 
Stephanie. Awesome. The higher it goes the better you will feel. The higher it goes 
– way to go, Nathan. Keep going. The higher that hand goes the better you will 
feel. 
 
Stephanie, awesome. It’s going higher and higher. Perfect. Nathan, just allow that 
hand – don’t resist it. Just allow it to start floating, and the higher your hand will 
go the better you’ll feel. Awesome. 
 
Stephanie, you’re doing amazing. It’s higher and higher and higher. Let it go as 
high as it can. Nathan, good job. When it can get as high as it can you’re going to 
maximize the feeling of that happiness, that joy within and you’re going to be 
able to take that joy with you anytime that you want. 
 
Nathan, good job. Oh my God. Stephanie, a little higher. Intensify it. Higher and 
higher and higher. Feel that helium balloon really pulling up, okay? Higher and 
higher and higher and higher. That a boy. Good job, Nathan.  
 
Now when it’s at its highest, when it’s at its highest, intensify it by 10 times, by 
100 times and you’ll begin to notice that you start smiling because the feeling will 
start to spread throughout your whole body. 
 
That’s right, Nathan. It’s started spreading throughout your whole body. Feel it in 
your heart right there, all right? Let’s see that smile on your face. There you go. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
161 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Stephanie, you too. The more you intensify it – there you go. Get that smile going. 
That’s right.  
 
The higher it goes; actually you’re going to start feeling funny inside like you want 
to laugh for some reason, right Nathan? That’s right. You want to start laughing. 
Right Nathan? You want to start laughing, don’t you? That’s right. Stephanie, it’s 
incredibly funny, isn’t it?  
 
And all of the sudden you’re going to start laughing uncontrollable. The higher 
that arm goes, the more you’re going to start laughing uncontrollable. That’s 
right. It’s kind of crazy, isn’t it? Now lock that feeling inside.  
 
Let’s jump in here once again and just point out some nice things this hypnotist is doing. 
We’ve already talked a lot about the crowd control, the crowd dynamics and how to 
really make this an interesting show.  
 
Remember, whilst he’s not really doing all that much – he’s done the finger vise, an 
instant induction, a hand catalepsy, and now he’s doing an arm levitation coupled with 
some nice emotional stuff, a hypnotic gift – he is really milking every moment for all it’s 
worth.  
 
1. He’s doing a great show with just some simple tools.  
 
This is important for you to realize, especially when you start doing street hypnosis. 
Don’t be concerned about whether or not you can make yourself invisible, or whether 
or not you can make someone chase invisible pixies around the forest.  
 
Just make sure you do some simple bits really fully and dramatically like this guy’s doing 
here, and you’ll have a great show. People will love you for it, and you will really 
entertain them whilst doing something really valuable.  
 
The next thing to point out here is whilst this hypnotist is sticking to some really solid 
basics and doing a great job of milking them he’s also going through the very transition 
that we’re encouraging you to go through in terms of your street hypnosis. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
162 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Remember, you begin with physical phenomena – they’re easy to get. You move to 
emotional phenomena and finally you get onto mental phenomena. At that point you 
have all three gates open where you can pretty much experiment with anything you 
want to. 
 
Even though he’s doing a simple show, he’s done a couple of physical phenomena to 
warm everyone up, he’s now moving into some emotional phenomena. He’s getting 
them to start laughing.  
 
Laughter in general is a very good one. It makes everyone glow and bask in happiness. It 
makes everyone feel sad – although that’s not necessarily as wonderful a gift.  
 
2. The point is that laughter is good because it gets the crowd going. 
 
You may remember being a child or even as an adult when a friend or a sibling may have 
had a giggling fit and you don’t know why they’re laughing, but you can’t help but to 
end up laughing right along with them. It’s kind of like when people are yawning and 
you end up yawning along with them too. 
 
If you can get your subjects to laugh – actually all you need to do is get one subject to 
laugh – then it makes it easier for the next subject to laugh as well because of that 
engaging approach, the way that laughter rubs off on other people, and then you can 
get the whole audience to laugh. The audience will appreciate it and enjoy it too. 
 
Once again simple tools like laughter, arm levitation, hand catalepsy, an instant 
induction, a finger vise or magnetic fingers as a demonstration. Really simple tools put 
together can really be milked and made into a really nice rewarding show, and this is a 
great example of that.  
 
As a final note, notice that as we play the tape again and you see the finishing part of 
this particular demonstration, how the hypnotist again gets the whole crowd involved 
with a round of applause.  
 
There’s a nice bit of applause, there’s a nice general feel-good feeling and everyone’s 
going to walk away from that having the sense that they’ve just witnessed something 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
163 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
interesting, something worthwhile and something they’ll remember and tell their 
friends about, whilst of course the volunteers – the subjects in this case – have gotten a 
tremendous gift out of it too. 
 
Relax. Lock it in, lock it in, lock it in. Relax all the way down, all the way down. 
Keep your eyes closed all the way down. Just remember that moment, that 
experience that you had today, locking that feeling in, feeling incredible inside. 
The power of the mind, Stephanie – good job. 
 
One, two, wide-awake. One, two, wide-awake. One, two, wide-awake, all the way 
back. Give them a round of applause, everyone. Any time you want to feel that 
moment again – just try it now. Just raise your hand up. Can you feel it? You try it. 
So any time you want to feel incredible – you just can’t help it, right? That’s the 
power of the mind. Anyway, thanks. Good job. 
 
 
 
 
Bonus DVD #4 –Hypnosis Demonstrations With 
Strangers On The Streets Of Las Vegas – With 
Commentary – Part Two 
 
 
Demonstration #5 
 
As soon as they touch, you’re going to feel yourself close your eyes. You’re 
getting closer, getting closer, getting closer and sleep. Nice and relaxed. There 
you go. Nice and relaxed. Does that feel good? That’s right, it does feel good.  
 
All right, in the same way I’m going to count from to three and you’re back into 
normal awareness. One, two and three wide awake. There we go. Feels pretty 
good right? All right, now we’re going to do the big one. Okay, are you right-
handed or left-handed? 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
164 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
I’m right-handed. 
 
All right, let me steal your left hand for a moment then. What I want you to do is 
look at the palm of your hand right here. Look at the lines. Now focus on one spot 
and one spot only. As that hand gets closer, notice your eyes start to change, your 
focus starts to change. As soon as you become aware of your eyes, allow them to 
close and sleep. Nice and relaxed.  
 
There you go, down, down, down. Nice and relaxed. The deeper you go the better 
it feels. The better it feels the easier it is to relax. That’s right, deep and relaxed, 
deep and relaxed. Excellent. Okay. 
 
We’re now onto the fifth demonstration on the streets of Vegas. This is a very nice little 
piece here, and I want to draw out a couple of the points that we’ve seen so far. Of 
course we missed the introduction piece because the camera wasn’t ready yet, so we’re 
into the first portion of the set, but we’re not quite all the way through. 
 
He’s probably done the first two set pieces. I’m guessing he’s done the finger vise and 
magnetic hands, and now he just did his induction. What I want to point out in terms of 
the induction is how quick and simple it was.  
 
There was no fuss, no frills. There’s no lengthy 10-minute deepener or anything like 
that. He just got in there, hand up. It’s a nice dramatic way of doing it. It’s something 
visual for people to see, and the time she has her eyes closed is literally 30 seconds, a 
minute at most, just enough to get her nice and comfortable. 
 
→ Notice how his voice is evenly paced. It’s comfortable. It’s relaxed. He’s not 
pushing his voice to go a million miles an hour, and yet he still gets relaxation 
and he gets it all done in a very short period of time.  
 
This is important because, remember, you are performing to an audience. They can’t 
hear the induction right now, so if all they can see is a man standing in front of a woman 
who’s got her head bowed and he’s just talking to her for 10 minutes, and you can’t 
hear a word of what’s going on, it’s not very entertaining for the audience. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
165 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Right now they’re giving him a bit of leeway because it’s dramatic. They’ve seen the 
hand up, they’ve seen the eyes closed and they’ve seen the head drop forward, so he’s 
got a bit of leeway to talk to her for another 30 seconds or a minute or so to build a bit 
more drama, and now he’s going to do something so that the audience still gets 
engaged and goes wow what’s going to happen next? 
 
Now what I’m going to do is I’m going to take your hand again. That’s right; just 
take your hand again. There it is. There it is. Okay, that’s right. It’s going to want 
to stay right there. 
 
In a moment you’re going to notice that hand is going to want to lift all by itself, 
like maybe it’s got a string tied around it with a helium balloon pulling up on it. 
The higher it goes, the funnier you’re going to think that is because it is pretty 
funny when things do things all by themselves. That’s right you feel it lifting just 
slightly. 
 
Now you’ve got like two helium balloons pulling on it even harder, and the higher 
it goes the funnier it gets, and the funnier it gets the higher it’s going to want to 
rise. That’s right.  
 
I want to jump in now and point out some interesting things here. He’s put the lady in 
trance pretty nicely. He put a quick induction, a quick deepener in there so that people 
don’t get too bored, and now he’s right back into something visually demonstrative so 
that the crowd can see something. 
 
He’s opted for a hand catalepsy, so he just literally picked the hand up and made it 
cataleptic. It’s a very nice simple quick thing to do. He’s moving very quickly. He’s 
transitioning from physical phenomena to mental phenomena. Right now he’s making 
her feel good and suggesting something funny. He’s trying to get laughter out of her, 
which of course is going to include the audience.  
 
Something emotional like that, any emotional response that you can get out of your 
subjects will be very powerful as far as the audience is concerned. The only points of 
improvement I would have for this hypnotist, something that he’s not doing and that is 
also very common as a mistake that novice hypnotists make, is that he’s only talking to 
his subject.  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
166 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
He’s very close to her. He’s talking directly to her. He’s got some therapeutic 
background obviously, which is great for the subject, but he’s not standing back and 
talking to the crowd. 
 
He can make the exact same suggestions.  
 
→ All he’s needs to do is take a half a step back, open his posture up so that he’s 
facing the audience more, and then talk in a much louder voice so that the 
audience and the subject can hear what he’s saying. 
 
That way they can feel the thrill of anticipation and wonder is this lady really going to 
laugh? Is she going to do what he suggests? Then when she starts laughing, they go oh 
my God I can’t believe it. He actually made her do it. It actually happened. That’s much 
more dramatic for them, it’s much more engaging for them and it still has the same 
impact on the subject because they’re still hearing it, and they still know the hypnotist is 
right there with them.  
 
Aside from that, this is a great performance so far. 
 
You feel that going up? Yes, it’s pretty funny, isn’t it? Yeah, the higher it goes the 
funnier it gets. The funnier it gets the higher it wants to raise all by itself. Now 
we’re going to tie four big balloons on there. Oh, it’s pulling really hard. You can’t 
even stop it now. The higher it goes, the funnier it gets. That’s right. Feel the 
giggle. 
 
As you’re laughing, you remember times when you were with your friends and 
things were absolutely hilarious, right? That’s right. That’s right. You remember 
that. The more your hand raises up the funnier it seems. The funnier it seems the 
more it raises up. That’s right. It’s going up. Oh yeah, it’s pretty funny. Don’t hold 
back. You know it’s funny. You know it’s funny and you’ve got to let it out. That’s 
right. That’s right. 
 
You know what? Any time you want to bring that feeling back, all you’ve got to do 
is raise your hand right here. Okay, go ahead and relax now.  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
167 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Let’s jump in here again and have a look at something he’s doing here that is very nice. 
Notice how the arm is starting to lift. He’s suggested arm levitation, but because the 
hypnotist has got a show to put on and he wants to be nice and dramatic, and he wants 
to be able to move onto whatever other ideas he’s got in mind, he’s not happy with the 
rate at which she’s lifting her arm.  
 
What does he do? He gently reaches over and he starts tapping the hand upwards. 
Sometimes it goes up on its own and sometimes he’s helping it lift even further, so he’s 
really speeding things up a bit.  
 
It’s basically a nonverbal suggestion to her that says speed things up a bit, be a little bit 
more dramatic, and do more of this. Rather than having this nice slow steady approach, 
which is perfect for hypnotherapy, he’s speeding it up so that it’s more dramatic for the 
audience to watch. 
 
1. Again this is a good example of a hypnotist who’s not afraid to get in there and 
correct the subject when they’re not giving him as full a response as he wants 
to have.  
 
2. Also note that when he’s talking to the girl about laughing and having a good 
time, he himself puts a bit of a laugh into his own voice. 
 
 
He starts enjoying himself more. He starts laughing, and that little laughter in his voice 
helps her find the emotional laughter inside herself too. Those are two great things that 
he’s doing right now. 
 
Of course it’s very rewarding for the audience because it’s moving along at a nice pace. 
It’s not too slow for them, so it’s less likely they’re going to get bored. There’s constant 
change going along and that makes it more interesting for them.  
 
3. Also notice that at the end of this whole piece – it’s going to end in a couple of 
minutes – that he once again engages the audience and gets them to give a 
round of applause.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
168 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
The audience won’t know when to applaud unless you tell them. He just goes ahead and 
tells them to give her a nice round of applause. Everyone applauds, the lady feels good, 
they feel good and once again it’s a really nice way of wrapping everything up and giving 
a good smooth ending to a nice demonstration.  
 
You’re doing a great job by the way. Fantastic. Okay, I’m going to count from one 
to five. When I get to five you’re going to be normally awake and alert, but when I 
get to three you’re going to feel that laugh come back. When that laugh comes 
back up, what that is, is all that stress and tension that you had with you that you 
didn’t know you had with you letting out. You’re going to let go of all that 
because you’re in Vegas baby. You’re here to have a good time, right?  
 
Yeah. 
 
Excellent. Okay one, getting a little more awake; two, deep breath, filling yourself 
with energy; three, there’s that little giggle letting the stress out. That’s right. 
Four, more and more awake; and five, wide awake. You did an excellent job. 
Thank you so much.  
 
Thank you. 
 
Give her a big round of applause. Excellent. Excellent. 
 
 
Demonstration #6 
 
This is the sixth demonstration. This is a very short piece. We only really caught the end 
of this particular demo. The things I want to point out here are: 
 
1. How simple things can be very enjoyable. 
 
Look more at the crowd than the actual hypnotist. What she’s doing is very simple. It’s 
the normal induction that you’ve seen a few times already, and a little hypnotic gift at 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
169 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
the end about feeling good, so nothing really out of the ordinary. You’ve seen this 
happening a few times by now. 
 
2. What I want you to notice is the crowd that she’s built up.  
 
She’s got literally dozens of people hanging around videotaping, watching and getting 
really excited. How did this occur? 
 
In part it has to do with where she is. She’s located in an area in downtown Las Vegas 
where there are a lot of people going out. They’re getting ready to party, they’re going 
to nightclubs and so on, and she’s caught the right place at the right time to build a 
crowd, which is fantastic.  
 
The next thing she’s doing are some visually demanding pieces – the hand’s up in the 
air, the hand’s moving and people are going to go what the heck is that woman doing 
with her hand just waving around in the air like that? They’re curious about it.  
 
Remember, the more the crowd builds around her, the more other people will stop and 
join that crowd because there is more anonymity and the curiosity is more easily 
satisfied.  
 
3. The one thing this hypnotist isn’t doing yet – and something that I’m going to 
encourage you to do – is she’s not working the crowd. 
 
She’s focusing all her attention on the subject once again, rather than taking time out to 
let the crowd do something – maybe bringing the crowd in, let the crowd touch her, 
maybe do something like a stiff arm and seeing if a member of the crowd can actually 
bend it for them, or at least touch it to know what a cataleptic arm feels like. 
 
Having said that, once again you can see with this piece that’s coming up – it’s very 
short, it’s only about a minute or less than that – that with these very simple things like 
a simple induction and a simple hypnotic gift, you can still pull in a huge crowd and 
detain them. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
170 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
People enjoyed this bit, they liked what they saw, they stuck around to watch the whole 
thing and very simple pieces were all that it took. You don’t have to be a phenomenal 
hypnotic genius that does amazing stunts to pull a crowd in.  
 
You’ve just got to have some simple solid pieces, milk them for all they’re worth, really 
make a performance out of it and allow yourself to evolve into the role so that over time 
you do more dramatic and more elaborate pieces, but you don’t have to begin there. 
 
With those thoughts in mind, go ahead and enjoy that video. Look at the crowd and ask 
yourself if you were this hypnotist, at what points would you pause to turn and address 
the crowd, and allow them to take part in the experience too? 
 
Notice a spot on your hand. Just stare at that spot. It seems to jump out at you, 
right? And as it jumps out at you, your hand goes closer and closer to your head, 
closer and closer to your head. It’s just drawing like there’s a string that’s pulling 
it, pulling your hand closer and closer to your head, almost like the magnets 
again, right? 
 
Your fingers are closing. Your fingers, your hands – what are the sensations you’re 
noticing in your hands? Tingly-ness, a little numb? Okay, well, when they touch 
you’re going to close your eyes again and sleep, sleep, sleep. That’s right, just 
sleep.  
 
What I want you to do now is to just remember, just recall a time when you were 
extremely happy, a fun time with your friends, maybe when you had a good 
laugh, when you were doing something when you were really happy, a good time 
in your life that brought lots of joy.  
 
You got that memory now? What I want you to do is feel it flowing, all the fun, all 
the good feelings, all the joy, all the laughter is flowing directly into this hand and 
feel it, the sensation, the tingles and as you feel it, as you clench your fist it goes 
stronger and stronger and stronger, getting stronger and stronger and stronger.  
 
You can feel it. It’s a little bit of a weird feeling. It makes you smile. It almost 
makes you chuckle, right? Do you want to laugh? 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
171 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Yes. 
 
You can laugh. It’s an odd thing, right? Okay, anytime you want to remember this 
good feeling, anytime you need it all you have to do is clench your hand together. 
You can feel it, and it will bring a smile to your face, okay? How about that? 
 
Awesome. 
 
Thank you for your demonstration. 
 
 
Demonstration #7 
 
The higher it gets, the better you feel. As it raises, you feel better and better. Just 
your whole body starts to radiate, feeling good. You even get a smile it’s so good.  
 
You really can’t believe how good this feels, and it’s getting better and more 
exquisite and better over and over. It goes up and up and you’re feeling really 
great, really wonderful. Excellent. Just allow it to come down and continue to feel 
really good.  
 
Let’s just jump in here very quickly. This hypnotist is doing something that you’re 
probably familiar by now. It’s an arm levitation.  
 
1. Notice how he does a nice dramatic arm levitation right up into the air, and he’s 
starting to couple that with some emotional responses, so it’s a good transition 
from physical to emotional responses. 
 
Whilst he’s doing this, you’ll notice that the crowd is actually quite engaged. There are a 
few people in the background starting to watch him because it’s unusual. It’s physically 
dramatic. There’s a hand up in the air. It’s a very visual piece right now. Of course 
behind the camera there’s a whole bunch of other people watching too. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
172 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
After this piece, you’ll notice that as we start the tape rolling again in a bit, he goes into 
a nice hypnotic gift. The only problem with the hypnotic gift right now is that it doesn’t 
seem very dramatic. He’s just holding her hand for a while and then he drops it for a 
while. It’s very difficult to tell what’s going on there just from a visual sense. 
 
2. What he could do as a hypnotist to improve this bit when he’s doing the gift is 
to actually address the audience. 
 
Now I’m going to give her a hypnotic gift. You’ve been a wonderful subject. Maybe he 
could get some applause saying didn’t she do well? Give her a nice round of applause. 
Now I think she deserves a gift. I’m going to make her feel fantastic. Are you ready to 
feel fantastic? Great, I’m going to hold your hand here – and all the time playing 
between talking to the subject and talking to the audience, talking to the subject and 
talking to the audience in order to keep everyone engaged.  
 
Remember the conversation is three ways – between you, the subject and the audience 
– and that flow has to continue. Otherwise your performance becomes stale and dull, 
and people will lose interest and move on. 
 
Watch as that happens. He gives her a really nice gift, but he could have done a better 
job in terms of addressing the audience to make them involved as well. As hypnosis 
goes, it’s great. As a performance goes, I would encourage you to take that extra step 
when you’re in his shoes. 
 
Now what I’m going to do right now is you’re going to hold your hand up and just 
relax, totally and completely. I’m going to let go of it. Now I know you’ve had 
really experiences in your life and you’ve had many good experiences. Now I’d like 
you to choose one in particular, a really good experience, one that you would love 
to have over and over and over again, the feelings in that experience.  
 
Have you got one? Excellent. Okay. What I want you to do is when I drop this, 
you’re going to really experience that. Ready one, two, three and go. We’ll do it 
again and even more so. Ten more times as powerful. Ready one, two, and three 
and relax. Excellent. We’ll do it one more time. Really feel that, and this is going 
to be 100 times. One, two, three – 100 times. Excellent. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
173 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Now what I want you to do is lift your hand up right like that, and now drop it and 
just let those feelings come right all the way back. How’s that going? Does that 
feel good? Excellent. Do it one more time. Do it one more time, and drop it and 
just feel great, and excellent. Good, good, good. 
 
Okay, now I’m going to count from one to five. Again, you’ll come up and on five 
your eyes will open you’ll feel great, fantastic. You’ll be ready to have the best 
time of your life tonight. One, two, three, take a deep breath; and four, really feel 
all the people around you; and five, eyes open, alert and ready to go. 
 
How are you doing? 
 
Good. 
 
Excellent. You did a good job. Go ahead and try it. Lift up your hand and drop it. 
How’s that go? Good, excellent, excellent.  
 
Let’s jump in here again and review a little bit of what’s happened here. As far as the gift 
goes, there’s nothing special about that. It is special for her. It’s a great gift to give. It’s 
very competently given. That’s a nice little piece of hypnosis there. 
 
The things I want to point out here in terms of the performance are: 
 
1. Notice the lady’s face light up when she comes out of trance. 
 
This is a very common thing, especially right after someone’s been given a gift. The 
actual portion where someone’s being given the gift isn’t very dramatic because usually 
those emotions are internalized.  
 
Unless you do some of the more dramatic points like you saw in some of the earlier 
demonstrations, especially the first demo here in Vegas where you train them to be 
more visually responsive in terms of an internal response, most hypnotic subjects will 
have a strong emotion but a blank face because it’s all felt internally.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
174 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Now she’s coming out, she’s coming back into social mode, which means her face will 
start expressing what she’s feeling, and that’s why she started beaming, which is really 
charming. 
 
The reason this is really nice to see is because you’ll notice that he gets a spontaneous 
smashing applause from the crowd. Why it is so small? The hypnotist has ignored the 
crowd up to this point. He hasn’t really engaged them, so they don’t know if they’re 
welcome or not welcome, or if they’re allowed to engage or not allowed to engage, so 
the more bold members of the crowd are starting to applaud to show their appreciation 
for the piece they’ve just witnessed. 
 
Because he’s made her feel good and the fact that he’s impressed them with a 
demonstration of some nice hypnosis, and because they’re charmed by that expression 
that the lady has on her face, they’ll start applauding a little bit but they don’t know 
how far to take it. They don’t know how bold to get with it because they haven’t been 
encouraged. 
 
2. All it would take at this point is for the hypnotist to turn around to the crowd, 
acknowledge them and say thank you.  
 
That was a great response. Didn’t she do well? Come on give her a really good round of 
applause. Show her that you mean it.  
 
That way he’s really amping up the response, the audience gets to have a stronger 
emotion, and that emotion gets transferred onto the lady. The lady herself has her own 
emotions then ratified even further. That pumps her emotions up and everyone has a 
much stronger response.  
 
The other thing he could do there – and you’ll see him doing some of this in a moment – 
is as he’s testing the anchor essentially, the trigger that he’s created so that she can 
enjoy the gift anytime in the future, he can also address the audience so that they can 
understand what’s going on. 
 
He can turn around and just bellow this out so that everyone can hear what he’s saying. 
He can say we’ve just created a hypnotic trigger in this lady, a gift from me to her for 
being such a wonderful subject. Every time she lifts her arm like that drops it, she will 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
175 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
have the most fantastic sensations, which are linked to the best memories of her life. 
Would you like to see her do it? Would you like to experience this for yourself? 
 
Then he can go ahead and do it. Once again milk every piece that you have. What he’s 
doing is good hypnosis, but to be a great performer: 
 
• You’ve got to be able to take some straightforward pieces of hypnosis, some solid 
performances like this one, and really milk it by playing to the crowd. 
 
• Putting some ideas around it. 
 
• Giving a little lecture around it. 
 
• Talking to the lady and the crowd, going back and forth between them and 
building up a bit of banter around it if you can so that the highlights are the 
hypnotic pieces, and they’re all being set up in terms of your interaction with the 
audience and the volunteers. 
 
This is great hypnosis. Watch as he goes through and does a nice solid ending piece in 
terms of testing the trigger, but he doesn’t really engage the audience as much, which 
means it kind of peters out after a little bit. It doesn’t come to this huge emotional 
crescendo, which would otherwise have meant that he could have ended this with a 
nice highlight of emotional responses. 
 
You did a great job. 
 
Thank you. 
 
You’re welcome. 
 
Demonstration #8 
 
Those are your sunglasses, right? Those are nice. I’m Michael. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
176 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
I’m Bianca. 
 
Bianca, that’s a beautiful name. Now if I may ask you to do something for me. I’d 
like you to stick your hands right in front of you. Okay, clap them together and 
lock the fingers tight. That’s perfect. You’re doing this great. 
 
This is really just a test if you can pay attention and follow directions. If you 
would, just squeeze your hands tightly together. Perfect.  
 
This is the next demonstration in sequence. Let’s talk a little bit about the setup he’s had 
here. It’s a very nice setup, very standard. He’s got a little compliance. Please take your 
glasses off and give them to your friends over there. That’s in part so that she can show 
compliance, and it’s also in part for safety – getting the glasses out of the way so that 
they don’t break or anything like that. 
 
3. The next thing he’s doing is he’s making sure that he’s set up the right context.  
 
His first experiment is just to see how well you can concentrate. It’s not a test of my skill 
as a hypnotist. It’s a test of your ability to concentrate. 
 
This is very important because once again it allows him to reframe any possible 
resistance she might have right out of the gate, and it gives her a motivation to prove 
herself to him. She proves herself to him by responding as a hypnotic subject.  
 
4. Next he’s once again very willing to engage with her physically so that when 
she’s not giving a full response. 
 
When her hands aren’t squeezing tightly together, he goes in, holds her hands and gives 
them a nice little squeeze to make sure that they squeeze even harder together.  
 
He’s telling her I expect full responses from you. Please don’t hold back. This way you’ll 
prove to me that you can concentrate and you’ll do very well. Those are the implied 
suggestions that he’s giving her. So far it’s a really nice setup.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
177 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
5. The only thing that he could improve on this though is once again to play to the 
audience.  
 
This girl is there with two of her friends, and there may well be other people walking by 
who would be interested in stopping and watching the show as well. He needs to be 
able to create a little bit of banter with them.  
 
Street hypnosis is very up close and personal. Right now he’s got the rapport with the 
volunteer, he’s got her name – it’s Bianca – but he hasn’t talked to her friends. He hasn’t 
interacted with her friends.  
 
What if he talked to her friends and said, are you ready to see your friend do something 
really crazy? Do you want to see your friend do something really cool? Let’s see how 
well you can impress your friends with this one. We’re going to test your ability to 
concentrate now. 
 
That way he’s going back and forth between the subject and the friends, and that’s 
building up more of the emotional energy and more investment for things to go right.  
As it happens, he’s still got a nice solid show.  
 
It’s just that these are the performance elements that will make it more dramatic and 
actually get better results because there’s more investment, and there’s more 
motivation for the volunteer to succeed too. 
 
And now bend your elbows, so you raise your hands right in front of you, and I 
know you can hear me, so stick your fingers right up like that. Perfect. Make a gap 
about an inch wide because soon your fingers will touch.  
 
In a moment your fingers will touch as you feel like there’s a little magnet, and 
you’re concentrating on that space. Watch your fingers move closer 
automatically, only slowly. You’re doing it perfectly. 
 
You’re feeling what you should be, and that’s good, as you’re doing that, 
watching your fingers moving closer and closer together like I’m winding the 
rubber band tighter and tighter and tighter. Perfect. I’m winding the rubber band.  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
178 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
That’s funny because the more you laugh, the faster your fingers move together 
because it’s quite amusing, and we all like to laugh. Watching your fingers move 
closer and closer together.  
 
She’s doing it really well. Give her a round of applause. She’s doing it perfect. Isn’t 
that cool? That’s right. 
 
I want to jump in here very quickly and just point out some dynamics again. He’s done 
the finger magnets. Again this is old hat. There’s no point in focusing on that. I do want 
to focus on some of the performance elements though.  
 
1. The first thing this hypnotist is doing, which is great, is he’s supplying constant 
reinforcement.  
 
He’s telling the girl that she’s doing great. He’s congratulating her. Everything that 
you’re doing is just right. Your fingers are coming together at exactly that speed. You’re 
feeling exactly the way you should be feeling. 
 
He’s really making it easy for her to succeed. I really like to see that.  
 
2. The next thing that he’s done – and he’s one of the few hypnotists that has 
been doing this in terms of the demos – is he’s remembered to actually pay 
attention to the audience, the other people watching. 
 
He’s turned around and asked the girls while watching their friend do this little street 
hypnosis piece to give her a nice round of applause. This is a great piece. This involves 
the friends and motivates the subject to do even better in order to be able to justify 
even better applause. 
 
3. If I were in his shoes, the only thing he could do to make it a little bit better still 
is to give the same kind of feedback to the audience that he’s giving to the 
actual subject.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
179 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Right now he’s telling the subject you’re doing a good job, that’s right, a little bit more, a 
little faster, excellent, you’re doing great, you’re feeling the right way, you’re moving 
the right away and everything’s working out. 
 
That’s all well and good as far as the subject is concerned, but what about the audience? 
What if he gave the same kind of reinforcement to the audience? When they clap, say 
that’s right, that’s a good clap, show her how much you appreciate what she’s doing and 
give her a really good clap now. 
 
Or when they’re clapping even more say that’s it, even better than that. Put your hearts 
into it because she’s putting everything into it. You’ve got to give your best as well; or 
maybe setting up the clapping or the applause by saying, in a moment you’re going to 
hear some thunderous applause from your friends. The louder they clap the better 
you’ll perform. 
 
That gives the audience another reason to become louder, more enthusiastic and so on. 
Remember, as street hypnotists, as a performer you’re performing to two groups at the 
same time. One is the volunteer – or the volunteers if you’re working with more than 
one person – and the other one is the audience that’s gathering around your volunteer. 
 
You’re playing to two groups at the same time, which means you’ve got to reinforce 
both groups, and both groups have to be educated in terms of you expect of them. Spell 
it out for them and encourage them, and then ratify and acknowledge the fact that 
they’re doing the right things when they are doing the right things. 
 
… because as soon as the fingers touch, your eyes will close. You already tried 
that? That’s good. Watch that. That’s good. That’s good. You’re doing good. You 
know what it feels like. Excellent. See how you can do that? 
 
Actually now this is what hypnosis feels like. You shouldn’t expect to black out. 
Now with your eyes closed, I’m just going to count one, two, three and will say 
wide awake. One, two, three, now wide awake. Open your eyes, relax your fingers 
and your hands. Excellent. 
 
How much fun was that? 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
180 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Let’s jump in here again and have a look at what just happened here. So far he’s done a 
pretty good job, but unfortunately he’s dropped the ball a little bit in the last couple of 
minutes or so. Here’s what’s happened there. 
 
Up until the finger vise and the applause, he did a really nice job, a really solid 
performance. Now a little bit of doubt starts creeping into it.  
 
1. His voice has changed from being a commanding tonality, which is where the 
tonality goes down at the end of a sentence and you make a statement that 
says you will do this, you’ll experience this. Instead he switches tonality to an 
upward inflection, which is known as a question tonality.  
 
You might be doing this? You’ll experience that? In hypnosis it’s okay to experience it 
that way?  
 
What that communicates is uncertainty. By being uncertain, it augments her uncertainty 
about the experience and pulls her out of trance a little bit as well.  
 
The next thing that happens is he is going to end the whole trance experience for a 
moment so that he can reset it for the next step, which is just fine. The problem is that 
he’s neglected the formula, which is tell someone what’s about to happen, tell them 
how to respond when that happens, and then do whatever you said is going to happen 
so that she can respond the way she needs to. 
 
All he said was in a moment, I’ll count from one to three and you’ll come out of 
hypnosis. He hasn’t told her how she’s going to come out of hypnosis. Will her eyes 
open up? Will her hands separate? Will she back in the here and now, and refocus on 
her friends? Will she be feeling refreshed and alert, ready to continue? 
 
2. He hasn’t given her those instructions yet, so when he counts from one to three 
and claps his hands just like he said he would, she doesn’t know how to 
respond.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
181 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Sure, I’m back but am I back with my eyes closed? Are my hands supposed to be open or 
separated? Are they supposed to stay here? 
 
She doesn’t quite know what to do with her reactions because he hasn’t told her yet, 
and that creates a bit of confusion inside her, which he has to fix and he does fix actually 
by giving her suggestions that counterman everything. In other words, that’s it relax 
your hands, open them up, open your eyes and so on. The hypnotist has to do a little bit 
more work because he neglected to set up the emergence instructions or the ex-duction 
in as useful a way as he set up the other pieces that he did beforehand. 
 
I didn’t feel anything. 
 
That’s good because the only difference between that and actual hypnosis is that 
you’re going to be a lot more relaxed. Are you ready? Give her a round of 
applause. She did a really good job.  
 
Let’s jump in here very quickly and have a little chat about the dynamic here. The 
hypnotist is on notice that he’s got a bit of a difficult subject here. The girl’s a little 
embarrassed, she’s a little shy, but she’s also feeling a little awkward. 
 
She said something along the lines of I didn’t feel anything. What is the hypnotist going 
to do with that? At this point he’s trying to say you’re just fine, what you’re doing is 
okay and it’s all fine.  
 
The problem right now is that the hypnotist is trying to persuade the subject that she’s 
doing a good job or that it’s going well. He’s trying to persuade her that everything is 
fine, when there are actually doubts inside her mind.  
 
3. If instead of trying to persuade her, he out-frames it, then he makes his life a lot 
easier.  
 
Remember, he set this exercise up as a concentration exercise, not as a hypnotic 
exercise. He’s not said this is hypnosis. He’s said this is a concentration exercise to see 
how well you can concentrate. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
182 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
By her saying, I didn’t feel anything he can turn around and say well what were you 
expecting to feel? Were you concentrated? Yes. Did you feel the fingers coming 
together? Yes. This is an example of how when you concentrate in the right way, your 
body has physical effects.  
 
Did you experience the physical effects through your concentration? Yes. This tells me 
as a hypnotist that you have the right amount of concentration to do what we need to 
do. The next step will be to test your imagination. Do you have a decent imagination?  
 
Again if she says no, this puts you on notice that you may not want to work with this 
person because she’s being resistant or awkward in some ways. As it happens, most 
people think that they have a decent imagination, so you can work with that quite 
easily. 
 
4. All I want you to notice right now is that this girl is a little bit on the awkward 
side, and you can tell that much of her mindset is stuck on wondering whether 
this is working or not or thinking that nothing dramatic is happening.  
 
As a result, you don’t have 100% of her concentration, which means that doing more 
elaborate pieces with her are more likely to fail at this point because you haven’t got 
her there yet. You’ve got to be able to break her of that by distracting her and so on. 
 
What I would do at this point is to move her again. Move her from the location she’s in 
now to somewhere else. Just say let’s go over here and try something else. I’m going to 
out-frame her objection about hypnosis by saying something along the lines of we 
haven’t started with hypnosis yet. We’re just testing your concentration and it’s decent, 
although I think you can do better than that. Do you think you can do better than that? 
 
In other words get her motivated to show me how well she can concentrate, and then 
give her something else to focus on instead, which is now I want to test your 
imagination. Do you think you have a good imagination? 
 
If she says no, I’ll get okay maybe we’ll work with one of your friends instead, or I might 
end it there. If she says I don’t know, I can still work with her. I can say something along 
the lines of let’s find out. Let’s really see where your imagination can take you. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
183 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Do you remember when you were a little girl and you just let yourself go playing dolls or 
playing house, and you really got involved in the role? That’s all I’m going to require of 
you. Pretend you’re a little girl again and really let go in the next exercise. Stand over 
here for me. Put your hands out like that. 
 
Then I’d go straight into the magnetic hands and use that as the “concentration and 
imagination exercise,” and see if that will out-frame her doubts and allow her to get lost 
in the experience a little bit more. 
 
What this is like is just paying attention and following directions. I’d like you to 
stick your hands out like this, and the smartest people do the best with this, so as 
you watch and imagine there’s a finger right here, and do you see where that 
finger went? Okay, now pretend there’s a magnet. I put a magnet right in the 
palm of your hand.  
 
Imagine that staring right past your hands. Imagine a magnet right here and 
continue to breathe. That’s right. Take another deep breath. That’s right. Your 
hands have already started to move together you’re imagining there are 
magnets, and as those magnets get closer they get more strongly attracted. 
 
As you’re feeling that and seeing that, the magnets are more strongly attracting 
your hands together closer and closer. When your hands come together, you’re 
going to feel even better because as you notice – you’re doing this perfectly. 
That’s good because it’s funny. 
 
The more your hands move closer together, the more you laugh because this 
could be one of the more interesting and funny things that you’ve experienced 
today. As you’re watching this – give her a round of applause. She’s doing really 
well. Excellent job.  
 
Every time you hear applause, you actually feel better…  
 
Let’s jump in here again. The hypnotist is rescuing the situation somewhat. He had a 
weak response and he had a halfhearted reframe; however, he’s getting her reengaged 
in magnet hands and he’s doing a phenomenal job. He’s getting the hands moving. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
184 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Watch the expression on the girl’s face. She’s actually getting more animated by it. As 
she succeeds, her own doubts – which are usually self-doubts more than anything – are 
actually vanishing more and more. He’s congratulating her, so she’s getting more praise, 
which she likes, and he does a phenomenal thing of once again involving the friends and 
getting them to applaud. 
 
It’s a nice little audience interaction. Then comes that really nice line. It’s a really nice 
thing for him to say at this point, which is the more they applaud the better, you will 
feel and the better you will do.  
 
→ Once again he’s setting up that interesting dynamic where audience reaction 
helps the volunteer do better, and the volunteer’s better reaction get the 
audience to respond better. 
 
That’s a really nice performance point, and he’s really rescued what looked like a bit of a 
dicey situation here. 
 
… and you actually notice as your hands are moving closer together – and you’re 
doing really well, isn’t she? She’s doing great. Bianca, you’re just doing this the 
way you should be.  
 
In fact everyone is enjoying this because you are the star. You are the star of the 
show. As you watch your hands move closer together, soon they’re going to end 
up like this. Watch as your hands are moving close together and they’re actually 
discovering they’re being more strongly attracted. You’re feeling that strong 
attraction. 
 
As you’re looking at your hands moving close together, you just become aware of 
the sound of my voice. Everything else fades and watch your hand move closer. 
When they touch, you actually discover they press tight together, so tight that the 
harder you try now, the tighter your hands squeeze together. 
 
The harder you try, the tighter your hands squeeze together. Notice her hands are 
actually stuck. Do you feel that? Your hands are squeezing so tight they shake, 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
185 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
and you can actually remember this feeling that the harder you try, the more your 
hands shake and the tighter they squeeze together. 
 
Actually satisfy yourself with that sensation as you’re doing that perfectly. Isn’t 
she doing great? Yeah, look at your friends. You can look at your friends and 
notice the smiles on their faces, the smile on your face. 
 
Now one, two, three, I’ll clasp my hands and your hands will fall loosely apart. 
One, two, three – that’s it. Awesome job. She’s amazing at this. Give her a round 
of applause. Look, they’re sincerely enjoying this. 
 
Do any of you want to join? Okay, so are you ready? Now I’m about to give you a 
little gift- why you need to be hypnotized. 
 
Well, what are you going to have me do? 
 
I’m just going to have you do the same things that you’ve been doing already. 
 
Let’s jump in here again and have a look at what’s going on here. Again the hypnotist 
has done a really nice piece, and he’s got her hands glued tight together and stuck 
together. It’s a very dramatic piece. 
 
He hasn’t milked it all that much, and the reason he hasn’t milked it that much is 
because his own voice isn’t get that animated. He’s done the right things. He’s involved 
the audience. He’s made a dramatic point of wow those hands aren’t coming apart and 
so on. 
 
1. The problem here is in terms of his voice. He doesn’t seem to be enjoying so 
much. He’s not amused by it. He’s not blown away by it, which means it’s more 
difficult for everyone else to be as well. 
 
When you watch a real consummate performer, he steps into his role. He goes first. 
He’s sitting there going oh my God those hands are stuck. Wow, do you usually do your 
hands like this? Does this usually happen? That’s amazing. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
186 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
It’s not so much the words that are important. It’s the attitude. It’s the expression of 
that attitude. It’s the way that you’re enjoying the show yourself that gives the audience 
permission to do that, and gives the subject the emotional hit that something really 
bizarre is going on. 
 
The next thing that happens is he’s about to give her a hypnotic gift. You’ll notice once 
again the girl’s insecurity kicks in at this point. I’m going to give you a gift. She asks what 
do I have to do?  
 
This shows you that this girl is very insecure once again. Can she be a great hypnotic 
subject? Absolutely, she’s already demonstrated a great use of the magnet hands, but 
you have to take that insecurity and you have to be able to work with it because 
otherwise she’ll make the audience feel insecure because they’ll be in rapport with her a 
little bit, and they won’t like that as much. 
 
Once again the hypnotist has to save the day with a stronger emotional response, which 
is calm and self-assured. It’s essentially saying this is going to be a great thing. You don’t 
have to do anything other than concentrate just like you’ve been doing, and you’re 
going to have a whale of a time. Let’s find out how good you do this; or let’s just find out 
how much you’ll enjoy this. Are you ready for this? 
 
2. Use kind of a grandfatherly voice or a grandmotherly voice, depending on 
which gender you are, to give them that reassurance that it’s going to be easy, 
it’s going to be fun and they’re going to enjoy this. 
 
Am I going to be like running around like crazy? 
 
Well, how about you guys? We’ll ask for a vote. She should stay here and be safe, 
right, so you can see her. Let’s do that. So that way we can have you on video and 
you’ll be the star. Are you okay with this? 
 
Okay. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
187 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Okay, now I’m going to ask you to – wait a minute. Which hand do you write 
with? Can I borrow that arm? Okay, I’d like you to look at this hand and stretch 
your hand right out like that. Just look right at the hand.  
 
I’m going to actually touch your shoulder for a moment. Just notice as your hand 
is in front of you, look at the lines on the hand and focus on one spot. In a 
moment I’m going to move your hand closer, and the focus of your eyes will 
change.  
 
When you become aware of your eyes, your eyes will close. After you become 
aware of your eyes, your eyes will close. That’s right. You’re doing great. After you 
become aware of your eyes, your eyes will close. That’s right. Sleep now. That’s it. 
That’s it. That’s okay. That’s okay. What I’m going to have you do is something a 
little different.  
 
Let’s jump in here and have a look at what’s going on. As we predicted earlier on, this 
girl is still nervous. She doesn’t know what’s going to happen, and so she’s actually 
resisting the process a little bit. As he’s doing the induction, sure she gets eye closure 
but that nervousness is keeping her holding on a little bit, so the induction essentially 
fails. 
 
What is really nice here though is to see how the hypnotist copes with that and deals 
with that. It might fail, but very smoothly he just says that’s okay, let’s try it a little 
differently. Look at the whole hand now.  
 
1. Essentially he’s recreating the same induction again, but using different 
parameters so that it feels different, and it gives her a second opportunity to do 
“better” the second time around.  
 
It’s very nicely handled. 
 
2. However, that insecurity is still there, and it would be important to somehow 
deal with that insecurity. Maybe have a chat with her about it, or maybe give 
her some reassurances to the point where she feels nice and calm. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
188 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Of course he did some of that already earlier on when she was asking, will I cluck like a 
chicken or run around like a rabbit? Clearly, that concern is still there at some level and 
he needs to take care of that. Either that, or call it quits and find someone else, 
someone who’s going to be easier to work with.  
 
As a rule, people that are very nervous and very insecure are probably the hardest 
people to work with because that insecurity and nervousness is a separate trance that 
does not include your reality, and that makes it a little bit harder for you to work with. 
 
It’s your choice. You can end it smoothly or you can move onto someone else, or you 
can do what this person’s doing, which is to change direction with it, ignore what’s 
happened – that’s the wash and rinse part – try something else, get a success with 
something else and use that as your steppingstone to move onto something else again.  
 
What I’m going to ask you to do is just pay attention to your hand – and you’re 
doing this right. Watch the lines on the hand. Watch the spot on the hand and 
when you see that spot, nod your head.  
 
When you’re ready, I’m going to raise the hand a little higher and now I’m going 
to ask you to pay attention. Focus all of your gaze, all of your awareness on that 
spot and when you see that spot move closer to you, your focus will change and 
as you become more aware of your eyes, your eyes can close now. That’s right. 
Now just let this hand relax and you feel safe. Let this hand relax, let this whole 
arm fall to your side and you feel safe. That’s right. You feel safer now. Take a 
deep breath in and let it all out. Let all that stress go away. Let all that tension go 
away. Take another deep breath in. Let all the stress go away.  
 
You’re safe, protected. Everyone here, your friends like you and we like our 
friends, don’t we? They’re nodding their heads. Imagine them smiling and 
nodding at you because I’m going to just ask you to remember a beautiful time in 
your life.  
 
In a moment this hand that I touch, this hand – in a moment when you feel me 
touch that hand, you’ll actually feel it rise up and go all the way to your upper rib 
cage right below your neck.  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
189 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
You’ll feel that and as you feel this hand start to go up – that’s right, just like a 
string is pulling it – that’s perfect. Actually start to feel it go up. The faster it goes 
up, the more you feel better and more relaxed. That’s right. You’re giving yourself 
a little gift. That’s good. Perfect. That’s good. Exactly. Touching your chest, feeling 
good.  
 
We’re doing a hypnosis show here. Give her a round of applause because she’s 
doing really well. Isn’t she doing really well? That’s excellent. Now as you’re 
feeling that and because every time you hear applause, you drift deeper. That’s 
right. Give her another round of applause. Help her feel good. Excellent.  
 
Your friends are applauding and they’re laughing with you because now you can 
start laughing because you remember having it on the inside and then on the 
outside. You’re doing really well. It’s a really pleasant time. Remember that 
pleasant time? That’s right. Then start laughing on the inside.  
 
Feel that on the inside and as you feel this hand touching your abdomen and your 
rib cage, start to laugh on the outside now, beginning to feel like getting twice as 
strong. That’s right, twice as strong. It’s good. That’s good. You’re doing it right. 
Yes, it’s pretty funny and everybody is smiling with you.  
 
You start to smile more and more, not because I suggested that. Only as much as 
you feel that, only as much as you’re feeling that, Bianca, because you’re taking 
the pressure off yourself.  
 
When I touch your shoulder, take the pressure off yourself and just relax and 
smile. That’s it. You’re doing great. Now I’d like you to remember that when you 
put your hand right there, you’re giving yourself this gift again, and every time 
you put your hand right there, you give yourself that gift.  
 
Imagine right now that the hand is stuck. Just imagine right now the hand is 
stuck. Tell yourself, want that, feel that. Is that all right with you? Good. Now feel 
that.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
190 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
I’m going to count one, two and say wide-awake, and you’ll be able to open your 
eyes and look at your hand and it will feel stuck. It will be one of the funniest 
things that’s happened today. One, two, wide-awake. Look at your hand. Notice it 
feels stuck, doesn’t it?  
 
Yes. 
 
Also the harder you try, the more stuck it is. Give her a round of applause. It is the 
funniest thing she’s had today. That’s actually pretty funny, isn’t it? The more you 
try the more funny it becomes because it’s pretty intriguing.  
 
And now what’s happening now is just close your eyes, just like that. Go deeper, 
go deeper and discover now when I snap my fingers, your hand can relax and 
you’ll be able to do this any time you want.  
 
One, two, three, now relax the hand. Let it fall away. You’ll be able to do that any 
time you want. Put the hand back there. Feel fun, feel joy and happiness every 
time you do that. That’s it.  
 
It gets stronger. You’re giving a gift to yourself, and nod your head when you’re 
feeling that. Do it again. When you’re ready, do that again. Feel it get stronger? 
That’s right. You can see that on her face, can’t you? 
 
 
Demonstration #9 
 
What I’d like you to do is go ahead and just take a look at that hand and notice 
the hand, and if you’ll notice the lines on the hand and now pick a spot. 
 
Pick a spot? 
 
Yes and then notice that spot. Focus all of your attention on that spot and as this 
hand comes closer to your eyes, you’re going to notice your eyes change focus, 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
191 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
and when your eyes change focus, just go ahead and let those eyes close and let 
yourself drift down inside into a deep and comfortable state of relaxation.  
 
That’s right. Just go ahead and close those eyes and go all the way down inside 
and just relax deeper and deeper. The deeper down inside you go, the better you 
feel and more and more relaxed. You can feel your whole body just starting to 
relax. Just notice how your arms are just becoming loose and limp.  
 
The deeper you go the better you feel. The better you feel you can find yourself 
drifting down in deeper and deeper and deeper. 
 
In a moment I’m going to count from one to three, and when I count to three 
you’ll open your eyes. After that when I say the word sleep, you’ll just go ahead 
and go down even deeper, even deeper into a deep state of relaxation. So go 
ahead and one, two, three, go ahead and open your eyes and sleep all the way 
down, all the way down and deeper. 
 
The deeper you go the better you feel. 
The better you feel the deeper you go.  
The deeper you go the better you feel.  
The deeper you go the better you feel.  
 
Just feel yourself relaxing deeper and deeper and deeper, and you can feel safe 
standing there knowing that you’re safe here, and you’re relaxing deeper and 
deeper and deeper. 
 
In a moment I’m going to borrow this hand again. Just go ahead and lift this hand 
up here. What I’d like you to do is just go ahead and notice the sensations in this 
hand. I’d like you to imagine that there are 1,000 helium balloons just tied around 
the wrist of this hand, and you can just see all those bright colors of those 
balloons and just feel that hand starting to lift… 
 
We’re now on the ninth demonstration at the same location as the previous one. It’s a 
different hypnotist and a different subject. In terms of the content of what he’s doing, 
it’s pretty straightforward stuff. He’s done a nice induction. He’s done a nice deepening. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
192 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Now he’s got a little bit of a hand catalepsy, which he’s going to convert into a nice 
dramatic arm levitation, which he going to use in other ways as well. As far as hypnosis 
goes, it’s pretty straightforward.  
 
Once again the performance pieces – the hypnotist is focusing virtually all of his 
attention onto the subject. He’s giving a little bit of attention to the friend that’s taking 
this as well, but notice in the background on the side of the street, you can see probably 
about a half dozen or maybe 10 people hanging out there watching him to this show 
and wondering what he’s doing, but he’s not engaging them.  
 
1. Once again the hypnotist has his back turned to the audience, and all the 
attention is with the subject. 
 
All he would need to do at this point is take his right foot and move it around so that he 
is facing the audience, so that he’s actually facing the same direction as the subject, so 
that both of them are facing towards the main road and both of them are facing 
towards the audience. 
 
Then at that point if he projects his voice a little bit more, everything that he says will be 
a suggestion for the subject, and the people that are watching get to get an idea of 
what’s going on as well and get a sense of oh wow this is a pretty cool show. Yes, I’m 
enjoying this. I wonder if what he’s asking him to do is actually going to happen. Will 
that hand actually float up? 
 
It becomes much more dramatic at this point because they’re involved. They get a sense 
of I know what he’s asking them to do. Now I get to have the pleasure of finding out 
whether or not it actually does happen. 
 
It’s just a little performance piece here. The hypnosis part is excellent. He just needs to 
be more of a performer and include the audience.   
 
Another thing he can do is if you notice the audience is actually quite far away from him, 
and especially there are a few more people standing by the tree in the red shirt and so 
on.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
193 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
2. What he could actually do at this point, because he’s got his subject nicely in 
trance, is to give the audience a lecture.  
 
Just wave them over and say come over here guys. What we’re doing right now is a nice 
hypnosis show. This person’s in trance. He feels comfortable and relaxed. His arm is over 
there. In a moment you’ll notice his hand starting to lift. When that happens, we’re 
going to start the show properly. He’s going to get some really nice gifts out of this. His 
unconscious mind is going to be doing some wonderful things for him. I’d like for you to 
be able to really observe this, so come in close enough to see this.  
 
You’ll notice how that little schpiel I just gave motivates the audience to come closer, 
but it also is being heard by the subject, and the chances are he’ll give a better response 
now because he’s been primed for that too, so everyone wins.  
 
The performance is stronger, the hypnosis gets better and the results are more dramatic 
all around.  
 
… more and more and more as those helium balloons pull and just tug at that 
hand. You can feel it going higher and higher. That’s right. Just go ahead and see 
those balloons and feel what it feels like just to have those balloons right around 
that wrist just tugging. Notice that hand how it wants to rise, and it really wants 
to go up higher and higher and higher.  
 
You’re going to begin to find it funny when that sensation of that hand moving, as 
it’s pulling higher and higher. That’s right. That’s right. That’s perfect. You’ll 
notice the higher that hand goes the funnier it feels. The funnier it feels the higher 
it goes.  
 
Let’s pause it there for just a second and talk about what he’s doing here. He’s doing a 
nice little performance again, and the bit I want to just point out to you here is notice 
how the hypnotist is changing his own voice. He’s getting a little giggle into his voice.  
 
1. Notice that when he gets his own giggle in his voice, the smile on the subject’s 
face starts spreading more and more. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
194 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
In other words emotions are transferrable. If you want someone to feel an emotion, you 
need to go there first. If you feel that emotion – in this case it’s laughter – and you feel it 
yourself first and it comes out in your voice, they will hear it and it will help them to 
access the emotions themselves and have a stronger response.  
 
2. When you’re making your shift from the physical response to the emotional 
responses, this is a great example of what you need to be doing, which is to go 
first, have the emotional response yourself, and let them feed off that initially 
so that they can build their own version of it in time. 
 
Just go ahead and see those balloons, feel those balloons just pulling that hand 
higher and higher and higher. That’s right. That’s right. That’s right, all the way, 
all the way. 
 
Just go ahead and let those balloons continue holding that, and the higher it goes 
the funnier it becomes. It just becomes the funniest thing, like when a friend tells 
you the funniest joke you’ve ever heard before in your life and you just can’t help 
but just laugh. The higher it goes, the funnier it becomes. That’s right.  
 
 
Demonstration #10 
 
This arm’s going to start feeling light, like it’s tied to helium balloons. It’s starting 
to feel light like it’s tied to helium balloons, pulled up by those balloons, getting 
higher and higher, lighter and lighter, all the way up into the sky now. That’s 
right. Lighter and lighter. It starts going up higher and higher into the sky all by 
itself, lighter and lighter all the way up, Veronica. That’s right, all the way up into 
the sky. Faster and faster.  
 
More helium is attached now. All the way up, quicker. You’re going to feel the 
center of that go into this profound state as long as it gets higher and higher, 
lighter and lighter. That’s right, all the way up. That’s right, moving by itself 
higher and higher into the sky now. That’s right, all the way up. That’s right, 
Veronica.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
195 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Welcome to the tenth demonstration. This hypnotist is doing some very nice things 
here. Essentially the demonstration he’s actually doing is very straightforward. It’s a 
classic arm levitation, the language that he’s using in not particularly interesting or 
crazy. It’s just a good solid performance, and he’s getting a good solid result from the 
subject. So far so good. 
 
What interests me here is less about the hypnosis elements – they’re just nice solid 
performance elements – and more about the performance that he’s doing. If you watch, 
the subject is doing an okay response. She might be a little bit inhibited, but she’s doing 
it. She’s good. 
 
The hypnotist on the other hand is right now where the show is at. He’s supplying the 
whole show. Look how animated he is. Listen to his voice and how animated that is. 
Look how he’s clicking his fingers and moving around. He’s even dressed in an 
interesting way. 
 
Although all that’s happening is a simple arm levitation – nothing very dramatic on its 
own – he really manages to milk it. Watch the audience right now. He’s got about a 
dozen or so people in a semicircle behind him watching it. He’s got a couple of people 
on the side of the street walking by curious and watching him as well, and he’s put the 
subject right in the center of it all. 
 
He’s standing aside a little bit to make sure that people get a chance to see the subject 
responding, so it’s a very visually dramatic piece. 
 
1. The hypnotist is supplying the emotion, the subject is the center of attention, 
and everyone’s attention is riveted on her.  
 
That’s a really nice dramatically piece that he’s set up here. Although not much is going 
on dramatically speaking in terms of the performance elements that he’s using, this is a 
really nice set. He’s milking it for all it’s worth, and you can clearly see that the audience 
is very engaged in what he’s doing.  
 
2. This is an excellent demonstration of how the performance matters more than 
the hypnosis in many instances.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
196 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
That’s right, deeply hypnotized. That’s right. I know you feel like you’re wide-
awake. You’re deeply asleep. That’s right, and I want you to feel as if there’s been 
a steel block completely locked down to the floor now. You can’t lift it and you 
don’t know why.  
 
In a moment I’m going to tap you on the shoulder. I’m going to tap you on the 
shoulder, and you’ll realize it’s been completely stuck. Look at those feet and 
realize it’s weird that you can’t move them, isn’t it? You don’t know why you can’t 
move it. It’s stuck down completely. That’s right. It’s so strange. 
 
Now in a moment – close your eyes.  
 
Let’s jump in here quickly and just have a little chat about what’s happened there. The 
hypnotist has gone from the simple little effect – which is the arm levitation as a useful 
induction – and he’s taking a really nice risk. He’s going right from that into an example 
of sticking something down – which in this case is sticking their feet down. 
 
1. What he’s doing here is interesting in the sense that not only are the feet stuck, 
but he’s also supplying her with an emotion.  
 
It’s weird, it’s strange, it’s unusual. Notice also how the hypnotist has constantly 
engaged the subject. 
 
He’s not just leaving her there to test out whether or not her feet are stuck and work 
out for herself what’s going on because if he did that he’s risking failure at that point. 
The feet might become unstuck he’s pushing too hard and so on. 
 
2. What he’s doing instead is he’s constantly supplying a stream of suggestions to 
back up the fact that those feet are stuck.  
 
Those feet are stuck. Try them out. That’s weird, isn’t it? They’re stuck even more. The 
more you try the more they’re stuck. Now look down at your feet and notice how stuck 
they are.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
197 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
3. He’s constantly redirecting her attention to that one key idea – those feet are 
stuck.  
 
By redirecting her attention that way constantly, it reinforces those suggestions and 
takes attention away from the other potentials, the other possibilities, including the 
possibility that she’ll find access back to the way she normally moves her feet, which 
would allow her to of course move her feet once again. 
 
Again this is a really nice way of showing how to take some of the more dramatic 
elements like the feet being stuck, and really playing it for all it’s worth so that you’re 
constantly reinforcing it whilst not really seeming to.  
 
It’s a dramatic piece. It’s giving her an emotional reaction, but it’s also a reinforcement 
of the piece to make it more likely to succeed. 
 
Okay, Veronica, you’ve done great. I’ll let your feet become unstuck from the floor 
now, and you’ll be wide-awake, all suggestions washed away. Thank you for 
doing that. It’s weird how your feet were stuck, wasn’t it? 
 
 
Demonstration #11 
 
Put your hands out in front of you. Clap your hands together nice and strong. 
Interlock your fingers like this, nice and strong and just bend your arms up 
towards your chin. Keep them together nice and tight. Feel the strength and the 
power in there. 
 
Now in a second I’d like you to take these two fingers and put them about one 
inch apart, and this is the first test of your power of concentration. I want you to 
focus your energy between the space in those fingers, and feel your magnetic 
personality pulling those fingers together. They’re going to touch.  
 
They are going to touch, and when they touch it’s going to feel really good. When 
they touch, you can just close your eyes and relax and go deeper and deeper, 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
198 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
more and more relaxed. Deeper and deeper and you can put your hands at your 
side. Let them go loose and limp. Feeling good, feeling great.  
 
I’ll give you a third gift today, which is the ability to party as much as you want to 
party with your friends. You will not have a hangover tomorrow. You will feel 
great. When your pillow hits the bed, you’re going to sleep the best sleep that 
you’ve ever had in your entire life. 
 
On the count of three, I’m going to have your eyes open, wide-awake. One, two, 
three, look at me. How are you feeling? 
 
Good. 
 
You’re feeling good so far? 
 
So relaxed. Put me to sleep. 
 
Okay. 
 
We’re now into the next demonstration, demonstration 11. This is a repeat hypnotist. In 
other words you’ve seen this one before. He was in the London tapes as well, so by this 
stage, this hypnotist has a lot of experience.  
 
1. You can actually compare his performance here to the performance in London, 
and notice how much smoother and how much more relaxed he’s become with 
it.  
 
He was already a great hypnotist in London. He has a lot of hypnotic experience 
obviously from before, but there’s a big shift between the London experience and this 
experience. This is very useful for you to see how quickly that transition occurs. It 
doesn’t take very long, but time does have a significant factor to play.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
199 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
The other thing I want you to notice here is that when he brings this particular subject 
back again to the world, he’s very relaxed and he’s also still a little woozy and actually 
says something along the lines of I feel like I’m going to sleep here. 
 
This is very important. The hypnotist does exactly the right thing at this point.  
 
2. He re-induces trance to make sure that he brings this person back properly. He 
doesn’t want to leave them in this sort of half-dazed situation because 
something dangerous could occur.  
 
He’s standing right next to the main road. He could end up walking across the road in a 
daze and get hurt or into an accident, or maybe he’s still in half a trance, he comes back 
to his friends all dazed and they get all worried and go my God what’s happened to you? 
My God maybe we should get a doctor. Maybe we should get an ambulance. What’s 
going on here?  
 
Those sorts of things that his friends could be saying to him whilst he in a dazed half 
trance could have the impact of a suggestion and could cause him to have a panic attack 
because they’re panicking, and as a subject he’s picking up on their emotions and he’s 
amplifying them into a full-blown attack. 
 
That could have a very negative consequence of something as simple as letting someone 
go when they’re still in that trance hangover. This hypnotist spots that and he does the 
right thing, which is he re-induces trance. As you’ll see in a moment, he works with it a 
little bit further to make sure that when he finished the show completely, the person’s 
back in a good spot. 
 
It’s an important safety point, and you’re about to see how that works. 
 
I’ll put you all the way out. You ready? Are you right-handed or left-handed? 
 
Right-handed. 
 
Can I borrow that right hand? Here’s what I want you to do. Take a look at that 
right hand, focus on the lines of your hand and just pick out a single spot. In a 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
200 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
moment I’m going to start moving it closer to your head, and when I do your eyes 
will change focus. 
 
As your eyes change focus, you can just have a deeper level of relaxation and now 
sleep, deeper and deeper, more relaxed. Let all of the tension go out of your body. 
As you let the tension go out of your body, your ability to go even deeper 
increases.  
 
As your ability to go even deeper increases, your ability to relax even more also 
increases and you can have an absolutely phenomenal time during your little 
thing of street hypnosis here. 
 
Now in a second I’m going to bring your hand up, and I’m going to get you in 
touch with a certain power inside of you, the power of invincibility, the power to 
be able to lift up. Are you doing okay? Your legs will hold you. You’re completely 
grounded. You’re able to stand on your own. You don’t need my assistance. 
 
Now in a second I’d like you to bring up this right arm, and I’d like you to think of 
the strongest time in your life, a time when you felt unstoppable, a time when you 
felt completely invincible, and get in touch with that moment in just a second. 
 
So bring your arm up. Bring your arm up to your side. Make a fist. Make a nice 
tight fist… 
 
This is another good point at which we can pause things and have a look at what’s going 
on. Remember, this subject was feeling a little bit woozy and he didn’t come out of the 
trance entirely, so part of this hypnotist’s job is to make sure that he reenergizes this 
subject and brings him out properly. 
 
One of the ways he’s doing this is he’s giving him a hypnotic gift – or he’s about to, or at 
least that’s what it looks like right now. What I want you to notice is exactly what he’s 
doing here. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
201 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
1. Remember, the problem this subject had is he was feeling too woozy, too 
drowsy and too sleepy. Now the hypnotic gift he’s giving him is the antidote to 
that.  
 
It’s feeing powerful, it’s feeling energized and so on, but because he’s gone into this sort 
of a deeply relaxed trance, he can’t access that power just yet. He’s too relaxed to go 
there. 
 
When he says lift up your arm and let it rise up, he’s not really doing very much. What 
does the hypnotist do? He pauses and says I want a quick response. He takes the hand, 
lifts it up and locks it in place there. He puts it there and says, keep it there now. 
 
That already tells the person you now are expected to engage in a different way with 
this. We’re no longer looking for the relaxed and lethargic. We’re now looking for a very 
focused, still relaxed and still comfortable, but a much more energized way of doing 
things. Hence, the arm up, the fist out and so on. 
 
2. This is an excellent demonstration of a way to revitalize someone and using it 
simultaneously as an entertaining effect for the rest of the world.  
 
Everyone else who’s watching, it looks like a nice classic physical test – the arm lock for 
example, coupled with a nice hypnotic gift – but internally what the hypnotist is doing is 
he’s reversing the suggestions of lethargy through yet another gift that he’s giving him 
of power, excitement, enthusiasm and energy, and he’s making sure that even thought 
the subject initially is a little bit lethargic in his responses, that’s he not accepting that. 
 
He’s taking control of him and saying no not like this; like this. A nice firm grip on the 
arm and a nice firm lifting of the arm. He tugs on the arm a little bit to make sure that it 
stays there. He pushes on the fist and says, make a fist and make it strong. He’s really 
forcing the result, which is excellent because by the end of this whole thing, the guy will 
come back and feel much better for it. 
 
Watch as that continues. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
202 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
… and just feel the strength, feel the power locking in like a steel bar locking in. 
Imagine that you’re shooting out a beam over to the hotel over there. The 
strength, get that so strong, so tight that even if you wanted to move it, you could 
not.  
 
In a second I’ll bring over one of your friends and we’ll get them to test it. Have 
him try. You feel like what? Fajita Go ahead and try. Lock it in. Lock it in with that 
sense of invincibility, that sense of internal power and go deeper, deeper and 
deeper, more relaxed. 
 
Demonstration #12 
 
And all you need to do is pay attention and have a sincere desire to be hypnotized. 
Close your hands just like that. Lock them together. Just pay attention to my 
voice.  
 
We’re onto the next demonstration now, and you may recognize this hypnotist. He’s 
been with us before on one of the earlier segments. What I want to point out here right 
now, even though it’s just a few seconds into the whole segment – and already we know 
what he’s doing. He’s going through the classic finger vise set piece. 
 
1. What I want you to notice is just the difference in the hypnotist now compared 
to the earlier piece. 
 
In the earlier piece, he’s getting a lot of things right, but it was also punctuated with 
moments of hesitation, moments of uncertainty and so on. In this situation here, he’s 
really grown as a hypnotist. 
 
He’s working the whole crowd. He’s working with several people at the same time. He’s 
shouting out his suggestions so that not only can the subjects hear it, but rather than 
being all close to the subject as he was before, he’s taken a step back and the whole 
crowd can hear him as well.  
 
Notice how many people are hanging around him. One of the main reasons for him 
having so many people hanging around him – and of course there are more behind the 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
203 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
camera as well – is his attitude. It’s the energy in his voice. It’s the way in which he’s 
presenting all of this. It’s engaging people. 
 
Remember, when you begin your performance, the magic is not in the subjects or the 
volunteers, or even in the hypnosis.  
 
2. The initial performance comes from you as the hypnotist, how engaging your 
voice is, how much drama you have, how powerful your voice presents itself 
and so on.  
 
That attracts the initial attention. It gives people that initial emotional reaction that they 
can then use to be intrigued by, and then as you build your show up you’ll pull more and 
more of those emotions out of the volunteers and out of the audience to build the piece 
up.  
 
Right now we can already see that this has very much a different starting point 
compared to his earlier induction, and as a result we can predict this is going to be a 
much more dramatic demonstration. In other words he’s going to be able to go much 
further with these subjects and get much better responses out of them because he’s 
engaged them at a much higher level. 
 
This is an excellent starting point.  
 
Bend your arms like you’re going to pray. You might need to. Now stick your 
fingers up here. Put a little gap about an inch between them because soon they’re 
going to touch. That’s right. Look at that space between your fingers – and you’re 
welcome to join us. That’s right. Looking at that space between your fingers. Soon 
they’ll touch as you’re concentrating. You’re doing that perfectly. 
 
As soon as your fingers touch – that’s right, you’re doing it exactly right. When 
your fingers touch, your eyes will get heavy and they’ll need to close, and that’s 
perfectly normal. That’s right, everybody. Excellent. Perfect and you’re feeling 
that right now. Good. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
204 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Now what I’m going to ask you to do is just one more thing. Cross your fingers 
and squeeze your hands really tight. Squeeze your hands really tight. That’s right. 
Exactly. You’re doing this perfectly right. 
 
As soon as your fingers touch, close your eyes. Excellent. That’s right. Perfect. 
Those of you who haven’t had their fingers touch yet, your eyes will close once 
your fingers touch. Keep taking a moment to just feel your hands squeeze tighter 
and tighter. That’s all right. You’re doing pretty good. 
 
Thank you. 
 
You’re welcome. What I’m going to ask you to do is with your fingers squeezing 
tighter together, just take a deep breath in. I’m going to count one, two, three, 
eyes open. One, two, three, you can take your hands apart.  
 
What you’ve proven is that you can be hypnotized. Would you like to go any 
further? 
 
Sure. 
 
Let’s jump in here and talk a little bit about what’s happened. The hypnotist is much 
animated, which is great. He’s got a couple of volunteers. He’s got about three. There’s 
a child there, there’s an older man and the young lady there as well. 
 
There are a couple of things I want to point out here. In terms of what he’s doing, the 
finger vise is very straightforward. There are a couple of things he can do to improve it. 
For example, he later realizes that by squeezing the fists together a little bit more, he’s 
getting a better reaction out of it and so on.  
 
Something that is really nice to see is at the end of this general induction, the gentleman 
pretty much failed the test. He messed it up, partly because he got the instructions 
slightly wrong, but for whatever reason he just decides to leave, which is no big deal. 
 
1. What I want you to notice is how comfortable the hypnotist was letting him go.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
205 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
There was no embarrassment. There were no recriminations. There was no desperation. 
It was just like sure, no problem. Off you go. That’s exactly what the audience wants to 
see. They don’t care about the failures. What they care about are the successes.  
 
As long as you’re comfortable at every step of the way, especially when something 
doesn’t work out right, they will forget about it. They will forget that gentleman even 
existed. In fact if you watch this bonus DVD with just the demonstrations on it, I would 
put money on the fact that you probably forgot that gentleman even existed. All you 
remember were the two ladies that came afterwards who succeeded greatly.  
 
2. The next thing I want to point out is that there’s a child present here as well. 
This is a very dicey situation legally speaking.  
 
Depending on what country and what state you’re in, there are different laws that 
apply. As a rule of thumb, don’t hypnotize children. Don’t work with children, especially 
in street hypnosis. You can work with them if you have their parents’ consent, but when 
it comes to street hypnosis it gets a little bit more difficult to prove things.  
 
As a rule of thumb, I recommend not working with children just because of the legal 
reasons if for no other reason. 
 
He’s already identified that the blonde girl is a great subject. When we go on in 
moment’s time, you’ll notice that we’ve jumped ahead a little bit, and the hypnotist has 
done a lot of fixes. 
 
In other words he’s gotten rid of the child. He’s explained to the child that he can’t take 
part in this for whatever reasons. He’s gotten more volunteers involved to have a little 
bit more of a chance of succeeding. In other words he’s replaced the gentleman that’s 
walked away. All this happened whilst the camera was fumbling a bit. Hence, we have to 
assume from one point to the next. Just notice however that the hypnotist’s energy is 
unaffected. He is confident, he’s powerful and his voice has a good authority in it.  
 
He’s already succeeded with one girl, and that success is going to move onto the next 
one who’s going to join him as well in a moment’s time, and he’s got a nice crowd 
building. It’s all because of his attitude, his energy and his enthusiasm because it’s 
allowing the crowd to be pulled in. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
206 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
3.  Also notice his body language. His body language is getting even better now. 
It’s very open and he’s addressing the audience. 
 
The whole performance is to the audience, the semicircle in front of him watching. Sure, 
there are people behind him watching as well. That’s just that what happens in street 
hypnosis, but the main audience is that semicircle that surrounds him and his two 
volunteers. That’s who he’s playing to and that’s where all the milking occurs. 
 
Let’s watch as he continues with that. 
 
And soon in a moment I’m going to just imagine – and you can imagine too – your 
hands are full of magnets. Imagine your hands are full of magnets and as you look 
at that space between your hands, soon your hands will move closer and closer 
together.  
 
There is no wrong way to do this. That’s right. You’re feeling that right now 
because it’s automatic and it’s really funny, because the more you laugh, the 
faster your hands move together. That’s right. The more you laugh, the faster 
your hands move together. Give him a round of applause. He’s doing really 
amazing. They’re awesome people.  
 
Let’s jump in here once again very briefly, and just point some things out here. This is a 
very nice thing the hypnotist has done. He’s set up the magnet hands, nothing surprising 
there. The hands start moving. Once again, no big surprise there he’s doing a 
component job of that.  
 
Because this is so unusual for most people, the girls start to laugh. They’re amazed by 
this, and this is something you really need to understand. 
 
 The simplest effects can be so amazing and dramatic to people that they are on 
their own a whole show.  
 
Instead of ignoring that because he wants to move onto something that would impress 
him more, he starts to milk it.  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
207 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
In fact he’s got an emotional response. As a hypnotist he knows that he needs to make 
the transition from a physical response to an emotional response in order to reach the 
mental responses later on, so he jumps on it.  
 
It’s already there, so rather than working hard for an emotion he just uses the emotion 
that arises. Notice how as soon as she starts laughing, he just enhances it. He gets them 
to laugh even more. He gets them enjoy it even more. This is great.  
 
 He’s taking a genuine unconscious response, a spontaneous response, and he’s 
hijacked it for his own purposes, which means that the trances that are about 
occur and the responses he’s going to get from them are going to be that much 
more powerful.  
 
This is a great example of utilizing a spontaneous response there.  
 
Fantastic. Watch your hands move closer together. Once they touch – in a 
moment they’re going to touch, and they’ll start to squeeze tighter and tighter 
together, feeling your hands squeeze so tight together that they become even 
stuck. 
 
Imagine they become stuck. Your hands are squeezing so tight they start to shake. 
They start to feel stuck, and the harder you try the more tightly your hands stick. 
That’s right. Now the harder you try the funnier it becomes. That’s right. The 
harder you try the funnier it becomes.  
 
Now in a moment I will count from one to three, and your hands will fall loosely to 
your sides and you’ll be ready to be hypnotized. Is everyone okay with that? Is 
everyone on board with that?  
 
Okay, one, two, three, now you can release your hands ready to be hypnotized. 
Okay, relax.  
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
208 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Absolutely awesome. You did really well. You should be congratulated at having 
an active relaxation right now, and I’m going to go one, two, three. When I snap 
my fingers you’ll just close your eyes and go into a deep, deep state of sleep.  
 
One, two, three, only as deep as you want to go right now. One, two, three, just 
like that, only as deep as it feels good. That’s right. Give him a round of applause. 
You’re doing well. You’re doing exactly right. 
 
Now I’d like everyone to be quiet for a moment because this will require a little 
concentration. What I would like you to do with your eyes comfortably closed and 
keeping your eyes comfortably closed, feeling very comfortable, roll your eyeballs 
upwards looking through your eyelids at the same spot.  
 
Be very gentle with yourselves. Be very gentle. That’s right, and you start to feel 
your eyelids get heavy or stuck. You can move your eyebrows up and down. That’s 
not a test. That’s right. Move your eyebrows up and down and find that the 
harder you tug on your eyelids like that, the heavier they feel. It’s pretty funny. 
 
It feels weird but every time you feel weird, it feels really funny. Now you can stop 
testing just like that and go even deeper. That’s right. Stop testing and go even 
deeper, feeling strong and secure. 
 
In a moment you’re going to have a chance to relax 10 times deeper. You’re going 
to feel your arm. When I touch your arm, you’re going to feel your hand and make 
a fist. Then I’ll count from one, that’s a fist; two, your arm goes straight; two, 
make your arm straight; three, take all the stress out of your mind and push it 
into that arm.  
 
Take all the stress from your mind and push it into that arm. It becomes stiff and 
rigid.  
 
This is a nice point for us to jump in again and have a little chat about what just 
happened there. The hypnotist is doing a great job. He’s involving the audience. He’s 
doing a nice induction. He did a nice couple of tests. He did the eye roll rest of course, 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
209 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
which a nice additional suggestion that we haven’t really worked with, but you’ve pretty 
much seen how he’s presented it and it’s a very nice way to do that.  
 
Now he’s going onto something more dramatic again. He’s got a stiff arm right up in the 
air. The two things I want to point out right now are: 
 
1. Notice how again he doesn’t wait for slow responses. He demands a fast 
response. 
 
He goes over and says I’m going to touch your arm. He picks the arm up. He leaves it 
there. Make a fist. Make a fist. Your arm’s going to go straight. He actually lifts the arm 
up for them into the position he wants it to be in, so it’s nice and dramatic, and he puts 
it there for them. 
 
As soon as he puts it there for them, it stays there. It’s actually a much faster way to get 
the result, and all that anyone else cares about is the fact that these ladies are standing 
here with their arms way up in the air like that all stiff and rigid. That’s impressive 
enough.  
 
He doesn’t have to waste time getting them up there in the first place. Of course you 
could do that and make something out of that too, but he chose not to. Just notice how 
you have a lot of flexibility in things that you can do.  
 
2. The next thing I want you to notice is how much these girls are smiling every 
time he gets them a round of applause or any kind of acknowledge that what 
they’re doing is great. 
 
This is very motivating for them, and I strongly encourage you to do the same when you 
do your performances. Motivate your clients, encourage them, and congratulate them 
on good responses when they come. 
 
The harder you try to bend that arm, the stiffer and more rigid it becomes. Notice 
the harder you try to bend the arm, the better you feel. In fact you feel powerful, 
strong. Feel your arm becoming really strong. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
210 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
I’m going to count from one to three, and your eyes will be open. One, two, three, 
eyes open. Look at your arm totally strong and solid. You feel that, don’t you? 
Notice the harder you try to bend the arm, the stronger it becomes.  
 
I’m going to ask you to come over here. Come over here and tap this arm. Make 
sure it’s strong. Wow, someone else come over here. Okay, another volunteer. 
Give him a round of applause, and now ready? Close your eyes. Just close your 
eyes and sleep, deeper, deeper, deeper. That’s it. You’re doing perfectly. 
 
This is what hypnosis feels like. As you know you can hear my voice, you can hear 
some things going on around you. You can feel very strong and solid, and I would 
like you to discover something amazing about the super powers of your 
unconscious.  
 
Something that I would like you to remember is you are here to have some fun 
tonight. Is that true or false? Nod your head if that’s true. Okay, and so what I’m 
going to ask you to do in a moment is when I count from one to three, your eyes 
will open and you’ll actually be seeing the funniest movie you’ve ever seen. 
 
Do you remember seeing a really funny movie? You start to smile when you think 
about it. The giggles are starting again and now one, two, three, eyes open. 
You’re looking at the funniest movie. You look at each other and the more they 
laugh, the funnier it gets. That’s right.  
 
The funnier it gets the more they laugh. The more you laugh the funnier they 
laugh. That’s pretty funny. 
 
Let’s take another break here and have a look at what the hypnotist is doing. This is a 
tremendous show. He’s really come on from the last one. He’s doing a really good job 
here.  
 
Of course he’s moving classically from the physical phenomenon like the stiff arm, and 
he’s constantly reinforcing the emotional ones – right now the laughter is really coming 
out – and he’s come up with a nice routine, the idea of watching a funny show. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
211 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
What I really like about this – and this is the drama of what he’s doing here, the 
performance elements – is that he’s not only having them laughing but he’s having them 
open their eyes up, and as they look at each other that increases the laughter as well. 
 
He’s using a couple of very clever psychological pieces here. 
 
 Whenever one person laughs, other people will join in or tend to join in as well. 
 
By having them look at each other and hear each other, it kind of reinforces what the 
suggestion is. As they see each other laugh, they get more and more hysterical with it. 
 
 He himself starts laughing, which again reinforces it.  
 
All in all, we have these three people in the front of the room or on the stage so to 
speak laughing away, which of course gets the audience involved as well, and as the 
audience starts having a few giggles, that reinforces the whole thing for them. 
 
This is a very nice dramatic piece he’s got here. It’s a very simple thing to set up. He 
already tested it ahead of time by getting them to smile and giggle a little bit earlier on 
for example with the magnet hands induction and so on. He’s just built on that very 
nicely into a very nice dramatic effect. 
 
From here, he’s in a good position to move onto a more mental effect, like some kind of 
amnesia or something like that.  
 
As you look at each other laugh – oh, it’s so funny. Oh my gosh. And now just 
sleep. That’s it. That’s it. Does she look like she’s hypnotized? Sleep. That’s right. 
No longer funny. Everything’s calm and normal.  
 
I’d like to have you guys give them a round of applause. Everybody that’s 
watching this show, give them a round of applause. They’ve been doing 
amazingly. 
 
Soon what I’m going to have you do in a moment is the same arm actually 
becomes very light. You’ll start to feel that arm become very light. It will actually 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
212 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
rise all the way up to your forehead. When it touches your forehead, you feel this 
arm become very light. When it touches your forehead, you’re going to feel 
amazingly good, amazingly happy and amazingly good. 
 
When you feel that good feeling, as the hand gets closer it gets stronger. Once the 
hand touches your forehead, you start to press it into your forehead. Pressing the 
hand into your forehead because you’re feeling amazingly good and you discover 
that now. 
 
Nod your head when you’re feeling good. That’s right. Now in a moment when I 
ask you to, your hand will feel stuck. Actually you actually suspected it to feel 
stuck already because it feels amazingly good. 
 
The harder you try, the more stuck your hand becomes. The harder you try, the 
better you feel. Notice that the harder you try, the better you feel. It’s feeling very 
good. You’re feeling that good feeling. 
 
I’m going to count one, two and say, awake. Your eyes will be open. One, two, 
eyes open.  
 
Let’s jump in here again and have a look at what he’s doing. Some great stuff has been 
coming out here, some nice interesting routines. It’s fractionated going between 
physical routines and the emotional routines, and then back to the physical and back to 
the emotional. There are some nice changes around there. 
 
Now he’s ready to go into the mental routines as well. He’s going for a name, amnesia 
and maybe even he can change the name as well. What I want to point out right now is 
how he’s just smoothly transitioned from this.  
 
Even though clearly he’s kind of making it up as he’s going along, he’s deciding as he’s 
going along which routine to try out, which ones to drop, which ones to go on with and 
so on, it’s still working incredibly well, and he’s always basing things off of success. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
213 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 When one thing succeeds, he moves onto another thing and another thing and 
another thing. He’s constantly going from one success to another, testing how 
responsive these people are. 
 
These two ladies are very responsive. He’s doing a great job with them, so that gives him 
the courage as a hypnotist to push it a little bit further and a little bit further, and get 
better results again. 
 
 Also notice how he’s making the suggestions in a very nature, very simple to 
understand way.  
 
Occasionally he gets a little tongue tied, but it’s okay. It doesn’t matter. Even though he 
gets a little tongue tied, he just corrects again afterwards and the results are just the 
same.  
 
These people are responding really nicely, and he’s getting some very nice results. Let’s 
watch on and see how the name amnesia goes. 
 
Notice your hand is stuck. Try harder. That’s really a good feeling. The harder you 
try the better you feel. Look around at your neighbor. It’s amazing. That’s 
amazing.  
 
What I’m going to ask you to do now is with your hands stuck, close your eyes. 
Just go inside and enjoy that pleasurable feeling. You can close your eyes and 
enjoy that pleasurable feeling because only you know what you’re feeling right 
now. 
 
I’d like you to remember this feeling with your hand. Whenever you touch your 
hand to your forehead, you will be able to remember this feeling. In fact you can 
transfer this feeling to anybody else.  
 
In a moment you’ll be able to transfer that feeling all the way to your feet and 
you’ll feel strong and rigid, stable, secure. Just when you release your hands and 
when I count from one to three, you’ll be able to release your hands. The feeling 
will transfer to your feet and you’ll feel strong, stable and secure.  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
214 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
One, two, three, release your hands now. Feel that feeling going all the way to 
your feet and all the way back up to the top of your head, so you feel it double 
every time it goes back up to the top of your head. 
 
Now you feel even better. As you’re feeling that, notice it’s a good feeling and 
you’re really strong. You’re actually stuck right there. Both of your feet feel stuck 
right there, and discover when I say one, two, awake your feet are stuck and 
everyone around here is actually wearing the weirdest shade of purple, which is 
going to be really silly and ridiculous like Barney. 
 
One, two, three, awake, eyes open. Notice how everybody’s wearing a weird 
shade of purple. Do you see that? Yes? It’s kind of interesting, isn’t it? Now you 
might start to remember something – because it’s pretty funny.  
 
Now I’d like you to close your eyes. Just go deeper. Just go deeper. Excellent job. 
That’s right. As you’re feeling this good feeling, you totally recall that your name 
can change because your old name simply starts to fade and go way off, like the 
laser show off into the distance.  
 
Your old name just goes off and you seem to have it slip your mind. Nod your 
head when you’re on board with this. Okay and one, two, awake. All right, give 
them a round of applause. They’re doing amazing.  
 
Hi, I’m Michael. What’s your name? I didn’t get it before. Okay sleep. That’s it. 
Sleep. That’s it. Hi, I didn’t get your name. What’s your name? Okay sleep. That’s 
it. That’s it.  
 
Now all the suggestions are cancelled except the useful ones. I’m going to count 
from one to five and you’ll return to your full awareness. You’ll remember your 
names. You’ll be able to move around. Every step you take you will feel better. 
 
One, starting to feel a little better now; two, getting ready to feel safe, protected 
and secure; now three, feeling comfortable; four, a pleasant feeling washes 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
215 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
through your body; five, opening your eyes, feeling strong, able to move your feet 
and pick them up.  
 
Remember your name? My name’s Michael. What’s your name?  
 
Kristy. 
 
Nice to meet you. What’s your name? 
 
Lauren. 
 
You did excellently.  
 
Let’s just jump in again right at the end of this particular demo before we go onto the 
next one, just to talk a little bit about what just happened there. It was a great 
demonstration, some great results. I really like the fact that this hypnotist is taking some 
risks and has gone for the full range of phenomena – physical, emotional and mental.  
 
He’s really covered every base here and done phenomenally well. The last thing I want 
to point out here is at the end of this whole show, he does something that is very 
important.  
 
1. He makes sure to cancel his suggestions. 
 
In fact he doesn’t just cancel them, but he tests to make sure that they are cancelled. 
What were the two major suggestions that he’s done recently? It’s the feet being stuck 
to the ground and the forgetting of their name.  
 
He checks it out by getting them to walk around a little bit, and shaking their hands and 
asking their names to make sure that they can remember their names again.  
 
2. Always remember to do that, and make sure that you’re leaving your 
volunteers in at least as good as shape if not in better shape than when you 
found them.  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
216 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
This is a great demonstration of that in action right here. 
 
 
Demonstration #13 
 
… a state of hypnosis. Just relaxation moving through. You’re doing a great job, 
Mike. Now Mike, I just want to make sure your arms are nice and relaxed. I want 
to make sure you’re in a nice comfortable state. Everything’s good.  
 
Now in a moment, Mike, what I’m going to do is I’m going to ask you what your 
name is, and for the life of you you’re not going to be able to remember your 
name. Now it’s only temporary. It’s only while we’re standing here on the Strip 
and while I’m talking to you, but for the life of you you’re not going to be able to 
remember what your name is. 
 
Even if I actually tell you what your name is and ask you what your name is using 
your name, you’re not going to be able to think of what your name is. It’s going to 
be the funniest thing and you’re not going to figure out why this is going on, but it 
doesn’t really matter because you’re having fun and you’re in Las Vegas and 
everything’s cool. 
 
Mike, in a second I’m going to ask you to open your eyes. I’m going to count to 
three and I’m going to ask you to open your eyes. I’m going to ask you what your 
name is and you’re not going to be able to remember what your name is. You’re 
going to look over at your lovely wife, and she’s going to ask you what your name 
is, and you’re not going to be able to remember what it is. 
 
Even if she says Mike, what’s your name, you’re going to say I don’t know what 
my name is. It’s on the tip of my tongue. I had it a second ago, but for some 
reason I can’t think of it anymore. 
 
So one, two, three, open your eyes. What’s your name?  
 
Giggling. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
217 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Really?  
 
We’re onto the next demonstration here. We’re on the last few demonstrations that 
we’ve got on here. Unfortunately, we missed most of the setup of this one. All the set 
pieces were carried out before the camera got turned on.  
 
However, luckily we did catch the end of his performance and there were some great 
suggestions. Of course here he’s already gone all the way through to the mental 
phenomenon of a name amnesia. 
 
1. I want you to pay attention to how he set that up.  
 
He really did a good job with the setup. He’s using the language of this is fun. You’re in 
Vegas. You’re here to have fun. You’re here to have fun, aren’t you? That’s right. In the 
spirit of fun, let’s just forget your name for a while. 
 
That is fantastic.  
 
2. He’s also including the audience.  
 
The gentleman has his wife with him, and so he’s going to include the wife by getting 
her to check the name out as well. It’s funny when people that know each other are 
talking to each other, especially with name amnesia, because the other person knows 
them so well, and for them to act out of the ordinary is even more powerful and even 
more dramatic. 
 
Now the audience not only appreciates the volunteer’s reaction, but they also get to 
appreciate the wife’s reaction who is flabbergasted at how amazing this person is doing. 
 
The next thing you want to do is remember that in the absence of a suggestion, the 
subject will fill in their own void and find their own ways of responding emotionally to 
something’s that’s happened. 
 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
218 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Name amnesia can be very disturbing because our identity’s attached to our name, so 
once again the hypnotist did a great job of setting this up as a fun thing, an interesting 
thing, something you do in Vegas.  
 
What is the subject’s response? It’s quite literal. He’s having fun. He’s laughing his head 
off at the fact that he can’t remember his name. He can’t say his name.  
 
If he hadn’t made those suggestions around fun, the danger or the risk that he’s running 
is that the subject would get disturbed by the fact that he can’t remember his own 
name because it is disturbing when your identity goes away. 
 
3. If you’re going to do some more edgy and risky like this, remember that you 
want to suggest not just the effect – in this case the name amnesia – but you 
also want to suggest a benevolent reaction to that effect. 
 
It will be strange but curious. It will be fun. It will be the funniest thing you’ve ever 
experienced. You want to give an emotional reaction to it so that there’s no void that 
they will have to fill in themselves with a less present reaction. 
 
Notice also as we continue playing the tape in a moment how the hypnotist really milks 
this and really plays with this. 
 
4. He really enhances it by going there himself first.  
 
Isn’t that funny how that happened? Isn’t that amazing? It’s on the tip of your tongue 
but you can’t say it. 
 
That’s a really nice performance piece, but also it’s a nice reinforcer for the fact that 
something unusual is going on. Go ahead and watch the rest of this piece now, and then 
we’ll go onto the next demonstration.  
 
Could you ask him what his name is please? 
 
What’s your name? 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
219 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Giggling. 
 
Isn’t that the funniest thing when it’s on the tip of your tongue and you try to 
remember what it is? I know what that is. I just can’t think of it.  
 
 
Demonstration #14 
 
… a happy strange feeling. Now I want you to try as you might, I want you to try 
and lift your hand off your head but it’s so tightly stuck to your head, as hard as 
you try you just will not be able to pull it. 
 
The harder you try the funnier it becomes. The funnier it becomes – this is really 
funny, isn’t it? It’s strange, isn’t it? How on Earth is this happening that you can’t 
take your hand off your head? How did it get stuck there?  
 
That’s it. That’s wonderful. That’s wonderful. That’s wonderful and sleep, down, 
down. That’s wonderful. You’re doing a fantastic job there. A fantastic job.  
 
We’re now into the next demonstration. Again we missed the starting point because the 
camera wasn’t ready to capture it. However, we come straight to the interesting point 
now, which is the middle of the demonstration where he’s actually starting to do some 
curious hypnotic phenomena. 
 
What I really like about this demonstration is how he’s again mixing effects. He’s getting 
the hand stuck to their head, which is something very usual and very visual, but he’s also 
giving an emotional reaction.  
 
This does several things. As in the previous demonstration, he’s making sure that he’s 
not only getting an effect, which is dramatic, but he’s giving a reaction to that effect. 
Why? Because in the absence of that reaction, several things could happen. 
 
1. It might get a very bland response, at which point the effect becomes blander.  

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
220 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
People are reacting to the emotions of the event without realizing it. They think that the 
drama is the fact that the hand’s stuck to the head. Sure, that’s part of it, but the main 
thing they’re reacting to is how the person reacts to the fact that their hand is stuck. 
 
If they’re bland and very literal, as a lot of people in hypnosis could be – yep, the hand is 
stuck – it becomes more of a bland demonstration.  
 
2. If on the other hand they start laughing as this lady does, notice how charmed 
the people watching are. It might be only a small group, but they’re still very 
charmed. 
 
In fact in the background you can see a lady who’s attracted by the laughter itself, and 
now we have a new person joining the audience purely based on the emotional 
response. It’s a very powerful thing there. 
 
3. The third possibility of what could happen is that she has a negative reaction. 
 
If you don’t say anything, she might get freaked out or scared by the fact that her arm is 
stuck to her head. That’s a very unusual thing to happen to someone. You don’t want 
that to happen. You don’t want that fear because it’s an unpleasant experience for 
everyone concerned. 
 
Do exactly what this hypnotist does. He suggests the fun of it. Notice that as he’s having 
fun with it, she’s having fun with it, the audience is reinforcing the whole thing, and it’s 
a really nice virtual circle. Everyone wins out this way. 
 
As you continue the end of this final demonstration, just notice the gift that this 
hypnotist is giving to this lady – a sense of a fantastic future and so on. It’s a really 
charming gift to give to someone. 
 
Also notice everybody about his performance qualities. 
 
→ His tone of voice. 
→ The emotional atmosphere that he’s creating. 
→ The fun that he’s creating with it. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
221 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
→ The way he’s projecting his voice not just at the subject, but past it at the people 
who are watching so that everyone’s included into it as well. 
 
This is a really fun piece. It’s a really nice piece. You can clearly see that the audience 
has been charmed by this, and of course you can tell as the lady comes back out of 
trance that she’s had an absolute blast. 
 
This really is the key to doing street hypnosis. Make sure that everyone’s having a good 
time, both the volunteers and the audience, and you’re sure to succeed. 
 
Okay now as you sit there, you can sit there, stand there even, you can support 
your body and go deeply down into a wonderful state of relaxation. You came to 
Las Vegas and you had no idea what was going to happen to you, but you wanted 
to have a good time and you are going to have a good time. 
 
Your time is going to get even better. In fact your life is going to get even better. 
Why? Because you just came down the street tonight and the whole universe is 
going to just line up in front of you, and your life is just going to get mysteriously 
better for absolutely no reason at all. Does that not sound wonderful? 
 
Yes. 
 
Absolutely wonderful. That’s great. Okay in a few moments I’m going to count 
from one to five. When I get to five, you’re going to come back. You’re going to 
feel relaxed, refreshed and absolutely fantastic knowing that something crazily 
nice happened.  
 
You don’t know what it is and you don’t need to know and you don’t care. It was 
just funny. It was good and now you’re just going to have good feelings and good 
stuff for the rest of your life. 
 
One, you’re just starting to come back being aware of the noises around you; two, 
coming more and more back; three, just starting to take a nice breath; four, just 
coming more and more back; and five, coming back feeling relaxed, refreshed and 
absolutely fantastic. 

Advanced Walk Up Street Hypnosis – Bonus Transcript Manual  
 
 
222 WUSH Bonus Transcript Manual              ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Thank you. 
 
Thank you very much.  
 
Thank you. 
 
That’s it. That’s great. 
 
That was really fun. 
 
The universe awaits you. Take your sisters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

