www.ebook3000.com

Advanced Numerical 
Simulations in Mechanical 
Engineering
Ashwani Kumar
Government of Uttar Pradesh, India
Pravin P. Patil
Graphic Era University, India
Yogesh Kr. Prajapati
National Institute of Technology Uttarakhand, India
A volume in the Advances in 
Mechatronics and Mechanical 
Engineering (AMME) Book Series 

Published in the United States of America by
IGI Global
Engineering Science Reference (an imprint of IGI Global)
701 E. Chocolate Avenue
Hershey PA, USA 17033
Tel: 717-533-8845
Fax:  717-533-8661 
E-mail: cust@igi-global.com
Web site: http://www.igi-global.com
Copyright © 2018 by IGI Global.  All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be 
reproduced, stored or distributed in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying, without written permission from the publisher.
Product or company names used in this set are for identification purposes only. Inclusion of the 
names of the products or companies does not indicate a claim of ownership by IGI Global of the 
trademark or registered trademark.
	
	
	
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
British Cataloguing in Publication Data
A Cataloguing in Publication record for this book is available from the British Library.
All work contributed to this book is new, previously-unpublished material.
The views expressed in this book are those of the authors, but not necessarily of the publisher.
For electronic access to this publication, please contact: eresources@igi-global.com.
Names: Kumar, Ashwani, 1989- author. | Patil, Pravin P., 1976- author. | 
   Prajapati, Yogesh Kr., 1983- author.
Title: Advanced numerical simulations in mechanical engineering / editors, 
   Ashwani Kumar, Pravin P. Patil, and Yogesh Kr. Prajapati.
Description: Hershey, PA : Engineering Science Reference, [2018] | Includes 
   bibliographical references.
Identifiers: LCCN 2017020859| ISBN 9781522537229 (hardcover) | ISBN 
   9781522537236 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Mechanical engineering--Mathematics. | 
   Machinery--Mathematical models. | Numerical analysis.
Classification: LCC TJ170 .K7984 2018 | DDC 620.001/5118--dc23 LC record available at https://
lccn.loc.gov/2017020859
 
 
This book is published in the IGI Global book series Advances in Mechatronics and Mechanical 
Engineering (AMME) (ISSN: 2328-8205; eISSN: 2328-823X)
www.ebook3000.com

Advances in Mechatronics 
and Mechanical Engineering 
(AMME) Book Series
Editor-in-Chief: J. Paulo Davim, University of Aveiro, Portugal
Mission
ISSN:2328-8205 
 EISSN:2328-823X
With its aid in the creation of smartphones, cars, medical imaging devices, and 
manufacturing tools, the mechatronics engineering field is in high demand. 
Mechatronics aims to combine the principles of mechanical, computer, and electrical 
engineering together to bridge the gap of communication between the different 
disciplines.
The Advances in Mechatronics and Mechanical Engineering (AMME) 
Book Series provides innovative research and practical developments in the field 
of mechatronics and mechanical engineering. This series covers a wide variety 
of application areas in electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, computer 
and software engineering; essential for academics, practitioners, researchers, and 
industry leaders.
•	Computational Mechanics
•	Design and Manufacture
•	Autonomous systems
•	Manufacturing Methodologies
•	Biologically Inspired Robotics
•	Micro and nanomechanics
•	Bioengineering Materials
•	Mechanisms and machines
•	Computer-Based Manufacturing
•	Nanomaterials and nanomanufacturing
Coverage
IGI Global is currently accepting 
manuscripts for publication within this 
series. To submit a proposal for a volume in 
this series, please contact our Acquisition 
Editors at Acquisitions@igi-global.com or 
visit: http://www.igi-global.com/publish/.
The Advances in Mechatronics and Mechanical Engineering  (AMME) Book Series (ISSN 2328-8205) is published 
by IGI Global, 701 E. Chocolate Avenue, Hershey, PA 17033-1240, USA, www.igi-global.com. This series is composed 
of titles available for purchase individually; each title is edited to be contextually exclusive from any other title within the 
series. For pricing and ordering information please visit http://www.igi-global.com/book-series/advances-mechatronics-
mechanical-engineering/73808. Postmaster: Send all address changes to above address. © © 2018 IGI Global. All rights, 
including translation in other languages reserved by the publisher. No part of this series may be reproduced or used in any 
form or by any means – graphics, electronic, or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, taping, or information and 
retrieval systems – without written permission from the publisher, except for non commercial, educational use, including 
classroom teaching purposes. The views expressed in this series are those of the authors, but not necessarily of IGI Global.

701 East Chocolate Avenue, Hershey, PA 17033, USA
Tel: 717-533-8845 x100 • Fax: 717-533-8661
E-Mail: cust@igi-global.com • www.igi-global.com
Numerical and Analytical Solutions for Solving Nonlinear Equations in Heat Transfer
Davood Domiri Ganji (Babol Noshirvani University of Technology, Iran) and Roghayeh 
Abbasi Talarposhti (University of Mazandaran, Iran) 
Engineering Science Reference • ©2018 • 275pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781522527138) • US $195.00
Nanofluid Technologies and Thermal Convection Techniques
Ramesh Chand (Government Arya Degree College Nurpur (HP), India) 
Engineering Science Reference • ©2017 • 229pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781683180067) • US $185.00
Mathematical Concepts and Applications in Mechanical Engineering and Mechatronics
Mangey Ram (Graphic Era University, India) and J. Paulo Davim (University of Aveiro, 
Portugal) 
Engineering Science Reference • ©2017 • 495pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781522516392) • US $215.00
Handbook of Research on Advances and Applications in Refrigeration Systems and 
Technologies
Pedro Dinis Gaspar (University of Beira Interior, Portugal) and Pedro Dinho da Silva 
(University of Beira Interior, Portugal) 
Engineering Science Reference • ©2015 • 924pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781466683983) • US $545.00
Engineering Creative Design in Robotics and Mechatronics
Maki K. Habib (The American University in Cairo, Egypt) and J. Paulo Davim (University 
of Aveiro, Portugal) 
Engineering Science Reference • ©2013 • 366pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781466642256) • US $195.00
Computational Methods for Optimizing Manufacturing Technology Models and Techniques
J. Paulo Davim (University of Aveiro, Portugal) 
Engineering Science Reference • ©2012 • 395pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781466601284) • US $195.00
For an enitre list of titles in this series, please visit:
https://www.igi-global.com/book-series/advances-mechatronics-mechanical-engineering/73808
Titles in this Series
For a list of additional titles in this series, please visit: 
https://www.igi-global.com/book-series/advances-mechatronics-mechanical-engineering/73808
www.ebook3000.com

Table of Contents
Preface..................................................................................................................xii
Acknowledgment................................................................................................. xv
Chapter 1
Low to High Speed Transient Structural and Thermal Temperature 
Measurement of Oil-Lubricated Multi-Speed Heavy Vehicle Transmission 
Gearbox System Based on FEA..............................................................................1
Ashwani Kumar, Government of Uttar Pradesh, India
Chapter 2
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With 
Piezoelectric Layers..............................................................................................22
Anshul Sharma, National Institute of Technology Uttarakhand, India
Chapter 3
Design and Simulation of Electro-Mechanical Mass Flow Sensor (EMMFS): 
Evaluation of Resonant Frequency Using Different Configuration of 
Resonating Tube...................................................................................................50
Pravin P. Patil, Graphic Era University, India
Chapter 4
Advanced Numerical and Experimental Methods Used in Material Science 
for Evaluating Mechanical and Damping Nature of Composite Materials...........63
Subhash Singh, Lovely Professional University, India
Kaushik Pal, IIT Roorkee, India
Chapter 5
Comparative Study of Conjugate Heat Transfer in Uniform and Diverging 
Cross-Section Microchannels...............................................................................76
Yogesh K. Prajapati, National Institute of Technology Uttarakhand,
 India

﻿
Chapter 6
A Study of Flexible Manufacturing System With Multiple Failures....................96
Monika Manglik, University of Petroleum and Energy Studies, India
Mangey Ram, Graphic Era University, India
Divya Ahluwalia, University of Petroleum and Energy Studies, India
Chapter 7
FEA-Based Numerical Simulation and Theoretical Modeling for Predicting 
Thermal Contact Conductance...........................................................................118
Sachin Rana, ABES Institute of Technology Ghaziabad, India
Chapter 8
Mathematical Modeling of Five-Link Inverted Cart and Pendulum System......140
Ashwani Kharola, Graphic Era University, India
Chapter 9
Design and Thermal Analysis of MgZrO3 Ceramic Coated I.C. Engine Piston 
Based on Finite Element Analysis (FEA)...........................................................156
Shailendra Kumar, College of Engineering Science and Technology 
Lucknow, India
Related References............................................................................................ 177
Compilation of References............................................................................... 220
About the Contributors.................................................................................... 238
Index................................................................................................................... 241
www.ebook3000.com

Detailed Table of Contents
Preface..................................................................................................................xii
Acknowledgment................................................................................................. xv
Chapter 1
Low to High Speed Transient Structural and Thermal Temperature 
Measurement of Oil-Lubricated Multi-Speed Heavy Vehicle Transmission 
Gearbox System Based on FEA..............................................................................1
Ashwani Kumar, Government of Uttar Pradesh, India
The main objective of this chapter is dynamic structural and thermal analysis 
of multi speed transmission gearbox (medium duty truck) using Finite Element 
Analysis (FEA). To evaluate the dynamic strength of transmission gearbox assembly 
transient structural analysis was performed. Dynamic varying loads at different 
rotational speed were applied to perform the transient analysis. In gear meshing 
operation at high rotational speed and loading condition, frictional heat is generated 
inside gearbox assembly. To reduce the effect of frictional heat, gear oil is used. In 
this research study gear oil SAE 85W140 was used for cooling and performance 
enhancement. Steady state thermal analysis was performed to evaluate the thermal 
effect of frictional heat, rotational speed of shafts (pinion, gear) and load with 
gear oil lubrication. In thermal effect gearbox surface temperature was measured 
at different points. FEA simulation results have been validated using experimental 
results available in literature.
Chapter 2
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With 
Piezoelectric Layers..............................................................................................22
Anshul Sharma, National Institute of Technology Uttarakhand, India
The active control of vibration of piezoelectric flexible smart structure is an important 
issue in engineering. Reducing vibration may improve the user’s comfort and safety. 
This chapter presents a fuzzy logic approach for active control of vibration of a 

﻿
smart composite laminated spherical shell. The spherical shell is in the form of a 
layered composite shell having collocated piezoelectric sensor/actuator pair. The 
vibratory response of the shell is modeled using finite element method. There are 
five mechanical degrees of freedom per node and the potential difference across 
the piezoelectric layer is introduced as an additional electrical degree of freedom 
on an element level. The mode superposition method has been used to transform 
the coupled finite element equations of motion in the physical coordinates into a set 
of reduced uncoupled equations in the modal coordinates. The simulation results 
illustrate that the superiority of designed nonconventional fuzzy logic controller 
over conventional controllers.
Chapter 3
Design and Simulation of Electro-Mechanical Mass Flow Sensor (EMMFS): 
Evaluation of Resonant Frequency Using Different Configuration of 
Resonating Tube...................................................................................................50
Pravin P. Patil, Graphic Era University, India
The main objective of this chapter is FEA simulation of resonating tube with different 
size and material configuration for evaluation of resonant frequency. Resonating tube 
is an important component of Electro-Mechanical Mass Flow Sensor (EMMFS) used 
for measuring direct mass flow. Omega and U-shaped resonating tube type EMMFS 
have been investigated for 200mm, 300 mm and 400mm height with three different 
materials Copper, Aluminium and Mild Steel. EMMFS analysis is highly nonlinear 
study having fluid structure interaction. To simplify the solution large deformations 
in resonating tube countered to be absent. Sensing points are located symmetrically 
at limbs of resonating tube to sense the phase shift for measuring mass flow rate. 
FEA simulation of EMMFS has been done using Ansys. Solid Edge and Pro-E has 
been used for modeling of omega and U-shaped resonating tube.
Chapter 4
Advanced Numerical and Experimental Methods Used in Material Science 
for Evaluating Mechanical and Damping Nature of Composite Materials...........63
Subhash Singh, Lovely Professional University, India
Kaushik Pal, IIT Roorkee, India
In this chapter, the authors provide the simultaneous applications of numerical and 
mathematical methods for engineers. The best way to ignite the fire of curiosity in 
the student is the validation of their ideas and learning. Specially, the engineering 
students learn best when they are prompted by problems. This can be achieved 
through the validation of their analytical results with experimental. Therefore, the 
scope of the present work is to synchronize of the above-mentioned two domains 
(numerical, experimental). Furthermore, we have approached numerical methods 
from an experimental perspective. Mathematical methods are techniques by which 
www.ebook3000.com

﻿
mathematical problems are developed so that these can be solved with arithmetic 
operations. Although, there are many forms of numerical methods, they possess one 
common characteristic: they invariably call for large numbers of tedious arithmetic 
calculations. This work intends to relate the theoretical understanding with the real 
world problems.
Chapter 5
Comparative Study of Conjugate Heat Transfer in Uniform and Diverging 
Cross-Section Microchannels...............................................................................76
Yogesh K. Prajapati, National Institute of Technology Uttarakhand, 
India
This chapter covers single-phase heat transfer analysis in microchannel heat sink 
relevant to electronic cooling application. In order to estimate the correct heat transfer 
performance, it is required to consider both, conduction and convection. Hence, 
conjugate analysis of heat transfer has been considered where both conduction 
and convection heat transfer are calculated as a part of solution. Two different 
configurations of microchannels namely, uniform and diverging cross-section have 
been considered individually on different copper substrate. A copper substrate of 
dimension 25×0.9×4 mm has been used to generate microchannel. Inlet cross-
section (0.4×0.75 mm) of both channels has been kept equal however; cross-section 
of diverging channel keeps on increasing as width is continuously increasing along 
the flow direction. A constant heat flux of 250 kW/m2 has been provided from the 
bottom. Comparative study has been done to analyse the heat transfer performance 
of both the configurations of microchannels.
Chapter 6
A Study of Flexible Manufacturing System With Multiple Failures....................96
Monika Manglik, University of Petroleum and Energy Studies, India
Mangey Ram, Graphic Era University, India
Divya Ahluwalia, University of Petroleum and Energy Studies, India
Flexibility refers to the capability of a manufacturing system to respond cost effectively 
and arbitrarily to adapting production needs and necessities. This ability is becoming 
increasingly important for the design and operation of manufacturing systems, as 
these systems do function in highly variable and unpredictable environments. In 
this chapter, the reliability of the flexible manufacturing system has been calculated 
based on the mathematical framework. The model of the system consists of the 
system structure and the distribution of its components. The components are assumed 
to be repairable after various types of failures. In this work, the reliability and 
availability have been analyzed by using Markov process, Laplace transformations 
and supplementary variable techniques. Furthermore, the impacts of various failures 
on reliability, and availability of the system have also been analyzed.

﻿
Chapter 7
FEA-Based Numerical Simulation and Theoretical Modeling for Predicting 
Thermal Contact Conductance...........................................................................118
Sachin Rana, ABES Institute of Technology Ghaziabad, India
The chapter states the problem of thermal contact conductance between surfaces. 
Rough surface generation and thermal contact conductance has been simulated using 
Finite Element Method (FEM) based Ansys. The resulting geometry is meshed 
by different meshing method to convert the solid model into FEM model. The 
main aim of meshing is to create fine and coarse mesh at the contact to reduce the 
computational time. To create a fine mesh at contact free meshing with refinement 
and mapped mesh has been used. The analysis has been performed on the FEM 
model with varying loading condition of different surface roughness and different 
materials to get the real contact area and thus thermal contact conductance. The 
variation of thermal contact conductance and real contact area with pressure of 
different surface roughness and with surface roughness of different loading condition 
of the specimen made of aluminum and mild steel has been plotted and compared.
Chapter 8
Mathematical Modeling of Five-Link Inverted Cart and Pendulum System......140
Ashwani Kharola, Graphic Era University, India
This chapter describes a mathematical model and design structure of five-link 
inverted pendulum on cart. The system comprises of five rigid pendulums or links 
mounted on a mutable cart. The objective is to control all the five links at vertical 
upright position when cart is stationary at particular location. The study considered 
free-body-diagram (FBD) analysis of proposed system and applied Newton’s second 
law of motion for deriving a mathematical model of proposed system. The derived 
governing equations of motion can be further used by researchers for developing 
a Matlab-Simulink model of five-link inverted pendulum system. The developed 
model can be further used for deriving equations of motions for n-link cart and 
pendulum system. Researchers can further apply various control techniques for 
control of proposed system.
Chapter 9
Design and Thermal Analysis of MgZrO3 Ceramic Coated I.C. Engine Piston 
Based on Finite Element Analysis (FEA)...........................................................156
Shailendra Kumar, College of Engineering Science and Technology 
Lucknow, India
Piston is considered to be one of the most important part of internal combustion 
engine. Piston is used to deliver thrust via connecting rod to the main shaft of the 
engine. Normally it is made of cast iron which bears high gas pressure and has damping 
www.ebook3000.com

﻿
property. The main objective of this chapter is to perform structural and thermal 
analysis of MgZrO3 top surface ceramic coated piston. Piston made up of gray cast 
iron coated with ceramic material (MgZrO3) which is bonded by special material 
(NiCrAl) is designed by machine design approach to determine the dimensions of 
the piston and Finite Element Analysis (FEA) was performed using ANSYS 17.1. 
The pressure of the 5 N/mm2 was applied at top land of piston. An equivalent Von 
misses stress in ceramic coated piston was found less in comparison to uncoated 
piston. Thermal analysis of both coated and non-coated piston was performed.
Related References............................................................................................ 177
Compilation of References............................................................................... 220
About the Contributors.................................................................................... 238
Index................................................................................................................... 241

Preface
The editors are delighted to present the high-quality research content of book 
series Advances in Mechatronics and Mechanical Engineering in first edition 
book Advanced Numerical Simulations in Mechanical Engineering. Book title was 
chosen as it converges upcoming technologies in mechatronics and mechanical 
engineering discipline for the next decade. This book is a compilation of research in 
advanced modelling and simulation method adopted in mechanical and mechatronics 
engineering. In present time, ‘‘Simulation’’ is the buzzword for any discipline and 
many scholars are working in these areas. This book provides a reference for all post 
graduate or senior undergraduate students working in mechatronics and mechanical 
discipline.
The word Simulation signifies imitation of real world system. Model development 
having same behaviors, functions and characteristics as real-world system is first 
step of simulation. This model represents real system itself and simulation work 
shows operation of the system over time. In present time simulation is used in various 
contexts as like insight function study of human systems, performance optimization, 
testing of dynamic system, training, health care, education and study of designed 
but not built system. Simulation results are directly governed by assumptions 
and approximations made during study. All engineering discipline like robotics, 
production, biomechanics, automobiles, electronics, telecommunication, economics, 
satellite navigation, process simulation in chemical engineering, ergonomic study, 
aesthetic study of product and disaster management used simulation method for 
valid result acquisition.
The chapters included in the book highlight important research in the numerical 
simulation field. Chapter 1, “Low to High Speed Transient Structural and Thermal 
Temperature Measurement of Oil-Lubricated Multi-Speed Heavy Vehicle 
Transmission Gearbox System Based on FEA,” covers advanced application of 
simulation technique in field of heavy vehicle dynamics and addresses the application 
of the Finite Element Analysis (FEA), an advance numerical simulation technique, 
to assess the dynamic strength of transmission gearbox assembly of a medium duty 
truck. Chapter 2, “Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented 
xii
www.ebook3000.com

Preface
With Piezoelectric Layers,” addresses the topic of active control of vibrations, 
which has a wide range of applications in engineering, from motorcar, spacecraft 
to nuclear industries. The approach taken to the analysis of the vibration control of 
mart shell structure was the use of fuzzy logic, moreover, the Finite Element Method 
(FEM) was employed to simulate the piezo-laminated composite shell structure 
and to predict the static and dynamic response of structure. The chapter develops 
the mathematical formulae from first principles and relatively easy to follow if the 
potential reader has a good mathematical background. In a similar vein, the authors 
present some recommendations for future research on the subject to increase the 
reliability and safety of such devices.
Sensors have wide application in various fields. Chapter 3, “Design and Simulation 
of Electro-Mechanical Mass Flow Sensor (EMMFS): Evaluation of Resonant 
Frequency Using Different Configuration of Resonating Tube,” provides a study of 
Electro-Mechanical Mass Flow Sensor (EMMFS). It highlights result associated with 
the resonating tube, which is an important component of EMMFS used for measuring 
direct mass flow. EMMFS works on the principle of Coriolis Effect. EMMFS analysis 
is highly nonlinear study having fluid structure interaction. To simplify the solution 
large deformations in resonating tube countered to be absent. The simulation was 
conducted under different resonating tube configurations; e.g., shape (‘omega’ and 
‘U’), size (200mm, 300 mm and 400mm height), material (Copper, Aluminium 
and Mild Steel). The simulation results will be used for excitation in experimental 
work. In recent years, due to development of integrated electronic devices and high 
speed processors, power densities of electronic components have been significantly 
increased resulting drastic increase in heat generation in these devices.
In continuation to EMMFS application, Chapter 4, “Advanced Numerical and 
Experimental Methods Used in Material Science for Evaluating Mechanical and 
Damping Nature of Composite Materials,” covers an interesting subject that associated 
with composite materials. Given the wide applicability of these, for example, in the 
internal combustion engines, rotary components, Nano and micro-electromechanical 
systems, among other; the subject could effectively be of great interest to researchers 
and students in the field of mechanical engineering. Chapter 5, “Comparative Study 
of Conjugate Heat Transfer in Uniform and Diverging Cross-Section Microchannels,” 
presents the simulation results of a single-phase heat transfer analysis for the case 
of a microchannel heat sink which is relevant to electronics cooling application.
The authors address the topic associated with reliability at the ‘macro’ level the 
case of a pulp flexible manufacturing system presented in Chapter 6, “A Study of 
Flexible Manufacturing System With Multiple Failures.” The authors addressed 
their analysis by applying the Markov process. The mathematical formulae are 
derived from first principles. Chapter 7, “FEA-Based Numerical Simulation and 
Theoretical Modeling for Predicting Thermal Contact Conductance,” investigates 
xiii

Preface
the topic associated with heat transfer phenomena occurring between surfaces. 
They presented the results associated with the contact area and the terminal contact 
conductance between different surface roughness and materials. They have employed 
Finite Element Method (FEM) simulation method to conduct their analysis. The 
variation of thermal contact conductance and real contact area with pressure of 
different surface roughness and with surface roughness of different loading condition 
of the specimen made of aluminum and mild steel has been plotted and compared.
Chapter 8, “Mathematical Modeling of Five-Link Inverted Cart and Pendulum 
System,” presents a mathematical modelling of a dynamical system i.e. a “five-link 
inverted cart and pendulum system”. Effectively, the system under study has a wide 
range of applications, such as the behavior of missile/rocket guidance system, ship 
yaw motion control, aircraft control, for example, during turbulence, etc. The authors 
decomposed the system under consideration into several sub-systems for developing 
the governing mathematical formulae of motion through the Free-Body-Diagram 
(FBD) representation. Also, the authors employed the Newton’s second law of 
motion for deriving the equations of motion for the proposed sub-systems. Chapter 
9, “Design and Thermal Analysis of MgZrO3 Ceramic Coated I.C. Engine Piston 
Based on Finite Element Analysis (FEA),” is focused on one of the key components 
of an internal combustion engine i.e. the Piston. Given the fact that the Piston’s 
function is to deliver thrust, it bears a considerable amount of high gas pressure. The 
authors concentrate their efforts to performing a structural and thermal analysis of 
the “Zirconium based ceramic coating” (MgZrO3) top surface ceramic coated piston.
The variety of models presented in the book is up-to-date and potentiality valuable 
to researchers in all engineering disciplines and covers a wide range of industries 
automotive, aviation, electronics, nuclear etc. The provided “Future research” section 
is very important because it may stimulate debate and research for those involved in 
the fields of Mechanical Engineering and Mechatronics. We are sure that researchers 
will be benefited with this approach.
Ashwani Kumar
Government of Uttar Pradesh, India
Pravin P. Patil
Graphic Era University, India
Yogesh K. Prajapati
National Institute of Technology Uttarakhand, India
xiv
www.ebook3000.com

Acknowledgment
We express our heartfelt gratitude to IGI Global and the editorial team for their 
inspiring guidance and support during preparation of this book. We are sincerely 
grateful to reviewers for their suggestions and illuminating views on research content 
presented in book Advanced Numerical Simulations in Mechanical Engineering.
We are thankful to Dr. Anshul Sharma, Department of Mechanical Engineering, 
National Institute of Technology, Uttarkhand for sharing his views on book and 
contributing book chapter in field of vibration and control. Our gratitude to Prof. 
Mangey Ram, Assistant Dean and Head Department of Mathematics, Graphic Era 
University, Dehradun for encouragement and support throughout working on this 
book. Our sincere thanks to Mr. Sachin Rana, Assistant Professor, Department of 
Mechanical Engineering, ABES Institute of Technology, Ghaziabad for providing 
constant ideas of innovation for book chapters. Special thanks to Dr. Subhash Singh, 
Division of Research and Development, Lovely Professional University, India for 
sharing his research experience and views on final draft of this book project.
Ashwani Kumar
Government of Uttar Pradesh, India
Pravin P. Patil
Graphic Era University, India
Yogesh K. Prajapati
National Institute of Technology Uttarakhand, India
xv

Copyright © 2018, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  1
1
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-3722-9.ch001
ABSTRACT
The main objective of this chapter is dynamic structural and thermal analysis of 
multi speed transmission gearbox (medium duty truck) using Finite Element Analysis 
(FEA). To evaluate the dynamic strength of transmission gearbox assembly transient 
structural analysis was performed. Dynamic varying loads at different rotational 
speed were applied to perform the transient analysis. In gear meshing operation 
at high rotational speed and loading condition, frictional heat is generated inside 
gearbox assembly. To reduce the effect of frictional heat, gear oil is used. In this 
research study gear oil SAE 85W140 was used for cooling and performance 
enhancement. Steady state thermal analysis was performed to evaluate the thermal 
effect of frictional heat, rotational speed of shafts (pinion, gear) and load with 
gear oil lubrication. In thermal effect gearbox surface temperature was measured 
at different points. FEA simulation results have been validated using experimental 
results available in literature.
Low to High Speed Transient 
Structural and Thermal 
Temperature Measurement of 
Oil-Lubricated Multi-Speed 
Heavy Vehicle Transmission 
Gearbox System Based on FEA
Ashwani Kumar
Government of Uttar Pradesh, India
www.ebook3000.com

2
Temperature Measurement of Vehicle Transmission Gearbox System Based on FEA
INTRODUCTION
Multi speed transmission gearbox is assembly of gears. The gearbox assembly is 
used for varying torque and gearing condition. Shifting from lower to higher gearing 
reduces torque value but increases rotational speed. In this chapter the object is 
multi speed transmission gearbox. This transmission gearbox consists of 4 set of 
gears excluding reverse gear. This transmission assembly is used in heavy vehicle 
medium duty trucks. Gear oil is used as lubricant for moving parts, dissipates 
frictional heat from gearbox assembly, prevent overheating of gears and it also 
works as vehicle performance enhancer. The operating temperature of gear oil varies 
(-18 to 110)0C. In past two decades various research studies has been performed in 
field of transmission gearbox concern with gear oil physical properties, material 
mechanical properties variation for gearbox housing, looseness study of gearbox, 
dynamic vibration, power-flow in transmission etc.
Kumar (2015) have studied the heavy duty truck transmission casing for different 
material application. The main objective of this study was selecting best suited 
material for transmission housing based on vibration suitability. A series of four 
materials has been selected Al alloys, Mg alloys, Structural Steel and Grey cast iron 
FG 260. The best suited material is grey cast iron FG 260. Zimparov (2002) have 
studied the design problem of the heat exchangers for cooling purpose. Entropy 
generation and irreversible friction flow problem was considered here. The objective 
was to design a heat exchanger with minimum system losses. Bozca (2010) have 
optimized the vehicle gearbox geometry. The authors have studied the rattle noise 
problem in transmission assembly. It is caused by torsional vibration transmitted 
from engine to the shaft of transmission. Rattle noise were calculated by varying 
various parameters. The authors have performed the numerical, analytical and 
experimental work.
Salah (2007) have investigated the vehicle fuel economy problem. Fuel economy 
of vehicle is governed by gear oil and proper functioning of transmission assembly. 
The aim of study was to find a relation between transmission cooling and vehicle 
fuel economy. The results were in favor and show that proper and efficient gear 
oil cooling reduces the fuel consumption by 1.0-1.4%. Kumar (2014) have studied 
the looseness study of truck transmission system. The loose frequency varies from 
(1311-3110) Hz. Looseness condition of transmission reduces the frequency range 
and increases the chances of resonance. The simulation results were obtained for 
different looseness condition of transmission casing. Zero displacement constraint 
based boundary condition was applied by constraining all 37 bolt holes.

3
Temperature Measurement of Vehicle Transmission Gearbox System Based on FEA
Karamavruc (2011) have studied the thermal properties of gear oil. Density, 
specific heat capacity, thermal conductivity and viscosity are the thermo-physical 
properties that highly depend on temperature. Viscosity changes in exponential 
manner but other thermo-physical properties changes in linear manner. Pennestri 
(2012) have studied the power flow mechanism in transmission gearbox assembly 
using graph theory method. They have also calculated the efficiency of epicyclic 
gearbox used in hybrid vehicles.
Quaiyum (2012) has studied the Automatic Transmission Fluid (ATF). He 
designed a Minichannel Heat Exchanger (MICHX) for cooling application. The wind 
tunnel based experimental setup was used for the micro channel analysis. ATF flow 
on a mini channel heat exchanger was studied for varying heat transfer coefficient 
and Reynold’s no. Researchers have also studied vehicle transmission lubrication, 
transient analysis of gear interaction, dynamic vibration analysis, thermal balance, 
gear interaction and gear oil lubrication of transmission Kouroussis (2015). Long, 
(2003) have studied the different parameters on single pair of meshing gear tooth. 
The varying parameters were load, rotational speed and convection heat transfer 
coefficient. The rotational speed varies (2000-10000) rpm. For combined loading 
condition the temperature variation of gear tooth is (70-135)0C. In study average 
heat transfer coefficient varies (100-350) w/m2k depends on radious of gear. The 
FEA results were compared with experimental results. Altinbalik (2015) has studied 
the gear profile for load optimization using theoretical and experimental approach. 
They have found the lowest load value for forming process of gear using lateral 
extrusion and forward extrusion.
Gear tooth analysis plays an important role in performance evaluation of 
transmission gearbox for high speed and heavy duty application. Gear tooth wear 
and tear is governed by rotational speed, load and gear oil lubrication. Effective 
lubrication reduces wear-tear action and increases the performance and life span 
of gearbox. The operating parameters that are load, rotational speed and effective 
cooling action. Suitable load (torque) and speed combination is managed by vehicle 
operator and effective cooling is done using gear oil. Gear oil dissipates the frictional 
heat from gearbox assembly to surroundings. Average convection heat transfer 
coefficient is used to indicate the gear oil cooling. Frictional heat removal takes 
place by convection process. The present chapter concern with transient structural 
and steady state thermal analysis of multi speed transmission gearbox assembly. FEA 
simulation was used to evaluate the results. The FEA based numerical simulation 
results are in agreement with experimental literature results.
www.ebook3000.com

4
Temperature Measurement of Vehicle Transmission Gearbox System Based on FEA
CAD MODELLING AND EVALUATION OF 
TRANSMISSION GEARBOX
Multi speed transmission gearbox is used with heavy vehicle medium duty trucks. 
Figure 1 show the complete assembly of gearbox transmission used in vehicle. To 
provide the gear oil tight sealing and moist free environment the gearbox assembly 
is fitted inside housing. Gearbox transmission housing is manufactured of damping 
material (grey cast iron) to absorb shock and vibration. Housing prevents direct 
damage of gears. Gearbox housing is mounted on vehicle chassis frame. It is 
constraint to move in any direction. In this study 37 connecting bolts were used to 
mount the housing on chassis frame. Figure 2 shows the meshing action of gears.4 
gears are mounted on main shaft and mating pinion on lay shaft. Solid edge (2006) 
and Pro-E (2013) were used for solid modeling of gearbox assembly. Deigning 
parameters were obtained from workshops and manufacturer of heavy vehicle in 
India. FEA based Ansys 14.5 (2013) has been used for the numerical simulation. It 
is an approximation technique used for analysis of objects. Transient structural and 
steady state simulation were done using FEA. Figure 3 shows meshed geometry 
of gearbox (5, 75, 383 nodes and 3, 39,898 elements) having computing time 27 
hours. Gearbox replacement is costly and time taking process. This study provides 
a reference work in design stage of transmission gearbox.
ASSIGNMENT OF MATERIAL PROPERTIES 
AND BOUNDARY CONDITIONS
Individual materials have been assigned to transmission gearbox components. Grey 
cast iron HT200 (Young’s modulus 1.1 e11, Poisson’s ratio 0.28, density 7200 kg/
m3) was assigned to transmission casing. SiMn alloys were used for output shaft 
(Young’s modulus 2.05 e11, Poisson’s ratio 0.29, density 7790 kg/m3). Gears were 
manufactured from Cr alloys (Young’s modulus 2.02 e11, Poisson’s ratio 0.29, density 
7800 kg/m3). Synchronizer material is CrMnTi alloy (Young’s modulus 2.01 e11, 
Poisson’s ratio 0.29, density 7912 kg/m3). Bearing material is CrMo alloys (Young’s 
modulus 2.04 e11, Poisson’s ratio 0.28, density 7860 kg/m3) (Qin-man, 2011).
In transmission gearbox assembly main, counter shafts are supported on bearings. 
Synchronizer is used for shifting of gears, from lower to higher or higher to lower 
gears. In 4 speed transmission gear first and second gear is known as lower gearing. 
Third and fourth gear is known as higher gearing. From lower gearing 2nd gear and 
3rd gear from higher gearing were selected for study. Table 1 shows the combined 

5
Temperature Measurement of Vehicle Transmission Gearbox System Based on FEA
Figure 1. Model of transmission gearbox assembly with housing
www.ebook3000.com

6
Temperature Measurement of Vehicle Transmission Gearbox System Based on FEA
loading conditions. When vehicle is in running condition the operating parameters 
are rotational speed and load (torque). Three cases (Case A, Case B, and Case C) of 
loading were assigned to mating (2nd, 3rd) gears. At 2000 rpm the load applied was 
230.48 Nm on 2nd gear and 147.78 Nm on 3rd gear. Peak load was applied in Case 
C when vehicle was running at 6000 rpm on 2nd gear. The time period of loading 
was selected as 9 seconds.
In present research study a broad range of rotational speed (2000-6000) rpm 
and load (147.78-375.56) Nm was applied for simulation. This combined load case 
(torque & rotational speed) covers all possible combination of combined loading for 
heavy vehicle medium duty trucks (Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) (4536-
8845) kg). The earlier research study on transmission only consider the single pair 
Figure 2. Transmission gearbox assembly

7
Temperature Measurement of Vehicle Transmission Gearbox System Based on FEA
of meshing gear but in this chapter the whole assembly of gearbox were considered 
for analysis. The effect of load, rotational speed and gear oil lubrication (average 
convection heat transfer coefficient) on gearbox assembly.
DYNAMIC STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS
Dynamic analysis was performed for the strength evaluation of gears. The combined 
load case of torque and rotational speed was applied. The main objective of transient 
structural analysis was to evaluate the dynamic failure condition in combined loading 
condition. In transient structural analysis total deformation, equivalent von-misses 
stress, max. principal stress, shear stress and equivalent elastic strain values were 
evaluated.
Figure 3. FEA meshing of 4-speed transmission gearbox
Table 1. FEA simulation combined load case
Case A (2000 rpm)
Case B (4000 
rpm)
Case C (6000 
rpm)
Load (Nm)
(Torque of 2nd Driving Gear)
230.48
347.08
375.56
Load (Nm)
(Torque of 3rd Driving Gear)
147.78
220.99
239.97
www.ebook3000.com

8
Temperature Measurement of Vehicle Transmission Gearbox System Based on FEA
Table 2 shows the dynamic transient structural analysis for lower gearing. In 
combined loading condition rotational speed varies (2000-6000) rpm and load (torque) 
varies (230.48-375.56) Nm. In ideal condition of vehicle operation at lower gearing 
speed should be less and at higher gearing speed requirement is high. When vehicle 
runs at high speed in lower gearing the level of deformation and stress generation 
will be high (Table 2). When vehicle is running at 2000 rpm, 230.48 Nm load is 
applied on gears the total deformation is 0.239 mm as load and speed increases 
the total deformation of gears also increases. At 6000 rpm, 375.56Nm load, total 
deformation increases 50-60% (Figure 5) in comparison to 2000 rpm. Von-misses 
stresses vary (3.11-5.01) GPa. Max. principal stress variation is uniform (1.03-1.66) 
GPa. Stresses and elastic strain are within permissible limits. The distrubutation of 
stresses (Figure 4) on gearbox is uniform without any crack, localization of thermal 
stresses which results in safe designing condition of gearbox for dynamic loading.
Figure 4 shows maximum principal stresses generation on gearbox surface at 
2000 rpm and the load value applied on second gear was 230.48 Nm. Green hues 
show variation of maximum principal stress on gearbox surface. The variation of 
stresses is uniform on gearbox surface. The stress variation is within permissible 
limit, showing no stress concentration at any point on gearbox surface. Figure 5 
shows total deformation variation at high rotational speed (6000) rpm on second 
gear, load 375.56 Nm. In dynamic loading condition blue hues show minimum level 
of deformation on gearbox surface. The green hues show regions where deformation 
level is average but there is no chance of failure. The red hues shows the maximum 
deformation level signify chances of failure is high. Red hues region can be seen 
on first and second gear.
Table 3 shows higher gearing dynamic transient structural analysis. When 
vehicle is running on higher gearing the operation is smooth and speed is also 
high. The combined load case shows rotational speed varies (2000-6000) rpm and 
load (147.78-239.97) Nm. When vehicle is running at 2000 rpm the deformation is 
0.153 mm, (35-36) % less in comparison to same speed operation on 2nd gear (0.239 
Table 2. Transient structural analysis of multi speed transmission gearbox lower 
gearing
Gear
Rpm
Torque 
Applied 
(Nm)
Total 
Deformation 
(mm)
Equivalent 
Von-Misses 
Stress 
(Pa)
Max. 
Principal 
Stress (Pa)
Shear 
Stress 
(Pa)
Equivalent 
Elastic 
Strain 
(m/m)
Second
2000
230.48
0.239
3.11e9
1.03e9
3.95e8
0.015
4000
347.08
0.357
4.66e9
1.55e9
5.86e8
0.023
6000
375.56
0.382
5.01e9
1.66e9
6.25e8
0.024

9
Temperature Measurement of Vehicle Transmission Gearbox System Based on FEA
mm). The total deformation is low at all speed in comparison to lower gearing (2nd 
gear). Von misses stresses on gear surface at 2000, 6000 rpm running is less than 
(36- 39)% in comparison to same speed operation on 2nd gear. Maximum principal 
stress, shear stress and elastic strain are within permissible limit. FEA results show 
that high speed (4000, 6000) vehicle running is suitable for higher gearing (3rd, 
4th). If vehicle runs at high speed with low gears (1st, 2nd) the level of deformation 
and stress, strain generation is very high (Table 2). It leads to high frictional heat 
generation inside gearbox housing which slow down the performance of vehicle. 
At the same time the wear and tear is also very high. So it can be concluded that 
for high performance and fuel economy low gearing-low speed, high gearing-high 
speed should be followed.
Figure 4. Max. principal stress variation 2nd gear 2000 rpm
www.ebook3000.com

10
Temperature Measurement of Vehicle Transmission Gearbox System Based on FEA
Figure 5. Total deformations on second gear at 6000 rpm
Table 3. Transient structural analysis of 4 speed transmission gearbox higher gearing
Gear
Rpm
Torque 
Applied 
(Nm)
Total 
Deformation 
(mm)
Equivalent 
Von-Misses 
Stress 
(Pa)
Max. 
Principal 
Stress (Pa)
Shear 
Stress 
(Pa)
Equivalent 
Elastic 
Strain 
(m/m)
Third
2000
147.78
0.153
1.98e9
6.60e8
2.52e8
0.009
4000
220.99
0.220
2.91e9
9.69e8
3.64e8
0.014
6000
239.97
0.224
3.05e9
1.02e9
3.76e8
0.015

11
Temperature Measurement of Vehicle Transmission Gearbox System Based on FEA
Figure 6 shows total deformation for higher gearing at 6000 rpm, load applied 
is 239.97 Nm. In dynamic FEA analysis, blue hues show minimum level of 
deformation. The green hues show regions on gearbox surface where deformation 
is average but chances of failure is minimum here. The region of red hues is more 
at 6000 rpm. The deformation is elastic deformation which happens in gears during 
meshing action. The region of yellow hues is also similar to red hues. It also shows 
high deformation region. The deformation is uniform without high concentration 
of thermal stress regions.
Steady State Thermal Analysis: FEA Results and Discussion
Surface temperature study of transmission gearbox is highly nonlinear problem 
due to gear oil thermo-physical properties variation. Gear oil viscosity changes 
in exponential manner and other physical properties shows linear relation with 
temperature. In this chapter steady state thermal analysis was performed to study 
the surface temperature of gearbox. All material properties and boundary conditions 
are same as in dynamic transient structural analysis. Gear oil lubrication is added 
for steady state thermal analysis. In steady state thermal analysis the main focus 
of study is to find the gearbox surface temperature under the influence of load, 
rotational speed and gear oil lubrication.
The main function of gear oil is to dissipate the frictional heat outside the gearbox 
housing. SAE 85W140 gear oil is used for lubrication purpose. The thermo-physical 
Figure 6. Total deformations on third gear at 6000 rpm
www.ebook3000.com

12
Temperature Measurement of Vehicle Transmission Gearbox System Based on FEA
properties of SAE 85W140 are- 30.3cSt (1000C), viscosity 411cSt (400C), Density 
901 kg/m3 (15.60C), Viscosity Index 103, Average convection heat transfer coefficient 
400 W/m2k. A non-uniform heat flux profile is generated on gearbox surface due to 
combined effect of load, rotational speed and frictional heat. Non-uniform heat flux 
causes change in temperature at different points on gearbox surface. The temperature 
is measured at 10 different points on gearbox surface for lower and higher gearing 
with varying vehicle speed.
Table 4 shows the variation of temperature on gearbox surface with varying 
combined load conditions. For lower gearing the range of temperature is broad. 
It varies (342.94-372.13) k. The reason of higher temperature on gearbox surface 
for lower gearing is generation of frictional heat. When vehicle runs at high speed 
in low gearing the deformation and stresses were high causes high frictional heat 
generation (Table 2). Maximum amount of frictional heat dissipates through gear 
tooth and transmission housing.
Figure 7 shows the gearbox surface temperature distributions for lower gearing. 
At 2000 rpm the load applied was 230.48 Nm and average convection heat transfer 
coefficient is 400w/m2k. Figure 7 (a) shows the variation of surface temperature of 
gearbox. The surface temperature varies (342.94-350.01)k. Temperature distribution 
at gearbox surface is uniform. It varies gradually at different points. Gradual 
variation of temperature is in favor because it reduces the chances of thermal stresses 
concentration at gear tip and prevents failure of gears. As the load (347.08 Nm) and 
rotational speed (4000 rpm) increases the heat flux concentration also increases. 
Figure 7(b) shows gradual changes in gearbox surface temperature. At 6000 the 
thermal stresses are very high shown as red hues in figure 7 (c). High level of stress 
concentration on gear surface causes failure of gears that’s why lower gearing with 
high rpm is prevented. The temperature varies (342.66-372.13) k.
Figure 8 shows the graphical representation of gearbox surface temperature for 
lower gearing. The temperature variation at 2000 rpm and 4000 rpm is gradual and 
causes no harm to gears. At 6000 rpm operating speed the temperature rises very 
Table 4. Steady state thermal analysis of transmission gearbox for lower gearing 
with varying rpm
Lower 
Gearing
RPM
Min 
Temperature 
(k)
Temperature Variation at Different Points (k)
Max 
Temperature 
(k)
2nd
2000
342.94
343.72
344.51
345.29
346.08
346.87
347.65
348.44
349.22
350.01
2nd
4000
342.93
343.94
344.95
345.97
346.98
347.99
349
350.01
351.02
352.03
2nd
6000
342.66
345.94
349.21
352.48
355.76
359.03
362.31
365.58
368.86
372.13

13
Temperature Measurement of Vehicle Transmission Gearbox System Based on FEA
sharply. It causes thermal failure of gears. So it can be concluded that without gear 
failure lower gearing is suitable up to 4000 rpm operating speed of vehicle.
Table 5 shows the variation of temperature profile at different points on gearbox 
surface under dynamic loading and gear oil lubrication conditions. At 2000 rpm 
(147.78 Nm) for higher gearing the temperature varies (342.88-351.59) k. The 
temperature variation is gradual preventing stress concentration on gearbox surface. 
Figure 9(a) at 2000 rpm the gearbox surface temperature is uniformly varying (blue 
hues). At right end of counter shaft supported on bearing shows stresses (red hues). 
At 4000 rpm (220.99 Nm) the thermal stress concentration is seen on 3rd gear (red 
hues). Other region of gearbox also shows thermal stress deformation shown by 
yellow hues (Figure 9 (b)). At high rotational speed and high loading (6000 rpm, 
239.97 Nm), the gearbox surface temperature increases up to 353.76 k. Figure 9 
Figure 7. Gearbox surface temperature distributions for lower gearing
www.ebook3000.com

14
Temperature Measurement of Vehicle Transmission Gearbox System Based on FEA
(c) shows uniform temperature variation without thermal stresses. At high rpm 
(6000) and high gearing (3rd) the performance of heavy vehicle medium duty truck 
is maximum showing no thermal stresses and failure conditions.
Figure 10 shows variation of gearbox surface temperature for higher gearing. The 
temperature variation at low speed is gradual. At high speed 6000 rpm the heat flux 
on gearbox surface is uniform showing no thermal stress deformation. So it can be 
concluded that higher gearing at higher speed increases the performance of vehicle.
FEA SIMULATION STEADY STATE 
THERMAL RESULT VALIDATION
FEA numerical simulation results were validated with experimental results available 
in literature. At particular rotational speed the simulation result of lower and higher 
gearing were plotted against experimental results. Experimental results were measured 
Figure 8. Temperature variations at different points of gearbox surface for lower 
gearing with varying rpm
Table 5. Steady state thermal analysis of transmission gearbox for higher gearing 
with varying rpm
Higher 
Gearing
RPM
Min 
Temperature 
(k)
Temperature Variation at Different Points (k)
Max 
Temperature 
(k)
3rd
2000
342.88
343.85
344.82
345.78
346.75
347.72
348.69
349.66
350.62
351.59
3rd
4000
342.89
343.98
345.07
346.16
347.25
348.34
349.44
350.53
351.62
352.71
3rd
6000
349.86
350.3
350.73
351.16
351.59
352.03
352.46
352.89
353.33
353.76

15
Temperature Measurement of Vehicle Transmission Gearbox System Based on FEA
at 13 different points and simulation results were taken at 10 different points on 
gearbox surface. At 2000, 4000 and 6000 rpm the validation graph were plotted and 
difference between simulation and experimental results were evaluated. H. long et 
al. (2003) have performed the numerical and experimental analysis of gear tooth. 
The rotational speed was varied (2000-10000) rpm with varying combined loading 
conditions. At each loading condition the surface temperature of gear tooth was 
measured. The load varies (80-650) Nm and average heat transfer coefficient varies 
(100-500) w/m2k. The numerical results are in full agreement with experimental 
results.
Figure 9. Gearbox surface temperature distributions for higher gearing
www.ebook3000.com

16
Temperature Measurement of Vehicle Transmission Gearbox System Based on FEA
Figure 11 shows the validation of results at 2000 rpm. When vehicle was running 
at 2000 rpm the simulation result of gearbox surface varies- for lower gearing 
(342.94-350.01)k and higher gearing (342.88-351.59)k. The experimental results 
varied (348.14-360.42)k. Simulation results lie within the range of experimental 
results. The difference in minimum temperature is less than 2% and for maximum 
temperature difference is (2-3) %. Overall difference between simulation and 
experimental result is less than 3% showing good validation of results.
Figure 12 shows variation of simulation and experimental results at 4000 rpm. At 
4000 rpm the gearbox surface temperature varies- for lower gearing (342.93-352.03)
k and higher gearing (342.89-352.71)k. The experimental results varied (348.2-
363.2)k. The difference in minimum temperatures at gearbox surface is 5.27k which 
shows less than 1.6% difference in FEA and experimental results. For maximum 
temperature at gearbox surface the difference is 11.17 k, shows 3% difference in 
results. So the deviation in FEA simulation and experimental results is 3%.
Figure 13 shows variation of gearbox surface temperature at 6000 rpm. At high 
speed and high loading the gearbox surface temperature varies- lower gearing 
(342.66-372.13)k, higher gearing (349.86-353.76)k. The literature experimental 
results vary (347.59-408.88) k. The difference in FEA and experimental results, 
minimum temperature is less than 2% and difference in maximum temperature is 
36.75 k less than 9%.
Figure 10. Temperature variations at different points of gearbox surface for higher 
gearing with varying rpm

17
Temperature Measurement of Vehicle Transmission Gearbox System Based on FEA
Figure 11. Gearbox surface temperature variations at 2000 rpm and comparison 
with experimental results
Figure 12. Gearbox surface temperature variations at 4000 rpm and comparison 
with experimental results
www.ebook3000.com

18
Temperature Measurement of Vehicle Transmission Gearbox System Based on FEA
FUTURE SCOPE
In future this research work can be extended to:
1. 	
Experimental study of temperature measurement for high speed vehicle 
operation.
2. 	
In future this research work can be extended for higher speed (6000-10000) 
rpm range with high loading conditions.
CONCLUSION
The chapter provides a reference at the initial stage of designing of transmission 
gearbox. Finite Element Analysis (FEA) has been used to evaluate the transient 
structural and steady state results for 4-speed transmission gearbox. Numerical 
simulation based dynamic structural and steady state thermal analysis concludes 
following points:
Figure 13 Gearbox surface temperature variations at 6000 rpm and comparison 
with experimental results

19
Temperature Measurement of Vehicle Transmission Gearbox System Based on FEA
1. 	
The presented model of transmission gearbox used for heavy vehicle medium 
duty truck is suitable to sustain the dynamic loading condition with minimum 
level of deformation, stresses and strains (Table 2 & Table 3).
2. 	
Transient structural analysis concludes that low speed with lower gearing and 
higher speed with higher gearing reduces the chances of failure by eliminating 
the thermal stresses and increase the vehicle performance, service life by 
reducing wear-tear.
3. 	
Steady state thermal analysis measured gearbox surface temperature at different 
points (Table 4 & Table 5). The FEA simulation results are in good agreement 
with experimental literature results.
The deviation in FEA results and experiment results is less than 9%. It may be 
caused due to steady state assumption of gear oil lubrication or operating conditions. 
The FEA simulation evaluates the stresses, deformation, strains and gearbox surface 
temperature. This research work has theoretical and practical importance at the 
preliminary design stage to find the dynamic behaviour of transmission gearbox.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are thankful to Department of Science and Technology (DST) New 
Delhi and research cell of Graphic Era University (GEU), Dehradun for necessary 
funding of advanced modelling and simulation lab. This research work has been 
carried out at advanced modelling and simulation lab, Department of Mechanical 
Engineering, GEU, Dehradun.
REFERENCES
Altinbalik & Ayer. (2015). A theoretical and experimental study for the load 
optimization of gear-like profiles by using forward and lateral extrusion. Transactions 
of the Canadian Society for Mechanical Engineering, 39(1), 53-69.
ANSYS R 14.5. (2013). Academic, Structural analysis Guide. Academic Press.
Bozca, M., & Fietkau, P. (2010). Empirical model based optimization of 
gearbox geometric design parameters to reduce rattle noise in an automotive 
transmission. Mechanism and Machine Theory, 45(11), 1599–1612. doi:10.1016/j.
mechmachtheory.2010.06.013
www.ebook3000.com

20
Temperature Measurement of Vehicle Transmission Gearbox System Based on FEA
De la Cruz, M., Chong, W. W. F., Teodorescu, M., Theodossiades, S., & Rahnejat, 
H. (2012). Transient mixed thermo-elastohydrodynamic lubrication in multi-speed 
transmissions. Tribology International, 49, 17–29. doi:10.1016/j.triboint.2011.12.006
Duan, C., & Singh, R. (2005). Super-harmonics in a torsional system with dry 
friction path subject to harmonic excitation under a mean torque. Journal of Sound 
and Vibration, 285(4-5), 803–834. doi:10.1016/j.jsv.2004.08.020
Jun, H., Kiritsis, D., Gambera, M., & Xirouchakis, P. (2006). Predictive algorithm to 
determine the suitable time to change automotive engine oil. Computers & Industrial 
Engineering, 51(4), 671–683. doi:10.1016/j.cie.2006.06.017
Karamavruc, A., Shi, Z., & Gunther, D. (2011). Determination of Empirical Heat 
Transfer Coefficient via CFD to Predict the Interface Temperature of Continuously 
Sleeping Clutches. SAE Technical Paper 2011-01-0313.
Kim, H. Y., Kim, C., Bae, W. B., & Han, S. M. (2007). Development of optimization 
technique of warm shrink fitting process for automotive transmission parts (3D 
FE analysis). Journal of Materials Processing Technology, 187–188, 458–462. 
doi:10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2006.11.107
Kouroussis, G., Dehombreux, P., & Verlinden, O. (2015). Vehicle and powertrain 
dynamics analysis with an automatic gearbox. Mechanism and Machine Theory, 
83, 109–124. doi:10.1016/j.mechmachtheory.2014.09.009
Kumar, A., Dwivedi, A., Jaiswal, H., & Patil, P. P. (2015). Material Based Vibration 
Characteristic Analysis of Heavy Vehicle Transmission Gearbox Casing Using 
Finite Element Analysis (FEA). Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, 
308, 527–533. doi:10.1007/978-81-322-2012-1_56
Kumar, A., & Patil, P. P. (2014). Dynamic Vibration Analysis of Heavy Vehicle 
Truck Transmission Gearbox Housing Using FEA. Journal of Engineering Science 
and Technology Review, 7(4), 66–72.
Long, H., Lord, A. A., Gethin, D. T., & Roylance, B. J. (2003). Operating 
temperatures of oil-lubricated medium-speed gears: numerical models and 
experimental results. Journal of Aerospace Engineering, 217(2), 87-106. 
doi:10.1243/095441003765208745
Markel, T., Brooker, A., Hendricks, T., Johnson, V., Kelly, K., Kramer, B., & Wipke, 
K. et al. (2002). ADVISOR: A systems analysis tool for advanced vehicle modeling. 
Journal of Power Sources, 110(2), 255–266. doi:10.1016/S0378-7753(02)00189-1

21
Temperature Measurement of Vehicle Transmission Gearbox System Based on FEA
Paul, D., & Pines, D. J. (2005). A review of vibration-based techniques for helicopter 
transmission diagnostics. Journal of Sound and Vibration, 282(1-2), 475–508. 
doi:10.1016/j.jsv.2004.02.058
Pennestrì, E., Mariti, L., Valentini, P. P., & Mucino, V. H. (2012). Efficiency evaluation 
of gearboxes for parallel hybrid vehicles: Theory and applications. Mechanism and 
Machine Theory, 49, 157–176. doi:10.1016/j.mechmachtheory.2011.10.012
Pro-E 5.0. (2013). Designing guide manual. Academic Press.
Qin-man, F. (2011).Modal analysis of a truck transmission based on ANSYS. 
Fourth International conference on Information and Computing. DOI: doi:10.1109/
ICIC.2011.75
Quaiyum, A. (2012). Experimental investigation of automatic transmission fluid 
(ATF) in an air cooled mini-channel heat exchanger (M.S. Thesis). Department 
Mechanical, Automotive, and Materials Engineering, University of Windsor, Canada.
Salah, M. H., Mitchell, T. H., Wagner, J. R., & Dawson, D. M. (2007). Multiple 
Cooling Loops in Advanced Vehicle Thermal Management Systems. IEEE/ASME 
Transactions on Mechatronics.
SOLIDEDGE. (2006). Version 19.0. Author.
Zimparov, V. (2002). Energy Conservation through Heat Transfer Enhancement 
Techniques. International Journal of Energy Research, 26(7), 675–696. doi:10.1002/
er.810
www.ebook3000.com

22
Copyright © 2018, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  2
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-3722-9.ch002
ABSTRACT
The active control of vibration of piezoelectric flexible smart structure is an important 
issue in engineering. Reducing vibration may improve the user’s comfort and safety. 
This chapter presents a fuzzy logic approach for active control of vibration of a 
smart composite laminated spherical shell. The spherical shell is in the form of a 
layered composite shell having collocated piezoelectric sensor/actuator pair. The 
vibratory response of the shell is modeled using finite element method. There are 
five mechanical degrees of freedom per node and the potential difference across 
the piezoelectric layer is introduced as an additional electrical degree of freedom 
on an element level. The mode superposition method has been used to transform 
the coupled finite element equations of motion in the physical coordinates into a set 
of reduced uncoupled equations in the modal coordinates. The simulation results 
illustrate that the superiority of designed nonconventional fuzzy logic controller 
over conventional controllers.
INTRODUCTION
Numerous aerospace structures are fabricated as shell type structures because of its 
different advantages including lighter weight, high strength, large size etc. These 
shell structures are used mostly as thin structures in many industries like aerospace, 
Active Vibration Attenuation 
of Smart Shell Structure 
Instrumented With 
Piezoelectric Layers
Anshul Sharma
National Institute of Technology Uttarakhand, India

23
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
automobile, communication. These thin shell structures have low structural damping 
resulting in undesired structural vibrations of long decay time. The prolonged 
vibrations in the structures may lead to fatigue and catastrophic failure. Hence, the 
prolonged undesired structural make these flexible structures unsuitable for long 
period of time during its operation. Moreover, the surface precision requirements of 
these structures, in some cases, are very stringent. In many practical applications, 
these structures are also exposed to harsh environmental conditions and even small 
variation in temperature may set vibrations in these structures due to thermal loadings. 
The conventional means of providing passive vibration suppression is infeasible in 
demanding aerospace applications and space environments. Due to the practical 
importance, the active vibration control is considered as the effective vibration 
attenuation strategy in demanding environment and applications. The AVC method 
attenuates the vibrations of structure/system through amendment in the dynamics 
of the system and its structural response, instead counter the vibrations directly. It 
involves a set of sensors (e.g. strain, acceleration, velocity, force etc.), a set of actuators 
(e.g. force, inertial, strain) and a control algorithm (feedback or feedforward). For 
AVC, the sensors and actuators are treated as integral part of flexible structure and 
are operated by control algorithm and such structures are known as smart structure 
Narayanan and Balamurugan (2001), Preumont (2011), Sharma et al. (2015).
Piezoelectric materials have been widely used as sensors/actuators for active 
vibration control successfully Narayanan and Balamurugan (2003), Sharma et al. 
(2007), Preumont (2011), Sharma et al. (2014), Sharma et al. (2015), Sharma et al. 
(2016). In this chapter, the active vibration control of shell structure is carried out 
numerically using nonlinear fuzzy logic controller instrumented with piezoelectric 
materials. The finite element method (FEM) is employed to model the piezo-laminated 
composite shell structure and to predict the static and dynamic response of structure.
The FEM formulation is based on first order shear deformation theory and linear 
piezoelectric theory. Fuzzy logic based controller designed as double input-single 
output (DISO) system using 49 If-Then rules and implemented numerically to 
perform active vibration control.
FINITE ELEMENT FORMULATION
Finite element method is most commonly used tool to analyze the piezo-laminated 
composite structures Bathe (2006). Different research groups have used finite element 
formulation for analyzing static and dynamic response of piezo-laminated structures 
Wankhade (2013), Sharma et al. (2015), Sharma et al. (2016). In this section, finite 
element formulation is presented which is used to predict the static and dynamic 
response of piezo-laminated composite shell structure.
www.ebook3000.com

24
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
The first order shear deformation theory (FSDT) and four noded isoparametric 
degenerated shell element (illustrated in Figure 1) is used to model the piezo-
laminated structure. It is assumed that piezo-ceramic layers are perfectly bonded 
above and below the structure and the effect of bonding material on the properties 
of structure is neglected.
Piezoelectric Constitutive Equations
The linear piezoelectric constitutive equations demonstrate direct and converse 
piezoelectric effect as Sharma et al. (2016).
D
d
b
E
k
k
k
k
k
{ } = { } + { }
ε
	
(1)
σ
ε
{ } = { } −{ }
k
k
k
k
k
Q
d
E
Τ
	
(2)
where {D}, {ε}, {E}and {σ} are electrical displacement, strain vector, electric field 
and stress vector respectively. [d], [b] and [Q] are piezoelectric coefficient, dielectric 
constant and elastic stiffness coefficient matrix respectively. Pyroelectric effect and 
thermal stress effects are ignored in the present analysis.
Figure 1. Four noded isoparametric degenerated shell element

25
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
Geometry and Displacement Field
The coordinates of arbitrary point within the shell may be represented in context of 
thickness and nodal coordinates as Sharma et al. (2016).
x
y
z
N
x
y
z
i
i
nnel
i
i
i










=








=∑
1



+
















1
2
3
3
3
th
l
m
n
i
i
i
i




	
(3)
where xi, yi, zi are global coordinates of midsurface node i, t is thickness of shell 
element, hi is the thickness of node i, Ni is the shape function, l3i, m3i, n3i are normal 
unit vectors at node i and nnel is no. of nodes per element.
Taking into account the shell assumptions of degeneration process, the 
displacement field is described using five mechanical degrees of freedom, i.e. three 
displacements (ui, vi, wi) and two rotations (αi, βi). The displacement of any point 
within the element can be given as
u
v
w
N
u
v
w
i
i
nnel
i
i
i










=





=∑
1
0
0
0





+
−
−
−






1
2
1
1
1
2
2
2
th
l
m
n
l
m
n
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
iα
βi


















	
(4)
where l1i, m1i, n1i are the direction cosines of a tangent unit vector V1i and l2i, m2i, 
n2i are the direction cosines of a tangent unit vector V2i. The rotations about V1i, V2i 
are αi and βi.
Strain Displacement Relationship
The strain vector ε{ }  is defined by the first partial derivative of the displacement 
vector u
v
w




Τ
by using a differential operator matrix as
www.ebook3000.com

26
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
ε
ε
ε
ε
γ
γ
γ
{ } =










x
y
z
xy
yz
zx

=
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
∂
+ ∂
∂
∂
∂
+ ∂
∂
∂
∂
+ ∂
∂



u
x
v
y
w
z
u
y
v
x
v
z
w
y
w
x
u
z








	
(5)
∂
∂
=
∂
∂
−
+






=∑
u
x
u
N
x
l g
l g
o
i
i
i
i
xi
i
i
xi
i
α
β
2
1
1
4
	
(6)
∂
∂
=
∂
∂
−
+






=∑
v
y
v
N
y
m g
m g
o
i
i
i
i
yi
i
i
yi
i
α
β
2
1
1
4
	
(7)
∂
∂
=
∂
∂
−
+






=∑
w
z
w
N
z
n g
n g
o
i
i
i
i
zi
i
i
zi
i
α
β
2
1
1
4
	
(8)
∂
∂
+ ∂
∂
=
∂
∂
−
+





+
∂
∂
u
y
v
x
u
N
y
l g
l g
v
N
x
o
i
i
i
i
yi
i
i
yi
o
i
i
α
β
2
1
−
+






=
=
∑
∑
α
β
i
i
xi
i
i
xi
i
i
m g
m g
2
1
1
4
1
4
	
(9)

27
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
∂
∂
+ ∂
∂
=
∂
∂
−
+





+
∂
∂
v
z
w
y
v
N
z
m g
m g
w
N
y
o
i
i
i
i
zi
i
i
zi
o
i
i
α
β
2
1
−
+






=
=
∑
∑
α
β
i
i
yi
i
i
yi
i
i
n g
n g
2
1
1
4
1
4
	
(10)
∂
∂
+ ∂
∂
=
∂
∂
−
+





+
∂
∂
w
x
u
z
w
N
x
n g
n g
u
N
z
o
i
i
i
i
xi
i
i
xi
o
i
i
α
β
2
1
−
+






=
=
∑
∑
α
β
i
i
zi
i
i
zi
i
i
l g
l g
2
1
1
4
1
4
	
(11)
Substituting equations (6 - 11) in equation (5)
ε{ } = 
′
{ }
B
q
e
e 	
(12)
Electric Field
In the present study, it is assumed that the electric field acts in the thickness direction 
of piezoelectric layer and also the electric effect is constant within a layer of the 
element. Within an element, electric field inside kth layer can be given mathematically 
as Sharma et al. (2016).
{ }
{
}
E
B
k
e
pk
= −
φ
φ
	
(13)
B
e
φ
{
} =











1
3
3
3
t
l
m
n
pk
	
(14)
where ϕpk, and tpk are electric potential and thickness of the kth piezoelectric layer 
respectively.
www.ebook3000.com

28
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
Strain Energy
The strain energy stored in the shell can be represented as
V
dV
k
V
k
nl
=
{ } { }
∫
∑
=
1
2
1
ε
σ
Τ
	
(15)
On substituting the strain and stress equations, we will finally get
V
q
k
q
q
k
e
uu e
e
e
u
e
e
=
{ } 
{ } + { } 


{ }




1
2
Τ
Τ
φ
φ
	
(16)
where
k
T
B
Q
B
T
dV
uu e
e
e
k
e
e
V

=





θ
θ
Τ
Τ
∫
∑
=
k
nl
1
	
(17)
k
T
B
e
B
dV
T
u
e
e
e
p
e
V
e
φ
θ
φ
θ



=



{
}


∫
Τ
Τ
Τ
1
Τ
Τ
Τ
Τ
Τ
B
e
B
dV
T
B
e
e
p
e
V
e
e

{
}




∫
2
φ
θ
...

{
}






∫
p
e
V
npl
B
dV
Τ
φ
	
(18)
φ
φ
φ
φ
{ } =










e
p
p
pnpl
1
2

	
(19)
[Tθ] is the rotational transformation matrix for the four nodes element, [Q] is 
material matrix, [B] is strain-displacement matrix.

29
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
Electrical Energy
Electrical energy stored in an element is obtained by summing the energy stored 
for each piezoelectric layer as Sharma et al. (2016).
W
E
D
dV
e
e
p
V
k
npl
k
=
{ } { }
∫
∑
=
1
2
1
Τ
	
(20)
On substituting the electric field {E} and electric displacement {D}, we will get
W
k
q
k
e
e
u e
e
e
e
e
= −{ } 


{ } + { } 


{ }
1
2
1
2
φ
φ
φ
φ
φφ
Τ
Τ
	
(21)
where k
k
u e
u
e
φ
φ



= 



Τ
k
B
b
B
dV
B
b
B
dV
e
e
p
e
V
e
p
e
V
φφ
φ
φ
φ
φ



=
{
} {
}
{
} {
}
∫
Τ
Τ
1
2
∫
∫{
} 
{
}







B
b
B
dV
e
p
e
V
npl
φ
φ
Τ

	
(22)
Kinetic Energy
Element kinetic energy can be written as Sharma et al. (2016).
T
u
u dV
e
k
V
k
nl
=
{ } { }
∫
∑
=
1
2
1
ρ


Τ
	
(23)
where, ρk  = Density of kth layer.
www.ebook3000.com

30
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
T
q
m
q
e
e
uu e
e
=
{ } 
{ }
1
2


Τ
	
(24)
where the element mass matrix muu e

is given as
m
T
N
N
T
uu e
k
e
u e
u e
e
V
k
nl

=







∫
=
ρ
θ
θ
Τ
Τ
1∑
dV 	
(25)
Work Done by the External Forces and Electrical Charge
External forces cause deformation in the structure, and hence work is done by 
external forces. Similarly, the applied electric charge in the presence of electric 
field in the piezoelectric layer does work. Therefore, total work externally done on 
the element is given by
W
u
f
ds
u
f
E
f
ds
s
e
s
s
e
e
p
e
s
q
e
=
{ } { }
+ { } { } −
{ } { }
∫
∫
Τ
Τ
Τ
1
2
	
(26)
where s1  = the surface area on which external force is acting
s2 = surface area of piezoelectric layer	
fs
e
{ } = surface force intensity	
fp
e
{ } = point load	
fq
e
{ } = surface electrical charge density	
W
q
T
N
f
ds
q
T
N
s
e
e
u e
s
s
e
e
e
u
=
{ } 


{ }
+ { } 


∫
Τ
Τ
Τ
Τ
Τ
θ
θ
1

{ } +
{ } {
} { }
∫
e
p
e
e
e
s
q
e
f
B
f
ds
Τ
Τ
Τ
φ
φ
2
	
(27)

31
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
Equation can be rewritten in condensed form as
W
q
F
F
s
e
m
e
e
q
e
= { } {
} + { } { }
Τ
Τ
φ
	
(28)
where, Fm
e
{
}  and Fq
e
{ }  are known as applied mechanical force and applied electrical 
charge vectors for an element.
F
T
N
f
ds
T
N
f
m
e
e
u e
s
s
e
e
u
p
{
} =





{ }
+ 



∫
θ
θ
Τ
Τ
Τ
Τ
1
{ }e 	
(29)
F
B
f
ds
q
e
e
s
q
e
{ } =
{
} { }
∫
φ
Τ
2
	
(30)
Coupled Equations of Motion
The global governing coupled equation of motion derived using Hamilton’s principle 
for an element can be represented as Sharma et al. (2016).
[
]
[
]
[
]
[
]
M
q
C
q
K
q
K
F
uu
uu
uu
u
m


{ } +
{ } +
{ } +
{ } = {
}
φ
φ
	
(31)
[
]
[
]
K
q
K
F
u
q
φ
φφ
φ
{ }−
{ } = { } 	
(32)
where [Muu] is the global mass matrix, [Cuu] is the global damping stiffness matrix, 
[Kuu] is the global elastic stiffness matrix, [Kuϕ] is the global elastic-electric coupling 
stiffness matrix and [Kϕϕ] is the global electric stiffness matrix. {Fm} and {Fq} are 
applied mechanical force and applied electrical charge respectively. {q} is a global 
nodal displacement vector and {ϕ} is global voltage vector.
As we are considering the smart structure, the top layer of structure is acting as 
a sensor while the bottom layer of structure is acting as an actuator. Equations (31) 
and (32) can be rewritten in terms of sensor voltage and actuator voltage as
[
]
[
]
[
]
[
]
M
q
C
q
K
F
K
uu
uu
u
m
u
s
a
s
a


{ } +
{ } +
{ } = {
}−
{ }
φ
φ
φ
φ
	
(33)
www.ebook3000.com

32
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
[
]
[
]
K
q
K
F
s
s
s
u
q
s
φ
φ φ
φ
{ }−
{ } = {
}	
(34)
From equation (34), we can calculate sensor voltage, where the external applied 
charge is zero, as
φ
φ φ
φ
s
K
K
q
s
su
{ } =
{ }
−
[
] [
]
1
	
(35)
Using φs
{ } in equation (33)
[
]
[
]
[
]
[
][
] [
]
(
)
M
q
C
q
K
K
K
K
q
F
uu
uu
uu
u
u
m
s
s
s


{ } +
{ } +
+
{ } = {
}−
−
φ
φ φ
φ
1
[
]
Ku a
a
φ
φ
{ }	
(36)
Equation (36) can be written in condensed form as
[
]
[
]
[
]
M
q
C
q
K
q
F
F
uu
uu
m
A


{ } +
{ } +
{ } = {
}−{
} 	
(37)
[
]
[
]
[
][
] [
]
K
K
K
K
K
uu
u
u
s
s
s
=
+
−
φ
φ φ
φ
1
	
(38)
F
K
A
u
a
a
{
} = 


{ }
φ
φ
	
(39)
where {FA} is an active force generated by piezoelectric actuators.
Controller Design
In engineering applications, fuzzy logic controller may be implemented to control 
complex loops effectively because it simulates human decisions during the whole 
process. Moreover, no mathematical model is essential for the process. This section 
designs nonconventional fuzzy logic controller to attenuate the structural vibrations 
instrumented with piezoelectric actuators. Figure 2 shows a block diagram of a 
smart shell structure in a close loop with a nonconventional controller. In general, 
fuzzification, fuzzy rule base, fuzzy interference engine and defuzzification are four 
basic elements used in fuzzy logic controller.

33
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
The fuzzification step performs the interpretation interface of input and output 
variables. In the present study, voltage signal obtained from a piezoelectric sensor 
patch and its rate changes are considered as input variables while the output variable 
is actuator voltage. The present fuzzy logic controller uses seven membership 
functions for fuzzy input and output variables. Input and output variables have been 
classified into seven groups: Negative large (N++), Negative medium (N+), Negative 
small (N), Zero (ZE), Positive small (P), Positive medium (P+), positive large (P++). 
For fuzzification process, the combination of trapezoidal and triangular functions 
have been used to fuzzify input and output variables Kioua & Mirza (2000).
The fuzzy relation between input and output variables is presented by fuzzy 
rules. Fuzzy control rules are an important factor which influences the fuzzy control 
effect. The fuzzy rules of fuzzy logic controller are generally in the If-Then form 
which link the input and output variables. One of the fuzzy If-Then rules is defined 
as: If φs  is P++ and φs  is N, then φa is Nwhere φs  represents sensor voltage (input 
variable), φs is the rate change of the sensor voltage (input variable), φa  indicates 
actuator voltage (output variable) of fuzzy logic system respectively. In order to 
implement the present controller, 49 rules have been designed and listed in Table 
1.
During defuzzification step, the result of fuzzy interference is transformed into 
a crisp value corresponding to the designed rules. The aggregate of a fuzzy set 
involves a range of output values and need to be defuzzified to determine a single 
Figure 2. Block diagram of a piezolaminated space antenna reflector in a close 
loop with fuzzy logic controller
www.ebook3000.com

34
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
output value. In present study, centroid method has been used for the defuzzification 
stage. The algebraic expression for centroid method can be represented as
φa t
w y
w
i
i
i
m
i
i
m
( ) =
=
=
∑
∑
1
1
	
(40)
where φa (t) is the output of the fuzzy logic system, k is the time step, yi ∈ R is any 
point at which μ(φa
i) achieves its maximum value i.e. μ(φa
i) = 1; wi =min(μ(φs ), 
μ( φs )), μ is the membership value (fuzzy value) associated with input and output 
variables and m is the number of fuzzy rules of every inference. The details of the 
designed fuzzy logic controller can be followed in reference Sharma et al. (2015).
VALIDATION AND NUMERICAL SIMULATION
In this section, the finite element formulation presented in previous sections and the 
computer program developed to implement the formulation has been validated by 
comparing the results of present formulation with the results reported in literature. 
The finite element procedure is implemented in MATLAB platform, to predict 
the static and dynamic characteristics of the structures. After verifying the results 
of present computer code with benchmark problems, the new results have been 
confronted in this section.
Table 1. Fuzzy if-then rules
φs
N++
N+
N
Z
P
P+
P++
φs
N++
P++
P++
P++
P++
P+
N
N
N+
P++
P++
P+
P++
P
Z
N
N
P++
P+
P+
P+
Z
N+
N+
Z
P++
P+
Z
Z
Z
N+
N++
P
P+
P+
Z
N+
N+
N+
N++
P+
N
Z
N
N++
N
N++
N++
P++
N
N
N+
N++
N+
N++
N++

35
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
Validation of Static Analysis
The cantilever composite plate bonded with distributed piezoelectric ceramics of 
different sizes is used as test case to verify the static deflection under the application 
of electric voltage to the piezoelectric patches. The piezoelectric patches are bonded 
in collocated manner. The plate is constructed using graphite/epoxy having length (L) 
of 292 mm, width (b) of 152 mm and thickness of 0.83 mm. The plate is laminated 
with piezoelectric patches having thickness of 0.25 mm in a sequence of [0/±45]
s. The material properties of graphite epoxy and piezoelectric ceramic are used as 
reported by Balamurugan and Narayanan (2003) and the geometric properties of 
piezolaminated plate are illustrated in Figure 3. A constant voltage of 157.6 V with 
opposite polarity has been applied to the actuators bonded on both sides of plate. 
The comparison of present formulation, with that of Crawley and Lazarus (1987), 
Ha et al. (1992) and Balamurugan and Narayanan (2003) is depicted in Figure 4 in 
context of longitudinal bending.
Validation of Dynamic Analysis
The non-dimensional natural frequencies obtained from the present formulation 
for laminated spherical shell structure are compared with the results reported by 
Reddy (1984). The normalized non-dimensional natural frequencies for spherical 
structure and comparison with reference results are listed in Table 2. For the spherical 
Figure 3. Cantilever composite plate with distributed piezoelectric patches
www.ebook3000.com

36
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
structure, the footprint is circle of radius a. The material and geometric properties 
are kept same as reported in reference. The symbols R and t represents the mean 
radius and thickness of the shell. The results are obtained for both the symmetric 
[0/90/90/0] and antisymmetric [0/90/0] stacking sequence. The results are compared 
for different radius to side length (R / a) of spherical shell structure.
Figure 4: Longitudinal bending of composite graphite/epoxy plate [0/±45]s with 
distributed piezoelectric actuators
Table 2. Nondimensionalized fundamental frequency (in Hz), ω
ω
ρ
= a
t
E
2
2
 of 
spherical shell
[0/90/90/0]
[0/90/0]
a/t=10
a/t=100
a/t=10
a/t=100
R/a
Reddy 
[14]
Present
Reddy 
[14]
Present
Reddy 
[14]
Present
Reddy 
[14]
Present
1
16.17
15.95
126.33
128.12
16.11
15.99
125.99
127.41
3
12.79
12.98
47.41
48.02
12.73
13.16
47.26
48.02
5
12.43
12.62
31.07
31.78
12.37
12.63
30.99
31.25
10
12.28
12.44
20.38
20.53
12.21
12.33
20.34
20.89

37
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
Validation of Piezo-Laminated Structures
A shallow spherical shell of graphite epoxy composite sandwiched between 
piezoelectric layers of PZT G1195 is considered as test case subjected to constant 
voltage of 100 V across the thickness of piezoelectric layers. The shell is having a 
stacking sequence of [0/90/0]s. The static central deflection is studied by varying the 
radius of curvatures and compared the results of present formulation with the results 
of Kioua and Mirza (2000). The geometric and material properties are kept same 
as reported by Kioua and Mirza (2000). The spherical shell of arc length (a) 0.254 
m, total thickness (t) 0.138 mm and variable radius of curvature is considered. The 
thickness of each piezoelectric layer is 0.245 mm. The present FEM results show 
very good agreement for central deflection of simply supported composite spherical 
shell with the results reported by Kioua and Mirza (2000) as shown in Figure 5.
Figure 5. Center deflection of a simply supported composite spherical shell with 
varying radius of curvature
www.ebook3000.com

38
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
NUMERICAL APPLICATION
Spherical shells are used as structural components in various industries and are 
fabricated in the form of doubly curved structures. In the aerospace and automobile 
industries, curved lightweight shells are the major components of the body structure 
due to its high load carrying capacity. Some of the important applications of spherical 
shell structures are in artillery rocket nose cone, fuselages, thermal shielding of 
space vehicles, heat exchanger tubes, reactor vessels, heat-engine components etc.
A doubly curved shell panel of composite material laminated with piezoelectric 
sensor/actuator layers in a closed loop is shown in Figure 6. The top piezoelectric 
layer behaves as piezoelectric sensor whereas the bottom piezoelectric layer behaves 
as piezoelectric actuator. The composite spherical shell panel is used as host structure 
which is sandwiched between two piezoelectric layers. The host structure consists 
of three laminates of composite material having stacking sequence as [ps/0/90/0/
pa]. The ps and pa represents the piezoelectric sensor and actuator layer respectively. 
Each laminate of host structure is of composite material graphite/epoxy whereas 
the piezoelectric sensor and actuator layer are of PZT-5H.
The material properties of both host structure and piezoelectric material are listed 
in Table 3. Both length (a) and width (b) of the spherical panel are 0.4 m, the radius 
of curvatures, Rx and Ry are 4a i.e. 1.6 m and the length-to-width ratio (a/b) is unity. 
The thickness of each laminate (tl) is considered as 0.5 mm and the thickness of 
each piezoelectric layer (tp) is 0.5 mm. The total thickness (t) of the piezolaminated 
Figure 6. Composite spherical shell panel with surface bonded piezoelectric sensor/
actuator pair in a closed loop

39
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
composite spherical shell structure is 2.5 mm. The composite spherical shell is 
modeled with degenerated shell element using 8 × 8 elements along length and 
width direction respectively. To investigate the vibration control of spherical shells, 
collocated sensors and actuators are assumed to be coupled into sensor/actuator (s/a) 
pairs through closed control loops. First of all, static analysis is performed to get the 
displacement at each node of the structure subjected to different loads. Then, nodal 
displacements (obtain by static analysis at all the free nodes) are used as input to 
perform dynamic analysis.
The piezolaminated composite spherical shell panel is subjected to uniformly 
distributed load (UDL) applied on the upper surface of the host structure in transverse 
direction. The simply supported boundary conditions are generated numerically. 
The boundary conditions at the edges of overall shell considered for performing the 
numerical simulation are Nanda (2010)
Simply supported edge (SS):
Table 3. Material properties of piezoelectric material (PZT-5H) and composite host 
structure (Graphite/Epoxy)
Properties
Piezoelectric Material
Host Structure
Elastic Moduli (GPa)
E1
63.0
150.0
E2
63.0
9.0
Shear Moduli (GPa)
G12
24.2
7.1
G23
24.2
2.5
G13
24.2
7.1
υ
0.3
0.3
Piezoelectric Charge Constant (10-12 m/V)
d31
254.0
-----
d32
254.0
-----
Density (kg/m3)
ρ
7600
1600
Dielectric Constant (10-9 f/m)
b11
15.3
-----
b22
15.3
-----
b33
15.0
-----
Thermal Expansion (10-6 m/moC)
α1
0.9
1.1
α2
0.9
25.2
Reference Temperature (oC)
20.0
20.0
Source: Sharma et al. (2015)
www.ebook3000.com

40
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
u = w = θx = 0, v = θy ≠ 0 at x = 0 and x = a	
v = w = θy = 0, u = θx ≠ 0 at y = 0 and y = b	
The static deflection of the centerline of simply supported piezo-laminated 
composite spherical shell panel along the length subjected to uniformly distributed 
load of 2000 N/m2 on the top surface of the structure in transverse direction is shown 
in Figure 7. After performing the static analysis, the dynamic analysis is carried 
out numerically. The frequencies and mode shapes are predicted using the finite 
element formulation. Figure 8 illustrates the first four mode shapes of the simply 
supported piezo-laminated composite spherical shell panel. Then, the effect of the 
ratio of radius of curvature (Rx) to arc length (a) on fundamental natural frequencies 
of piezo-laminated composite spherical shell panel is investigated. The first five 
natural frequencies of simply supported spherical shell panel sandwiched between 
piezoelectric sensor and actuator layer are tabularized in Table 4. The variation of 
frequencies of spherical shell structure with the ratio of radius of curvature to arc 
length (Rx/a) is presented in Figure 9. The decrease in the natural frequencies is 
Figure 7. Static deflection of the centerline of simply supported piezo-laminated 
composite spherical shell panel subjected to uniformly distributed load

41
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
Figure 8. Mode shapes of the simply supported piezolaminated composite spherical 
shell structure; (a) first mode, (b) second mode, (c) third mode and (d) fourth mode
Table 4. Effect of curvature on frequencies (in Hz) of piezo-laminated composite 
spherical shell panel with simply supported boundary conditions
R
a
x
ω1
ω2
ω3
ω4
ω5
1
2044.8
2300.6
2403.8
3008.9
3039.3
3
851.5
1292.4
1358.1
1874.6
2227.6
5
660.6
1147.1
1242.3
1762.6
2133.6
10
555.9
1073.9
1184.6
1673.1
2086.6
20
523.5
1051.3
1166.5
1651.8
2071.2
50
512.1
1042.6
1159.3
1643.3
2064.7
100
509.7
1040.6
1157.5
1641.1
2063
www.ebook3000.com

42
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
observed with the increase in structures curvature as it is tending toward the flat 
structure resulting in reduction in stiffness. It is observed that the variation of the 
frequencies of the cylindrical shell panel is significant up to the value of Rx/a = 15.
The nodal displacements predicted by static analysis are used as the initial 
condition to carry out dynamic analysis. The dynamic response of the piezolaminated 
composite spherical shell structure is being presented for open loop and close loop 
under the application of UDL. The open loop response corresponds to structural 
damping only which is assumed to be 0.5% whereas, the close loop response includes 
the control force applied by piezoelectric actuator in addition to structural damping. 
The fuzzy logic based controller has been implemented to provide the control force. 
Only first vibration mode and first four cumulative vibration modes are targeted 
for active vibration control of simply supported spherical shell structure. The load 
is applied for 6.8 × 10-5 sec for first vibration mode while 2.5 × 10-5 sec for first 
four vibration modes and suddenly released to set free vibrations in the structure.
In order to compute the performance of the fuzzy logic controller for controlling 
the free vibrations of the simply supported piezolaminated composite spherical shell 
panel, a performance index is defined as follows:
Figure 9. Variation of frequency of spherical shell structure with the ratio of radius 
of curvature to length (Rx/a)

43
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
P
w a b h
w a b h
w a
I =





−






2 2 2 0
2 2 2 0 005
2
,
,
,
,
,
, .
, b h
2 2 0
100
,
,






×
	
(41)
In Equation (41), PI measures the percentage reduction of the vibration amplitude 
at point a b h
2 2 2
,
,





of the controlled spherical shell structure after 0.005 s from the 
initial time which is disturbed by the external load.
Figures 10 and 13 present the open loop and close loop transient response of 
simply supported piezo-laminated composite spherical shell panel for first vibration 
Figure 10. Uncontrolled and controlled response of simply supported spherical 
shell structure for first vibration mode using fuzzy logic controller subjected to 
uniformly distributed load
www.ebook3000.com

44
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
Figure 11. Phase plot corresponding to first mode controlled actively using nonlinear 
fuzzy logic controller
Figure 12. Control voltage provided by nonlinear fuzzy logic controller to piezoelectric 
actuator to suppress first vibration mode subjected to UDL

45
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
mode and first four vibration modes respectively under the application of 2000 N/
m2 UDL.
The performance index (PI) for first vibration mode and first four vibration 
modes is 92.18% and 98.3% respectively. Figures 11 and 14 depict the phase plot 
of the composite spherical shell structure after applying nonlinear fuzzy logic 
controller for first vibration mode and first four vibration modes respectively. The 
control voltage required by piezoelectric actuator layer from fuzzy logic controller 
to damp the corresponding structural vibrations for first vibration mode and first 
four vibration modes is shown in Figures 12 and 15 respectively. For first vibration 
mode, the peak voltage applied to actuator is 46.84 V while for first four vibration 
modes, the peak voltage provide is 45.14 V.
Figure 13. Open loop and close loop transient response of simply supported spherical 
shell structure comprising first four vibration modes using nonlinear fuzzy logic 
controller disturbed by uniformly distributed load
www.ebook3000.com

46
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
Figure 14. Phase plot conforming first four modes controlled using nonlinear fuzzy 
logic controller
Figure 15. Time history response of the control voltage provided by nonlinear fuzzy 
logic controller to piezoelectric actuator

47
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
FUTURE SCOPE
The objective of the present chapter is to control the vibration of shell structures 
using fuzzy logic controller. However, the present work may be extended in multi 
directions. Some recommendations for future work are listed below:
•	
Response of the smart shell structures is extremely sensitive to material 
properties of the host structure and piezoelectric layers. Therefore, in addition 
to the effect of temperature on piezoelectric properties, the temperature 
dependent material properties should be considered.
•	
The shell structures of general shape having variable curvature and thickness 
having different boundary conditions should be investigated.
•	
The optimum vibration control should be performed experimentally by 
bonding the piezoelectric patches at optimized location.
CONCLUSION
In this chapter, the vibration control of smart shell structure is presented using non-
conventional fuzzy logic controller. The finite element method (FEM) is employed 
to model the piezo-laminated composite shell structure and to predict the static and 
dynamic response of structure. The FEM formulation is based on first order shear 
deformation theory and linear piezoelectric theory. Fuzzy logic based controller 
designed as double input-single output (DISO) system using 49 If-Then rules and 
implemented numerically to perform active vibration control. The results are presented 
in context of vibration attenuation in time domain, stability of the controller and the 
actuator voltage provided to the piezoelectric actuator.
REFERENCES
Balamurugan, V., & Narayanan, S. (2001). Shell finite element for smart piezoelectric 
composite plate/shell structures and its application to the study of active vibration 
control. Finite Elements in Analysis and Design, 37(9), 713–738. doi:10.1016/
S0168-874X(00)00070-6
Bathe, K. J. (2006). Finite element procedures. Pearson.
Crawley, E. F., & De Luis, J. (1987). Use of piezoelectric actuators as elements of 
intelligent structures. AIAA Journal, 25(10), 1373–1385. doi:10.2514/3.9792
www.ebook3000.com

48
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
Ha, S. K., Keilers, C., & Chang, F. K. (1992). Finite element analysis of composite 
structures containing distributed piezoceramic sensors and actuators. AIAA Journal, 
30(3), 772–780. doi:10.2514/3.10984
Kioua, H., & Mirza, S. (2000). Piezoelectric induced bending and twisting of 
laminated composite shallow shells. Smart Materials and Structures, 9(4), 476–484. 
doi:10.1088/0964-1726/9/4/310
Nanda, N. (2010). Non-linear free and forced vibrations of piezoelectric laminated 
shells in thermal environments. The IES Journal Part A: Civil & Structural 
Engineering, 3, 147–160.
Narayanan, S., & Balamurugan, V. (2003). Finite element modelling of piezo-
laminated smart structures for active vibration control with distributed sensors and 
actuators. Journal of Sound and Vibration, 262(3), 529–562. doi:10.1016/S0022-
460X(03)00110-X
Preumont, A. (2011). Vibration control of active structures: An Introduction. Springer 
Science & Business Media. doi:10.1007/978-94-007-2033-6
Reddy, J. N. (1984). Exact solutions of moderately thick laminated shells. 
Journal of Engineering Mechanics, 110(5), 794–809. doi:10.1061/(ASCE)0733-
9399(1984)110:5(794)
Sharma, A., Kumar, A., Susheel, C. K., & Kumar, R. (2016). Smart damping of 
functionally graded nanotube reinforced composite rectangular plates. Composite 
Structures, 155, 29–44. doi:10.1016/j.compstruct.2016.07.079
Sharma, A., Kumar, R., Vaish, R., & Chauhan, V. S. (2014). Lead-free piezoelectric 
materials performance in structural active vibration control. Journal of Intelligent 
Material Systems and Structures, 25(13), 1596–1604. doi:10.1177/1045389X13510222
Sharma, A., Kumar, R., Vaish, R., & Chauhan, V. S. (2015). Active vibration control 
of space antenna reflector over wide temperature range. Composite Structures, 128, 
291–304. doi:10.1016/j.compstruct.2015.03.062
Sharma, A., Kumar, R., Vaish, R., & Chauhan, V. S. (2015). Active vibration control 
of space antenna reflector over wide temperature range. Composite Structures, 128, 
291–304. doi:10.1016/j.compstruct.2015.03.062
Sharma, A., Kumar, R., Vaish, R., & Chauhan, V. S. (2016). Experimental and 
numerical investigation of active vibration control over wide range of operating 
temperature. Journal of Intelligent Material Systems and Structures, 27(13), 
1846–1860. doi:10.1177/1045389X15615968

49
Active Vibration Attenuation of Smart Shell Structure Instrumented With Piezoelectric Layers
Sharma, M., Singh, S. P., & Sachdeva, B. L. (2007). Modal control of a plate 
using a fuzzy logic controller. Smart Materials and Structures, 16(4), 1331–1341. 
doi:10.1088/0964-1726/16/4/047
Wankhade, R. L., & Bajoria, K. M. (2013). Free vibration and stability analysis 
of piezo-laminated plates using the finite element method. Smart Materials and 
Structures, 22(12), 125040. doi:10.1088/0964-1726/22/12/125040
www.ebook3000.com

50
Copyright © 2018, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  3
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-3722-9.ch003
ABSTRACT
The main objective of this chapter is FEA simulation of resonating tube with different 
size and material configuration for evaluation of resonant frequency. Resonating 
tube is an important component of Electro-Mechanical Mass Flow Sensor (EMMFS) 
used for measuring direct mass flow. Omega and U-shaped resonating tube type 
EMMFS have been investigated for 200mm, 300 mm and 400mm height with three 
different materials Copper, Aluminium and Mild Steel. EMMFS analysis is highly 
nonlinear study having fluid structure interaction. To simplify the solution large 
deformations in resonating tube countered to be absent. Sensing points are located 
symmetrically at limbs of resonating tube to sense the phase shift for measuring 
mass flow rate. FEA simulation of EMMFS has been done using Ansys. Solid Edge 
and Pro-E has been used for modeling of omega and U-shaped resonating tube.
Design and Simulation of 
Electro-Mechanical Mass 
Flow Sensor (EMMFS):
Evaluation of Resonant Frequency 
Using Different Configuration 
of Resonating Tube
Pravin P. Patil
Graphic Era University, India

51
Design and Simulation of Electro-Mechanical Mass Flow Sensor (EMMFS)
INTRODUCTION
Finite Element Analysis (FEA) is advanced numerical simulation technique applied 
in all engineering fields. Now days it has vast application subjected to highly 
nonlinear analysis in different engineering problems (Sharma 2010, Patil 2012). In 
this chapter, fluid carrying tube with omega shape has been analysed. Tube vibrates 
at its fundamental frequency. Flowing fluid inside tube apply forces on tube walls 
due to this mode shape changes (Cheesewright, 2003). Advanced coriolis mass 
flow sensors are independent of viscosity and density of flowing fluids. During 
flow inside tube generated velocity profile and obtained Reynolds number of the 
flow does not affect the flow meter as compared to others conventional flow meters 
based on volume measurements (Anklin, 2006). Coriolis flow meter is also used 
for measuring fluid density by measuring change in natural frequency (Bobovnik, 
2005). Many Authors have numerically investigated working method of Coriolis 
flow meters. In coriolis flow meters there are no moving parts only fluid carrying 
flow tube vibrates with small amplitude (Mole 2008, Wang 2014, Saravanan 2015 
and Rongmo 2013).
Mass flow study is highly nonlinear problem. To simplify the solution, it is 
assumed that large deformations in fluid tube are absent. Finite Element Analysis 
(FEA) is an advanced technique used for complex geometry analysis. Artificial 
Neural Network (ANN) based model was developed for copper type CMFS (Patil 
2014). The developed model has been found in agreement with experimental setup 
model. Modelling of CMFS using Adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) 
has been studied (Patil 2014) to check the influence of material. The input parameters 
are tube material, drive frequency, sensor location and height of tube. Using various 
parameters performance of mass flow sensor has been predicted. Material influence 
is an important criterion to check the structural rigidity and performance. Material 
based free vibration analysis was performed for transmission system using FEA 
(Kumar, 2015). Author has used Fuzzy interference system tools for comparison 
of texture and CMFS study. Coriolis effect and new straight coriolis flow meter has 
been investigated by researcher (Ying, 2008) for further development.
RESONATING TUBE CONFIGURATIONS
In general omega and U shaped resonating tubes are used in EMMFS. It is observed 
from previous studies that Omega tube produces more accurate and reliable results 
in comparison to U shaped tube. Geometric properties of resonating tube are its 
tube height, internal diameter and external diameter. Solid Edge, Pro-E was used 
for modelling of omega and U shaped tube. The tube material is taken as Copper, 
www.ebook3000.com

52
Design and Simulation of Electro-Mechanical Mass Flow Sensor (EMMFS)
Aluminium and Mild Steel. Figure 1 shows photographic view of experimental test 
rig. In this test rig resonating tube is detachable. It can be changed as per experiment 
needs. Different components of experimental setup is (1) Hydraulic bench, (2) 
Electromagnetic flow meter, (3) Vibration Control unit, (4) Vibration driver, (5) 
Resonating tube, (6) Test Bench, (7) Laser sensors, (8) Sensor holding stand, (9) 
Foundation, (10) Data Acquisition box, (11) Inlet pipe, (12) Outlet pipe and (13) 
Sensor location.
Lab fabricated different shape and size resonating tubes are shown in Figure 2. 
These tubes were used for experimental study. Table 1 and 2 shows the notations 
for omega and u shaped resonating tube configurations.
DESIGN PARAMETERS AND RANGE
Simulation and experimental investigation of EMMFS is required for direct mass flow 
measurement. FEA simulation is first step in EMMFS study. Using modal analysis, 
resonant frequency was calculated. This resonant frequency was applied on tube for 
excitation. Second step belongs to experimental study of different parameters using 
resonant frequency. Table 3 shows different parameters used in modal analysis and 
experimental study.
Figure 1. Photographic view of the experimental test rig

53
Design and Simulation of Electro-Mechanical Mass Flow Sensor (EMMFS)
Table 1. Notations for omega resonating tube configurations
Omega tubes
Tube Materials
Height (L) mm
Width (D) mm
Copper
Aluminium
Mild Steel
200
300
OC-23
OA-23
OM-23
400
OC-24
OA-24
OM-24
500
OC-25
OA-25
OM-25
300
300
OC-33
OA-33
OM-33
400
OC-34
OA-34
OM-34
500
OC-35
OA-35
OM-35
400
300
OC-43
OA-43
OM-43
400
OC-44
OA-44
OM-44
500
OC-45
OA-45
OM-45
Table 2. Notations for U shaped resonating tube configurations
U tubes
Tube Materials
Height (L) mm
Width (D) mm
Copper
Aluminium
Mild Steel
200
300
UC-23
UA-23
UM-23
400
UC-24
UA-24
UM-24
500
UC-25
UA-25
UM-25
300
300
UC-33
UA-33
UM-33
400
UC-34
UA-34
UM-34
500
UC-35
UA-35
UM-35
400
300
UC-43
UA-43
UM-43
400
UC-44
UA-44
UM-44
500
UC-45
UA-45
UM-45
Figure 2. Lab fabricated omega and U shaped resonating tube of all materials
www.ebook3000.com

54
Design and Simulation of Electro-Mechanical Mass Flow Sensor (EMMFS)
MODELLING AND FEA BOUNDARY CONDITIONS
Omega type EMMFS is shown in Figure 3. Omega tube was modeled using hollow 
pipe bend at specific angle. FEA meshed model of omega Copper tube consists of 
6497 nodes and 1080 elements. FEA analysis and meshing was performed using 
Ansys.
The operating simulation conditions are finalized and implemented on various 
tube configurations with different materials. Figure 4 shows the geometry and mesh 
model of U shaped resonating tube. Geometry of U tube is prepared using hollow 
tubes with specific dimensions.
Table 3. Selected design parameters and their range
Design Parameters
Range
Unit
Independent Parameters
Shape of Tube
Omega type, U type
Tube Material
Cu (E =110 GPa, ρ = 8950 kg/m3
µ =0.34) 
Al (E = 70 GPa,, ρ = 2700 kg/m3
µ =0.33) 
MS (E = 210 GPa, ρ = 7850 kg/m3
µ =0.3)
Height of tube
L = 200,300,400
mm
Width of tube
D = 300,400,500
mm
Inclination angle
α= 40-800
Deg.
Mass Flow rate
0.1 – 0.3
Kg/s
Sensor Location (SL)
60-120
mm
Drive Frequency (DF)
10-100
Hz
Constant Parameter
Surrounding Temperature of tube
Room Temperature (300)
Deg.
Pressure inside tube
< 100
bar
Pressure drop across tube
< 1
bar
Outer diameter of tube
D0 = 12
mm
Inner diameter of tube
Di = 10.9
mm
Number of Samples
25000
Fluid
Water (ρ = 1000 kg/m3)
Dependent Parameter
Phase shift 
(Coriolis effect)
-----
Deg.

55
Design and Simulation of Electro-Mechanical Mass Flow Sensor (EMMFS)
FEA SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A modal analysis shows the vibration response of Omega and U shaped tube. In 
this research article Modal analysis serve as starting point for detailed dynamic 
analysis of EMMFS. Table 4&5 shows the frequency variation for omega and U tube 
electromechanical mass flow sensor. First natural frequency is known as fundamental 
frequency. A tube resonates when it is subjected to excitation at resonance frequency. 
The first six-mode shape of vibration under excitation condition is shown in Figure 
5 and 6.
Figure 3. Developed omega type EMMFS model for modal analysis: a) omega tube 
for modal analysis; b) green hues shows working fluid inside tube; c) solid part of 
tube configuration; d) mesh model for modal analysis.
www.ebook3000.com

56
Design and Simulation of Electro-Mechanical Mass Flow Sensor (EMMFS)
In Coriolis metering the tube is to be vibrated in its first mode of vibration. 
Using mode shape, it provides estimation for the experimentation phase to expect 
Coriolis action generation around the evaluated frequency. Phase shift between two 
arms of omega tube is measured using displacement sensors and this phase shift is 
proportional to mass flow rate.
Figure 4. Developed U type EMMFS Model for modal analysis: a) model of U 
shaped resonating tube; b) Solid part of Tube; c) Mesh model for modal analysis ; 
d) Green color shows working fluid inside tube

57
Design and Simulation of Electro-Mechanical Mass Flow Sensor (EMMFS)
Table 4. Natural frequencies for omega tube configurations
Omega tubes
Tube Materials
Height (L) mm
Width (D) mm
Copper
Aluminium
Mild Steel
200
300
57.671
69.17
84.395
400
38.539
46.213
56.555
500
28.423
34.08
41.743
300
300
33.835
40.574
49.436
400
24.283
29.115
35.587
500
18.744
22.473
27.507
400
300
22.245
26.672
32.471
400
16.756
20.094
24.527
500
13.358
16.019
19.581
Table 5. Natural frequencies for u tube configurations
U tubes
Tube Materials
Height (L) mm
Width (D) mm
Copper
Aluminium
Mild Steel
200
300
106.57
127.78
154.9
400
86.945
104.24
126.46
500
70.459
84.465
102.57
300
300
52.689
63.165
76.564
400
46.101
55.267
66.987
500
40.659
48.737
59.103
400
300
31.343
37.574
45.539
400
28.137
33.73
40.884
500
25.538
30.611
37.112
www.ebook3000.com

58
Design and Simulation of Electro-Mechanical Mass Flow Sensor (EMMFS)
Figure 5. Various mode shapes of omega type EMMFS modal analysis: a) first 
mode shapte; b) second mode shape; c) third mode shape; d) fourth mode shape

59
Design and Simulation of Electro-Mechanical Mass Flow Sensor (EMMFS)
FUTURE SCOPE
In future present work can be extended for:
1. 	
Variation of Phase Shift with mass flow rate.
2. 	
Variation of Sensor locations.
CONCLUSION
FEA simulation of EMMFS was performed for different configuration of resonating 
tube for evaluation of resonant frequency. The main objective of this research 
work has been achieved by calculating resonant frequency in all cases. Obtained 
fundamental frequency will be used for excitation in experimental study. Resonant 
Figure 6. Various mode shapes of U type EMMFS modal analysis: a) first mode 
shapte; b) second mode shape; c) third mode shape; d) fourth mode shape
www.ebook3000.com

60
Design and Simulation of Electro-Mechanical Mass Flow Sensor (EMMFS)
frequencies for omega tube are 57.671 Hz (Copper), 69.17 Hz (Al) and 84.395 Hz 
(mild Steel) when height of tube is 200mm and 300 mm width. At same boundary 
conditions the resonant frequency for 400 mm height and 500 mm width U shaped 
tube are 25.53 Hz (copper), 30.61 Hz (Al), and 37.11 Hz (Mild Steel). In future, 
this research work can be extended for experimental analysis of different parameters 
related to EMMFS.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Authors are thankful to Department of Science and Technology (DST, New Delhi) 
for necessary funding of this project.
REFERENCES
Anklin, M., Drahm, W., & Rieder, A. (2006). Coriolis mass flow meters: Overview of 
the current state of the art and latest research. Flow Measurement and Instrumentation, 
17(6), 317–323. doi:10.1016/j.flowmeasinst.2006.07.004
Ansys R 14.5. (2015). Structural Analysis guide 2015. Academic Press.
Avci, E. (2008). Comparison of wavelet families for texture classification by using 
wavelet packet entropy adaptive network based fuzzy inference system. Applied Soft 
Computing, 8(1), 225–231. doi:10.1016/j.asoc.2007.01.003
Bobovnik, G., Mole, N., Kutina, J., Stok, B., & Bajsic, I. (2005). Coupled finite-
volume/finite-element modelling of the straight-tube Coriolis flowmeter. Journal 
of Fluids and Structures, 20(6), 785–800. doi:10.1016/j.jfluidstructs.2005.04.008
Cascetta, F., Valle, S. D., Guido, A. R., Pagano, S., & Vigo, P. (1991). A new 
straight-pipe Coriolis mass flow meter: The mathematical model. Measurement, 
9(3), 115–123. doi:10.1016/0263-2241(91)90031-K
Cheesewright, R., Belhadj, A., & Clark, C. (2003). Effect of mechanical vibrations 
on Coriolis mass flow meters. Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and 
Control, 125(1), 103–113. doi:10.1115/1.1539098
Jang, J. S. R. (1993). ANFIS: Adaptive Network-Based Fuzzy Inference 
System. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 23(3), 665–685. 
doi:10.1109/21.256541

61
Design and Simulation of Electro-Mechanical Mass Flow Sensor (EMMFS)
Kumar, Dwivedi, Jaiswal, & Patil. (2015). Material based Vibration Characteristic 
Analysis of Heavy Vehicle Transmission Gearbox Casing using Finite Element 
Analysis. Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, 308, 527–533. 
Doi:10.1007/978-81-322-2012-1_56
Mole, N., Bobovnik, G., Kutina, J., Stok, B., & Bajsic, I. (2008). An improved 
three-dimensional coupled fluid–structure model for Coriolis flowmeters. Journal 
of Fluids and Structures, 24(4), 559–575. doi:10.1016/j.jfluidstructs.2007.10.004
Patil, P. P., Sharma, S. C., & Jain, S. C. (2012). Response surface modelling of 
vibrating omega tube (Copper) Electromechanical Coriolis mass flow sensor. Expert 
Systems with Applications, 39(4), 4418–4426. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2011.09.149
Patil, P. P., Sharma, S. C., & Jain, S. C. (2012). Performance evaluation of a Copper 
omega type Coriolis Mass Flow Sensor with an aid of ANFIS tool. Expert Systems 
with Applications, 39(5), 5019–5024. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2011.10.010
Patil, P. P., Sharma, S. C., Jaiswal, H., & Kumar, A. (2014). Modeling Influence 
of Tube material on vibration Based EMMFS using ANFIS. Procedia Material 
Science, 6, 1097–1103. doi:10.1016/j.mspro.2014.07.181
Patil, P. P., Sharma, S. C., Paliwal, V., & Kumar, A. (2014). ANN Modelling of Cu 
Type Omega Vibration Based Mass Flow Sensor. Procedia Technology, 14, 260–265. 
doi:10.1016/j.protcy.2014.08.034
Pro-E 5.0. (2013). Designing manual. Academic Press.
Raszillier, H., & Durst, F. (1991). Coriolis effect in mass flow metering. Archive of 
Applied Mechanics, 61, 192–214.
Rongmo, L., & Jian, W. (2013). Fluid-structure coupling analysis and simulation 
of viscosity effect on Coriolis mass flowmeter. APCOM & ISCM Singapore.
Saravanan, R. M., Raj, C. W., & Shanmugavalli, M. (2015), Design and Simulation of 
Coriolis Flow Tube in Meso and Micro Level to Determine Its Resonant Frequency. 
Middle-East Journal of Scientific Research, 23, 239-242. DOI: 10.5829/idosi.
mejsr.2015.23.ssps.101
Sharma, S. C., Patil, P. P., Vasudev, M. A., & Jain, S. C. (2010). Performance 
Evaluation of an Indigenously Designed Copper (U) tube Coriolis Mass flow 
sensors. Measurement, 43(9), 1165–1172. doi:10.1016/j.measurement.2010.05.007
www.ebook3000.com

62
Design and Simulation of Electro-Mechanical Mass Flow Sensor (EMMFS)
Wang, T., & Baker, R. (2014). Coriolis flowmwters: A review of developments 
over the past 20 years and an assessment of the state of the art and likely future 
directions. Flow Measurement and Instrumentation, 40, 99–123. doi:10.1016/j.
flowmeasinst.2014.08.015
Ying, L. C., & Pan, M. C. (2008). Using adaptive network based fuzzy inference 
system to forecast regional electricity loads. Energy Conversion and Management, 
49(2), 205–211. doi:10.1016/j.enconman.2007.06.015
Zadeh. (2015). Simulation a disposable mass flow meter by an advanced FSI modeling 
and finite element analysis (Master’s Degree Thesis). Department of Mechanical 
Engineering, Blekinge Institute of Technology, Karlskrona, Sweden.

Copyright © 2018, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  4
63
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-3722-9.ch004
ABSTRACT
In this chapter, the authors provide the simultaneous applications of numerical and 
mathematical methods for engineers. The best way to ignite the fire of curiosity in 
the student is the validation of their ideas and learning. Specially, the engineering 
students learn best when they are prompted by problems. This can be achieved 
through the validation of their analytical results with experimental. Therefore, the 
scope of the present work is to synchronize of the above-mentioned two domains 
(numerical, experimental). Furthermore, we have approached numerical methods 
from an experimental perspective. Mathematical methods are techniques by which 
mathematical problems are developed so that these can be solved with arithmetic 
operations. Although, there are many forms of numerical methods, they possess one 
common characteristic: they invariably call for large numbers of tedious arithmetic 
calculations. This work intends to relate the theoretical understanding with the real 
world problems.
Advanced Numerical and 
Experimental Methods Used in 
Material Science for Evaluating 
Mechanical and Damping 
Nature of Composite Materials
Subhash Singh
Lovely Professional University, India
Kaushik Pal
IIT Roorkee, India
www.ebook3000.com

64
Advanced Numerical and Experimental Methods Used in Material Science
INTRODUCTION
The composite materials have aroused considerable interest because they exhibit 
fascinating properties. The mechanical and physical properties of multi-functional 
composites were intensively investigated during the past decade. Among the reported 
functionalities, those in optics, quantum computing, photonics, nano and micro-
electromechanical systems (NEMS, MEMS), sensors, electronics are most promising. 
Some of these architectures are potentially suitable for technological applications such 
as solar cells, optical modulators or switches, high temperature energy conversion 
systems, heat engine, gas turbines, sensors and waveguide material in refractometric 
or fluorescence detection. Similarly, on macro scale the composites are extensively 
used in aerospace structures, aircraft industry, automobile sector, defense equipment, 
various components of IC engine, springs in mechanical engineering field, rotary 
components (as parts of motors and turbines), electronic packaging, towers for power 
transmission and multiple recreational products (Miracle, 2005), (Luo, 2006), (Arsha, 
2015) and (Singh, 2017). Generally, superior physical, mechanical and damping 
properties are essential requisite of composite materials which are principally used 
in mechanically loaded regions to stabilize and stimulate the integrity of fractures, 
stiffness, strength, wear resistance, fatigue behavior, corrosion resistance and creep 
resistance (Ruiz-Navas, 2009).
PROPERTIES OF COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Composites are most often used as structural elements in numerous industries and 
operated under unstable temperature conditions, consequences in the advent of some 
effects of structural and dimensional instability. Finally, degradation of mechanical 
as well as damping (internal friction) properties of the composites may take place. 
That why, it is essential to study the damping properties of the composite materials. 
Composites having excellent damping and mechanical properties are highly desirable 
and widely used in many applications.
Mechanical Properties
The mechanical properties of various composites were examined by performing 
ultimate tensile strength (UTS) as discussed below.

65
Advanced Numerical and Experimental Methods Used in Material Science
Ultimate Tensile Strength (UTS)
The mechanical characteristic (axial tensile strength) of composite is defined as the 
quotient of its maximum load at failure to average cross-sectional area and likely 
dependent upon transferring of externally applied load from matrix to reinforcement. 
Fundamentally there are four major strengthening mechanisms functioning in 
strength enhancement: Orowan strengthening, fine grain size according to Hall-
Petch rule, work hardening (because of strain misfit between the particulates and 
the matrix) and strengthening due to difference in coefficient of thermal expansion 
(CTE) (Lloyd, 1994). The overall strength of the composites may be stated as the 
following equation:
τ
τ
τ
τ
τ
C
M
Hall Petch
Load
Orowan
=
+
+
+
−
∆
∆
∆
	
(1)
where τC  and τ M  are the strength of the composite and matrix respectively. Whereas 
∆τ Hall Petch
−
, ∆τ Load  and ∆τOrowan  are the increment due to refinement of grain 
size, effect of load transfer and effect of Orowan strengthening, correspondingly. 
Furthermore, the equation for individual strengthening mechanism could be expressed 
as:
∆τ Hall Petch
o
k
d
d
−
=
−






1
1
	
(2)
∆τ
τ
Load
p
M
V
l
t A
l
=
+
(
)
4
	
(3)
∆τ
π
πγ
ϑ
Orowan
t
MGb
d
b
=
(
)
−
(
)
 ln
| 4
2
1
	
(4)
where k, d and do represents Hall-Petch coefficient of aluminium matrix, average 
grain size of fabricated composite and average grain size of pure aluminium, 
respectively. The A
l t
= (
)
/
, t and l are aspect ratio, thickness and size in parallel 
www.ebook3000.com

66
Advanced Numerical and Experimental Methods Used in Material Science
of load direction of the incorporated particles. While G, M, ϑ, dt and γ symbolize 
as shear modulus, Taylor factor, Possion’s ratio, uniform diameter of the particle 
and inter-particle spacing, respectively. Figure 1 shows the yield strength (offset 
0.2%) and UTS for pristine aluminium and other as-cast composites like bare SiC/
Al, TiO2 coated SiC/Al and nanocrystalline lithium titanate (LTO) coated SiC/Al, 
respectively. At first scan, enhancement of strength for individual as-cast composites 
is due to significant grain size reduction according to Hall–Petch relation. As shown 
in eq. (ii), grain size directly affects the strength of the Al metal matrix composite. 
Though, formation of intermetallic compound (Al4C3, reaction product between 
pristine SiC and Al), poor wettability of SiC in Al matrix and agglomeration of SiC 
particles are mainly responsible for reduced modulus elasticity and strength of SiC/
Al.
We tried to overcome from these problems by encapsulating SiC particles with 
TiO2 layer and LTO layer, respectively. Therefore, TiO2 encapsulated SiC/Al and 
LTO encapsulated SiC/Al composites have higher tensile strength as compare pure 
Al and SiC/Al composite. In this research, it is revealed that the yield strength and 
ultimate tensile strength of the as-cast pure Al was obtained as 38 ±
(
)
5  and 70 
±
(
)
5 , respectively. Whereas, the UTS for as-cast aluminium matrix composites 
incorporated with bare SiC, TiO2 encapsulated SiC and LTO encapsulated SiC were 
obtained as 220 ±
(
)
9 , 251 ±
(
)
6  and 268 ±
(
)
6  MPa, respectively. Previously, it 
was reported that the tensile strength of lithium zirconate (nanocrystalline spinel) 
Figure 1. Yield strength (offset 0.2%) and Ultimate Tensile Strength (UTS) for pristine 
aluminium and other as-cast composites

67
Advanced Numerical and Experimental Methods Used in Material Science
ceramic coating on SiC particles reinforced composite (SiC@LZO/Al) was increased 
with a factor of 3.8 as compared to the pure aluminium (Singh, 2015). The UTS of 
SiC/LTO/Al composite significantly higher than the UTS of SiC/TiO2/Al composite 
might be due to improvement in incorporated particles distribution in the matrix 
and enhanced interface bonding between matrix and reinforcement. Role of Orowan 
strengthening and deference in coefficient of thermal expansion in strength 
enhancement are largely depend upon volume fraction of reinforcements.
Microhardness
Figure 2 demonstrates the results of microhardness value obtained for the as-cast 
pristine Al, SiC/Al, TiO2 grafted SiC/Al and LTO grafted SiC/Al composites. We 
found the hardness value for as-cast base aluminium as 28(±4). For pristine SiC 
incorporated Al matrix composite, hardness value was measured almost doubled 
[61(±6)] as compare to pure Al. At first glance, it seems that coating of dispersoids 
help in improving the hardness values considerably. Again, the resultant hardness 
value of the aluminium matrix incorporated with TiO2 grafted SiC was increased to 
71(±9) while 84(±7) was observed for the aluminium matrix incorporated with LTO 
Figure 2. Results of microhardness value for the as-cast pristine Al, SiC/Al, TiO2 
grafted SiC/Al and LTO grafted SiC/Al composites
www.ebook3000.com

68
Advanced Numerical and Experimental Methods Used in Material Science
encapsulated SiC dispersoids. De-agglomeration, improved wettability, enhanced 
dispersibility of the encapsulated SiC dispersoids in the Al matrix was transformed 
to an improved value of hardness.
Damping Properties
Damping is one of the prominent model parameter for designing and analysis of 
various vibrating structural elements. The damping property of the fabricated 
composites was studied by using storage modulus E '
(
), loss modulus E ''
(
)  and 
internal friction, tanδ  (=  ’/
’’
E
E ) obtained from dynamic mechanical analysis 
(DMA) with 3 point bending clamp, able to work in the frequency of 1Hz with the 
specimens (size 40
10
1
mm
mm
mm
×
×
) over an exceptionally wide range of 
temperature (ambient N2 atmosphere) and with different heating and cooling rates. 
Further, obtained experimental data from the DMA analysis is sufficient for explaining 
the damping behaviour of the composites.
Figure 3 illustrates the storage modulus and the internal friction upon heating 
and cooling as a function of temperature for as-cast Al, bare SiC incorporated Al, 
TiO2 grafted SiC incorporated Al and LTO spinel grafted SiC incorporated Al 
matrix composites, respectively. In this study significant improvement in damping 
flexural characteristics of the as-cast pristine aluminium as well as other composites 
incorporated with unmodified and modified SiC particles was observed. Initially, 
Blanter et al. proposed a technique called mechanical spectroscopy that consists 
of applying a sinusoidal stress to a material and measuring the strain response 
(Blanter, 2007).
The response of induced strain by applying sinusoidal stress was measured via 
mechanical spectroscopy technique which explores the mechanism. Internal friction 
is related to the time-dependent elasticity of a material. Metals and alloys reply to an 
applied load by time-independent elastic strain as well as by time-dependent strain 
that lags behind the applied load. In other words, internal friction of the materials 
and alloys are associated to the time-dependent elasticity. The following equations 
can be stated for stress (σ) and strain (ε) because of lag induced by the relaxation:
σ
σ
ω
=
(
)
oexp i t 	
(5)
ε
ε
=
o exp i t
ω
δ
−
(
)	
(6)

69
Advanced Numerical and Experimental Methods Used in Material Science
Figure 3. Graphs between storage modulus and Damping factor (Tan delta) as a 
function of temperature for pristine Al, bare SiC incorporated Al and TiO2 coated 
SiC/Al and LTO encapsulated SiC/Al: (a, c, e and g) for heating curve and (b, d, f 
and h) for cooling curve
www.ebook3000.com

70
Advanced Numerical and Experimental Methods Used in Material Science
The term σ
ε
o
o
,
 δ  and ω  represent stress, strain amplitudes loss angle and 
angular vibration frequency, respectively. By dividing the terms on each side of 
above equations, resulting complex modulus E
( ) is expressed as follows:
E
i
E
iE
O
O
=
+
=
+
σ
ε
δ
δ
(cos
sin )
'
''	
(7)
Storage modulus E '
(
) characterises as stiffness and loss modulus E ''
(
)  is 
defined as quantity of oscillation energy converted into heat. Damping capacity of 
the material is the ratio of E ''
(
)  to E '
(
) and usually denoted as tanδ :
tan
''
'
δ = E
E
	
(8)
Initially, maximum and minimum value of the storage modulus for as-cast Al 
is reported as 44 GPa at -100 ºC and 32 GPa at 400 ºC, respectively as revealed 
in Figure 3 (a). On addition of pristine SiC dispersoids in Al matrix, the value of 
storage modulus increased. Further, the value of storage modulus was increased for 
samples containing TiO2 grafted SiC and LTO grafted SiC dispersoids in Al matrix. 
On comparing the storage modulus results for LTO grafted SiC/Al composites with 
pristine Al, we obtained nearly ~67% higher storage modulus, as revealed in Figure 
3 (g). The value of storage modulus shows retarding tendency on increasing the 
temperature for all the composites due to relaxation phenomena.
As shown in Figure 3 (b), storage modulus further increases during cooling after 
reaching highest temperature of 400 °C for the pure aluminium. However, damping 
and strengthening microscopic mechanisms are not independent for most of the 
metals. So it would be of great interest to search for new materials simultaneously 
exhibiting good mechanical as well as and high damping properties. For industrial 
purpose, materials that simultaneously exhibit excellent damping capacity and better 
mechanical properties are of great interest. This task could be achieved via one way 
only, when the hardening mechanisms are independent of microscopic mechanism 
responsible for dissipation of the vibration energy that is internal friction. However, 
another way to accomplish this task by developing two-phase or three phase materials 
where each phase plays a definite role (Schaller, 2003). The damping behaviour of 
the composites is intensively depends upon lattice defects (point defects, dislocations, 
grain boundaries and interfaces between reinforcements and matrix) or in other words 
lattice defects such as dislocations, point defects, interfaces between reinforcements 

71
Advanced Numerical and Experimental Methods Used in Material Science
and matrix and grain boundaries are primarily responsible for defining the damping 
characteristics (Liu, 1999 and Liu, 2014). At low temperature, the dislocations are 
much more extensive up to room temperature at which displacements are typically 
fractions of an atomic diameter whereas, at high temperatures, sliding can be much 
more extensive and lead to viscoelastic strain.
Primarily, Zhang et al. was explained the conceivable governing mechanism 
of damping for MMCs (Zhang, 1994). Basically, difference in the coefficient of 
thermal mismatch (CTE) between dispersoids and matrix at low temperature is the 
principal cause of dislocation damping whereas interface sliding and grain boundary 
play critical role for damping at high temperatures, (Arsenault, 1983). Dislocation 
damping of the matrix and intrinsic damping of the reinforcement play a leading role 
at relatively low temperatures. The difference in the coefficient of thermal mismatch 
(CTE) between the reinforcements and metal matrix is the root cause of dislocation. 
At higher temperatures, the sliding of interface and grain boundary is responsible 
for a large portion of the observed damping. In relation to Granato–Lucke (G-L) 
dislocation theory given by Granato et al., dislocation motion between dispersoids 
and the matrix can be expressed as follows (Granato, 1956):
tanδ
ε
ε
=




C exp C
1
2
	
(9)
C
F L
bEL
B
N
C
1
3
2
6
= ρ
	
(10)
C
F
bEL
B
C
2 =
	
(11)
Here, E represents to elastic modulus; ε is strain amplitude; ρ is the dislocation 
density; C1 and C2 are material constants; LC and LN are average dislocation distance 
between weak and strong pinning points; b and FB are the Burger’s vector and binding 
force between dislocations and weak pinning points. Both storage modulus and tan 
delta display a hysteresis between cooling and heating curve, which interpreted as 
being due to stresses that are present at reinforcements and matrix. The interface 
www.ebook3000.com

72
Advanced Numerical and Experimental Methods Used in Material Science
thermal stresses can be relaxed either by dislocation motion in ductile matrix or 
interface cracking in hard matrix. Thus, dislocation motion is responsible for an 
extra contribution to damping because of materials property. Also, the thermal 
cycling in DMA analysis directly affects the damping capacity and strain produced 
in different composites at constant frequency.
CONCLUSION
This chapter provides valuable information for investigations and mechanical as well 
as damping properties evaluated for the metal matrix composites. Here, we studied 
that the morphology of SiC particles of submicron size was changed by encapsulating 
these particles with TiO2 and nanocrystalline Li4Ti5O12 spinel, correspondingly 
for further enhancement of mechanical as well damping properties. Furthermore, 
aluminium metal matrix composites were fabricated by incorporating pristine and 
tailored SiC dispersoids through stir casting (facilitated with vacuum casting). The 
major conclusions are as follows:
•	
Among all these composites, the highest value for storage modulus and 
damping capacity were obtained for LTO encapsulated SiC incorporated Al 
matrix composite;
•	
The results from the tensile analysis displayed improved failure strains for 
the composite containing LTO encapsulated SiC reinforced Al as compare to 
pristine Al, bare SiC incorporated Al and TiO2 decorated SiC incorporated Al 
because of enhanced wettability, de-agglomeration, enhanced dispersibility, 
grain refinement and enhanced load transfer capability;
•	
Microhardness value obtained for the as-cast pristine Al, SiC/Al, TiO2 grafted 
SiC/Al and LTO grafted SiC/Al composites are as 28(±4), 61(±6), 71(±9) 
and 84(±7), respectively;
•	
Also, we have been stated various possible strengthening mechanism which 
take part in mechanical as well as damping strengthening of metal matrix 
composites;
•	
The improvement in storage modulus, damping capacity, UTS and hardness is 
attributed to Orowan strengthening mechanism, strengthening from difference 
in CTE between the particulates and matrix, Hall–Petch relationship and 
work hardening resulting from the strain misfit between the particulates and 
the matrix.

73
Advanced Numerical and Experimental Methods Used in Material Science
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
In present day situation, materials having excellent mechanical properties and good 
damping capacity are significantly required to overcome the situation of mechanical 
vibrations, produced in almost every sector such as manufacturing industry, automobile 
sector, aerospace industry, construction and other industries where structural elements 
are exposed to dynamic loads. The Composites materials are a better choice to 
fulfill this gape, are becoming better substitutes for the conventional materials and 
alloys. Metal matrix composites (MMCs) simultaneously reveal high stiffness, good 
mechanical properties, low density and high damping capacity. Furthermore, the 
damping and mechanical properties was improved by reinforcing surface modified 
dispersoids in aluminium matrix. This chapter is an attempt to understand the 
interface relationship between the reinforcement and the matrix. As mentioned in 
the previous section that every work has its own limitations. These limitations may 
be considered as research opportunity for the future work. The following are some 
research directions suggested for future research based on this work:
•	
Agglomeration, poor stability and dispersibility of the SiC particles in 
AMMCs are always a great challenge for the scientists for obtaining the 
fascinating properties of AMMCs. Some other advanced coating materials 
having better mechanical, chemical and thermal properties may be suggested 
to overcome these problems;
•	
Obtaining uniform coating layer is also a great task for researchers. Developing 
new advanced coating techniques can be another direction for future work;
The work could be further extended by performing some other secondary 
processes like hot extrusion, hot/cold rolling, heat treatment, etc. followed by stir 
casting for further enhancement of mechanical as well as damping properties.
REFERENCES
Arsenault, R. J., & Shi, N. (1986). Dislocation generation due to differences between 
the coefficients of thermal expansion. Materials Science and Engineering, 81, 
175–187. doi:10.1016/0025-5416(86)90261-2
www.ebook3000.com

74
Advanced Numerical and Experimental Methods Used in Material Science
Arsha, A. G., Jayakumar, E., Rajan, T. P. D., Antony, V., & Pai, B. C. (2015). Design 
and fabrication of functionally graded in-situ aluminium composites for automotive 
pistons. Materials & Design, 88, 1201–1209. doi:10.1016/j.matdes.2015.09.099
Blanter, M. S., Golovin, I. S., Neuhauser, H., & Sinning, H. R. (2007). Internal 
friction in metallic materials. Berlin: Springer Verlag.
Granato, A., & Lucke, K. (1956). Theory of mechanical damping due to dislocations. 
Journal of Applied Physics, 27(6), 583–593. doi:10.1063/1.1722436
Liu, G., Tang, S., Ren, W., & Hu, J. (2014). Effect of thermal cycling on the damping 
behaviour in alumina borate whisker with and without Bi2O3 coating reinforced 
pure aluminium composites. Materials & Design, 60, 244–249. doi:10.1016/j.
matdes.2014.03.034
Liu, Y., Yang, G., Lu, Y., & Yang, L. (1999). Damping behavior and tribological 
properties of as-spray-deposited high silicon alloy ZA27. Journal of Materials 
Processing Technology, 87(1-3), 53–58. doi:10.1016/S0924-0136(98)00331-8
Lloyd, D. J. (1994). Particle reinforced aluminium and magnesium matrix composites. 
International Materials Reviews, 39(1), 1–23. doi:10.1179/imr.1994.39.1.1
Luo, Z. P. (2006). Crystallography of SiC/MgAl2O4/Al interfaces in a pre-oxidized 
SiC reinforced SiC/Al composite. Acta Materialia, 54(1), 47–58. doi:10.1016/j.
actamat.2005.08.022
Miracle, D. B. (2005). Metal matrix composites-From science to technological 
significance. Composites Science and Technology, 65(15-16), 2526–2540. 
doi:10.1016/j.compscitech.2005.05.027
Ruiz-Navas, E. M., Delgado, M. L., & Trindade, B. (2009). Improvement of the 
bonding interface of a sintered Al 2014–(Ti5Si3)p composite by the copper coating 
of the reinforcement. Composites. Part A, Applied Science and Manufacturing, 
40(8), 1283–1290. doi:10.1016/j.compositesa.2009.05.022
Schaller, R. (2003). Metal matrix composites, a smart choice for high damping 
materials. Journal of Alloys and Compounds, 355(1-2), 131–135. doi:10.1016/
S0925-8388(03)00239-1

75
Advanced Numerical and Experimental Methods Used in Material Science
Singh, S., & Pal, K. (2015). Effect of surface modification on silicon carbide particles 
with nanocrystalline spinel LZO for enhanced damping and mechanical property. 
Materials & Design, 82, 223–237. doi:10.1016/j.matdes.2015.05.076
Singh, S., & Pal, K. (2017). Influence of surface morphology and UFG on damping 
and mechanical properties of composite reinforced with spinel MgAl2O4-SiC core-
shell microcomposites. Materials Characterization, 123, 244–255. doi:10.1016/j.
matchar.2016.11.042
Zhang, J., Perez, R. J., & Lavernia, E. J. (1994). Effect of SiC and graphite particulates 
on the damping behaviour of metal matrix composites. Acta Metallurgica et Materialia, 
42(2), 395–409. doi:10.1016/0956-7151(94)90495-2
www.ebook3000.com

76
Copyright © 2018, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  5
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-3722-9.ch005
ABSTRACT
This chapter covers single-phase heat transfer analysis in microchannel heat sink 
relevant to electronic cooling application. In order to estimate the correct heat 
transfer performance, it is required to consider both, conduction and convection. 
Hence, conjugate analysis of heat transfer has been considered where both conduction 
and convection heat transfer are calculated as a part of solution. Two different 
configurations of microchannels namely, uniform and diverging cross-section have 
been considered individually on different copper substrate. A copper substrate of 
dimension 25×0.9×4 mm has been used to generate microchannel. Inlet cross-
section (0.4×0.75 mm) of both channels has been kept equal however; cross-section 
of diverging channel keeps on increasing as width is continuously increasing along 
the flow direction. A constant heat flux of 250 kW/m2 has been provided from the 
bottom. Comparative study has been done to analyse the heat transfer performance 
of both the configurations of microchannels.
Comparative Study of 
Conjugate Heat Transfer in 
Uniform and Diverging Cross-
Section Microchannels
Yogesh K. Prajapati
National Institute of Technology Uttarakhand, India

77
Comparative Study of Conjugate Heat Transfer
INTRODUCTION
Narrow flow channels with hydraulic diameters (Dh) in 1–200 µm range are termed 
as microchannels. Defining threshold diameter (macro to micro transition) of 
microchannels is still a matter of considerable discussion in the research community. 
Till date no consensus has been reached for defining the critical diameter below 
which a channel is termed as microchannel. Nonetheless, widely accepted bands for 
microchannel diameter have been proposed by few researchers. Mehendale (2000) 
defined the micro heat exchanger in range of 1–100 µm whereas Kandlikar (2002) 
defined this range between 10–200 µm. In addition to geometrical parameters, there 
are certain dimensionless numbers which are used to define the threshold limit for 
microchannels. Kew and Cornwell (1997) proposed confinement number (Co) as:
Co
D
g
h
l
g
=
−
1
σ
ρ
ρ
(
)
	
(1)
where ρl  and ρg  are densities of liquid and gas phases respectively and σ is the 
surface tension. Channels with Co > 0.5 are termed as microchannels. Based on 
this criterion, channels with hydraulic diameter less than 1000 µm can be treated 
as microchannels for flow boiling of water.
Microchannels have been established to dissipate high heat. These channels are 
gaining popularity due to fact that significant amount of heat dissipation could be 
accomplished using small area and less amount of coolant. Microchannels also have 
got important applications in other fields to access fluid flow from confined space. 
Channels of different geometry and shapes are essentially required for different 
applications in various fields. One of the important applications of microchannel is 
as heat sink especially for electronic cooling. Heat sink may be defined as a device 
that simultaneously absorb and dissipate undesirable heat form a component using 
thermal contact. Heat sink transfers thermal energy from a high temperature source 
to a low temperature coolant. In recent years, the development of compact electronic 
devices and high-speed processors has significantly increased power densities in 
the component. Therefore, heat generation per unit volume in these devices has 
increased drastically. To keep the component under working conditions, efforts are 
needed to design more efficient and stable heat sink. Miniaturization of electronic 
devices requires mini/micro cooling system capable of dissipating heat flux in the 
range of 300–500 W/cm2. Of course, the time is not far off when these requirements 
will shoot-up to 1000 W/cm2 krishnan (2007).
www.ebook3000.com

78
Comparative Study of Conjugate Heat Transfer
The conventional air cooling technology using fan cannot dissipate heat in these 
devices. Moreover, these systems are bulky, noisy, and produce vibrations. Compared 
to liquid coolant, thermal conductivity of air is low resulting in poor heat dissipation. 
It has been observed that liquid cooling offers four to ten times higher heat flux 
over air-cooled system. With the evolution of micro fabrication techniques, massive 
research has been carried out to explore the possibility of using microchannels as 
heat sink. Silicon and copper are most commonly used materials for fabricating the 
microchannel heat sink. Both materials have high thermal conductivity and they are 
compatible with the application. Silicon has added benefits over copper material 
since in the electronic field it is a widely used material. Microchannels can be 
fabricated with the help of sophisticated machines such as micro-milling, wire-cut 
EDM and laser-cutting. However, chemical etching and lithography techniques are 
fabricating small dimension microchannels. Due to high surface-to-volume ratio 
and subsequent augmentation in heat transfer rate has attracted the attention of 
research community towards microchannels. Microchannel heat sinks are considered 
to be indirect cooling device as there is no direct contact between coolant fluid 
and device that generating the heat. Therefore, proper thermal contact is required 
between electronic chip and coolant. Other applications of microchannles include 
microfluidic devices such as microevaporators, micromicxtures and MEMS. All these 
devices may have uniform, diverging or other favourable geometry flow passages. 
Converging-diverging channels have been used in micromixtures to reduce mixing 
time Lee (2005) compared to T-shaped micromixture. Similar kind of observation 
has also been reported by Fu and Pan (2010).
A numerical study of fluid flow in converging-diverging passage has been carried 
out by Akbari (2010a). Study estimates flow resistance using analytical technique. 
Subsequently, they also performed Akbari (2010b). experiments on slowly varying 
cross-section of a tube. Duryodhan (2013) experimentally and numerically study 
the liquid flow through diverging channel. Authors discuss the difference in flow 
behaviour between uniform and diverging cross-section channels. It is pointed out 
that beyond 16º of divergence angle flow reversal takes place in the channel. In 
the similar kind of work, Duryodhan (2014) have compared the performance of 
converging-diverging channel with diverging channel. Mixing and heat transfer 
performance of converging-diverging microchannels have been studies by Yong and 
Teo (2014). They have reported significant improvement in the thermal-hydraulic 
performance compared to uniform cross-section channel.
Non-uniform cross-section (diverging) channels have also been examined for 
heat transfer performance mainly for microchannel heat sink applications. The 
idea of enlarging the micro channel cross-section was proposed by Mukherjee and 

79
Comparative Study of Conjugate Heat Transfer
Kandlikar (2005). Since then, Diverging cross-section microchannels have been 
significantly studies in the literature Lee (2008), Fu (2012) and Lin (2011) mainly 
for two-phase flow of the coolant. Prajapati and Pathak (2016 & 2015), Prajapati, 
Pathak and Khan (2016 & 2017) have studies the heat transfer, bubble dynamics and 
coolant flow behaviour in diverging channels. It has been identified that diverging 
channels performs comparatively better to uniform channel during flow boiling of 
the coolant. Since cross-section is increasing along the flow direction, it has enough 
space to supress flow boiling instabilities up to some extent. It has been recognised 
that unlike uniform cross-section, this configuration of microchannel facilitates 
smooth bubble removable from the channel passage. Bubbles in a diverging channel 
move easily with flow stream due to divergence in the channel. It has also been 
identified that overall pressure drop in diverging channel is also less compared to 
its counterpart uniform channel. Divergence angle should be kept small to avoid 
flow separation. All these favourable circumstances during two-phase flow supress 
flow instability in microchannels.
In order to predict the heat transfer from microchannels various methods have 
been adopted in the literature. In order to estimate the more accurate heat transfer 
performance it is required to consider both, conduction in the solid wall and forced 
convection in the liquid flow. Hence, in the present work conjugate analysis of heat 
transfer has been considered where both conduction and convection heat transfer are 
calculated as a part of the solution. Conjugate modelling is essentially required to 
consider heat transfer in both solid and liquid sections. Iaccarino (2002) numerically 
investigated the conjugated heat transfer on ribbed surface. Effect of thermal boundary 
condition has been studies during turbulent flow. It has been found that in the 
upstream side heat transfer was dominated by convection whereas conduction was 
more effective in the downstream side. 3D numerical model considering conjugate 
effect to investigate microchannel cooling performance has been done by Fedorov 
and Viskanta (2000).
Authors have used the experimental data of Kawano (1998) for the validation 
of their model. Constant flow pattern of the coolant was reported along the flow 
direction, expect in the inlet region where large temperature gradient was found. 
Mudawar (2002) have performed both experimental and numerical investigations 
of pressure drop and heat transfer characteristics of single-phase laminar flow in 
microchannels. Single flow channel has been considered which is etched on silicon 
substrate. Heat input of constant wall heat flux 50 W/cm2 was given to the top 
wall of the channel. They have also reported higher Nusselt number (Nu) and heat 
transfer coefficient in the developing region of the flow domain. Lee (2005) have 
revealed that conjugate approach with careful boundary condition can be employed 
with assurance to get the correct heat transfer in microchannel.
www.ebook3000.com

80
Comparative Study of Conjugate Heat Transfer
Axial conduction in microchannels is also a concern that needs to be considered 
while designing it. Conjugate heat transfer takes care of this effect. Lelea D (2007) 
investigated the effect of partial heating (upstream and downstream side) of 
microchannel using conjugate heat transfer. Similar kind of studies has been carried 
out by Croce (2015) and Ambatipudi (2000). Qu (2000) investigated conjugate 
heat transfer model in trapezoidal microchannel. However, while comparing the 
numerical results with experiments they have found significant discriminations in 
the Nusselt number. The importance of axial conduction and conjugate heat transfer 
has also been discussed by Gamrat (2005), Maranzana (2004) and Morini, (2006).
Recently Duryodhan (2016) have numerically studies the conjugate heat transfer 
effect in diverging microchannel having divergence angle in the range of (1-8º). It 
has been found that along the flow direction temperature gradient reduces. From the 
above discussion it is apparent that conjugate heat transfer analysis has conceivably not 
been considered. Keeping this objective in mind, present work has been undertaken. 
A better understanding is required to comprehend the single phase heat transfer 
performance of diverging microchannel considering the conjugate effect.
METHODOLOGY
In the present work, conjugate heat transfer analysis of water flow in a single 
microchannel has been presented. Simultaneous conduction in copper substrate and 
convection in coolant has been modelled using three dimensional (3D) geometry of 
the microchannel. Two types of channels geometries namely, uniform and diverging 
cross-section have been used in the study. Figure 1(a) shows the schematic diagram 
of microchannel with substrate.
Figure 1. Schematic of (a) Microchannel with substrate (b) Top view

81
Comparative Study of Conjugate Heat Transfer
A copper substrate of dimension 25×0.9×4 mm has been used to generate 
microchannel. Inlet cross-section of both channels has been kept equal however; 
cross-section of diverging channel keeps on increasing as width is continuously 
increasing along the flow direction. Figure 1(b) shows the top view of both 
configurations of microchannels. Due to divergence angle of 0.5º, exit width of 
diverging microchannel is 0.84 mm. Table 1 tabulates the complete specifications 
and operating range of data.
Governing Equations
Single phase water flows in the channels. Following assumptions have been considered 
to simplify the problem:
1. 	
Fluid is incompressible;
2. 	
Steady and fully developed laminar flow;
3. 	
Copper substrate has uniform thermal conductivity;
4. 	
Outer walls are insulated;
5. 	
Water is cooling medium with constant properties.
Uniform heat flux (q) has been provided at the bottom wall of the copper 
substrate. Remaining all walls have adiabatic boundary condition. Velocity inlet and 
pressure outlet boundary conditions have been considered at the inlet and outlet of 
the channel respectively.
Continuity equation:
∇⋅
=
V
0 	
(2)
Table 1. Range of data
www.ebook3000.com

82
Comparative Study of Conjugate Heat Transfer
For 3D fully developed laminar flow it is assumed that:
∂
∂=
=
=
u
x
v
w
0
0
0
,
,
 
	
(3)
therefore, momentum equation is simplified to:
∂
∂
+ ∂
∂
= −
2
2
2
2
1
u
y
u
z
dP
dx
lµ
	
(4)
Energy equation for liquid coolant becomes:
u T
x
k
C
T
x
T
y
T
z
l
l
p
l
l
l
l
∂
∂
=
∂
∂
+ ∂
∂
+ ∂
∂




ρ
2
2
2
2
2
2
	
(5)
Energy equation for conduction in solid copper substrate:
∂
∂
∂
∂



+ ∂
∂
∂
∂



+ ∂
∂
∂
∂



=
x k T
x
y k T
y
z k T
z
w
w
w
0 	
(6)
only important boundary condition is:
y
k T
y
q
w
w
=
−∂
∂
=
0,
	
(7)
In the above expressions V is velocity vector, u, v and w are components of velocity 
in x, y and z directions respectively. P, T, k, q, ρ and cp are respectively, pressure, 
temperature, thermal conductivity, heat flux and specific heat. The subscript l and 
w represents the liquid and wall.
MESH
Commercial code ANSYS FLUENT based on finite volume method has been used 
in the present study. Three dimensional (3D) simulations have been performed 
considering the conjugate approach. PISO (pressure implicit with splitting of 

83
Comparative Study of Conjugate Heat Transfer
operator) algorithm has been implemented for pressure velocity coupling. Second 
order upwind scheme is adopted for the discretization of different equations. Non-
uniform grids of hexahedral cells have been used and grid has been clustered in near 
wall region. The grid sensitivity test of the computation has been performed with 
three sets of grids, i.e. 239552, 449592 and 867420 hexahedral cells. The maximum 
difference between the predictions with last two sets of grid has been observed as 
1%. Based on the grid independency test simulations have been performed with 
449592 numbers of cells.
Figure 2 shows the resolution of the mess for the front face of uniform channel. It 
can be observed that mess has been refined at the interfacing of the liquid and solid 
interface. The computation has been assumed to be converged when the normalized 
sum of the residual for mass is less than 10-4 and variation of other variables in 
successive iteration is less than 10-3.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Simulations have been carried out for single heat flux value of 25 kW/m2 and three 
values of Reynolds number i.e. 100, 200 and 500 at the inlet of the channel. Fixed 
inlet temperature of (20ºC) the coolant has been used for the all cases. Comparative 
performances of heat transfer and pressure drop for both configurations of 
microchannels have been presented. Heat transfer performance of the heat sink in 
terms of temperature, heat flux (q), heat transfer coefficient (h) and Nusselt number 
(Nu) have been estimated.
Figure 2. Mess resolution of the front face of the uniform channel
www.ebook3000.com

84
Comparative Study of Conjugate Heat Transfer
Validation of the Model
The present numerical method has been validated with the results of Qu and Mudawar 
(2002) for conjugate heat transfer in silicon substrate with water as coolant. The 
methodologies of the present code have been applied to reproduce the results of 
Qu and Mudawar (2002) at Re = 140. Identical geometry, substrate material and 
all other operating conditions of above work have been used.
A single channel which is etched on Silicon substrate has been used in the above 
mentioned work. Uniform heat flux has been given from the top wall of the channel. 
For the validation purpose, wall heat flux of q = 50 W/cm2 and Re = 140 has been 
considered. Single-phase liquid water flows inside the microchannel. The comparison 
of temperature distribution at the vertical middle plane of the substrate from present 
work with those of Qu and Mudawar (2002) has been shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3. Temperature distribution at the middle plane (a) Present model (b) Qu 
and Mudawar (2002)

85
Comparative Study of Conjugate Heat Transfer
Further, a comparison of Nusselt number (Nu) along the channel length has been 
shown in Figure 4. Good agreement may be observed between Figure 3 (a) and (b) 
which is showing temperature contour at the vertical middle plane of the silicon 
substrate. It can be observed that compared to solid region of silicon; temperature 
gradient in liquid coolant is very large. Due to this fact, channel section is clearly 
differentiable from the solid section. It is worth mentioning that silicon has high 
thermal conductivity therefore, temperature gradient in the silicon is much smaller 
than that in water.
Figure 4 shows the comparison of Nusselt number (Nu) at channel side wall and 
top wall along the length of the channel. Nu is significantly high at the entrance 
and developing region of the channel. However, in the developed region of the 
microchannel, Nu almost remains constant up to the exit of the channel. Above 
comparison conforms that present numerical prediction is in good agreement with 
the Qu and Mudawar (2000) results.
Figure 4. Validation of Nusselt number (Nu)
www.ebook3000.com

86
Comparative Study of Conjugate Heat Transfer
Temperature Profile
Figure 5 shows the temperature rise of the coolant as well as bottom wall of the 
channel. Bulk fluid temperature has been shown corresponding to a line drawn at 
the midpoint of the channel whereas, a line drawn at the middle of the bottom wall 
along the channel length represents the bottom wall temperature of the channel.
Consistent temperature rise of bulk fluid and bottom wall may be observed along 
the flow direction for both configurations of the channels. Plots also indicate that 
inlet temperature of the coolant is 20ºC for all operating conditions. It is obvious 
that bulk fluid temperature increases sharply in the entrance region of the channel. 
Afterward, linear rise of the bulk fluid temperature can be observed in both channels. 
In Figure 5(a) at Re = 100, it can be observed that compared to uniform channel, 
bulk coolant temperature is consistently higher in diverging channel. Similarly, 
bottom wall temperature of diverging channel is 6ºC higher than uniform channel 
at the inlet itself. This initial temperature difference keeps on increasing towards the 
outlet of the channel, as slope of curve of diverging channel increases significantly 
compared to uniform channel bottom wall temperature. And it approaches to 13ºC 
at the outlet of the channel. Therefore, it can be concluded that diverging channel 
dissipates less heat compared to uniform channel.
Similar observation can also be made in Figure 5(b) for Re = 500. In this case, 
temperature rise of bulk fluid is very small (6-7ºC) and curves for both channels 
have similar slope. Bottom wall temperature also represents similar trend as for Re 
= 100, although, temperature rise is significantly less. This is due to the increased 
convection heat transfer at higher Reynolds number. More heat dissipation at this 
Re causes wall temperature to decrease. In this case also bottom wall of diverging 
channel shows more temperature compared to uniform channel. Less heat dissipation 
Figure 5. Temperature profile in the microchannels (a) Re = 100 (b) Re = 500

87
Comparative Study of Conjugate Heat Transfer
in diverging channel may be due to the fact that convective heat transfer reduces as 
coolant velocity decreases along the flow direction. The reason for decreasing coolant 
velocity is enlarging cross-section area of diverging channel towards the outlet.
Temperature contour at the middle plane of the copper substrate has been shown in 
Figure 6 for Re = 100 and 500. Isotherms have been plotted across the solid substrate 
and fluid zone. In the contour plots, red colour indicates higher temperature (in ºC) 
and blue colour indicates lower temperature. It can be seen that for copper substrate, 
magnitude of inclined isotherms are increasing in the flow direction. Higher thermal 
conductivity of copper substrate causes very low temperature gradient as predicted 
in figure. Whereas, temperature gradient in the liquid region is quite large therefore 
isotherms are clearly differentiable from solid substrate. This is due to the fact that 
thermal conductivity of coolant water is significantly lesser than copper substrate. 
Comparing the temperature profile of two channels at Re = 100, it has been found out 
that diverging channel possess higher temperature than uniform channel. Similarly, 
corresponding to Re = 500 also difference in maximum reported temperature is 
Figure 6. Temperature contour plot at the vertical middle plane (coolant flows from 
left to right)
www.ebook3000.com

88
Comparative Study of Conjugate Heat Transfer
about ≈ 10ºC. It is as per the discussion made for Figure 5. Higher temperature of 
the solid substrate for diverging channel clearly point out that less heat dissipates 
from the diverging configuration.
Pressure Profile
Similar to bulk fluid temperature, pressure drop has been plotted across the midpoint 
of the channel as shown in Figure 7 (a, b). In Figure 7 (a), pressure curves have been 
shown for uniform channel, it can be observe that curves are linear for all values of 
Reynolds numbers. Moreover, total pressure drop decreases with decreasing value 
of Re. The maximum value of predicted pressure drop is 3200 Pa corresponding to 
Re = 500 whereas it is 1190 Pa and 550 Pa for Re = 200 and 100 respectively. It is 
obvious that pressure drop decreases with reduction in Reynolds number.
Unlike uniform channel, pressure drop is no more linear in diverging channel 
as shown in Figure 7(b). Along the flow direction, magnitude of pressure drop 
decreases as cross-sectional area increases. It is worth mentioning that pressure 
drop is significantly less in diverging channel compared to uniform channel. 
Maximum value of predicted pressure drop corresponding to Re = 500 is merely 
1000 Pa compared to 3200 Pa of uniform channel. Likewise, ∆p is 420 Pa and 215 
Pa corresponding to Re = 200 and 100 respectively. Therefore, it may be concluded 
that diverging channels could be implemented with less pressure.
Figure 7. Pressure drop plots for different values of Re (a) uniform (b) diverging

89
Comparative Study of Conjugate Heat Transfer
Heat Flux Distribution
Heat flux at the bottom wall and side wall of the microchannels has been shown in 
Figure 8 (a, b). Figure 8(a) shows the heat flux at Re = 100. In the entrance region of 
the channel high heat flux has been found. This is due to the fact that in this region 
boundary layer is under development subsequently; thermal boundary layer is very 
thin. Comparing the side wall and bottom wall of the channel, q is significantly 
high at the side wall. Similar observations have been made by Qu and Mudawar 
(2002). They have revealed that small distance between side walls caused the large 
velocity gradient.
After initial shoot-up of heat flux in both channels, it is almost constant in the 
remaining section of the channel and its value lies in the range of 70-115 kW/m2 
corresponding to Re = 100. Stable value of heat flux (q) lies in the range of 90-120 
kW/m2 for Re = 500. High initial value of heat flux predominates at the side wall 
of channel compared to bottom wall.
Heat Transfer Coefficient
Figure 9 (a, b), shows the heat transfer coefficient (h) at the bottom wall of the 
channel. It has been calculated as:
h
q
T
T
w
b
=
−
(
)
	
Figure 8. Heat flux (q) along the channel length (a) Re = 100 and (b) Re = 500
www.ebook3000.com

90
Comparative Study of Conjugate Heat Transfer
where Tw is wall temperature and Tb is bulk fluid temperature. Like heat flux, heat 
transfer coefficient is significantly high in the entrance region of the channel for 
both configurations. Slope of the curve during initial is quite high for Reynolds 
number of 100 whereas at Re = 500, it is moderately declining in the flow direction. 
It is attributed due the increased convection rate at higher flow rate. Heat transfer 
coefficient keeps on decreasing along the channel length for both the cases. Moreover, 
only nominal decline has been reported corresponding to Re = 100 compared to Re 
= 500 in the downstream section of the channels.
It has been observed that curve of heat transfer coefficient significantly deviates 
for uniform and diverging channels for Re = 500. Uniform channel has higher heat 
transfer coefficient compared to diverging channel. It is obvious that average value 
of h is almost double at the higher Reynolds number.
Nusselt Number (Nu)
Figure 10 (a, b) shows the Nusselt number (Nu) at the bottom wall of the channel 
for Re = 100 and 500. Nusselt number distribution is illustrating the clear picture 
of heat transfer in the channels. It has been defined as:
Nu
qD
T
T k
h
w
b
f
=
−
(
)
(
)
	
where kf is the thermal conductivity of the coolant. It can be seen from the figure 
that Nusselt number is approaching to 22 in the entrance region of the channel 
Figure 9. Heat transfer coefficient (h) along the channel length (a) Re = 100 and 
(b) Re = 500

91
Comparative Study of Conjugate Heat Transfer
whereas; it sharply declines in the remaining part of the channel. It specifies the 
higher heat transfer occurring in the inlet region followed by moderate and constant 
heat dissipation in the downstream section of the channel. Compared to Re = 100, 
at higher Reynolds number, moderate change in slope has been reported.
At Re = 500, significant rise in Nu can be observed in the downstream section 
of the channel also. Moreover, compared to diverging channel, in uniform channel, 
Nusselt number is high in the most of the region especially in the middle as illustrated 
in Figure 10. However, very close to the exit of the channel, both channels show 
similar value of Nu. It can be established form the above discussion that diverging 
channel of present geometry is not much influential to support higher heat transfer 
rate compared to uniform channel of similar inlet width.
FUTURE SCOPE
It is worth mentioning that present work covers the simulation of only single channel. 
However, in the real practice multiple parallel channels are used in the microchannel 
heat sinks. Therefore, present work may be extended in this direction to predict 
the more actual flow condition. Uniform heat flux has been applied at the bottom 
wall of the substrate, essentially it may be non-uniform and uneven hot spot heat 
sources. In the present work, considered geometry of diverging channel with similar 
inlet hydraulic diameter not performs satisfactorily hence, improved geometry with 
constricted inlet may be examined. Moreover, varying physical properties of coolant 
is also required to incorporate in the simulation.
Figure 10. Variation of Nusselt number (Nu) for Re = 100 and 500
www.ebook3000.com

92
Comparative Study of Conjugate Heat Transfer
CONCLUSION
Numerical work has been carried out to investigate the performance of uniform 
and diverging cross-section microchannels. Hydraulic diameters at the inlet of both 
configurations are equal. Heat transfer, temperature isotherms and pressure drop 
have been studies. Conjugate heat transfer effect has been implemented. Results 
have been validated with the existing literature and good agreement has been found. 
It has been found that channel geometry has significant influence in heat transfer 
performance. In the present case considered geometry of diverging channel has not 
performed satisfactorily. However, predicted pressure drop is less in diverging channel 
compared to uniform cross-section channel. It has been commonly observed in both 
channels that at the entrance region, where flow is developing and boundary layer 
is thinner, heat transfer coefficient is significantly high whereas in the remaining 
section along the flow direction, it becomes less and stable.
REFERENCES
Akbari, M., Sinton, D., & Bahrami, M. (2010b). Laminar fully developed flow in 
periodically converging–diverging microtubes. Heat Transfer Engineering, 31(8), 
628–634. doi:10.1080/01457630903463404
Akbari, M., Sinton, D., & Bahrami, M. (2010a). Analytical and experimental 
characteristic of flow in slowly varying cross section microchannels. Proceedings 
of 8th international conference on FEDSM-ICNMM.
Ambatipudi, K. K., & Rahman, M. M. (2000). analysis of conjugate heat 
transfer in microchannel heat sinks. Numerical Heat Transfer Part A, 37. 
doi:10.1080/104077800274046
Croce, Rovenskaya, & D’Agaro. (2015). Computational Analysis of Conjugate Heat 
Transfer in Gaseous Microchannels. J. Heat Transfer, 137.
Duryodhan, V. S., Singh, A., Singh, S. G., & Agrawal, A. (2016). Three-Dimensional 
Numerical Study of Conjugate Heat Transfer in Diverging Microchannel. Proc 
Indian Natn Sci Acad, 82(2), 321–328.
Duryodhan, V. S., Singh, S. G., & Agrawal, A. (2013). Liquid flow through a 
diverging microchannel. Microfluid Nanofluid, 14(1-2), 53–67. doi:10.1007/
s10404-012-1022-7

93
Comparative Study of Conjugate Heat Transfer
Duryodhan, V. S., Singh, S. G., & Agrawal, A. (2014). Liquid flow through converging 
microchannels and a comparison with diverging microchannels. J. Micromech. 
Microeng., 24.
Fedorov, A. G., & Viskanta, R. (2000). Three-dimensional conjugate heat transfer 
in the microchannel heat sink for electronic packaging. International Journal of 
Heat and Mass Transfer, 43(3), 399–415. doi:10.1016/S0017-9310(99)00151-9
Fu, B. R., Lin, P. H., Tsou, M. S., & Pan, C. (2012). Flow pattern maps and transition 
criteria for flow boiling of binary mixtures in a diverging microchannels. International 
Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 55, 1754–1763.
Fu, B. R., & Pan, C. (2010). Simple channel geometry for enhancement of chemical 
reactions in microchannels. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 49(19), 
9413–9422. doi:10.1021/ie100589c
Gamrat, G., Facre-Marinet, M., & Asendrych, D. (2005). Conduction and entrance 
effects on laminar liquid flow and heat transfer in rectangular microchannels. 
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 48(14), 2943–2954. doi:10.1016/j.
ijheatmasstransfer.2004.10.006
Iaccarino, G., Ooi, A., Durbin, P. A., & Behnia, M. (2002). Conjugate heat transfer 
predictions in two-dimensional ribbed passages. International Journal of Heat and 
Fluid Flow, 23(3), 340–345. doi:10.1016/S0142-727X(02)00181-9
Kandlikar, S. G. (2002). Fundamental issues related to flow boiling in minichannels 
and microchannels. Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science, 26(2-4), 389–407. 
doi:10.1016/S0894-1777(02)00150-4
Kawano, K., Minakami, K., Iwasaki, H., & Ishizuka, M. (1998). Application of 
Heat Transfer in Equipment, Systems and Education. ASME HTD-361-3/PID-3.
Kew, P. A., & Cornwell, K. (1997). Correlations for the prediction of boiling heat 
transfer in small-diameter channels. Applied Thermal Engineering, 17(8-10), 
705–715. doi:10.1016/S1359-4311(96)00071-3
Krishnan, S., Garimella, S. V., Chrysler, G. M., & Mahajan, R. V. (2007). Towards a 
Thermal Moores Law. IEEE Transactions on Advanced Packaging, 30(3), 462–474. 
doi:10.1109/TADVP.2007.898517
Lee, J. S. H., Hu, Y., & Li, D. (2005). Electrokinetic concentration gradient generation 
using a converging-diverging microchannel. Analytica Chimica Acta, 543(1-2), 
99–108. doi:10.1016/j.aca.2005.04.041
www.ebook3000.com

94
Comparative Study of Conjugate Heat Transfer
Lee, P. C., & Pan, C. (2008). Boiling heat transfer and two-phase flow of water in 
a single shallow microchannel with uniform or diverging cross section. Journal 
of Micromechanics and Microengineering, 18(2), 025005. doi:10.1088/0960-
1317/18/2/025005
Lee, P. S., Garimella, S. V., & Liu, D. (2005). Investigation of heat transfer in 
rectangular microchannels. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 48(9), 
1688–1704. doi:10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2004.11.019
Lelea, D. (2007). The conjugate heat transfer of the partially heated microchannels. 
Heat and Mass Transfer, 44(1), 33–41. doi:10.1007/s00231-006-0228-1
Lin, P. H., Fu, B. R., & Pan, C. (2011). Critical heat flux on flow boiling of methanol-
water mixture in a diverging microchannels with artificial cavities. International 
Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 54(15-16), 3156–3166. doi:10.1016/j.
ijheatmasstransfer.2011.04.016
Maranzana, G., Perry, I., & Maillet, D. (2004). Mini- and micro-channels: Influence 
of axial conduction in the walls. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 
47(17-18), 3993–4004. doi:10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2004.04.016
Mehendale, S. S., Jacobi, A. M., & Shah, R. K. (2000). Fluid Flow and Heat Transfer 
at Micro- and Meso-Scales With Application to Heat Exchanger Design. Applied 
Mechanics Reviews, 53(7), 175–193. doi:10.1115/1.3097347
Morini, G. L. (2006). Scaling effects for liquid flows in microchannels. Heat Transfer 
Engineering, 27(4), 64–73. doi:10.1080/01457630500523865
Mukherjee, A., & Kandlikar, S. G. (2005). Numerical study of the effect of inlet 
constriction on bubble growth during flow boiling in microchannel. Proceedings 
of 3rd International Conference on Microchannels and Minichannels. doi:10.1115/
ICMM2005-75143
Prajapati, Y. K., Pathak, M., & Khan, M. K. (2015). A comparative study of 
flow boiling heat transfer in three different configurations of microchannels. 
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 85, 711–722. doi:10.1016/j.
ijheatmasstransfer.2015.02.016
Prajapati, Y. K., Pathak, M., & Khan, M. K. (2016). Clogging behaviour of an elongated 
bubble in uniform and diverging microchannel, Proc IMechE Part C. Journal of 
Mechanical Engineering Science, 230, 1861–1875. doi:10.1177/0954406215585365

95
Comparative Study of Conjugate Heat Transfer
Prajapati, Y. K., Pathak, M., & Khan, M. K. (2016). Transient heat transfer 
characteristics of segmented finned microchannels. Experimental Thermal and Fluid 
Science, 79, 134–142. doi:10.1016/j.expthermflusci.2016.07.004
Prajapati, Y. K., Pathak, M., & Khan, M. K. (2017). Bubble dynamics and flow 
boiling characteristics in three different microchannel configurations. International 
Journal of Thermal Sciences, 112, 371–382. doi:10.1016/j.ijthermalsci.2016.10.021
Prajapati, Y. K., Pathak, M., & Khan, M. K. (2017). Numerical investigation 
of subcooled flow boiling in segmented finned microchannels. International 
Communications in Heat and Mass Transfer, 86, 215–221. doi:10.1016/j.
icheatmasstransfer.2017.06.009
Qu, W., Mohiuddin Mala, G., & Li, D. (2000). Heat transfer for water flow in 
trapezoidal silicon microchannels. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 
43(21), 3925–3936. doi:10.1016/S0017-9310(00)00045-4
Qu, W., & Mudawar, I. (2002). Experimental and numerical study of pressure drop 
and heat transfer in a single-phase micro-channel heat sink. International Journal of 
Heat and Mass Transfer, 45(12), 2549–2565. doi:10.1016/S0017-9310(01)00337-4
Yong, J. Q., & Teo, C. J. (2014). Mixing and Heat Transfer Enhancement in 
Microchannels Containing Converging-Diverging Passages. Journal of Heat Transfer, 
136(4), 041704. doi:10.1115/1.4026090
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Conjugate: A scheme that estimates the heat conduction as well as convection.
Diverging Channel: Cross-section of the channel increases along the flow 
direction.
Microchannel: Flow passage with high surface to volume ratio having hydraulic 
diameter less than 1 mm.
www.ebook3000.com

96
Copyright © 2018, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  6
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-3722-9.ch006
ABSTRACT
Flexibility refers to the capability of a manufacturing system to respond cost effectively 
and arbitrarily to adapting production needs and necessities. This ability is becoming 
increasingly important for the design and operation of manufacturing systems, as 
these systems do function in highly variable and unpredictable environments. In 
this chapter, the reliability of the flexible manufacturing system has been calculated 
based on the mathematical framework. The model of the system consists of the system 
structure and the distribution of its components. The components are assumed 
to be repairable after various types of failures. In this work, the reliability and 
availability have been analyzed by using Markov process, Laplace transformations 
and supplementary variable techniques. Furthermore, the impacts of various failures 
on reliability, and availability of the system have also been analyzed.
A Study of Flexible 
Manufacturing System 
With Multiple Failures
Monika Manglik
University of Petroleum and Energy Studies, India
Mangey Ram
Graphic Era University, India
Divya Ahluwalia
University of Petroleum and Energy Studies, India

97
A Study of Flexible Manufacturing System With Multiple Failures
INTRODUCTION
Reliability analysis is an essential viewpoint of the business as far as higher profitability 
and lower running cost which can be accomplished by making the system free from 
failures by appropriate support, arranging and control. This can likewise help the 
administration to comprehend the impact of expanding or diminishing the repair rates 
of a specific part or subsystem in a general framework. While Managing unwavering 
quality based outline of machinery and structures, we may concentrate the relative 
mechanical and auxiliary failures from the perspective of loss of human lives. 
Reliability analysis of such sorts of systems helps us to get the required data about 
the control of different parameters. In the present section authors have examined the 
unwavering quality investigation of the paper, assembling plant by considering the 
failures of its primary segments. A few specialists for the last numerous years have 
examined the different certainties of dependability innovation of the subsystems or 
frameworks in process ventures at different level and various research papers have 
been distributed toward this path including Gupta et al. (2005) derived a numerical 
analysis of reliability and availability of the serial processes in butter-oil processing 
plant. Shakuntla et al. (2011) analyzed the reliability of palliative industry using the 
supplementary variable technique. Zadeh (1965) proved a separation theorem for 
convex fuzzy sets without requiring that the fuzzy sets be disjoint. Wong and Chen 
(2000) proposed a design and implementation methodology of a GA-based fuzzy 
system on a Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) chip.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Different authors talked about the system having Markovian properties. The system 
has non-Markovian property can be changed over into a system having the Markovian 
nature by presenting another supplementary variable.
Initially, (Cox, 1955) utilized supplementary variable method for the examinations 
of non-Markovian systems. He displayed a methodological arrangement of reliability 
and availability of that system with the assistance of Supplementary variable 
technique. Dhillon and Yang (1995) displayed a numerical model for reliability and 
availability investigation of a general standby system with expanding human error 
rates and irregular fizzled framework and repair rates. The authors utilized joint 
density function approach and supplementary variable method. Elsayed and Turley 
(1980) introduced a two-stage manufacturing system with buffer storing. Ram and 
Viswanadham (1994) introduced a structure for execution assessment of assembling 
www.ebook3000.com

98
A Study of Flexible Manufacturing System With Multiple Failures
system subject to failure and repair. Jain et al. (2002) explored a stochastic model for 
an assembling system comprising of adaptable machine, stacking/emptying robot 
and a computerized bed taking care of gadget. Lin and Chang (2012) examined the 
reliability of assembling systems with improving activity and distinctive failure 
rates. Kumar et al. (1988) dissected the accessibility of the encouraging system 
in the sugar industry. Gottumullala et al. (2010) talked about the dependability of 
k hubs for superior registering application. Different authors have worked in the 
field of dependability of mechanical frameworks, for example Dhillon and Natesan 
(1983), Mahajan and Singh (1996, 1997), Gupta et al. (2007), and so forth have 
examined the reliability and accessibility of the different assembling systems by 
utilizing distinctive methods. The execution examination of plastic pipe producing 
plant was talked about by Gupta et al. (2007) accepting consistent failure and repair 
rates. Manglik and Ram (2014) examined the different dependability measures of 
hydroelectric power plant under various failures by utilizing supplementary variable 
strategy and Markov Process. Wang et al. (2012) examined two accessibility systems 
with warm standby and diverse flawed scope. Ram et al. (2013) talked about a scope 
demonstrate for a parallel repetitive system to enhance the reliability, availability 
and for the decrease in the cost of the system. Garg et al. (2010) talked about the 
maintenance planning of a repairable square board producing system.
The paper producing system has been talked about before by utilizing Fuzzy 
logic. In the present chapter authors examined five-unit paper produces plant 
subject to consistent failure and repair rates of the subsystems and talked about the 
reliability demonstrating of the paper fabricating Plant by utilizing supplementary 
variable technique.
The chapter has been organized as follows: The section one is introductory in 
nature. In section one, a brief introduction about the system is presented. In Section 2 
the literature review has been discussed. Section three consists of system description 
notations and assumptions related to the work. The mathematical formulation of 
paper manufacturing plant developed by using the supplementary variable technique, 
assuming constant failure and repair rates. Analysis of the reliability and availability 
of the system has been discussed.
SYSTEM DESCRIPTION, NOTATIONS AND ASSUMPTIONS
The paper making procedure is an exceptionally complex system, including numerous 
unit operations and procedures; it basically comprises taking after five subsystems.

99
A Study of Flexible Manufacturing System With Multiple Failures
Raw Material Preparation
Common fiber based crude materials are received and cut or chopped into little 
pieces and afterward screened for further handling the failure of this component 
cause complete failure of the system.
Pulp Making
Pulping indicates two different mechanical procedures used to change over crude 
plant materials or reused paper into a stringy crude material known as pulp, which 
is utilized principally to make paper or paperboard items. The pulp is then washed 
to make the mash free from solvent pollutions and expulsion of black liquor through 
usual 3 or 4 phases of counter current washing with the help of revolving drum 
filters. The washed pulp is then sent for bleaching to build the splendor of the pulp 
and the dilute black liquor is sent to the evaporators. The failure of this component 
causes the complete failure of the system.
Bleaching
Pulp when it comes from digester contains residual coloring matter. This unbleached 
pulp may be used for making heavy wrapping paper or bags. However, paper to be 
used for printing, writing or paper which is to be dyed must first be bleached. The 
main object in bleaching is to remove residual lignin from the pulp fibers as well as 
to destroy or remove remaining coloring matter. The Minor failure of this subsystem 
reduced the capacity of the system, hence a loss in production. Major failure results 
in complete failure of the system.
Stock Preparation
It is comprised to give the pulp different required qualities through refining. It is 
mostly accomplished in either twofold plate or tapered refiners. The Minor failure 
of this subsystem lessened the capacity of the system, whereas major failure causes 
complete failure of the system.
Sheet Formation and Water Removal
Minor failure of paper machine reduces the capacity of the system while the Major 
failure of the machine causes the complete failure of the system. The flow chart of 
working of the paper manufacturing plant and state transition diagram is mentioned 
in Figure1 and Figure 2 respectively.
www.ebook3000.com

100
A Study of Flexible Manufacturing System With Multiple Failures
Notations
A B C D E
, ,
,
,
: Represent that the sub-system is working in full capacity.
C D E
,
,
: Represent the reduced state of subsystem C, D and E.
a b c d e
, , , , : Represent the failed state of the subsystems.
λi x
( )  i = 1,2,….5: Failure rates of the Subsystem A,B, C, D and E respectively.
µ j x
( )  j = 1,2,….5: Repair rates of A, B, C, D and E, respectively.
P t
0( ): Probability of the system when it is in full working condition.
P x t
k ( , )  k = 1,2…..22: Probability the system is in state k at time t has elapsed 
failure and repair time x.
Figure 1. Paper manufacturing process flow chart

101
A Study of Flexible Manufacturing System With Multiple Failures
Assumptions
•	
Failure and repair rates are independent of each other;
•	
Failure and repair rates of the subsystems are taken as constant;
•	
A repaired unit is as good as new ones for specified duration performance 
wise;
•	
Adequate repair facilities are provided;
•	
A service of the subsystem includes repair and/or replacement;
•	
The system can work at reduced capacity also;
•	
There are simultaneous failures.
Figure 2. State transition diagram
www.ebook3000.com

102
A Study of Flexible Manufacturing System With Multiple Failures
Mathematical Modeling of the System
∂
∂+
+
+
+
+




=
+
+
+
∞
t
P t
P t
P t
P t
λ
λ
λ
λ
λ
µ
µ
µ
µ
1
2
3
4
5
0
3 1
4
2
5
3
1
0
( )
( )
( )
( )
∫
∫
+
∞
( )
( , )
( )
( , )
x P x t dx
x P x t dx
6
2
0
7
µ
	
(1)
∂
∂+
+
+
+
+




=
+
+
∞
∫
t
P t
P t
P t
x P x
λ
λ
λ
λ
µ
λ
µ
µ
1
2
3
4
3
1
3
0
4
4
1
0
8
( )
( )
( )
( )
( , )
( )
( , )
( )
( , )
t dx
x P x t dx
x P
x t dx
+
+
∞
∞
∫
∫
µ
µ
2
0
9
3
0
10
	
(2)
∂
∂+
+
+
+
+
+




=
+
+
+
t
P t
P t
P t
P t
λ
λ
λ
λ
λ
µ
λ
µ
µ
µ
1
2
3
4
5
4
2
4
0
3
4
5
5
( )
( )
( )
( )
1
0
11
2
0
12
4
0
13
∞
∞
∞
∫
∫
∫
+
+
( )
( , )
( )
( , )
( )
( , )
x P
x t dx
x P
x t dx
x P
x t dx
µ
µ
	
(3)
∂
∂+
+




=
+
t
P t
P t
P t
λ
µ
µ
λ
4
5
3
4
5
3
0
( )
( )
( ) 	
(4)
∂
∂+
+
+
+
+
+




=
+
+
∞
∫
t
P t
P t
P t
x P
λ
λ
λ
λ
µ
µ
λ
λ
µ
1
2
3
4
3
4
4
4
1
3
2
1
0
( )
( )
( )
( ) 14
2
0
15
3
0
16
4
0
( , )
( )
( , )
( )
( , )
( )
x t dx
x P
x t dx
x P
x t dx
x P
+
+
+
∞
∞
∞
∫
∫
∫
µ
µ
µ
17( , )
x t dx
	
(5)

103
A Study of Flexible Manufacturing System With Multiple Failures
∂
∂+
+
+
+
+
+
+




=
+
+
∞
∫
t
P t
P t
P t
λ
λ
λ
λ
λ
µ
µ
λ
λ
µ
1
2
3
4
5
4
5
5
4
3
5
2
1
0
( )
( )
( )
(x P
x t dx
x P
x t dx
x P
x t dx
)
( , )
( )
( , )
( )
( , )
(
18
2
0
19
3
0
20
4
0
+
+
+
∞
∞
∞
∫
∫
∫
µ
µ
µ
x P
x t dx
x P
x t dx
)
( , )
( )
( , )
21
5
0
22
+
∞
∫µ
	
(6)
∂
∂+ ∂
∂+




=
t
x
x
P x t
µ1
6
0
( )
( , )
	
(7)
∂
∂+ ∂
∂+




=
t
x
x
P x t
µ2
7
0
( )
( , )
	
(8)
∂
∂+ ∂
∂+




=
t
x
x
P x t
µ1
8
0
( )
( , )
	
(9)
∂
∂+ ∂
∂+




=
t
x
x
P x t
µ2
9
0
( )
( , )
	
(10)
∂
∂+ ∂
∂+




=
t
x
x
P
x t
µ3
10
0
( )
( , )
	
(11)
∂
∂+ ∂
∂+




=
t
x
x
P
x t
µ1
11
0
( )
( , )
	
(12)
www.ebook3000.com

104
A Study of Flexible Manufacturing System With Multiple Failures
∂
∂+ ∂
∂+




=
t
x
x
P
x t
µ2
12
0
( )
( , )
	
(13)
∂
∂+ ∂
∂+




=
t
x
x
P
x t
µ4
13
0
( )
( , )
	
(14)
∂
∂+ ∂
∂+




=
t
x
x
P
x t
µ1
14
0
( )
( , )
	
(15)
∂
∂+ ∂
∂+




=
t
x
x
P
x t
µ2
15
0
( )
( , )
	
(16)
∂
∂+ ∂
∂+




=
t
x
x
P
x t
µ3
16
0
( )
( , )
	
(17)
∂
∂+ ∂
∂+




=
t
x
x
P
x t
µ4
17
0
( )
( , )
	
(18)
∂
∂+ ∂
∂+




=
t
x
x
P
x t
µ1
18
0
( )
( , )
	
(19)
∂
∂+ ∂
∂+




=
t
x
x
P
x t
µ2
19
0
( )
( , )
	
(20)

105
A Study of Flexible Manufacturing System With Multiple Failures
∂
∂+ ∂
∂+




=
t
x
x
P
x t
µ3
20
0
( )
( , )
	
(21)
∂
∂+ ∂
∂+




=
t
x
x
P
x t
µ4
21
0
( )
( , )
	
(22)
∂
∂+ ∂
∂+




=
t
x
x
P
x t
µ5
22
0
( )
( , )
	
(23)
Initial Condition
P t
0
1
( ) = , when t=0	
(24)
P t
0
0
( ) =
, when t>0	
(25)
Boundary Conditions
P
t
P t
6
1
0
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(26)
P
t
P t
7
2
0
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(27)
P
t
P t
8
1 1
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(28)
P
t
P t
9
2
1
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(29)
P
t
P t
10
3 1
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(30)
www.ebook3000.com

106
A Study of Flexible Manufacturing System With Multiple Failures
P
t
P t
11
1
2
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(31)
P
t
P t
12
2
2
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(32)
P
t
P t
13
4
2
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(33)
P
t
P t
14
1
4
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(34)
P
t
P t
15
2
4
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(35)
P
t
P t
16
3
4
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(36)
P
t
P t
17
4
4
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(37)
P
t
P t
18
1
5
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(38)
P
t
P t
19
2
5
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(39)
P
t
P t
20
3
5
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(40)
P
t
P t
21
4
5
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(41)
P
t
P t
22
5
5
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(42)

107
A Study of Flexible Manufacturing System With Multiple Failures
Taking Laplace of Equations (1) - (23) and (24) - (40) we get:
s
P s
P s
P s
P s
x P
+
+
+
+
+
[
]
=
+
+
+
∞
∫
λ
λ
λ
λ
λ
µ
µ
µ
µ
1
2
3
4
5
0
3 1
4
2
5
3
1
0
6
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( , )
( )
( , )
x s dx
x P x s dx
+
∞
∫µ2
0
7
	
(43)
s
P s
P s
P s
x P x s dx
+
+
+
+
+
[
]
=
+
+
+
∞
∫
λ
λ
λ
λ
µ
λ
µ
µ
1
2
3
4
3
1
3
0
4
4
1
0
8
( )
( )
( )
( )
( , )
µ
µ
2
0
9
3
0
10
∞
∞
∫
∫
+
( )
( , )
( )
( , )
x P x s dx
x P
x s dx
	
(44)
s
P s
P s
P s
P s
x
+
+
+
+
+
+
[
]
=
+
+
+
∞
∫
λ
λ
λ
λ
λ
µ
λ
µ
µ
µ
1
2
3
4
5
4
2
4
0
3
4
5
5
1
0
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( , )
( )
( , )
( )
( , )
P
x s dx
x P
x s dx
x P
x s dx
11
2
0
12
4
0
13
+
+
∞
∞
∫
∫
µ
µ
	
(45)
s
P s
P s
P s
+
+
[
]
=
+
λ
µ
µ
λ
4
5
3
4
5
3
0
( )
( )
( ) 	
(46)
s
P s
P s
P s
x P
x s
+
+
+
+
+
+
[
]
=
+
+
∞
∫
λ
λ
λ
λ
µ
µ
λ
λ
µ
1
2
3
4
3
4
4
4
1
3
2
1
0
14
( )
( )
( )
( )
( , )
( )
( , )
( )
( , )
( )
( ,
dx
x P
x s dx
x P
x s dx
x P
x s
+
+
+
∞
∞
∞
∫
∫
∫
µ
µ
µ
2
0
15
3
0
16
4
0
17
)dx
	
(47)
s
P s
P s
P s
x P
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
[
]
=
+
+
∞
∫
λ
λ
λ
λ
λ
µ
µ
λ
λ
µ
1
2
3
4
5
4
5
5
4
3
5
2
1
0
18
( )
( )
( )
( )
(x t dx
x P
x s dx
x P
x s dx
x P
, )
( )
( , )
( )
( , )
( )
(
+
+
+
∞
∞
∞
∫
∫
∫
µ
µ
µ
2
0
19
3
0
20
4
0
21 x s dx
x P
x s dx
, )
( )
( , )
+
∞
∫µ5
0
22
	
(48)
www.ebook3000.com

108
A Study of Flexible Manufacturing System With Multiple Failures
s
x
x
P x s
+ ∂
∂+




=
µ1
6
0
( )
( , )
	
(49)
s
x
x
P x t
+ ∂
∂+




=
µ2
7
0
( )
( , )
	
(50)
s
x
x
P x s
+ ∂
∂+




=
µ1
8
0
( )
( , )
	
(51)
s
x
x
P x s
+ ∂
∂+




=
µ2
9
0
( )
( , )
	
(52)
s
x
x
P
x s
+ ∂
∂+




=
µ3
10
0
( )
( , )
	
(53)
s
x
x
P
x s
+ ∂
∂+




=
µ1
11
0
( )
( , )
	
(54)
s
x
x
P
x s
+ ∂
∂+




=
µ2
12
0
( )
( , )
	
(55)
s
x
x
P
x s
+ ∂
∂+




=
µ4
13
0
( )
( , )
	
(56)

109
A Study of Flexible Manufacturing System With Multiple Failures
s
x
x
P
x s
+ ∂
∂+




=
µ1
14
0
( )
( , )
	
(57)
s
x
x
P
x s
+ ∂
∂+




=
µ2
15
0
( )
( , )
	
(58)
s
x
x
P
x s
+ ∂
∂+




=
µ3
16
0
( )
( , )
	
(59)
s
x
x
P
x s
+ ∂
∂+




=
µ4
17
0
( )
( , )
	
(60)
s
x
x
P
x s
+ ∂
∂+




=
µ1
18
0
( )
( , )
	
(61)
s
x
x
P
x s
+ ∂
∂+




=
µ2
19
0
( )
( , )
	
(62)
s
x
x
P
x s
+ ∂
∂+




=
µ3
20
0
( )
( , )
	
(63)
s
x
x
P
x s
+ ∂
∂+




=
µ4
21
0
( )
( , )
	
(64)
s
x
x
P
x s
+ ∂
∂+




=
µ5
22
0
( )
( , )
	
(65)
www.ebook3000.com

110
A Study of Flexible Manufacturing System With Multiple Failures
Boundary Conditions
P
s
P s
6
1
0
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(66)
P
s
P s
7
3
0
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(67)
P
s
P s
8
1 1
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(68)
P
s
P s
9
2
1
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(69)
P
s
P s
10
3 1
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(70)
P
s
P s
11
1
2
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(71)
P
s
P s
12
2
2
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(72)
P
s
P s
13
4
2
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(73)
P
s
P s
14
1
4
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(74)
P
s
P s
15
2
4
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(75)

111
A Study of Flexible Manufacturing System With Multiple Failures
P
s
P s
16
3
4
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(76)
P
s
P s
17
4
4
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(77)
P
s
P s
18
1
5
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(78)
P
s
P s
19
2
5
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(79)
P
s
P s
20
3
5
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(80)
P
s
P s
21
4
5
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(81)
P
s
P s
22
5
5
0
( , )
( )
= λ
	
(82)
Solving above equations, one may get:
d
S
s
S
s
P s
P s
P s
P s
1
1
3
0
3 1
4
2
5
3
1
1
1
−
−


= +
+
+
λ
λ
µ
µ
µ
µ
µ
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( ) 	
(83)
d
S
s
S
s
S
s
P s
P s
P s
2
1
2
3
1
3
0
4
4
1
2
3
−
−
−


=
+
λ
λ
λ
λ
µ
µ
µ
µ
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( ) 	
(84)
d
S
s
S
s
S
s
P s
P s
P s
P
3
1
2
4
2
4
0
3
4
5
1
2
4
−
−
−


=
+
+
λ
λ
λ
λ
µ
µ
µ
µ
µ
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
5( )s 	
(85)
www.ebook3000.com

112
A Study of Flexible Manufacturing System With Multiple Failures
dP s
P s
P s
3
3
0
4
5
( )
( )
( )
=
+
λ
µ
	
(86)
d
S
s
S
s
S
s
S
s
P s
P s
4
1
2
3
4
4
4
1
3
1
2
3
4
−
−
−
−


=
+
λ
λ
λ
λ
λ
λ
µ
µ
µ
µ
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
P s
2( ) 	
(87)
d
S
s
S
s
S
s
S
s
S
s
P s
5
1
2
3
4
5
4
1
2
3
4
5
−
−
−
−
−


=
λ
λ
λ
λ
λ
λ
µ
µ
µ
µ
µ
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
4
3
5
2
P s
P s
( )
( )
+ λ
	
(88)
P s
P s
S
s
s
6
1
0
1
1
( )
( )[
( )]/
=
−
λ
µ
	
(89)
P s
P s
S
s
s
7
3
0
1
2
( )
( )[
( )]/
=
−
λ
µ
	
(90)
P s
P s
S
s
s
8
1 1
1
1
( )
( )[
( )]/
=
−
λ
µ
	
(91)
P s
P s
S
s
s
9
2
1
1
1
( )
( )[
( )]/
=
−
λ
µ
	
(92)
P
s
P s
S
s
s
10
3 1
1
1
( )
( )[
( )]/
=
−
λ
µ
	
(93)
P
s
P s
S
s
s
11
1
2
1
1
( )
( )[
( )]/
=
−
λ
µ
	
(94)
P
s
P s
S
s
s
12
2
2
1
2
( )
( )[
( )]/
=
−
λ
µ
	
(95)

113
A Study of Flexible Manufacturing System With Multiple Failures
P
s
P s
S
s
s
13
4
2
1
4
( )
( )[
( )]/
=
−
λ
µ
	
(96)
P
s
P s
S
s
s
14
1
4
1
1
( )
( )[
( )]/
=
−
λ
µ
	
(97)
P
s
P s
S
s
s
15
2
4
1
2
( )
( )[
( )]/
=
−
λ
µ
	
(98)
P
s
P s
S
s
s
16
3
4
1
3
( )
( )[
( )]/
=
−
λ
µ
	
(99)
P
s
P s
S
s
s
17
4
4
1
4
( )
( )[
( )]/
=
−
λ
µ
	
(100)
P
s
P s
S
s
s
18
1
5
1
1
( )
( )[
( )]/
=
−
λ
µ
	
(101)
P
s
P s
S
s
s
19
2
5
1
2
( )
( )[
( )]/
=
−
λ
µ
	
(102)
P
s
P s
S
s
s
20
3
5
1
3
( )
( )[
( )]/
=
−
λ
µ
	
(103)
P
s
P s
S
s
s
21
4
5
1
4
( )
( )[
( )]/
=
−
λ
µ
	
(104)
P
s
P s
S
s
s
22
5
5
1
5
( )
( )[
( )]/
=
−
λ
µ
	
(105)
where:
d
s
=
+
+
λ
µ
4
5, d
s
1
1
2
3
4
5
=
+
+
+
+
+
λ
λ
λ
λ
λ , d
s
2
1
2
3
4
3
=
+
+
+
+
+
λ
λ
λ
λ
µ 	
www.ebook3000.com

114
A Study of Flexible Manufacturing System With Multiple Failures
d
s
3
1
2
3
4
5
4
=
+
+
+
+
+
+
λ
λ
λ
λ
λ
µ , d
s
4
1
2
3
4
3
4
=
+
+
+
+
+
+
λ
λ
λ
λ
µ
µ 	
d
s
4
1
2
3
4
3
4
=
+
+
+
+
+
+
λ
λ
λ
λ
µ
µ , d
s
5
1
2
3
4
5
4
5
=
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
λ
λ
λ
λ
λ
µ
µ 	
S
s
x
sx
x dx dx
x
µ
µ
µ
1
1
0
1
0
( )
( ){exp(
( )
)}
,
=
−
−
∞
∫
∫
S
s
x
sx
x dx dx
x
µ
µ
µ
2
2
0
2
0
( )
( ){exp(
( )
)}
=
−
−
∞
∫
∫
	
S
s
x
sx
x dx dx
x
µ
µ
µ
3
3
0
3
0
( )
( ){exp(
( )
)}
,
=
−
−
∞
∫
∫
S
s
x
sx
x dx dx
x
µ
µ
µ
4
4
0
4
0
( )
( ){exp(
( )
)}
=
−
−
∞
∫
∫
	
S
s
x
sx
x dx dx
x
µ
µ
µ
5
5
0
5
0
( )
( ){exp(
( )
)}
=
−
−
∞
∫
∫
	
The Laplace transformations of the probabilities that the system is in up (i.e. 
good state) and failed state at any time are as follows:
P
s
P s
P s
P s
P s
P s
P s
up( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
=
+
+
+
+
+
0
1
2
3
4
5
	
(106)
P
s
P s
P s
P s
P s
P
s
P
s
P
s
P
down( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
(
=
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13 s
P
s
P
s
P
s
P
s
P
s
P
s
P
s
P
s
)
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
(
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
)
( )
+ P
s
22
	
(107)
ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION
All things considered, circumstances, the significant worry of a producer is to expand 
the benefits and profitability of the system and make the system very dependable for 
a long term of time. In this way, it is essential while outlining the system to know 
the data about its units which impact system’s working limit and furthermore pick 
the best parts which increment the general working of the system for longer run time 
with respect to their failures. In this manner our fundamental reason for existing is 

115
A Study of Flexible Manufacturing System With Multiple Failures
to locate the best system plan units by choosing proper estimations of failure and 
repair rates inside the predefined ranges to such an extent that the system long run 
accessibility boosts. The extents or fresh estimations of failure and repair rates of the 
system can be found by exploring the past records of that system or by exploratory 
process or by worrying that specific system examiner.
Through this study, one can find the measure of performance such as availability, 
reliability, cost etc. we consider a physical situation where each subsystem of paper 
manufacturing plant has constant failure and repair rates.
CONCLUSION
After complete study of the system we concluded that the subsystem B i.e., pulp 
making affect the availability of the system more than any of other subsystems. The 
authors also analyzed that the other subsystems are almost equally affected. We, thus 
make an analysis that during the manufacturing process management should take 
care of subsystem B in order to improve the availability and Reliability of the system.
FUTURE SCOPE
The reliability and availability of the paper manufacturing plant by considering the 
possible failures have been analyzed in this chapter. In future the redundancies also 
can be used to avoid the complete failures of the subsystems. Further, it is assumed 
that every subsystem can be repaired immediate after failure where as there is a 
scope of waiting repair strategy in future.
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
In the current chapter authors solved the equations by using Laplace Transformations 
in future that can be done by Numerical Methods. Also expected cost and sensitivity 
of the system with respect to various failure rates can also be evaluated and analyzed.
REFERENCES
Cox, D. R. (1955). Analysis of Non Markovian stochastic processes by the inclusion 
of supplementary variables. Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 
51(03), 433–441. doi:10.1017/S0305004100030437
www.ebook3000.com

116
A Study of Flexible Manufacturing System With Multiple Failures
Dhillon, B. S., & Natesan, J. (1983). Stochastic analysis of a system in fluctuating 
environment. Microelectronics and Reliability, 23(5), 867–881. doi:10.1016/0026-
2714(83)91015-6
Dhillon, B. S., & Yang, N. (1995). Probabilistic analysis of a maintainable system 
with human error. Journal of Quality in Maintenance Engineering, 1(2), 50–59. 
doi:10.1108/13552519510089592
Elsayed, E. A., & Turley, R. E. (1980). Reliability analysis of production systems 
with buffer storage. International Journal of Production Research, 18(5), 637–645. 
doi:10.1080/00207548008919695
Garg, S., Singh, J., & Singh, D. V. (2010). Availability and maintenance scheduling 
of a repairable block-board manufacturing system. Int. J. Safe., 1, 101–118.
Gottumullala, N. R., Nassar, R., Paunm Leabsuksan, C. B., & Scott, S. L. (2010). 
Reliability of a system of k nodes for high performance computing application. 
IEEE Transactions on Reliability, 59(1), 162–169. doi:10.1109/TR.2009.2034291
Gupta, P., Lal, A. K., Sharma, R. K., & Singh, J. (2005). Numerical Analysis 
of reliability and availability of serial processes in butter oil processing plant. 
International Journal of Quality and Reliability Maintenance, 22(3), 303–316. 
doi:10.1108/02656710510582507
Gupta, P., Lal, A. K., Sharma, R. K., & Singh, J. (2007). Analysis of reliability and 
availability of serial processes of plastic pipe manufacturing plant –a case study. 
International Journal of Quality & Reliability Management, 24(4), 404–419. 
doi:10.1108/02656710710740563
Jain, M., Kumar, A., & Sharma, G. C. (2002). Maintenance cost analysis for 
replacement model with perfect/minimal repair. International Journal of Engineering 
Transactions A: Basics, 15(2), 161-168.
Kumar, D., Singh, J., & Singh, I. P. (1988). Reliability analysis of the feeding 
system in the paper industry. Microelectronics and Reliability, 28(2), 213–215. 
doi:10.1016/0026-2714(88)90353-8
Lin, Y. K., & Chang, P. C. (2012). System reliability of a manufacturing network 
with reworking action and different failure rates. International Journal of Production 
Research, 50(23), 6930–6944. doi:10.1080/00207543.2011.638939
Mahajan & Singh. (1997). Reliability evaluation and optimization of packers 
manufacturing plant. Narosa Publ.

117
A Study of Flexible Manufacturing System With Multiple Failures
Mahajan, P., & Singh, J. (1996). Reliability analysis of a straw board mill. Proceedings 
of National Conference on Operation Research in Modern Technology, 21-28.
Manglik, M., & Ram, M. (2014). Behavioural analysis of a hydroelectric production 
power plant under reworking scheme. International Journal of Production Research, 
53(2), 648–664. doi:10.1080/00207543.2014.962114
Ram, M., Singh, S. B., & Varshney, R. G. (2013). Performance improvement of 
a parallel redundant system with coverage factor. Journal of Engineering Science 
and Technology, 8(3), 344–350.
Ram, R., & Viswanadham, N. (1994). Performability of automated manufacturing 
systems with centralized material handling. International Journal of Production 
Research, 32(8), 1775–1799. doi:10.1080/00207549408957041
Shakuntala, S. (2011). Reliability analysis of Polytube industry using supplementary 
variable technique. Applied Mathematics and Computation, 218(8), 3981–3992. 
doi:10.1016/j.amc.2011.10.016
Wang, K.-H., Yen, T.-C., & Fang, Y.-C. (2012). Comparison of availability between 
two systems with warm standby units and different imperfect coverage. Quality 
Technology & Quantitative Management, 9(3), 265–282. doi:10.1080/16843703.
2012.11673291
Wong, C. C., & Chen, C. C. (2000). A GA-based method for constructing fuzzy 
systems directly from numerical data. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and 
Cybernetics, 30(6), 904–911. doi:10.1109/3477.891153 PMID:18252422
Zadeh, L. A. (1965). Fuzzy sets. Information and Control, 8(3), 338–353. doi:10.1016/
S0019-9958(65)90241-X
www.ebook3000.com

118
Copyright © 2018, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  7
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-3722-9.ch007
ABSTRACT
The chapter states the problem of thermal contact conductance between surfaces. 
Rough surface generation and thermal contact conductance has been simulated 
using Finite Element Method (FEM) based Ansys. The resulting geometry is meshed 
by different meshing method to convert the solid model into FEM model. The 
main aim of meshing is to create fine and coarse mesh at the contact to reduce the 
computational time. To create a fine mesh at contact free meshing with refinement 
and mapped mesh has been used. The analysis has been performed on the FEM 
model with varying loading condition of different surface roughness and different 
materials to get the real contact area and thus thermal contact conductance. The 
variation of thermal contact conductance and real contact area with pressure of 
different surface roughness and with surface roughness of different loading condition 
of the specimen made of aluminum and mild steel has been plotted and compared.
INTRODUCTION
All engineering surfaces exhibit some level of microscopic roughness. The resistance 
to heat flow through a contact interface occurs because only a small portion (usually 
1-2%) of the nominal surface area is actually in contact. Heat may pass through 
FEA-Based Numerical 
Simulation and Theoretical 
Modeling for Predicting 
Thermal Contact Conductance
Sachin Rana
ABES Institute of Technology Ghaziabad, India

119
Numerical Simulation Modeling for Predicting Thermal Contact Conductance
the interface via three paths: conduction through the contact spots, conduction 
through the gas present in the gap between the surfaces, and radiation across the 
gap. Convection may be neglected due to the small length scales involved. Also, 
radiation does not play a significant role at temperatures below 500°C.
Since the conductivity of the gas is much smaller than that of the substrate, most 
of the heat is constrained to flow through the contact spots. This constriction and 
subsequent spreading of heat flow lines in the two materials in contact manifests 
as a thermal resistance at the interface. The total resistance of the surface is found 
by summing, in parallel, the constriction resistances of all of the contact spots. 
This thermal resistance impedes the heat flow across the interface, when two solid 
bodies at different temperatures are brought into mechanical contact, and results in 
a temperature drop as shown in Fig. This resistance, commonly known as thermal 
contact resistance, is well-explained by the fact that the real contact area is exceedingly 
small as compared to the apparent contact area due to the presence of roughness and 
waviness of the engaging surfaces. As the interstitial material, such as air, is a poor 
heat conductor and the radiative heat transfer is often insignificant, a large portion 
of the heat flow converges to the discrete solid-solid contact spots as illustrated in 
Figure 1. Hence, the increase in the heat-flow path length causes the thermal contact 
resistance. Its reciprocal is called thermal contact conductance, defined as:
h
q
A T
c =
∆
	
(1)
where q is the heat flow rate, A is the apparent contact area, and △T is the temperature 
drop at the interface.
Thermal contact conductance plays an important role in all thermal systems where 
a mechanical contact is involved. Recently, such conductance has received special 
interest and attention in small-scale heat removal systems such as microelectronics 
and in heat transfer between superconductor films. More recent attempts at predicting 
thermal contact conductance at an interface, especially focusing on the low contact 
pressures allowable in electronics cooling, have taken advantage of the speed and 
processing power of modern computers to track the number of asperities in contact 
at a surface by directly using surface profile data. Inputs to the model include the 
surface profiles, mechanical and thermal material properties, nominal contact area, 
and specified loads. The mode of deformation of each asperity is not assumed, but 
determined by guessing the mean plane separation between the surfaces, calculating 
the pressure and area of each microscopic asperity in contact, and summing the 
contribution to the total load from each asperity.
www.ebook3000.com

120
Numerical Simulation Modeling for Predicting Thermal Contact Conductance
Surface roughness is a measure of the microscopic irregularity, whereas the 
macroscopic errors of form include flatness deviations, waviness and, for cylindrical 
surfaces, out of roundness. Two solid surfaces apparently in contact touch each other 
only at a few individual spots as shown in Figure 1. Even at relatively high contact 
pressure of the order of 10 Mpa, the real area of contact for most metallic surfaces 
is only about 1 to 2% of the nominal contact area Leung (1998).
Thermal contact conductance is an important factor in a variety of applications, 
largely because many physical systems contain a mechanical combination of two 
Figure 1. Illustration of thermal contact conductance

121
Numerical Simulation Modeling for Predicting Thermal Contact Conductance
materials. Some of the fields where contact conductance has importance are Electronic 
packaging Luo (2010) Microelectronics Yovanovich (1984), Biomedicine Singhal 
(2005), Nuclear reactor Mochizuki (1994), advanced materials, space applications 
Peterson (1990), I.C. Engine Marotta (1999), Heat exchanger Jeng (2006) Metal-
Forming Rosochowska (2003) and Super Conductor Mantelli (1980) etc.
Cooper (1969) developed a thermal contact conductance model (CMY Model). 
They consider the resistance to the flow of heat between two thick solid bodies in 
contact in a vacuum. Existing analyses of single idealized contacts are summarized and 
compared, and then applied, together with results of recent electrolytic analogy tests, 
to predict the conductance of multiple contacts “Appropriately” or “inappropriately” 
distributed at the interface. Reconsideration of the theory of interaction between 
randomly rough surfaces shows how the parameters required predicting heat transfer 
can be determined in principle by simple manipulation of typical profiles of the 
mating surface, together with an approximation from deformation theory. It is also 
shown that this process depends more crucially than had been realized upon the 
distribution of the few high peaks of the surfaces, where the assumption of Gaussian 
distribution of heights is suspect. In place of that assumption, the use of describing 
functions is suggested.
Mikic (1970) presents the major theoretical contributions in the area of thermal 
contact resistance dealt with a simple contact, multiple contacts, directional effects 
and others. In this work, Mikic eliminated the concept of the contour area and the 
macroscopic construction is related directly to non-uniformity of the macroscopic 
heat flux and specifically, to the pressure distribution over the interface. Mikic (1974) 
considered the thermal contact conductance of nominally flat surfaces in contact was 
considered. The emphasis of the work is on effect of the mode of deformation on 
the value of conductance. Sayles and Thomas (1976) derived a completely general 
relationship for the conductance of the elastic contact of an isotropic Gaussian random 
surface with a flat in terms only of properties of the bulk material and quantifiable 
parameters of the surface topography. Gibson (1976) considered the flow through 
abutting cylinders having, in general, different conductivities. As Cooper has shown 
that the contact spot may be considered as an isotherm.
Antonetti and Yovanovich (1985) has developed a thermo mechanical model for 
nominally flat, rough contacting surfaces coated with a metallic layer. The model is 
shown to agree quite well with thermal test data obtained using nickel specimens, 
with one side of the contact coated with silver and the other side glass-bead blasted. 
McGee (1985) developed a line-contact model for the thermal resistance of a 
cylinder-flat contact. Resistance due to heat flow constriction across the solid-to-
solid contact was calculated. Huang (1992) present the inverse solution methodology 
based on the conjugate gradient method is developed for estimating the variation 
www.ebook3000.com

122
Numerical Simulation Modeling for Predicting Thermal Contact Conductance
of air-gap resistance with time from the transient temperature measurements taken 
with thermocouples inside the casting region and at the outer mould surface.
Tsai and Crane (1992) presented an analytical temperature distribution solution 
to the one-dimensional symmetric system with heat flux on one outside surface 
and insulation on the other. The analysis provided theoretical basis for transient 
measurement of thermal contact conductance. Antonetti (1993) developed a 
correlation for an approximate thermal contact conductance which does not depend 
upon the surface asperity slope. Madhusudana (1993) demonstrated that in many 
applications involving contact heat transfer, including electronic components, the 
contact pressure is low or moderate. Nishino (1995) was studied the thermal contact 
conductance in a vacuum environment under low applied load with square test plates 
made of aluminum alloy. Sridhar and Yovanovich (1996) made a measurement on 
thermal contact conductance on ground-lapped interfaces of tool steel and they were 
compared with the recently proposed elastoplastic model. Sridhar and Yovanovich 
(1996) proposed a new thermal elastoplastic contact conductance model for isotropic 
conforming rough surfaces. This model is based on surface and thermal models used 
in the Cooper, Mikic, and Yovanovich plastic model but it differs in the deformation 
aspects of the thermal contact conductance model.
CHALLENGES IN NUMERICAL SIMULATION 
OF THERMAL CONDUCTANCE
The main challenges in numerical simulation of thermal conductance are as follows:
1. 	
Generation of Rough Surface profiles;
2. 	
Evaluation of Real Contact Area.
For the analysis of structures, users have historically chosen to model the gross 
geometry of the system and ignore the details to simplify the model and reduce 
computation times. Surface effects are generally ignored in the analysis, partly 
because of the difficulty in creating a reasonable model of the surface and partly 
because of the assumption that surface effects are less important. However, surface 
effects caused by surface topography are of major concern in some engineering 
applications and may become critical when contact is involved.
Evaluation of real contact area by experimental methods is also a difficult task 
because no instrument can be put at the contact interface therefore no work has been 
done experimentally to evaluate real contact area and uses the nominal contact area 
in place of real contact area. The prediction of real contact area is needed in many 

123
Numerical Simulation Modeling for Predicting Thermal Contact Conductance
applications such as electronic packaging, I.C.Engines etc. to obtain the actual heat 
transfer rate and provide required cooling effect.
Some of the available commercial finite element programs have incorporated 
features that permit the user to customize or modify the program to increase the 
capabilities and flexibility of the program. This allows the programs to bridge the 
gap between commercial and custom codes. ANSYS and ABAQUS are two of 
the leaders in this area. In ANSYS, these capabilities include a scripting language 
called the ANSYS Parametric Design Language (APDL) and User Programmable 
Features which allow the user to write FORTRAN routines to create a custom 
version of ANSYS. Because of the difficulty in creating the model of rough surface 
in contact and evaluation of real contact area, I have chosen to create the rough 
surface geometry in a FEM software ANSYS to predict the correct estimation of 
heat transfer between contacting surfaces.
ROUGH SURFACE MODELLING
This work presents two methods for creating surface geometry using the normal 
Gaussian distribution data. It is shown that it is possible to solve relatively small 
contact problems with real surface geometry on a desktop computer. (Larger problems 
could be solved on industrial computers with or without parallel processing capability 
today if desired.) The results of mechanical contact analyses with imported surface 
geometry are shown to qualitatively match expectations.
Rough surfaces profile is composed of a large number of surface asperities which 
can be thought of as local deviations from the nominal or average surface height. 
Real surfaces may exhibit roughness (high frequency asperities), waviness (medium 
frequency asperities) and surface form (the general shape of the surface neglecting 
roughness and waviness). Surfaces may also exhibit lay, which is a directional 
characteristic of the surface “such as a parallel, circular, radial or multidirectional 
pattern.”
Surface roughness and other surface topography may be a function of more 
than one roughness (waviness, form or lay) distribution. Bimodal or multimodal 
systems would require up to six more parameters for each additional distribution 
mode, whether the additional mode is an additional roughness distribution or a 
contribution from waviness or surface form. The affect of lay can be incorporated 
by careful choice of coordinate system and asperity density parameters.
Consider a simple surface in Cartesian coordinates that is characterized by a single 
modal distribution of roughness and does not exhibit waviness, surface form or lay. 
The rough surface can then be fully described by six parameters. Two parameters 
should describe the asperity density, or the amount of space between asperities: one 
www.ebook3000.com

124
Numerical Simulation Modeling for Predicting Thermal Contact Conductance
in x and another y. Three parameters should describe the asperity size: length (x), 
width (y) and height or depth (+/- z). The last parameter should describe the asperity 
shape and define any coupling between the first five parameters if appropriate. These 
parameters may have values that are constants, functions, or statistical distributions.
Here we have assumed the asperity density to be equal in X and Y directions 
and set to a single parameter: ASPDENS= 5000asperities/unit length. The asperity 
sizes in X and Y was assumed to be equal to each other and set to a value of 1/
ASPDENS, thus each asperity is 200μm X 200μm square. The asperity size in z 
was assumed to be a normal Gaussian distribution with a mean of 0 and a standard 
deviation of 0.33 * MAXZ meters, where MAXZ is the maximum roughness of 
the surface. The length, width and height of model are set to 5mm.
The main benefits of this procedure are its robustness and flexibility. It can be 
used on arbitrary geometry including on models that have been imported from an 
Figure 2. Stages of creating rough surface by moving all nodes (Brick Mesh)

125
Numerical Simulation Modeling for Predicting Thermal Contact Conductance
external CAD package. It is also slightly less complicated and quicker procedure to 
perform. The disadvantages of this procedure are a lack of user-friendliness. After 
the rough surface is created, the model cannot be re-meshed (only modified manually 
by moving nodes and elements). And, finite element entities (nodes and elements) 
can no longer be selected based on their attachment to solid model entities. Careful 
planning is, therefore, required when modifying the finite element mesh.
In this model two volumes having rough surface has been created separately 
and brought into contact. ANSYS has a feature to create contact pair between two 
contacting surfaces to transmit forces across the interface in the model. To create 
a contact pair between rough surfaces 8-noded surface to surface contact elements 
(CONTACT 174) and 3D target element (TARGET 170) are applied to the rough 
surface to create the contact and target surface and to allow 3D mechanical contact 
Figure 3. Rough surfaces in contact to create interface
www.ebook3000.com

126
Numerical Simulation Modeling for Predicting Thermal Contact Conductance
to occur and forces to be transmitted across the interface in the model. Contact 
behavior is defined as rough key option five for the CONTACT 174 element was set 
to “3” to allow element to close the gap and reduce penetration between contacting 
surfaces. A small value of coefficient of friction has been given to allow the sliding 
between surfaces.
EVALUATING REAL CONTACT AREA
Analysis consists of modeling of real contact area and TCC based on real contact 
area. Real contact area has been evaluated by using ANSYS and a MATLAB program 
and on the basis of real contact area TCC has been evaluated by using available 
co-relation Jeng (2013).
Figure 4. 3-D mechanical contact between two contacting surfaces

127
Numerical Simulation Modeling for Predicting Thermal Contact Conductance
After modeling and meshing, the analysis has been performed to estimating real 
contact area under varying loading condition. Mapped meshing has been found 
suitable to use for estimating the area of each element at interface to get the real 
contact area. In this work real contact area has been evaluated by using ANSYS 
and MATLAB. A small program in MATLAB has been used to evaluate the real 
contact area.
To evaluate real contact area an element table has been created in ANSYS. The 
element table contains the each and every element in contact with their corresponding 
value of contact gap. It is assumed that the element having zero gap is in perfectly 
contact with the target element. The data in element table has been saved and imported 
into MATLAB and fined the elements having zero contact gap by using a program. 
MATLAB counts the no. of elements having zero contact gap and multiply to the 
area of one element to get the real contact area. The area of one element can be 
calculated by using the formula:
Area of one element
Asperity size
No of element division
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
=


.




2
	
Real Contact Area
Area of one element
No of elements havi
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
=
×
.
ng zero contact gap
 
 
 
	
ESTIMATING THERMAL CONTACT CONDUCTANCE
The governing equation:
∂
∂
+
∂
∂
+ ∂
∂
=
2
2
2
2
1
0
T
x
r
T
r
T
r
	
(2)
The appropriate boundary conditions are:
k
T
z
Q
b b
r
1
2
2 1 2
2
∂
∂
=
−
(
)
π
/ , z −0, 0 <
<
r
b 	
k
T
z
1
0
∂
∂
= , z = 0, b
r
c
 <
<
	
www.ebook3000.com

128
Numerical Simulation Modeling for Predicting Thermal Contact Conductance
k
T
z
Q
c
z
1
2
∂
∂
=
= ∞
π
,
	
k
T
r
r
c
1
0
∂
∂
=
=
,
	
(3)
Using the method of variable separation, we can write the temperature distribution 
at z=0 as:
T
C
Q
k b
c
b
b J
b
c J
c
n
n
n
n
o
n
0
0
1
1
1
3
2
8
4
=
+
(
)
(
)
(
)
=
∞
∑
π
α
α
α
α
sin
(
)
	
=
+






C
Q
k b
b
c
0
1
4
Ψ
	
Ψ b
c
c
b
b J
b
c
n
n
n
n





=






(
)
(
)
=
∞
∑
8
1
1
3
π
α
α
α
sin
(
) J
c
o
n
2 α
(
)
	
(4)
where Ψ  is the constriction parameter of contact area heat transfer.
When the two contact surfaces are of different heat transfer coefficients, the 
temperature difference can be given by:
∆
Ψ
T
Q
k b
b
c
c
s
=






4
	
(5)
where ks  is the mean thermal conductivity, b is the mean radius, b is the mean 
radius of the real contact area and c is the nominal contact area.
The CMY Model showed that the relation between the contact area and the heat 
transfer coefficient can be written as:
h
k Nb
A
k nb
c
s
c
n
i
N
s
c
i
N
=
( )
=
( )
=
=
∑
∑
2
1
2
1
1
1
Ψ
Ψ
ε
ε
	
(6)
Mikic proposed the constriction parameter of contact area heat transfer as:

129
Numerical Simulation Modeling for Predicting Thermal Contact Conductance
Ψ ε
ε
( ) =
−
(
)
=
−






1
1
1 5
1 5
.
.
A
A
t
n
	
(7)
From Equations (6) and (7), the thermal contact conductance can be expressed as:
h
k nb
A
A
c
s
c
t
n
=
−






2
1
1 5
. 	
(8)
where n is the density of asperities and bc  is the mean radius of spherical asperity.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
After meshing and creation of contact pair the analysis can be start with properly 
constrained model. To perform the analysis on the FEM model, all of the key points 
on the bottom of the block were constrained in all three direction i.e. x, y and z 
and all the key points at the above side of the block were constrained in x and y 
direction to prevent the rigid body displacement and rotation, leaving the surface 
free to deform. A varying load is applied on all the key points at the above side of 
the block to move the contact surface towards the target surface and analysis starts. 
Results have been produced with varying loading condition and varying roughness.
Contact Pressure Plots
Figure 5 shows the contact pressure plots of aluminum and mild steel models of 
roughness 10 µm with different loading condition. The real contact area in case of 
aluminum at 5N is about 95% and the real contact area in case of mild steel at 5N is 
about 80% at roughness 10µm but as the roughness increases the percentage of real 
contact area decreases. In the contact pressure plots it is clear that elements having 
zero pressure are not in contact and the elements having some value of pressure are 
in contact hence the pressure plots also shows the area of contact. It is clear that for 
the same loading condition the area in contact for mild steel is less than as compared 
to area in contact for aluminum for roughness of 10µm. The maximum contact 
pressure is located at the same place for both the materials because both materials 
have same roughness but the value of maximum contact pressure in case of mild 
www.ebook3000.com

130
Numerical Simulation Modeling for Predicting Thermal Contact Conductance
Figure 5. Comparison of pressure plots between aluminum and mild steel models 
of roughness 10µm with different loading condition

131
Numerical Simulation Modeling for Predicting Thermal Contact Conductance
steel is greater than as compared to aluminum. The percentage of real contact area 
in case of aluminum at 2N is about 21% and the percentage of real contact area in 
case of mild steel at 2N is about 19%.
Roughness Effect: Mild Steel Model
Figure 6 shows the effect of surface roughness on real contact area at different 
loading condition. The analysis has been performed on the rough surface model of 
the surface roughness of 10µm, 25µm and 40µm at 0.5N, 1N, 2N, 3N, 4N and 5N 
to see the effect of roughness at different loading condition on real contact area. As 
the surface roughness increases the real contact area decreases for the same load 
due the increase in gap between the rough surfaces.
Figure 7 shows the relation between the surface roughness and percentage of real 
contact area at different loading condition. The analysis has been performed on the 
rough surface model of the surface roughness of 10µm, 25µm and 40µm at 0.5N, 
1N, 2N, 3N, 4N and 5N to see the effect of roughness at different loading condition 
on the percentage of real contact area. With the increase in surface roughness the 
real contact area decreases because of the increase in gap between the contacting 
surfaces and hence the percentage of real contact area decreases.
THERMAL CONTACT CONDUCTANCE (TCC)
Figure 8 and Figure 9 shows the variation of TCC with pressure for different materials. 
Figure 8 is the results from the present wok for three materials aluminium, mild steel 
and stainless steel at increasing pressure. Figure 9 is the result taken from Jeng et. al. 
(2003) for aluminium and stainless steel at both increasing and decreasing pressure. 
For the same pressure, TCC in the process of decreasing pressure is larger than that 
in the process of increasing pressure due to plastic deformation. The trend of the 
curves of TCC with pressure is same for the models of aluminium and stainless 
steel for both the study. It is clear from both the fig that TCC increases of all the 
materials with the increase in pressure.
www.ebook3000.com

132
Numerical Simulation Modeling for Predicting Thermal Contact Conductance
Figure 6. Contact area vs. roughness plot

133
Numerical Simulation Modeling for Predicting Thermal Contact Conductance
Figure 7. Percentage of contact area vs. roughness plot
www.ebook3000.com

134
Numerical Simulation Modeling for Predicting Thermal Contact Conductance
FUTURE SCOPE
In the future this research work can be extended to find:
1. 	
Actual contact area and Thermal contact conductance for higher pressure and 
more complex trajectory;
2. 	
To evaluate contact area vs. hardness, contact pressure vs. nominal pressure, 
contact area vs. nominal pressure, TCC vs. roughness, TCC vs. hardness.
CONCLUSION
To convert the solid model into FEM model different meshing method has been 
used. The main aim of meshing in this model is to create a fine mesh at the contact 
and create coarse mesh at the remaining model to reduce the computational time. 
To create a fine mesh at contact free meshing with refinement and mapped mesh 
Figure 8. Comparison of the curves for thermal contact conductance versus contact 
pressure

135
Numerical Simulation Modeling for Predicting Thermal Contact Conductance
has been used but due to the limitation of element shape free meshing cannot be 
used in this work. Thus mapped meshing with 8 noded structural solid hexahedral 
elements (SOLID 185) has been used to evaluate the real contact area. To create a 
contact pair between rough surfaces 8-noded surface to surface contact elements 
(CONTACT 174) and 3D target element (TARGET 170) are applied to the rough 
surface to create the contact and target surface and to allow 3D mechanical contact 
to occur and forces to be transmitted across the interface in the model.
The analysis has been performed on the FEM model with varying loading condition 
of different surface roughness and different materials to get the real contact area 
and thus TCC. Effect of varying parameters on real contact area has been obtained. 
Increase in Roughness (10-40μm) results in increase in real contact area for Al & 
MS. Under negligible Loading, real contact area is ≤5% of the nominal area. Increase 
in Load results in terms of increase in real contact area for Al & MS.
Figure 9. TCC vs. contact pressure for aluminum and stainless steel
www.ebook3000.com

136
Numerical Simulation Modeling for Predicting Thermal Contact Conductance
REFERENCES
Antonetti, V. W., Whittle, T. D., & Simons, R. E. (1993). An approximate thermal 
contact conductance correlation. Journal of Electronic Packaging, 115(1), 131–134. 
doi:10.1115/1.2909293
Antonetti, V. W., & Yovanovich, M. M. (1985). Enhancement of thermal contact 
conductance by metallic coatings: Theory and experiment. Journal of Heat Transfer, 
107(3), 513–519. doi:10.1115/1.3247454
Benigni, P., Marchionni, C., & Rogez, J. (2000). High temperature contact conductance 
measurement across cylindrical joint by periodic method: Feasibility and results. 
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 43(23), 4217–4227. doi:10.1016/
S0017-9310(00)00069-7
Cooper, M. G., Mikic, B. B., & Yovanovich, M. M. (1969). Thermal contact 
conductance. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 12(3), 279–300. 
doi:10.1016/0017-9310(69)90011-8
Gibson, R. D. (1976). The contact resistance for a semi- infinite cylinder in a vacuum. 
Applied Energy, 2(1), 57–65. doi:10.1016/0306-2619(76)90039-8
Huang, C. H., Hsu, G.-C., & Jang, J.-Y. (2001). A non liner inverse problem for the 
prediction of local thermal contact conductance in plate finned tube heat exchanger. 
Heat and Mass Transfer, 37(4-5), 351–359. doi:10.1007/s002310000162
Huang, C. H., Ozisik, M. N., & Sawaf, B. (1992). Conjugate gradient method for 
determining unknown contact conductance during metal casting. International Journal 
of Heat and Mass Transfer, 35(7), 1779–1786. doi:10.1016/0017-9310(92)90148-L
Jeng, Y. (2003). Theoretical and experimental study of a thermal contact conductance 
model for elastic, elastoplastic and plastic deformation of rough surfaces (Vol. 14). 
Tribolgy Letters.
Jeng, Y., Chen, J.-T., & Cheng, C.-Y. (2006). Thermal contact conductance of coated 
surfaces. Wear, 260(1-2), 159–167. doi:10.1016/j.wear.2004.12.041
Kim, C. N., Jeong, J., & Youn, B. (2003). Evaluation of thermal contact conductance 
using a new experimental-numerical method in fin-tube heat exchangers. International 
Journal of Refrigeration, 26(8), 900–908. doi:10.1016/S0140-7007(03)00075-6

137
Numerical Simulation Modeling for Predicting Thermal Contact Conductance
Kumar, S. S. (2004). Thermal contact conductance for cylindrical and spherical 
contacts. Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 40, 679–688.
Kumar, S. S., & Ramamurthi, K. (2003). Influence of flatness and waviness of rough 
surfaces on surface contact coductance. Journal of Heat Transfer, 125, 362–371.
Lee, S. (1995). Constriction/spreading resistance model for electronics packaging. 
ASME Thermal Engineering Conference, 4, 321-327.
Leung, M. (1998). Prediction of thermal contact conductance in vacuum by statistical 
mechanics. Journal of Heat Transfer, 120(51).
Luo, X. (2010). A simple setup to test thermal contact resistance between interfaces 
of two contacted solid materials. 11th International Conference on Electronic 
Packaging Technology & High Density Packaging, 256-261.
Madhusudana, C. V. (1993). Thermal contact conductance and rectification at low 
joint pressure. International Communications in Heat and Mass Transfer, 20(1), 
123–132. doi:10.1016/0735-1933(93)90013-L
Mantelli, M., & Yovanovich, M. M. (1980). Thermal contact resistance- theory and 
applications. Lecture Notes, University of Waterloo.
Marotta, E. (1999). Thermal contact conductance of sintered copper coatings on 
ferro alloy (Vol. 121). ASME Journal of Heat Transfer.
Mcgee, G. R., Schankula, M. H., & Yovanovich, M. M. (1985). Thermal resistance 
of cylinder flat contacts: Theoretical analysis and experimental verification of a line 
contact model. Nuclear Engineering and Design, 86(3), 369–385. doi:10.1016/0029-
5493(85)90302-4
Mikic, B. (1970). Thermal constriction resistance due to non-uniform surface 
conditions; contact resistance at non-uniform interface pressure. International Journal 
of Heat and Mass Transfer, 13(9), 1497–1500. doi:10.1016/0017-9310(70)90182-1
Mikic, B. (1974). Thermal contact conductance; theoretical considerations. 
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 17(2), 205–214. doi:10.1016/0017-
9310(74)90082-9
Mochizuki, H., & Quaiyum, M. A. (1994). Contact conductance between cladding/
pressure tube and pressure tube/calandria tube of advanced thermal reactor. Journal 
of Nuclear Science and Technology, 31(7), 726–734. doi:10.1080/18811248.1994
.9735215
www.ebook3000.com

138
Numerical Simulation Modeling for Predicting Thermal Contact Conductance
Nishino, K., Yamashita, S., & Torii, K. (1995). Thermal contact conductance under 
low applied load in a vacuum environment. Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science, 
10(2), 258–271. doi:10.1016/0894-1777(94)00091-L
Ohsone, Y., “Optical measurement of thermal contact conductance between wafer-
like thin solid samples”, Mechanical Engineering Research Laboratory, Hitachi 
Ltd., Japan.
Peterson, G. P., & Fletcher, L. S. (1990). Measurement of thermal contact conductance 
and thermal conductivity of anodized aluminum coatings. Journal of Heat Transfer, 
112/585.
Rosochowska, M., Balendra, R., & Chodnikiewicz, K. (2003). Measurement of 
thermal contact conductance. Journal of Materials Processing Technology, 135(2-
3), 204–210. doi:10.1016/S0924-0136(02)00897-X
Sayles, R. S., & Thomas, T. R. (1976). Thermal conductance of a rough elastic 
contact. Applied Energy, 2(2), 249–267. doi:10.1016/0306-2619(76)90012-X
Singhal, V., Litke, P. J., Black, A. F., & Garimella, S. V. (2005). An experimentally 
validated thermo-mechanical model for prediction of thermal contact conductance. 
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 48(25-26), 5446–5459. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2005.06.028
Sridhar, M. R., & Yovanovich, M. M. (1996). Thermal contact conductance of tool 
steel and comparision with model. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 
39(4), 831–839. doi:10.1016/0017-9310(95)00141-7
Sridhar, M. R., & Yovanovich, M. M. (1996). Elastoplastic contact conductance for 
isotropic conforming rough surface and comparision with experiments. Journal of 
Heat Transfer, 118(3).
Tsai, Y. M., & Crane, R. A. (1992). An analytical solution of a one- dimensional 
thermal contact conductance problem with one heat flux and one insulated boundary 
condition. Journal of Heat Transfer, 114(2), 503–505. doi:10.1115/1.2911301
Tseng, A. A. (1999). Thermal modeling of roll and strip interface in rolling 
processes: Part 2d simulation. Numerical Heat Transfer Part A, 35(2), 135–154. 
doi:10.1080/104077899275290

139
Numerical Simulation Modeling for Predicting Thermal Contact Conductance
Williamson, M., & Majumdar, A. (1992). Effect of surface deformations on contact 
conductance. Journal of Heat Transfer, 23, 345–349.
Yovanovich & Antonetti. (1984). Thermal contact resistance in microelectronic 
equipment. In Thermal Management Concepts in Microelectronic Packaging From 
Component to System. ISHM Technical Monograph Series.
Zhao, Y. (2000). An asperity micro contact model incorporating the Transition 
from elastic deformation to fully plastic flow. ASME Journal of Heat Transfer, 
122, 235–264.
www.ebook3000.com

140
Copyright © 2018, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  8
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-3722-9.ch008
ABSTRACT
This chapter describes a mathematical model and design structure of five-link 
inverted pendulum on cart. The system comprises of five rigid pendulums or links 
mounted on a mutable cart. The objective is to control all the five links at vertical 
upright position when cart is stationary at particular location. The study considered 
free-body-diagram (FBD) analysis of proposed system and applied Newton’s second 
law of motion for deriving a mathematical model of proposed system. The derived 
governing equations of motion can be further used by researchers for developing a 
Matlab-Simulink model of five-link inverted pendulum system. The developed model 
can be further used for deriving equations of motions for n-link cart and pendulum 
system. Researchers can further apply various control techniques for control of 
proposed system.
INTRODUCTION
Inverted Pendulum system belongs to a category of highly non-linear, multi-
variable and dynamic system which acts as a testing bed for validating various 
control algorithms (Lee & Jung, 2008; Lobas, 2005). Some of the popular control 
algorithms which are being widely tested using inverted pendulum system include 
Mathematical Modeling 
of Five-Link Inverted Cart 
and Pendulum System
Ashwani Kharola
Graphic Era University, India

141
Mathematical Modeling of Five-Link Inverted Cart and Pendulum System
Proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controllers (Prasad et al., 2014), neural 
networks (Noh et al., 2010), fuzzy logic controllers (Elsayed et al., 2006), adaptive 
neuro fuzzy inference system (ANFIS), genetic algorithms (Dadios et al., 2006), 
particle swarm optimsation algorithm etc. The system comprises of a rigid/flexible 
pendulum mounted over a movable cart. The system has got its center of mass above 
its pivot point which makes the behaviour of complete system highly nonlinear. 
The objective is to control the pendulum at vertically upright orientation when 
cart is being stabilised at particular location under influence of a control force 
(Soumelids et al., 1997). A traditional pendulum system employed in wall clocks 
is inherently stable when it is positioning vertically downwards whereas an inverted 
pendulum needs a counter force for its balancing (Ananevskii & Anokhin, 2014). 
The dynamics of inverted pendulum is related to the behaviour of missile or rocket 
guidance system, ship yaw motion control, aircraft control in turbulence, human 
standing etc (Gawthrop et al., 2014). There exist various variants of conventional 
single-stage cart and pendulum system. These variants may include a multi-link cart 
and pendulum system (Bowden et al., 2012), an elastic/flexible inverted pendulum 
(Chao & Yu, 2004), cart and pole system climbing on slope (Dai et al., 2014), ball 
and beam system, rotary inverted pendulum etc (Yavin, 1999). These systems are 
widely employed in various robotics and industrial applications in order to satisfy 
futuristic needs of mankind (Pomales & Gonzalez, 1996). This chapter focuses on 
deriving a mathematical model of five-link cart and pendulum system. The system 
comprises of five rigid links attached to each other and mounted on a movable cart as 
shown in Figure 1. A five-link cart and pendulum system comprises of five identical 
rigid links of masses (m1, m2…..m5) and lengths (l1, l2…..l5) respectively attached 
one above another. These links or pendulums are inclined at an angle of (θ1, θ2…..
θ5) respectively from the vertical axis. The bottom most link is pivoted to a movable 
cart of mass (m) which can move freely along horizontal direction under action of 
frictional force (b). The cart is supplied an input force (F) to drag it on the surface. 
The overall objective is to balance all the pendulums in vertical upright orientation 
while the cart is stationary at the desired location. The configuration of proposed 
system can be effectively used for analysing behaviour of flexible machine structures 
and humanoid robots (Lee et al., 2012). The governing equations of motion for five-
link inverted pendulum system have been derived applying Newton’s second law 
of motion. The complete system has been divided into separate cart and pendulum 
sub-systems for better free-body-diagram (FBD) analysis.
www.ebook3000.com

142
Mathematical Modeling of Five-Link Inverted Cart and Pendulum System
MATHEMATICAL MODEL OF FIVE-LINK 
CART AND PENDULUM SYSTEM
The mathematical model for five-link cart and pendulum system was built using 
governing equations applying Newton’s second law of motion. The complete cart 
and pendulum system was divided into various sub-systems for better free-body-
diagram (FBD) analysis of proposed system. The equations of motion derived for 
various sub-systems are given below (Eltohamy & Kuo, 1999).
Figure 1. A schematic view of Five-link cart and pendulum system

143
Mathematical Modeling of Five-Link Inverted Cart and Pendulum System
Equation of Motion for Cart-Subsystem
A FBD of cart sub-system incorporating all the forces acting on it is shown in 
Figure 2. A control force (F) is required to drag the cart in horizontal direction under 
influence of friction (b). The interaction forces acting between the cart and link-1 
along vertical and horizontal directions are represented by P1 and N1 respectively.
Summing all the forces acting in horizontal direction on cart gives the following 
equation of motion:


x
M F
N
bx
=
−
−
(
)
1
1
	
(1)
Equations of Motion for Link-1
A FBD analysis of link-1 incorporating all the forces acting on it is shown in Figure 
3. It is clear from the figure that link-1 makes an angle of θ1  from vertical and is 
subjected to a vertical downward force of magnitude m g
1
. The interaction forces 
acting between link-1 and link-2 along vertical and horizontal directions are 
represented by P2 and N2 respectively.
Summing all the forces acting in horizontal direction on link-1 gives the following 
equations of motion:
x
x
l
1
1
1
=
−
sinθ 	
(2)
Differentiating Equation (2) once yields:
Figure 2. FBD analysis of cart sub-system
www.ebook3000.com

144
Mathematical Modeling of Five-Link Inverted Cart and Pendulum System



x
x
l
1
1 1
1
=
−θ
θ
cos
	
(3)
Differentiating Equation (2) twice yields:




x
x
l
l
1
1
2
1
1
1 1
1
=
−
−
θ
θ
θ
θ
sin
cos
	
(4)
Summing all the forces acting in vertical direction on link-1 gives the following 
equations of motion:
y
l
1
1
1
=
cosθ 	
(5)
Differentiating Equation (5) once yields:


y
l
1
1 1
1
= −θ
θ
sin
	
(6)
Differentiating Equation (5) twice yields:



y
l
l
1
1
2
1
1
1 1
1
= −
−
θ
θ
θ
θ
cos
sin
	
(7)
Now, considering the interaction forces between cart and link-1 along horizontal 
direction give the following equations:
m x
N
N
1 1
1
2
=
−
	
(8)
Figure 3. FBD analysis of link-1

145
Mathematical Modeling of Five-Link Inverted Cart and Pendulum System
Solving for N1 gives:
N
m x
N
1
1 1
2
=
+

	
(9)
Now, considering the interaction forces between cart and link-1 along vertical 
direction give the following equations:
m y
P
m g
P
1
1
1
1
2
=
−
−
	
(10)
Solving for P1  gives:
P
m y
m g
P
1
1
1
1
2
=
+
+

	
(11)
The above equations were further used for deriving an expression for angular 
acceleration θ1
( )  of link-1 given by:


θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
1
1
1 1
1
1 1
1
1 1
2 1
1
2 1
1
1
=
+
−
+
+
(
)
I
N l
Pl
b
N l
P l
cos
sin
cos
sin
	
(12)
Equations of Motion for Link-2
A FBD analysis of link-2 incorporating all the forces acting on it is shown in Figure 
4. It is clear from the figure that link-2 makes an angle of θ2  from vertical and is 
Figure 4. FBD analysis of link-2
www.ebook3000.com

146
Mathematical Modeling of Five-Link Inverted Cart and Pendulum System
subjected to a vertical downward force of magnitude m g
2
. The interaction forces 
acting between link-2 and link-3 along vertical and horizontal directions are 
represented by P3 and N3 respectively.
Summing all the forces acting in horizontal direction on link-2 gives the following 
equations of motion:
x
x
l
l
2
1
1
2
2
2
=
−
−
sin
sin
θ
θ 	
(13)
Differentiating Equation (13) once yields:




x
x
l
l
2
1 1
1
2 2
2
2
=
−
−
θ
θ
θ
θ
cos
cos
	
(14)
Differentiating Equation (13) twice yields:






x
x
l
l
l
l
2
1
2
1
1
1 1
1
2
2
2
2
2 2
2
2
2
=
+
−
+
−
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
sin
cos
sin
sin
−θ
θ
2 2
2
l cos
	
(15)
Summing all the forces acting in vertical direction on link-2 gives the following 
equations of motion:
y
l
l
2
1
1
2
2
2
=
+
cos
cos
θ
θ 	
(16)
Differentiating Equation (16) once yields:



y
l
l
2
1 1
1
2 2
2
2
= −
+
θ
θ
θ
θ
sin
sin
	
(17)
Differentiating Equation (16) twice yields:





y
l
l
l
l
2
1
2
1
1
1 1
1
2
2
2
2
2 2
2
2
2
= −
−
−
−
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
cos
sin
cos
sin
	
(18)
Now, considering the interaction forces between link-1 and link-2 along horizontal 
direction give the following equations:
m x
N
N
2
2
2
3
=
−
	
(19)
Solving for N2  gives:

147
Mathematical Modeling of Five-Link Inverted Cart and Pendulum System
N
m x
N
2
2
2
3
=
+

	
(20)
Considering the interaction forces between link-1 and link-2 along vertical 
direction give the following equations:
m y
P
m g
P
2
2
2
2
3
=
−
−
	
(21)
The above equations were further used for deriving an expression for angular 
acceleration θ2
( ) of link-2 given by:


θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
2
2
2 2
2
2 2
2
2
2
3 2
2
3 2
2
1
=
+
−
+
+
(
)
I
N l
P l
b
N l
Pl
cos
sin
cos
sin
	
(22)
Equations of Motion for Link-3
A FBD analysis of link-3 incorporating all the forces acting on it is shown in Figure 
5. It is clear from the figure that link-3 makes an angle of θ3  from vertical and is 
subjected to a vertical downward force of magnitude, m g
3
. The interaction forces 
acting between link-3 and link-4 along vertical and horizontal directions are 
represented by P4 and N4 respectively.
Summing all the forces acting in horizontal direction on link-3 gives the following 
equations of motion:
Figure 5. FBD analysis of link-3
www.ebook3000.com

148
Mathematical Modeling of Five-Link Inverted Cart and Pendulum System
x
x
l
l
l
3
1
1
2
2
3
3
2
2
=
−
−
−
sin
sin
sin
θ
θ
θ 	
(23)
Differentiating Equation (23) once yields:





x
x
l
l
l
3
1 1
1
2 2
2
3
3
3
2
2
=
−
−
−
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
cos
cos
cos
	
(24)
Differentiating Equation (23) twice yields:






x
x
l
l
l
l
3
1
2
1
1
1 1
1
2
2
2
2
2 2
2
2
2
2
=
+
−
+
−
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
sin
cos
sin
cosθ
θ
θ
θ
θ
2
3 3
3
3
2
3
3
−
+


l
l
cos
sin
	
(25)
Summing all the forces acting in vertical direction on link-3 gives the following 
equations of motion:
y
l
l
l
3
1
1
2
2
3
3
2
2
=
+
+
cos
cos
cos
θ
θ
θ 	
(26)
Differentiating Equation (26) once yields:




y
l
l
l
3
1 1
1
2 2
2
3 3
3
2
2
= −
−
−
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
sin
sin
sin
	
(27)
Differentiating Equation (26) twice yields:





y
l
l
l
3
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
2
2
= −
+
−
+
−
(
sin
cos
)
(
sin
cos
)
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
(
sin
cos
)


θ
θ
θ
θ
3
3
3
2
3
+
	
(28)
Now, considering the interaction forces between link-2 and link-3 along horizontal 
direction give the following equations:
m x
N
N
3
3
3
4
=
−
	
(29)
Solving for N3  gives:
N
m x
N
3
3
3
4
=
+

	
(30)
Considering the interaction forces between link-2 and link-3 along vertical 
direction give the following equations:

149
Mathematical Modeling of Five-Link Inverted Cart and Pendulum System
m y
P
m g
P
3
3
3
3
4
=
−
−
	
(31)
Solving for P3  gives:
P
m y
m g
P
3
3
3
3
4
=
+
+

	
(32)
The above equations were further used for deriving an expression for angular 
acceleration θ3
( )  of link-3 given by:


θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
3
3
3 3
3
3 3
3
3
3
4 3
3
4 3
3
1
=
+
−
+
+
(
)
I
N l
Pl
b
N l
P l
cos
sin
cos
sin
	
(33)
Equations of Motion for Link-4
A FBD analysis of link-4 incorporating all the forces acting on it is shown in Figure 
6. It is clear from the figure that link-4 makes an angle of θ4  from vertical and is 
subjected to a vertical downward force of magnitude m g
4
. The interaction forces 
acting between link-4 and link-5 along vertical and horizontal directions are 
represented by P5 and N5 respectively.
Summing all the forces acting in horizontal direction on link-4 gives the following 
equations of motion:
x
x
l
l
l
l
4
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
2
2
2
=
−
−
−
−
sin
sin
sin
sin
θ
θ
θ
θ 	
(34)
Figure 6. FBD analysis of link-4
www.ebook3000.com

150
Mathematical Modeling of Five-Link Inverted Cart and Pendulum System
Differentiating Equation (34) once yields:






x
x
l
l
l
l
4
1 1
1
2 2
2
3
3
3
4
4
4
2
2
2
=
−
−
−
−
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
cos
cos
cos
cos
	
(35)
Differentiating Equation (34) twice yields:






x
x
l
l
l
l
4
1
2
1
1
1 1
1
2
2
2
2
2 2
2
2
2
2
=
+
−
+
−
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
sin
cos
sin
cosθ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
2
2
3 3
3
3 3
3
4
4
2
4
4
4
4
2
2
+
−
+
−




l
l
l
l
sin
cos
sin
cos
	
(36)
Summing all the forces acting in vertical direction on link-4 gives the following 
equations of motion:
y
l
l
l
l
4
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
2
2
2
=
+
+
+
cos
cos
cos
cos
θ
θ
θ
θ 	
(37)
Differentiating Equation (37) once yields:





y
l
l
l
l
4
1 1
1
2 2
2
3 3
3
4 4
4
2
2
2
= −
−
−
−
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
sin
sin
sin
sin
	
(38)
Differentiating Equation (37) twice yields:





y
l
l
l
4
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
= −
+
−
+
−
(
sin
cos
)
(
sin
cos
)
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
3
3
3
3
2
3
4
4
4
4
2
4
(
sin
cos
)
(
sin
cos
)




θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
+
−
+
l
	
(39)
Now, considering the interaction forces between link-3 and link-4 along horizontal 
direction give the following equations:
m x
N
N
4
4
4
5
=
−
	
(40)
Now, considering the interaction forces between link-3 and link-4 along vertical 
direction give the following equations:
m y
P
m g
P
4
4
4
4
5
=
−
−
	
(41)
Solving for P4  gives:

151
Mathematical Modeling of Five-Link Inverted Cart and Pendulum System
P
m
y
g
P
4
4
4
5
=
+
+
(
)

	
(42)
The above equations were further used for deriving an expression for angular 
acceleration θ4
( ) of link-4 given by:


θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
4
4
4 4
4
4 4
4
4
4
5 4
4
5 4
4
1
=
+
−
+
+
(
)
I
N l
P l
b
N l
Pl
cos
sin
cos
sin
	
(43)
Equations of Motion for Link-5
A FBD analysis of link-5 incorporating all the forces acting on it is shown in Figure 
7. It is clear from the figure that link-5 makes an angle of θ5  from vertical and is 
subjected to a vertical downward force of magnitude m g
5
.
Summing all the forces acting in horizontal direction on link-5 gives the following 
equations of motion:
x
x
l
l
l
l
l
5
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
2
2
2
2
=
−
−
−
−
−
sin
sin
sin
sin
sin
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ 	
(44)
Differentiating Equation (44) once yields:







x
x
l
l
l
l
l
5
1 1
1
2 2
2
3
3
3
4
4
4
5
2
2
2
2
=
−
−
−
−
−
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
cos
cos
cos
cos
θ
θ
5
5
cos
	
(45)
Figure 7. FBD analysis of link-5
www.ebook3000.com

152
Mathematical Modeling of Five-Link Inverted Cart and Pendulum System
Differentiating Equation (44) twice yields:






x
x
l
l
l
l
5
1
2
1
1
1 1
1
2
2
2
2
2 2
2
2
2
2
=
+
−
+
−
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
sin
cos
sin
cosθ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
2
2
3 3
3
3 3
3
4
4
2
4
4
4
4
5
2
2
2
2
+
−
+
−
+




l
l
l
l
l
sin
cos
sin
cos


θ
θ
θ
θ
5
2
5
5
5
5
sin
cos
−l
	
(46)
Summing all the forces acting in vertical direction on link-5 gives the following 
equations of motion:
y
l
l
l
l
l
5
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
2
2
2
2
=
+
+
+
+
cos
cos
cos
cos
cos
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ 	
(47)
Differentiating Equation (47) once yields:






y
l
l
l
l
l
5
1 1
1
2 2
2
3 3
3
4 4
4
5 5
2
2
2
2
= −
−
−
−
−
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
sin
sin
sin
sin
sinθ5 	
(48)
Differentiating Equation (47) twice yields:





y
l
l
l
5
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
= −
+
−
+
−
(
sin
cos
)
(
sin
cos
)
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
3
3
3
3
2
3
4
4
4
4
2
4
5
5
2
(
sin
cos
)
(
sin
cos
)
(
si





θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
+
−
+
−
l
l
n
cos
)
θ
θ
θ
5
5
2
5
+ 
	
(49)
Now, considering the interaction forces between link-4 and link-5 along horizontal 
direction give the following equations:
m x
N
5
5
5
=
	
(50)
Now, considering the interaction forces between link-4 and link-5 along vertical 
direction give the following equations:
m y
P
m g
5
5
5
5
=
−
	
(51)
Solving for P5  gives:
P
m
y
g
5
5
5
=
+
(
)

	
(52)

153
Mathematical Modeling of Five-Link Inverted Cart and Pendulum System
The above equations were further used for deriving an expression for angular 
acceleration θ5
( )  of link-5 given by:


θ
θ
θ
θ
5
5
5 5
5
5 5
5
5
5
1
=
+
−
(
)
I
N l
Pl
b
cos
sin
	
(53)
FUTURE SCOPE
As an extension to future work the proposed governing equations can be further used 
to build a Simulink model of five-link cart and pendulum system. The Simulink 
model can be further used to test various control algorithms and techniques. Apart 
from this these equations can be further used to obtain a general expression for 
n-link cart and pendulum system.
CONCLUSION
This chapter has successfully presented mathematical modeling and dynamic 
representation of a five-link inverted pendulum on cart. Initially, a brief introduction 
and description about the system has been given. The proposed system is further 
divided into different sub-systems for developing governing equations of motion 
through FBD representation. The study applied Newton’s second law of motion 
for deriving equations of motion for the proposed sub-systems. As an extension to 
future work the above derived equations can be further used to generate a Matlab-
Simulink model of five-link inverted pendulum system which can be used by students 
and researchers for testing various control algorithms. The proposed system can be 
considered for analysing behaviour of many practical systems and assemblies like 
robotic joints, humanoid robot motion control, missile subsystems etc (Baltes et al., 
2014; Takano & Nakamura, 2017; Liano et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2016).
REFERENCES
Ananevskii, I. M., & Anokhin, N. V. (2014). Control of the spatial motion of 
a multi-link inverted pendulum using a torque applied to the first link. Journal 
of Applied Mathematics and Mechanics, 78(6), 543–540. doi:10.1016/j.
jappmathmech.2015.04.001
www.ebook3000.com

154
Mathematical Modeling of Five-Link Inverted Cart and Pendulum System
Baltes, J., Kopacek, P., & Schorghuber, M. (2014). A cost oriented Humanoid 
robot motion control system. IFAC Proceedings Volumes, 47(3), 4529-4534. 
doi:10.3182/20140824-6-ZA-1003.01243
Bowden, C., Holderbaum, W., & Becerra, V. M. (2012). Strong structural 
controllability and the multilink inverted pendulum. IEEE Transactions on Automatic 
Control, 57(11), 2891–2896. doi:10.1109/TAC.2012.2191180
Chao, X. (2004). Mathematical modeling of elastic inverted pendulum control 
system. Journal of Control Theory and Applications, 2(3), 281–282. doi:10.1007/
s11768-004-0010-1
Dadios, E. P., Fernandez, P. S., & Williams, D. J. (2006). Genetic algorithm on 
line controller for the flexible inverted pendulum problem. Journal of Advanced 
Computational Intelligence and Intelligent Informatics, 10(2), 155–160. doi:10.20965/
jaciii.2006.p0155
Dai, F., Gao, X., Jiang, S., Liu, Y., & Li, J. (2014). A multi-DOF two wheeled inverted 
pendulum robot climbing on a slope. Proceedings of IEEE International Conference 
on Robotics and Boimimetics, 1958-1963. doi:10.1109/ROBIO.2014.7090623
Elsayed, B. A., Hassan, M. A., & Mekhilef, S. (2015). Fuzzy swinging-up with sliding 
mode control for third order cart-inverted pendulum system. International Journal of 
Control Automation and Systems, 13(1), 238–248. doi:10.1007/s12555-014-0033-4
Eltohamy, K. G., & Kuo, C. Y. (1999). Nonlinear generalized equations of motion 
for multi-link inverted pendulum systems. International Journal of Systems Science, 
30(5), 505–513. doi:10.1080/002077299292245
Gawthrop, P., Loram, I., Gollee, H., & Lakie, M. (2014). Intermittent control models 
of human standing: similarities and differences. doi: 101.007/s00422-014-0587-5
Lee, G. H., & Jung, S. (2008). Control of inverted pendulum system using a 
neuro-fuzzy controller for intelligent control education. Proceedings of IEEE 
International Conference on Mechatronics and Automation, 965-970. doi:10.1109/
ICMA.2008.4798889
Lee, T., Leok, M., & McClamroch, N. H. (2012). Dynamics and Control of a chain 
pendulum on a cart. Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Decision 
and Control, 2502-2506. doi:10.1109/CDC.2012.6427059
Liano, G., Castillo, J. L., & Garcia-Ybarra, P. L. (2016). Steady states of the rolling 
and yawing motion of unguided missiles. Aerospace Science and Technology, 59, 
103–111. doi:10.1016/j.ast.2016.10.016

155
Mathematical Modeling of Five-Link Inverted Cart and Pendulum System
Lobas, L. G. (2005). Dynamic behaviour of multi-link pendulums under follower 
forces. International Applied Mechanics, 41(6), 587–613. doi:10.1007/s10778-
005-0128-y
Noh, J. S., Lee, G. H., & Jung, S. (2010). Position control of a mobile inverted 
pendulum system using radial basis function network. International Journal of 
Control. Automation and Systems, 8(1), 157–162. doi:10.1007/s12555-010-0120-0
Pomales-Torres, W., & Gonzalez, O. R. (1996). Nonlinear control of swing-up 
inverted pendulum. Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Control 
Applications, 259-264.
Prasad, L. B., Tyagi, B., & Gupta, H. O. (2014). Optimal control of nonlinear inverted 
pendulum system using PID controller and LQR: Performance analysis without and 
with disturbance input. International Journal of Automation and Computing, 11(6), 
661–670. doi:10.1007/s11633-014-0818-1
Soumelids, A., Gaspar, P., & Bokor, J. (1997). An inverted pendulum tool for 
teaching linear optimal and model control. Periodica Polytechnica Transportation 
Engineering, 25(1-2), 9–19.
Takano, W., & Nakamura, Y. (2017). Planning of goal-oriented motion from stochastic 
motion primitives and optimal controlling of joint torques in whole body. Robotics 
and Autonomous Systems, 91, 226–233. doi:10.1016/j.robot.2017.01.013
Xu, T., Rong, J., Xiang, D., Pan, C., & Yin, X. (2016). Dynamic modeling and 
stability analysis of a flexible spinning missile under thrust. International Journal 
of Mechanical Sciences, 119, 144–154. doi:10.1016/j.ijmecsci.2016.09.027
Yavin, Y. (1999). Control of a rotary inverted pendulum. Applied Mathematics 
Letters, 12(2), 131–134. doi:10.1016/S0893-9659(98)00161-X
www.ebook3000.com

156
Copyright © 2018, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  9
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-3722-9.ch009
ABSTRACT
Piston is considered to be one of the most important part of internal combustion 
engine. Piston is used to deliver thrust via connecting rod to the main shaft of the 
engine. Normally it is made of cast iron which bears high gas pressure and has 
damping property. The main objective of this chapter is to perform structural and 
thermal analysis of MgZrO3 top surface ceramic coated piston. Piston made up of 
gray cast iron coated with ceramic material (MgZrO3) which is bonded by special 
material (NiCrAl) is designed by machine design approach to determine the dimensions 
of the piston and Finite Element Analysis (FEA) was performed using ANSYS 17.1. 
The pressure of the 5 N/mm2 was applied at top land of piston. An equivalent Von 
misses stress in ceramic coated piston was found less in comparison to uncoated 
piston. Thermal analysis of both coated and non-coated piston was performed.
Design and Thermal Analysis 
of MgZrO3 Ceramic Coated 
I.C. Engine Piston Based on 
Finite Element Analysis (FEA)
Shailendra Kumar
College of Engineering Science and Technology Lucknow, India

157
Design and Thermal Analysis of MgZrO3 Ceramic Coated I.C. Engine Piston
INTRODUCTION
Piston is an integral part of internal combustion engine. It helps to produce power and 
it is subjected to high temperature and pressure. The life of components like piston, 
piston pin, connecting rod, crank and other internal part of piston is affected by high 
temperature and pressure. Piston is a cylindrical part in cylinder which reciprocates 
in it. It is either moved by the mixture (air and fuel) or it moves the mixture which 
enters inside the cylinder of I.C. engine. Function of piston is to receive thrust due 
to combustion of mixture and then transfer thrust to the crankshaft via connecting 
rod which in turn runs the engine shaft. It also transferred a large amount of heat 
from the combustion chamber to the cylinder walls.
Cerit (2014) in his research article titled “Temperature and thermal stress analyses 
of a ceramic-coated aluminum alloy piston used in a diesel engine” has determined 
temperature and thermal stress distributions on a plasma-sprayed and magnesia-
stabilized zirconia coated aluminum piston crown. It improves the performance 
of a C.I. engine. Effect of the coating thickness on temperature and thermal stress 
distributions was well investigated, including results comparison with uncoated 
piston. Temperature and thermal stress analysis was performed for various coating 
thicknesses from 0.2 to 1.6 mm. Temperature at the coated surface is found to be 
significantly higher than that of the uncoated piston. It observed that the coating 
surface temperature increases with decreasing rate of coating thickness. For 1 mm 
thickness coating on piston it increases 64.3% higher temperature sustainability. 
The normal stress on the coated surface decreases with increase in coat thickness. 
The higher combustion chamber temperature achieve by coating results with better 
thermal efficiency of the engine.
Chan (2000) in his article titled “The effect of thermal barrier coated piston 
crown on engine characteristics”, has investigated the use of ceramic components 
in reciprocating engines. Ceramic components are now in service, mainly for 
enhancing cylinder heat absorption on thermal coating. They work on a low heat 
rejection engine. Experiments were conducted on a three-cylinder SI engine with 
piston crowns coated with layers of ceramic, which is composed of Yttria-Stabilized 
Zirconia (YSZ). Measurement and comparison of engine performance has been 
done for particular fuel consumption, made before and after the application of YSZ 
coatings on the piston crowns.
Hejwowski (2002) in research article entitled “ The effect of thermal barrier 
coatings on diesel engine performance” has performed experimental study to know 
effects of thin thermal barrier coatings on the performance of a diesel engine. The 
results obtained from the analysis of thermally insulated pistons of engines were 
compared with the base (existing) engine data. Engine trials demonstrated good 
www.ebook3000.com

158
Design and Thermal Analysis of MgZrO3 Ceramic Coated I.C. Engine Piston
properties of both coating systems. The temperature and stress distributions on the 
pistons were evaluated analytically by means of the Cosmos/Works FEM. Results 
of a road test on a gasoline-engine-driven car are also reported. They concluded 
that the performance of the modified engine-driven car was found satisfactory and 
ceramic coating did not produce observable knocking in the engine, no significant 
wear of piston skirts or cylinder liners were reported.
Pierz (1993) in research article “Thermal barrier coating development for diesel 
engine aluminum pistons” determined the Specific outputs of some diesel engine 
applications have applied thermal loadings in excess on aluminum-piston alloys. He 
has evaluated Thermal barrier coatings to find the component durability to acceptable 
levels and also giving a means of lowering heat rejection. The use of a finite element 
model to analyze these thermal barrier coating systems which include the impact on 
material properties, coating thickness, residual stress and boundary conditions was 
discussed in this research article. The resulting temperature and stresses, together 
with material strength were found. The main cause of failure of coating was found 
to be due to low cycle fatigue arises due to localized yielding when the coating is 
hot and in compression.
Buyukkaya (2008) in article, “Thermal analysis of functionally graded coating 
Al Si alloy and steel pistons” found that functionally graded coatings are useful to 
increase performances of high temperature components in engines. These coatings 
consist of a transition from the metallic bond layer to cermet layer and from cermet 
layer to the ceramic layer. In his summary, thermal behavior of functional graded 
coatings on AISi and steel piston materials was determine by means of using a 
analysis software, ANSYS. Thermal analyses were employed to deposit metallic, 
cermet and ceramic powders such as NiCrAI, NiCrAI + MgZrO3 and MgZrO3 
on the substrate. The results of AISi and steel pistons are comparing with respect 
to each other. It was showing that the max surface temperature of the functional 
graded coating AI Si alloy and steel pistons was gradually increased by 28% and 
17%, respectively. Silva (2006), has performed case study on the fatigue of pistons 
uses in different applications and found that fatigue is not the major reason for all 
the piston damages but it remains a problem. Now days more investigations are 
made into fuel consumption obtained by decreasing weight which resulted in the 
thin walls for the piston and thus possess maximum stresses.
Cerit (2014) carried out “Thermal analysis on partially coated SI engine piston” 
to explore the effects of ceramic coatings on the temperatures of crevices and wall 
quenching regions. The results obtained by analysis shows that the temperatures 
on the coated surfaces close to the crevice and wall quenching regions resulted in 
increase of 100°C in the temperatures. These increases in the temperatures indicate 
the fact that the temperature of air fuel mixture can be raised.

159
Design and Thermal Analysis of MgZrO3 Ceramic Coated I.C. Engine Piston
Previously, cast iron was used as piston material because of its better wear 
properties, but possesses high specific weight, thus experiencing larger inertia forces. 
Later on Aluminum alloy containing silicon come into existence which has high 
strength and reduced expansion. Aluminum alloy uses mainly two configurations 
of silicon. One is eutectic and another is hyper-eutectic which having 12% and 22% 
of silicon respectively. The material becomes more brittle if its content is more than 
12%. Performance of an engine can be increased by insulating the components. 
Insulation prevents the components to with stand the higher temperatures resulting 
in failure. In order to avoid this, ceramic coatings are employed which can resist high 
temperatures to work efficiently as metal alone cannot withstand high temperatures. 
The requirements of the materials used in the piston very wide and of diverse nature 
as it works in extreme hostile environment. The Materials used in the manufacturing 
of piston are Cast Iron, Aluminum Alloys, Special steel alloys.
Cast iron used in piston is mainly of perlite structure with laminas as separate 
entity. When it is alloyed, fine-grained structure is obtained to improve the 
mechanical properties of the material. The advantages of cast iron are high abrasion 
resistance, good sliding properties small decrease in strength and hardness in high 
temperatures, small coefficient of thermal expansion but disadvantages are high 
density and small coefficient of heat conduction. Hardness in cast shall be iron in 
the range 180 – 240 HB.
CERAMIC COATING
Ceramic Coatings are often used as a protective coating on or in between the engine 
Parts, which result in minimize of friction, increase wear resistance and maintaining 
heat Shielding. All above factors have great influence on the performance parameters 
and the life of the component in an automobile vehicle. Ceramic coatings help parts 
to connect in Uniform manner and in compatible fashion. Zirconium based ceramic 
coatings are used mainly. Zirconiums in combination with Magnesia have very good 
mechanical properties, thermal shock resistance and impact properties. Zirconium-
based ceramic coatings are used as thermal barrier coatings (TBC) because of they 
possess very low thermal conductivity and relatively high coefficients of thermal 
expansion in comparison to other ceramics which reduce the stresses. Thermal 
barrier coatings acting as the insulators on piston surface making it possible to 
avail maximum heat for combustion, which results in better work completed on 
piston. These coatings distribute the heat evenly, which help in preventing high 
temperature zones.
www.ebook3000.com

160
Design and Thermal Analysis of MgZrO3 Ceramic Coated I.C. Engine Piston
Acquiring more heat on to the piston surface rather than transferring prevents the 
Pre-ignition of the gasses in the cylinder. The problem in the combustion chamber 
with conventional materials is that most of the heat generated in an engine will be lost 
through conduction, convection and radiation. Hence, the way out of this situation 
is to make the components insulated so that it could withstand high temperatures in 
combustion chamber (C.C.) By TBCs. Burning of gases in an engine can be done 
more efficiently and effectively by increasing the temperature of the air-fuel mixture.
Thermal barrier coatings (TBC) help in increasing the thermal efficiency of the 
engine. The heat rejection to surroundings is minimized by use of ceramics material. 
The excess heat can be used for effective burning of the air-fuel mixture and reduces 
heat loss. These coatings have high thermal durability so the requirement to cool 
them immediately is not needed. Wear and corrosive properties are very much better 
than regularly used component materials. Less heat transfer from the combustion 
chamber due to thermal coatings helps in using the cylinder heat more effectively. 
More heat can be transferred to exhaust system. This heat can be reused for heat 
recovery systems for power generation. These coatings also help in reducing the 
cold start emissions.
STATEMENT OF PROBLEM
A ceramic coated (MgZrO3) piston made of gray cast iron is designed for a single acting 
four stroke internal combustion engine. Ceramic coated piston is then structurally 
and thermally analyzed under given load and in convective environment respectively. 
Design experiment was performed to determine the variation of different parameters 
like equivalent stresses, total deformation and the maximum temperature with the 
application of different thickness of ceramic coating. Specification of engine is as 
following for which piston coating has been done (see Figure 1):
Bore of cylinder = 100 mm	
length of Stroke = 125 mm	
Maximum gas pressure(Pmax) = 5 N/mm2	
Indicated mean effective pressure = 0.75 N/mm2	

161
Design and Thermal Analysis of MgZrO3 Ceramic Coated I.C. Engine Piston
Mechanical efficiency (η) = 80%	
Fuel consumption = 0.15 kg per brake power per hour	
Higher calorific value of fuel = 42 × 103 kJ/kg	
Speed = 2000 R.P.M	
NUMERICAL CALCULATION FOR PISTON MODELLING
The analysis of piston is broadly divided into several parts which include designing 
of piston parts. In this section different parameters has been determined for solid 
modelling of piston.
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of ceramic coated piston
www.ebook3000.com

162
Design and Thermal Analysis of MgZrO3 Ceramic Coated I.C. Engine Piston
Piston Head or Crown
There are two methods on which the thickness of the piston head is designed:
1. 	
Strength basis
2. 	
Heat dissipation
To find the thickness of piston head on the basis of strength, we require tensile 
stress for cast iron which may be taken as (σt= 38 MPa):
t
pD
mm
h
t
=
=
≈
3
16
15 7
16
2
σ
.
	
The engine is a four-stroke engine, therefore, the number of working strokes 
per minute:
n = N / 2 = 1000	
Cross-sectional area of the cylinder:
A
D
mm
=
=
π
4
7855
2
2 	
The indicated power of the cylinder may be calculated as:
IP
LANp
kW
m
=
=
60
12 276
.
	
Brake power:
BP
IP
kW
m
=
×
=
η
9 8.
	

163
Design and Thermal Analysis of MgZrO3 Ceramic Coated I.C. Engine Piston
The heat flowing through the piston head (Assuming C = 0.051) is given by:
H = C × HCV × m × BP≈ 860W	
Thickness of the piston head on the basis of heat dissipation, we require thermal 
conductivity for cast ironk = 46.6 W/m/°C, and assume (TC– TE)= 200°C):
t
H
k T
T
mm
h
c
E
=
−
(
)
=
12 56
7 3
.
.
	
Taking the larger of the two values, we will take:
th = 16 mm	
since the ratio of L / D is 1.25.
A cup in the top of the piston head with a radius equal to 0.7 D (i.e. 70 mm) is 
provided.
Radial Ribs
The radial ribs are taken as four in number. The range of thickness of the ribs varies 
from th / 3 to th / 2.
Range of Thickness of the ribs:
tR = 16 / 3 to 16 / 2 = 5.33 to 8 mm	
Lets take it astR = 7 mm.
Piston Rings
Assuming, there are total four rings out of which three are compression ringsand 
one is an oil ring. And taking Pw = 0.035 N/mm2, and σt= 90 MPa.
The radial thickness of the piston rings is given by:
t
D
p
mm
w
t
1
3
3 4
=
=
σ
.
	
and axial thickness of the piston rings:
www.ebook3000.com

164
Design and Thermal Analysis of MgZrO3 Ceramic Coated I.C. Engine Piston
t2 = 0.7 t1 to t1 = 0.7 × 3.4 to 3.4 mm = 2.38 to 3.4 mm	
Take:
t2 = 3 mm	
We also know that the minimum axial thickness of the piston ring:
t
D
n
mm
r
2
10
2 5
=
= .
	
Thus the axial thickness of the piston ring as already calculated (i.e. t2= 3 mm) 
is satisfactory.
The distance from the top of the piston to the first ring groove.
The width of the top land of the piston:
z1 = th to 1.2 th = 16 to 1.2 × 16 mm = 16 to 19.2 mm	
The width of lands of other ring:
z2 = 0.75 t2 to t2 = 0.75 × 3 to 3 mm = 2.25 to 3 mm	
Taking:
z1 = 18 mm; and z2= 2.5 mm	
The gap between the free ends of the ring is calculated as:
Gap1 = 3.5 t1 to 4 t1 = 3.5 × 3.4 to 4 × 3.4 mm = 11.9 to 13.6 mm	
The gap when the ring is in the cylinder is determined as:
Gap2 = 0.002 D to 0.004 D = 0.002 × 100 to 0.004 × 100 mm	
= 0.2 to 0.4 mm	
Taking:
Gap1= 12.8 mm and Gap2= 0.3 mm	

165
Design and Thermal Analysis of MgZrO3 Ceramic Coated I.C. Engine Piston
Piston Barrel
The radial depth of the piston ring grooves (z) is about 0.4 mm more than the radial 
thickness of the piston rings (t1).
Thus, z is calculated as:
z = t1 + 0.4 = 3.4 + 0.4 = 3.8 mm	
The maximum thickness of barrel is calculated as 4.5mm more than the sum of 
0.03 times diameter and radial depth:
t3 = 0.03 D + z + 4.5 = 0.03 × 100 + 3.8 + 4.5 = 11.3 mm	
The piston wall thickness towards the open end:
t4 = 0.25 t3 to 0.35 t3 = 0.25 × 11.3 to 0.35 × 11.3 = 2.8 to 3.9 mm	
Taking:
t4 = 3.4 mm	
Piston Skirt
Let L = Length of the skirt in mm.
The maximum side thrust on the cylinder due to gas pressure (p) and assuming 
μ = 0.1:
T
D p
kN
=
=
µ π
2
4
3 928
.
	
Because of bearing pressure on the piston barrel (Pb= 0.45 N/mm2), the side 
thrust may be calculated as:
T = Pb× D × L = 0.45 × 100 × L = 45L N	
From above, we find that:
45L= 3928 or L = 3928 / 45 ≈90 mm	
www.ebook3000.com

166
Design and Thermal Analysis of MgZrO3 Ceramic Coated I.C. Engine Piston
Total length of the piston:
L = Length of the skirt + Length of the ring section + Top land	
= L + (4 t2 + 3z2) + z1	
= 90 + (4 × 3 + 3 × 3) + 18 ≈ 130 mm	
Piston Pin
Let:
d0 = Outside diameter of the pin in mm	
l1 = Length of pin in the bush of the small end of the connecting rod in mm (Taking 
l1 = 0.45 D)	
and:
pb1 = Bearing pressure at the small end of the connecting rod bushing in N/mm2	
Bearing pressure for bronze bushing is 25 N/mm2.
The load on the pin because to bearing pressure may be calculated as:
= Bearing pressure × Bearing area = pb1 × d0 × l1	
= 25 × d0 × 0.45 × 100 = 1.125 d0kN	
The maximum load on the piston due to gas pressure or maximum gas load:
=
=
π D p
kN
2
4
39 275
.
	
From above, we find that:
1.125 d0 = 39 .275 or d0 = 39. 275 / 1.125 ≈ 35 mm	
The inside diameter of the pin (di) is usually taken as 0.6 d0:
di = 0.6 × 35 = 21 mm	

167
Design and Thermal Analysis of MgZrO3 Ceramic Coated I.C. Engine Piston
SOLID MODELLING AND MESHING
Figure 2 shows modelling of piston using calculated dimensions. To know accurate 
stresses and thermal profile of piston calculated modelling of piston has been done. 
Figure 3 shows front and isometric view of 3D modeled piston. After solid modelling 
of piston ceramic coating has been applied on top surface of piston as shown in 
Figure 4. Ceramic coating (MgZrO3) was applied on gray cast iron piston using 
bonding material (NiCrAl). Mechanical properties of ceramic material and bonding 
material have been listed in Table 1.
Figure 2. Piston modelling based on previous calculations
www.ebook3000.com

168
Design and Thermal Analysis of MgZrO3 Ceramic Coated I.C. Engine Piston
For Finite Element Analysis (FEA) solid mesh was generated individually for all 
three materials (ceramic coating, bonding material and gray cast iron). Tetra mesh 
was used to meet more number of elements for approximately match the accuracy 
of the hex mesh. Figure 5 shows meshed model of coated piston.
Figure 3. Different 3D views of solid piston
Figure 4. Ceramic coated piston

169
Design and Thermal Analysis of MgZrO3 Ceramic Coated I.C. Engine Piston
After meshing the 3D model, has been checked for elemental quality. If the 
elements fail in quality check by permissible amount, the quality of results obtained 
from post processing will deteriorate. Different entity sets were created to ease the 
load application in ANSYS. As the piston is a complex structure, SOLID 186 was 
chosen for the thermal analysis and structural analysis. The number of elements 
obtained after default settings in ANSYS are 4661 and the number of nodes are 
10698 for the uncoated piston.
Table 1 Mechanical properties of piston materials
S.N.
Property
Gray Cast Iron
MgZrO3 
(Ceramic Material)
NiCrAl 
(Bonding Material)
1
Young’s Modulus(MPa)
110000
46000
90000
2
Poisson’s ratio
0.28
0.2
0.27
3
Thermal Conductivity (W/
mm0C)
52
8
12
4
Thermal expansion 
coefficient(1/0C)
0.000011
0.0008
16
5
Density (Ton/mm3)
7.2 E-09
5.6 E-09
7.8 E-09
6
Specific heat(J/kg0C)
460
650
764
Figure 5. FEA meshing of ceramic coated piston
www.ebook3000.com

170
Design and Thermal Analysis of MgZrO3 Ceramic Coated I.C. Engine Piston
MATERIAL PROPERTIES AND FEA SIMULATION RESULTS
Structural Analysis
To perform the FEA analysis of piston mechanical properties are required. Piston is 
made up of gray cast iron material and MgZrO3 has been used as ceramic material 
for coating. To add coating on piston surface NiCrAl has been used as bonding 
material. Mechanical properties of these materials are listed in Table 1.
For structural analysis the main objective was to calculate stresses and total 
deformation due to stresses. As per specification of engine maximum pressure of 5N/
mm2 is applied at the top land of the piston for evaluating stresses and deformation 
patterns.
In first stage equivalent stresses and total deformation was simulated for uncoated 
gray cast iron piston. In second stage stresses and deformation was calculated for 
ceramic coated piston and FEA results comparison has been done. Figure 6 shows 
structural analysis of uncoated piston. From stress pattern Figure 6 (a) it is confirmed 
that maximum stress was evaluated at top land and piston pin area of piston. Von 
misses stress variation in uncoated piston is in range of 15 to 20 Mpa. Due to high 
stress generation maximum deformation has been seen on top centre portion of piston. 
Red hues show maximum deformation in piston (Figure 6 (b)) which is 0.029 mm.
Figure 7 shows structural analysis of ceramic coated piston. Figure 7 (a) shows 
equivalent von misses stress. Blue hues shows minimum stress pattern in coated piston. 
Figure 6. Structural analysis of uncoated piston

171
Design and Thermal Analysis of MgZrO3 Ceramic Coated I.C. Engine Piston
Stress pattern numerically varies between 5 to 7 Mpa which is within permissible 
range of ceramic material. In comparison to uncoated piston the stress generation 
in ceramic coated piston is (50-70) % less. It will result in high service life of piston 
under extreme condition of temperature and pressure. Figure 7 (b) shows deformation 
pattern in ceramic coated piston. Red hues show maximum deformation (0.028 mm) 
where blue hues show minimum deformation (0.0031 mm). Use of ceramic coating 
reduces deformation by 0.001 mm. These results signifies that MgZro3 ceramic 
coating have significant effect on piston service life.
Thermal Analysis
Thermal analysis of uncoated and ceramic coated piston was performed and full 
temperature profile of piston was simulated. For thermal analysis convective heat 
transfer coefficient and maximum head load was considered and applied in different 
part of piston as shown in Figure 8. Maximum temperature profile was generated 
shown in Figure 9. Red hues shows maximum temperature of 6820C found at top land 
of piston and at different side of piston rings. Inner core of piston have temperature 
up to 1800C.
Figure 10 shows temperature profile of ceramic coated piston. At top land of 
ceramic piston maximum temperature is 6970C which is 170C higher than uncoated 
piston. Inner core of piston have temperature up to 3000C. Higher temperature 
profile signifies lower heat loss which was the main objective of ceramic coating. 
On thermal ground it was found that Zirconium based ceramic coating (MgZrO3) 
serve the purpose of thermal barrier coatings (TBC) because it have low thermal 
conductivity and relatively high coefficients of thermal expansion in comparison.
Figure 7. Structural analysis of coated piston
www.ebook3000.com

172
Design and Thermal Analysis of MgZrO3 Ceramic Coated I.C. Engine Piston
Design of experiment work has been done. All parameters were considered to find 
the variation of stresses and temperature with ceramic coating thickness. Figure 11 
shows temperature variation with ceramic coating thickness. When coating thickness 
is 0.6 mm maximum temperature of piston is 6970C. For coating thickness variation 
of (0.6 to 2.4) mm maximum temperature varies (681 to 697) 0C.
Figure 12 shows variation of total deformation with thickness of ceramic coating. 
It was concluded that as thickness increases level of deformation decreases. When 
coating thickness is less than 1mm total deformation is more than 0.028 mm. As 
coating thickness increases deformation level decreases.
Figure 8. Application of thermal convective load on uncoated piston
Figure 9. Variation of temperature profile on uncoated piston

173
Design and Thermal Analysis of MgZrO3 Ceramic Coated I.C. Engine Piston
Figure 10. Variation of temperature profile on ceramic coated piston
Figure 11. Graphical representation of temperature variation with respect to the 
thickness of ceramic coating
www.ebook3000.com

174
Design and Thermal Analysis of MgZrO3 Ceramic Coated I.C. Engine Piston
FUTURE SCOPE
In future this research work can be extended for following problem definition:
1. 	
Validation of simulation results by experimental temperature profile 
measurement of ceramic coated piston;
2. 	
Evaluation of heat transfer effect due to ceramic coating and role of bonding 
material.
CONCLUSION
The following points have been concluded from the structural and the thermal analysis 
of the gray cast iron piston coated with ceramic material (MgZrO3). NiCrAl has 
been used as special bonding material for ceramic coating of piston:
•	
Equivalent stresses for ceramic coated piston are found to be around 7 Mpa 
which is half of uncoated piston stresses (15-20) MPa;
•	
The maximum temperature experienced by the piston crown is 697 ºC for 
ceramic coated piston which signifies TBC property of ceramic coating. This 
temperature is higher than 15 ºC in comparison to uncoated piston higher 
temperature (682 ºC);
Figure 12. Variation of total deformation with respect to the thickness of ceramic 
coating

175
Design and Thermal Analysis of MgZrO3 Ceramic Coated I.C. Engine Piston
•	
The total deformation decreases considerably with the increase in the thickness 
of the ceramic coats. There is decrease of 0.01 mm in total deformation for 
ceramic coated piston in comparison to uncoated piston.
REFERENCES
ANSYS. (2017). Structural analysis Guide, release 17.0. ANSYS.
Buyukkaya, E. (2008). Thermal analysis of functionally graded coating Al Si 
alloy and steel pistons. Surface and Coatings Technology, 202(16), 3856–3865. 
doi:10.1016/j.surfcoat.2008.01.034
Buyukkaya, E., & Cerit, M. (2007). Thermal analysis of a ceramic coating diesel 
engine piston using 3-D finite element method. Surface and Coatings Technology, 
202(2), 398–402. doi:10.1016/j.surfcoat.2007.06.006
Cerit, M., & Coban, M. (2014). Temperature and thermal stress analyses of a 
ceramic-coated aluminum alloy piston used in a diesel engine. International Journal 
of Thermal Sciences, 77, 11–18. doi:10.1016/j.ijthermalsci.2013.10.009
Chan, S. H., & Khor, K. A. (2000). The effect of thermal barrier coated piston crown 
on engine characteristics. Journal of Materials Engineering and Performance, 9(1), 
103–109. doi:10.1361/105994900770346358
Hejwowski, T., & Weroriski, A. (2002). The effect of thermal barrier coatings 
on diesel engine performance. Vacuum, 65(3-4), 427–432. doi:10.1016/S0042-
207X(01)00452-3
Kumar, D., & Pandey, K. N. (2014). Study on Thermal Fatigue Behavior of Plasma 
Sprayed Yttria-Zirconia Thermal Barrier Coatings (Tbcs) Systems on Aluminium 
Alloy. Proceedings of Irf International Conference.
Parlak, A., Cesur, I., Ayhan, V., Boru, B., & Kökkülünk, G. (2014). Comparison 
for Performance and Exhaust Emissions of Steam Injected and Thermal Barrier 
Layer (TBL). Coated Piston Spark Ignition Engine.
Pierz, P. M. (1993). Thermal barrier coating development for diesel engine aluminum 
pistons. Surface and Coatings Technology, 6(1-3), 60–66. doi:10.1016/0257-
8972(93)90203-Z
www.ebook3000.com

176
Design and Thermal Analysis of MgZrO3 Ceramic Coated I.C. Engine Piston
Sapuan, S. M., Jacob, M. S. D., Mustapha, F., & Ismail, N. (2002). A prototype 
knowledge-based system for material selection of ceramic matrix composites of 
automotive engine Components. Materials & Design, 23(8), 701–708. doi:10.1016/
S0261-3069(02)00074-2
Silva, F. S. (2004). Fatigue on engine pistons – A compendium of case studies, 
science direct. Engineering Failure Analysis, 13(3), 480–492. doi:10.1016/j.
engfailanal.2004.12.023
Singh, K., & Jakhar, O. P. (2014). The Behavior of Temperature on Insulated 
(MgZrO3) Diesel Engine Piston With ANSYS. Academic Press.
Torres, M. A. S., & Voorwald, V. J. C. (2002). An evaluation of shot peening, residual 
stresses and stress relaxation on the fatigue life of AISI 4340 steel. International 
Journal of Fatigue, 24(8), 877–886. doi:10.1016/S0142-1123(01)00205-5
Vikram, Mistry, Gosai, & Nagarsheth. (2014). Temperature Distribution Analysis of 
MgZrO3 Coated and Conventional IC Engine parts using FEM. Academic Press.

Related References
To continue our tradition of advancing research on topics in the field of engineering, 
we have compiled a list of recommended IGI Global readings. These references will 
provide additional information and guidance to further enrich your knowledge and 
assist you with your own research and future publications.
Abawajy, J. H., Pathan, M., Rahman, M., Pathan, A., & Deris, M. M. (2013). Network 
and traffic engineering in emerging distributed computing applications. Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1888-6
Abu-Faraj, Z. O. (2012). Bioengineering/biomedical engineering education. In Z. 
Abu-Faraj (Ed.), Handbook of research on biomedical engineering education and 
advanced bioengineering learning: Interdisciplinary concepts (pp. 1–59). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0122-2.ch001
Abu-Nimeh, S., & Mead, N. R. (2012). Combining security and privacy in 
requirements engineering. In T. Chou (Ed.), Information assurance and security 
technologies for risk assessment and threat management: Advances (pp. 273–290). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61350-507-6.ch011
Abu-Taieh, E., El Sheikh, A., & Jafari, M. (2012). Technology engineering and 
management in aviation: Advancements and discoveries. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-887-3
Achumba, I. E., Azzi, D., & Stocker, J. (2010). Low-cost virtual laboratory workbench 
for electronic engineering. International Journal of Virtual and Personal Learning 
Environments, 1(4), 1–17. doi:10.4018/jvple.2010100101
177
www.ebook3000.com

Related References
Achumba, I. E., Azzi, D., & Stocker, J. (2012). Low-cost virtual laboratory 
workbench for electronic engineering. In M. Thomas (Ed.), Design, implementation, 
and evaluation of virtual learning environments (pp. 201–217). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1770-4.ch014
Addo-Tenkorang, R., & Eyob, E. (2013). Engineer-to-order: A maturity concurrent 
engineering best practice in improving supply chains. In Industrial engineering: 
Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 1780-1796). Hershey, PA: 
IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1945-6.ch095
Aguilera, A., & Davim, J. (2014). Research developments in wood engineering and 
technology. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4554-7
Aharoni, A., & Reinhartz-Berger, I. (2013). Semi-automatic composition of situational 
methods. In K. Siau (Ed.), Innovations in database design, web applications, 
and information systems management (pp. 335–364). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2044-5.ch013
Ahmad, M., Jung, L. T., & Zaman, N. (2014). A comparative analysis of software 
engineering approaches for sequence analysis. In Software design and development: 
Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 1093–1102). Hershey, PA: 
IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4301-7.ch053
Ahrens, A., Bassus, O., & Zaščerinska, J. (2014). Enterprise 2.0 in engineering 
curriculum. In M. Cruz-Cunha, F. Moreira, & J. Varajão (Eds.), Handbook of 
research on enterprise 2.0: Technological, social, and organizational dimensions 
(pp. 599–617). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4373-4.ch031
Akbar, D. (2012). Community engagement in engineering education: Needs and 
learning outcomes. In M. Rasul (Ed.), Developments in engineering education 
standards: Advanced curriculum innovations (pp. 301–317). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0951-8.ch017
Alam, F., Subic, A., Plumb, G., Shortis, M., & Chandra, R. P. (2012). An innovative 
offshore delivery of an undergraduate mechanical engineering program. In M. Rasul 
(Ed.), Developments in engineering education standards: Advanced curriculum 
innovations (pp. 233–245). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
0951-8.ch013
Ali, D. F., Patil, A., & Nordin, M. S. (2012). Visualization skills in engineering 
education: Issues, developments, and enhancement. In A. Patil, H. Eijkman, & 
E. Bhattacharyya (Eds.), New media communication skills for engineers and IT 
professionals: Trans-national and trans-cultural demands (pp. 175–203). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0243-4.ch011
178

Related References
Aljawarneh, S. (2013). Cloud security engineering: Avoiding security threats 
the right way. In S. Aljawarneh (Ed.), Cloud computing advancements in design, 
implementation, and technologies (pp. 147–153). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1879-4.ch010
Alkhatib, G. (2012). Models for capitalizing on web engineering advancements: 
Trends and discoveries. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0023-2
Allee, T., Handorf, A., & Li, W. (2010). Electrospinning: Development and biomedical 
applications. In A. Shukla & R. Tiwari (Eds.), Intelligent medical technologies and 
biomedical engineering: Tools and applications (pp. 48–78). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61520-977-4.ch003
Alsmadi, I. (2014). Website performance measurement: Process and product metrics. 
In Software design and development: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications 
(pp. 1801–1827). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4301-7.ch086
Altarawneh, H., & El-Shiekh, A. (2010). Web engineering in small Jordanian 
web development firms: An XP based process model. In A. Tatnall (Ed.), Web 
technologies: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 1696–1707). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-982-3.ch091
Altarawneh, H., Alamaro, S., & El Sheikh, A. (2012). Web engineering and business 
intelligence: Agile web engineering development and practice. In A. Rahman El 
Sheikh & M. Alnoukari (Eds.), Business intelligence and agile methodologies for 
knowledge-based organizations: Cross-disciplinary applications (pp. 313–344). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61350-050-7.ch015
Alzoabi, Z. (2014). Agile software: Body of knowledge. In Software design and 
development: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 96–116). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4301-7.ch006
Andrade-Campos, A. (2013). Development of an optimization framework for 
parameter identification and shape optimization problems in engineering. In J. Davim 
(Ed.), Dynamic methods and process advancements in mechanical, manufacturing, 
and materials engineering (pp. 1–24). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-1867-1.ch001
Andreatos, A. (2012). Educating the 21st century’s engineers and IT professionals. 
In A. Patil, H. Eijkman, & E. Bhattacharyya (Eds.), New media communication 
skills for engineers and IT professionals: Trans-national and trans-cultural demands 
(pp. 132–159). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0243-4.ch009
179
www.ebook3000.com

Related References
Annamalai, C., & Ramayah, T. (2013). Reengineering for enterprise resource 
planning (ERP) systems implementation: An empirical analysis of assessing critical 
success factors (CSFs) of manufacturing organizations. In Industrial engineering: 
Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 791-806). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1945-6.ch044
Antchev, M. (2010). Other applications of converters and systems of converters. In 
Technologies for electrical power conversion, efficiency, and distribution: Methods 
and processes (pp. 270–299). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61520-
647-6.ch011
Anzelotti, G., & Valizadeh, M. (2010). Purpose-oriented small software: A case 
study for some engineering subjects. In R. Luppicini & A. Haghi (Eds.), Cases 
on digital technologies in higher education: Issues and challenges (pp. 164–178). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61520-869-2.ch012
Anzelotti, G., & Valizadeh, M. (2010). Sights inside the virtual engineering education. 
In D. Russell & A. Haghi (Eds.), Web-based engineering education: Critical design 
and effective tools (pp. 160–174). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
61520-659-9.ch012
Asadi, M., Mohabbati, B., Gaševic, D., Bagheri, E., & Hatala, M. (2012). Developing 
semantically-enabled families of method-oriented architectures. International 
Journal of Information System Modeling and Design, 3(4), 1–26. doi:10.4018/
jismd.2012100101
Augusti, G., & Feyo de Azevedo, S. (2011). Qualification frameworks and field-
specific approaches to quality assurance: Initiatives in engineering and technical 
education. International Journal of Quality Assurance in Engineering and Technology 
Education, 1(1), 44–57. doi:10.4018/ijqaete.2011010104
Aung, Z., & Nyunt, K. K. (2014). Constructive knowledge management model and 
information retrieval methods for software engineering. In Software design and 
development: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 253–269). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4301-7.ch014
Azad, A. K., Auer, M. E., & Harward, V. (2012). Internet accessible remote 
laboratories: Scalable e-learning tools for engineering and science disciplines. 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61350-186-3
Azar, A. T. (2013). Overview of biomedical engineering. In Bioinformatics: 
Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 1-28). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-3604-0.ch001
180

Related References
Badr, K. B., Badr, A. B., & Ahmad, M. N. (2013). Phases in ontology building 
methodologies: A recent review. In M. Nazir Ahmad, R. Colomb, & M. Abdullah 
(Eds.), Ontology-based applications for enterprise systems and knowledge 
management (pp. 100–123). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
1993-7.ch006
Baer, W., & Renfro, C. (2013). Information sources and collection planning for 
engineering. In S. Holder (Ed.), Library collection development for professional 
programs: Trends and best practices (pp. 128–144). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1897-8.ch008
Baghdadi, Y., & Kraiem, N. (2014). Business process modeling with services: 
reverse engineering databases. In R. Perez-Castillo & M. Piattini (Eds.), Uncovering 
essential software artifacts through business process archeology (pp. 177–200). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4667-4.ch007
Bakopoulou, A., Leyhausen, G., Geurtsen, W., & Koidis, P. (2013). Dental tissue 
engineering research and translational approaches towards clinical application. In 
A. Daskalaki (Ed.), Medical advancements in aging and regenerative technologies: 
Clinical tools and applications (pp. 279–312). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2506-8.ch013
Baporikar, N. (2012). Developing right graduate attributes through project-based 
teaching. In M. Rasul (Ed.), Developments in engineering education standards: 
Advanced curriculum innovations (pp. 64–79). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0951-8.ch004
Baraldi, E., & Nadin, G. (2012). “Network process re-engineering” in a home textile 
network: The importance of business relationships and actor bonds. In T. Choi (Ed.), 
Fashion supply chain management: Industry and business analysis (pp. 212–234). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-756-2.ch012
Barbu, M. C., Hasener, J., & Bernardy, G. (2014). Modern testing of wood-based 
panels, process control, and modeling. In A. Aguilera & J. Davim (Eds.), Research 
developments in wood engineering and technology (pp. 90–130). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4554-7.ch003
Bas, T. G. (2013). Dual market(ing) in “bio-engineering high technology” new 
products: The risk of uncertainty and failure. International Journal of Measurement 
Technologies and Instrumentation Engineering, 3(2), 63–74. doi:10.4018/
ijmtie.2013040104
181
www.ebook3000.com

Related References
Bedi, P., Gandotra, V., & Singhal, A. (2014). Innovative strategies for secure software 
development. In Software design and development: Concepts, methodologies, tools, 
and applications (pp. 2099–2119). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-4301-7.ch097
Bellatreche, L. (2010). Data warehousing design and advanced engineering 
applications: Methods for complex construction. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-756-0
Bhattacharyya, S., & Dutta, P. (2013). Handbook of research on computational 
intelligence for engineering, science, and business (Vols. 1–2). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2518-1
Blicblau, A. S., & Richards, D. (2012). Development of “real world” project skills 
for engineering students. International Journal of Quality Assurance in Engineering 
and Technology Education, 2(1), 1–13. doi:10.4018/ijqaete.2012010101
Boci, E. S., Sarkani, S., & Mazzuchi, T. A. (2013). Development of a complex 
geospatial/RF design model in support of service volume engineering design. 
In M. Bartolacci & S. Powell (Eds.), Advancements and innovations in wireless 
communications and network technologies (pp. 56–67). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2154-1.ch005
Boudreaux, A., & Primeaux, B. (2014). Modular game engine design. In Software 
design and development: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 
1179–1199). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4301-7.ch058
Boudriga, N., & Hamdi, M. (2014). Security engineering techniques and solutions 
for information systems: Management and implementation. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-61520-803-6
Brad, S. (2010). Competitive design of web-based courses in engineering education. 
In D. Russell & A. Haghi (Eds.), Web-based engineering education: Critical design 
and effective tools (pp. 119–148). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
61520-659-9.ch010
Brad, S. (2010). Designing effective web-based courses in engineering. In R. 
Luppicini & A. Haghi (Eds.), Cases on digital technologies in higher education: 
Issues and challenges (pp. 217–240). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-61520-869-2.ch016
182

Related References
Bradford, M., Gingras, R., & Hornby, J. (2010). Business process reengineering and 
ERP: Weapons for the global organization. In K. St.Amant (Ed.), IT outsourcing: 
Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 211–228). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-770-6.ch012
Brennan, R. W., Hugo, R., & Rosehart, W. D. (2012). CDIO as an enabler for graduate 
attributes assessment: A Canadian case study. International Journal of Quality 
Assurance in Engineering and Technology Education, 2(2), 45–54. doi:10.4018/
ijqaete.2012040105
Burnett, M. (2012). End-user software engineering and why it matters. In A. Dwivedi 
& S. Clarke (Eds.), End-user computing, development, and software engineering: 
New challenges (pp. 185–201). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
0140-6.ch009
Burns, G. U., & Chisohlm, C. (2011). Engineering professional development related 
to sustainability of quality. International Journal of Quality Assurance in Engineering 
and Technology Education, 1(1), 15–29. doi:10.4018/ijqaete.2011010102
Byrne, D., Kelly, L., & Jones, G. J. (2014). Multiple multimodal mobile devices: 
Lessons learned from engineering lifelong solutions. In Software design and 
development: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 2014–2032). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4301-7.ch093
Cervera, M., Albert, M., Torres, V., & Pelechano, V. (2012). A model-driven 
approach for the design and implementation of software development methods. 
International Journal of Information System Modeling and Design, 3(4), 86–103. 
doi:10.4018/jismd.2012100105
Chang, L., Levy, M., & Powell, P. (2011). Small firm process re-engineering success. 
In M. Tavana (Ed.), Managing adaptability, intervention, and people in enterprise 
information systems (pp. 138–155). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
60960-529-2.ch007
Chinyemba, F. (2011). Mobility of engineering and technology professionals and 
its impact on the quality of engineering and technology education: The case of 
Chinhoyi University of Technology, Zimbabwe. International Journal of Quality 
Assurance in Engineering and Technology Education, 1(2), 35–49. doi:10.4018/
ijqaete.2011070104
183
www.ebook3000.com

Related References
Chiong, R. (2010). Nature-inspired informatics for intelligent applications and 
knowledge discovery: Implications in business, science, and engineering. Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-705-8
Chiprianov, V., Kermarrec, Y., & Rouvrais, S. (2014). Integrating DSLs into a 
software engineering process: Application to collaborative construction of telecom 
services. In Software design and development: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and 
applications (pp. 570–595). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
4301-7.ch028
Chis, M. (2010). Introduction: A survey of the evolutionary computation techniques 
for software engineering. In M. Chis (Ed.), Evolutionary computation and optimization 
algorithms in software engineering: Applications and techniques (pp. 1–12). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61520-809-8.ch001
Chiu, D. K. (2013). Mobile and web innovations in systems and service-oriented 
engineering. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2470-2
Chu, P. K., & Wu, S. (2012). Biomaterials. In Z. Abu-Faraj (Ed.), Handbook of 
research on biomedical engineering education and advanced bioengineering 
learning: Interdisciplinary concepts (pp. 238–283). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0122-2.ch006
Cimellaro, G. P. (2013). Optimal placement of controller for seismic structures. 
In N. Lagaros, V. Plevris, & C. Mitropoulou (Eds.), Design optimization of active 
and passive structural control systems (pp. 1–33). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2029-2.ch001
Clark, R., & Andrews, J. (2012). Engineering the future. In M. Rasul (Ed.), 
Developments in engineering education standards: Advanced curriculum innovations 
(pp. 143–155). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0951-8.ch008
Clark, T., & Willans, J. (2013). Software language engineering with XMF and 
XModeler. In M. Mernik (Ed.), Formal and practical aspects of domain-specific 
languages: Recent developments (pp. 311–340). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2092-6.ch011
Coll, R. K., & Zegwaard, K. E. (2012). Enculturation into engineering professional 
practice: Using legitimate peripheral participation to develop communication skills 
in engineering students. In A. Patil, H. Eijkman, & E. Bhattacharyya (Eds.), New 
media communication skills for engineers and IT professionals: Trans-national and 
trans-cultural demands (pp. 22–33). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-0243-4.ch003
184

Related References
Coll, R. K., & Zegwaard, K. E. (2012). Enculturation into engineering professional 
practice: Using legitimate peripheral participation to develop communication skills 
in engineering students. In A. Patil, H. Eijkman, & E. Bhattacharyya (Eds.), New 
media communication skills for engineers and IT professionals: Trans-national and 
trans-cultural demands (pp. 22–33). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-0243-4.ch003
Colomb, R. M. (2013). Representation of action is a primary requirement in 
ontologies for interoperating information systems. In M. Nazir Ahmad, R. Colomb, 
& M. Abdullah (Eds.), Ontology-based applications for enterprise systems and 
knowledge management (pp. 68–76). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-1993-7.ch004
Cooklev, T. (2013). The role of standards in engineering education. In K. Jakobs 
(Ed.), Innovations in organizational IT specification and standards development 
(pp. 129–137). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2160-2.ch007
Costa, L., Loughran, N., & Grønmo, R. (2014). Model-driven engineering, services 
and interactive real-time applications. In Software design and development: Concepts, 
methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 178–202). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4301-7.ch010
Dai, Y., Chakraborty, B., & Shi, M. (2011). Kansei engineering and soft computing: 
Theory and practice. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61692-797-4
Daud, M. F., Taib, J. M., & Shariffudin, R. S. (2012). Assessing mechanical 
engineering undergraduates’ conceptual knowledge in three dimensional computer 
aided design (3D CAD). In K. Yusof, N. Azli, A. Kosnin, S. Yusof, & Y. Yusof 
(Eds.), Outcome-based science, technology, engineering, and mathematics education: 
Innovative practices (pp. 350–363). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-1809-1.ch017
Daugherty, A., Hires, W. E., & Braunstein, S. G. (2013). Collection development 
for the college of engineering at Louisiana State University libraries: Liaison 
responsibilities and duties. In S. Holder (Ed.), Library collection development for 
professional programs: Trends and best practices (pp. 291–305). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1897-8.ch017
Davim, J. (2013). Dynamic methods and process advancements in mechanical, 
manufacturing, and materials engineering. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-1867-1
185
www.ebook3000.com

Related References
de Vere, I., & Melles, G. (2013). Integrating ‘designerly’ ways with engineering 
science: A catalyst for change within product design and development. In Industrial 
engineering: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 56-78). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1945-6.ch005
del Sagrado Martinez, J., & del Aguila Cano, I. M. (2010). A Bayesian network for 
predicting the need for a requirements review. In F. Meziane & S. Vadera (Eds.), 
Artificial intelligence applications for improved software engineering development: 
New prospects (pp. 106–128). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-
758-4.ch006
Dhar-Bhattacharjee, S., & Takruri-Rizk, H. (2012). An Indo-British comparison. In 
C. Romm Livermore (Ed.), Gender and social computing: Interactions, differences 
and relationships (pp. 50–71). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-
759-3.ch004
Díaz, V. G., Lovelle, J. M., García-Bustelo, B. C., & Martinez, O. S. (2014). 
Advances and applications in model-driven engineering. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4494-6
Dogru, A. H., & Biçer, V. (2011). Modern software engineering concepts and 
practices: Advanced approaches. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
60960-215-4
Dogru, A., Senkul, P., & Kaya, O. (2012). Modern approaches to software engineering 
in the compositional era. In Machine learning: Concepts, methodologies, tools and 
applications (pp. 1903–1923). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-
818-7.ch803
Doll, W. J., & Deng, X. (2013). Antecedents of improvisation in IT-enabled 
engineering work. In A. Dwivedi & S. Clarke (Eds.), Innovative strategies and 
approaches for end-user computing advancements (pp. 242–264). Hershey, PA: 
IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2059-9.ch013
Dominguez, U., & Magdaleno, J. (2011). Industrial training in engineering education 
in Spain. In P. Keleher, A. Patil, & R. Harreveld (Eds.), Work-integrated learning 
in engineering, built environment and technology: Diversity of practice in practice 
(pp. 72–84). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-547-6.ch004
186

Related References
Dormido, S., Vargas, H., & Sánchez, J. (2013). AutomatL@bs consortium: A 
Spanish network of web-based labs for control engineering education. In Industrial 
engineering: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 679–699). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1945-6.ch039
Dyro, J. F. (2012). Clinical engineering. In Z. Abu-Faraj (Ed.), Handbook of research 
on biomedical engineering education and advanced bioengineering learning: 
Interdisciplinary concepts (pp. 521–576). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-0122-2.ch012
Easton, J. M., Davies, J. R., & Roberts, C. (2011). Ontology engineering the “what’s”, 
“why’s”, and “how’s” of data exchange. International Journal of Decision Support 
System Technology, 3(1), 40–53. doi:10.4018/jdsst.2011010103
Eijkman, H., & Kayali, O. (2011). Addressing the politics of accreditation in 
engineering education: The benefits of soft systems thinking. International Journal 
of Quality Assurance in Engineering and Technology Education, 1(2), 1–10. 
doi:10.4018/ijqaete.2011070101
El-Khalili, N. H. (2013). Teaching agile software engineering using problem-based 
learning. International Journal of Information and Communication Technology 
Education, 9(3), 1–12. doi:10.4018/jicte.2013070101
Favre, L. M. (2010). MDA-based object-oriented reverse engineering. In L. 
Favre (Ed.), Model driven architecture for reverse engineering technologies: 
Strategic directions and system evolution (pp. 199–229). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-61520-649-0.ch010
Favre, L. M. (2010). Reverse engineering and MDA: An introduction. In L. Favre 
(Ed.), Model driven architecture for reverse engineering technologies: Strategic 
directions and system evolution (pp. 1–14). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-61520-649-0.ch001
Fenton, N., Hearty, P., Neil, M., & Radlinski, L. (2010). Software project and quality 
modelling using Bayesian networks. In F. Meziane & S. Vadera (Eds.), Artificial 
intelligence applications for improved software engineering development: New 
prospects (pp. 1–25). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-758-4.
ch001
187
www.ebook3000.com

Related References
Ferreira da Silva Oliveira, M., Wehrmeister, M. A., Assis do Nascimento, F., & 
Pereira, C. E. (2010). High-level design space exploration of embedded systems 
using the model-driven engineering and aspect-oriented design approaches. In L. 
Gomes & J. Fernandes (Eds.), Behavioral modeling for embedded systems and 
technologies: Applications for design and implementation (pp. 114–146). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-750-8.ch005
Ferreira, R., Brisolara, L., Mattos, J. C., Spech, E., & Cota, E. (2010). Engineering 
embedded software: From application modeling to software synthesis. In L. Gomes 
& J. Fernandes (Eds.), Behavioral modeling for embedded systems and technologies: 
Applications for design and implementation (pp. 245–270). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-750-8.ch010
Ferris, T. L. (2013). Engineering design as research. In Industrial engineering: 
Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 1766–1779). Hershey, PA: 
IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1945-6.ch094
Frank, M. (2010). Capacity for engineering systems thinking (CEST): Literature 
review, principles for assessing and the reliability and validity of an assessing tool. 
In M. Hunter (Ed.), Strategic information systems: Concepts, methodologies, tools, 
and applications (pp. 1171–1183). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
60566-677-8.ch076
Fraser, D. (2012). A case study of curriculum development in engineering: Insights 
gained over two decades. In K. Yusof, N. Azli, A. Kosnin, S. Yusof, & Y. Yusof 
(Eds.), Outcome-based science, technology, engineering, and mathematics education: 
Innovative practices (pp. 27–49). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-1809-1.ch002
Fraser, D. (2012). Curriculum initiatives to help engineering students learn and 
develop. In K. Yusof, N. Azli, A. Kosnin, S. Yusof, & Y. Yusof (Eds.), Outcome-based 
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics education: Innovative practices 
(pp. 85–106). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1809-1.ch005
Fries, T. P. (2014). Reengineering structured legacy system documentation to 
UML object-oriented artifacts. In Software design and development: Concepts, 
methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 749–771). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4301-7.ch036
188

Related References
Funabashi, M. (2014). Transdisciplinary science and technology and service 
systems. In M. Kosaka & K. Shirahada (Eds.), Progressive trends in knowledge 
and system-based science for service innovation (pp. 101–127). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4663-6.ch006
Gaetano, L., Puppato, D., & Balestra, G. (2012). Modeling clinical engineering 
activities to support healthcare technology management. In A. Kolker & P. Story 
(Eds.), Management engineering for effective healthcare delivery: Principles and 
applications (pp. 113–131). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-
872-9.ch005
Galvão, T. A., Neto, F., & Bonates, M. F. (2013). eRiskGame: A persistent browser-
based game for supporting project-based learning in the risk management context. 
In Industrial engineering: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 
1243-1259). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1945-6.ch067
Garousi, V., Shahnewaz, S., & Krishnamurthy, D. (2013). UML-driven software 
performance engineering: A systematic mapping and trend analysis. In V. Díaz, J. 
Lovelle, B. García-Bustelo, & O. Martínez (Eds.), Progressions and innovations 
in model-driven software engineering (pp. 18–64). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4217-1.ch002
Ge, W., Yang, N., Wang, W., & Li, J. (2011). Interfacial interactions: Drag. In S. 
Pannala, M. Syamlal, & T. O’Brien (Eds.), Computational gas-solids flows and 
reacting systems: Theory, methods and practice (pp. 128–177). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61520-651-3.ch004
Génova, G., Llorens, J., & Morato, J. (2014). Software engineering research: The 
need to strengthen and broaden the classical scientific method. In Software design 
and development: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 1639–1658). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4301-7.ch079
Genvigir, E. C., & Vijaykumar, N. L. (2010). Requirements traceability. In M. 
Ramachandran & R. de Carvalho (Eds.), Handbook of research on software 
engineering and productivity technologies: Implications of globalization (pp. 
102–120). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-731-7.ch008
Ghosh, S. (2010). Online automated essay grading system as a web based learning 
(WBL) tool in engineering education. In D. Russell & A. Haghi (Eds.), Web-based 
engineering education: Critical design and effective tools (pp. 53–62). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61520-659-9.ch005
189
www.ebook3000.com

Related References
Gill, A. Q., & Bunker, D. (2013). SaaS requirements engineering for agile development. 
In X. Wang, N. Ali, I. Ramos, & R. Vidgen (Eds.), Agile and lean service-oriented 
development: Foundations, theory, and practice (pp. 64–93). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2503-7.ch004
Giraldo, F. D., Villegas, M. L., & Collazos, C. A. (2014). The use of HCI approaches 
into distributed CSCL activities applied to software engineering courses. In Software 
design and development: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 
2033–2050). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4301-7.ch094
Girardi, R., & Leite, A. (2011). Knowledge engineering support for agent-oriented 
software reuse. In M. Ramachandran (Ed.), Knowledge engineering for software 
development life cycles: Support technologies and applications (pp. 177–195). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-509-4.ch010
Goodhew, P. (2013). Why get your engineering programme accredited? In Industrial 
engineering: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 18–20). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1945-6.ch002
Goossenaerts, J., Possel-Dölken, F., & Popplewell, K. (2011). Vision, trends, gaps 
and a broad roadmap for future engineering. In IRMA (Ed.), Global business: 
Concepts, methodologies, tools and applications (pp. 2229-2243). Hershey, PA: 
IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-587-2.ch802
Goyal, S. B., & Prakash, N. (2013). Functional method engineering. International 
Journal of Information System Modeling and Design, 4(1), 79–103. doi:10.4018/
jismd.2013010104
Gunasekaran, A., & Shea, T. (2010). Requirements management for ERP projects. 
In Organizational advancements through enterprise information systems: 
Emerging applications and developments (pp. 29–45). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-968-7.ch003
Gustavsson, I., Claesson, L., Nilsson, K., Zackrisson, J., Zubia, J. G., & Jayo, U. H. 
… Claesson, I. (2012). The VISIR open lab platform. In A. Azad, M. Auer, & V. 
Harward (Eds.) Internet accessible remote laboratories: Scalable e-learning tools 
for engineering and science disciplines (pp. 294-317). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-61350-186-3.ch015
Habib, M. K., & Davim, J. (2013). Engineering creative design in robotics and 
mechatronics. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4225-6
190

Related References
Haghi, A. K. (2013). Methodologies and applications for chemoinformatics and 
chemical engineering. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4010-8
Haghi, A. K., & Noroozi, B. (2010). Adapting engineering education to the new 
century. In D. Russell & A. Haghi (Eds.), Web-based engineering education: Critical 
design and effective tools (pp. 30–41). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-61520-659-9.ch003
Haghpanahi, M., Nikkhoo, M., & Peirovi, H. A. (2010). Computer aided tissue 
engineering from modeling to manufacturing. In A. Lazakidou (Ed.), Biocomputation 
and biomedical informatics: Case studies and applications (pp. 75–88). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-768-3.ch004
Hepsø, I. L., Rindal, A., & Waldal, K. (2013). The introduction of a hand-held 
platform in an engineering and fabrication company. In T. Rosendahl & V. Hepsø 
(Eds.), Integrated operations in the oil and gas industry: Sustainability and capability 
development (pp. 246–260). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
2002-5.ch015
Hernández-López, A., Colomo-Palacios, R., García-Crespo, Á., & Cabezas-Isla, 
F. (2013). Software engineering productivity: Concepts, issues and challenges. In 
J. Wang (Ed.), Perspectives and techniques for improving information technology 
project management (pp. 69–79). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-2800-7.ch006
Herrmann, A., & Morali, A. (2012). Interplay of security requirements engineering 
and reverse engineering in the maintenance of undocumented software. In J. Rech 
& C. Bunse (Eds.), Emerging technologies for the evolution and maintenance of 
software models (pp. 57–91). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61350-
438-3.ch003
Hochrainer, M., & Ziegler, F. (2013). Tuned liquid column gas damper in structural 
control: The salient features of a general purpose damping device and its application 
in buildings, bridges, and dams. In N. Lagaros, V. Plevris, & C. Mitropoulou (Eds.), 
Design optimization of active and passive structural control systems (pp. 150–179). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2029-2.ch007
Hochstein, L., Schott, B., & Graybill, R. B. (2013). Computational engineering in 
the cloud: Benefits and challenges. In A. Dwivedi & S. Clarke (Eds.), Innovative 
strategies and approaches for end-user computing advancements (pp. 314–332). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2059-9.ch017
191
www.ebook3000.com

Related References
Höhn, S., Lowis, L., Jürjens, J., & Accorsi, R. (2010). Identification of vulnerabilities 
in web services using model-based security. In C. Gutiérrez, E. Fernández-Medina, & 
M. Piattini (Eds.), Web services security development and architecture: Theoretical 
and practical issues (pp. 1–32). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-
950-2.ch001
Holton, D. L., & Verma, A. (2010). Designing animated simulations and web-based 
assessments to improve electrical engineering education. In D. Russell & A. Haghi 
(Eds.), Web-based engineering education: Critical design and effective tools (pp. 
77–95). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61520-659-9.ch007
Honnutagi, A. R., Sonar, R., & Babu, S. (2012). Quality accreditation system for 
Indian engineering education using knowledge management and system dynamics. 
International Journal of Quality Assurance in Engineering and Technology Education, 
2(3), 47–61. doi:10.4018/ijqaete.2012070105
Hua, G. B. (2013). Business process re-engineering. In Implementing IT business 
strategy in the construction industry (pp. 118–140). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4185-3.ch006
Hussein, B., Hage-Diab, A., Hammoud, M., Kawtharani, A., El-Hage, H., & Haj-
Ali, A. (2014). Management response to improve the educational performance of 
engineering students: The case of the lebanese international university. In G. Khoury 
& M. Khoury (Eds.), Cases on management and organizational behavior in an Arab 
context (pp. 91–110). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-5067-1.
ch006
Hussey, M., Wu, B., & Xu, X. (2011). Co-operation models for industries and 
software education institutions. In Software industry-oriented education practices 
and curriculum development: Experiences and lessons (pp. 39–56). Hershey, PA: 
IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-797-5.ch003
Hussey, M., Wu, B., & Xu, X. (2011). Curriculum issues in industry oriented 
software engineering education. In Software industry-oriented education practices 
and curriculum development: Experiences and lessons (pp. 153–165). Hershey, PA: 
IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-797-5.ch010
Hussey, M., Wu, B., & Xu, X. (2011). Industry oriented curriculum and syllabus 
creation for software engineering series courses in the school of software. In Software 
industry-oriented education practices and curriculum development: Experiences 
and lessons (pp. 98–109). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-
797-5.ch006
192

Related References
Ilyas, Q. M. (2013). Ontology augmented software engineering. In K. Buragga & 
N. Zaman (Eds.), Software development techniques for constructive information 
systems design (pp. 406–413). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
3679-8.ch023
Islam, S., Mouratidis, H., Kalloniatis, C., Hudic, A., & Zechner, L. (2013). Model 
based process to support security and privacy requirements engineering. International 
Journal of Secure Software Engineering, 3(3), 1–22. doi:10.4018/jsse.2012070101
Jahan, K., Everett, J. W., Tang, G., Farrell, S., Zhang, H., Wenger, A., & Noori, M. 
(2010). Use of living systems to teach basic engineering concepts. In D. Russell & 
A. Haghi (Eds.), Web-based engineering education: Critical design and effective 
tools (pp. 96–107). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61520-659-9.ch008
Jakovljevic, M. (2013). A conceptual model of creativity, invention, and innovation 
(MCII) for entrepreneurial engineers. In S. Buckley & M. Jakovljevic (Eds.), 
Knowledge management innovations for interdisciplinary education: Organizational 
applications (pp. 66–87). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1969-
2.ch004
Jaroucheh, Z., Liu, X., & Smith, S. (2014). A software engineering framework for 
context-aware service-based processes in pervasive environments. In Software design 
and development: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 71–95). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4301-7.ch005
Joiner, R., Iacovides, I., Darling, J., Diament, A., Drew, B., Duddley, J., & Gavin, 
C. et al. (2013). Racing academy: A case study of a digital game for supporting 
students learning of physics and engineering. In Y. Baek & N. Whitton (Eds.), Cases 
on digital game-based learning: Methods, models, and strategies (pp. 509–523). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2848-9.ch026
Jordan, M. E. (2014). Interweaving the digital and physical worlds in collaborative 
project-based learning experiences. In D. Loveless, B. Griffith, M. Bérci, E. Ortlieb, 
& P. Sullivan (Eds.), Academic knowledge construction and multimodal curriculum 
development (pp. 265–282). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
4797-8.ch017
Juang, Y. (2010). WIRE: A highly interactive blended learning for engineering 
education. In D. Russell & A. Haghi (Eds.), Web-based engineering education: 
Critical design and effective tools (pp. 149–159). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-61520-659-9.ch011
193
www.ebook3000.com

Related References
Kadry, S. (2013). Diagnostics and prognostics of engineering systems: Methods and 
techniques. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2095-7
Kamboj, A., Kumar, S., & Singh, H. (2012). Design and development of hybrid 
stir casting process. International Journal of Applied Industrial Engineering, 1(2), 
1–6. doi:10.4018/ijaie.2012070101
Kamthan, P. (2010). A methodology for integrating the social web environment in 
software engineering education. In S. Dasgupta (Ed.), Social computing: Concepts, 
methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 457–471). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-984-7.ch031
Kamthan, P. (2010). A social web perspective of software engineering education. In 
S. Murugesan (Ed.), Handbook of research on web 2.0, 3.0, and X.0: Technologies, 
business, and social applications (pp. 472–495). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-384-5.ch026
Kamthan, P. (2010). On the prospects and concerns of pattern-oriented web 
engineering. In G. Alkhatib & D. Rine (Eds.), Web engineering advancements and 
trends: Building new dimensions of information technology (pp. 97–128). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-719-5.ch006
Kamthan, P. (2011). Using the social web environment for software engineering 
education. In L. Tomei (Ed.), Online courses and ICT in education: Emerging 
practices and applications (pp. 23–45). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-60960-150-8.ch003
Kamthan, P. (2013). An exploration of the social web environment for collaborative 
software engineering education. In N. Karacapilidis, M. Raisinghani, & E. Ng (Eds.), 
Web-based and blended educational tools and innovations (pp. 1–23). Hershey, PA: 
IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2023-0.ch001
Kapos, G., Dalakas, V., Nikolaidou, M., & Anagnostopoulos, D. (2014). An integrated 
framework to simulate SysML models using DEVS simulators. In P. Fonseca i Casas 
(Ed.), Formal languages for computer simulation: Transdisciplinary models and 
applications (pp. 305–332). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
4369-7.ch010
Karlsson, F., & Ågerfalk, P. J. (2011). Towards structured flexibility in information 
systems development: Devising a method for method configuration. In K. Siau (Ed.), 
Theoretical and practical advances in information systems development: Emerging 
trends and approaches (pp. 214–238). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-60960-521-6.ch010
194

Related References
Karpati, P., Sindre, G., & Matulevicius, R. (2012). Comparing misuse case and mal-
activity diagrams for modelling social engineering attacks. International Journal of 
Secure Software Engineering, 3(2), 54–73. doi:10.4018/jsse.2012040103
Keleher, P., & Patil, A. (2012). Conducting an effective residential school for an 
undergraduate materials science and engineering course. International Journal 
of Quality Assurance in Engineering and Technology Education, 2(3), 41–46. 
doi:10.4018/ijqaete.2012070104
Ker, H. W. (2012). Engineering education and attitudes toward mathematics: A 
comparative study. International Journal of Quality Assurance in Engineering and 
Technology Education, 2(1), 63–76. doi:10.4018/ijqaete.2012010105
Kinsner, W. (2012). Challenges in the design of adoptive, intelligent and cognitive 
systems. In Y. Wang (Ed.), Software and intelligent sciences: New transdisciplinary 
findings (pp. 47–67). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0261-8.ch004
Kirikova, M. (2011). Domain modeling approaches in IS engineering. In J. Osis 
& E. Asnina (Eds.), Model-driven domain analysis and software development: 
Architectures and functions (pp. 388–406). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-61692-874-2.ch018
Kljajic, M., & Farr, J. V. (2010). Importance of systems engineering in the development 
of information systems. In D. Paradice (Ed.), Emerging systems approaches in 
information technologies: Concepts, theories, and applications (pp. 51–66). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-976-2.ch004
Kljajic, M., & Farr, J. V. (2010). The role of systems engineering in the development 
of information systems. In M. Hunter (Ed.), Strategic information systems: Concepts, 
methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 369–381). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-677-8.ch026
Knoell, H. D. (2010). User participation in the quality assurance of requirements 
specifications: An evaluation of traditional models and animated systems 
engineering techniques. In M. Hunter (Ed.), Strategic information systems: Concepts, 
methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 1623–1638). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-677-8.ch106
Kof, L. (2010). From textual scenarios to message sequence charts. In F. Meziane 
& S. Vadera (Eds.), Artificial intelligence applications for improved software 
engineering development: New prospects (pp. 83–105). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-758-4.ch005
195
www.ebook3000.com

Related References
Köhler, B., Gluchow, M., & Brügge, B. (2014). Teaching basic software engineering 
to senior high school students. In K-12 education: Concepts, methodologies, tools, 
and applications (pp. 1634–1649). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-4502-8.ch094
Kolker, A. (2012). Efficient managerial decision-making in healthcare settings: 
Examples and fundamental principles. In A. Kolker & P. Story (Eds.), Management 
engineering for effective healthcare delivery: Principles and applications (pp. 1–45). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-872-9.ch001
Kolker, A., & Story, P. (2012). Management engineering for effective healthcare 
delivery: Principles and applications. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-60960-872-9
Kornyshova, E., Deneckère, R., & Claudepierre, B. (2013). Towards method 
component contextualization. In J. Krogstie (Ed.), Frameworks for developing 
efficient information systems: Models, theory, and practice (pp. 337–368). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4161-7.ch015
Krishnan, S. (2012). Problem-based learning curricula in engineering. In M. Rasul 
(Ed.), Developments in engineering education standards: Advanced curriculum 
innovations (pp. 23–40). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0951-
8.ch002
Ku, H., & Thonglek, S. (2011). Running a successful practice school: Challenges 
and lessons learned. In P. Keleher, A. Patil, & R. Harreveld (Eds.), Work-integrated 
learning in engineering, built environment and technology: Diversity of practice in 
practice (pp. 131–163). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-547-6.
ch007
Lacuesta, R., Fernández-Sanz, L., & Romay, M. D. (2014). Requirements specification 
as basis for mobile software quality assurance. In Software design and development: 
Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 719–732). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4301-7.ch034
Lai, A., Zhang, C., & Busovaca, S. (2013). 2-SQUARE: A web-based enhancement 
of SQUARE privacy and security requirements engineering. International Journal 
of Software Innovation, 1(1), 41–53. doi:10.4018/ijsi.2013010104
Lane, J. A., Petkov, D., & Mora, M. (2010). Software engineering and the systems 
approach: A conversation with Barry Boehm. In M. Hunter (Ed.), Strategic information 
systems: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 333–337). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-677-8.ch024
196

Related References
Lansiquot, R. D. (2013). Cases on interdisciplinary research trends in science, 
technology, engineering, and mathematics: Studies on urban classrooms. Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2214-2
Laribi, S., Le Bris, A., Huang, L. M., Olsson, P., & Guillemoles, J. F. (2013). 
Phononic engineering for hot carrier solar cells. In L. Fara & M. Yamaguchi (Eds.), 
Advanced solar cell materials, technology, modeling, and simulation (pp. 214–242). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1927-2.ch012
Lee, C. K., & Sidhu, M. S. (2013). Computer-aided engineering education: New 
learning approaches and technologies. In V. Wang (Ed.), Handbook of research on 
teaching and learning in K-20 education (pp. 317–340). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4249-2.ch019
Lee, J., Ma, S., Lee, S., Wu, C., & Lee, C. L. (2014). Towards a high-availability-
driven service composition framework. In Software design and development: 
Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 1498–1520). Hershey, PA: 
IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4301-7.ch073
Leng, J., & Sharrock, W. (2012). Handbook of research on computational science 
and engineering: Theory and practice (Vols. 1–2). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-61350-116-0
Leng, J., Rhyne, T., & Sharrock, W. (2012). Visualization: Future technology and 
practices for computational science and engineering. In J. Leng & W. Sharrock 
(Eds.), Handbook of research on computational science and engineering: Theory 
and practice (pp. 381–413). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61350-
116-0.ch016
Li, Z. J. (2013). Prototyping of robotic systems in surgical procedures and automated 
manufacturing processes. In Industrial engineering: Concepts, methodologies, tools, 
and applications (pp. 1969–1987). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-1945-6.ch106
Lladó, C. M., Bonet, P., & Smith, C. U. (2014). Towards a multi-formalism multi-
solution framework for model-driven performance engineering. In M. Gribaudo & 
M. Iacono (Eds.), Theory and application of multi-formalism modeling (pp. 34–55). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4659-9.ch003
Loo, A. (2013). Distributed computing innovations for business, engineering, and 
science. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2533-4
197
www.ebook3000.com

Related References
Ma, Z. M. (2011). Engineering design knowledge management. In D. Schwartz & 
D. Te’eni (Eds.), Encyclopedia of knowledge management (2nd ed., pp. 263–269). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-59904-931-1.ch025
Maiti, C. K., & Maiti, A. (2013). Teaching technology computer aided design (TCAD) 
online. In Industrial engineering: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications 
(pp. 1043-1063). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1945-6.ch057
Male, S. A. (2012). Generic engineering competencies required by engineers 
graduating in Australia: The competencies of engineering graduates (CEG) project. 
In M. Rasul (Ed.), Developments in engineering education standards: Advanced 
curriculum innovations (pp. 41–63). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-0951-8.ch003
Malmqvist, J. (2012). A comparison of the CDIO and EUR-ACE quality assurance 
systems. International Journal of Quality Assurance in Engineering and Technology 
Education, 2(2), 9–22. doi:10.4018/ijqaete.2012040102
Information Resources Management Association. (2012). Computer engineering: 
Concepts, methodologies, tools and applications (4 Volumes). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61350-456-7
Information Resources Management Association. (2013). Industrial engineering: 
Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (3 Volumes). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1945-6
Maree, D. J., & Maree, M. (2010). Factors contributing to the success of women 
working in science, engineering and technology (SET) careers. In A. Cater-Steel 
& E. Cater (Eds.), Women in engineering, science and technology: Education and 
career challenges (pp. 183–210). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
61520-657-5.ch009
Marichal, G. N., & González, E. J. (2012). Intelligent MAS in system engineering 
and robotics. In Machine learning: Concepts, methodologies, tools and applications 
(pp. 175–182). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-818-7.ch204
Martinez, L., Favre, L., & Pereira, C. (2013). Architecture-driven modernization 
for software reverse engineering technologies. In V. Díaz, J. Lovelle, B. García-
Bustelo, & O. Martínez (Eds.), Progressions and innovations in model-driven 
software engineering (pp. 288–307). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-4217-1.ch012
198

Related References
Matanovic, D. (2014). The macondo 252 disaster: Causes and consequences. In D. 
Matanovic, N. Gaurina-Medjimurec, & K. Simon (Eds.), Risk analysis for prevention 
of hazardous situations in petroleum and natural gas engineering (pp. 115–131). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4777-0.ch006
Matanovic, D., Gaurina-Medjimurec, N., & Simon, K. (2014). Risk analysis for 
prevention of hazardous situations in petroleum and natural gas engineering. 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4777-0
Matsuo, T., & Fujimoto, T. (2012). Analogical thinking based instruction method in 
IT professional education. In R. Colomo-Palacios (Ed.), Professional advancements 
and management trends in the IT sector (pp. 95–108). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0924-2.ch007
Mazo, R., Salinesi, C., Diaz, D., Djebbi, O., & Lora-Michiels, A. (2012). Constraints: 
The heart of domain and application engineering in the product lines engineering 
strategy. International Journal of Information System Modeling and Design, 3(2), 
33–68. doi:10.4018/jismd.2012040102
Mead, N. R. (2010). Benefits and challenges in the use of case studies for security 
requirements engineering methods. International Journal of Secure Software 
Engineering, 1(1), 74–91. doi:10.4018/jsse.2010102005
Méausoone, P., & Aguilera, A. (2014). Inventory of experimental works on cutting 
tools’ life for the wood industry. In A. Aguilera & J. Davim (Eds.), Research 
developments in wood engineering and technology (pp. 320–342). Hershey, PA: 
IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4554-7.ch009
Medlin, B. D., & Cazier, J. (2011). Obtaining patient’s information from hospital 
employees through social engineering techniques: An investigative study. In H. 
Nemati (Ed.), Pervasive information security and privacy developments: Trends 
and advancements (pp. 77–89). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61692-
000-5.ch006
Meziane, F., & Vadera, S. (2010). Artificial intelligence applications for improved 
software engineering development: new prospects. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-758-4
Meziane, F., & Vadera, S. (2012). Artificial intelligence in software engineering: 
Current developments and future prospects. In Machine learning: Concepts, 
methodologies, tools and applications (pp. 1215–1236). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-818-7.ch504
199
www.ebook3000.com

Related References
Milanovic, N. (2011). Engineering reliable service oriented architecture: Managing 
complexity and service level agreements. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-60960-493-6
Miller, W. S., & Summers, J. D. (2013). Tool and information centric design process 
modeling: Three case studies. In Industrial engineering: Concepts, methodologies, 
tools, and applications (pp. 1613–1637). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-1945-6.ch086
Mishra, B., & Shukla, K. K. (2014). Data mining techniques for software quality 
prediction. In Software design and development: Concepts, methodologies, tools, 
and applications (pp. 401–428). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
4301-7.ch021
Mishra, S. (2011). Social and ethical concerns of biomedical engineering research and 
practice. In A. Shukla & R. Tiwari (Eds.), Biomedical engineering and information 
systems: Technologies, tools and applications (pp. 54–80). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-61692-004-3.ch003
Moeller, D. P., & Sitzmann, D. (2012). Online computer engineering: combining 
blended e-learning in engineering with lifelong learning. In M. Rasul (Ed.), 
Developments in engineering education standards: Advanced curriculum innovations 
(pp. 194–215). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0951-8.ch011
Moeller, D. P., & Vakilzadian, H. (2012). Technology-enhanced learning standard 
through integration of modeling and simulation into engineering study programs. 
In M. Rasul (Ed.), Developments in engineering education standards: Advanced 
curriculum innovations (pp. 157–177). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-0951-8.ch009
Mohan Baral, L., Kifor, C. V., Bondrea, I., & Oprean, C. (2012). Introducing 
problem based learning (PBL) in textile engineering education and assessing its 
influence on six sigma project implementation. International Journal of Quality 
Assurance in Engineering and Technology Education, 2(4), 38–48. doi:10.4018/
ijqaete.2012100104
Moore, S., May, D., & Wold, K. (2012). Developing cultural competency in 
engineering through transnational distance learning. In R. Hogan (Ed.), Transnational 
distance learning and building new markets for universities (pp. 210–228). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0206-9.ch013
200

Related References
Mora, M., Gelman, O., Frank, M., Paradice, D. B., & Cervantes, F. (2010). Toward an 
interdisciplinary engineering and management of complex IT-intensive organizational 
systems: A systems view. In D. Paradice (Ed.), Emerging systems approaches in 
information technologies: Concepts, theories, and applications (pp. 1–24). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-976-2.ch001
Mora, M., O’Connor, R., Raisinghani, M. S., Macías-Luévano, J., & Gelman, O. 
(2013). An IT service engineering and management framework (ITS-EMF). In P. 
Ordóñez de Pablos & R. Tennyson (Eds.), Best practices and new perspectives 
in service science and management (pp. 76–91). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-3894-5.ch005
Moser, T., Biffl, S., Sunindyo, W. D., & Winkler, D. (2013). Integrating production 
automation expert knowledge across engineering domains. In N. Bessis (Ed.), 
Development of distributed systems from design to application and maintenance 
(pp. 152–167). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2647-8.ch009
Mouratidis, H. (2011). Software engineering for secure systems: Industrial and 
research perspectives. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61520-837-1
Mourtos, N. J. (2012). Defining, teaching, and assessing engineering design skills. 
International Journal of Quality Assurance in Engineering and Technology Education, 
2(1), 14–30. doi:10.4018/ijqaete.2012010102
Moustafa, A. (2012). Damage assessment of inelastic structures under simulated 
critical earthquakes. In V. Plevris, C. Mitropoulou, & N. Lagaros (Eds.), Structural 
seismic design optimization and earthquake engineering: Formulations and 
applications (pp. 128–151). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
1640-0.ch006
Nasir, M. H., Alias, N. A., Fauzi, S. S., & Massatu, M. H. (2012). Implementation 
of the personal software process in academic settings and current support tools. In S. 
Fauzi, M. Nasir, N. Ramli, & S. Sahibuddin (Eds.), Software process improvement 
and management: Approaches and tools for practical development (pp. 117–148). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61350-141-2.ch007
Nhlabatsi, A., Nuseibeh, B., & Yu, Y. (2012). Security requirements engineering 
for evolving software systems: A survey. In K. Khan (Ed.), Security-aware systems 
applications and software development methods (pp. 108–128). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1580-9.ch007
201
www.ebook3000.com

Related References
Noroozi, B., Valizadeh, M., & Sorial, G. A. (2010). Designing of e-learning for 
engineering education in developing countries: Key issues and success factors. In 
D. Russell & A. Haghi (Eds.), Web-based engineering education: Critical design 
and effective tools (pp. 1–19). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61520-
659-9.ch001
Oh Navarro, E. (2011). On the role of learning theories in furthering software 
engineering education. In Instructional design: Concepts, methodologies, tools 
and applications (pp. 1645–1666). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
60960-503-2.ch709
Onwubiko, C. (2014). Modelling situation awareness information and system 
requirements for the mission using goal-oriented task analysis approach. In Software 
design and development: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 
460–478). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4301-7.ch023
Osis, J., & Asnina, E. (2011). Is modeling a treatment for the weakness of software 
engineering? In J. Osis & E. Asnina (Eds.), Model-driven domain analysis and 
software development: Architectures and functions (pp. 1–14). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61692-874-2.ch001
Othman, R., & Awang, Z. (2012). Using multiple methods in assessing oral 
communication skills in the final year project design course of an undergraduate 
engineering program. In K. Yusof, N. Azli, A. Kosnin, S. Yusof, & Y. Yusof (Eds.), 
Outcome-based science, technology, engineering, and mathematics education: 
Innovative practices (pp. 263–287). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-1809-1.ch013
Ozcelik, Y. (2010). IT-enabled reengineering: Productivity impacts. In K. St.Amant 
(Ed.), IT outsourcing: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 371–376). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-770-6.ch022
Ožvoldová, M., & Schauer, F. (2012). Remote experiments in freshman engineering 
education by integrated e-learning. In A. Azad, M. Auer, & V. Harward (Eds.), 
Internet accessible remote laboratories: Scalable e-learning tools for engineering 
and science disciplines (pp. 60–83). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
61350-186-3.ch004
Paay, J., Pedell, S., Sterling, L., Vetere, F., & Howard, S. (2011). The benefit of 
ambiguity in understanding goals in requirements modelling. International Journal 
of People-Oriented Programming, 1(2), 24–49. doi:10.4018/ijpop.2011070102
202

Related References
Palmer, S., & Holt, D. (2010). Online discussion in engineering education: Student 
responses and learning outcomes. In L. Shedletsky & J. Aitken (Eds.), Cases on 
online discussion and interaction: Experiences and outcomes (pp. 105–122). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61520-863-0.ch005
Pandian, A., Ismail, S. A., & Abdullah, A. S. (2012). Communication framework 
to empower 21st century engineers and IT professionals. In A. Patil, H. Eijkman, 
& E. Bhattacharyya (Eds.), New media communication skills for engineers and IT 
professionals: Trans-national and trans-cultural demands (pp. 34–54). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0243-4.ch004
Pasupathy, K. S. (2010). Systems engineering and health informatics: Context, 
content, and implementation. In S. Kabene (Ed.), Healthcare and the effect of 
technology: Developments, challenges and advancements (pp. 123–144). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61520-733-6.ch009
Pasupathy, K. S. (2010). Transforming healthcare: Leveraging the complementarities 
of health informatics and systems engineering. International Journal of Healthcare 
Delivery Reform Initiatives, 2(2), 35–55. doi:10.4018/jhdri.2010040103
Pasupathy, K. S. (2011). Systems engineering and health informatics. In Clinical 
technologies: Concepts, methodologies, tools and applications (pp. 1684–1705). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-561-2.ch606
Patel, C., & Ramachandran, M. (2010). Story card process improvement framework 
for agile requirements. In M. Ramachandran & R. de Carvalho (Eds.), Handbook 
of research on software engineering and productivity technologies: Implications 
of globalization (pp. 61–54). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-
731-7.ch006
Patro, C. S. (2012). A study on adaptability of total quality management in engineering 
education sector. International Journal of Quality Assurance in Engineering and 
Technology Education, 2(4), 25–37. doi:10.4018/ijqaete.2012100103
Peña de Carrillo, C. I., Choquet, C., Després, C., Iksal, S., Jacoboni, P., & Lekira, A. 
… Thi-Ngoc, D. P. (2014). Engineering and reengineering of technology enhanced 
learning scenarios using context awareness processes. In Software design and 
development: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 1289-1313). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4301-7.ch063
203
www.ebook3000.com

Related References
Peng, F., & Li, H. (2011). A steganalysis method for 2D engineering graphics based 
on the statistic of geometric features. International Journal of Digital Crime and 
Forensics, 3(2), 35–40. doi:10.4018/jdcf.2011040103
Pérez, J. L., Rabuñal, J., & Abella, F. M. (2012). Soft computing techniques in 
civil engineering: Time series prediction. In Computer engineering: Concepts, 
methodologies, tools and applications (pp. 1982–1997). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-61350-456-7.ch811
Pérez-Castillo, R., Rodríguez de Guzmán, I. G., & Piattini, M. (2011). Architecture-
driven modernization. In A. Dogru & V. Biçer (Eds.), Modern software engineering 
concepts and practices: Advanced approaches (pp. 75–103). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-215-4.ch004
Pérez-Castillo, R., Rodríguez de Guzmán, I. G., & Piattini, M. (2012). Model-
driven reengineering. In J. Rech & C. Bunse (Eds.), Emerging technologies for the 
evolution and maintenance of software models (pp. 200–229). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61350-438-3.ch008
Petkov, D., Edgar-Nevill, D., Madachy, R., & O’Connor, R. (2010). Information 
systems, software engineering, and systems thinking: Challenges and opportunities. 
In M. Hunter (Ed.), Strategic information systems: Concepts, methodologies, tools, 
and applications (pp. 315–332). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
60566-677-8.ch023
Petkov, D., Edgar-Nevill, D., Madachy, R., & O’Connor, R. (2012). Towards a wider 
application of the systems approach in information systems and software engineering. 
In Computer engineering: Concepts, methodologies, tools and applications (pp. 
1627–1645). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61350-456-7.ch701
Petre, L., Sere, K., & Troubitsyna, E. (2012). Dependability and computer engineering: 
Concepts for software-intensive systems. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-60960-747-0
Poels, G., Decreus, K., Roelens, B., & Snoeck, M. (2013). Investigating goal-oriented 
requirements engineering for business processes. Journal of Database Management, 
24(2), 35–71. doi:10.4018/jdm.2013040103
Polgar, J., & Adamson, G. (2011). New generation of portal software and engineering: 
Emerging technologies. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-571-1
204

Related References
Power, C., Freire, A. P., & Petrie, H. (2011). Integrating accessibility evaluation 
into web engineering processes. In G. Alkhatib (Ed.), Web engineered applications 
for evolving organizations: Emerging knowledge (pp. 315–339). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-523-0.ch018
Praeg, C. (2011). Framework for IT service value engineering: Managing value 
and IT service quality. In C. Praeg & D. Spath (Eds.), Quality management for IT 
services: Perspectives on business and process performance (pp. 274–297). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61692-889-6.ch016
Prescott, J., & Bogg, J. (2013). Gendered occupational differences in science, 
engineering, and technology careers. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-2107-7
Prpic, J. K., & Moore, G. (2012). E-portfolios as a quantitative and qualitative 
means of demonstrating learning outcomes and competencies in engineering. In K. 
Yusof, N. Azli, A. Kosnin, S. Yusof, & Y. Yusof (Eds.), Outcome-based science, 
technology, engineering, and mathematics education: Innovative practices (pp. 
124–154). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1809-1.ch007
Puteh, M. M., & Ismail, K. (2012). Quality assurance through innovation policy: The 
pedagogical implications on engineering education. In Human resources management: 
Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 40–49). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1601-1.ch004
Puthanpurayil, A. M., Dhakal, R. P., & Carr, A. J. (2013). Optimal passive damper 
positioning techniques: State-of-the-art. In N. Lagaros, V. Plevris, & C. Mitropoulou 
(Eds.), Design optimization of active and passive structural control systems (pp. 
85–111). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2029-2.ch004
Ramachandran, M. (2010). Knowledge engineering support for software requirements, 
architectures and components. In F. Meziane & S. Vadera (Eds.), Artificial intelligence 
applications for improved software engineering development: New prospects (pp. 
129–145). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-758-4.ch007
Ramachandran, M. (2011). Knowledge engineering for software development 
life cycles: Support technologies and applications. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-509-4
205
www.ebook3000.com

Related References
Ramachandran, M., & de Carvalho, R. (2010). Handbook of research on software 
engineering and productivity technologies: Implications of globalization. Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-731-7
Rasul, M., Nouwens, F., Swift, R., Martin, F., & Greensill, C. V. (2012). Assessment 
of final year engineering projects: A pilot investigation on issues and best practice. 
In M. Rasul (Ed.), Developments in engineering education standards: Advanced 
curriculum innovations (pp. 80–104). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-0951-8.ch005
Razali, Z. B., & Trevelyan, J. (2012). An evaluation of students’ practical intelligence 
and ability to diagnose equipment faults. In K. Yusof, N. Azli, A. Kosnin, S. 
Yusof, & Y. Yusof (Eds.), Outcome-based science, technology, engineering, and 
mathematics education: Innovative practices (pp. 328–349). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1809-1.ch016
Reimann, D. (2011). Shaping interactive media with the sewing machine: Smart 
textile as an artistic context to engage girls in technology and engineering education. 
International Journal of Art, Culture and Design Technologies, 1(1), 12–21. 
doi:10.4018/ijacdt.2011010102
Rikkilä, J. (2014). Agile, lean, and service-oriented development, continuum, or 
chasm. In Software design and development: concepts, methodologies, tools, and 
applications (pp. 132–163). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
4301-7.ch008
Rocci, L. (2010). Engineering and environmental technoethics. In R. Luppicini (Ed.), 
Technoethics and the evolving knowledge society: Ethical issues in technological 
design, research, development, and innovation (pp. 146–162). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-952-6.ch008
Rodrigues, D., Estrella, J. C., Monaco, F. J., Branco, K. R., Antunes, N., & Vieira, 
M. (2012). Engineering secure web services. In V. Cardellini, E. Casalicchio, K. 
Castelo Branco, J. Estrella, & F. Monaco (Eds.), Performance and dependability 
in service computing: Concepts, techniques and research directions (pp. 360–380). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-794-4.ch016
Rodríguez, J., Fernández-Medina, E., Piattini, M., & Mellado, D. (2011). A security 
requirements engineering tool for domain engineering in software product lines. 
In N. Milanovic (Ed.), Non-functional properties in service oriented architecture: 
Requirements, models and methods (pp. 73–92). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-794-2.ch004
206

Related References
Rojko, A., Zürcher, T., Hercog, D., & Stebler, R. (2012). Implementation of remote 
laboratories for industrial education. In A. Azad, M. Auer, & V. Harward (Eds.), 
Internet accessible remote laboratories: Scalable e-learning tools for engineering 
and science disciplines (pp. 84–107). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-61350-186-3.ch005
Rosado, D. G., Mellado, D., Fernandez-Medina, E., & Piattini, M. G. (2013). Security 
engineering for cloud computing: Approaches and tools. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2125-1
Rose, S., Lauder, M., Schlereth, M., & Schürr, A. (2011). A multidimensional approach 
for concurrent model-driven automation engineering. In J. Osis & E. Asnina (Eds.), 
Model-driven domain analysis and software development: Architectures and functions 
(pp. 90–113). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61692-874-2.ch005
Russell, C. (2012). Conceptual mapping, visualisation, and systems thinking 
in engineering. In A. Patil, H. Eijkman, & E. Bhattacharyya (Eds.), New media 
communication skills for engineers and IT professionals: Trans-national and trans-
cultural demands (pp. 72–93). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
0243-4.ch006
Russell, D., & Haghi, A. (2010). Web-based engineering education: Critical design 
and effective tools. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61520-659-9
Russo, B., Scotto, M., Sillitti, A., & Succi, G. (2010). Improving agile methods. 
In B. Russo, M. Scotto, A. Sillitti, & G. Succi (Eds.), Agile technologies in open 
source development (pp. 189–231). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
59904-681-5.ch012
Russo, B., Scotto, M., Sillitti, A., & Succi, G. (2010). Requirements management. 
In B. Russo, M. Scotto, A. Sillitti, & G. Succi (Eds.), Agile technologies in open 
source development (pp. 268–286). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
59904-681-5.ch015
Russo, M. T. (2012). Humanities in engineering education. In M. Rasul (Ed.), 
Developments in engineering education standards: Advanced curriculum innovations 
(pp. 285–300). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0951-8.ch016
Saidane, A., & Guelfi, N. (2014). Towards test-driven and architecture model-based 
security and resilience engineering. In Software design and development: Concepts, 
methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 2072–2098). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4301-7.ch096
207
www.ebook3000.com

Related References
Sala, N. (2012). Virtual reality in architecture, in engineering and beyond. In E. Abu-
Taieh, A. El Sheikh, & M. Jafari (Eds.), Technology engineering and management 
in aviation: Advancements and discoveries (pp. 336–345). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-887-3.ch020
Salzmann, C., Gillet, D., Esquembre, F., Vargas, H., Sánchez, J., & Dormido, S. 
(2012). Web 2.0 open remote and virtual laboratories in engineering education. 
In A. Okada, T. Connolly, & P. Scott (Eds.), Collaborative learning 2.0: Open 
educational resources (pp. 369–390). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-0300-4.ch020
Samaras, G. (2012). Human-centered systems engineering: Managing stakeholder 
dissonance in healthcare delivery. In A. Kolker & P. Story (Eds.), Management 
engineering for effective healthcare delivery: Principles and applications (pp. 
148–171). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-872-9.ch007
Sampaio, A. Z., Henriques, P. G., Cruz, C. O., & Martins, O. P. (2011). Interactive 
models based on virtual reality technology used in civil engineering education. In 
G. Vincenti & J. Braman (Eds.), Teaching through multi-user virtual environments: 
Applying dynamic elements to the modern classroom (pp. 387–413). Hershey, PA: 
IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61692-822-3.ch021
Sanabria, S. J., Furrer, R., Neuenschwander, J., Niemz, P., & Sennhauser, U. (2014). 
Bonding defect imaging in glulam with novel air-coupled ultrasound testing. In 
A. Aguilera & J. Davim (Eds.), Research developments in wood engineering and 
technology (pp. 221–246). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4554-
7.ch006
Sánchez de la Rosa, J. L., Miranda, S. A., & González, C. S. (2013). Evaluation of 
transversal competences of the engineering students and their relation to the enterprise 
requirements. In K. Patel & S. Vij (Eds.), Enterprise resource planning models for 
the education sector: Applications and methodologies (pp. 1–17). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2193-0.ch001
Sarirete, A., & Chikh, A. (2012). A knowledge management process in communities 
of practice of engineering based on the SECI model for knowledge. In E. Ng, N. 
Karacapilidis, & M. Raisinghani (Eds.), Evaluating the impact of technology on 
learning, teaching, and designing curriculum: Emerging trends (pp. 134–149). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0032-4.ch009
208

Related References
Sass, L. (2013). Direct building manufacturing of homes with digital fabrication. 
In Industrial engineering: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 
1231–1242). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1945-6.ch066
Sauvet, B., Boukhicha, M., Balan, A., Hwang, G., Taverna, D., Shukla, A., & Régnier, 
S. (2012). Selective pick-and-place of thin film by robotic micromanipulation. 
International Journal of Intelligent Mechatronics and Robotics, 2(3), 24–37. 
doi:10.4018/ijimr.2012070103
Schnabel, M. A. (2013). Learning parametric designing. In Industrial engineering: 
Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 197–210). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1945-6.ch013
Schrödl, H., & Wind, S. (2013). Requirements engineering for cloud application 
development. In A. Bento & A. Aggarwal (Eds.), Cloud computing service and 
deployment models: Layers and management (pp. 137–150). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2187-9.ch007
Schulz, T., Radlinski, L., Gorges, T., & Rosenstiel, W. (2011). Software process model 
using dynamic bayesian networks. In M. Ramachandran (Ed.), Knowledge engineering 
for software development life cycles: Support technologies and applications (pp. 
289–310). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-509-4.ch016
Sevillian, D. B. (2013). Aircraft development and design: Enhancing product 
safety through effective human factors engineering design solutions. In Industrial 
engineering: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 858–886). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1945-6.ch048
Shan, T. C., & Hua, W. W. (2010). Strategic technology engineering planning. In M. 
Hunter (Ed.), Strategic information systems: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and 
applications (pp. 414–434). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-
677-8.ch029
Sharma, A., & Maurer, F. (2014). A roadmap for software engineering for the cloud: 
Results of a systematic review. In Software design and development: Concepts, 
methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 1–16). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4301-7.ch001
209
www.ebook3000.com

Related References
Sharma, N., Singh, K., & Goyal, D. (2014). Software engineering, process 
improvement, and experience management: Is the nexus productive? Clues from 
the Indian giants. In Software design and development: Concepts, methodologies, 
tools, and applications (pp. 1401–1414). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-4301-7.ch068
Shirk, S., Arreola, V., Wobig, C., & Russell, K. (2012). Girls’ e-mentoring in science, 
engineering, and technology based at the University of Illinois at Chicago women 
in science and engineering (WISE) program. In Computer engineering: Concepts, 
Methodologies, tools and applications (pp. 1144-1163). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-61350-456-7.ch505
Shukla, A., & Tiwari, R. (2011). Biomedical engineering and information systems: 
Technologies, tools and applications. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-61692-004-3
Sidhu, M. S. (2010). Challenges and trends of TAPS packages in enhancing engineering 
education. In M. Sidhu (Ed.), Technology-assisted problem solving for engineering 
education: Interactive multimedia applications (pp. 158–166). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-764-5.ch011
Sidhu, M. S. (2010). Evaluation of TAPS packages. In M. Sidhu (Ed.), Technology-
assisted problem solving for engineering education: Interactive multimedia 
applications (pp. 128–147). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-
764-5.ch009
Sidhu, M. S. (2010). Technology assisted problem solving packages: A new 
approach to learning, visualizing, and problem solving in engineering. In M. Sidhu 
(Ed.), Technology-assisted problem solving for engineering education: Interactive 
multimedia applications (pp. 69–90). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-60566-764-5.ch006
Sidhu, M. S. (2010). Technology-assisted problem solving for engineering education: 
Interactive multimedia applications. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
60566-764-5
Sidhu, M. S., & Kang, L. C. (2012). Emerging trends and technologies for enhancing 
engineering education: An overview. In L. Tomei (Ed.), Advancing education with 
information communication technologies: Facilitating new trends (pp. 320–330). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61350-468-0.ch026
210

Related References
Sidhu, M. S., & Kang, L. C. (2012). New trends and futuristic information 
communication technologies for engineering education. In S. Chhabra (Ed.), ICTs for 
advancing rural communities and human development: Addressing the digital divide 
(pp. 251–262). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0047-8.ch017
Simonette, M. J., & Spina, E. (2014). Enabling IT innovation through soft systems 
engineering. In M. Pańkowska (Ed.), Frameworks of IT prosumption for business 
development (pp. 64–72). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4313-
0.ch005
Singh, T., Verma, M. K., & Singh, R. (2014). Role of emotional intelligence in 
academic achievement: An empirical study on engineering students. In P. Ordóñez de 
Pablos & R. Tennyson (Eds.), Strategic approaches for human capital management 
and development in a turbulent economy (pp. 255–263). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4530-1.ch016
Smolnik, S., Teuteberg, F., & Thomas, O. (2012). Semantic technologies for business 
and information systems engineering: Concepts and applications. Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-126-3
Solemon, B., Sahibuddin, S., & Ghani, A. A. (2014). Requirements engineering 
process improvement and related models. In Software design and development: 
Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 203–218). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4301-7.ch011
Sorial, G. A., & Noroozi, B. (2012). Improvement of engineering students education 
by e-learning. In Virtual learning environments: Concepts, methodologies, tools 
and applications (pp. 870–883). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-0011-9.ch414
Srinivasan, A., López-Ribot, J. L., & Ramasubramanian, A. K. (2011). Microfluidic 
applications in vascular bioengineering. In A. Shukla & R. Tiwari (Eds.), Biomedical 
engineering and information systems: Technologies, tools and applications (pp. 
1–30). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61692-004-3.ch001
Steinbuch, R. (2013). Evolutionary optimization of passive compensators to improve 
earthquake resistance. In N. Lagaros, V. Plevris, & C. Mitropoulou (Eds.), Design 
optimization of active and passive structural control systems (pp. 250–273). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2029-2.ch011
211
www.ebook3000.com

Related References
Stephenson, S. V., & Sage, A. P. (2010). Information and knowledge perspectives 
in systems engineering and management for innovation and productivity through 
enterprise resource planning. In M. Hunter (Ed.), Strategic information systems: 
Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 338–368). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-677-8.ch025
Strasser, T., Zoitl, A., & Rooker, M. (2013). Zero-downtime reconfiguration 
of distributed control logic in industrial automation and control. In Industrial 
engineering: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 2024–2051). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1945-6.ch109
Sun, Z., Han, J., Dong, D., & Zhao, S. (2010). Engineering of experience based trust 
for e-commerce. In M. Wang & Z. Sun (Eds.), Handbook of research on complex 
dynamic process management: Techniques for adaptability in turbulent environments 
(pp. 342–367). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-669-3.ch014
Sudeikat, J., & Renz, W. (2010). Building complex adaptive systems: On engineering 
self-organizing multi-agent systems. In M. Hunter (Ed.), Strategic information 
systems: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 767–787). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-677-8.ch050
Sugiyama, S., & Burgess, L. (2012). Principle for engineering service based system by 
swirl computing. In X. Liu & Y. Li (Eds.), Advanced design approaches to emerging 
software systems: Principles, methodologies and tools (pp. 48–60). Hershey, PA: 
IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-735-7.ch003
Sunindyo, W. D., Moser, T., Winkler, D., Mordinyi, R., & Biffl, S. (2013). Workflow 
validation framework in collaborative engineering environments. In A. Loo (Ed.), 
Distributed computing innovations for business, engineering, and science (pp. 
285–299). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2533-4.ch015
Szeto, A. Y. (2014). Assistive technology and rehabilitation engineering. In Assistive 
technologies: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 277–331). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4422-9.ch015
Takruri-Rizk, H., Sappleton, N., & Dhar-Bhattacharjee, S. (2010). Progression 
of UK women engineers: Aids and hurdles. In A. Cater-Steel & E. Cater (Eds.), 
Women in engineering, science and technology: Education and career challenges 
(pp. 280–300). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61520-657-5.ch013
212

Related References
Tekinerdogan, B., & Aksit, M. (2011). A comparative analysis of software engineering 
with mature engineering disciplines using a problem-solving perspective. In A. 
Dogru & V. Biçer (Eds.), Modern software engineering concepts and practices: 
Advanced approaches (pp. 1–18). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
60960-215-4.ch001
Tellioglu, H. (2012). About representational artifacts and their role in engineering. 
In G. Viscusi, G. Campagnolo, & Y. Curzi (Eds.), Phenomenology, organizational 
politics, and IT design: The social study of information systems (pp. 111–130). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0303-5.ch007
Terawaki, Y., Takahashi, Y., Kodama, Y., & Yana, K. (2013). The development 
of educational environment suited to the Japan-specific educational service using 
requirements engineering techniques: Case study of running Sakai with PostgreSQL. In 
V. Kumar & F. Lin (Eds.), System and technology advancements in distance learning 
(pp. 261–270). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2032-2.ch019
Thomas, K. D., & Muga, H. E. (2012). Sustainability: The new 21st century general 
education requirement for engineers. In M. Rasul (Ed.), Developments in engineering 
education standards: Advanced curriculum innovations (pp. 263–284). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0951-8.ch015
Trigo, B., Olguin, G., & Matai, P. (2010). The use of applets in an engineering 
chemistry course: Advantages and new ideas. In D. Russell & A. Haghi (Eds.), 
Web-based engineering education: Critical design and effective tools (pp. 108–118). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61520-659-9.ch009
Tsadimas, A., Nikolaidou, M., & Anagnostopoulos, D. (2014). Model-based system 
design using SysML: The role of the evaluation diagram. In P. Fonseca i Casas 
(Ed.), Formal languages for computer simulation: Transdisciplinary models and 
applications (pp. 236–266). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
4369-7.ch008
Unhelkar, B., Ghanbary, A., & Younessi, H. (2010). Collaborative business process 
engineering and global organizations: Frameworks for service integration. Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-689-1
Uziak, J., Oladiran, M. T., & Kommula, V. P. (2012). Integrating general education 
courses into engineering curriculum: Students’ perspective. In M. Rasul (Ed.), 
Developments in engineering education standards: Advanced curriculum innovations 
(pp. 247–262). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0951-8.ch014
213
www.ebook3000.com

Related References
Valizadeh, M., Anzelotti, G., & Salehi, A. S. (2010). Web-based approaches 
in engineering education. In R. Luppicini & A. Haghi (Eds.), Cases on digital 
technologies in higher education: Issues and challenges (pp. 241–256). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61520-869-2.ch017
Valizadeh, M., Anzelotti, G., & Salehi, S. (2010). Web-based training: An applicable 
tool for engineering education. In D. Russell & A. Haghi (Eds.), Web-based 
engineering education: Critical design and effective tools (pp. 186–198). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61520-659-9.ch014
Valverde, R., Toleman, M., & Cater-Steel, A. (2010). Design science: A case study 
in information systems re-engineering. In M. Hunter (Ed.), Strategic information 
systems: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 490–503). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-677-8.ch033
Vaquero, L. M., Rodero-Merino, L., Cáceres, J., Chapman, C., Lindner, M., & 
Galán, F. (2012). Principles, methodology and tools for engineering cloud computing 
systems. In X. Liu & Y. Li (Eds.), Advanced design approaches to emerging software 
systems: Principles, methodologies and tools (pp. 250–273). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-735-7.ch012
Vargas, E. P. (2014). Quality, improvement and measurements in high risk software. In 
Software design and development: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications 
(pp. 733–748). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4301-7.ch035
Vasant, P. (2013). Meta-heuristics optimization algorithms in engineering, business, 
economics, and finance. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2086-5
Venkatraman, S. (2013). Software engineering research gaps in the cloud. Journal 
of Information Technology Research, 6(1), 1–19. doi:10.4018/jitr.2013010101
Villazón-Terrazas, B. C., Suárez-Figueroa, M., & Gómez-Pérez, A. (2012). A 
pattern-based method for re-engineering non-ontological resources into ontologies. 
In A. Sheth (Ed.), Semantic-enabled advancements on the web: Applications across 
industries (pp. 17–54). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0185-7.
ch002
Vinod, J. S. (2010). Dem simulations in geotechnical earthquake engineering 
education. International Journal of Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering, 1(1), 
61–69. doi:10.4018/jgee.2010090804
214

Related References
Virdi, J. (2014). Business risk analysis: Obsolescence management in requirements 
engineering. In Software design and development: Concepts, methodologies, tools, 
and applications (pp. 1736–1763). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-4301-7.ch083
Walk, S., Pöschko, J., Strohmaier, M., Andrews, K., Tudorache, T., Noy, N. F., & 
Musen, M. A. et al. (2013). PragmatiX: An interactive tool for visualizing the creation 
process behind collaboratively engineered ontologies. International Journal on 
Semantic Web and Information Systems, 9(1), 45–78. doi:10.4018/jswis.2013010103 
PMID:24465189
Wang, J. (2013). Architects and engineers. In Challenging ICT applications in 
architecture, engineering, and industrial design education (pp. 48–64). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1999-9.ch003
Wang, J. (2013). Challenging ICT applications in architecture, engineering, and 
industrial design education. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
1999-9
Wang, J. (2013). Pedagogy and curriculum in architecture and engineering. In 
Challenging ICT applications in architecture, engineering, and industrial design 
education (pp. 65–92). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1999-9.
ch004
Wang, J. (2013). Professionalism in architecture and engineering. In Challenging 
ICT applications in architecture, engineering, and industrial design education (pp. 
137–156). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1999-9.ch007
Wang, J. (2013). Reviewing engineers and introducing industrial designers. In 
Challenging ICT applications in architecture, engineering, and industrial design 
education (pp. 111–136). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1999-
9.ch006
Wang, Y. (2010). On cognitive properties of human factors and error models in 
engineering and socialization. In Y. Wang (Ed.), Discoveries and breakthroughs 
in cognitive informatics and natural intelligence (pp. 93–109). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-902-1.ch006
215
www.ebook3000.com

Related References
Wang, Y. (2012). Convergence of software science and computational intelligence: 
A new transdisciplinary research field. In Y. Wang (Ed.), Software and intelligent 
sciences: New transdisciplinary findings (pp. 1–13). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0261-8.ch001
Wang, Y., & Patel, S. (2012). Exploring the cognitive foundations of software 
engineering. In Y. Wang (Ed.), Software and intelligent sciences: New transdisciplinary 
findings (pp. 232–251). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0261-8.
ch014
Wei, J., Chen, J., & Zhu, Q. (2010). Service science, management and engineering 
education: A unified model for university. International Journal of Service 
Science, Management, Engineering, and Technology, 1(2), 51–69. doi:10.4018/
jssmet.2010040104
Weigang, L., Barros, A. D., & Romani de Oliveira, I. (2010). Computational 
models, software engineering, and advanced technologies in air transportation: Next 
generation applications. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-800-0
Westh Nicolajsen, H. (2010). Limitations and perspectives on use of e-services 
in engineering consulting. In Electronic services: Concepts, methodologies, tools 
and applications (pp. 1280–1295). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
61520-967-5.ch078
Wilson, R., & Younis, H. (2013). Business strategies for electrical infrastructure 
engineering: Capital project implementation. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2839-7
Winter, A. (2010). The smart women – smart state strategy: A policy on women’s 
participation in science, engineering and technology in Queensland, Australia. 
In A. Cater-Steel & E. Cater (Eds.), Women in engineering, science and 
technology: Education and career challenges (pp. 1–20). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-61520-657-5.ch001
Winter, R., & van Beijnum, I. (2014). Inter-domain traffic engineering using 
the origin preference attribute. In M. Boucadair & D. Binet (Eds.), Solutions for 
sustaining scalability in internet growth (pp. 18–38). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4305-5.ch002
216

Related References
Worth, D., Greenough, C., & Chin, S. (2014). Pragmatic software engineering 
for computational science. In Software design and development: Concepts, 
methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 663–694). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4301-7.ch032
Wu, J. (2013). Biomedical engineering and cognitive neuroscience for healthcare: 
Interdisciplinary applications. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
2113-8
Wu, Y., & Koszalka, T. A. (2013). Instructional design of an advanced interactive 
discovery environment: Exploring team communication and technology use in virtual 
collaborative engineering problem solving. In Industrial engineering: Concepts, 
methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 117–136). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1945-6.ch009
Yadav, V. (2011). Research review: Globally distributed requirements engineering 
and agility. International Journal of Innovation in the Digital Economy, 2(1), 1–11. 
doi:10.4018/jide.2011010101
Yang, J. J., Liu, J. F., Kurokawa, T., Kitamura, N., Yasuda, K., & Gong, J. P. 
(2013). Tough double-network hydrogels as scaffolds for tissue engineering: Cell 
behavior in vitro and in vivo test. In J. Wu (Ed.), Technological advancements in 
biomedicine for healthcare applications (pp. 213–222). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2196-1.ch023
Yeoh, W., Gao, J., & Koronios, A. (2010). Empirical investigation of critical success 
factors for implementing business intelligence systems in multiple engineering asset 
management organisations. In M. Hunter (Ed.), Strategic information systems: 
Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 2039–2063). Hershey, PA: 
IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-677-8.ch129
Yerrick, R., Lund, C., & Lee, Y. (2013). Online simulator use in the preparing 
chemical engineers. International Journal of Online Pedagogy and Course Design, 
3(2), 1–24. doi:10.4018/ijopcd.2013040101
Yilmaz, A. E., & Yilmaz, I. B. (2012). Natural language processing techniques in 
requirements engineering. In Computer engineering: Concepts, methodologies, 
tools and applications (pp. 533–545). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-61350-456-7.ch303
217
www.ebook3000.com

Related References
Yong, E. (2012). Literature review skills for undergraduate engineering students 
in large classes. In K. Yusof, N. Azli, A. Kosnin, S. Yusof, & Y. Yusof (Eds.), 
Outcome-based science, technology, engineering, and mathematics education: 
Innovative practices (pp. 240–261). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-1809-1.ch012
Yun, H., Xu, J., Xiong, J., & Wei, M. (2013). A knowledge engineering approach 
to develop domain ontology. In V. Kumar & F. Lin (Eds.), System and technology 
advancements in distance learning (pp. 55–70). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2032-2.ch004
Zardari, S., Faniyi, F., & Bahsoon, R. (2013). Using obstacles for systematically 
modeling, analysing, and mitigating risks in cloud adoption. In I. Mistrik, A. Tang, R. 
Bahsoon, & J. Stafford (Eds.), Aligning enterprise, system, and software architectures 
(pp. 275–296). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2199-2.ch014
Zašcerinska, J., Ahrens, A., & Bassus, O. (2012). Enterprise 2.0 and 3.0 in education: 
Engineering and business students’ view. In M. Cruz-Cunha, P. Gonçalves, N. Lopes, 
E. Miranda, & G. Putnik (Eds.), Handbook of research on business social networking: 
Organizational, managerial, and technological dimensions (pp. 472–494). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61350-168-9.ch025
Zašcerinska, J., Ahrens, A., & Bassus, O. (2012). Enterprise 2.0 and 3.0 in education: 
Engineering and business students’ view. In M. Cruz-Cunha, P. Gonçalves, N. Lopes, 
E. Miranda, & G. Putnik (Eds.), Handbook of research on business social networking: 
Organizational, managerial, and technological dimensions (pp. 472–494). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-61350-168-9.ch025
Zhang, D. (2012). Machine learning and value-based software engineering. In Y. 
Wang (Ed.), Software and intelligent sciences: New transdisciplinary findings (pp. 
287–301). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0261-8.ch017
Zhang, H., Xu, C., Su, W., & Luo, H. (2014). Routing optimization for inter-domain 
traffic engineering under identifier network. In M. Boucadair & D. Binet (Eds.), 
Solutions for sustaining scalability in internet growth (pp. 127–147). Hershey, PA: 
IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4305-5.ch007
Zhong, Y. (2013). Processing of 3D unstructured measurement data for reverse 
engineering. In S. Sirouspour (Ed.), Advanced engineering and computational 
methodologies for intelligent mechatronics and robotics (pp. 118–127). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-3634-7.ch008
218

Related References
Zhou, Z., Wang, H., & Lou, P. (2010). Manufacturing intelligence for industrial 
engineering: Methods for system self-organization, learning, and adaptation. 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-864-2
Zhu, L., Jayaram, U., & Kim, O. (2011). Online semantic knowledge management 
for product design based on product engineering ontologies. International Journal on 
Semantic Web and Information Systems, 7(4), 36–61. doi:10.4018/jswis.2011100102
219
www.ebook3000.com

Compilation of References
Akbari, M., Sinton, D., & Bahrami, M. (2010a). Analytical and experimental 
characteristic of flow in slowly varying cross section microchannels. Proceedings 
of 8th international conference on FEDSM-ICNMM.
Akbari, M., Sinton, D., & Bahrami, M. (2010b). Laminar fully developed flow in 
periodically converging–diverging microtubes. Heat Transfer Engineering, 31(8), 
628–634. doi:10.1080/01457630903463404
Altinbalik & Ayer. (2015). A theoretical and experimental study for the load 
optimization of gear-like profiles by using forward and lateral extrusion. Transactions 
of the Canadian Society for Mechanical Engineering, 39(1), 53-69.
Ambatipudi, K. K., & Rahman, M. M. (2000). analysis of conjugate heat 
transfer in microchannel heat sinks. Numerical Heat Transfer Part A, 37. 
doi:10.1080/104077800274046
Ananevskii, I. M., & Anokhin, N. V. (2014). Control of the spatial motion of 
a multi-link inverted pendulum using a torque applied to the first link. Journal 
of Applied Mathematics and Mechanics, 78(6), 543–540. doi:10.1016/j.
jappmathmech.2015.04.001
Anklin, M., Drahm, W., & Rieder, A. (2006). Coriolis mass flow meters: Overview of 
the current state of the art and latest research. Flow Measurement and Instrumentation, 
17(6), 317–323. doi:10.1016/j.flowmeasinst.2006.07.004
ANSYS R 14.5. (2013). Academic, Structural analysis Guide. Academic Press.
Ansys R 14.5. (2015). Structural Analysis guide 2015. Academic Press.
ANSYS. (2017). Structural analysis Guide, release 17.0. ANSYS.
220

Compilation of References
Antonetti, V. W., Whittle, T. D., & Simons, R. E. (1993). An approximate thermal 
contact conductance correlation. Journal of Electronic Packaging, 115(1), 131–134. 
doi:10.1115/1.2909293
Antonetti, V. W., & Yovanovich, M. M. (1985). Enhancement of thermal contact 
conductance by metallic coatings: Theory and experiment. Journal of Heat Transfer, 
107(3), 513–519. doi:10.1115/1.3247454
Arsenault, R. J., & Shi, N. (1986). Dislocation generation due to differences between 
the coefficients of thermal expansion. Materials Science and Engineering, 81, 
175–187. doi:10.1016/0025-5416(86)90261-2
Arsha, A. G., Jayakumar, E., Rajan, T. P. D., Antony, V., & Pai, B. C. (2015). Design 
and fabrication of functionally graded in-situ aluminium composites for automotive 
pistons. Materials & Design, 88, 1201–1209. doi:10.1016/j.matdes.2015.09.099
Avci, E. (2008). Comparison of wavelet families for texture classification by using 
wavelet packet entropy adaptive network based fuzzy inference system. Applied Soft 
Computing, 8(1), 225–231. doi:10.1016/j.asoc.2007.01.003
Balamurugan, V., & Narayanan, S. (2001). Shell finite element for smart piezoelectric 
composite plate/shell structures and its application to the study of active vibration 
control. Finite Elements in Analysis and Design, 37(9), 713–738. doi:10.1016/
S0168-874X(00)00070-6
Baltes, J., Kopacek, P., & Schorghuber, M. (2014). A cost oriented Humanoid 
robot motion control system. IFAC Proceedings Volumes, 47(3), 4529-4534. 
doi:10.3182/20140824-6-ZA-1003.01243
Bathe, K. J. (2006). Finite element procedures. Pearson.
Benigni, P., Marchionni, C., & Rogez, J. (2000). High temperature contact conductance 
measurement across cylindrical joint by periodic method: Feasibility and results. 
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 43(23), 4217–4227. doi:10.1016/
S0017-9310(00)00069-7
Blanter, M. S., Golovin, I. S., Neuhauser, H., & Sinning, H. R. (2007). Internal 
friction in metallic materials. Berlin: Springer Verlag.
Bobovnik, G., Mole, N., Kutina, J., Stok, B., & Bajsic, I. (2005). Coupled finite-
volume/finite-element modelling of the straight-tube Coriolis flowmeter. Journal 
of Fluids and Structures, 20(6), 785–800. doi:10.1016/j.jfluidstructs.2005.04.008
221
www.ebook3000.com

Compilation of References
Bowden, C., Holderbaum, W., & Becerra, V. M. (2012). Strong structural 
controllability and the multilink inverted pendulum. IEEE Transactions on Automatic 
Control, 57(11), 2891–2896. doi:10.1109/TAC.2012.2191180
Bozca, M., & Fietkau, P. (2010). Empirical model based optimization of 
gearbox geometric design parameters to reduce rattle noise in an automotive 
transmission. Mechanism and Machine Theory, 45(11), 1599–1612. doi:10.1016/j.
mechmachtheory.2010.06.013
Buyukkaya, E. (2008). Thermal analysis of functionally graded coating Al Si 
alloy and steel pistons. Surface and Coatings Technology, 202(16), 3856–3865. 
doi:10.1016/j.surfcoat.2008.01.034
Buyukkaya, E., & Cerit, M. (2007). Thermal analysis of a ceramic coating diesel 
engine piston using 3-D finite element method. Surface and Coatings Technology, 
202(2), 398–402. doi:10.1016/j.surfcoat.2007.06.006
Cascetta, F., Valle, S. D., Guido, A. R., Pagano, S., & Vigo, P. (1991). A new 
straight-pipe Coriolis mass flow meter: The mathematical model. Measurement, 
9(3), 115–123. doi:10.1016/0263-2241(91)90031-K
Cerit, M., & Coban, M. (2014). Temperature and thermal stress analyses of a 
ceramic-coated aluminum alloy piston used in a diesel engine. International Journal 
of Thermal Sciences, 77, 11–18. doi:10.1016/j.ijthermalsci.2013.10.009
Chan, S. H., & Khor, K. A. (2000). The effect of thermal barrier coated piston crown 
on engine characteristics. Journal of Materials Engineering and Performance, 9(1), 
103–109. doi:10.1361/105994900770346358
Chao, X. (2004). Mathematical modeling of elastic inverted pendulum control 
system. Journal of Control Theory and Applications, 2(3), 281–282. doi:10.1007/
s11768-004-0010-1
Cheesewright, R., Belhadj, A., & Clark, C. (2003). Effect of mechanical vibrations 
on Coriolis mass flow meters. Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and 
Control, 125(1), 103–113. doi:10.1115/1.1539098
Cooper, M. G., Mikic, B. B., & Yovanovich, M. M. (1969). Thermal contact 
conductance. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 12(3), 279–300. 
doi:10.1016/0017-9310(69)90011-8
222

Compilation of References
Cox, D. R. (1955). Analysis of Non Markovian stochastic processes by the inclusion 
of supplementary variables. Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 
51(03), 433–441. doi:10.1017/S0305004100030437
Crawley, E. F., & De Luis, J. (1987). Use of piezoelectric actuators as elements of 
intelligent structures. AIAA Journal, 25(10), 1373–1385. doi:10.2514/3.9792
Croce, Rovenskaya, & D’Agaro. (2015). Computational Analysis of Conjugate Heat 
Transfer in Gaseous Microchannels. J. Heat Transfer, 137.
Dadios, E. P., Fernandez, P. S., & Williams, D. J. (2006). Genetic algorithm on 
line controller for the flexible inverted pendulum problem. Journal of Advanced 
Computational Intelligence and Intelligent Informatics, 10(2), 155–160. doi:10.20965/
jaciii.2006.p0155
Dai, F., Gao, X., Jiang, S., Liu, Y., & Li, J. (2014). A multi-DOF two wheeled inverted 
pendulum robot climbing on a slope. Proceedings of IEEE International Conference 
on Robotics and Boimimetics, 1958-1963. doi:10.1109/ROBIO.2014.7090623
De la Cruz, M., Chong, W. W. F., Teodorescu, M., Theodossiades, S., & Rahnejat, 
H. (2012). Transient mixed thermo-elastohydrodynamic lubrication in multi-speed 
transmissions. Tribology International, 49, 17–29. doi:10.1016/j.triboint.2011.12.006
Dhillon, B. S., & Natesan, J. (1983). Stochastic analysis of a system in fluctuating 
environment. Microelectronics and Reliability, 23(5), 867–881. doi:10.1016/0026-
2714(83)91015-6
Dhillon, B. S., & Yang, N. (1995). Probabilistic analysis of a maintainable system 
with human error. Journal of Quality in Maintenance Engineering, 1(2), 50–59. 
doi:10.1108/13552519510089592
Duan, C., & Singh, R. (2005). Super-harmonics in a torsional system with dry 
friction path subject to harmonic excitation under a mean torque. Journal of Sound 
and Vibration, 285(4-5), 803–834. doi:10.1016/j.jsv.2004.08.020
Duryodhan, V. S., Singh, S. G., & Agrawal, A. (2014). Liquid flow through converging 
microchannels and a comparison with diverging microchannels. J. Micromech. 
Microeng., 24.
Duryodhan, V. S., Singh, A., Singh, S. G., & Agrawal, A. (2016). Three-Dimensional 
Numerical Study of Conjugate Heat Transfer in Diverging Microchannel. Proc 
Indian Natn Sci Acad, 82(2), 321–328.
223
www.ebook3000.com

Compilation of References
Duryodhan, V. S., Singh, S. G., & Agrawal, A. (2013). Liquid flow through a 
diverging microchannel. Microfluid Nanofluid, 14(1-2), 53–67. doi:10.1007/
s10404-012-1022-7
Elsayed, B. A., Hassan, M. A., & Mekhilef, S. (2015). Fuzzy swinging-up with sliding 
mode control for third order cart-inverted pendulum system. International Journal of 
Control Automation and Systems, 13(1), 238–248. doi:10.1007/s12555-014-0033-4
Elsayed, E. A., & Turley, R. E. (1980). Reliability analysis of production systems 
with buffer storage. International Journal of Production Research, 18(5), 637–645. 
doi:10.1080/00207548008919695
Eltohamy, K. G., & Kuo, C. Y. (1999). Nonlinear generalized equations of motion 
for multi-link inverted pendulum systems. International Journal of Systems Science, 
30(5), 505–513. doi:10.1080/002077299292245
Fedorov, A. G., & Viskanta, R. (2000). Three-dimensional conjugate heat transfer 
in the microchannel heat sink for electronic packaging. International Journal of 
Heat and Mass Transfer, 43(3), 399–415. doi:10.1016/S0017-9310(99)00151-9
Fu, B. R., Lin, P. H., Tsou, M. S., & Pan, C. (2012). Flow pattern maps and transition 
criteria for flow boiling of binary mixtures in a diverging microchannels. International 
Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 55, 1754–1763.
Fu, B. R., & Pan, C. (2010). Simple channel geometry for enhancement of chemical 
reactions in microchannels. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 49(19), 
9413–9422. doi:10.1021/ie100589c
Gamrat, G., Facre-Marinet, M., & Asendrych, D. (2005). Conduction and entrance 
effects on laminar liquid flow and heat transfer in rectangular microchannels. 
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 48(14), 2943–2954. doi:10.1016/j.
ijheatmasstransfer.2004.10.006
Garg, S., Singh, J., & Singh, D. V. (2010). Availability and maintenance scheduling 
of a repairable block-board manufacturing system. Int. J. Safe., 1, 101–118.
Gawthrop, P., Loram, I., Gollee, H., & Lakie, M. (2014). Intermittent control models 
of human standing: similarities and differences. doi: 101.007/s00422-014-0587-5
Gibson, R. D. (1976). The contact resistance for a semi- infinite cylinder in a vacuum. 
Applied Energy, 2(1), 57–65. doi:10.1016/0306-2619(76)90039-8
224

Compilation of References
Gottumullala, N. R., Nassar, R., Paunm Leabsuksan, C. B., & Scott, S. L. (2010). 
Reliability of a system of k nodes for high performance computing application. 
IEEE Transactions on Reliability, 59(1), 162–169. doi:10.1109/TR.2009.2034291
Granato, A., & Lucke, K. (1956). Theory of mechanical damping due to dislocations. 
Journal of Applied Physics, 27(6), 583–593. doi:10.1063/1.1722436
Gupta, P., Lal, A. K., Sharma, R. K., & Singh, J. (2005). Numerical Analysis 
of reliability and availability of serial processes in butter oil processing plant. 
International Journal of Quality and Reliability Maintenance, 22(3), 303–316. 
doi:10.1108/02656710510582507
Gupta, P., Lal, A. K., Sharma, R. K., & Singh, J. (2007). Analysis of reliability and 
availability of serial processes of plastic pipe manufacturing plant –a case study. 
International Journal of Quality & Reliability Management, 24(4), 404–419. 
doi:10.1108/02656710710740563
Ha, S. K., Keilers, C., & Chang, F. K. (1992). Finite element analysis of composite 
structures containing distributed piezoceramic sensors and actuators. AIAA Journal, 
30(3), 772–780. doi:10.2514/3.10984
Hejwowski, T., & Weroriski, A. (2002). The effect of thermal barrier coatings 
on diesel engine performance. Vacuum, 65(3-4), 427–432. doi:10.1016/S0042-
207X(01)00452-3
Huang, C. H., Hsu, G.-C., & Jang, J.-Y. (2001). A non liner inverse problem for the 
prediction of local thermal contact conductance in plate finned tube heat exchanger. 
Heat and Mass Transfer, 37(4-5), 351–359. doi:10.1007/s002310000162
Huang, C. H., Ozisik, M. N., & Sawaf, B. (1992). Conjugate gradient method for 
determining unknown contact conductance during metal casting. International Journal 
of Heat and Mass Transfer, 35(7), 1779–1786. doi:10.1016/0017-9310(92)90148-L
Iaccarino, G., Ooi, A., Durbin, P. A., & Behnia, M. (2002). Conjugate heat transfer 
predictions in two-dimensional ribbed passages. International Journal of Heat and 
Fluid Flow, 23(3), 340–345. doi:10.1016/S0142-727X(02)00181-9
Jain, M., Kumar, A., & Sharma, G. C. (2002). Maintenance cost analysis for 
replacement model with perfect/minimal repair. International Journal of Engineering 
Transactions A: Basics, 15(2), 161-168.
225
www.ebook3000.com

Compilation of References
Jang, J. S. R. (1993). ANFIS: Adaptive Network-Based Fuzzy Inference 
System. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 23(3), 665–685. 
doi:10.1109/21.256541
Jeng, Y. (2003). Theoretical and experimental study of a thermal contact conductance 
model for elastic, elastoplastic and plastic deformation of rough surfaces (Vol. 14). 
Tribolgy Letters.
Jeng, Y., Chen, J.-T., & Cheng, C.-Y. (2006). Thermal contact conductance of coated 
surfaces. Wear, 260(1-2), 159–167. doi:10.1016/j.wear.2004.12.041
Jun, H., Kiritsis, D., Gambera, M., & Xirouchakis, P. (2006). Predictive algorithm to 
determine the suitable time to change automotive engine oil. Computers & Industrial 
Engineering, 51(4), 671–683. doi:10.1016/j.cie.2006.06.017
Kandlikar, S. G. (2002). Fundamental issues related to flow boiling in minichannels 
and microchannels. Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science, 26(2-4), 389–407. 
doi:10.1016/S0894-1777(02)00150-4
Karamavruc, A., Shi, Z., & Gunther, D. (2011). Determination of Empirical Heat 
Transfer Coefficient via CFD to Predict the Interface Temperature of Continuously 
Sleeping Clutches. SAE Technical Paper 2011-01-0313.
Kawano, K., Minakami, K., Iwasaki, H., & Ishizuka, M. (1998). Application of 
Heat Transfer in Equipment, Systems and Education. ASME HTD-361-3/PID-3.
Kew, P. A., & Cornwell, K. (1997). Correlations for the prediction of boiling heat 
transfer in small-diameter channels. Applied Thermal Engineering, 17(8-10), 
705–715. doi:10.1016/S1359-4311(96)00071-3
Kim, C. N., Jeong, J., & Youn, B. (2003). Evaluation of thermal contact conductance 
using a new experimental-numerical method in fin-tube heat exchangers. International 
Journal of Refrigeration, 26(8), 900–908. doi:10.1016/S0140-7007(03)00075-6
Kim, H. Y., Kim, C., Bae, W. B., & Han, S. M. (2007). Development of optimization 
technique of warm shrink fitting process for automotive transmission parts (3D 
FE analysis). Journal of Materials Processing Technology, 187–188, 458–462. 
doi:10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2006.11.107
Kioua, H., & Mirza, S. (2000). Piezoelectric induced bending and twisting of 
laminated composite shallow shells. Smart Materials and Structures, 9(4), 476–484. 
doi:10.1088/0964-1726/9/4/310
226

Compilation of References
Kouroussis, G., Dehombreux, P., & Verlinden, O. (2015). Vehicle and powertrain 
dynamics analysis with an automatic gearbox. Mechanism and Machine Theory, 
83, 109–124. doi:10.1016/j.mechmachtheory.2014.09.009
Krishnan, S., Garimella, S. V., Chrysler, G. M., & Mahajan, R. V. (2007). Towards a 
Thermal Moores Law. IEEE Transactions on Advanced Packaging, 30(3), 462–474. 
doi:10.1109/TADVP.2007.898517
Kumar, A., Dwivedi, A., Jaiswal, H., & Patil, P. P. (2015). Material Based Vibration 
Characteristic Analysis of Heavy Vehicle Transmission Gearbox Casing Using 
Finite Element Analysis (FEA). Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, 
308, 527–533. doi:10.1007/978-81-322-2012-1_56
Kumar, A., & Patil, P. P. (2014). Dynamic Vibration Analysis of Heavy Vehicle 
Truck Transmission Gearbox Housing Using FEA. Journal of Engineering Science 
and Technology Review, 7(4), 66–72.
Kumar, D., & Pandey, K. N. (2014). Study on Thermal Fatigue Behavior of Plasma 
Sprayed Yttria-Zirconia Thermal Barrier Coatings (Tbcs) Systems on Aluminium 
Alloy. Proceedings of Irf International Conference.
Kumar, D., Singh, J., & Singh, I. P. (1988). Reliability analysis of the feeding 
system in the paper industry. Microelectronics and Reliability, 28(2), 213–215. 
doi:10.1016/0026-2714(88)90353-8
Kumar, S. S. (2004). Thermal contact conductance for cylindrical and spherical 
contacts. Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 40, 679–688.
Kumar, S. S., & Ramamurthi, K. (2003). Influence of flatness and waviness of rough 
surfaces on surface contact coductance. Journal of Heat Transfer, 125, 362–371.
Lee, G. H., & Jung, S. (2008). Control of inverted pendulum system using a 
neuro-fuzzy controller for intelligent control education. Proceedings of IEEE 
International Conference on Mechatronics and Automation, 965-970. doi:10.1109/
ICMA.2008.4798889
Lee, J. S. H., Hu, Y., & Li, D. (2005). Electrokinetic concentration gradient generation 
using a converging-diverging microchannel. Analytica Chimica Acta, 543(1-2), 
99–108. doi:10.1016/j.aca.2005.04.041
Lee, P. C., & Pan, C. (2008). Boiling heat transfer and two-phase flow of water in 
a single shallow microchannel with uniform or diverging cross section. Journal 
of Micromechanics and Microengineering, 18(2), 025005. doi:10.1088/0960-
1317/18/2/025005
227
www.ebook3000.com

Compilation of References
Lee, P. S., Garimella, S. V., & Liu, D. (2005). Investigation of heat transfer in 
rectangular microchannels. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 48(9), 
1688–1704. doi:10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2004.11.019
Lee, S. (1995). Constriction/spreading resistance model for electronics packaging. 
ASME Thermal Engineering Conference, 4, 321-327.
Lee, T., Leok, M., & McClamroch, N. H. (2012). Dynamics and Control of a chain 
pendulum on a cart. Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Decision 
and Control, 2502-2506. doi:10.1109/CDC.2012.6427059
Lelea, D. (2007). The conjugate heat transfer of the partially heated microchannels. 
Heat and Mass Transfer, 44(1), 33–41. doi:10.1007/s00231-006-0228-1
Leung, M. (1998). Prediction of thermal contact conductance in vacuum by statistical 
mechanics. Journal of Heat Transfer, 120(51).
Liano, G., Castillo, J. L., & Garcia-Ybarra, P. L. (2016). Steady states of the rolling 
and yawing motion of unguided missiles. Aerospace Science and Technology, 59, 
103–111. doi:10.1016/j.ast.2016.10.016
Lin, P. H., Fu, B. R., & Pan, C. (2011). Critical heat flux on flow boiling of methanol-
water mixture in a diverging microchannels with artificial cavities. International 
Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 54(15-16), 3156–3166. doi:10.1016/j.
ijheatmasstransfer.2011.04.016
Lin, Y. K., & Chang, P. C. (2012). System reliability of a manufacturing network 
with reworking action and different failure rates. International Journal of Production 
Research, 50(23), 6930–6944. doi:10.1080/00207543.2011.638939
Liu, G., Tang, S., Ren, W., & Hu, J. (2014). Effect of thermal cycling on the damping 
behaviour in alumina borate whisker with and without Bi2O3 coating reinforced 
pure aluminium composites. Materials & Design, 60, 244–249. doi:10.1016/j.
matdes.2014.03.034
Liu, Y., Yang, G., Lu, Y., & Yang, L. (1999). Damping behavior and tribological 
properties of as-spray-deposited high silicon alloy ZA27. Journal of Materials 
Processing Technology, 87(1-3), 53–58. doi:10.1016/S0924-0136(98)00331-8
Lloyd, D. J. (1994). Particle reinforced aluminium and magnesium matrix composites. 
International Materials Reviews, 39(1), 1–23. doi:10.1179/imr.1994.39.1.1
228

Compilation of References
Lobas, L. G. (2005). Dynamic behaviour of multi-link pendulums under follower 
forces. International Applied Mechanics, 41(6), 587–613. doi:10.1007/s10778-
005-0128-y
Long, H., Lord, A. A., Gethin, D. T., & Roylance, B. J. (2003). Operating 
temperatures of oil-lubricated medium-speed gears: numerical models and 
experimental results. Journal of Aerospace Engineering, 217(2), 87-106. 
doi:10.1243/095441003765208745
Luo, X. (2010). A simple setup to test thermal contact resistance between interfaces 
of two contacted solid materials. 11th International Conference on Electronic 
Packaging Technology & High Density Packaging, 256-261.
Luo, Z. P. (2006). Crystallography of SiC/MgAl2O4/Al interfaces in a pre-oxidized 
SiC reinforced SiC/Al composite. Acta Materialia, 54(1), 47–58. doi:10.1016/j.
actamat.2005.08.022
Madhusudana, C. V. (1993). Thermal contact conductance and rectification at low 
joint pressure. International Communications in Heat and Mass Transfer, 20(1), 
123–132. doi:10.1016/0735-1933(93)90013-L
Mahajan & Singh. (1997). Reliability evaluation and optimization of packers 
manufacturing plant. Narosa Publ.
Mahajan, P., & Singh, J. (1996). Reliability analysis of a straw board mill. Proceedings 
of National Conference on Operation Research in Modern Technology, 21-28.
Manglik, M., & Ram, M. (2014). Behavioural analysis of a hydroelectric production 
power plant under reworking scheme. International Journal of Production Research, 
53(2), 648–664. doi:10.1080/00207543.2014.962114
Mantelli, M., & Yovanovich, M. M. (1980). Thermal contact resistance- theory and 
applications. Lecture Notes, University of Waterloo.
Maranzana, G., Perry, I., & Maillet, D. (2004). Mini- and micro-channels: Influence 
of axial conduction in the walls. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 
47(17-18), 3993–4004. doi:10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2004.04.016
Markel, T., Brooker, A., Hendricks, T., Johnson, V., Kelly, K., Kramer, B., & Wipke, 
K. et al. (2002). ADVISOR: A systems analysis tool for advanced vehicle modeling. 
Journal of Power Sources, 110(2), 255–266. doi:10.1016/S0378-7753(02)00189-1
229
www.ebook3000.com

Compilation of References
Marotta, E. (1999). Thermal contact conductance of sintered copper coatings on 
ferro alloy (Vol. 121). ASME Journal of Heat Transfer.
Mcgee, G. R., Schankula, M. H., & Yovanovich, M. M. (1985). Thermal resistance 
of cylinder flat contacts: Theoretical analysis and experimental verification of a line 
contact model. Nuclear Engineering and Design, 86(3), 369–385. doi:10.1016/0029-
5493(85)90302-4
Mehendale, S. S., Jacobi, A. M., & Shah, R. K. (2000). Fluid Flow and Heat Transfer 
at Micro- and Meso-Scales With Application to Heat Exchanger Design. Applied 
Mechanics Reviews, 53(7), 175–193. doi:10.1115/1.3097347
Mikic, B. (1970). Thermal constriction resistance due to non-uniform surface 
conditions; contact resistance at non-uniform interface pressure. International Journal 
of Heat and Mass Transfer, 13(9), 1497–1500. doi:10.1016/0017-9310(70)90182-1
Mikic, B. (1974). Thermal contact conductance; theoretical considerations. 
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 17(2), 205–214. doi:10.1016/0017-
9310(74)90082-9
Miracle, D. B. (2005). Metal matrix composites-From science to technological 
significance. Composites Science and Technology, 65(15-16), 2526–2540. 
doi:10.1016/j.compscitech.2005.05.027
Mochizuki, H., & Quaiyum, M. A. (1994). Contact conductance between cladding/
pressure tube and pressure tube/calandria tube of advanced thermal reactor. Journal 
of Nuclear Science and Technology, 31(7), 726–734. doi:10.1080/18811248.1994
.9735215
Mole, N., Bobovnik, G., Kutina, J., Stok, B., & Bajsic, I. (2008). An improved 
three-dimensional coupled fluid–structure model for Coriolis flowmeters. Journal 
of Fluids and Structures, 24(4), 559–575. doi:10.1016/j.jfluidstructs.2007.10.004
Morini, G. L. (2006). Scaling effects for liquid flows in microchannels. Heat Transfer 
Engineering, 27(4), 64–73. doi:10.1080/01457630500523865
Mukherjee, A., & Kandlikar, S. G. (2005). Numerical study of the effect of inlet 
constriction on bubble growth during flow boiling in microchannel. Proceedings 
of 3rd International Conference on Microchannels and Minichannels. doi:10.1115/
ICMM2005-75143
230

Compilation of References
Nanda, N. (2010). Non-linear free and forced vibrations of piezoelectric laminated 
shells in thermal environments. The IES Journal Part A: Civil & Structural 
Engineering, 3, 147–160.
Narayanan, S., & Balamurugan, V. (2003). Finite element modelling of piezo-
laminated smart structures for active vibration control with distributed sensors and 
actuators. Journal of Sound and Vibration, 262(3), 529–562. doi:10.1016/S0022-
460X(03)00110-X
Nishino, K., Yamashita, S., & Torii, K. (1995). Thermal contact conductance under 
low applied load in a vacuum environment. Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science, 
10(2), 258–271. doi:10.1016/0894-1777(94)00091-L
Noh, J. S., Lee, G. H., & Jung, S. (2010). Position control of a mobile inverted 
pendulum system using radial basis function network. International Journal of 
Control. Automation and Systems, 8(1), 157–162. doi:10.1007/s12555-010-0120-0
Ohsone, Y., “Optical measurement of thermal contact conductance between wafer-
like thin solid samples”, Mechanical Engineering Research Laboratory, Hitachi 
Ltd., Japan.
Parlak, A., Cesur, I., Ayhan, V., Boru, B., & Kökkülünk, G. (2014). Comparison 
for Performance and Exhaust Emissions of Steam Injected and Thermal Barrier 
Layer (TBL). Coated Piston Spark Ignition Engine.
Patil, P. P., Sharma, S. C., & Jain, S. C. (2012). Performance evaluation of a Copper 
omega type Coriolis Mass Flow Sensor with an aid of ANFIS tool. Expert Systems 
with Applications, 39(5), 5019–5024. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2011.10.010
Patil, P. P., Sharma, S. C., & Jain, S. C. (2012). Response surface modelling of 
vibrating omega tube (Copper) Electromechanical Coriolis mass flow sensor. Expert 
Systems with Applications, 39(4), 4418–4426. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2011.09.149
Patil, P. P., Sharma, S. C., Jaiswal, H., & Kumar, A. (2014). Modeling Influence 
of Tube material on vibration Based EMMFS using ANFIS. Procedia Material 
Science, 6, 1097–1103. doi:10.1016/j.mspro.2014.07.181
Patil, P. P., Sharma, S. C., Paliwal, V., & Kumar, A. (2014). ANN Modelling of Cu 
Type Omega Vibration Based Mass Flow Sensor. Procedia Technology, 14, 260–265. 
doi:10.1016/j.protcy.2014.08.034
231
www.ebook3000.com

Compilation of References
Paul, D., & Pines, D. J. (2005). A review of vibration-based techniques for helicopter 
transmission diagnostics. Journal of Sound and Vibration, 282(1-2), 475–508. 
doi:10.1016/j.jsv.2004.02.058
Pennestrì, E., Mariti, L., Valentini, P. P., & Mucino, V. H. (2012). Efficiency evaluation 
of gearboxes for parallel hybrid vehicles: Theory and applications. Mechanism and 
Machine Theory, 49, 157–176. doi:10.1016/j.mechmachtheory.2011.10.012
Peterson, G. P., & Fletcher, L. S. (1990). Measurement of thermal contact conductance 
and thermal conductivity of anodized aluminum coatings. Journal of Heat Transfer, 
112/585.
Pierz, P. M. (1993). Thermal barrier coating development for diesel engine aluminum 
pistons. Surface and Coatings Technology, 6(1-3), 60–66. doi:10.1016/0257-
8972(93)90203-Z
Pomales-Torres, W., & Gonzalez, O. R. (1996). Nonlinear control of swing-up 
inverted pendulum. Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Control 
Applications, 259-264.
Prajapati, Y. K., Pathak, M., & Khan, M. K. (2015). A comparative study of 
flow boiling heat transfer in three different configurations of microchannels. 
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 85, 711–722. doi:10.1016/j.
ijheatmasstransfer.2015.02.016
Prajapati, Y. K., Pathak, M., & Khan, M. K. (2016). Clogging behaviour of an elongated 
bubble in uniform and diverging microchannel, Proc IMechE Part C. Journal of 
Mechanical Engineering Science, 230, 1861–1875. doi:10.1177/0954406215585365
Prajapati, Y. K., Pathak, M., & Khan, M. K. (2016). Transient heat transfer 
characteristics of segmented finned microchannels. Experimental Thermal and Fluid 
Science, 79, 134–142. doi:10.1016/j.expthermflusci.2016.07.004
Prajapati, Y. K., Pathak, M., & Khan, M. K. (2017). Bubble dynamics and flow 
boiling characteristics in three different microchannel configurations. International 
Journal of Thermal Sciences, 112, 371–382. doi:10.1016/j.ijthermalsci.2016.10.021
Prajapati, Y. K., Pathak, M., & Khan, M. K. (2017). Numerical investigation 
of subcooled flow boiling in segmented finned microchannels. International 
Communications in Heat and Mass Transfer, 86, 215–221. doi:10.1016/j.
icheatmasstransfer.2017.06.009
232

Compilation of References
Prasad, L. B., Tyagi, B., & Gupta, H. O. (2014). Optimal control of nonlinear inverted 
pendulum system using PID controller and LQR: Performance analysis without and 
with disturbance input. International Journal of Automation and Computing, 11(6), 
661–670. doi:10.1007/s11633-014-0818-1
Preumont, A. (2011). Vibration control of active structures: An Introduction. Springer 
Science & Business Media. doi:10.1007/978-94-007-2033-6
Pro-E 5.0. (2013). Designing guide manual. Academic Press.
Pro-E 5.0. (2013). Designing manual. Academic Press.
Qin-man, F. (2011).Modal analysis of a truck transmission based on ANSYS. Fourth 
International conference on Information and Computing. Doi:10.1109/ICIC.2011.75
Quaiyum, A. (2012). Experimental investigation of automatic transmission fluid 
(ATF) in an air cooled mini-channel heat exchanger (M.S. Thesis). Department 
Mechanical, Automotive, and Materials Engineering, University of Windsor, Canada.
Qu, W., Mohiuddin Mala, G., & Li, D. (2000). Heat transfer for water flow in 
trapezoidal silicon microchannels. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 
43(21), 3925–3936. doi:10.1016/S0017-9310(00)00045-4
Qu, W., & Mudawar, I. (2002). Experimental and numerical study of pressure drop 
and heat transfer in a single-phase micro-channel heat sink. International Journal of 
Heat and Mass Transfer, 45(12), 2549–2565. doi:10.1016/S0017-9310(01)00337-4
Ram, M., Singh, S. B., & Varshney, R. G. (2013). Performance improvement of 
a parallel redundant system with coverage factor. Journal of Engineering Science 
and Technology, 8(3), 344–350.
Ram, R., & Viswanadham, N. (1994). Performability of automated manufacturing 
systems with centralized material handling. International Journal of Production 
Research, 32(8), 1775–1799. doi:10.1080/00207549408957041
Raszillier, H., & Durst, F. (1991). Coriolis effect in mass flow metering. Archive of 
Applied Mechanics, 61, 192–214.
Reddy, J. N. (1984). Exact solutions of moderately thick laminated shells. 
Journal of Engineering Mechanics, 110(5), 794–809. doi:10.1061/(ASCE)0733-
9399(1984)110:5(794)
Rongmo, L., & Jian, W. (2013). Fluid-structure coupling analysis and simulation 
of viscosity effect on Coriolis mass flowmeter. APCOM & ISCM Singapore.
233
www.ebook3000.com

Compilation of References
Rosochowska, M., Balendra, R., & Chodnikiewicz, K. (2003). Measurement of 
thermal contact conductance. Journal of Materials Processing Technology, 135(2-
3), 204–210. doi:10.1016/S0924-0136(02)00897-X
Ruiz-Navas, E. M., Delgado, M. L., & Trindade, B. (2009). Improvement of the 
bonding interface of a sintered Al 2014–(Ti5Si3)p composite by the copper coating 
of the reinforcement. Composites. Part A, Applied Science and Manufacturing, 
40(8), 1283–1290. doi:10.1016/j.compositesa.2009.05.022
Salah, M. H., Mitchell, T. H., Wagner, J. R., & Dawson, D. M. (2007). Multiple 
Cooling Loops in Advanced Vehicle Thermal Management Systems. IEEE/ASME 
Transactions on Mechatronics.
Sapuan, S. M., Jacob, M. S. D., Mustapha, F., & Ismail, N. (2002). A prototype 
knowledge-based system for material selection of ceramic matrix composites of 
automotive engine Components. Materials & Design, 23(8), 701–708. doi:10.1016/
S0261-3069(02)00074-2
Saravanan, R. M., Raj, C. W., & Shanmugavalli, M. (2015), Design and Simulation of 
Coriolis Flow Tube in Meso and Micro Level to Determine Its Resonant Frequency. 
Middle-East Journal of Scientific Research, 23, 239-242. DOI: 10.5829/idosi.
mejsr.2015.23.ssps.101
Sayles, R. S., & Thomas, T. R. (1976). Thermal conductance of a rough elastic 
contact. Applied Energy, 2(2), 249–267. doi:10.1016/0306-2619(76)90012-X
Schaller, R. (2003). Metal matrix composites, a smart choice for high damping 
materials. Journal of Alloys and Compounds, 355(1-2), 131–135. doi:10.1016/
S0925-8388(03)00239-1
Shakuntala, S. (2011). Reliability analysis of Polytube industry using supplementary 
variable technique. Applied Mathematics and Computation, 218(8), 3981–3992. 
doi:10.1016/j.amc.2011.10.016
Sharma, A., Kumar, A., Susheel, C. K., & Kumar, R. (2016). Smart damping of 
functionally graded nanotube reinforced composite rectangular plates. Composite 
Structures, 155, 29–44. doi:10.1016/j.compstruct.2016.07.079
Sharma, A., Kumar, R., Vaish, R., & Chauhan, V. S. (2014). Lead-free piezoelectric 
materials performance in structural active vibration control. Journal of Intelligent 
Material Systems and Structures, 25(13), 1596–1604. doi:10.1177/1045389X13510222
234

Compilation of References
Sharma, A., Kumar, R., Vaish, R., & Chauhan, V. S. (2015). Active vibration control 
of space antenna reflector over wide temperature range. Composite Structures, 128, 
291–304. doi:10.1016/j.compstruct.2015.03.062
Sharma, A., Kumar, R., Vaish, R., & Chauhan, V. S. (2016). Experimental and 
numerical investigation of active vibration control over wide range of operating 
temperature. Journal of Intelligent Material Systems and Structures, 27(13), 
1846–1860. doi:10.1177/1045389X15615968
Sharma, M., Singh, S. P., & Sachdeva, B. L. (2007). Modal control of a plate 
using a fuzzy logic controller. Smart Materials and Structures, 16(4), 1331–1341. 
doi:10.1088/0964-1726/16/4/047
Sharma, S. C., Patil, P. P., Vasudev, M. A., & Jain, S. C. (2010). Performance 
Evaluation of an Indigenously Designed Copper (U) tube Coriolis Mass flow 
sensors. Measurement, 43(9), 1165–1172. doi:10.1016/j.measurement.2010.05.007
Silva, F. S. (2004). Fatigue on engine pistons – A compendium of case studies, 
science direct. Engineering Failure Analysis, 13(3), 480–492. doi:10.1016/j.
engfailanal.2004.12.023
Singh, K., & Jakhar, O. P. (2014). The Behavior of Temperature on Insulated 
(MgZrO3) Diesel Engine Piston With ANSYS. Academic Press.
Singhal, V., Litke, P. J., Black, A. F., & Garimella, S. V. (2005). An experimentally 
validated thermo-mechanical model for prediction of thermal contact conductance. 
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 48(25-26), 5446–5459. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2005.06.028
Singh, S., & Pal, K. (2015). Effect of surface modification on silicon carbide particles 
with nanocrystalline spinel LZO for enhanced damping and mechanical property. 
Materials & Design, 82, 223–237. doi:10.1016/j.matdes.2015.05.076
Singh, S., & Pal, K. (2017). Influence of surface morphology and UFG on damping 
and mechanical properties of composite reinforced with spinel MgAl2O4-SiC core-
shell microcomposites. Materials Characterization, 123, 244–255. doi:10.1016/j.
matchar.2016.11.042
SOLIDEDGE. (2006). Version 19.0. Author.
Soumelids, A., Gaspar, P., & Bokor, J. (1997). An inverted pendulum tool for 
teaching linear optimal and model control. Periodica Polytechnica Transportation 
Engineering, 25(1-2), 9–19.
235
www.ebook3000.com

Compilation of References
Sridhar, M. R., & Yovanovich, M. M. (1996). Elastoplastic contact conductance for 
isotropic conforming rough surface and comparision with experiments. Journal of 
Heat Transfer, 118(3).
Sridhar, M. R., & Yovanovich, M. M. (1996). Thermal contact conductance of tool 
steel and comparision with model. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 
39(4), 831–839. doi:10.1016/0017-9310(95)00141-7
Takano, W., & Nakamura, Y. (2017). Planning of goal-oriented motion from stochastic 
motion primitives and optimal controlling of joint torques in whole body. Robotics 
and Autonomous Systems, 91, 226–233. doi:10.1016/j.robot.2017.01.013
Torres, M. A. S., & Voorwald, V. J. C. (2002). An evaluation of shot peening, residual 
stresses and stress relaxation on the fatigue life of AISI 4340 steel. International 
Journal of Fatigue, 24(8), 877–886. doi:10.1016/S0142-1123(01)00205-5
Tsai, Y. M., & Crane, R. A. (1992). An analytical solution of a one- dimensional 
thermal contact conductance problem with one heat flux and one insulated boundary 
condition. Journal of Heat Transfer, 114(2), 503–505. doi:10.1115/1.2911301
Tseng, A. A. (1999). Thermal modeling of roll and strip interface in rolling 
processes: Part 2d simulation. Numerical Heat Transfer Part A, 35(2), 135–154. 
doi:10.1080/104077899275290
Vikram, Mistry, Gosai, & Nagarsheth. (2014). Temperature Distribution Analysis of 
MgZrO3 Coated and Conventional IC Engine parts using FEM. Academic Press.
Wang, K.-H., Yen, T.-C., & Fang, Y.-C. (2012). Comparison of availability between 
two systems with warm standby units and different imperfect coverage. Quality 
Technology & Quantitative Management, 9(3), 265–282. doi:10.1080/16843703.
2012.11673291
Wang, T., & Baker, R. (2014). Coriolis flowmwters: A review of developments 
over the past 20 years and an assessment of the state of the art and likely future 
directions. Flow Measurement and Instrumentation, 40, 99–123. doi:10.1016/j.
flowmeasinst.2014.08.015
Wankhade, R. L., & Bajoria, K. M. (2013). Free vibration and stability analysis 
of piezo-laminated plates using the finite element method. Smart Materials and 
Structures, 22(12), 125040. doi:10.1088/0964-1726/22/12/125040
Williamson, M., & Majumdar, A. (1992). Effect of surface deformations on contact 
conductance. Journal of Heat Transfer, 23, 345–349.
236

Compilation of References
Wong, C. C., & Chen, C. C. (2000). A GA-based method for constructing fuzzy 
systems directly from numerical data. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and 
Cybernetics, 30(6), 904–911. doi:10.1109/3477.891153 PMID:18252422
Xu, T., Rong, J., Xiang, D., Pan, C., & Yin, X. (2016). Dynamic modeling and 
stability analysis of a flexible spinning missile under thrust. International Journal 
of Mechanical Sciences, 119, 144–154. doi:10.1016/j.ijmecsci.2016.09.027
Yavin, Y. (1999). Control of a rotary inverted pendulum. Applied Mathematics 
Letters, 12(2), 131–134. doi:10.1016/S0893-9659(98)00161-X
Ying, L. C., & Pan, M. C. (2008). Using adaptive network based fuzzy inference 
system to forecast regional electricity loads. Energy Conversion and Management, 
49(2), 205–211. doi:10.1016/j.enconman.2007.06.015
Yong, J. Q., & Teo, C. J. (2014). Mixing and Heat Transfer Enhancement in 
Microchannels Containing Converging-Diverging Passages. Journal of Heat Transfer, 
136(4), 041704. doi:10.1115/1.4026090
Yovanovich & Antonetti. (1984). Thermal contact resistance in microelectronic 
equipment. In Thermal Management Concepts in Microelectronic Packaging From 
Component to System. ISHM Technical Monograph Series.
Zadeh. (2015). Simulation a disposable mass flow meter by an advanced FSI modeling 
and finite element analysis (Master’s Degree Thesis). Department of Mechanical 
Engineering, Blekinge Institute of Technology, Karlskrona, Sweden.
Zadeh, L. A. (1965). Fuzzy sets. Information and Control, 8(3), 338–353. doi:10.1016/
S0019-9958(65)90241-X
Zhang, J., Perez, R. J., & Lavernia, E. J. (1994). Effect of SiC and graphite particulates 
on the damping behaviour of metal matrix composites. Acta Metallurgica et Materialia, 
42(2), 395–409. doi:10.1016/0956-7151(94)90495-2
Zhao, Y. (2000). An asperity micro contact model incorporating the Transition 
from elastic deformation to fully plastic flow. ASME Journal of Heat Transfer, 
122, 235–264.
Zimparov, V. (2002). Energy Conservation through Heat Transfer Enhancement 
Techniques. International Journal of Energy Research, 26(7), 675–696. doi:10.1002/
er.810
237
www.ebook3000.com

About the Contributors
Ashwani Kumar is Officer at Department of Technical Education (Ministry 
of Technical Education), Government of Uttar Pradesh, India. He has seven years 
of academic and research experience in mechanical vibration and design, design 
of dynamics system with special emphasis in heavy vehicle dynamics, mechanics 
of solid, industrial management and BioMechanical body vibration analysis. He 
is editorial board member of two international journals and acts as review board 
member of 15 prestigious Web of science international journals. In addition he 
has also published 67 research articles in journals, book chapters and conferences. 
Presently he is involved in research and training for skill development.
Pravin P. Patil received M.Tech (Machine Design) and PhD (Mech. Engg.) 
degrees from the Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee. He has published more 
than 100 research papers in highly indexed international journals and conferences. 
He is on reviewer panel of various reputed International Journals in his areas of 
research such as IEEE/ASME Transaction of Mechatronics, ISA Transactions of 
Elsevier, etc. He has been awarded with Young Scientist Award for the year 2013 
(Research Grant of Rs. 18.3 Lakhs) by Department of Science and Technology 
(DST), New Delhi, Govt. of India. He is a recipient of MHRD / QIP Fellowship 
award of Govt. of India. He is recipient of Meritorious Research Performance award 
at Graphic Era University, Dehradun. He is consistently involved in teaching and 
research since last 18 years in multidisciplinary research areas which includes finite 
element analysis, mechatronics, mechanical vibration, soft computing techniques, 
computational statistics techniques, etc.
Yogesh K. Prajapati received M.Tech (Thermal Engg.) and PhD (Thermal Engg.) 
degrees from the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur and Patna respectively. 
He has published several research papers in highly indexed international journals 
and conferences. He has also been reviewer of reputed International Journal and 
238

About the Contributors
conferences in his areas of research such as Elsevier, FMFP, etc. He is consistently 
involved in teaching and research since last 8 years in interdisciplinary research areas 
which includes Multiphase flow, heat transfer, flow boiling in miniature devices, 
computational fluid dynamics, etc.
* * *
Divya Ahluwalia received her Ph.D degree in Mathematics from Indian Institute 
of Technology, Roorkee (India) in 2004. Currently, she is an Associate Professor 
& Head, Department of Mathematics, University of Petroleum and Energy Stud-
ies, Dehradun (India). Her research interest include controllability of deterministic 
systems and reliability theory.
Monika Manglik received a Bachelor’s Degree in Science from Rohilkhand 
University, Bareilly in 2002 and a Master’s Degree in Mathematics from H. N. B 
Gharwal University, Srinagar (Gharwal) in 2004. She has completed Ph.D. in math-
ematics from Graphic Era University, Dehradun, Uttarakhand in 2014. She worked 
as a Faculty Member for around two Years. Currentry she is working as Assistant 
Professor in University of Petroleum and Energy studies, Dehradun, Uttarakhand. 
She has taught several core courses in applied Mathematics at undergraduate and 
postgraduate levels. She has published research papers in National and international 
Journals also presented her works at National and International conferences. Her 
fields of research are reliability theory and applied Mathematics.
Mangey Ram received the B.Sc. degree in science from Chaudhary Charan Singh 
University, Meerut, India, in 2000, the M.Sc. degree in mathematics from Hemwati 
Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University, Srinagar (Garhwal), India, in 2004, and the 
Ph.D. degree major in mathematics and minor in computer science from G. B. Pant 
University of Agriculture and Technology, Pantnagar, India, in 2008. He has been a 
Faculty Member for around nine years and has taught several core courses in pure 
and applied mathematics at undergraduate, postgraduate, and doctorate levels. He 
is currently a Professor at Graphic Era University, Dehradun, India. Before joining 
the Graphic Era University, he was a Deputy Manager (Probationary Officer) with 
Syndicate Bank for a short period. He is Editor-in-Chief of International Journal of 
Mathematical, Engineering and Management Sciences; Executive Editor of Journal 
of Graphic Era University; Associate Executive Editor of Journal of Reliability and 
Statistical Studies and the Guest Editor & Member of the editorial board of many 
journals. He is a regular Reviewer for international journals, including IEEE, Elsevier, 
Springer, Emerald, John Wiley, Taylor & Francis and many other publishers. He has 
239
www.ebook3000.com

About the Contributors
published 111 research publications in IEEE, Springer, Emerald, World Scientific 
and many other national and international journals of repute and also presented his 
works at national and international conferences. His fields of research are reliability 
theory and applied mathematics. Dr. Ram is a senior member of the IEEE, member 
of Operational Research Society of India, Society for Reliability Engineering, Qual-
ity and Operations Management in India, International Association of Engineers in 
Hong Kong, and Emerald Literati Network in the U.K. He has been a member of 
the organizing committee of a number of international and national conferences, 
seminars, and workshops. He has been conferred with “Young Scientist Award” by 
the Uttarakhand State Council for Science and Technology, Dehradun, in 2009. He 
has been awarded the “Best Faculty Award” in 2011 and recently Research Excel-
lence Award in 2015 for his significant contribution in academics and research at 
Graphic Era University.
240

Index
A
Active vibration control 23, 42, 47
advanced numerical simulation technique 
51
aluminium 50, 52, 65-68, 70, 72-73, 131
aluminum alloy 122, 157, 159
automobile 23, 38, 64, 73, 159
Availability 96-98, 115
C
Ceramic Coating 67, 158-160, 167-168, 
171-174
ceramic-coated aluminum alloy 157
Composite materials 63-64
composites 64-68, 70, 72-73
Conductance 118-122, 127, 129, 131, 134
Conjugate 76, 79-80, 82, 84, 92, 95, 121
conversion systems 64
copper substrate 76, 80-82, 87
D
deformation theory 23-24, 47, 121
dissipates frictional heat 2
Diverging Channel 76, 78-79, 81, 86-88, 
90-92, 95
double input-single output (DISO) 23, 47
Dynamic Analysis 7, 35, 39-40, 42, 55
E
elastic strain 7-9, 68
EMMFS 50-52, 54-56, 58-60
Excitation 52, 55, 59
F
FEM formulation 23, 47
finite element 1, 18, 22-23, 34, 40, 47, 51, 
118, 123, 125, 156, 158, 168
Finite Element Analysis (FEA) 1, 3-4, 7, 
9, 11, 14, 16, 18-19, 50-52, 54-55, 59, 
156, 168-170
Finite Element Method (FEM) 22-23, 
47, 118
Five-link inverted pendulum 140-141, 153
free-body-diagram (FBD) 140-145, 147, 
149, 151, 153
free-body-diagram (FBD) analysis 140-142
fuel economy 2, 9
Fundamental Frequency 51, 55, 59
fuzzy logic 22-23, 32-34, 42-47, 98, 141
Fuzzy logic controller 22-23, 32-34, 42-47
G
gas turbines 64
Gaussian distribution 121, 123-124
Gear oil 1-4, 7, 11, 13, 19
Gearbox 1-9, 11-19
H
heat transfer 3, 7, 12, 15, 76, 78-80, 83-
84, 86-87, 89-92, 119, 121-123, 128, 
160, 171
Higher gearing 2, 4, 8-9, 11-16
I
internal combustion engine 156-157, 160
241
www.ebook3000.com

Index
Internal friction 64, 68, 70
Inverted Pendulum 140-141, 153
M
Manufacturing System 96-97
Markov process 96, 98
Material 2, 4, 11, 24, 28, 35-38, 50-51, 63-
64, 68, 70-71, 78, 84, 99, 119, 121, 
156, 158-160, 167-168, 170-171, 174
mathematical modeling 102, 140, 153
Mechanical properties 2, 64, 70, 73, 159, 
167, 170
metal 66, 71-73, 159
Microchannels 76-81, 83, 86, 89, 92
Modeling 4, 50, 102, 118, 126-127, 140, 153
N
Newton’s second law 140-142, 153
nonlinear fuzzy logic 23, 44-46
numerical simulation 3-4, 14, 18, 34, 39, 
51, 118, 122
O
omega shape 51
P
paper manufacturing 98-100, 115
physical properties 2, 11, 64, 91
Piezo-laminated composite 23, 40, 43, 47
Piston 156-174
Proportional-integral-derivative (PID) 
controllers 141
R
Relaxation phenomena 70
Reliability Analysis 97
repair rates 97-98, 115
resonating tubes 51-52
rotational speed 1-3, 6-8, 11-15
rough surfaces 118, 121-125, 131, 135
Roughness 118-120, 123-124, 129-133, 135
S
shell structure 22-23, 32, 35-36, 39-43, 
45, 47
SiC particles 66-68, 72
solar cells 64
spherical shell 22, 35-43, 45
spherical shell structure 35-36, 39-43, 45
steady state 1, 3-4, 11, 14, 18-19
structural elements 64, 68, 73
supplementary variable 96-98
surface temperature 1, 11-19, 157-158
T
temperature 1-3, 11-19, 23, 64, 68-71, 77, 
79-80, 82-88, 90, 92, 119, 122, 128, 
157-160, 171-173
thermal analysis 1, 3, 11, 18, 156, 158, 
169, 171, 174
Thermal contact 77-78, 118-122, 127, 129, 
131, 134
three dimensional (3D) 79-80, 82, 125, 
135, 167-169
Total deformation 7-9, 11, 160, 170, 172, 
174
transfer effect 80, 92
242

