Communications
in Computer and Information Science
77
www.ebook3000.com

Chin-Chen Chang Thanos Vasilakos
Purnendu Das Tai-hoon Kim
Byeong-Ho Kang Muhammad Khurram Khan
(Eds.)
Advanced
Communication
and Networking
Second International Conference, ACN 2010
Miyazaki, Japan, June 23-25, 2010
Proceedings
1 3

Volume Editors
Chin-Chen Chang
National Chung Cheng University
Minhsiung Township, Chiayi County, Taiwan
E-mail: ccc@cs.ccu.edu.tw
Thanos Vasilakos
University of Western Macedonia
Kozani, Greece
E-mail: vasilako@ath.forthnet.gr
Purnendu Das
Heritage Institute of Technology
Calcutta, India
E-mail: purnendu_das@yahoo.com
Tai-hoon Kim
Hannam University
Daejeon, South Korea
E-mail: taihoonn@hnu.kr
Byeong-Ho Kang
University of Tasmania
Hobart, Australia
E-mail: bhkang@utas.edu.au
Muhammad Khurram Khan
King Saud University
Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
E-mail: khurram.phd@gmail.com
Library of Congress Control Number: 2010928189
CR Subject Classiﬁcation (1998): I.4, I.5, I.2, C.2, H.4, H.3
ISSN
1865-0929
ISBN-10
3-642-13404-1 Springer Berlin Heidelberg New York
ISBN-13
978-3-642-13404-3 Springer Berlin Heidelberg New York
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved, whether the whole or part of the material is
concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, re-use of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting,
reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other way, and storage in data banks. Duplication of this publication
or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the German Copyright Law of September 9, 1965,
in its current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer. Violations are liable
to prosecution under the German Copyright Law.
springer.com
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010
Printed in Germany
Typesetting: Camera-ready by author, data conversion by Scientiﬁc Publishing Services, Chennai, India
Printed on acid-free paper
06/3180
5 4 3 2 1 0
www.ebook3000.com

Foreword 
Advanced Science and Technology, Advanced Communication and Networking, 
Information Security and Assurance, Ubiquitous Computing and Multimedia Applica-
tions are conferences that attract many academic and industry professionals. The goal 
of these co-located conferences is to bring together researchers from academia and 
industry as well as practitioners to share ideas, problems and solutions relating to the 
multifaceted aspects of advanced science and technology, advanced communication 
and networking, information security and assurance, ubiquitous computing and mul-
timedia applications. 
This co-located event included the following conferences: AST 2010 (The second 
International Conference on Advanced Science and Technology), ACN 2010 (The 
second International Conference on Advanced Communication and Networking), ISA 
2010 (The 4th International Conference on Information Security and Assurance) and 
UCMA 2010 (The 2010 International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing and 
Multimedia Applications). 
We would like to express our gratitude to all of the authors of submitted papers and 
to all attendees, for their contributions and participation. We believe in the need for 
continuing this undertaking in the future.  
We acknowledge the great effort of all the Chairs and the members of advisory 
boards and Program Committees of the above-listed events, who selected 15% of over 
1,000 submissions, following a rigorous peer-review process. Special thanks go to 
SERSC (Science & Engineering Research Support soCiety) for supporting these co-
located conferences. 
We are grateful in particular to the following speakers who kindly accepted our in-
vitation and, in this way, helped to meet the objectives of the conference:  Hojjat 
Adeli (The Ohio State University), Ruay-Shiung Chang (National Dong Hwa Univer-
sity), Adrian Stoica (NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory), Tatsuya Akutsu (Kyoto Uni-
versity) and Tadashi Dohi (Hiroshima University). 
We would also like to thank Rosslin John Robles and Maricel O. Balitanas, gradu-
ate students of Hannam University, who helped in editing the material with great 
passion. 
April 2010 
Tai-hoon Kim 

Preface
We would like to welcome you to the proceedings of the Second International Confer-
ence on Advanced Communication and Networking (ACN 2010), which was held on 
June 23–25, 2010, at Sheraton Grande Ocean Resort, in Miyazaki, Japan. 
ACN 2010 focused on various aspects of advances in advanced communication and 
networking with computational sciences, mathematics and information technology. It 
provided a chance for academic and industry professionals to discuss recent progress 
in the related areas. We expect that the conference and its publications will be a trig-
ger for further related research and technology improvements in this important subject. 
We would like to acknowledge the great effort of all the Chairs and members of the 
Program Committee. Out of around 190 submissions to ACN 2010, we accepted 27 
papers to be included in the proceedings and presented during the conference. This 
gives an acceptance ratio firmly below 15%. Twelve of the papers accepted for ACN 
2010 were published in a special volume, LNCS 6059, by Springer. The remaining 15 
accepted papers can be found in this CCIS volume. 
We would like to express our gratitude to all of the authors of submitted papers and 
to all the attendees, for their contributions and participation. We believe in the need 
for continuing this undertaking in the future.  
Once more, we would like to thank all the organizations and individuals who sup-
ported this event as a whole and, in particular, helped in the success of ACN 2010. 
April 2010 
Alan Chin-Chen 
Thanos Vasilakos 
Purnendu Das 
Tai-hoon Kim 
Byeong-Ho Kang 
Muhammad Khurram Khan 
www.ebook3000.com

Organization 
Organizing Committee 
Honorary Chair  
Hojjat Adeli (The Ohio State University, USA) 
General Chair 
 
Alan Chin-Chen Chang (National Chung Cheng  
                                                University, Taiwan) 
Thanos Vasilakos (University of Western Macedonia,  
Greece)
Purnendu Das (Heritage Institute of Technology, India) 
Program Co-chairs: 
Tai-hoon Kim (Hannam University, Korea) 
Byeong-Ho KANG (University of Tasmania, Australia) 
Muhammad Khurram Khan (King Saud University,  
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia) 
Workshop Co-chairs 
Muhammad Khurram Khan (King Saud University,  
                                            Kingdom of Saudi Arabia) 
Seok-soo Kim (Hannam University, Korea) 
International Advisory 
Board  
 
Yun-sik Kwak (Chungju University, Korea) 
Hsiao-Hwa Chen (National Cheng Kung University,  
Taiwan) 
Publicity Co-chairs 
Debnath Bhattacharyya (Heritage Institute of Technology, 
     India) 
Ching-Hsien Hsu (Chung Hua University, Taiwan) 
Deepak Laxmi Narasimha (University of Malaya, Malaysia) 
Prabhat K. Mahanti (University of New Brunswick,  
 
     Canada) 
Publication Chair  
Bongen Gu (Chungju National University, Korea) 
Local Arrangements  
Co-chairs  
 
G.S. Tomar (VITM, India) 
Debnath Bhattacharyya (Heritage Institute of Technology, 
     India

Organization
X
Program Committee 
Aboul Ella Hassanien 
Ai-Chun Pang 
Andres Iglesias Prieto 
Chao-Tung Yang 
Chia-Chen Lin 
Cho-Li Wang 
Chu-Hsing Lin 
Dimitrios Vergados 
Don-Lin Yang 
Farrukh A. Khan 
Gianluigi Ferrari 
Hong Sun 
Hui Chen 
Janusz Szczepanski 
Javier Garcia-Villalba 
Jiann-Liang 
Jieh-Shan George Yeh 
Juha Jaakko Röning 
Kazuto Ogawa 
Kwok-Yan Lam 
Li Weng 
Marc Lacoste 
Matthias Reuter 
Michel Deza 
Mohammad Riaz Moghal 
N. Jaisankar 
Rui L. Aguiar 
Shijian Li 
Shun-Ren Yang 
Soon Ae Chun 
Sun-Yuan Hsieh 
Tae Oh 
Vincenzo De Florio 
Victor Leung 
Viktor Yarmolenko 
Witold Pedrycz 
www.ebook3000.com

Table of Contents
Design of a Reliable Wireless Switch for the Intersection Area on
Vehicular Telematics Networks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Junghoon Lee, Gyung-Leen Park, Ho-Young Kwak,
Sang Joon Lee, and Mikyung Kang
A Middleware Based Approach to Dynamically Deploy Location Based
Services onto Heterogeneous Mobile Devices Using Bluetooth in Indoor
Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
Pampa Sadhukhan, Rijurekha Sen, and Pradip K. Das
Hiding Data in Audio Signal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
Debnath Bhattacharyya, Poulami Dutta, Maricel O. Balitanas,
Tai-hoon Kim, and Purnendu Das
Feature Extraction and Analysis of Breast Cancer Specimen . . . . . . . . . . .
30
Debnath Bhattacharyya, Rosslin John Robles, Tai-hoon Kim, and
Samir Kumar Bandyopadhyay
Three-Phase Scheme for Supporting Time-Constrained Data with
Duplication in Wireless Broadcast Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
Chao-Chun Chen, Lien-Fa Lin, and Shih-Chia Wang
A Feedback-Based Secure Path Approach for Wireless Sensor Networks
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
Yuxin Mao
An Eﬀective Power Saving Mechanism for IEEE 802.11 PSM in
Double-Layered Mobile P2P Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
Ju-Hee Lee, Taek-Hun Kim, Jin-Woo Song, Kwang-Jo Lee, and
Sung-Bong Yang
A New Image Enhancement Method Based on Nonsubsampled
Contourlet Transform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
Md. Foisal Hossain, Mohammad Reza Alsharif, and
Katsumi Yamashita
Enable Cache Eﬀect on Forwarding Table in Metro-Ethernet . . . . . . . . . .
81
Xiaocui Sun and Zhijun Wang
A Handover Mechanism Using IEEE 802.21 in Heterogeneous Wireless
Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
Lin-Huang Chang, Chau-Chi Wang, and Tsung-Han Lee
Duplicate Address Detection Table in IPv6 Mobile Networks . . . . . . . . . .
109
Farkhod Alisherov and Tai-hoon Kim

XII
Table of Contents
A Hop-Sensitive Mechanism to Establish Route Optimization in Mobile
Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
116
J. Isac Gnanaraj, P. Calduwel Newton, L. Arockiam, and
Tai-hoon Kim
A Novel Analysis of Single Mode Fiber for Reduction of Chromatic
Dispersion Using Dispersion Compensated Fiber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
124
Laxman Tawade, Shantanu Jagdale, Munir Sayyad, and
Sanjay Nalbalwar
Image Tampering Detection and Recovery Using Dual Watermarks and
Cyclic Redundancy Checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
134
Chu-Hsing Lin, Jung-Chun Liu, Wei-Cheng Hsu,
Hsing-Weng Wang, Wei-Chih Lin, and Jian-Wei Li
Response Time Enhancement of Sensor Network Using the Solid State
Drive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
144
Dae-Sik Ko and Yoon-Sik Kwak
Author Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
149
www.ebook3000.com

Design of a Reliable Wireless Switch for the
Intersection Area
on Vehicular Telematics Networks⋆
Junghoon Lee1, Gyung-Leen Park1, Ho-Young Kwak2,
Sang Joon Lee2, and Mikyung Kang3,⋆⋆
1 Dept. of Computer Science and Statistics
2 Dept. of Computer Engineering,
Jeju National University, 690-756, Jeju Do, Republic of Korea
3 University of Southern California, Information Sciences Institute, VA22203, USA
{jhlee,glpark,sjlee,kwak}@jejunu.ac.kr, mkkang@east.isi.edu
Abstract. This paper proposes an eﬃcient message switch scheme for an
intersection area in vehicular telematics network, where routing decision
may be complex due to dynamic vehicle distribution change. Installed at
each corner of an intersection, each switch node opens an external interface
to exchange messages with vehicles proceeding to the intersection from the
pre-assigned branch, while switching the received messages via the inter-
nal interfaces, accessing two shared channels according to slot-based MAC.
The diﬀerence in the access phases across two channels further enhances
the switch speed and message discard ratio. The performance measure-
ment result obtained by simulation using SMPL shows that the proposed
scheme can improve the access delay by up to 16.4 %, showing over 85 %
delivery ratio for all discard interval range.
1
Introduction
Nowadays, wireless vehicular communications have become an important prior-
ity for car manufactures, while the penetration of in-vehicle telematics devices
capable of exchanging messages makes it possible to build a vehicular network[1].
The wireless network type may range from the fully-connected cellular network
to the infrastructure-free ad oc network, having a variety of hybrid combination
of the two[2]. Each network has its own beneﬁts and drawbacks in terms of cost,
maintainability, connectivity, and so on. In particular, vehicular ad hoc networks,
or VANET in short, draw special attention from both industry and academy in
diverse areas covering communication interface technology, medium access con-
trol, routing protocol, network conﬁguration, and vehicular application design,
introducing many standards in each area[3].
⋆This research was supported by the MKE(The Ministry of Knowledge Economy),
Korea, under the ITRC(Information Technology Research Center) support program
supervised by the NIPA(National IT Industry Promotion Agency). (NIPA-2010-
(C1090-1011-0009)).
⋆⋆Corresponding author.
C.-C. Chang et al. (Eds.): ACN 2010, CCIS 77, pp. 1–8, 2010.
c
⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

2
J. Lee et al.
On the vehicular network, many application scenarios are possible. In addi-
tion to the basic safety-related applications such as traﬃc accident propaga-
tion and emergency warning, information retrieval is very useful for drivers and
passengers[4]. For example, a driver may want to know the current traﬃc condi-
tion of speciﬁc road segments that lie on the way to its destination, query several
shops to decide where to go, and check parking lot availability. Moreover, a pas-
senger on a bus may query several bus stops to choose the best next stop for
bus transfer[5]. Such queries must be delivered to the destinations and the result
be sent back to the query issuer. Sometimes, the query result may be the video
data. It is the routing protocol that delivers the message, and VANET inevitably
pursues a best-eﬀort strategy, as fast vehicle movement and the dynamic distri-
bution change do not only make it impossible to provide a guaranteed and timely
message delivery, but also makes the end-to-end error control have no eﬀect.
Like in other mobile ad hoc networks, multiple nodes participate in routing
and relaying messages in VANET, exchanging messages according to the under-
lying MAC protocol[6]. In the message delivery procedure, the distribution of
nodes is of great importance, while the VANET nodes include vehicles themselves
and other static entities such as traﬃc light and parking system. Particularly,
each vehicle can move only along the road segment and static nodes are gen-
erally placed on the roadside[7]. Correspondingly, the message delivery path in
VANET must trail the actual road layout. In this delivery path, intersection
areas are important for both vehicle traﬃc and data traﬃc. Moreover, as the
vehicle can move very fast, without an eﬃcient message delivery mechanism, the
reply message would not be sent back to the vehicle which have generated query.
An end-to-end path generally involves one or more intersection areas where
many vehicles are likely to gather, making the routing decision very complex
and raises intervehicle interference. How to manage the communication in this
area is very critical to the communication performance such as transmission
delay and delivery ratio. In this regard, this paper is to design a robust message
switch scheme for the intersection area in VANET, exploiting a set of stationary
switch nodes which run a slot-based MAC on dual frequency channels. Even
though such employment of additional equipments brings extra cost and loses
the advantage of autonomous ad hoc operation, access predictability, enhanced
delivery speed, and better delivery ratio can compensate for the loss.
This paper is organized as follows: After issuing the problem in Section 1,
Section 2 describes the background of this paper. Section 3 designs a wireless
switch for intersection areas and performance measurement results are exhibited
in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 summarizes and concludes this paper with a brief
introduction of future work.
2
Background and Related Work
Fig. 1 shows the vehicle distribution on a real road network. This ﬁgure is ob-
tained from the Jeju taxi telematics system which keeps track of each taxi for the
purpose of providing an eﬃcient taxi dispatch service to customer[8]. This system
www.ebook3000.com

Design of a Reliable Wireless Switch for the Intersection Area
3
Fig. 1. Car distribution at intersections
creates location history data by which we can trace the spatiotemporal movement
of each vehicle on the road network. This history is very useful for the vehicular
network design and the traﬃc pattern analysis. In this ﬁgure, the intersection is
represented by a rectangle and the road segment is by a line, while the location of
taxis during the speciﬁc time interval is marked with a small dot. The intersection
area has more dots, which appear just along the road segment, even though the
number of dots is diﬀerent for each segment which meets at an intersection.
As for the wireless channel, the IEEE 802.11b standard speciﬁes 11 channels
operating in the 2.4 GHz band with 80 MHz of reusable spectrum. Even though
the number of simultaneous channels in a cell is limited to 3 due to the channel
overlap problem, it is possible to create multiple channels from the wireless
spectrum in a cell. In addition, Zigbee and Wireless HART support channels
spaced by 5 MHz guard band, making it possible for each node to hop over
channels to reduce the eﬀect of channel errors[9]. The link layer is based on
a TDMA style access scheme which runs on top of the time synchronization
mechanism carried out continuously during the whole operation time by means
of MAC PDUs. The time axis is divided into 10 ms time slots and a group of
consecutive slots are deﬁned to be a superframe. This access scheme can provide
bounded access time for each node.
High mobility and nonuniform distribution of vehicles prevent the existing
routing schemes from applying to the vehicular network. Quite a lot of researches
have been recently conducted for vehicular networks to deal with such problems.
Basically, the carry and forward strategy is preferred to cope with disconnection
in the sparse network part[10]. Here, when a node cannot ﬁnd a receiver, it
stores the message in its buﬀer until it enters the range of a new receiver. Even
though this scheme increases the transmission delay, it is better not to discard
a message. This leads to a large traﬃc load around the intersection area.
As a variant of carry and forward scheme, VADD (Vehicle-Assisted Data De-
livery) exploits predictable vehicle mobility model in which vehicle movement is

4
J. Lee et al.
TsTxAckDelay
TsCCA
TsRsTx
TsCCSOffset
TsMaxPacket
TsRxAckDelay
TsAckWait
TsCCSOffset
Source
Destination
TsRxOffset
TsError
TsRxWait
TsAck
Fig. 2. Time slot organization
limited by the traﬃc pattern and road layout. Based on the traﬃc pattern esti-
mation, a vehicle decides the best next node to forward a packet[5]. In addition,
Zhao et al.’s V2VR is a relay-based scheme that extends the service range of
roadside APs[11]. When the link quality between a drive-thru vehicle and the
AP is poor, a relay with good link quality to the vehicle and the AP are chosen
to improve the performance. This scheme also designed a technique to select
forward and backward proxies based on the mobility pattern of the vehicle.
3
Wireless Switch Design
Fig. 3 shows the basic idea of this paper. At the intersection where many vehicles
pass by, four static switch nodes from A to D are installed at each corner. Each
switch node has internal and external interfaces, each of which is bound to a spe-
ciﬁc communication channel. While vehicles exchange messages via the external
interface, the internal interface connects the 4 switch nodes for the purpose of
speeding up the intersection transit time. For internal message exchange, each
node is connected to dual frequency channels which run slot-based MAC. Exist-
ing researches have also pointed out that multiple network interfaces does not
cost too much[6]. These 4 switch nodes cooperatively play a role of high-speed
wireless switch, receiving a message from the vehicles and switching to the appro-
priate directions. For the wireless switch part, switch nodes access each channel
in a slot-based manner as shown in Fig 3. (b). While this access enables a node
predictably access the shared channel, it demands that the clock of 4 nodes must
be synchronized. However, clock synchronization can be easily achieved by GPS
technology which provides a global clock to the whole world.
The interfaces for the switch part and the vehicle part may be diﬀerent, for
example, WLAN and WirelessHART. A vehicle having messages, whether they
are created at the node or received from the other vehicles, checks if it can reach a
switch node, when it approaches an intersection. If so, it sends its message directly
to the switch node without contacting any other vehicles. Otherwise, it sends to
the vehicle in its forward. In case there is no vehicle in its transmission range,
too, it just carries the message and keeps moving. Each switch node ﬁrst stores
the message received from the vehicles in its buﬀer until its slot time. The buﬀer
www.ebook3000.com

Design of a Reliable Wireless Switch for the Intersection Area
5
(b) time slot operation
A
B
B
A
C
D
C
D
A
C
A
B
C
D
(a) configuration of swithing nodes
time
.....
.....
.....
.....
Fig. 3. Basic concept
space can be assumed to have no limitation, but it is desirable to discard a mes-
sage which stayed in the buﬀer too much so as to obviate unnecessarily prolonged
transmission of the subsequent messages.
4
Performance Measurement
We conducted performance evaluation via simulation using SMPL, which pro-
vides a simple and robust discrete event trace library similar to ns-2 event
scheduler[12]. The performance metric includes the channel access delay and
delivery ratio. The simulation assumes that messages arrive from vehicles ac-
cording to an exponential distribution having diﬀerent average interarrival times.
For simplicity, each message ﬁts a single time slot, making simple to estimate
the traﬃc load. Moreover, every time is aligned to a slot length. In addition, we
do not concern the channel error or the slot allocation according to the diﬀerent
message arrival rate on each direction, and they can be employed from other
papers. We mainly focus on the idea of operating two channels in an intersection
switch.
Fig. 4 plots the access delay according to the traﬃc load oﬀered to the inter-
section. We compared the two cases, namely, when the time slot of two chan-
nels are identical (marked as normal) and when the slots proceed as shown in
Fig 3. (b) (marked as proposed). The message arrival ratio of one direction can
be up to three times as large as that of other direction. Without this diﬀerence,
the no message can be discarded until the traﬃc load reaches 1.0 just with a
small buﬀer. When there is no message discard, both schemes cannot avoid delay
explosion, resulting in the uncontrollable access time when the intersection load
gets higher than 0.7. On the contrary, if we discard the message which has stayed
in the buﬀer more than 32 slots, the access delay is very stable. The proposed
scheme improves the access delay by up to 16.4 % in both cases. However, the
gaps get narrower to 2.7 % for no discard case and to 4.3 % for discard case,
respectively.

6
J. Lee et al.
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
 16
 0.5
 0.55
 0.6
 0.65
 0.7
 0.75
Access delay (slot time)
Insersection load
"Normal(NoDiscard)"
"Normal(Discard32)"
"Proposed(NoDiscard)"
"Proposed(Discard32)"
Fig. 4. Access time vs. load
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
 11
 12
 13
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
Access delay (slot time)
Discard interval
"Normal"
"Proposed"
Fig. 5. Access time vs. discard interval
 0.8
 0.82
 0.84
 0.86
 0.88
 0.9
 0.92
 0.94
 0.96
 0.98
 1
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
Delivery ratio
Discard interval
"Normal"
"Proposed"
Fig. 6. Delivery ratio vs. discard interval
www.ebook3000.com

Design of a Reliable Wireless Switch for the Intersection Area
7
Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 show the access delay and the delivery ratio according to the
discard interval, respectively. If the discard interval is 10, it means that messages
that have stayed more than 10 will be discarded. In this ﬁgure, network load is
ﬁxed to 1.0. The shorter the discard interval, the shorter we can expect the
access delay will be, while more messages are likely to be discarded. As can be
expected, the access delay increases linearly according to the discard interval.
However, as shown in Fig. 6, the delivery ratio (thus discard ratio) is not aﬀected
signiﬁcantly by the discard interval when it is larger than 15. This indicates that
access delay is controllable by the network manager according to the application
requirement and traﬃc condition without sacriﬁcing the delivery ratio.
5
Conclusion
This paper has proposed and measured the performance of a message switch
scheme for an intersection area in vehicular telematics network, where routing
decision may be complex due to dynamic vehicle distribution change. Installed
at each corner of an intersection where many vehicles potentially increase the in-
terference, each switch node receives messages from the external interface, while
switching them via the internal interfaces which run dual frequency channels.
The slot-based access in the internal channels provides the bounded channel ac-
cess time, while the diﬀerence in the access phases across two channels further
enhances the switch time and the message delivery ratio. The performance mea-
surement result obtained by simulation using SMPL shows that the proposed
scheme can improve the access delay by up to 16.4%, showing a stable pattern
for the increased network load.
As future work, we will integrate an error control scheme that can take ad-
vantage of the dual channels.
References
1. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/telematics
2. Namboodiri, V., Agrawal, M., Gao, L.: A study on the feasibility of mobile gateways
for vehicular ad-hoc networks. In: ACM VANET, pp. 66–75 (2004)
3. Society of Automotive Engineers: Dedicated short range communication message
set dictionary. Technical Report Standard J2735 (2006)
4. Dikaiakos, M., Iqbal, S., Nadeem, T., Iftode, L.: VITP: An information transfer
protocol for vehicular computing. In: ACM VANET, pp. 30–39 (2005)
5. Zhao, J., Cao, G.: VADD: Vehicle-assisted data delivery in vehicular ad hoc net-
works. In: IEEE INFOCOM (2006)
6. Naumov, V., Gross, T.: Connectivity-aware routing (CAR) in vehicular ad hoc
networks. In: IEEE Infocom, pp. 1919–1927 (2007)
7. Lochert, C., Scheuermann, B., Wewetzer, C., Luebke, A., Mauve, M.: Data aggre-
gation and roadside unit placement for a VANET traﬃc information system. In:
ACM VANET, pp. 58–65 (2008)
8. Lee, J., Park, G., Kim, H., Yang, Y., Kim, P.: A telematics service system based
on the Linux cluster. In: Shi, Y., van Albada, G.D., Dongarra, J., Sloot, P.M.A.
(eds.) ICCS 2007. LNCS, vol. 4490, pp. 660–667. Springer, Heidelberg (2007)

8
J. Lee et al.
9. Song, S., Han, S., Mok, A., Chen, D., Nixon, M., Lucas, M., Pratt, W.: Wire-
lessHART: Applying Wireless Technology in Real-Time Industrial Process Con-
trol. In: The 14th IEEE Real-Time and Embedded Technology and Applications
Symposium, pp. 377–386 (2008)
10. Chen, Z., Kung, H., Vlah, D.: Ad hoc relay wireless networks over moving vehicles
on highways. In: ACM MOBIHOC (2001)
11. Zhao, J., Arnold, T., Zhang, Y., Cao, G.: Extending drive-thru data access by
vehicle-to-vehicle relay. In: ACM VANET, pp. 30–39 (2008)
12. MacDougall, M.: Simulating Computer Systems: Techniques and Tools. MIT Press,
Cambridge (1987)
www.ebook3000.com

A Middleware Based Approach to Dynamically
Deploy Location Based Services onto
Heterogeneous Mobile Devices Using Bluetooth
in Indoor Environment
Pampa Sadhukhan1, Rijurekha Sen2, and Pradip K. Das3
1 School of Mobile Computing & Communication,
Jadavpur University, India 700032
pampa.sadhukhan@gmail.com
2 Dept. of CSE, IIT Bombay, Powai, Mumbai-400076
riju@cse.iitb.ac.in
3 Faculty of Engineering & Technology,
Mody Institute of Technology & Science, India 332311
pkdas@ieee.org
Abstract. Several methods for providing location based service (LBS)
to mobile devices in indoor environment using wireless technologies like
WLAN, RFID and Bluetooth have been proposed, implemented and eval-
uated. However, most of them do not focus on heterogeneity of mobile
platforms, memory constraint of mobile devices, the adaptability of client
or device to the new services it discovers whenever it reaches a new lo-
cation. In this paper, we have proposed a Middleware based approach
of LBS provision in the indoor environment, where a Bluetooth enabled
Base Station (BS) detects Bluetooth enabled mobile devices and pushes
a proper client application only to those devices that belong to some reg-
istered subscriber of LBS. This dynamic deployment enables the mobile
clients to access any new service without having preinstalled interface
to that service beforehand and thus the client′s memory consumption is
reduced. Our proposed work also addresses the other issues like authen-
ticating the clients before providing them LBSs and introducing paid
services. We have evaluated its performance in term of ﬁle transfer time
with respect to ﬁle size and throughput with respect to distance. Ex-
perimental results on service consumption time by the mobile client for
diﬀerent services are also presented.
Keywords: Base Station (BS), Location Based Service (LBS), Middle-
ware, Bluetooth.
1
Introduction and Related Work
The current advancement in wireless communication technology and mobile plat-
form has led the researchers to work in the ﬁeld of providing location based
services (LBSs) to mobile clients. It is quite helpful to have LBS in indoor en-
vironments like a shopping mall, a railway station, an airport or a university
C.-C. Chang et al. (Eds.): ACN 2010, CCIS 77, pp. 9–22, 2010.
c
⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

10
P. Sadhukhan, R. Sen, and P.K. Das
department building for sharing information of exciting purchase oﬀers, sched-
ule change of train and ﬂight, direction to reach a location and so on. Several
major problems faced by the service providers to provide aforementioned services
are pointed out in the following sub sections.
1.1
Problem of Localization and Technology Availability
Several approaches [1, 2] to provide context-aware services and LBS in ubiq-
uitous environment have been proposed. These approaches depend on the in-
tegrated positioning technology employing Global Positioning System (GPS),
Radio-frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) and Wi-Fi to provide location-related in-
formation and context-aware services to the mobile users. However, one of the
major challenges for providing LBS indoor is localization, as GPS does not work
properly in indoor environment. Cell based localization is too coarse to localize
within a building. Acoustic wave based localization as in [3] needs dense sensor
deployment. On the other hand, a Bluetooth enabled Base Station (BS) can
localize all Bluetooth enabled devices in its vicinity very easily using Bluetooth
inquiry procedure [4]. Although several other technologies like Zigbee and RFID
[5, 6, 7] can also be used for indoor localization, Bluetooth is the most widely
available technology in mobile devices.
In this work, the position of a mobile user is determined by the position of
the BS that detects the user within its Bluetooth connectivity range (20 meters
only) and is provided to the user via a location service.
1.2
Problem of Connectivity
In our previous work [8], we have presented a Middleware based approach and an
LBS-Infrastructure that would enable service providers to deploy Location-aware
application eﬃciently and to publish them to the mobile users. Mobile clients
could consume these services over Bluetooth, GPRS or Wi-Fi connection. Wi-Fi
based localization and LBS provision have been also been studied in [9,10,11].
Wi-Fi communication, however, is hindered by varying network connectivity and
limited bandwidth. In this work, we do not use the infrastructure network of
wireless access points, if any, inside the building and hence do not pose problem
to the normal internet users. Instead we deploy some Bluetooth enabled BS
inside the building, that provide LBS to Bluetooth enabled mobile devices in its
vicinity. In Table 1, we compare various available technologies to validate the
use of Bluetooth due to its precise indoor localization, good connectivity, low
cost and easy availability in mobile devices. Some might argue that Bluetooth
range is too limited. Nevertheless, in our kind of application, setting up a few
BSs at strategic positions like baggage counter in shopping malls, ticket counters
or information centers in railway stations and airports and departmental oﬃces
in university buildings will be suﬃcient, as almost all people visit these locations
initially after reaching the place.
www.ebook3000.com

A Middleware Based Approach to Dynamically Deploy LBS
11
Table 1. Reasons justifying the choice of Bluetooth
Technology
Indoor Localization
Connectivity
Availability
Cost
Bluetooth
good
good
good
low
Wi-Fi
good load on Internet users good
low
Zigbee
good
good
poor
low
RFID
good
N.A.
poor
infrastructure cost
Accoustic sensing
good
N.A.
good
infrastructure cost
GPS
poor
N.A.
good
low
SIM-based
poor
good
good
service provider charges
GPRS
N.A.
good
good
service provider charges
1.3
Problem of Application Preinstallation in Mobile Devices
The authors in [12, 13] present Bluetooth based LBS provision in indoor environ-
ment. In [12], authors have presented a Bluetooth and Java based context-aware
system, UbiqMuseum, to provide the museum visitors the precise information
about the arts that they are viewing inside the museum. In their proposed sys-
tem, the mobile client obtains information on the pieces of arts via Museum
Information Point (MIP) from the central data server where information related
to all arts inside the museum are stored. The MIP provides that information to
client over Bluetooth connection. However, this sort of context-aware informa-
tion provisioning is limited to those mobile devices that have the support for
the standard Java API for Bluetooth Wireless Technology [14] to communicate
with the MIP and they have the preinstalled client application running on the
device. In UbiqMuseum, each MIP acts as a master in its own piconet [15] to
communicate with multiple mobile clients acting as slave devices in that piconet.
The authors have also proposed an algorithm to form Scatternet [16] in which
a mobile client needs to act either as a master/slave bridge device in the MIP′s
piconet or to join to another piconet hosted by another mobile client acting as a
bridge device in the MIP′s piconet when it ﬁnds that the MIP already has ﬁve
active slave devices. This algorithm would fail to provide uninterrupted infor-
mation delivery in case the mobile client acting as master/slave bridge device
leaves the existing piconet to view some other art inside the museum.
In [13], authors have described a Bluetooth technology based system, SBIL,
to provide location information for mobile users in indoor environment by using
the Received Signal Strength (RSS) measurements. SBIL also provides service
information from the server to the mobile users via Bluetooth beacons, which
also help to track location of the mobile user by using the signal strength from
the mobile device. To provide uninterrupted service to the mobile user in the
SBIL system, the mobile client acts as a master and remains connected to at
least four beacons all the time it wishes to navigate the service. The negativity
in this approach is that it requires a high density of Bluetooth beacons around
the area where SBIL is deployed. Moreover, mobile devices must have extended
battery life to remain connected to at least four beacons all the time.

12
P. Sadhukhan, R. Sen, and P.K. Das
The issue of adapting a mobile device to new LBSs it is oﬀered whenever it
moves to a new location without having any prior installed client applications
for those services has been highlighted by very few researchers. It is impossi-
ble to predict what applications might come in use and thus, preinstallation of
the applications wastes a lot of memory. A sensible way to address the problem
is providing all software and data needed to consume the LBS to the device
that chooses to consume that LBS. In [17], authors have proposed and given
a prototype implementation of a comprehensive architecture that enables the
heterogeneous mobile devices to discover the new services as it moves to a new
location and then to invoke those services. Their proposed architecture exposes
the interface of the services and accessible resources through an interface speciﬁ-
cation language (ISL) to avoid the diﬃculties in obtaining all the required custom
user interfaces (UIs) for invoking all the services on diﬀerent types of hardware.
However only those mobile devices which have proper compiler support for that
interface speciﬁcation language, could be able to discover and access the services
as they need to read the ISL ﬁle for the services to be invoked.
In our proposed system, the BS pushes the appropriate client application and
other data ﬁles needed to consume the LBS to the devices based on the proﬁle
of the devices. Thus, in our work, heterogeneous mobile devices can invoke LBSs
dynamically irrespective of whether these devices have support for Java Runtime
Environment or not.
1.4
Problem of Authenticating the User and Oﬀering Paid Services
We have introduced a registration process to be followed by each mobile user
willing to invoke LBSs, for the purpose of preventing malicious users from block-
ing network resources and oﬀering the paid services to the users. In this work, the
mobile user obtains a unique user name and password based on device′s proﬁle
after successful registration. The user has to set the Bluetooth device name to
the user name given to him/her so that any BS can recognize it as a registered
mobile device during the Bluetooth inquiry procedure. The password is used for
authenticating the user before allowing him/her to consume LBSs.
2
System Design and Implementation
Our proposed system shown in ﬁg. 1 consists of several BSs among which one
is attached to a GSM box via a serial port to collect the registration request
message from the mobile users. That BS is called the central BS. The central
is connected to other BSs through a LAN so that central BS can periodically
broadcast the list of registered mobile users to the other BSs.
Each BS in our system is Bluetooth enabled and a Java based Middleware is
deployed onto each BS. The registration process to be followed by mobile users to
invoke LBSs is described in subsection 2.1. The sequences of events that happen
when a new mobile device comes in the vicinity of a BS are i) upon detecting a new
device during Bluetooth inquiry operation, BS tries to send an appropriate client
www.ebook3000.com

A Middleware Based Approach to Dynamically Deploy LBS
13
Fig. 1. Architecture of the system
application to the device depending on its proﬁle if the Bluetooth device name of
that device appears in the list of registered user name. ii) The user can run the
client application and needs to send the password to the BS over the Bluetooth
connection. iii) After successful authentication, mobile client would receive the list
of services available there and would be able to consume the LBSs.
2.1
Registration Process
A mobile user who is willing to invoke LBSs has to send an SMS (Short Messag-
ing Service) carrying his/her device′s proﬁle and preferred user name to a well
known phone number assigned to the GSM box of the central BS. The Middle-
ware deployed onto the central BS would generate, at ﬁrst, a unique user name
and password for that user and then sends back to that user an SMS containing
the user name, password and an instruction to set the Bluetooth device name to
that user name generated by the central BS. How the user name is generated is
described in subsection 2.3.2. The central BS periodically broadcasts the regis-
tered users′ user name, password and registration time along with their devices′
proﬁles to the other BSs. The registration would remain valid for 24 hours. The
telecom operators can easily provide the paid services through wireless technol-
ogy like Bluetooth to the mobile users in places like shopping mall, airport etc
by adopting this registration process.
2.2
Middleware Software
The Middleware consists of several modules. Fig. 2 shows all the modules of
the Middleware and how they work together to provide LBSs to the mobile
user. The Main Module (MM) receives and handles the request from the clients
sent over Bluetooth Connection. It invokes the Authentication Module (AM)
by providing it the user name and password received from the client over the
Bluetooth connection. If client provided user name and password match with
those of a registered user, AM would invoke Service Advertising and Invocation

14
P. Sadhukhan, R. Sen, and P.K. Das
Fig. 2. Sequence diagram of interaction between diﬀerent modules of Middleware
and MD
Module (SAIM) to allow the mobile client to receive the service advertisement
and to consume the LBSs. The detailed design of MM and SAIM and the mobile
client has been given in our previous work [8].
2.3
Enhancements Made to the Middleware
Two new modules, incorporated into the Middleware of our previous work, Dis-
covery Module (DM) and PushFile Module (PM), the changes made to AM and
the services deployed onto the BS are presented in this sub section. Each BS
advertises two LBSs, namely location service and content-mapping service via
SAIM to the mobile client over the establishd Bluetooth connection. The loca-
tion service gives the location of the mobile user and the second one provides
a map showing the direction from the current location to the destination user
wants to reach upon receiving the name of destination from the user. Both of
these services are quite useful to a newcomer in a multifunctional building.
2.3.1 Discovery Module (DM)
It initiates Bluetooth inquiry procedure periodically (every 1 minute) and detects
all the Bluetooth enabled devices set in discoverable mode in the neighborhood
of the BS. Upon detecting a new device, it checks whether the Bluetooth device
name of that device appears in the list of registered user name by invoking AM
and sorts out those devices that belong to some registered user into a device
pool, that is a data structure like Java Vector [18]. Another thread created by
this module examines the proﬁle of each device stored into the device pool to
determine the appropriate client application to be sent onto that device and
www.ebook3000.com

A Middleware Based Approach to Dynamically Deploy LBS
15
Fig. 3. Implementation details of Discovery Module(DM)
invokes the PushFile module (PM). The implementation details and the work
ﬂow diagram for this module are depicted in ﬁg. 3.
2.3.2 Authentication Module (AM)
AM on the central BS receives the registration request message from the mobile
users and inserts a record consisting of the user name, password, user′s phone
number, registration time and the proﬁle of the device belonging to the user into
its database. The user name ﬁeld is generated uniquely by the AM based on de-
vice model and the preferred user name provided by the user in the following way.
user name = device model + preferred user name + 3-digit random number
The AM of central BS periodically (at every three minutes interval) broadcasts
to the other BSs the list of records for users who have registered during the last
time-interval.
The AM of other BSs also maintain that list of records received from the
central BS into its database. It searches that list of records in two cases. When
invoked by the DM, the AM searches the database to ﬁnd a match for the
Bluetooth device name obtained from some mobile client via the DM with the
user name ﬁeld in the registered users′ records. In the other case, it searches that
list to ﬁnd a match for the pair <user name, password> obtained from some
client via the MM to authenticate that client. When the time of registration for
a user becomes a day old, the corresponding record would be removed from the
database in all the BSs.

16
P. Sadhukhan, R. Sen, and P.K. Das
Fig. 4. Sequence diagram of pushing ﬁle from BS to mobile device
2.3.3 PushFile Module (PM)
It is invoked by AM and other modules of Middleware to send any type of ﬁle to
a Bluetooth enabled mobile device using its OBEX Object Push Service [19] that
begins to run whenever Bluetooth of the device is turned on. The implementation
detail of this module is given below.
Implementation Details of PushFile Module. OBEX Object Push Service
can be located into the Service Discovery Database (SDDB) available on ev-
ery Bluetooth enabled device using Service Discovery Protocol (SDP) [20] that
is part of Bluetooth Core Protocol stack. This service, identiﬁed by the 16-bit
UUID value 0x1105, can be used by PM to push a ﬁle to the inbox of the mobile
device. Fig. 4 shows how PM pushes the given ﬁle into the inbox of the Blue-
tooth enabled mobile device using OBEX Object Push Service. The structure of
packets exchanged between the Middleware and the mobile device in course of
ﬁle transfer is shown in ﬁg. 5. Finding the structure of the packets required a lot
of eﬀort because no such document describing the exact structure of the pack-
ets required to exchange between two Bluetooth enabled devices during OBEX
Object Push operation is available.
1. PM acts as SDP Client and mobile device acts as SDP Server.
2. Once the service is found, PM sends a connection request to it to establish
a logical link between the BS and the mobile device.
3. In general connection request packet and connection response packet are 7
bytes long. Packet 1 and Packet 2 show the structures of these packets in ﬁg. 5.
Since Max OBEX Packet Length ﬁeld is of two bytes, the maximum length of
data packet can be 65,535 bytes.
www.ebook3000.com

A Middleware Based Approach to Dynamically Deploy LBS
17
Fig. 5. Packet Structures
4. SDP Server sends back to the SDP Client the response to CONNECT
request. This response packet also contains the maximum packet size that can
be received by the SDP Server. This maximum packet size, i.e, MTU (Maximum
Transfer Unit) is determined by the minimum value among the Max OBEX
Packet Length that sender supports and the Max OBEX Packet Length that
the receiver supports.
5. If the ﬁrst byte of Packet 2 contains opcode value for connection request
accepted, that is 0xA0, SDP Client sends the PUT Request packet to indicate
that it is about to send a ﬁle to the SDP server. The structure of the ﬁrst PUT
Request packet is depicted by packet 3.1 and packet 3.2. From those structures,
it is evident that the body part of the ﬁrst PUT request packet contains n2 data

18
P. Sadhukhan, R. Sen, and P.K. Das
bytes, where n2 = MT U −(14 + x1) and x1 is the length of ﬁle name string
in UTF-16 format. If the ﬁle is longer than n2 bytes, multiple PUT request
packets are required to send the entire ﬁle by the SDP client. In that case, all
intermediate PUT request packets contain PUT opcode value 0x02 except the
last PUT request packet that contain PUT opcode value 0x82 as shown by packet
5 and packet 6. On the other hand, the entire body of ﬁle can be sent in only
one PUT request packet when the lengh of file ≤n2 and PUT opcode value in
that case will be 0x82 as shown by packet 3.2.
6. The structure of response packets sent by the SDP Server to the SDP Client
corresponding to PUT requests in (5) are shown by packet 4.1 and packet 4.2.
When the SDP Server has received part of ﬁle by examining the PUT opcode
value and it wants to receive the remaining part, packet 4.1 is sent. In case, SDP
Server has received the entire ﬁle, packet 4.2 is sent.
7. Packet 5 shows how the remaining part of ﬁle body is sent except the last
PUT request packet. In these packets, length of body n3 = MT U −6.
8. When n3 is greater than the remaining part of ﬁle content(n4 bytes) to
be sent, the remaining part of the ﬁle is sent by last PUT request as shown by
packet 6.
9. SDP Server sends success response to SDP Client after receiving the entire
ﬁle body as shown by packet 7.
10. SDP Client now disconnects from the SDP Server by sending the DIS-
CONNECT packet as shown by packet 8.
3
Performance Evaluation
We did some experiments to evaluate the performance of PM in terms of time
it takes to push ﬁle to the mobile clients with respect to diﬀerent ﬁle size and
the throughput with respect to distance between the BS and the device. Some
preliminary experiments have been done to evaluate our proposed Middleware
by measuring the time taken by the mobile devices to consume LBSs. To carry
out the tests, we have used the following devices.
– Base Station: Work Station IBM XSERIES 206, Intel(R) Pentium(R) IV
CPU, 2.80 GHz, 512MB RAM with Bluetooth USB Dongle of Connection
range 20 m and running Windows XP Professional with Service Pack 2.
– Mobile Devices: Tests were carried out with eight devices (ﬁve Nokia N70s,
one Nokia 6600 and two HP iPAQs hw6515e).
3.1
Variation of Push Time with File Size
Here the BS tries to push the ﬁles with diﬀerent sizes, such as 2KB, 11.5KB, 62KB
and 167KB to the eight devices as mentioned above simultaneously. Our experi-
mentation shows that a device with more battery power is likely to be detected by
the BS earlier than the others. Fig. 6 shows the time required to transfer the ﬁles
of diﬀerent sizes into the inbox of those devices. It is obvious that a device that is
discovered earlier and prompts to accept message earlier, would be transferred the
www.ebook3000.com

A Middleware Based Approach to Dynamically Deploy LBS
19
Fig. 6. File Size vs Push Time for diﬀerent mobile devices
Fig. 7. Throughput achieved by Middleware vs separation distance between BS and
mobile device
ﬁle before the others. In this experiment, Nokia N70 had more battery power than
the other two devices like Nokia 6600 and HP iPaq and thus the ﬁle transfer time
for N70 become short compared to other two devices.
3.2
Throughput Evaluation
Fig. 7 shows the impact on throughput with varying the distance between the
device and the BS. Throughput is estimated as follows.
Throughput (Kbytes/s) = Size of file that has been sent to the device in Kilobytes
Time to send the file in seconds
.
The tests were carried out by placing a N70 at diﬀerent distances such as 2
meter, 4 meter,· · ·, 12 meter, etc. from the BS and measuring the transfer time

20
P. Sadhukhan, R. Sen, and P.K. Das
of a ﬁle of size 96 Kbytes to the N70 at the BS. Fig. 7 depicts that the throughput
achieved by PM falls with growing distance between the device and the BS.
Tests were also carried out with that N70 by keeping it out of Bluetooth
connectivity range of the BS for 20, 23 and 25 seconds and then bringing it
back near the BS. In the ﬁrst case, N70 successfully received the ﬁle, but in
the remaining two cases, BS showed Connection Closed. Exception: Failed to
write because the N70 remained out of BS′s Bluetooth range for a long time.
According to Bluetooth speciﬁcation version 2.0, when two Bluetooth devices
have established a connection, the Link Manager(LM) in the Logical Layer of
the Bluetooth Protocol Stack on both master and slave sides periodically (time
period SupervisionTO [21] ) send packet to detect link loss. Any time master
or slave has not received a valid packet within period SupervisionTO, it breaks
down the logical link.
3.3
Test Results on LBS Consumption Time by Mobile Devices
Tests were carried out using two Nokia N70s to estimate the service consumption
time for two LBSs, namely location service and content-mapping service at the
devices. The service consumption time is deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the
time at which client obtains the service result and the time at which it sends the
request for that service. Fig. 8 shows the screenshot for location service.
The execution of LBS for the ﬁrst time always takes more time than its later
execution as shown in ﬁg. 9. This is because stubs (that send the SOAP request
message to the service) use some caching mechanism to store the service result
and send the cached result when they receive subsequent request for a service
with same input data. Fig. 9 also shows that N70-1 takes larger time than N70-2
to consume the content-mapping service in the ﬁrst iteration. The BS acquires
knowledge about mobile device like its Bluetooth address, the URL of OBEX
Object Push Service only after it sends the device the initial client application.
N70-1 received the client application from some other BS and directly requested
service. The BS needed some time to obtain the URL of OBEX Object Push
Service for N70-1 before initiating the ﬁle transfer operation. The subsequent
iterations take same time for the two devices as the BS now has the entire
device details about those two devices.
Fig. 8. Screen shot for location service
www.ebook3000.com

A Middleware Based Approach to Dynamically Deploy LBS
21
Fig. 9. Service consumption time for content-mapping and location service vs Iteration
4
Conclusions and Future Work
This work was motivated by the recent trends in the area of providing location
based services and information to the mobile user in public places. In the context
of Middleware design, the implementation of a module to push location based
information and client application onto a low-cost device that has no other wire-
less communication facility except a Bluetooth radio, has been shown. User has
to run the client application on the device to interact with the Middleware to
invoke LBS. The experimental results related to sending diﬀerent size of ﬁles
to multiple mobile devices, possibly indicate a new way of downloading multi-
media data to the mobile devices from a nearby BS or Server using Bluetooth
technology.
There are some challenging issues that we hope to implement in near future.
Due to mobility, it may happen that the mobile device goes out of the Bluetooth
range of the BS while it is receiving the ﬁle from BS. Based on the experimen-
tation on the estimation of SupervisionTO, we can think of creating another
module that would help the LM of the current BS to transfer the device details
including the connection properties of the OBEX Object Push Service of the de-
vice to the LM of neighboring BS to continue with the interrupted ﬁle transfer
service running on the mobile device.
Some rogue BS might try to mimic our BS, sending virus and malware in the
guise of LBS advertisement. Thus, some method of authenticating the BS by
mobile client is needed to be incorporated into our present work.
Acknowledgments. The authors gratefully acknowledge the facilities and sup-
port provided by the Director and all other staﬀmembers of the School of Mobile
Computing and Communication, Jadavpur University, a Centre of Excellence set
up under the ′′University with potential for Excellence′′ Scheme of the UGC.

22
P. Sadhukhan, R. Sen, and P.K. Das
References
1. Martin, S., Cristobal, E.S., Gil, R., Castro, M., Diaz, G., Peire, J.: A context-
aware application based on ubiquitous location. In: Proc. of Second International
Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
(UBICOMM 2008), September 29 - October 4, pp. 83–88 (2008)
2. Xia, Y., Bae, H.Y.: General platform of location based services in ubiquitous en-
vironment. In: Proc. of IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Ubiq-
uitous Engineering (MUE 2007), pp. 791–795 (2007)
3. http://cricket.csail.mit.edu/
4. Bluetooth Inquiry procedure, Bluetooth speciﬁcation version 2.0 + EDR, vol. 1,
p. 53
5. Bahl, P., Padmanabhan, V.N.: Radar: an in-building RF-based user location and
tracking system. In: The Nineteenth Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE Com-
puter and Communications Societies Proceedings INFOCOM 2000, vol. 2, pp. 775–
784 (2000)
6. Ohta, Y., Sugano, M., Kawazoe, T., Murata, M.: Indoor localization system using
RSSI measurement of wireless sensor network based on zigbee standard. In: Proc.
of Wireless Sensor Network (2006)
7. Lu, X., Jin, G., Park, M.: An indoor localization mechanism using active RFID
tag. In: Proc. of IEEE International Conference on Sensor Networks, Ubiquitous,
and Trustworthy Computing, June 5-7 (2006)
8. Sadhukhan, P., Das, P.K., Sen, R., Chatterjee, N., Das, A.: A middleware-based
approach to mobile web services. In: Proceeding of Asian Mobile Computing Con-
ference (AMOC-2007): 5th international conference, Kolkata, India, January 3-6,
pp. 167–175 (2007)
9. http://newsroom.cisco.com/dlls/partners/news/2006/prprod05-02.html
10. di Flora, C., Hermersdorf, M.: A practical implementation of indoor location-based
services using simple Wi-Fi positioning. Journal of Location Based Services 2(2),
87–111 (2008)
11. Castro, P., Chiu, P., Kremenek, T., Muntz, R.: A probabilistic room location service
for wireless networked environments. In: Abowd, G.D., Brumitt, B., Shafer, S.
(eds.) UbiComp 2001. LNCS, vol. 2201, pp. 18–34. Springer, Heidelberg (2001)
12. Cano, J.-C., Manzoni, P., Toh, C.K.: Ubiqmuseum: A bluetooth and java based
context-aware system for ubiquitous computing. In: Wireless Personal Communi-
cations (2006), vol. 38, pp. 187–202. Springer Science+Business Media B.V (2006)
13. Subramanian, S.P., Sommer, J., Schmitt, S., Rosenstiel, W.: Sbil: Scalable indoor
localization and navigation service. In: Proc. of Third International Conference on
Wireless Communications and Sensor Networks, WCSN (2007)
14. JABWT: Java APIs for Bluetooth, http://www.jcp.org/en/jsr/detail?id=82
15. Piconet: Bluetooth speciﬁcation version 2.0 + EDR, vol. 1, p. 51
16. Scatternet: Bluetooth speciﬁcation version 2.0 + EDR, vol. 1, p. 177
17. Hodes, T.D., Katz, R.H.: Composable ad hoc location-based services for heteroge-
neous mobile clients. Wireless Networks 5, 411–427 (1999)
18. Class vector,
http://java.sun.com/j2se/1.4.2/docs/api/java/util/vector.html
19. OBEX Object Push Service: Speciﬁcation of the bluetooth system, speciﬁcation,
vol. 2, pp. 331–353
20. SDP:Service Discovery Protocol,speciﬁcation of the bluetooth system, vol. 2, pp.
66–80
21. SupervisionTO,Bluetooth speciﬁcation version 2.0 + EDR, vol. 1, p. 261, 374
www.ebook3000.com

 
C.-C. Chang et al. (Eds.): ACN 2010, CCIS 77, pp. 23–29, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Hiding Data in Audio Signal 
Debnath Bhattacharyya1, Poulami Dutta2, Maricel O. Balitanas1,  
Tai-hoon Kim1,* , and Purnendu Das2 
1 Multimedia Department, Hannam University, 
Daejeon, Republic of Korea 
debnathb@gmail.com, jhe_c1756@yahoo.com, taihoonn@empal.com 
2 Computer Science and Engineering Department, 
Heritage Institute of Technology 
Kolkata-700107, India 
poulamiduttacse@gmail.com, purnendu_das@yahoo.com 
Abstract. This paper describes the LSB technique for secure data transfer.  
Secret information can be hidden inside all sorts of cover information: text, im-
ages, audio, video and more. Embedding secret messages in digital sound is 
usually a more difficult process. Varieties of techniques for embedding infor-
mation in digital audio have been established. These are parity coding, phase 
coding, spread spectrum, echo hiding, LSB. Least significant bits (LSB) inser-
tion is one of the simplest approaches to embedding information in audio file.  
Keywords: Image Processing, Video, Audio, Data Hiding. 
1   Introduction 
Currently the fast improvement of the Internet and the digital information revolution 
caused major changes in the overall culture. In modern communication system Data 
Hiding is most essential for Network Security issue. 
The internet has also encouraged a number of audio applications like internet te-
lephony, voice query and assistance on the net and voice activated web sites. Music is 
another subject of interest worldwide and reaches its audience as audio files or inter-
net-radio broadcasts (apart from conventional radio and television). Audio traffic on 
the internet is increasing at a high rate. Therefore, choosing audio as a cover -media is 
quite obvious for data hiding. Popular audio formats on the internet are the WAV 
(Windows Audio Visual), AIFF (Audio Interchange File Format), log scale 8-bit m-
law and MP3 (Motion Picture Experts Group Layer III). Data rates supported vary 
from 8 kbps to 44.1 kbps. Audio hiding techniques rely on the weakness of the human 
auditory system (HAS). 
Hiding information inside audio is a popular technique now a day. Audio data hiding 
can be used any time you want to hide data. There are many reasons to hide data but 
most important is to prevent unauthorized persons from becoming aware of the exis-
tence of a message. Data hiding in the least significant bits (LSBs) of audio samples in 
                                                           
* Corresponding author. 

24 
D. Bhattacharyya et al. 
 
the time domain is one of the simplest algorithms with very high data rate of additional 
Information. 
In this paper we will present general principles of data hiding basic terminology, 
and an overview of applications and techniques. In particular we will consider data 
hiding within audio signals, basic requirements and the state of the art techniques. We 
will propose a novel technique with several variations. The proposed method is char-
acterized by perfect transparency, robustness, high bit rate, low processing load, and, 
particularly, high security. 
2   Previous Works 
This section presents some common existing methods used for hiding secret informa-
tion in audio. Many software implementations of these methods are available on the 
Web and are listed in the relatives section. Some of the latter methods require previ-
ous knowledge of signal processing techniques, Fourier analysis, and other areas of 
high level mathematics. When developing a data-hiding method for audio, one of the 
first considerations is the likely environments the sound signal will travel between 
encoding and decoding. There are two main areas of modification which we will 
consider. First, the storage environment, or digital representation of the signal that 
will be used, and second the transmission pathway the signal might travel [4]. 
2.1   Parity Coding  
One of the prior works in audio data hiding technique is parity coding technique. 
Instead of breaking a signal down into individual samples, the parity coding method 
breaks a signal down into separate regions of samples and encodes each bit from the 
secret message in a sample region's parity bit. If the parity bit of a selected region 
does not match the secret bit to be encoded, the process flips the LSB of one of the 
samples in the region. Thus, the sender has more of a choice in encoding the secret 
bit, and the signal can be changed in a more unobtrusive fashion [5]. 
2.2   Phase Coding  
The phase coding method works by substituting the phase of an initial audio segment 
with a reference phase that represents the data. The phase of subsequent segments is 
adjusted in order to preserve the relative phase between segments. Phase coding, 
when it can be used, is one of the most effective coding methods in terms of the sig-
nal-to perceived noise ratio. When the phase relation between each frequency compo-
nent is dramatically changed, noticeable phase dispersion will occur. However, as 
long as the modification of the phase is sufficiently small (sufficiently small depends 
on the observer; professionals in broadcast radio can detect modifications that are 
imperceivable to an average observer), an inaudible coding can be achieved [4]. Phase 
coding relies on the fact that the phase components of sound are not as perceptible to 
the human ear as noise is. Rather than introducing perturbations, the technique en-
codes the message bits as phase shifts in the phase spectrum of a digital signal, 
achieving an inaudible encoding in terms of signal-to-perceived noise ratio [5]. 
www.ebook3000.com

 
Hiding Data in Audio Signal 
25 
 
2.3   Spread Spectrum  
In a normal communication channel, it is often desirable to concentrate the informa-
tion in as narrow a region of the frequency spectrum as possible in order to conserve 
available bandwidth and to reduce power. The basic spread spectrum technique, on 
the other hand, is designed to encode a stream of information by spreading the en-
coded data across as much of the frequency spectrum as possible. This allows the 
signal reception, even if there is interference on some frequencies. While there are 
many variations on spread spectrum communication, we concentrated on Direct  
Sequence Spread Spectrum encoding (DSSS). The DSSS method spreads the signal 
by multiplying it by a chip, a maximal length pseudorandom sequence modulated at a 
known rate. Since the host signals are in discrete-time format, we can use the sam-
pling rate as the chip rate for coding. The result is that the most difficult problem in 
DSSS receiving, that of establishing the correct starts and ends of the chip quanta for 
phase locking purposes, is taken care of by the discrete nature of the signal. Conse-
quently, a much higher chip rate, and therefore a higher associated data rate, is possi-
ble. Without this, a variety of signal locking algorithms may be used, but these are 
computationally expensive [4]. 
2.4   Echo Hiding  
In echo hiding, information is embedded in a sound file by introducing an echo into 
the discrete signal. Like the spread spectrum method, it too provides advantages in 
that it allows for a high data transmission rate and provides superior robustness when 
compared to the noise inducing methods. If only one echo was produced from the 
original signal, only one bit of information could be encoded. Therefore, the original 
signal is broken down into blocks before the encoding process begins. Once the en-
coding process is completed, the blocks are concatenated back together to create the 
final signal [5]. 
3   Our Work, Result and Analysis 
Here we will discuss the disadvantages of the previous procedure and how those are 
different with present method. There are two main disadvantages associated with the 
use of methods like parity coding. The human ear is very sensitive and can often de-
tect even the slightest bit of noise introduced into a sound file, although the parity 
coding method does come much closer to making the introduced noise inaudible. 
Another problem is robustness. One disadvantage associated with phase coding is a 
low data transmission rate due to the fact that the secret message is encoded in the 
first signal segment only. Phase coding method is used when only a small amount of 
data needs to be considered. 
Least significant bit (LSB) coding is the simplest way to embed information in a 
digital audio file. By substituting the least significant bit of each sampling point with 
a binary message, LSB coding allows for a large amount of data to be encoded. 
Among many different data hiding techniques proposed to embed secret message 
within audio file, the LSB data hiding technique is one of the simplest methods for 

26 
D. Bhattacharyya et al. 
 
inserting data into digital signals in noise free environments, which merely embeds 
secret message-bits in a subset of the LSB planes of the audio stream. 
The method of LSB technique: 
 
• 
Receives the audio file in the form of Hex code and converted in to bit  
pattern. 
• 
Each character in the message is converted in bit pattern. 
• 
Replaces the LSB bit from audio with LSB bit from character in the message 
[11]. 
 
Proposed Audio data hiding is a method of hiding the message in the audio file for-
mats. The proposed LSB audio data hiding method was tested on a large set of songs 
from different music styles. The hiding operation will be done on the basis of bit wise 
message hiding concept. 
To hide a secret message into an audio file we are using following steps: 
a. 
Select an audio file. 
b. Converting the audio file into hexadecimal coded file. 
c. 
Enter the secret information 
d. Convert the secret message into equivalent ASCII 
e. 
Convert each segment of the hexadecimal value of audio file into binary  
f. 
Convert each ASCII of hiding data into binary 
g. Encoding two binary data into the LSB part of the audio file 
h. Hide message in audio file.  
 
Fig. 1. Hiding data in WAV file 
Here we used a .wav file as an audio file and converting into binary. After converting 
into binary this method is very similar to hiding message in the pixels of a bitmap. 
This hiding method provides an easy way of implementation of mechanism when 
compared with other audio data hiding method. 
The main two features of this system are: 
a. 
Size of file will not changed after hiding data in audio file.  
b. The sound variations cannot be determined by comparing previous and 
new file.  
Here we first looked at a Wave file in a HEX editor. Hex editor applications the data 
of the audio file is represented as hexadecimal values grouped in 4 groups of 4 bytes 
and one group of 16 ASCII characters. We can see it in Fig 2. 
www.ebook3000.com

 
Hiding Data in Audio Signal 
27 
 
 
Fig. 2. Hexadecimal code value of audio file 
 
Fig. 3. Binary conversion of hex code 
 
Fig. 4. First group of hex code and secret data 
 
Fig. 5. Attaching secret bit in audio 
Then we converting hexadecimal value to binary value. From Fig. 3 we can see the 
binary value of each hex code. 
Here we proposed a method which is called zig zag lsb method. Where the binary 
value of the secret message is inserted into the last bit of audio data but in zigzag 
basis.   
Now suppose for example our secret message is A whose binary value is 
10000011. Using this method we can hide the message A into the audio file. When 
the character A, whose binary value equals 10000011, is inserted, the result we can 
see from Fig. 4 and Fig. 5. 
In this case, only three bits needed to be changed to insert the character success-
fully. On average, only half of the bits in an audio will need to be modified to hide a 

28 
D. Bhattacharyya et al. 
 
secret message using the maximal cover size. The resulting changes that are made to 
the least-significant bits are too small to be recognized by the human eye, so the mes-
sage is effectively hidden. 
4   Conclusion 
In this paper we have introduced a robust method of imperceptible audio data hiding. 
This system is to provide a good, efficient method for hiding the data from hackers 
and sent to the destination in a safe manner. This proposed system will not change the 
size of the file even after encoding and also suitable for any type of audio file format. 
Thus we conclude that audio data hiding techniques can be used for a number of pur-
poses other than covert communication or deniable data storage, information tracing 
and finger printing, tamper detection. As the sky is not limit so is not for the devel-
opment. Man is now pushing away its own boundaries to make every thought possi-
ble. So similarly these operations described above can be further modified as it is in 
the world of Information Technology. After designing any operation every developer 
has a thought in his mind that he could develop it by adding more features to it. 
Acknowledgement 
This work was supported by the Security Engineering Research Center, granted by the 
Korea Ministry of Knowledge Economy. And this work has successfully completed 
by the active support of Prof. Tai-hoon Kim, Hannam University, Republic of Korea. 
References 
1. Pfitzmann, B.: Information Hiding Terminology. In: First International Workshop on In-
formation Hiding, Cambridge, UK, May 30 – June 1, pp. 347–350 (1996) 
2. Petrovi, R., Jemili, K., Winograd, J.M., Stojanovi, I., Metois, E.: Data Hiding Within Au-
dio Signals. Electronics and Energetics 12(2), 103–122 (1999) 
3. Johnston, J., Brandenburg, K.: Wideband Coding Perceptual Consideration for Speech and 
Music. In: Furoi, S., Sondhi, M. (eds.) Advances in Speech Signal Processing. Marcel 
Dekker, New York (1992) 
4. Bender, W., Butera, W., Gruhl, D., Hwang, R., Paiz, F.J., Pogreb, S.: Techniques for data 
hiding. IBM Systems Journal 39(3-4), 547–568 (2000) 
5. Bandyopadhyay, S.K., Bhattacharyya, D., Das, P., Ganguly, D., Mukherjee, S.: A tutorial 
review on Steganography. In: International Conference on Contemporary Computing  
(IC3-2008), Noida, India, August 7-9, pp. 105–114 (2008) 
6. Czerwinski, S., Fromm, R., Hodes, T.: Digital Music Distribution and Audio Watermarking,  
 http://reference.kfupm.edu.sa/content/d/i/digital_music_ 
 distribution_and_audio_wat_1045219.pdf,      
  http://http.cs.berkeley.edu/~hodes/watermarking.ps  
  (Source: Computer Science Division, University of California, Berkeley)  
7. Krenn, R.: Steganography and steganalysis, An Article (January 2004),  
 http://www.krenn.nl/univ/cry/steg/article.pdf 
 
www.ebook3000.com

 
Hiding Data in Audio Signal 
29 
 
8. Queirolo, F.: Steganography in Images., Final Communications Report,  
 http://eric.purpletree.org/file/Steganography%20In% 
 20Images.pdf  
9. Cox, I.J., Kalker, T., Pakura, G., Scheel, M.: Information Transmission and Steganogra-
phy. In: Barni, M., Cox, I., Kalker, T., Kim, H.-J. (eds.) IWDW 2005. LNCS, vol. 3710, 
pp. 15–29. Springer, Heidelberg (2005) 
10. LoboGuerrero, A., Marques, F., Lienard, P.B.J.: Enhanced audio data hiding synchroniza-
tion using non linear filters. In: ICASSP 2004, May 17–21, vol. 2, pp. ii- 885–ii- 888 
(2004) 
11. Dutta, P., Bhattacharyya, D., Kim, T.-h.: Data Hiding in Audio Signal: A Review. Interna-
tional Journal of Database Theory and Application 2(2), 1–8 (2009) 

C.-C. Chang et al. (Eds.): ACN 2010, CCIS 77, pp. 30–41, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Feature Extraction and Analysis of Breast Cancer 
Specimen 
Debnath Bhattacharyya1, Rosslin John Robles1, Tai-hoon Kim1,∗,  
and Samir Kumar Bandyopadhyay2 
1 Multimedia Department, Hannam University, 
Daejeon, Republic of Korea 
debnathb@gmail.com, rosslin_john@yahoo.com, taihoonn@empal.com 
2 University of Calcutta 
Kolkata-700009, India 
skb1@vsnl.com 
Abstract. In this paper, we propose a method to identify abnormal growth of 
cells in breast tissue and suggest further pathological test, if necessary. We 
compare normal breast tissue with malignant invasive breast tissue by a series 
of image processing steps. Normal ductal epithelial cells and ductal / lobular in-
vasive carcinogenic cells also consider for comparison here in this paper. In 
fact, features of cancerous breast tissue (invasive) are extracted and analyses 
with normal breast tissue. We also suggest the breast cancer recognition tech-
nique through image processing and prevention by controlling p53 gene muta-
tion to some greater extent.  
Keywords: Gene, Image Processing, Pattern Recognition, mammography. 
1   Introduction 
Imaging techniques play an important role in helping perform breast biopsies, espe-
cially of abnormal areas that cannot be felt but can be seen on a conventional mam-
mogram or with ultrasound. One type of needle biopsy, the stereotactic-guided  
biopsy, involves the precise location of the abnormal area in three dimensions using 
conventional mammography. Stereotactic refers to the use of a computer and scan-
ning devices to create three-dimensional images. A needle is then inserted into the 
breast and a tissue sample is obtained. Additional samples can be obtained by moving 
the needle within the abnormal area [2]. 
Another type of needle biopsy uses a different system, known as the Mammotome 
breast biopsy system. The FDA (Food and Drug Administration) approved Mammo-
tome in 1996; the hand-held version of the Mammotome received FDA clearance in 
September 1999. A large needle is inserted into the suspicious area using ultrasound 
or stereotactic guidance. The Mammotome is then used to gently vacuum tissue from 
the suspicious area. Additional tissue samples can be obtained by rotating the needle. 
                                                           
∗ Corresponding author. 
www.ebook3000.com

 
Feature Extraction and Analysis of Breast Cancer Specimen 
31 
This procedure can be performed with the patient lying on her stomach on a table. If 
the hand-held device is used, the patient may lie on her back or in a seated position.  
There have been no reports of serious complications resulting from the Mammo-
tome breast biopsy system. Women interested in this procedure should talk with their 
doctor. 
Digital mammography is a technique for recording x-ray images in computer code 
instead of on x-ray film, as with conventional mammography. The images are dis-
played on a computer monitor and can be enhanced (lightened or darkened) before 
they are printed on film. Images can also be manipulated; the radiologist can magnify 
or zoom in on an area. From the patient’s perspective, the procedure for a mammo-
gram with a digital system is the same as for conventional mammography [2]. 
Digital mammography may have some advantages over conventional mammogra-
phy. The images can be stored and retrieved electronically, which makes long-distance 
consultations with other mammography specialists easier. Because the images can be 
adjusted by the radiologist, subtle differences between tissues may be noted. The im-
proved accuracy of digital mammography may reduce the number of follow up proce-
dures. Despite these benefits, studies have not yet shown that digital mammography is 
more effective in finding cancer than conventional mammography. 
The first digital mammography [1] system received U.S. Food and Drug Admini-
stration (FDA) approval in 2000. An example of a digital mammography system is 
the Senographe 2000D. Women considering digital mammography should talk with 
their doctor or contact a local FDA-certified mammography center to find out if this 
technique is available at that location. Only facilities that have been certified to prac-
tice conventional mammography and have FDA approval for digital mammography 
may offer the digital system. 
Many more techniques are available other than the cytogenetic processes, however, 
these are imaging technologies to detect, diagnose, and characterize breast. 
2   Previous Works 
Numerous promising approaches are coming up, few of those only stated here out of 
our study, and these are very recent. 
V. Mallapragada, et al, October, 2007, presented [3, 7] a new concept for real-time 
manipulation of a tumor using a robotic force controller that monitored the image of 
the tumor to generate appropriate force to position the tumor at a desired location. The 
idea was to demonstrate that it was possible to manipulate a tumor in real-time by 
applying controlled external force in an automated way such that the tumor did not 
deviate from the path of the needle. The success of this approach had the potential to 
reduce the number of attempts a surgeon make to capture the desired tissue specimen, 
minimized tissue damage, improved speed of biopsy, and reduced patient discomfort. 
Cigdem Gunduz, et al, 2004, reported a computational method that modeled a type 
of brain cancer using topological properties of cells in the tissue image. They con-
structed the graphs based on the locations of cells within the image. They used the 
Waxman model in their experiment [4]. 
C. Cagatay Bilgin, et al, 2007, classified [5] the breast cancer tissues using graph the-
ory. Image segmentation approach was used and Euclidean Distances were calculated 

32 
D. Bhattacharyya et al. 
between vertices [5]. Cell Graphs were generated by considering the cell locations.  
Approach was same to the greater extent with the work of Cigdem Gunduz, et al, 2004. 
These approaches toward automatic detection of cancer were actually failed be-
cause the types of cancers identified more and more. 
A.M. Tang, et al, 2008, proposed, simultaneous capturing of ultrasound (US) and 
magnetic resonance (MR) images allowed fusion of information obtained from both 
modalities. An MR-compatible US system where MR images were acquired in a 
known orientation with respect to the US imaging plane and concurrent real-time 
imaging could be achieved. Compatibility of the two imaging devices was a major 
issue in the physical setup. Tests were performed to quantify the radio frequency (RF) 
noise introduced in MR and US images, with the US system used in conjunction with 
MRI scanner of different field strengths (0.5 T and 3 T). Furthermore, simultaneous 
imaging was performed on a dual modality breast phantom in the 0.5 T open bore and 
3 T close bore MRI systems to aid needle-guided breast biopsy. Fiducial based pas-
sive tracking and electromagnetic based active tracking were used in 3 T and 0.5 T, 
respectively, to establish the location and orientation of the US probe inside the mag-
net bore. Their results indicated that simultaneous US and MR imaging were feasible 
with properly-designed shielding, resulting in negligible broadband noise and mini-
mal periodic RF noise in both modalities. US could be used for real time display of 
the needle trajectory, while MRI could be used to confirm needle placement [6]. 
C. Zhu, et al, 2009, have explored [8] the use of a fiber-optic probe for in vivo 
fluorescence spectroscopy of breast tissues during percutaneous image-guided breast 
biopsy. A total of 121 biopsy samples with accompanying histological diagnosis were 
obtained clinically and investigated in their study. The tissue spectra were analyzed 
using partial least-squares analysis and represented using a set of principal compo-
nents (PCs) with dramatically reduced data dimension. For nonmalignant tissue  
samples, a set of PCs that account for the largest amount of variance in the spectra 
displayed correlation with the percent tissue composition. For all tissue samples, a set 
of PCs was identified using a Wilcoxon rank-sum test as showing statistically signifi-
cant differences between: 1) malignant and fibrous/benign; 2) malignant and adipose; 
and 3) malignant and nonmalignant breast samples. These PCs were used to distin-
guish malignant from other nonmalignant tissue types using a binary classification 
scheme based on both linear and nonlinear support vector machine (SVM) and logis-
tic regression (LR). For the sample set investigated in this study, the SVM classifier 
provided a cross-validated sensitivity and specificity of up to 81% and 87%, respec-
tively, for discrimination between malignant and fibrous/benign samples, and up to 
81% and 81%, respectively, for discriminating between malignant and adipose sam-
ples. Classification based on LR was used to generate receiver operator curves with 
an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.87 for discriminating malignant versus  
fibrous/benign tissues, and an AUC of 0.84 for discriminating malignant from adipose 
tissue samples. This study demonstrated the feasibility of performing fluorescence 
spectroscopy during clinical core needle breast biopsy, and the potential of that tech-
nique for identifying breast malignancy in vivo. 
Lin Yang, et al, 2007, introduced a Grid-enabled CAD to perform automatic analy-
sis of imaged histopathology breast tissue specimens [10]. More than 100,000 digitized 
samples (1200 × 1200 pixels) were processed on the Grid.  They analyzed results for 
3744 breast tissue samples, which were originated from four different institutions using 
www.ebook3000.com

 
Feature Extraction and Analysis of Breast Cancer Specimen 
33 
diaminobenzidine (DAB) and hematoxylin staining. Both linear and nonlinear dimen-
sion reduction techniques were compared, and the best one was applied to reduce the 
dimensionality of the features. The results shown that the Gentle Boosting using an 
eight node CART decision tree as the weak learner provided the best result for classifi-
cation. The algorithm has an accuracy of 86.02% using only 20% of the specimens as 
the training set. 
3   Our Work 
We used free Tissue Blocks downloaded from OriGene Technologies, Inc, 2009 [9]. 
Here in our experiment, 18 invasive breast cancer tissues from different 18 patients 
and 8 non-cancerous falsely detected breast tissues from 8 different normal females 
are considered. Each of the 24-bit BMP Image size is 640 x 480 Pixels. 
3.1   24-Bit Color Image to 256-Color Gray Image  
1. Take this 24-Bit BMP file as Input file and open the file in Binary Mode, 
(Size M x M). 
2. Copy the ImageInfo (First 54 byte) of the Header from Input 24-Bit Bmp file 
to a newly created BMP file and edit this Header by changing filesize, Bit 
Depth, Colors to confirm to 8-Bit BMP. 
3. Copy the ColorTable from a sample gray scale Image to this newly created 
BMP at 54th Byte place on words. 
4. Convert the RGB value to Gray Value using the following formula: 
a. blueValue = (0.299*redValue + 0.587*greenValue + 
0.114*blueValue); 
b. greenValue = (0.299*redValue + 0.587*greenValue + 
0.114*blueValue); 
c. redValue = (0.299*redValue + 0.587*greenValue + 
0.114*blueValue); 
d. grayValue = blueValue = greenValue = redValue; 
5. Write to new BMP file. 
 
Take 24-bit BMP color image as input. Then convert it to 256-color Gray Scale image 
by following this algorithm. This 256-color Gray Scale image is the output of the algo-
rithm. In this algorithm, first read the red, blue and green value of each pixel and then 
after formulation, three different values are converted into gray value, stated in Step 4. 
3.2   256-Color Gray Image to Bi-color (Using Pixel Clustering on Threshold 
Value, T)  
1. Open 256-color Image (Size M x M) 
2. Read a Pixel value  
3. If the Pixel Intensity value less than or equal to T (128) then make it 0 Else 
make it 255 and write into same Pixel Location 
4. Go to Step 2 until end of file 
5. Close file 

34 
D. Bhattacharyya et al. 
This algorithm is actually used here to convert the Gray Image to Bi-color (Mono-
chrome Image).  In some cases we can say this is the Edge Detection Algorithm set on 
a Threshold Value. 
3.3   Cell Representation Algorithm on Spatial Domain  
1. Open Bi-color Image (Size M x M) 
2. Set a 2D Integer Array (equivalent to size of Bi-color Image, M x M) 
3. Read a Pixel value  
4. Store corresponding location of 2D Array (If the Pixel value is 255, make it 1 
in our case) 
5. Go to Step 2 until end of file 
6. Close file 
7. Draw the Graph on 2D Space using that generated Binary Matrix 
8. End 
 
The Generated Binary Matrix can be used for future statistical analysis to make the 
system automatic, definitely, with other biological characteristics of Breast Cancer 
Cells. Here in this work we compare the those Graphs and suggest for further patho-
logical test or for no need of test. 
4   Result and Analysis 
Here the challenge is Mammogram and Digital Biopsy. Problem with mammogram 
may arise biopsy also. Now we are considering some kind of mammogram analysis. 
We have noticed same problem with Biopsy. 
In most individuals the bulk of the breast extends from the second to the seventh 
rib. Since breast tissues often curve around the lateral margin of the pectoralis major 
muscle (Fig. 1), the orientation of the muscle is important for optimal mammographic 
positioning. The pectoralis major muscle spreads like a fan across the chest wall. 
Portions of the pectoralis major muscle attach to the clavicle, the lateral margin of the 
scapula, costal cartilage, and the aponeurosis of the external oblique muscles of the 
abdomen. All these fibers converge on and attach to the greater tubercle of the hume-
rus. The free fibers predominantly run obliquely over the chest from the medial por-
tion of the thorax toward the humerus. The relationship of the breast to the pectoralis 
major muscle influences two-dimensional projectional imaging, such as mammogra-
phy. Since the breast tissue is closely applied to the muscle, some of the lateral tissues 
can only be imaged through the muscle. As with any soft-tissue structure overlying 
muscle, it is easier to project the breast into the field of view by pulling it away from 
the chest wall and compressing it with the plane of compression along the obliquely 
oriented muscle fibers of the pectoralis major muscle. In order to maximize the tissue 
imaged, the free portion of the muscle should be included in the field of view. 
In view of the enormous amount of work that has been done in an effort to under-
stand the breast and the development of breast cancer, it is surprising that the normal 
breast has never been clearly defined. This is likely due to the fact that since breast 
cancer is really the only significant abnormality that occurs in the breast, it is really only 
the changes that appear to predispose to breast cancer that are considered significant. 
www.ebook3000.com

 
Feature Extraction and Analysis of Breast Cancer Specimen 
35 
There is a large range of histologic findings that occur in women who never develop 
breast cancer, but where normal ends and abnormal begins is not obvious, and past 
classifications have been found to be inaccurate. 
The ability to detect breast cancers earlier requires high-quality imaging, proper 
film processing, systematic review of the images, reasoned interpretation, the ability 
to solve problems raised by the imaging, and the ability to guide the diagnostic re-
moval of cells or tissue for diagnosis. The interpreter should participate in all aspects 
of this process. It is very important that quality control be supervised by the inter-
preter(s) of the images so that any image degradation can be detected and corrected as 
quickly as possible.  
Errors can be reduced by following a carefully structured approach to the process. 
The detection and diagnosis of breast cancer can be divided into five very specific 
tasks: Detection—Find it. Verification—Is it real?  Triangulation—Where is it? Iden-
tification—What is it? Management—What should be done about it? 
 
Fig. 1. Computed Breast tomography with the breasts in the pendent position shows breast 
tissue on the left adjacent to the pectorals major muscle extending up toward the axilla 
Ductal Cancer can spread up and down the duct network and remain in situ, 
whereas invasive cancer can be found associated with a part of the process. This find-
ing would support the continuum theory. Their data suggest that one of the already 
genetically unstable cells in the duct developed an invasive clone and that this clone 
proliferated while the remaining in situ cells, unable to invade, continued to prolifer-
ate and spread up and down the ducts. This observation explains invasive breast can-
cer can be found in the same lesion (Fig. 2). In fig. 2, outside the ducts and lobules a 
huge amount of breast muscle and tissue are present and here is the challenge. 
An understanding of breast tissue patterns as they apply to the sensitivity of mam-
mographic detection of breast malignancy is important. The greater the amount of fat 
within the breast, the easier it is to recognize a water-density tumor (Fig. 3). As in any 
other x-ray study, the margins of a water-density cancer will be obscured or invisible 
when they are contiguous with normal tissue of equivalent x-ray attenuation. In breasts 
in which the parenchyma is nonuniform, the x-ray attenuation will vary in a nonuni-
form way, making it difficult to detect a small cancer whose margins are similarly  
 

36 
D. Bhattacharyya et al. 
 
Fig. 2. Cells that are proliferating out of control but lack the ability to invade may continue to 
grow within the duct while a clone that has developed invasive capability can be growing  
simultaneously in the same lesion 
 
Fig. 3. This 6-mm invasive ductal carcinoma is easily visible because it is surrounded by fat 
tissue 
nonuniform. In the breast that is heterogeneously dense or extremely dense, the sensi-
tivity of mammography, not only for the early detection of malignancy, but also for 
large cancers is somewhat diminished because of the difficulty of finding ill-defined 
cancers within the inhomogeneous background.  
The fact that mammography can detect very small cancers but can also miss some 
very large cancers is confusing to clinicians and the public. Fig. 4-11are useful for 
explaining how mammography can detect many very small cancers, but some large 
palpable cancers can still be difficult to image.  
The dense breast is not the only reason for overlooking cancers. It is of some inter-
est that among cancers overlooked in the screening study many cancers were over-
looked in women with predominantly fatty breast tissue. Detecting small cancers in  
 
www.ebook3000.com

 
Feature Extraction and Analysis of Breast Cancer Specimen 
37 
the dense breast is more difficult, but early-stage breast cancer can be detected by 
mammography among these women. In a review of 118 women with breast cancer 
detected by mammography alone32, among women under the age of 50 years, we 
found that 70% were detected in women with radiographically dense breast tissue and 
these were at a smaller size and earlier stage than among women with palpable can-
cers. Even though a higher proportion of younger women have dense tissues, recent 
data from modern mammography screening programs show that mammography can 
detect early cancers among women aged 40 to 49 years at the same proportion as for 
women aged 50 to 59 years33, 34. The dense breast does reduce the sensitivity of 
mammography somewhat, but should not deter screening among these women and is 
not the sole cause for overlooking breast cancers. 
The projection of a potted plant onto the wall using a spotlight (Fig. 4) is a good 
analogy to the breast and cancer detection by clinical breast examination and mam-
mography. Assume that a chestnut, with its prickly shell (Fig. 5), is placed in among 
the branches and leaves of the plant (Fig. 6). If the leaves are densely packed, the nut 
even a very large one may not be visible (Fig. 7), yet fingers pressed against it can 
easily feel it (Fig. 8). If the plant has fewer leaves, analogous to the breast with less 
fibrous tissue, then the nut becomes more visible (Fig. 9). If there are few leaves, then 
even a very small nut is visible (Fig. 10), and if an extremely small nut is nestled 
between the rigid stems of the plant, the nut may be easily visible, but not palpable 
because it is protected by the stems (Fig. 11). 
 
                  Fig. 4. Light experiment 1                                  Fig. 5. Seed inside bush 
 
Fig. 6. Light experiment 2                                     Fig. 7. Light experiment 3 
 

38 
D. Bhattacharyya et al. 
 
                  Fig. 8. Light experiment 4                                   Fig. 9. Light experiment 5 
 
                    Fig. 10. Light experiment 6                                Fig. 11. Light experiment 7 
 
  Fig. 12a. 24-bit Color Image   Fig. 12b. 256-Color Gray Image  Fig. 12c. Bi-color Color Image 
 
  Fig. 13a. 24-bit Color Image  Fig. 13b. 256-Color Gray Image  Fig. 13c. Bi-color Color Image 
www.ebook3000.com

 
Feature Extraction and Analysis of Breast Cancer Specimen 
39 
 
Fig. 14. Normal breast tissue with normal cells in graphical problem space with dotted signs 
 
Fig. 15. Invasive situ breast cancer tissue with cells in graphical problem space with dotted 
signs 

40 
D. Bhattacharyya et al. 
Our algorithms, specially first and second, are used to remove the huge amount of 
tissue and fat from the Cancerous cells within the biopsy samples, here we are naming 
these as tissue blocks, shown in Fig. 12. Our target is to get the image something like 
in Fig. 11. Outputs of those algorithms are shown in Fig. 12a-c, for normal breast 
tissue. Fig. 12c, shows the cells with black spotted on the space. 
Fig. 13a-c, shows the Cancerous cells, some kind of abnormal size and numbers 
are marked. These outputs also from the same set of algorithms. We have conducted 
the observations using 18 different patients tissue block all are invasive situ breast 
cancer and 8 normal breast tissue blocks. 
Graphical observations also conducted as shown in Fig. 14 and 15. In case of nor-
mal tissue, disconnected cell graphs have been identified with few numbers. On the 
other hand, in case of invasive breast cancer tissue uncounted connected cell graphs 
are observed. 
5   Conclusion 
Till date, it is observed genetic mutation of certain oncogenes is responsible for any 
type of cancers. Modern techniques are using for treatment and chemotherapy is an 
established way of controlling cancers now a days. But, the question is that “Why the 
oncogenes are suddenly changing their behavior or becoming inactivated”? Next we 
will put more effort on genetical behavior of cancer genes and how these can be tuned 
that leads to more biometric. 
Acknowledgement 
This work was supported by the Security Engineering Research Center, granted by the 
Korea Ministry of Knowledge Economy. And this work has successfully completed 
by the active support of Prof. Tai-hoon Kim, Hannam University, Republic of Korea. 
References 
1. FDA Web site,  
 http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfMQSA/ 
 mqsa.cfm [last visited September 30, 2009]  
2. National Cancer Institute (NCI) Web site, http://www.cancernet.gov [last visited 
September 30, 2009] 
3. Mallapragada, V., Sarkar, N., Podder, T.K.: A Robotic System for Real-time Tumor Ma-
nipulation During Image guided Breast Biopsy. In: IEEE International Conference on Bio-
informatics and Bioengineering, Boston, MA, October 14-17, pp. 204–210 (2007) 
4. Gunduz, C., Yener, B., Humayun Gultekin, S.: The cell graphs of cancer. Bioinformat-
ics 20(1), 145–151 (2004) 
5. Cagatay Bilgin, C., Demir, C., Nagi, C., Yener, B.: Cell-Graph Mining for Breast Tissue 
Modelling and Classification. In: 29th IEEE EMBS Annual International Conference, 
Lyon, France, August 23-26 (2007) 
www.ebook3000.com

 
Feature Extraction and Analysis of Breast Cancer Specimen 
41 
6. Tang, A.M., Kacher, D.F., Lam, E.Y., Wong, K.K., Jolesz, F.A., Yang, E.S.: Simultaneous 
Ultrasound and MRI System for Breast Biopsy: Compatibility Assessment and Demonstra-
tion in a Dual Modality Phantom. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 27(2), 247–254 
(2008) 
7. Mallapragada, V., Sarkar, N., Podder, T.K.: Robot-Assisted Real-Time Tumor Manipula-
tion for Breast Biopsy. IEEE Transactions on Robotics 25(2), 316–324 (2009) 
8. Zhu, C., Burnside, E.S., Sisney, G.A., Salkowski, L.R., Harter, J.M., Yu, B., Ramanujam, 
N.: Fluorescence Spectroscopy: An Adjunct Diagnostic Tool to Image-Guided Core  
Needle Biopsy of the Breast. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 56(10),  
2518–2528 (2009) 
9. Origene Web site, http://www.origene.com/ (one such example we have used 
here),  
  http://www.origene.com/assets/images/tissues/blocks/ 
 CU0000005705.AF1.20X.jpg [last visited August 29, 2009]  
10. Yang, L., Chen, W., Meer, P., Salaru, G., Feldman, M.D., Foran, D.J.: High Throughput 
Analysis of Breast Cancer Specimens on the Grid. In: Ayache, N., Ourselin, S., Maeder, A. 
(eds.) MICCAI 2007, Part I. LNCS, vol. 4791, pp. 617–625. Springer, Heidelberg (2007) 

Three-Phase Scheme for Supporting
Time-Constrained Data with Duplication
in Wireless Broadcast Systems⋆
Chao-Chun Chen1, Lien-Fa Lin2, and Shih-Chia Wang3
1 Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Info. Engr., Southern Taiwan University, Taiwan
chencc@mail.stut.edu.tw
2 Dept. of Info. Comm., Kao Yuan University, Taiwan
lienfa@cc.kyu.edu.tw
3 Chunghwa Telecom, Taiwan
ripken95@cht.com.tw
Abstract. The wireless data broadcast techniques raised in 1990s. Since
the wireless data dissemination techniques are emerged, more and more
data services are proposed based on the wireless data broadcast tech-
niques in these years. Among the new services, the time-constraint data
broadcast service is critical for many real-time related applications, and
has been studied in the recent years. However, the related works did not
consider the duplicate pages of requests on data scheduling. Hence, in this
paper, we consider the duplicate pages in the multi-page time-constraint
data broadcast service. We ﬁrst proposed a duplication page-optimized
architecture for supporting the multi-page time-constraint data broad-
cast service. We then proposed a three-phase scheme for the time-slot
sharing optimizer to improve the bandwidth utility of the TDA-based
program. The experiments reveal that our proposed indeed signiﬁcantly
reduce the number of used channels for a data broadcast server.
Keywords: wireless data management, wireless communication, time-
constrained service, multi-channel broadcast, wireless data broadcast
architecture.
1
Introduction
The wireless data broadcast technology has been proposed in 1990s [1]. The
advantage of the wireless data broadcast technology is the scalability of client
population. Hence, for the push-based applications, e.g, stock information system
and traﬃc information system, clients can share the information by using the
wireless data broadcast technology. Furthermore, researchers augmented single-
channel broadcast systems to the multi-channel broadcast systems [2,3]. Hence,
more and more applications with diﬀerent constraints can be built up on the top
of the broadcast platform [4,5,6,7].
⋆This work is supported by National Science Council of Taiwan (R.O.C.) under Grants
NSC 98-2221-E-218-036.
C.-C. Chang et al. (Eds.): ACN 2010, CCIS 77, pp. 42–55, 2010.
c
⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010
www.ebook3000.com

Three-Phase Scheme for Supporting Time-Constrained Data
43
Since the bandwidth becomes scalable in the wireless broadcast environment,
many researchers point out that the time-constraint data broadcast service is
signiﬁcant for many real-time related applications [8,9,10]. In [11], Chung et al.
studied the time-constraint data retrieval issue in wireless broadcast environ-
ment, and they proposed a method to schedule the single-page request into a
multi-channel broadcast system. In the very recent study, Chen et al. [12] further
release the limitation that each request contains only one page, and propose the
Transformation-based Data Allocation (TDA) method to oﬀer the multi-page
time-constrained data broadcast service. In TDA, a set of transformation op-
erators are invented to transform multi-channels to diﬀerent types of virtual
channels which need only few simple operations (with pseudopolynomial time
complexity [13,14]) to schedule variable-length requests (i.e., diﬀerent number
of data pages in a request) for diﬀerent kinds of time constraints. TDA focuses
on designing a computation-eﬃcient algorithm so that most broadcast servers
can aﬀord the scheduling task, and does not consider the relationship between
requests. That is, data pages among the requests are assumed to be distinct in
TDA. However, for many applications, e.g, stock information system and traﬃc
information system, it is quite often to observe that there exists certain common
pages needed by diﬀerent requests. That is, these data pages are shared by dif-
ferent requests. If these applications disseminate data by using TDA, it incurs
that certain buckets in channels are spent on scheduling the duplicate pages.
Notice that oﬀering a broadcast channel for a broadcast server needs expensive
cost, e.g., budget for purchasing hardware, minimizing the number of channel
would save a great amount resource on building the hardware facility.
In this paper, we consider the scheduling of duplicate pages in the multi-
page time-constraint data broadcast service, and aim at minimizing the number
of broadcast channels for improving TDA method. We propose a duplication
page-optimized architecture for supporting the multi-page time-constraint data
broadcast service, and design a three-phase scheme for the time-slot sharing op-
timizer to let duplicate pages be shared by requests as possible such that the
needed channels are minimized. Recall that the advantage of TDA is its process-
ing eﬃciency where TDA can schedule the requests in pseudopolynomial time,
the processing time spent by using our proposed architecture would not increase
too much, and should be acceptable for most data broadcast applications. Our
basic idea for generating a duplication-free program is to erase the duplicate
pages in each column and diﬀerent rows within time constraints, and then com-
pact the data pages to reduce the number of broadcast channels by moving
the pages of the low-usage channels to the available broadcast slots. In order
to guarantee no violation of the time constraint in a broadcast program during
compacting data pages, we also invent a data structure, called Request Arrange-
ment Map (RAM), to assist our proposed method in adjusting and compacting
data pages. We conduct a primary version of experiments to verify the perfor-
mance of the three-phase scheme. The results reveal that our proposed method
can signiﬁcantly reduce more than 50% bandwidth on broadcasting replicate
pages by using the typical TDA method.

44
C.-C. Chen, L.-F. Lin, and S.-C. Wang
The rest paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the preliminaries.
Section 3 discusses the analysis of the concerned problem. Section 4 presents the
multi-page time-constraint data broadcast architecture. Then, Section 5 proposes
the time-slot sharing optimization method. We conduct experiments in Section 6.
Finally, we conclude our paper in Section 7.
2
Preliminaries
Figure 1 depicts a generic architecture of the data broadcast service. In the wire-
less data broadcast service, requested data are encapsulated into ﬁxed-sized data
pages, and a broadcast server can delivery data pages through multiple channels.
Mobile users retrieve data from the wireless broadcast medium by using a mobile
device. A mobile device ﬁrst listens to a speciﬁc broadcast channel, and wait the
data broadcast server to disseminate the required data. When retrieving required
information under the data broadcast environment, the mobile device keeps the
required data pages and ignores others. Notice that a mobile device only access
data from a broadcast channel at a time unit, thus, a mobile device needs to switch
channels to retrieve other data pages in diﬀerent channels if necessary.
The multi-page time-constraint scheduling issue is studied recently for sup-
porting the real-time applications. Chen et al [12] analyzed the complexity of the
multi-page time-constraint scheduling problem, and proposed Transformation-
based Data Allocation (TDA) method to schedule the multi-page time-constraint
program. We use an example to illustrate the process of generating a time-
constrained broadcast program by using TDA [12]. Assume two time constraints,
t1 = 3 and t2 = 6, and a set of requests are given as follows.
– t1=3, q11=(1, 2, 3), q12=(4, 5, 6),
– t2=6, q21=(7, 8, 9), q22=(10, 11, 5), q23=(1, 12).
Notice that in the example, requests q11 and q23 contain duplicate pages 1, and
q12 and q22 contain duplicate pages 5. Figure 2 shows the key steps of TDA on
scheduling the broadcast program that satisfy the above requests. Figure 2(a) is
a blank broadcast program before scheduling. In the example, the length of the
program is six because max(t1, t2) = 6, and four channels are needed for schedul-
ing the ﬁve requests. The number of needed channels for scheduling these requests
1
4
5
3
7
8
2
6
broadcast server
uplink
Fig. 1. A generic architecture of the data broadcast service
www.ebook3000.com

Three-Phase Scheme for Supporting Time-Constrained Data
45
Φspace
t1
t1
Γ
1space
r 1
1
r 2
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
1
2
2 3
3
4
4
5
5
6
6
Γ
2space
r 2
1
(a) blank broadcast channels.
(b) scheduling q11 and q12.
(c) channel transformation for time constraint t2.
(d) scheduling q21, q22, and q23.
t1
t2
1
2
3
1
2
3
5
6
4
5
6
7
9 11 8 10 5
4
1
12
(e) scheduled broadcast channels.
1
1
2
2 3
3
4
4
5
5
6
6
Γ
2space
r 2
1
7
8
9 10 11 5
1 12
Fig. 2. An example of generating a multi-page time-constrained program by using TDA
algorithm [12]
can be obtained by using the derived formula in [12]. In Figure 2(b), TDA trans-
forms the broadcast channels to virtual channels whose buckets in each channel
are suitable to schedule requests of time constraint t1. Then, TDA sequentially
schedules q11 and q12 into each channel. After dealing with all requests of time con-
straint t1, TDA transforms the virtual channels to another type of virtual channels
whose buckets in each channel are suitable to schedule requests of time constraint
t2, and the result is as shown in Figure 2(c). Similar to scheduling requests of t1,
TDA sequentially schedules q21, q22, and q23 into the virtual channel, as shown in
Figure 2(d). After scheduling all requests, TDA transforms the virtual channel to
the broadcast channels, and data pages of requests are allocated into broadcast
channels with satisfying time constraints, as shown in Figure 2(e).
3
Problem Analysis
In this section, we demonstrate the situations that bandwidth wastes so that
the scheduling algorithms need to avoid these situations. A good scheduling
method should eﬃciently utilize the available broadcast buckets. Thus, at any

46
C.-C. Chen, L.-F. Lin, and S.-C. Wang
time instant, if two or more pages of the same request are allocated to the
same time slot, the allocated broadcast buckets become waste because a mobile
client cannot receive multiple data pages from two or more diﬀerent channels at
the same time. Hence, for scheduling a given set of requests, if such situation
occurs, the broadcast server needs to broadcast the data pages of the same time
slot at another time slot, and thus, the number of needed broadcast channels
increases. That is, more hardware resource need to be spent for the multi-page
time-constraint data broadcast service.
The reasons for causing such the bandwidth waste can be classiﬁed into two
categories: request duplication and request folding. We describe the two types of
situations as follows.
– Request duplication refers to the situation that a page of a request is allo-
cated twice or more times within the length a time constraint of the request
in the program. Figure 3(a) shows an example of the request duplication.
Pages 1, 2, and 3 are three data pages of a request. This request is broad-
cast twice within its corresponding time constraint, and thus one of them
becomes waste.
– Request folding refers to the situation that two or more pages of a re-
quest are “folded” and allocated to the same time slots of diﬀerent channels.
Figure 3(b) illustrates a request folding problem, where page 1 and page 2
of the same request are broadcast in the ﬁrst time slot of both channels.
The client is able to receive only page 1 or page 2, but not both. Then, one
of them becomes waste because a mobile device cannot access them at the
same time.
Next, we present a multi-page time-constraint scheduling architecture for mini-
mizing the usage of broadcast channels based on the above observation.
1
2
3
1
2
3
duplication
t
(a) page duplication
1
3
folding
2
(b) requests folding
Fig. 3. Two broadcast situations that cause the bandwidth waste
4
Multi-page Time-Constraint Scheduling Architecture
for Data Broadcast Services
Figure 4 shows the multi-page time-constraint scheduling architecture for data
broadcast services. The proposed architecture is extended from the traditional
data broadcast model [1] shown in Figure 1 and the TDA scheduling method.
The architecture includes three components: the request collector, the broad-
cast program generator, and the broadcast server. The request collector is used
to gather the clients’ requests. Note that each client who sends his/her request to
www.ebook3000.com

Three-Phase Scheme for Supporting Time-Constrained Data
47
1
4
5
3
7
8
2
6
tc :q
q
…q1n
tc :q
q
…q2n
tc :q
q
…qmn
1
11
12
1
2
21
2
m
m1
m2
2
k
broadcast server
TDA
component
optimizer
h
uplink
request collector
2
Fig. 4. The multi-page time-constraint scheduling architecture for data broadcast
services
the request collector has to specify a time constraint for the requested data. The
broadcast program generator is used to generate a broadcast program that satis-
ﬁes the time constraints of the collected requested data pages. The generator has
two sub-components: one is TDA subcomponent, the other is the time-slot shar-
ing optimizer. The TDA subcomponent can generate multi-page time-constraint
programs by using the TDA algorithm as mentioned in Section 2. The advantage
of adopting TDA in our architecture is that the broadcast programs generated
by TDA have satisﬁed the request duplication. Hence, the scheduling problem
on erasing the duplication for supporting multi-page time-constraint service is
simpliﬁed, and only request folding needs to be considered in the following com-
ponent. Recall that the TDA algorithm may not generate a broadcast program
with minimal number of channels if the requests contain duplicate pages. Thus,
the second subcomponent, time-slot sharing optimizer, is designed to minimize
the number of needed channels based on the problem generated by the TDA
subcomponent. The details of the time-slot sharing optimizer will be presented
in Section 5. After generating a broadcast program, the broadcast server dissem-
inates data pages to the client devices.
Notice that it is possibly that diﬀerent clients issue the same request, but the
request are assigned to diﬀerent time constraints. In this situation, the request
collector has to determine an uniform time constraint for the request. Making
an uniform time constraint is a tradeoﬀbetween resource requirement (e.g., the
number of channels and computation) and the satisfaction of clients. A small
time constraint would sacriﬁce clients’ requests and use less resource require-
ment. On the other hand, a large time constraint would satisfy more clients’
request and use more resource. Thus, the request collector has to determine a
proper time constraint for such the request, particularly when the number of
channels is insuﬃcient. We design three methods for the request collector so
that the administrator can choose one according to the consideration between
resource and clients’ satisfaction.

48
C.-C. Chen, L.-F. Lin, and S.-C. Wang
– Maximum policy: the request collector sets the time constraint to the
maximum of the requests’ time constraints. The maximum policy would use
least bandwidth on scheduling, but most users who issue the request would
not access their requested data within their time constraint settings.
– Minimum policy: the request collector sets the time constraint to the min-
imum of the requests’ time constraints. The minimum policy would satisfy
most users who issue the request meet their time constraints, but the system
uses most bandwidth on scheduling.
– Median policy: the request collector sets the time constraint to the median
of the requests’ time constraints. The median policy would strike a balance
between the bandwidth on scheduling and the number of users who issue the
request access their data within their time constraint settings.
The above policies can also be adopted in a single broadcast system. For ex-
ample, the administrator can adopt the maximum policy when a lot of requests
arrive within a short period. On another period, the administrator can adopt
the minimum policy if few request arrive.
5
Time-Slot Sharing Optimizer
5.1
Overview
The time-slot sharing optimizer is based on our proposed heuristic method, three-
phase scheme, which is a post processing procedure to eliminate duplicate pages
in a time-constraint broadcast program generated by other existing algorithms
that do not consider duplicate pages, e.g., TDA algorithm [12]. In the ﬁrst phase,
called column reduction phase, each page is checked whether it is duplicate in the
corresponding column of the TDA generated program. If there exists duplicate
pages in a column, only one duplicate page is left and others can be erased. In
the second phase, called row reduction phase, each page is checked whether it is
duplicate in other channels of the broadcast program within the corresponding
time constraint. Similar to the above processing, if there exists duplicate pages
in other channels, only one duplicate page is left and others are erased. In the
third phase, called page compacting phase, the algorithm would compact the
broadcast program to reduce the number of necessary broadcast channels. The
algorithm looks up the available broadcast buckets in small channel for data
pages in large number channels. If all pages in a channel are moved to other
broadcast channels, this channel is free and the bandwidth is released.
Notice that when ﬁnding duplicate pages in second phase and unused buckets
in the third phase, the request information is frequently looked up to avoid
request folding (refer to Section 3). Instead of exhaustively search all requests
to obtain such the information, we design a supporting data structure, called
Request Arrangement Map (RAM) to speed up processing of the three-phase
scheme. In the following, we ﬁrst describe the structure of RAM, and then present
the details of the three-phase scheme.
www.ebook3000.com

Three-Phase Scheme for Supporting Time-Constrained Data
49
5.2
Request Arrangement Map (RAM)
Figure 5 is an example to illustrate the details of the data structure, Request
Arrangement Map (RAM). RAM is a two-dimensional array so that each element
can be mapped to a broadcast slot in a broadcast program, and is used to look
up which requests occupy the broadcast bucket located at (x,y), where x is the
channel number and y is oﬀset to the ﬁrst broadcast time slot. Thus, the number
of row in RAM is equal to the number of channels, and the number of column
is equal to the length of a program cycle.
In RAM, each element contains a request list, as the shaded rectangle shown in
Figure 5. The request list maintains the requests whose data page is scheduled
in the corresponding broadcast bucket of the element. Thus, when a page is
allocated to a broadcast bucket at the scheduling stage (i.e., TDA component in
Figure 4), the request list in the corresponding element of RAM will be modiﬁed
to reﬂect the page allocation.
L
C
RAM
Request_list
smallest time constraint
largest time constraint
NULL
q1
q2
qn
Fig. 5. The structure of the request arrangement map (RAM)
5.3
Three-Phase Scheme
The goal of the three-phase scheme is to eliminate duplicate pages and rearrange
broadcast pages to minimize the number of used channels based on the broad-
cast program generated by the previous TDA subcomponent. In this subsection,
we use the example mentioned in Section 2 to illustrate the detailed steps in the
three-phase scheme.
Phase 1: Column Reduction Phase
This phase scans each column of the generated scheduling program (e.g., by the
TDA algorithm) and eliminate duplicate pages which are broadcast at the same
time, because these duplicate pages would incur request folding mentioned in
Section 3. Figure 6 depicts the column reduction phase. In this phase, each col-
umn of the broadcast program is sequentially scanned from the ﬁrst time slot to
the last time slot to identify the duplicate pages in a column, such as the pages
with shaded circles (i.e., page 1) in Figure 6(a). Since only one of duplicate pages
in a column is able to oﬀer the multi-page time-constrained service, thus only

50
C.-C. Chen, L.-F. Lin, and S.-C. Wang
q11
1
2
3
1
2
3
5
6
4
5
6
7
9
8 10
4
12
CH1
CH2
CH3
t1
t2
RAM
CH4
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
23
11
11
12
12
12
21
21
22
11
q
q
q
q
11
12
21
23
q
q
q
11
12
22
q11
q
q
12
22
5
1
(a) The TDA-generated program and its RAM structure
q11
1
2
3
1
2
3
5
6
4
5
6
7
9
8 10
4
12
CH1
CH2
CH3
t1
t2
RAM
CH4
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
23
11
11
12
12
12
21
21
22
11
q
q
q
q
11
12
21
23
q
q
q
11
12
22
q11
q
q
12
22
5
(b) The column reduction process
Fig. 6. Illustration of the column reduction
one duplicate page is reserved and others are erased, as shown in Figure 6(b). In
other words, the reserved page is shared by the requests whose data pages are
erased. At the moment, the corresponding element of the reserved page in RAM
maintains the request ids for those erased pages to indicate which requests share
the reserved page. In the example, the maintenance of the request ids is shown in
the shaded elements of RAM in Figure 6(b). The purpose of maintaining request
ids for each broadcast bucket is to check whether the request folding principle
is met in the next two phases (i.e., row reduction phase and page-compacting
phase).
Phase 2: Row Reduction Phase
The second phase, row reduction phase, is used to remove the duplicate pages which
duplicately appears in other channels and satisﬁes request folding. Figure 7 illus-
trates the row reduction phase. In this phase, each page is examined whether an-
other the same page duplicately appears within the corresponding time constraint.
The row reduction phase starts the examining process from pages of largest con-
straint to those of smallest constraint because most duplicate pages that can be
erased are in large time constraints. When a page duplicately scheduled is found
(page 5 in Figure 7(a)), the duplicate pages are merged by erasing one of the du-
plicate page and moving the corresponding request id to the cell of the reserved
page in RAM. In most cases, the erased duplicate page is usually the one with the
larger constraint because the page with the larger constraint has the higher de-
gree of freedom to be re-scheduled than one with the small constraint. Similar to
the ﬁrst phase, the reserved page is shared by the requests whose data pages are
erased. After merging the duplicate pages, those requests shared the reserved page
are recorded in RAM. In our example, page 5 in channel 3 is erased, and in RAM,
the request id q22 is move to the new cell in channel 2.
www.ebook3000.com

Three-Phase Scheme for Supporting Time-Constrained Data
51
q11
1
2
3
1
2
3
5
6
4
5
6
7
9
8 10
4
12
CH1
CH2
CH3
t1
t2
RAM
CH4
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
23
11
11
12
12
12
21
21
22
11
q
q
q
q
11
12
21
23
q
q
q
11
12
22
q11
q
q
12
22
5
(a) The row reduction process and its RAM structure
q11
1
2
3
1
2
3
5
6
4
5
6
7
9
8 10
4
12
CH1
CH2
CH3
t1
t2
RAM
CH4
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
23
11
11
12
12
12
21
21
22
11
q
q
q
q
11
12
21
23
q
q
q
11
12
22
q11
q
q
12
22
(b) Remove request folding in the row reduction process
Fig. 7. Illustration of the row reduction phase
Next, the row reduction algorithm continue to verify whether request folding
occurs among the reserved page and other pages in the same time slot. The oc-
currence of request folding can be found out by looking up the RAM structure.
If a request folding occurs, such as pages 5 and 10 which both belong to request
q22 (refer to Figure 7(b)), then a page which incurs the request folding needs to
move to another broadcast bucket to resolve the request folding. Our principle
is that the data page with large time constraint moves to the broadcast bucket
that the previous duplicate page is erased. In our example, page 10 (which has
the larger time constraint than page 5) is moved to the broadcast bucket of the
previously erased page 5, as shown in Figure 7(b). Conversely, if no request fold-
ing occur, the row reduction phase ends the examining process of the current
page, and continues to examine the next unexamined page.
Phase 3: Page Compacting Phase
The goal of the third phase, the page compacting phase, is to move the pages in
the channels of low utilization to another channels so that the number of used
channels can be reduced. Since the ﬁrst two phases reserve the shared page in
the small-number channels, the unused broadcast buckets are usually grouped
in the large-number channels. Hence, the principle of the page compacting phase
is to release channels from large-number channels to small-number channels.
In this phase, each page will be examined whether it can be moved to an-
other available broadcast bucket. A page that can be moved to another available
broadcast bucket needs to satisfy the following two conditions.
1. When the page moves to a new buckets, time constraints of the corresponding
requests should still be satisﬁed. Assume a page of the request whose time
constraint is t is scheduled to broadcast in the time slot s, and an available

52
C.-C. Chen, L.-F. Lin, and S.-C. Wang
bucket is in the time slot k. The condition that the page can be moved to
another available bucket should satisfy
s
t

=
k
t

2. When the page moves to a new buckets, no request folding is incurred. To
examine if the page in the new bucket incur request folding or not, we can
examine the page through looking up the RAM structure. We just need to
examine the request lists in the elements which are at the same column as
the new bucket. If no request in the lists is the same as the request of the
examined page, the page can move to this unused bucket and no request
folding is incurred.
Notice that after moving a page to a new broadcast bucket, there could happen
that another page and the new moved page are of the same content and in the
same column. If the situation happens, these two pages can be merged into one
(i.e., column reduction rule).
Figure 8 is an example which follows the previous example to illustrate the
page compacting phase. The page compacting process scans the channels from
large number to small number. At this stage, the broadcast page 12 in channel 4
is selected to move to another available bucket. In the current broadcast program,
the unused buckets between channel 1 and channel 3 will be examined. Then,
an available broadcast bucket in channel 3 is found, as shown in Figure 8(a).
Consequently, the page compacting phase looks up the RAM structure, and
ﬁnds that the rearrangement of page 12 from current broadcast bucket to the
available bucket in channel 3 satisﬁes the above mentioned conditions and, thus,
ensures no request folding. Hence, the page 12 is moved to the new broadcast
q11
1
2
3
1
2
3
5
6
4
5
6
7
9
8
10
4
12
CH1
CH2
CH3
t1
t2
RAM
CH4
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
23
11
11
12
12
12
21
21
22
11
q
q
q
q
11
12
21
23
q
q q
11
12
22
q11
q
q
12
22
(a) The page compacting process and its RAM structure.
q11
1
2
3
1
2
3
5
6
4
5
6
7
9
8 12
4
10
CH1
CH2
CH3
RAM
CH4
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
q
23
11
11
12
12
12
21
21
22
11
q
q
q
q
11
12
21
22
q
q
q
11
12
23
q11
q
q
12
22
(b) The broadcast program after running three-phase
scheme.
Fig. 8. Illustration of the page compacting phase
www.ebook3000.com

Three-Phase Scheme for Supporting Time-Constrained Data
53
bucket in channel 3, as shown in Figure 8(b). At the same time, channel 4 is
released for future use by the broadcast server.
6
Performance Evaluation
We assume the request collector collects 600 requests from clients, and these
requests contain 2400 distinct pages. These 600 requests belong to ﬁve time con-
straints, that is, 4, 8, 16, 32, and 64. In the experiments, the broadcast program
scheduling methods includes TDA with three-phase algorithm, pure TDA, and
the experimental optimal scheduling method. They are denoted as Three-phase
Optimizer, TDA, and Exp. OPT., respectively. Exp. OPT. obtains the experi-
mental optimal results by choosing the optimal program from all possibilities of
heuristic scheduling programs. In other words, Exp. OPT. is a time-consuming
exhaustive search method which tests as many generated programs as possible to
ﬁnd out the optimal program. Since the real optimal number of channels needed
for duplicate-page time-constraint data broadcast service is hard to obtain, we
use Exp. OPT as a pseudo optimal method on performance comparison.
The experiment studies the need of broadcast channels for each scheduling
method in diﬀerent number of requests. The experimental result is shown in
Figure 9. From the result, we can see that comparing to TDA, the proposed
three-phase optimizer is quite close to the Exp. OPT. The number of channels
for the three-phase optimizer is almost only 1
2 ∼1
7 of that in TDA. Thus, the
proposed method has the high eﬃciency on saving bandwidth, comparing to
past proposed TDA. In addition, the number of channels for the three-phase
optimizer does not increase as increasing number of requests. It means that our
proposed method performs quite stable and scalable to the number of requests.
Hence, the three-phase optimizer can be applied to large-scale wireless broadcast
systems.
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
 350
 400
 100
 200
 300
 400
 500
 600
 700
number of channels
number of requests
Three-phase Optimizer
TDA
Exp. OPT.
Fig. 9. The number of broadcast channels considering page duplication for diﬀerent
schemes

54
C.-C. Chen, L.-F. Lin, and S.-C. Wang
7
Conclusions and Future Work
Since multi-channel techniques are proposed in wireless data broadcast envi-
ronments, more and more applications with diﬀerent constraints are designed
based the the wireless data broadcast platform. In this paper, we focus on the
multi-page time-constraint service in the wireless data broadcast system, and in-
vestigate the scheduling issue of duplicate pages for the time-constraint service.
We proposed the multi-page time-constraint scheduling architecture for generat-
ing data broadcast program based on the TDA scheduling method, and designed
the novel three-phase scheme to optimize the number of necessary channels for
scheduling the arrival requests. We conduct experiments to study the channel
utilization of our proposed method. The results reveal that our proposed method
indeed requires less number of channels than TDA, and is adaptive to the request
duplication degree.
Our future work will continue to study the impact on the determination of
three policies on determining an uniform time constraint for a request, as men-
tioned in Section 4. In addition, from the experiments, we can see that it is pos-
sibly further reduce the number of necessary channels in the three-phase scheme
to that in the Exp. OPT. Hence, our another future direction of will focus on
further reducing the number of channels. Our currently proposed three-phase
heuristic optimization scheme is based on TDA algorithm. We plan to directly
schedule the requests to satisfy time constraint and reduce duplicate pages si-
multaneously.
References
1. Acharya, S., Alonso, R., Franklin, M.J., Zdonik, S.B.: Broadcast disks: Data
management for asymmetric communication environments. In: Proceeding of
the 1995 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data
(SIGMOD 1995), San Jose, California, May 22-25, pp. 199–210 (1995)
2. Prabhakara, K., Hua, K.A., Oh, J.H.: Multi-level multi-channel air cache designs
for broadcasting in a mobile environment. In: Proceedings of the 16th International
Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE 2000), San Diego, California, USA, 28
February - 3 March, pp. 167–176 (2000)
3. Lo, S.C., Chen, A.L.: Optimal index and data allocation in multiple broadcast
channels. In: Proceedings of 16th International Conference on Data Engineering
(ICDE 2000), San Diego, CA, USA, February 28-March 3, pp. 293–302 (2000)
4. Hu, C.L., Chen, M.S.: Online scheduling sequential objects with periodicity
for dynamic information dissemination. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 21(2),
273–286 (2009)
5. Tsai, H.P., Hung, H.P., Chen, M.S.: On channel allocation for heterogeneous data
broadcasting. IEEE Trans. on Mobile Computing 8(5), 694–708 (2009)
6. Chu, C.H., Hung, H.P., Chen, M.S.: A general framework of time-variant band-
width allocation in the data broadcasting environment. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
Eng. 22(3) (March 2010)
7. Gu, Q., Liu, P., Chu, C.H., Lee, W.C.: Ktr: an eﬃcient key management scheme
for secure data access control in wireless broadcast services. IEEE Transactions on
Dependable and Secure Computing (TDSC) (accepted and to appear)
www.ebook3000.com

Three-Phase Scheme for Supporting Time-Constrained Data
55
8. Fernandez-Conde, J., Ramamritham, K.: Adaptive dissemination of data in time-
critical asymmetric communication environments. In: Proceedings of the 11th Eu-
romicro Conference on Real-Time Systems (ECRTS 1999), York, England, June
9-11 (1999)
9. Xu, J., Tang, X., Lee, W.C.: On scheduling time-critical on-demand broadcast.
IEEE Transactions on Distributed and Parallel Systems 17(1), 3–14 (2006)
10. Chung, Y.C., Lin, L., Lee, C.: Scheduling non-uniform data with expected-
time constraint in wireless multi-channel environments. J. Parallel Distrib. Com-
put. 69(3), 247–260 (2009)
11. Chung, Y.C., Chen, C.C., Lee, C.: Design and performance evaluation of broadcast
algorithms for time-constrained data retrieval. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge
and Data Engineering 18(11), 1526–1543 (2006)
12. Chen, C.C., Lee, C., Wang, S.C.: On optimal scheduling for time-constrained ser-
vices in multi-channel data dissemination systems. Inf. Syst. 34(1), 164–177 (2009)
13. Kenyon, C., Schabanel, N., Young, N.: Polynomial-time approxdmation scheme for
data broadcast. In: Proceedings of the Thirty-second Annual ACM Symposium on
Theory of Computing (STOC), Portland Oregon USA, May 21-23, pp. 659–666
(2000)
14. Cormen,
T.H.,
Leiserson,
C.E.,
Rivest,
R.L.:
Introductions
to
Algorithms
(June 1990)

C.-C. Chang et al. (Eds.): ACN 2010, CCIS 77, pp. 56–63, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
A Feedback-Based Secure Path Approach  
for Wireless Sensor Networks Data  
Collection 
Yuxin Mao 
School of Computer and Information Engineering, Zhejiang Gongshang University, 
Xuezheng Street NO. 18, Hangzhou 310018, Zhejiang, P.R. China 
maoyuxin@zjgsu.edu.cn 
Abstract. The unattended nature of WSNs makes them very vulnerable to  
malicious attacks. In this paper, we propose a novel approach of secure data 
collection for WSN. We explore secret sharing and multipath routing to achieve 
secure data collection in a WSN with compromised nodes. We propose to use a 
novel tracing-feedback mechanism, which makes full use of the routing func-
tionality of WSN, to improve the quality of data collection. The algorithms of 
the approach are easy to be implemented and performed in WSN. We also 
evaluate the approach with a simulation experiment and analyze the simulation 
results in detail. We illustrate that the approach is efficient to support secure 
data collection in wireless sensor network.   
Keywords: Data Collection, Feedback, Secure Path, Wireless Sensor Network. 
1   Introduction 
Although intrusion detection is an important aspect to WSN, it is still in its infancy 
and there are currently only a few studies in this area. Due to some intrinsic features 
of WSN, it’s difficult to perform efficient intrusion detection in a resource-restricted 
environment. Many intelligent or statistical approaches are too complex to WSNs. It’s 
much easier to elude or bypass the holes rather than detect them. One possible solu-
tion to such kind of attack is to exploit the routing functionality of WSN. Specifically, 
if the locations of the black holes formed by the compromised nodes are known a 
priori, then sensed information can be delivered over paths that circumvent (bypass) 
these holes, whenever possible. As the existing intrusion detection methods for WSN 
are still immature, it’s difficult to acquire such location information precisely in prac-
tice. Therefore the above idea of delivering information is often implemented in a 
probabilistic manner. Multipath routing allows the establishment of multiple paths 
between a single source and single destination node. It is typically proposed in order 
to increase the reliability of data transmission (i.e., fault tolerance) or to provide load 
balancing [4]. If the location information of compromised nodes is not known a priori, 
the source node can deliver sensed information by multiple paths to decrease the 
chance of the information being intercepted. 
However, there are still problems with multipath routing approach. If the adversary 
can selectively compromise nodes, the sensed information is intercepted in each fixed 
www.ebook3000.com

 
A Feedback-Based Secure Path Approach for WSNs Data Collection 
57 
routing path even if it can be distributed over different routes. One possible solution to 
this problem is delivering information randomly through different paths rather than 
fixed set of routes [5]. Although the adversary can still intercept part of information, we 
can reduce the probability of interception to an acceptable extent by some mechanism. 
In this paper, we propose a novel approach of secure data collection for WSN. We 
explore secret sharing and multipath routing to achieve secure data collection in a 
WSN with compromised nodes. The remaining of the paper is organized as follows. 
In Section 2, we present a feedback-based secure path algorithm for secure data col-
lection in WSN. We evaluate the approach with a simulation experiment in section 3 
and give the simulation results in detail. Section 4 gives an overview of the related 
works. Section 5concludes the paper with an outlook to future research directions. 
2   Secure Path Approach 
In this paper, we consider a relatively simple WSN. Each sensor node in the WSN is 
battery-powered and has limited sensing, computation and wireless communication 
capabilities. The sink is a data collection center equipped with sufficient computation 
and storage capabilities. Sensor nodes generate sensor information and aggregate data 
packets. The sink collects data from sensor nodes periodically. We assume that com-
promised nodes, in order to allay suspicions, selectively drop only a small proportion 
of all packets passing by rather than every packet. The routing layer of WSNs is 
threatened by various attacks. However, due to the focus of this paper, it will not be 
further discussed and here we consider only selective forwarding attacks. 
The process of data collection in WSN is a relay of data packet from the source 
node to the sink. If the packet successfully arrives at the sink in the end, it means that 
there are no compromised nodes along the path. Therefore, we can make use of such 
historical information about data collection to improve the quality of the data collec-
tion and even perform intrusion detection. 
2.1   Feedback-Based Secure Path Construction 
We try to use a tracing/feedback mechanism for secure data collection. Therefore, we 
propose a feedback-based secure path construction (FSPC) algorithm for this purpose. 
The algorithm is illustrated as follows: 
 
(1) 
A source node S sends a data packet according to the ADC algorithm. To 
each share of data packet, S attaches an identity list L to it. Initially, L is an 
empty list. 
(2) 
When a sensor node Sk receives a share, if it is a normal node, it adds its 
identity dk to L. 
(3) 
On the arrival of the share, the sink extracts L={d1, d2, …, dn} (di refers to 
the identity of the node Si) from the share and stores the pair <S, L> in its lo-
cal database. 
(4) 
The sink adds L to a notification packet and sends the packet to S according 
to L. 
 

58 
Y. Mao 
 
Fig. 1. An illustration of the FSPC algorithm for secure data collection 
(5) 
When a sensor node Sj receives the packet, if its identity dj is in L, it extracts 
a sub-path Pj={dj+1, dj+2, …, dn} from L and stores it into its local cache. Sj 
extracts its next-hop node Sj-1 with identity dj-1 from L and forwards the 
packet to it. 
(6) 
On the arrival of the packet, S extracts L from the packet, and stores it in its 
local cache. S also attaches a counter with an initial value λ to L. Here L is 
called a secure path for S. Pj is called a secure path for Sj (see figure 1). 
In this algorithm, each normal sensor node in a routing path adds its unique identity to 
the data packet. When the data packet reaches the sink, it involves a routing path that 
consists of a list of the identities of normal sensor nodes. It means that the path is 
potentially secure for data collection and can be used again by the source node in the 
future. A complete secure path is always terminated and collected by the sink. Here 
we use a feedback mechanism to notify the source node that requires the path for 
future data collection. The sink sends back a notification packet that contains a secure 
path to the source node. The task of notification may be performed at intervals rather 
than immediately in order to reduce the overall consumption of the WSN. 
Here the notion of secure path does not mean that the path is absolutely secure for 
data collection. A secure path may include compromised nodes on itself. It’s mainly 
because that a compromised node drops a data packet with a probability. If a com-
promised node does not drop any data packet during the process of secure path con-
struction, it will be considered potentially safe and be included in the path. In the 
worst case, each compromised node does not drop the data packet on the stage of 
secure path construction, in order to be involved in a secure path. Then each compro-
mised node will appear on a secure path, which leads to a very low success ratio of 
data transmission. Therefore, when we say a path is a secure path, it only means that 
the path is currently safe for data collection. 
www.ebook3000.com

 
A Feedback-Based Secure Path Approach for WSNs Data Collection 
59 
2.2   Secure-Path Based Data Collection 
As long as a source node receives enough secure paths from the sink, it is able to send 
data via these paths. Therefore we can improve the ADC algorithm in section 2 by 
using secure paths. The secure-path based data collection (SPDC) algorithm is illus-
trated as follows: 
(1) 
When a source node S intends to send a data share to the sink, it first checks 
its local cache. If there are secure paths, it selects a secure path P={d1, d2, …, 
dn} randomly from its local data repository and send the share to the node S1 
for d1. If there are no secure paths in the local cache of the relay node, it just 
performs random multipath routing as the ADC algorithm in section 2. If S 
has no secure paths at all, it performs path construction as the FSP algorithm 
in section 3.2. 
(2) 
When a sensor node Sk receives a share, it checks its local cache, randomly 
selects a secure path Pk={dk1, dk2, …, dkn} and sends the share to the node Sk1 
with the identity of dk1. To each relay node, it performs path selection by us-
ing some random propagation mechanism or path construction if it has no 
secure paths.  
If the share reaches the sink successfully: 
(3) 
On the arrival of the share, if there is no secure path in the share, it means 
every relay node has secure paths and the sink just sends back an empty noti-
fication to S. Otherwise, the sink extracts a secure path from the share, up-
dates its local database and sends back a notification with the secure path  
to S. 
(4) 
The relay nodes on the path update their local cache with secure path.  
(5) 
On the arrival of the notification, S extracts L from the packet, and stores it 
in its local cache.  
If the share is dropped or does not reaches the sink within the time span allowed: 
(6) 
S does not receive a notification from the sink, and then it just decreases the 
counter of P by 1.  
(7) 
If the counter of a secure path is cleared, S will remove it from its local 
cache. 
From this algorithm, we can see that a secure path is not considered to be secure all 
the time. Secure paths are evaluated by their quality of service (QoS) for data collec-
tion. The SPDC algorithm deals with the problem of selective forwarding by using a 
scoring mechanism. We can exclude compromised nodes from data collection as 
many as possible. The local cache for secure paths of a source node therefore changes 
dynamically. 
3   Simulation 
In this section, we construct simulation to evaluate the performance of the proposed 
approach. The major metric for performance evaluation is the packet interception 
probability (PIP) for a source node, defined as the ratio of the number of intercepted  
 

60 
Y. Mao 
Table 1. The major parameters for the simulation 
Parameter 
Value 
Font size and style 
Sensor Node Number 
50 
Sensor Node Number 
Drop Rate 
0.2 
Drop Rate 
Threshold Value k 
5 
Threshold Value k 
data packets to the total number of packets sent from the source node. To better under-
stand the capability of these randomized multi-path routing algorithms in bypassing 
black holes, we also compare the performance of our approach with the original algo-
rithms in [5]. The basic setting for the simulation is illustrated in table 1. Here the pa-
rameter drop rate refers to the probability that a compromised will drop a data packet. 
3.1   Packet Interception Probability Evaluation 
We first fix the location of the source node that sends data the sink. We first investi-
gate the PIP for the source node under different numbers of compromised nodes. For 
each number of compromised nodes, we evaluate the average PIP for the source node. 
Figure 2 shows a plot of the PIP for the source node under different numbers of com-
promised nodes. It’s obvious to see that the PIP increases when the number of com-
promised nodes becomes larger. When half of the sensor nodes are compromised 
nodes, most of the data packets are intercepted. We also compare the performance of 
the SPDC algorithm with that of NRRP algorithm proposed in [5]. As can be seen in  
 
 
Fig. 2. The PIP values for SPDC, DRP and NRRP with different numbers of compromised 
nodes 
www.ebook3000.com

 
A Feedback-Based Secure Path Approach for WSNs Data Collection 
61 
the figure, the performance of SPDC is better than NRRP with the same number of 
compromised nodes. When the number of compromised nodes is small or large, the 
performance of the two algorithms is very close. However, SPDC behaves much 
better than NRRP with number of compromised nodes falling into the extent (13, 18). 
3.2   Performance Evaluation under Different Drop Ratios 
We change the drop rate of compromised nodes to different values and evaluate the 
performance of the approach under different drop rate values. A larger drop rate im-
plies that more data packets will be dropped by compromised nodes. Therefore, the 
PIP is more likely to increase when the drop rate value increases. As illustrated in 
figure 3, both SPDC and NRRP get a higher PIP value when we change the drop rate 
from 0.2 to 0.5. 
 
 
Fig. 3. The PIP values for SPDC, DRP and NRRP with different drop rate values 
It can be seen that the performance of SPDC is better than NRRP when the drop 
rate value is large. The performance of SPDC at drop rate of 0.5 is close to that at 0.2. 
In the contrast, the overall PIP of NRRP increases a lot when the drop rate changes 
from 0.2 to 0.5. It means that the performance of NRRP is poor when the drop rate is 
high. With a large drop rate value, it’s easier to exclude compromised nodes from 
secure paths in the beginning, which results in a better performance. However, to 
NRRP, a large drop rate value just increase the number of data packets being dropped. 
Therefore, SPDC performs better than NRRP when the drop rate is high. 

62 
Y. Mao 
4   Related Works 
There have been a few of on-going efforts about multipath routing for secure data 
collection presented in literature. For example, the SPREAD algorithm in [10] at-
tempts to find multiple most-secure and node-disjoint paths. A modified Dijkstra 
algorithm is used to iteratively find the top-K most secure node-disjoint paths. The H-
SPREAD algorithm [11] improves the SPREAD algorithm by simultaneously ac-
counting for both security and reliability requirements. The work in [12] presents 
distributed Bound-Control and Lex-Control algorithms, which compute multiple paths 
respectively. Shu et al. in [5] present an approach for secure data collection by using 
(t, n)-threshold secret sharing algorithm and randomized multipath routes. A packet is 
broken into shares, which are sent to the sink through randomly-generated paths. 
Compared with our approach, they use a fixed source node to evaluate the approach in 
simulation, while we extend their simulation with a collection of source nodes. Nasser 
and Chen in [13] propose a routing protocol that uses multipath alternately as the path 
for communicating between two nodes. The protocol defends against some specific 
attacks like selective forwarding by advertising an attractive route to the destination. 
Deng et al. in [14] propose an intrusion-tolerant routing protocol for WSNs. They try 
to preserve WSN security by using one way hash chains and nested keyed message 
authentication codes, as well as multipath routing.  
Compared with existing works in this field, our approach use a novel tracing-
feedback mechanism, which makes full use of the routing functionality of WSN, to 
improve the quality of data collection. The process of constructing secure path places 
limited consumption on sensor nodes and WSN, while perform routing via secure 
paths is much safer than random multipath routing. The major difference between our 
approach and the existing multipath methods is that the secure paths here are poten-
tially safe for data collection.  Moreover, the algorithms are easy to be implemented 
and performed in WSN. 
5   Conclusion 
In this paper, we propose a novel approach of secure data collection for WSN. We 
explore secret sharing and multipath routing to achieve secure data collection in a 
WSN with compromised nodes. We propose to use a novel tracing-feedback mecha-
nism, which makes full use of the routing functionality of WSN, to improve the qual-
ity of data collection. Compared with existing works in this field, our approach use a 
novel tracing-feedback mechanism, which makes full use of the routing functionality 
of WSN, to improve the quality of data collection. The major difference between our 
approach and the existing multipath methods is that the secure paths here are poten-
tially safe for data collection. In all, our work tries to take a step forward secure data 
collection for WSN. Future works may include: (1) improve the efficiency of the 
algorithms; (2) enhance the approach to support intrusion detection for WSN. 
 
Acknowledgments. This work is partially supported by a grant from Educational 
Commission of Zhejiang Province (NO. Y200908082) and a Science and Technology 
Program of ZJGSU (NO. 1130XJ200920). 
www.ebook3000.com

 
A Feedback-Based Secure Path Approach for WSNs Data Collection 
63 
References 
[1] Low, K.S., Win, W.N., Er, M.J.: Wireless Sensor Networks for Industrial Environments. 
Mater. Sci. Forum 119, 83–87 (1992) 
[2] Akyildiz, F., Su, W., Sankarasubramaniam, Y., Cayirci, E.: A survey on sensor networks. 
IEEE Communications Magazine 40(8), 102–114 (2002) 
[3] Zhang, Y., Lee, W.: Intrusion Detection in Wireless Ad-Hoc Networks. In: Proc. the 6th 
Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking (2000) 
[4] Tsirigos, A., Haas, Z.J.: Multipath routing in the presence of frequent topological 
changes. IEEE Communication Magazine 39(11), 132–138 (2001) 
[5] Shu, T., Liu, S., KrunzSecure, M.: Data Collection in Wireless Sensor Networks Using 
Randomized Dispersive Routes. In: Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conference, pp. 2846–2850 
(2009) 
[6] Akyildiz, F., Su, W., Sankarasubramaniam, Y., Cayirci, E.: Wireless Sensor Networks: A 
Survey. Computer Networks 38, 393–422 (2002) 
[7] Ioannis, K., Dimitriou, T., Freiling, F.C.: Towards Intrusion Detection in Wireless Sensor 
Networks. In: Proc. the 13th European Wireless Conference (2007) 
[8] Onat, I., Miri, A.: An Intrusion Detection System for Wireless Sensor Networks. In: Proc. 
IEEE International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking and 
Communications (2005) 
[9] Shamir, A.: How to Share a Secret. Communication of the ACM 22(11), 612–613 (1979) 
[10] Lou, W., Liu, W., Fang, Y.: Spread: enhancing data confidentiality in mobile ad hoc net-
works. In: Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conference, vol. 4, pp. 2404–2413 (2004) 
[11] Lou, W., Kwon, Y.: H-spread: a hybrid multipath scheme for secure and reliable data col-
lection in wireless sensor networks. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology 55(4), 
1320–1330 (2006) 
[12] Lee, P.C., Misra, V., Rubenstein, D.: Distributed algorithms for secure multipath rout-ing 
in attack-resistant networks. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking 15(6), 1490–1501 
(2007) 
[13] Nasser, N., Chen, Y.: SEEM: Secure and energy-efficient multipath routing protocol for 
wireless sensor networks. Computer Communications 30(11-12), 2401–2412 (2007) 
[14] Deng, J., Han, R., Mishra, S.: INSENS: Intrusion-tolerant routing for wireless sensor 
networks. Computer Communication 29(2), 216–230 (2006) 

C.-C. Chang et al. (Eds.): ACN 2010, CCIS 77, pp. 64–73, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
An Effective Power Saving Mechanism for IEEE 802.11 
PSM in Double-Layered Mobile P2P Systems 
Ju-Hee Lee, Taek-Hun Kim, Jin-Woo Song, Kwang-Jo Lee, and Sung-Bong Yang 
Dept. of Computer Science, Yonsei University 
134 Shinchon-Dong Sudaemoon-Gu Seoul, 120-749, Korea 
{happy1024,kimthun,fantaros,kjlee5435,yang}@cs.yonsei.ac.kr 
Abstract. In this paper, we propose a scheme for double-layered mobile P2P 
systems that enhances energy efficiency by modifying PSM(Power Saving 
Mode) defined in 802.11. The proposed scheme lengthens the beacon interval 
adaptively and adopts a known power saving scheme for more power saving. 
The experimental results showed that the proposed scheme improved 58.3% in 
terms of the average energy saving and 10% in terms of the average success ra-
tio for file searches over the system with the standard PSM. 
Keywords: Mobile P2P systems, Energy efficiency, IEEE 802.11, PSM. 
1   Introduction 
Mobile devices that have been gaining rapid popularity have different environments 
in terms of hardware, software, networks, and services in contrast to fixed devices. 
Therefore, there are various researches on mobile networks, especially peer-to-
peer(P2P) systems. The mobile P2P systems offer services such as file search and 
transmission for peers under mobile environments. Since mobile devices have limited 
energy capacity, more efficient use of energy is ever required for the mobile P2P 
systems. In mobile network environments, it is important and necessary for terminals 
to manage effectively their limited energy to sustain networks. Therefore, researches 
on network configuration and operation for reducing energy consumption become 
more important. 
The double-layered P2P systems introduced in [1][2][3] exhibit more effective  
energy usage in mobile ad hoc networks. In a double-layered P2P system peers are 
classified into super peers and subpeers for reducing network traffic; such reduction 
contributes to saving peers’ energy. Note that if the total number of messages gener-
ated in a network is small, so is the energy consumption of peers. In a double-layered 
system a super peer has appropriate information of its subpeers and a subpeer partici-
pates in the network through its super peer. So, a double-layered system allows file 
searches with much less network traffic compared with a typical single-layered mo-
bile P2P system like ORION(Optimized Routing Independent Overlay Network)[4] 
that resorts tp flooding[2]; a double-layered system performs file searches through 
super peers and only a portion of subpeers.  
In this paper, we manage peers’ energy more effectively by applying the power 
saving mode(PSM) defined in IEEE 802.11 to a double-layered mobile P2P system. 
www.ebook3000.com

 
An Effective Power Saving Mechanism for IEEE 802.11 PSM 
65 
We propose a power saving scheme to enhance energy efficiency and the success 
ratio of file searches over a system with PSM. The proposed scheme adjusts the BI 
adaptively and adopts a power saving scheme suggested in [5] for more energy sav-
ing. The experimental results showed that the proposed scheme improved 58.3% in 
terms of the average energy saving and 10% in terms of the average success ratio for 
file searches over the system with PSM. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The related work that includes double-
layered P2P systems, network mobility models and PSM of IEEE 802.11 is discussed in 
Section 2. The proposed scheme to minimize energy consumption is presented in  
Section 3, the experimental environment and results are given in Section 4, and the 
conclusions are made in Section 5. 
2   Related Work 
2.1   Double-Layered P2P Systems 
A double-layered P2P system configures a network in which super peers are in the 
upper layer and subpeers are in the lower layer. A super peer is supposed to manage 
its subpeers. Fig. 1 illustrates a double-layered P2P system in which super peers rep-
resent rectangles and subpeers are circles. Each super peer has a route table and file 
table. The route table of a super peer stores the IDs of its neighboring subpeers; for 
example, in the table of super peer Q, there are two entries indicating that super peers 
P and T can be reached from Q via B and D, respectively. The file table stores the IDs 
of peers and files; for example, the file table of Q shows that peer D has files 6 and 7 
and G has file 3. 
When a subpeer wants to find file n. First, it informs its super peer that it wants file 
n. Then the super peer looks into its file table. If it finds the information of file n, then 
it sends the ID of the peer who owns file n. Otherwise, it sends a message for request-
ing the file to each of its neighboring super peers by referring to its own route table. 
Observe that the messages are sent via subpeers that connect super peers; for exam-
ple, in Fig. 1 super peer P sends a message to super peer Q via subpeer B, to super 
peer R through subpeers B and C, and to super peer S through subpeer A. 
Therefore, a double-layered system allows file searches with much less network 
traffic than a single-layered P2P system like ORION that uses flooding for searches. 
A double-layered P2P system reconfigures its network by reselecting super peers and 
its subpeers periodically; that is, network configuration is updated periodically. There 
are three types of double-layered systems; they are the Greedy system, the 
MIS(Maximal Independent Set), and the MOB(mobility) system[1][2][3]. Each sys-
tem has a different super peer selection method. The MOB system has the best per-
formance in reducing network traffic among them. 
The MOB system selects super peer using peers’ mobility, the movement of peers 
during a period between two consecutive network reconfigurations. In the beginning 
of a network reconfiguration, each peer calculates its own mobility value, the total 
distance it moved around during the period from the previous network reconfiguration 
till now. Then each peer sends its mobility value to its adjacent peers who are reach-
able with one hop. Now each peer compares its mobility value with those values just  
 

66 
J.-H. Lee et al. 
 
Fig. 1. A double layered mobile P2P system 
received and sends a “You are the winner” message to each of its neighbors who have 
smaller mobility values. The ties are broken arbitrarily. A peer who receives the win-
ner messages from all of its neighbors becomes a super peer and its adjacent peers 
become its subpeers. The same selection process is done with the rest of peers repeat-
edly until all peers become either super peers or subpeers.  
After finishing the selection of super peers and subpeers, the routing table of each 
super peer is made by its subpeers who check if their adjacent peers are other super 
peers or subpeers who belong to other super peers; proper information is exchanged to 
establish routes and the information is stored in the route table. 
2.2   PSM of IEEE 802.11 
IEEE 802.11, a well-known standard MAC(medium access control) protocol, defines the 
active mode(AM) and PSM [6]. In AM, all peers stay always in Awake state to keep 
readiness, consuming much energy, although some peers may have no tasks related to 
data transmissions or receptions. When a peer in Awake state should send some data, 
it can send the data to other peer immediately. Therefore, the transmission delay for 
communication is minimal in a system with AM. But the system cannot avoid huge 
energy consumption to keep its readiness. 
PSM of IEEE 802.11 is designed to reduce peers’ energy consumption and classi-
fies peers’ states into Awake, Sleep, and Off state. In Awake state, a peer is able to 
transmit or receive data. Awake state is further classified into Transmit, Receive, and 
Idle states. When there is no transmission or reception for a peer in Awake state, it  
 
www.ebook3000.com

 
An Effective Power Saving Mechanism for IEEE 802.11 PSM 
67 
 
Fig. 2. Data transmission between peers in PSM of IEEE 802.11 
goes to Idle state in which a smaller amount of energy is still consumed. In Sleep 
state, a peer consumes the least amount of energy and no data transmission or recep-
tion takes place. In Off state, a peer consumes no energy since it is regarded as being 
turned the power off. 
In PSM, each peer periodically switches its state as long as it is not in Off state and 
the switching period is determined by BI. Each BI consists of the ad-hoc traffic indi-
cation message(ATIM) window and the data transmission interval as shown in Fig. 2. 
When an ATIM window begins, a beacon frame containing the time stamp is ex-
changed with each other for synchronization, and a pre-check is made to see whether 
there are data to receive or transmit. That is, ATIM is sent to the other peer when 
there are data to transmit and the peer who receives ATIM transmits an acknowl-
edgement(ACK) message, after which it maintains Awake state during the data 
transmission period along with the peer who transmitted ATIM for receiving and 
transmitting the data. On the other hand, a peer with no data to exchange does nothing 
during ATIM window and hence it changes its state to Sleep state during the data 
transmission period to reduce energy consumption.  
In Fig. 2, peers A and B exchange ATIMs in the second BI and hence maintain 
Awake state each. On the other hand, peer C, who doesn’t perform any activity during 
the ATIM window, switches to Sleep state and consumes minimal energy. 
3   Proposed Power Saving Scheme 
In a mobile ad hoc network(MANET) environment, multi-hop transmissions for 
communications are made among peers. In a system with PSM, transmission delay 
occurs in proportion to the number of hops between the source and the destination and 
the length of BI. Although PSM was designed for saving energy, it cannot avoid 
transmission delays. A longer BI can save more energy, but delay is also increased. 
However, we may increase the length of BI for peers who are not used as part of the 
communication route, call them inactive peers, for saving energy further and such 
increments do hardly cause the transmission delays.  
Communications in a double-layered P2P system are done mostly among super 
peers and subpeers who connect super peers. Since inactive peers don’t perform any 
tasks in the network, the response time for file searches and the success ratio may not 
be affected even if the BI lengths of them are increased. Hence we double the BI  
, 

68 
J.-H. Lee et al. 
 
Fig. 3. BI periods of peers under doubling BI 
length of these peers. Fig. 3 shows the BIs of peers under the doubling BI scheme; 
peer A has the standard BI length, while the BI length of peer B is doubled. Observe 
that peer B has one ATIM Window while peer A has two.  
After super peers and subpeers have been selected during network reconfiguration, 
all peers have the standard BI length. Once file searches begin and if a peer receives a 
request for a file search, it recognizes itself that it is an active peer. In addition, the 
peer sets and maintains the default BI until the next network reconfiguration. If an 
inactive peer does not perform any activity related to transmission or reception during 
a certain period of time τ, the BI length of the peer is increased by a factor of two. 
Doubling BI length is done up to twice so that a peer with the standard length is able 
to transmit ATIM to a peer with a longer BI length than the standard length, since 
retransmissions of ATIM can be made up to three times in the standard.   
 
Fig. 4. State diagram of doubling BI 
Fig. 4 shows how the BI length changes in doubling BI as a state diagram. When-
ever a peer with a longer BI length than the standard length receives a message from 
other peer, its BI length is set to the standard one and never changes the length until 
the next network reconfiguration. Note that when a peer with a longer BI length has to 
change its BI length to the standard, a delay for data transmission occurs in proportion 
to the BI length. 
For more energy saving, we adopt the longer dozing time scheme suggested in [5]. In 
the longer dozing time scheme, a peer can reduce its energy consumption by switching 
to Sleep state immediately after the completion of data transmission; that is, the  
 
www.ebook3000.com

 
An Effective Power Saving Mechanism for IEEE 802.11 PSM 
69 
 
Fig. 5. Energy saving using longer doze time 
peer does not have to be in Awake state during the remainder of the data transmission 
interval. Such state changes could reduce energy consumption without adjusting the BI 
or ATIM window lengths.  
Fig. 5 shows when data exchanges between peers A and B take place during only a 
portion of the data transmission interval. The longer dozing time scheme may com-
pensate the doubling BI scheme in such a way that if a sleep peer wakes up and fin-
ishes its data transmission, then it can switch its state to Sleep state even within the 
current ATIM window, and hence we may apply the doubling BI scheme in the next 
period if it happens to be still in Sleep state. 
4   Experimental Results 
4.1   Experimental Environments 
The experiments were performed using a mobile network simulation tool, the network 
simulator NS-2 2.33[7]. The parameters of the experiments are shown in Table 1. We 
have implemented the MOB system as a double-layered P2P system. There are 100 
peers with the maximum speed of 1.39m/sec (≈5km/sec) in a network area of 1,000m 
×1,000m. The transmission range of a peer is 250m with the two ray ground propaga-
tion model. The movements of peers are based on the random way point (RWP) 
model which is widely used as a network mobility model. Each peer has five files and 
some files can be stored in other peers redundantly. 
The initial energy level of a peer is between 400J and 1,000J. The energy con-
sumption model of peers is set as in [8]; that is, transmitting requires 1,327mW, re-
ceiving 976mW, idling 843mW, and sleeping 66mW. The standard BI length is 
0.1second and an ATIM window length is 0.02 second. For doubling the BI length, τ 
is set to 5 seconds through various experiments. In the experiments 5,000 requests for 
file searches were processed. After every 100 seconds, the network update is  
performed; that is, the network is reconfigured by reselecting super peers and their 
subpeers. The overall simulation was processed for 5,000 seconds. Under the above 
environment, we used 100 test datasets and obtained the average values as the ex-
perimental results. 
 

70 
J.-H. Lee et al. 
Table 1. The parameters 
Parameters 
Values 
Total number of peers 
100 
Simulation area 
1,000m × 1,000m 
Transmission range 
250m 
Initial energy of a peer 
400J~1,000J 
Transmit 
1,327mW 
Receive 
976mW 
Idle 
843mW 
Amount of  
energy  
consumption 
Sleep 
66mW 
Maximum speed of a peer 
1.39m/s 
Number of files that a peer owns 
5 
Channel attributes 
Channel/WirelessChannel 
Propagation model 
Propagation/ 
TwoRayGround 
Network interface 
Phy/WirelessPhy 
MAC Interface 
MAC/802.11 
Period of updating the network 
100s 
Simulation time 
5,000s 
Beacon interval length 
0.1s 
ATIM window length 
0.02s 
τ for doubling the BI size 
5s 
Number of requests  
for file searches 
5,000 
4.2   Experimental Results 
We have implemented five different systems to evaluate the proposed scheme. The 
first system is the MOB system without PSM, we call it MOB. The second system is 
the MOB system with PSM, we call it PSM. The third and fourth systems are the 
MOB system with the longer dozing time and doubling BI schemes, we call them 
LDT and DBI, respectively. The last system is a hybrid system of both the longer 
dozing time and doubling BI schemes, we call it Hybrid. 
Fig. 6 shows the average remaining energy of the peers as the simulation pro-
gresses. In the experiments, the average remaining energy of MOB decreased more 
rapidly than those of others; because MOB does not concern about energy saving. 
LDT had 2.3% and 7.3% more remaining energy than PSM at 1,000 and 2,000 
seconds, respectively. DBI saved 11.9% and 51.7% energy over PSM at 1,000 and 
2,000 seconds, respectively. DBI contributed to more energy saving than LDT be-
cause DBI could be applied to all inactive peers and there are more inactive peers than 
active peers; about 60% were inactive peers throughout the experiments. Hybrid had 
about 14% and 58.3% more energy than PSM at 1,000 and 2,000 seconds, respec-
tively. The improved percentages of Hybrid are similar to adding up those of LDT 
and DBI. 
 
 
www.ebook3000.com

 
An Effective Power Saving Mechanism for IEEE 802.11 PSM 
71 
 
 
Fig. 6. Average remaining energy 
 
Fig. 7. Success Ratios 

72 
J.-H. Lee et al. 
 
Fig. 8. Number of peers without energy 
Fig. 7 shows the success ratio of file searches for the systems. The energy level of 
the peers was closely related to the success ratio of file searches. It is obvious that 
peers with little energy could disappear from the network soon and destroy the com-
munication routes. As shown in the figure, the success ratio of MOB was dropped 
very quickly after about 700 seconds, while the success ratios other systems decreased 
quite slowly. The experiments showed the average success ratios of LDT, DBI, and 
Hybrid are 75.5%, 82.1%, and 83.6%, respectively. LDT, DBI, and Hybrid improved 
the average success ratios over PSM by 1.9%, 8.5%, and 10%, respectively. The gap 
between the success ratios of DBI and LDT became noticeably wider after 2,000 
seconds as shown in Fig.7. The reason why DBI showed higher success ratios than 
LDT is that DBI made more even energy consumption over all the peers in the net-
work; note that the network is reconfigured every 100 seconds so that there are more 
chances that inactive peers become active. Such energy consumption provided more 
stable connectivity of the network. Fig. 8 shows the number of the peers with no en-
ergy for each system. This figure provides indirect evidence that DBI and LDT  
perform quite well. 
5   Conclusions 
In this paper, we applied PSM that is defined in IEEE 802.11 as the standard MAC 
protocol to a double-layered P2P system in order to save peers’ energy. We proposed 
effective energy saving scheme that doubles the BI length of a peer up to twice when 
the peer does not participate in routing. Furthermore, we applied the longer dozing 
time scheme to improve the energy efficiency. The experimental results showed that 
www.ebook3000.com

 
An Effective Power Saving Mechanism for IEEE 802.11 PSM 
73 
Hybrid improved 58.3% in terms of the average energy saving and 10% in terms of 
the average success ratio for file searches over the system with PSM. Such improve-
ment was made possible by consuming energy more evenly over the peers. 
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF) 
for the research (2009-0073072). 
References 
1. Han, J.-S., Song, J.-W., Lee, K.-J., Yang, S.-B.: Mobile Peer-to-Peer system using Super 
Peers for Mobile Environments. In: The International Conference on Information  
Networking (ICOIN 2008) (January 2008) 
2. Han, J.-S., Song, J.-W., Yang, S.-B.: Mobile Peer-to-Peer System using Super Peers for 
Mobile Environments. In: The International Conference on Information Networking 2008 
(2008) 
3. Kim, J.-H., Song, J.-W., Yang, S.-B.: A Double-layered P2P System Considering Mobility 
for Reliability in MANET. In: Proceeding of IEEE Seoul Section 2008, pp. 178–181 (2008) 
4. Klemm, A., Lindemann, C., Waldhorst, O.: A Special-Purpose Peer-to-Peer File Sharing 
System for Mobile Ad hoc Networks. In: Proceedings on the Vehicular Technology Confer-
ence (VTC 2003), vol. 4, pp. 2758–2763 (2003) 
5. Jung, E.-S., Vaidya, N.: An energy efficient MAC protocol for wireless LANs. In:  
INFOCOM 2002, vol. 3, pp. 1756–1764 (2002) 
6. LAN MAN Standards Committee of the IEEE Computer Society, IEEE Std 802.11-1000, 
Wireless LAN Medisum Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer(PHY) specifications. 
IEEE, Los Alamitos (1999) 
7. The Network Simulator NS-2, http://www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns/ 
8. Feeney, L.M., Nilsson, M.: Investigating the Energy Consumption of a Wireless Network 
Interface in an Ad Hoc Networking Environment. In: IEEE INFOCOM 2001 (2001) 

 
C.-C. Chang et al. (Eds.): ACN 2010, CCIS 77, pp. 74–80, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
A New Image Enhancement Method Based  
on Nonsubsampled Contourlet Transform 
Md. Foisal Hossain1, Mohammad Reza Alsharif1, and Katsumi Yamashita2 
1 Department of Information Engineering, University of the Ryukyus, Okinawa, Japan  
foisalkuet@yahoo.com, asharif@ie.u-ryukyu.ac.jp 
2 Department of Electrical Engineering, Osaka Prefecture University, Osaka, Japan 
yamashita@eis.osakafu-u.ac.jp  
Abstract. This paper presents a new image enhancement method based on 
Nonsubsampled Contourlet Transform (NSCT). The contourlet transform is a 
new extension of the wavelet transform that provides a multi-resolution and 
multi-direction analysis for two dimension images. The NSCT expansion is 
composed of basis images oriented at various directions in multiple scales, with 
flexible aspect ratios. Existing image enhancement methods cannot confine the 
directional edge information of the image. Given this rich set of basis images, 
the NSCT transform effectively captures direction edges that are the dominant 
feature in natural images. Each pixel is enhanced using nonlinear mapping 
functions depending on the category of the edges. Experimental results ascer-
tain that the proposed method gives better performance of image enhancement 
than other methods. 
Keywords: Image enhancement, NSCT, nonlinear mapping, edge direction. 
1   Introduction 
Digital image enhancement is necessary to improve the visual appearance of the im-
age or to provide a better transform representation for future automated image proc-
essing such as image analysis, detection, segmentation and recognition [1],[2]. Image 
enhancement technology plays a very important role in image processing. By enhanc-
ing some information and restraining other information selectively, it can improve 
image visual effect. Image enhancement is a technique which reduces image noise, 
removes artifacts, and preserves details. Its purpose is to amplify certain image fea-
tures for analysis, diagnosis and display. Techniques can be performed by increasing 
the image contrast, enhancing edges, emphasizing the differences, or suppressing the 
noise [3-8].  
A comprehensive survey of enhancement methods has been published in [2]. Ele-
mentary enhancement techniques are histogram based [3]. Those are simple, fast, and 
with them acceptable results for some applications can be achieved. Histogram equali-
zation suffers from the problem of being poorly suited for retaining local detail due to 
its global treatment of the image. Histogram equalization tends to over-enhance the 
image contrast if there is a high peak in the histogram resulting in an undesired loss of 
visual data, of quality and of intensity scale [4],[5]. Also small scale details that are 
www.ebook3000.com

 A New Image Enhancement Method Based on Nonsubsampled Contourlet Transform 
75 
 
often associated with the small bins of the histogram are eliminated. Afterward, an 
adaptive histogram equalization technique has been proposed [6], which brings limited 
improvement, because fixed contextual regions cannot adapt to features of different 
sizes. This method does not completely eliminate noise enhancement in smooth regions.  
In an attempt to overcome these limitations, more advanced and most widespread 
enhancement algorithms has been proposed which has a common strategy-edge 
sharpening. The technique of unsharp masking has become a popular enhancement to 
assist in diagnosis [7]. Unsharp masking sharpens edges by subtracting a portion of a 
filtered component from an original image [8]. However, techniques of unsharp mask-
ing are less efficient for images containing a wide range of features because of their 
single scale properties. Their major drawback is missing of explicit noise suppression 
model which could cause that noise or artifacts could be amplified. 
Image enhancement methods based on wavelet transforms are being used and give 
good results [9],[10],[11]. However, all of the methods decompose images in separa-
ble way and can not extract geometrical information of the decomposed image. As a 
result, it becomes a difficult task to find exact edge information which is useful for 
image enhancement. 
Contourlet transform [12] is a multidirectional and multiscale transform that is 
constructed by combining the Laplacian pyramid [13],[14] with directional filter bank 
(DFB), which can be used to capture geometrical properties of images. Cunha and Do 
[15], developed nonsubsampled contourlet transform (NSCT), which is a fully shift-
invariant version of contourlet transform, as well as multiscale, and multidirectional 
expansion. The NSCT is based on a nonsubsampled pyramid structure and nonsub-
sampled directional filter banks. NSCT transform allows for different and flexible 
number of directions at each scale, while achieving nearly critical sampling. Using 
this NSCT, we propose a new image enhancement method. Using NSCT and thresh-
old function, we determine the edge information. Each pixel is modified using nonlin-
ear mapping functions depending on the properties of edges. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the construction 
of NSCT in brief. Section 3 discusses about the proposed method. Experimental re-
sults are presented in Section 4 and finally Section 5 concludes the presented work. 
2   Construction of NSCT 
The NSCT is a fully shift-invariant, multi-scale, and multidirectional expansion that 
has a fast implementation. Overview of the NSCT is shown in Figure 1(a). The struc-
ture consists of a bank of filters that splits the 2-D frequency plane in the subbands 
shown in Figure 1(b). NSCT transform can thus be divided into two shift-invariant 
parts which are as follow: 
 
1. A nonsubsampled pyramid structure that ensures the multi-scale property and 
2. A nonsubsampled DFB structure that gives directionality. 
 
The contourlet transform is implemented via a two dimensional filter bank that decom-
poses an image into several directional subbands at multiple scales. This is accom-
plished by combining the Laplacian pyramid with a DFB at each scale. Nonsubsampled 
pyramids provide multiscale decomposition and nonsubsampled DFB provide direc-
tional decomposition. 

76 
M.F. Hossain, M.R. Alsharif, and K. Yamashita 
 
(-ʌ,-ʌ)
(ʌ,ʌ)
Ȧ1
Ȧ2
 
Fig. 1. Nonsubsampled contourlet transform. (a) NSFB structure that implements the NSCT. 
(b) Obtained idealized frequency partitioning.  
x
H0(z)
H1(z)
H0(z2I)
H1(z2I)
H0(z4I)
H1(z4I)
y0
y1
y2
y3
(-ʌ,-ʌ)
(ʌ,ʌ)
Ȧ1
Ȧ2
0
1
2
3
 
Fig. 2. Nonsubsampled pyramid is a 2-D multiresolution expansion. (a) Three stage pyramid 
decomposition. (b) Subbands on the 2-D frequency plane.  
2.1   Nonsubsampled Pyramid 
The multiscale property of the NSCT is obtained from a shift invariant filtering struc-
ture that achieves subband decomposition similar to that of the Laplacian pyramid. 
This is achieved by using two-channel nonsubsampled 2-D filter banks [15]. A non-
subsampled filter bank has no downsampling or upsampling, and hence it is shift-
invariant. The block diagram of the nonsubsampled pyramid is shown in Figure 2(a) 
and subband on the 2-D frequency plane is shown in Figure 2(b).  
Specifically, NSFB can be built from low-pass filter H0(z). Then we need to set  
H1(z)=1-H0(z). 
(1) 
Perfect reconstruction condition is given as follows: 
www.ebook3000.com

 A New Image Enhancement Method Based on Nonsubsampled Contourlet Transform 
77 
 
( )
( )
( )
( )
1
1
1
0
0
=
+
z
G
z
H
z
G
z
H
. 
(2) 
where G0(z) and G1(z) are the reconstruction low-pass and high-pass filters. This 
condition is much easier to satisfy than the perfect reconstruction condition for criti-
cally sampled filter banks, and thus allows better filters to be designed. 
2.2   Nonsubsampled Directional Filter Banks 
The nonsubsampled DFB is a shift-invariant version of the critically sampled DFB in 
the contourlet transform. The directional filter bank can be constructed by combining 
critically sampled two channel fan filter banks and resampling operations. Nonsub-
sampled pyramids provide multiscale decomposition and nonsubsampled DFB’s pro-
vide directional decomposition. The building block of a nonsubsampled DFB is also a 
two-channel nonsubsampled filter bank. However, shift invariance property is ob-
tained by eliminating the downsamplers and upsamplers if the DFB. This is done by 
switching off the downsamplers/upsamplers in each two-channel filter bank in the 
DFB tree structure and upsampling the filters accordingly. This results in a tree com-
posed of two-channel NSFB.  Figure 3 shows the block diagram of two-channel 
NSFB used to construct NSCT. 
                                                                            
H0(z)
H1(z) 
G0(z) 
G1(z) 
y0
y1
xˆ
x
U0(z) 
U1(z) 
V0(z) 
V1(z)
y0
y1
xˆ
x
 
Fig. 3. Two-channel NSFBs used in NSCT. (a) Pyramid NSFB (b) Fan NSFB. 
3   Proposed Method 
The NSCT is shift invariant. Therefore the spatial location of each pixel of the trans-
form subband is same as original image. We get the geometrical information for all 
subbands pixel by pixel after NSCT transformation. At first, we apply NSCT to the 
input image. Depending on the geometrical information gathered from all the sub-
bands using NSCT, we divide the pixels into three classes: strong edges, middle edges 
and weak edges according to the following relation   
⎪⎩
⎪⎨
⎧
<
<
≥
<
≥
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
c
c
mean
if
edge
weak
c
c
mean
if
edge
middle
c
mean
if
edge
strong
max
,
max
,
. 
(3)

78 
M.F. Hossain, M.R. Alsharif, and K. Yamashita 
 
where mean denotes the mean value of the coefficients, max denotes the maximum 
magnitude of the coefficients, σ is the standard deviation of the subband at a specific 
level, c is a parameter ranging from1 to 5. For our experiment we set it 4.  
The pixels having large coefficient in all subbands is considered as strong edges. 
Pixels having large coefficient in some subbands and small coefficients in other sub-
bands are considered as middle edges. Also, pixels having small coefficients in all 
subbands are considered as weak edges. Then we alter the NSCT coefficients depend-
ing on the category of the edge pixel according to the following equation: 
( )
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎧
⎟
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎜
⎝
⎛
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
+
=
pixels
edge
weak
x
pixels
edge
middle
x
x
c
pixels
edge
strong
x
x
x
y
p
01
.0
1,
max
1.0
σ
. 
(4)
where x is the original input coefficients, and 0<p<1 is the amplifying ratio. This 
function linearly increases strong and weak edges with different slope, and amplify 
middle edges nonlinearly. While, most of the methods amplify only middle edges and 
discard weak edges. Last of all, inverse NSCT is used to get the enhanced image. 
   
      
      
      
 
              (a)                               (b)                               (c)                               (d) 
Fig. 4. Comparison of enhancement performance over the image lena a) Original image  
b) Enhanced image by wavelet c) Enhanced image by Contourlet d) Enhanced image with 
proposed method 
   
      
      
      
 
               (a)                              (b)                               (c)                            (d) 
Fig. 5. Comparison of enhancement performance over the image barbara a) Original image  
b) Enhanced image by wavelet c) Enhanced image by Contourlet d) Enhanced image with 
proposed method 
www.ebook3000.com

 A New Image Enhancement Method Based on Nonsubsampled Contourlet Transform 
79 
 
   
      
      
      
 
              (a)                              (b)                               (c)                              (d) 
Fig. 6. Comparison of enhancement performance over the image hill a) Original image b) Enhanced 
image by wavelet c) Enhanced image by Contourlet d) Enhanced image with proposed method 
 
             (a)                              (b)                                 (c)                              (d) 
Fig. 7. Comparison of enhancement performance using crop image of barbara a) 
Original image b) Enhanced image by wavelet c) Enhanced image by Contourlet d) 
Enhanced image with proposed method 
4   Experimental Results 
In this section, we present the results of enhancement with our proposed method and 
compare with other methods. We compared the results of the proposed method with 
wavelet enhancement and contourlet enhancement method. For experiment, we use 
three images: lena, Barbara and hill respectively. Figure 4, figure 5 and figure 6 com-
pares the results of the proposed method with the other aforementioned methods using 
the experimented images respectively. 
Investigating these three figures, it can be seen that the resultant images obtained 
by the proposed method are more enhanced than the other two methods. All the edges 
become more visible and distinguishable in the proposed method.  
Figure 7 shows a cropped portion of the image Barbara for clearly showing the en-
hancement effect. Observing figure 7, it can be seen clearly that the proposed method 
enhances the edge portion better than the other methods. As the NSCT decomposes 
the image using directional information, so, edges can be enhanced more than other 
methods.  This figure also shows that the proposed method gives better enhanced 
results not only for the edge region but also for other smooth regions. 
5   Conclusion 
In this paper, we have presented a new method of image enhancement based on nosub-
sampled contourlet transform. This transformation gives directional multi-resolution 

80 
M.F. Hossain, M.R. Alsharif, and K. Yamashita 
 
shift invariant image representation. We collect the geometrical information of all the 
pixels using nonsubsampled contourlet transform. Depending on the geometrical in-
formation, pixels are divided into three classes. The defined mapping functions for 
different classes modify the pixels in such a way that the proposed method enhances 
the whole image in a suitable manner. The proposed method improves edges as well as 
other parts of the input image. Experimental results ascertain that the proposed method 
gives better results for image enhancement than other methods of enhancement.  
References 
1. Rosebfield, A., Kak, A.C.: Digital Picture processing. Academic Press, San Diego (1976) 
2. Gonzalez, R.C., Woods, R.E.: Digital Image processing. Addison Wesley, Reading (2003) 
3. Harris, J.: Contrast variance enhancement: a digital processing technique. Appl. Opt. 16, 
1268–1271 (1977) 
4. Elliot, D.F., Rao, K.R.: Fast transforms: Algorithms, analyzes, applications. Academic, 
New York (1983) 
5. Wang, D., Vagnucci, A.H.: Digital image enhancement. Comput. Vis., Graph, Image Proc-
ess. 24, 363–381 (1981) 
6. Morrow, W.M., et al.: Region-Based Contrast Enhancement of Mammograms. IEEE 
Trans. Med. Imag. 11(3) (September 1992) 
7. Ji, T.L., Sundareshan, M.K., Roehrig, H.: Adaptive image contrast enhancement based on 
human visual properties. IEEE Trans. Med. Imag. 13(4), 573–586 (1994) 
8. Zamperoni, P.: Image enhancement. Adv. Image Electron Phys. 92, 1–7 (1995) 
9. Prager, K.E., Singer, P.F.: Image enhancement and filtering using wavelets. In: Proc. 25th 
Asilomar Conf. Signals, Systems and computers, vol. 1(3), pp. 169–174 (1991) 
10. Mallat, S., Zhong, S.: Characterization of signals from multiscale edges. IEEE Trans.  
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 14(7), 710–732 (1992) 
11. Laine, A., Fan, J., Yang, W.: Wavelets for contrast enhancement of mammography. IEEE 
Eng. Med. Biol. 14, 536–550 (1995) 
12. Do, M.N., Vetterli, M.: The contourlet transform: An efficient directional multiresolution 
image representation. IEEE Trans. Image Process 14(12), 2091–2106 (2005) 
13. Burt, P.J., Adelson, E.H.: The Laplacian pyramid as a compact image code. IEEE Trans. 
Commun. 31(4), 532–540 (1983) 
14. Do, M.N., Vetterli, M.: Framing pyramids. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 51(9), 2329–2342 
(2003) 
15. Cunha, A.L., Zhou, J., Do., M.N.: The nonsubsampled contourlet transform: theory, design 
and applications. IEEE Trans. Image Proc. 15(4), 3089–3101 (2006) 
www.ebook3000.com

Enable Cache Eﬀect on Forwarding Table
in Metro-Ethernet
Xiaocui Sun and Zhijun Wang
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
{csxcsun,cszjwang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk
Abstract. Broadcast based Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) is a
major challenge for deploying Ethernet in Metropolitan Area Networks
(MAN). This paper proposes to enable Cache eﬀect on Forwarding Table
(CFT) in Metro Ethernet. CFT can reduce numerous broadcast messages
by solving the address through cached entries. The simulation results
show that the proposed scheme can signiﬁcantly decrease communication
messages for address resolution in Metro Ethernet.
1
Introduction
Ethernet is the dominant layer 2 communication technology. Currently, it has
gained popularity for deploying in Metropolitan Area Networks (MANs). The
traditional MANs are generally built based on layer 3 IP technology, usually
using Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) as its layer 2 transport, whereas
the Local Area Networks (LANs) are dominated by layer 2 technologies, mostly
based on Ethernet technologies. As a result, when a data frame is sent across
a MAN, it may have to travel through multiple heterogeneous networks, and
hence it may need to be re-encapsulated in diﬀerent frame formats a number of
times and even be split into multiple smaller frames/cells or merged with other
frames/cells into a larger frame. This not only makes the packet forwarding
complex and ineﬃcient, but also adds complexity and cost to the router/switch
design, as well as network operation and management, in support of heteroge-
neous networks and interfaces. Clearly, deploying the same technology, such as
Ethernet, in both MAN and LAN segments can potentially reduce the complex-
ity and cost in network design and management, and improve packet forwarding
performance.
Even though Ethernet has ample advantages to be deployed in MANs, it has
to solve the scalability issues [3] [4] [6]. Ethernet was originally designed as a
LAN technology that usually handles small number of users. Broadcast is fre-
quently used to resolve unknown MAC addresses. Many protocols such as ARP
[7] and DHCP [8] use the broadcast service as a service discovery mechanism. For
example, to solve the MAC address for an IP address, an ARP request message
is broadcast through the network so that the corresponding end user can receive
and response an ARP replay message. The broadcast based address resolution
schemes make Ethernet extremely convenient and easily accomplished. However,
C.-C. Chang et al. (Eds.): ACN 2010, CCIS 77, pp. 81–94, 2010.
c
⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

82
X. Sun and Z. Wang
for MANs with millions of end users [9], high frequency broadcast messages waste
a lot of bandwidth for address resolution. Moreover, every end user has to take
resource to handle every broadcast message [10]. Virtual LAN (VLANs) [22]
technology is one way to reduce the broadcast message by logically segment-
ing the whole network into separate communication groups. However, even after
segmentation, the number of users located in one VLAN is still considerable in
MAN.
In this paper, we propose to enable Cache eﬀect on Forwarding Table (CFT) in
Metro Ethernet. In CFT, we modiﬁed the forwarding table entries in Customer
Edge (CE) and Provider Edge (PE) to store both the IP and MAC addresses (i..e,
an ARP entry). By receiving an ARP response frame, a CE and/or a PE records
the forwarding entry, and also records the IP address associated with it. Once the
entry is recorded, it can be used as a cached ARP entry. When an ARP request
arrives, a CE or PE node ﬁrstly looks up the forwarding table, if an cached ARP
entry is found, an ARP response frame is returned, and then the broadcast
message is stopped. The simulation results show that CFT can signiﬁcantly save
communication messages for address resolution in PE/CE nodes.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II gives the related works.
Section III presents the details of CFT. An analytical model is constructed in
section IV. The performances are illustrated in Section V. Finally, Section VI
concludes the paper.
2
Related Work
Scalability is a major challenge for deploying Ethernet technology in MANs.
There are a lot of works focused on the development of scalable solutions for
Ethernet. VLAN technology [21] is a useful scheme to make Metro-Ethernet
scalable. It uses a VLAN tag [22][4] to partition a single large Ethernet to mul-
tiple VLANs. The broadcasting messages for address resolution are limited to
a single VLAN instead of the whole network, and hence the redundancy traﬃc
is reduced. The VLAN tag has only 12 bits and hence can only support up to
4096 active VLANs at any time in the network. To support more active VLANs,
Q-in-Q or VLAN stacking encapsulation [23] is proposed. In this scheme, a PE
node inserts an additional Q-tag in the Ethernet frame to support more active
VLANs. However, this scheme still cannot avoid learning table explosion. MAC-
in-MAC (MiM) encapsulation [4][13] can be used to reduce the forwarding table
size in the CNs, but the PE nodes still need to keep a potential large number of
forwarding entries for MiM encapsulation.
Spanning tree protocols draw mounting attentions when Ethernet is being
considered in Metro areas. In [14] and [15], the link state routing protocols were
proposed to replace the spanning tree based routing schemes [16][17][18]. In [19],
a hybrid scheme which uses the spanning tree protocol in the core network and
the link state protocol in Metro access network respectively was proposed. The
hybrid scheme can achieve better performance than using either spanning tree
or link state scheme in the MANs. In [20], an alternative multiple spanning tree
www.ebook3000.com

Enable Cache Eﬀect on Forwarding Table in Metro-Ethernet
83
is developed to minimize hop distance among switches. Cost [29] and STEP [30]
enhanced the resiliency of the MAN and had the potential of utilizing multiple
Spanning Trees. [31] constructed an eﬃcient algorithm to ﬁnd the best Spanning
Tree with the consideration of both shortest path selection and load balancing
on links and switches. The same idea is employed to discover more suitable
Metro Ethernet structure on the basis of load balance in [32]. However, all these
schemes still have to use the broadcast based ARP.
Recently, a suggested solution to enhance the scalability for the traditional
Ethernet is to use directory based ARP [6] to eliminate broadcast service for
address resolution. In the scheme, a user needs to register its ARP entry in the
ARP directory before its communication, and an unknown MAC address is re-
solved through the ARP directory lookup. But for Metro-Ethernet, a single ARP
directory based solution is not scalable and eﬃcient. Moreover, it creates single
point of failure. Some hash based address resolution schemes [24] [25] [26] are
proposed to eliminate the reliance broadcasting frame learning. Instead, when a
destination MAC address is missed in the forwarding table, the frame is routed
to a designated user based on the MAC hash value. But routing frame with
unknown destination addresses to designated user may take the frame travel
more unnecessary hops to the destination, and make the traﬃc control more dif-
ﬁcult. SmartBridge [12] allows ﬁnding the shortest forwarding path by exchang-
ing topology information among bridges. Hence a full knowledge of the network
topology should be obtained. In [27], a MAC address translation scheme is pro-
posed for frame forwarding. The ﬂat MAC address is translated to a hierarchical
structured address for frame routing so that the number of forwarding table en-
tries is reduced. However, it is possible that two MAC addresses are translated
to the same structured address. Both [33] and [5] provided the concept of using
cache to suppress broadcast traﬃc. By caching the most recently used dynamic
directory entries at every PE node and using Relay PE maintaining the ARP
entry, broadcasting messages can be reduced [33]. Similarly, Etherproxy in [5]
caches the ARP entries it learned and suppresses broadcast messages it received
by looking up the entries it cached. It retains the plug and play nature of Eth-
ernet and is backward compatible. However, broadcast still happened under the
Etherproxy, which scales with the size of the network.
3
Enable Cache Eﬀect on Forwarding Table
Figure 1 shows a general Metro-Ethernet including a provider network and mul-
tiple LAN segments. A provider network is composed of multiple PE nodes and
Core Nodes (CNs) (switch or bridge). A LAN segment includes a CE node and
multiple end users. In the Metro-Ethernet, a PE node and a CN may need to
maintain a potential large number of forwarding entries for frame forwarding.
3.1
Caching in Forwarding Table
Ethernet nodes have the ability to dynamically learn the location of an end
user. Upon receiving a frame, a source address of the frame is learned in the

84
X. Sun and Z. Wang
Fig. 1. A Metro-Ethernet
forwarding table of the Ethernet bridge. The forwarding entries are in the format
of <MAC address, Port, Recordtime>. The subsequent frames destined to this
address passing through the node could be direct to this port. ARP process is
solved by broadcast in Ethernet. Once a user broadcasts an ARP request frame
to Ethernet, all the other users attached to the Ethernet in the same VLAN
receive the frame. Only the destination user with the corresponding IP address
replies back its MAC address. The ARP reply is send via unicast. Both the users
record the IP and MAC addresses mapping of each other.
In CFT, the forwarding table is modiﬁed to enable caching ARP entries. The
entry format of the forwarding table in CFT is <IP address, MAC address,
port, recordtime, age>. Here IP is the end user’s IP address; recordtime is the
time when this ARP entry is created or refreshed; and age indicates if the ARP
entry is valid or not. So not only the MAC address, but also the IP address
of an end user is recorded in the forwarding table. Only CE and PE employ
the modiﬁed forwarding table. The PE or CE intercepts ARP broadcast frame
coming from the LAN behind it by either 1) responds to the user’s query if the
destination’s IP-MAC address is cached in its forwarding table and valid. The
request is stopped from delivering to the core network. 2) forwards the broadcast
to the core network if no valid entry is found.
www.ebook3000.com

Enable Cache Eﬀect on Forwarding Table in Metro-Ethernet
85
Fig. 2. Forwarding Table Format
The address resolution and frame forwarding process are as follows. When an
end user broadcasts an ARP request, the broadcast frame is checked by the CE
or PE of the LAN. After looking up its forwarding table, if the IP address of the
destination is found, a response is sent back. The request is solved. Otherwise, the
request is continuously broadcast in the network. Other PE or CE nodes which
receive broadcast frame from the core network do not intercept the broadcast
and simply passing through it to the LANs behind them. When an ARP response
comes from the host with the corresponding IP address, all the PE and CE nodes
transmitting it record the corresponding ARP entry in their forwarding tables.
It can be used as a cached entry for answering the following requests.
3.2
Forwarding Table Look Up
The modiﬁed forwarding table is divided into two parts. One part contains the
index and the IP address which are sorted by the IP address. The other part
includes the index, the MAC address, port, recordtime, and age. The two parts
are united by an index to associate the MAC address with the corresponding IP
address. A binary search is used to ﬁnd an unsolved IP address. In this way, at
most ⌞log2(N) + 1⌟lookups are needed. Here N is the number of IP addresses
in the list. If the IP address is found, the index is used to ﬁnd the corresponding
MAC address. The two tables are always updated at the same time. If the entry
of MAC address is outdated and deleted, the IP address with the same index
will also be deleted. The table format is shown in Figure 2.
3.3
Address Resolution Process and Data Frame Format
When an end user needs to resolve a MAC address for a destination, it directly
broadcasts an ARP request to the network. The CE or PE node of the LAN

86
X. Sun and Z. Wang
Fig. 3. Flow chart of processing ARP frames
intercepts this frame and checks its forwarding table ﬁrstly. The ARP entry is
returned if the entry is found there. The request is stopped from ﬂooding into the
network. Otherwise, the request is going on broadcast through the network. If
the forwarding entry of the source MAC address has not been recorded, the CE
or PE stores the entry in its forwarding table. A PE or CE node which receives
a broadcast frame from the core network does not intercept the broadcast and
simply forwards it to the LAN area behind it. When an ARP response comes
from a host, the PE or CE node learns the entry in its forwarding table. The
ﬂow chart in ﬁgure 3 demonstrates how an ARP frame is processed.
4
Hit Ratio Analysis
In this section, an analytical model is developed to examine the hit ratio in CFT
at a PE node. The following assumption is made in our model:
– The data access (to send frame) time follows Poisson distribution. The aver-
age data access time is Ta (one communication session per Ta seconds). Ri
is the data access rate of user i which is the reciprocal of data access time.
– All the end users belong to one VLAN. Each user has probability to com-
municate with any other end users in the network. When an end user starts
a data session, it randomly chooses another end user in the same VLAN as
the destination user.
– The destinations are selected based on Zipf distribution with zipf exponent n.
www.ebook3000.com

Enable Cache Eﬀect on Forwarding Table in Metro-Ethernet
87
– The default forwarding table sizes are suﬃcient to store all the entries and
each forwarding table entry is timed out every To seconds.
Using Zipf’s law, the frequency of a user of rank i being selected out of a popu-
lation of N is:
f(i, n) = (1/in)/
N

j=1
(1/jn)
(1)
Where N is the number of users; i is their rank; n be the value of the exponent
characterizing the distribution.
The rate a node being selected as the destination by a node in the network is:
λi = fi ∗
M

j=1
Ri
(2)
Here M is the number of users under a PE.
When the entry of node i comes to the forwarding table, it has To time to be
stored there. If it is selected as a destination node in less than To by a node in
the network, a hit is counted. Hence the hit ratio can be calculated as:
hi =
 To
0
λie−λitdt = 1 −e−λi∗To
(3)
The total cache hit ratio for a PE node is:
h =
N

i=1
(f(i, n) ∗hi)
(4)
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
 Number of end users
 Hit ratio
 Hit Ratio Comparison (diff user)
 
 
Simulation(1.0z)
Theory(1.0z)
Simulation(1.5z)
Theory(1.5z)
Fig. 4. Hit Ratio Comparison

88
X. Sun and Z. Wang
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
 Session Interval
 Hit ratio
 Hit Ratio Comparison (diff rate)
 
 
Simulation(1.0z)
Theory(1.0z)
Simulation(1.5z)
Theory(1.5z)
Fig. 5. Hit Ratio Comparison (diﬀrate)
We compared the simulation results with the analytical results. The simulated
Metro-Ethernet have 4 PEs in the network. Every PE node have the same num-
ber of end users under it. We run 3600 seconds and the results of the last 2600
seconds are collected. All the forwarding tables are set to be empty at start-up.
The following ﬁgures describe simulation hit ratio and analytical modeling hit
ratio with various value of N and R.
From Figure 4, we know that the hit ratio increases as the increase of the
number of end users. The average data access rate is set to 180s.
Figure 5 compares the results by varying the data access rate. The simulation
with n=1.0 has 5 thousand end users while for n=1.5 has 6 thousand end users
in the network.
The results show that the analytical results are well matched with the simu-
lation results, particularly for n=1.5.
5
Performance Evaluation
This section compares the performances of the proposed schemes and the legacy
VLAN based scheme. Both the impact of session interval and number of users
are considered. In this section, we simulated a Metro-Ethernet with 50 thousand
end users, 40 PEs, 150 CEs and 1000 VLANs in the network. Every PE node
directly connects to at least 2 and at most 5 PE nodes. At least 2 and at most
6 CEs are behind a PE node. Every CE node can have up to 6 sites located
under it. There are at least 8 and at most 256 end users behind a CE node.
Each VLAN has at least 3 and at most 13 sites. Each user has probability to
communicate with other end users in the same VLAN. The data access (to send
www.ebook3000.com

Enable Cache Eﬀect on Forwarding Table in Metro-Ethernet
89
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
 Zipf Coefficient 
Number of messages
 Average number of  messages per PE (n=50000) 
 
 
 CFT
VLAN
Fig. 6. Average PE message number
frame) time follows Poisson distribution. The average data access time is Ta (one
communication session per Ta seconds), and each data session lasts for average 20
seconds, randomly chosen between 1 and 39 seconds. When an end user starts a
data session, it randomly picks a VLAN it belongs to, and then randomly chooses
another end user in the same VLAN as the destination user. The destinations
are selected based on Zipf distribution. That means the probabilities of session
destined to few addresses are heavier than others, which is more suitable for the
real world traﬃc situation [5]. The default forwarding table sizes are set to store
at most 20000 entries, and each forwarding table entry is timed out every 120
seconds.
In the simulation, we run 1600 seconds and the results of the last 600 seconds
are collected. All the forwarding tables are set to be empty at startup. We
compare the performances of the proposed scheme with the legacy VLAN based
scheme.
The data access rate is set to 60s. We vary the zipf coeﬃcient from 0.5 to 1.5
to study its impact on the performance.
The average number of messages a PE generated per second is shown in
Figure 6. At n is 0.5, the scheme can reduce about 30% average number of
messages. As n increases, the hit ratio increases and more number of messages
can be saved. At n is 1.5, more than 60% number of messages can be reduced
for a PE node. The average number of messages a user handled per unit time
decreases as the increase of zipf coeﬃcient n as shown in Figure 7. This is because
a high Zipf coeﬃcient n means the destination is more focused on few end users.
Then high cache hit ratio is achieved.
Figure 8 and Figure 9 report the average and max PE table size of the schemes.
VLAN based Ethernet requires more state than CFT scheme because of the

90
X. Sun and Z. Wang
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
 Zipf Coefficient 
Number of messages
 Average number of messages per user (n=50000) 
 
 
 CFT
VLAN
Fig. 7. Average User message
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4 x 10
4
 Zipf Coefficient 
Table size
 Average table size in PE  node 
 
 
 CFT
VLAN
Fig. 8. Average PE table size
nature of broadcasting and inherent source address learning. The beneﬁt of the
proposed scheme becomes more obvious with bigger zipf coeﬃcient. The average
and max table size in CE node are also shown in Figure 10 and Figure 11. From
the Figures, we know that CFT scheme signiﬁcantly reduces the forwarding table
size as compared with the VLAN scheme.
www.ebook3000.com

Enable Cache Eﬀect on Forwarding Table in Metro-Ethernet
91
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2
2.1
2.2 x 10
4
 Zipf Coefficient 
Table size
 Max table size in PE  node 
 
 
 CFT
VLAN
Fig. 9. Max PE table size
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
 Zipf Coefficient 
Table size
 Average table size in CE  node 
 
 
 CFT
VLAN
Fig. 10. Average CE table size
The is because when the zipf coeﬃcient increases, the chance of users start
sessions with the same destination increases. The replacement of the table entries
that are used more often are refreshed frequently. This means fewer table entries
will be deleted as the utilization frequency for individual table entry is increased.

92
X. Sun and Z. Wang
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
4000
4500
5000
5500
6000
6500
7000
7500
8000
8500
9000
 Zipf Coefficient 
Table size
 Max table size in CE  node 
 
 
 CFT
VLAN
Fig. 11. Max CE table size
This in turn improves the overall traﬃc load as more broadcast traﬃc can be
intercept by CE and PE.
6
Conclusions and Future Work
Ethernet technology has been an attractive technologies to be deployed in MANs
for service providers [20]. Recently, Metro-Ethernet Forum has deﬁned the ser-
vices model for Ethernet services. However, Ethernet as mentioned above is
originally designed for LAN area which handles limited number of users. When
deploy Ethernet in MAN areas, some loss in eﬃciency and scalability have came
out. Specially, the following two design challenges must be solved:
– use of ﬂat addressing scheme(i.e., non-hierarchical MAC addresses)
– use broadcast-based mechanism to resolve the location of an unknown
address.
This paper proposes an eﬃcient cache scheme for Metro-Ethernet. The cache
eﬀect is enabled by modifying the forwarding table, i.e., associate an IP address
with each forwarding entry. When an unsolved address arrives in a PE or CE
node, it ﬁrstly searches if the entry is in the forwarding table. If so, a response
message is returned, and hence no further broadcast message is needed, thus
reducing the number of broadcast messages. The simulation results show the
proposed schemes can save signiﬁcant broadcast messages for address resolution.
Moreover, it inherits the plug-and-play setup and self-conﬁguration nature of
Ethernet.
www.ebook3000.com

Enable Cache Eﬀect on Forwarding Table in Metro-Ethernet
93
References
1. IEEE Std 802.3x-1997 and IEEE Std 802.3y-1997
2. Postel, J., Reynolds, J.: A Standard for the Transmission of IP Datagrams over
IEEE 802 Networks. RFC 1042 (1988)
3. Casado, M., Freedman, M.J., Shenker, S.: Ethane: Taking Control of the Enterprise.
In: ACM SIGCOM (2007)
4. Chiruvolu, G.: Issues and Approaches on Extending Ethernet Beyond LANs. IEEE
Communication Magazine 42(3), 80–86 (2004)
5. Elmeleegy, K., Cox, A.L.: EtherProxy: Scaling Ethernet By Suppressing Broad-
cast Traﬃc. In: The 28th Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE, Los
Alamitos (2009)
6. Myers, A., Ng, T.E., Zhang, H.: Rethinking the Service Model: Scaling Ethernet
to a Million Nodes. In: Third Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks, HotNets-III
(2004)
7. Plummer, D.C.: An Ethernet Address Resolution Protocol or Converting Network
Addresses to 48.bit Ethernet Address for Transmission on Ethernet Hardware.
RFC 826 (1982)
8. Droms, R.: Dynamic host conﬁguration protocol. RFC 2131 (1997)
9. Halabi, S.: Metro Ethernet. Cisco Press (2003)
10. Problems with broadcasts,
http://www.ists.dartmouth.edu/classroom/crs/arp_broadcast.php
11. IEEE Std. 802.1Q, Virtual Bridged Local Area Networks
12. Rodeheﬀer, T.L., Thekkath, C.A., Anderson, D.C.: SmartBridge: a Scalable Bridge
Architecture. In: ACM SIGCOMM (2000)
13. IEEE 802.1ah, Provider Backbone Bridges
14. Perlman, R.: Rbridges: Transparent routing. In: IEEE Infocom (2004)
15. Garcia, R., Duato, J., Silla, F.: LSOM: A Link State Protocol Over Mac Addresses
for Metropolitan Backbones Using Optical Ethernet Switches. In: The Second IEEE
International Symposium on Network Computing and Applications, NCA (2003)
16. IEEE 802.1D-2004, Spanning Tree Protocol revision of IEEE std 802.1D
17. IEEE 802.1S, Multiple Spanning Tree
18. IEEE 802.1W, Rapid Reconﬁguration of Spanning Tree
19. Minh, H., Prasant, M.: A Scalable Hybrid Approach to Switching in Metro Ethernet
Networks Local Computer Networks. In: The 32nd IEEE Conference on Local
Computer Networks (2007)
20. Ibanez, G., Garcia, A., Azcorra, A.: Alternative multiple spanning tree protocol
(AMSTP) for optical Ethernet backbones. In: The 29th Annual IEEE International
Conference on Local Computer Networks (2004)
21. IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks: Virtual Bridged Local
Area Networks. IEEE, Los Alamitos (1998)
22. Ali, M., Chiruvolu, G., Ge, A.: Traﬃc Engineering in Metro Ethernet. IEEE Net-
works 19(2), 10–17 (2005)
23. IEEE 802.1Q, Virtual LANs
24. Ray, S., Guerin, R.A., Soﬁa, R.: A Distributed Hash Table Based Address Resolu-
tion Scheme for Large-Scale Ethernet Networks. IEEE ICC (2007)
25. Kim, C., Rexford, J.: Revisiting Ethernet: Plug-and-play made scalable and eﬃ-
cient. In: The 15th IEEE Workshop on Local and Metropolitan Area Networks
(2007)

94
X. Sun and Z. Wang
26. Kim, C., Caesar, M., Rexford, J.: Floodless in SEATTLE: A Scalable Ethernet
Architecture for Large Enterprises. In: ACM SIGCOMM (2008)
27. Wang, P., Chan, C., Lin, P.: Translation for Enabling Scalable Virtual Private LAN
Service. In: 21st International Conference on Advanced Information Networking
and Applications Workshops (2007)
28. BellSouth Metro Ethernet, http://www.bellsouthlargebusiness.com
29. Minh, H., Prasant, M., Stuart, G.: Cross-over spanning trees Enhancing metro
ethernet resilience and load balancing. BROADNETS (2007)
30. Huynh, M., Mohapatra, P., Goose, S.: Spanning tree elevation protocol: Enhancing
metro Ethernet performance and QoS. Computer Communications (2009)
31. Mirjalily, G., Karimi, M.H., Adibnia, F., Rajai, S.: An Approach to Select the Best
Spanning Tree in Metro Ethernet Networks. Computer and Information Technology
(2008)
32. Tafti, M., Mirjalily, G., Rajaee, S.: Topology Design of Metro Ethernet Networks
Based on Load Balance Criterion. In: Internatioal Symposium on Telecommunica-
tions (2008)
33. Buregoni, R.K.: A Uniﬁed Distributed Directory based Service Delivery Architec-
ture for Metro Ethernet Networks. In: 11th International Conference on Advanced
Communication Technology (2009)
34. Sun, X., Wang, Z., Che, H., Zhao, F.: An End User Enabled MAC-in-MAC En-
capsulation Scheme for Metro-Ethernet. In: Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE Interna-
tional Symposium on Parallel and Distributed Processing with Applications (2008)
www.ebook3000.com

 
C.-C. Chang et al. (Eds.): ACN 2010, CCIS 77, pp. 95–108, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
A Handover Mechanism Using IEEE 802.21  
in Heterogeneous Wireless Networks 
Lin-Huang Chang*, Chau-Chi Wang, and Tsung-Han Lee 
Department of Computer and Information Science, National Taichung University 
Taichung 40306, Taiwan 
{lchang,chauchi,thlee}@mail.ntcu.edu.tw 
Abstract. The IEEE 802.21 framework is a novel standard and the scope of this 
standard is to optimize and facilitate handover in heterogeneous networks. In 
this paper, we propose a handover mobility management by using the IEEE 
802.21 to solve some handover issues, such as handover delay and packet loss, 
in homogeneous and heterogeneous networks. By setting certain signal 
thresholds and probability confidence to trigger the Link Going Down event, 
the proposed handover mechanism is capable of providing better handover 
efficiency and reducing the handover delay and possible packet loss during 
handover. The NS-2 simulation is conducted to verify the performance of our 
handover mobility management across WLAN and WiMAX heterogeneous 
networks. 
Keywords: IEEE 802.21, Heterogeneous Networks, Handover, NS-2. 
1   Introduction 
With the rapid deployment and development of wireless access technologies in 
current years, it is expected that the next-generation mobility management will be 
integrated with different wireless access technologies, such as Wi-Fi and WiMAX [1] 
heterogeneous networks, which are based on all-IP infrastructure. Through the 
wireless access technologies, the mobile stations (MSs) are capable of utilizing 
multiple radio access technologies to link to the Internet while roaming across the 
heterogeneous networks. Thus, the handover among heterogeneous access 
technologies, known as vertical handover, has led to several important issues in 
research, for example seamless handover and fast handover. The network 
performance in terms of throughput is one of the important metrics for MSs to pursue 
while locating in the overlap of different wireless access networks. 
In order to provide the integrated information for the heterogeneous network 
handover, the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) Standards 
Association approved the IEEE 802.21[2] Working Group on Feb. 2004 to develop 
the IEEE 802.21 Media Independent Handover (MIH) standard. The MIH is an 
abstract logical layer sitting between layer 2 and layer 3. 
                                                           
* Corresponding author. 

96 
L.-H. Chang, C.-C. Wang, and T.-H. Lee 
 
In this paper, we utilize the IEEE 802.21 standard to integrate with heterogeneous 
wireless access technologies, including IEEE 802.11 and IEEE 802.16, and propose a 
handover mechanism as handover decision to achieve better transmission throughput. 
Therefore, without considering the underlying link signal and protocol setup, the MS 
is capable of roaming across heterogeneous network with higher throughput. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we introduce some 
mobility management techniques related to the handover problems. The IEEE 802.21 
MIH system is briefly reviewed in section 3. Section 4 presents the proposed 
handover mechanism based on MIH system in heterogeneous networks. The 
simulation result of our proposed handover mechanism is described in section 5. 
Finally we conclude this research in section 6. 
2   Related Work 
Two major factors that affect the handover performance are the handover delay and 
packet loss which consequently affect the performance of the network throughput during 
handover period. Many researchers have proposed mobility management techniques to 
solve the handover related issues. The mobility management is mainly operated at IP 
layer. In [3-7], the MS employs the home agent (HA) to create MIP tunnel with Foreign 
Agent (FA) and pre-registration for data handover. However, the MIP has the severe 
disadvantage on relatively long handover latency and large packet loss. 
The mobility management operated in the transport layer, such as mobile stream 
control transmission protocol (mSCTP) [8-11], is another handover solution. The 
mSCTP mechanism utilizes the multi-homing and multi-streaming features of SCTP 
to reduce the handover delay and packet loss. On the other hand, some researches [12-
13] have focused on the mobility management based on the application layer using 
session initiation protocol (SIP) which is a famous signaling protocol currently 
applied for voice over IP (VoIP) services. 
However, the mobility management using a single layer may not be sufficient to fully 
reduce handover delay or to support the advanced handover mobility requirements. The 
design of mobility solutions across heterogeneous networks with low handover delay is 
a challenge because each access network has its own mobility, security and QoS 
requirements. Hence, the IEEE 802.21 is expected to provide the solution regarding the 
handover issues across the heterogeneous access networks. In [14], the researches have 
explored the influence of the thresholds for handover decision on WLAN utilization and 
packet loss in IEEE 802.11 and IEEE 802.16 hybrid networks. In [15]-[18], they 
modified the MIPv6 stack and set the handover threshold based on IEEE 802.21 
mechanism to allow MSs to seamlessly handover across WLAN and 3G networks. In 
[19], they proposed an MIH based handover decision mechanism in IEEE 802.11 and 
IEEE 802.16 networks. The handover decision algorithm used the Multiple Attribute 
Decision Making (MADM) mechanism to calculate the pre-defined scores for 
corresponding QoS requirements. 
In this paper, we propose a cross layer mechanism, which integrated MIPv6 with 
MIH, for handover mobility management across the heterogeneous Wi-Fi and 
WiMAX networks.  The proposed mechanism will solve the handover delay and 
www.ebook3000.com

 
A Handover Mechanism Using IEEE 802.21 in Heterogeneous Wireless Networks 
97 
 
packet loss issues. The performance of the proposed design will be analyzed in terms 
of transmission throughput and handover latency. 
3   Background of the IEEE 802.21 
The IEEE 802.21 framework is specified to facilitate handover between 
heterogeneous IEEE 802 networks and cellular networks by exchanging the 
information and defining commands and events to make the handover decision. The 
core element of the IEEE 802.21 framework is the Media Independent Handover 
Function (MIHF), as shown in Figure 1. 
The MIHF is a logical entity between MAC layer and IP layer that facilitates 
mobility to make the handover decision. It provides three services, including the Media 
Independent Event Service (MIES), Media Independent Command Service (MICS) and 
Media Independent Information service (MIIS). MIH users make handover decisions 
based on inputs from MIHF. 
 
Fig. 1. MIH services and their initiation 
3.1   The Media Independent Event Service (MIES) 
The MIES is responsible for detecting events in lower layers (MAC and PHY layers) 
and reporting them from both MIHF and MIH users. The MIES also initiates 
appropriate events obtained from both local and remote interfaces. The MIES 
supports the following several categories of link events: 
(1) MAC and PHY State Change events: These events correspond to changes in 
MAC and PHY states. 
(2) Link Parameter events: These events are due to changes in link-layer parameters.  
(3) Predictive events: Predictive events convey the likelihood of a change in the link 
conditions in the near future based on past and present conditions. 
 

98 
L.-H. Chang, C.-C. Wang, and T.-H. Lee 
 
(4) Link Handover events: These events inform upper layers about the occurrence of 
layer 2 handovers/link switches if supported by the given media type. 
(5) Link Transmission events: These events indicate the successful or failed link-
layer transmission status of upper layer protocol data units. This information is 
used by upper layers to improve buffer management for minimizing the upper 
layer data loss due to a handover. 
3.2   The Media Independent Command Service (MICS) 
The MICS provides a set of commands for the MIH users to control link properties 
that are relevant to handover and switch between links. It enables the MIH users to 
manage and control link behavior relevant to the handover and mobility. The MIH 
users utilize command services to determine the status of links and to control the 
multi-mode device for optimal performance. Command services also enable MIH 
users to facilitate optimal handover policies. 
The information provided by MICS is dynamic information composed of link 
parameters such as signal strength and link speed which vary with time and MS 
mobility. A number of commands, classified into two categories: MIH commands and 
link commands, are defined in MIH standard to allow the MIH users to configure, 
control, and retrieve information from the lower layers.  
3.3   The Media Independent Information Service (MIIS) 
The MIIS provides the information about different networks and their services which 
enables more effective handover decision to be made across heterogeneous networks. 
It details the characteristics and services provided by the serving and neighboring 
networks. The MIIS includes the support for various information elements (IEs) 
which is essential for a network selector to make intelligent handover decision. The 
IEs are classified into three groups. 
(1) General Information and Access Network Specific Information: These 
information elements give a general overview of the different networks providing 
coverage within an area. 
(2) Point of Attachment (PoA) Specific Information: These IEs provide information, 
such as PoA addressing information, PoA location, and the type of PHY and 
MAC layers, about different PoAs for each of the available access networks. 
(3)  Other information which includes access network specific, service specific, or 
vendor/network specific. 
4   System Design 
In the normal condition of hard handover, the MS usually disconnects the association 
with the serving BS or AP prior to discovering and detecting the available 
neighboring BSs or APs. The disadvantage of this case is that it causes longer delay 
and the possible packet loss during the handover. In the IEEE 802.16e-2005, the MS 
needs to acquire the related information of neighboring BSs through the discovering 
from the serving BS when it initiates the solicitation handover procedure. However, if 
www.ebook3000.com

 
A Handover Mechanism Using IEEE 802.21 in Heterogeneous Wireless Networks 
99 
 
the serving BS’s link has been interrupted, the MS will be unable to perform a 
neighboring search for BSs. Therefore, the MS can not conduct the pre-
synchronization with the neighboring BSs. 
In this paper, the Link Going Down event in MIES is used to trigger a pre-
handover procedure when the received signal strength from the serving BS is lower 
than a RXthreshold. This mechanism would reduce the packet loss and process delay 
during the handover. Figure 2 shows the definition and coverage of the received BS’s 
or AP’s signal thresholds for the MS. Three types of BS or AP signal strength 
parameters are defined as follows. 
(a) CSThreshold: defines the minimum received signal strength of packets. When the 
BS detects this signal strength, the BS’s MAC will switch from the Idle state into 
the Carrier Sense state. 
(b) RXThreshold: defines the minimum received signal strength of error-free 
packets. Within the range of this signal strength threshold, the packet should be 
received with no error except the network congestion. 
(c) Alpha*RXThreshold: defines the minimum received signal strength to trigger 
Link Going Down event. The alpha is equal to or lager than one. Larger alpha 
value will trigger the Link Going Down event earlier. 
 
Fig. 2. Three types of BS (AP) signal strength thresholds 
Based on the signal threshold defined above, we propose a Link Going Down event 
detection probability as shown in Eq. (1). We implement the probability formula in 
the MIH module to act as the Link Going Down event trigger. The process will be 
conducted according to the follow steps. 
(1) Compare the received BS’s signal strength in the MS (RSS_now) with 
RXThreshold value. If RSS_now < RXThreshold, it means the link going down 
is true. Otherwise, the packet should be received with no error when RSS_now > 
RXThreshold. 
(2) Then, compare RSS_now with alpha*RXThreshold value. The Link Going Down 
event detection formula, shown in Eq. (1), is activated when RSS_now < 
alpha*RXThreshold. Then, the MIH handover procedure will be initiated when 
probability > threshold confidence, where the threshold confidence is the likelihood 
to trigger the handover which can be pre-defined and adjusted by users. 

100 
L.-H. Chang, C.-C. Wang, and T.-H. Lee 
 
d
RXThreshol
d
RXThreshol
alpha
now
RSS
d
RXThreshol
alpha
y
probabilit
−
×
−
×
=
)
(
_
)
(
 
(1)
For example: we assume that the RXThreshold is 0.05, the value of alpha is 1.6 
(hence, alpha * RXThreshold is equal to 0.08), and the confidence is 80% (i.e. when 
the probability is more than 80%, the MIH will initiate the handover procedure). 
When the received signal strength in the MS is 0.055, the first step is to determine 
whether the RSS_now is greater than RXThreshold, which are 0.055 and 0.05 
respectively in this case. Thus, the MS will not trigger the Link Going Down event as 
long as the RSS_now maintains larger than RXThreshold. Next, the MS determines 
whether the RSS_now (0.055) is less than alpha * RXThreshold (0.08). The 
probability detection scheme will calculate the value base on Eq. (1) which comes out 
with probability 83%. The probability 83% is greater than the pre-defined confidence, 
80% in this assumption. Thus, the MIH will trigger the handover procedure. On the 
contrary, the MIH will not process the handover procedure when the RSS_now is 
lower than 0.06. From the example shown above, our proposes mechanism provides a 
criterion for handover decision making which can be automatically decided by the 
MS according to the dynamic change of the received signal strength. 
Mobile Station
Serving 
Network
(AP)
Candidate 
Network 1
(UMTS-BS)
Candidate 
Network 2
(WiMAX-BS)
MIH 
User
MIHF
MAC 1
WLAN
MAC 2
UMTS
Traffic Flow
Compare the Candidate Networks Resources
Connecting to WiMAX
Traffice Flow
Link_Parameters_Change
MIH_Link_Parameters_Report
MIH_MN_HO_Candidate_Query.request
MIH_MN_HO_Candidate_Query.request
MIH_N2N_HO_Query_Resources.request
MIH_MN_HO_Candidate_Query.request
MIH_MN_HO_Candidate_Query.request
MIH_N2N_HO_Query_Resources.request
MIH_N2N_HO_Query_Resources.response
MIH_N2N_HO_Query_Resources.response
MIH_MN_HO_Candidate_Query.response
MIH_MN_HO_Candidate_Query.response
MIH_MN_HO_Candidate_Query.confirm
MIH_MN_HO_Candidate_Query.confirm
Link_Going_Down
MIH_Link_Going_Down
Link_Down
MIH_Link_Down
Disconnecting to WLAN
MAC 3
WiMAX
 
Fig. 3. MIH assisted MIPv6-based mobility management in the heterogeneous network 
www.ebook3000.com

 
A Handover Mechanism Using IEEE 802.21 in Heterogeneous Wireless Networks 
101 
 
For the heterogeneous networks handover scenario, we consider the MS roams over 
WLAN and WiMAX hybrid networks. As shown in Figure 3, the MS has tow types of 
wireless interface, including WLAN and WiMAX. Initially, the MS uses WLAN 
interface to communicate with the corresponding node (CN) via AP1. Upon receiving 
the Link_Parameters_Change event, the MIHF reports the event to the upper layer 
stack. Then, the MIH user will send the candidate query request (MIH_MN_ 
HO_Candidate_Query-request) command, forwarded by the MIHF, to the neighboring 
BSs to discover the neighboring service status. Because the MS may not receive the 
neighboring BS’s signaling directly due to the out of signal range or hidden node issues, 
it can still collect and integrate the messages from the MIH via the serving network. 
Upon receiving the neighboring network information, the MIH compares the related 
data, such as throughput, to make the switchover decision. For instance, as example 
shown in Figure 3, the MIH user calculates the best throughput from the UMTS-BS and 
WiMAX-BS and then selects the WiMAX as the serving network after handover. This 
is followed by sending the binding update to the HA. Finally, the MS disables the 
WLAN network interface to complete the handover process. 
5   Simulation Results 
In this section, simulation results are presented for the proposed handover mobility 
management mechanism with MSs across the heterogeneous WLAN and WiMAX 
networks. The simulation environment was developed using the NS-2-2.29 [20] 
network simulator, with the NIST Software mobility package [21]. Table 1 shows the 
simulation parameters in more detail. A method based on MIPv6 is used to compare 
with our proposed handover mechanism. 
Table 1. Simulation parameters 
Name of parameter 
Value of parameter 
Simulation range 
3000 m × 3000 m 
Simulation duration 
120 sec 
Transmission radiuses of IEEE 802.16 
500 m 
MAC/802.16 scan interval 
50 sec 
MAC/802.16 interleaving interval 
40 sec 
MAC/802.16 UCD interval 
5 sec 
MAC/802.16 DCD interval 
5 sec 
802.16modulation and coding 
OFDM 16QAM 3/4 
802.16 channel bandwidth 
10 MHz 
Transmission radiuses of IEEE 802.11 
50 m 
Bit rate of 802.11 
11 Mbps 
Antenna 
Omni Antenna 
Propagation model 
TwoRayGround 
Confidence 
80% 
alpha(WiMAX) 
1.1 
alpha(WLAN) 
1.2 
UMTS uplink bandwidth 
384 kbps 
UMTS downlink bandwidth 
384 kbps 
MS moving speed 
1 m/s 

102 
L.-H. Chang, C.-C. Wang, and T.-H. Lee 
 
We will first discuss the WLAN homogeneous network scenario as shown in 
Figure 4. The MS roams across the WLAN homogeneous networks with three WLAN 
APs. The simulation parameters are set as follows. The transmission radius of each 
WLAN AP is 50 meter. The MS moves from AP1 to AP3 with moving speed 1 m/s at 
simulation time 5s. The MS sends out the constant bit rate (CBR) TCP packets, with 
data rate 1000 B/s, to the CN starting at time 4s. The total simulation time is 160s. 
 
Fig. 4. WLAN homogeneous network scenario 
Figure 5 shows the performance of received packets by using the MIH and the 
MIPv6 mechanisms in WLAN homogeneous networks. The vertical axis represents 
the sequence number of received packets and the horizontal axis stands for the 
simulated time. For the MIPv6 mechanism, the MS handovers from AP1 to AP2 at 
time 38.34s. During the handover process, the MS disconnects the association with 
AP1 prior to making the connection with AP2. This results in significant packet loss, 
as shown in Figure 5. Packets are successfully delivered to CN via AP2 after time 
63.84s. The handover delay is 25.5s in the first handover for the MIPv6 mechanism. 
Then, the received sequence number grows stably. When the MS handovers from 
AP2 to AP3 at time 113.23s, it results in the packet loss again. The MS does not make 
the connection with AP3 until time 138.72s after disconnecting the association with 
AP2, as shown in Figure 5. 
On the other hand, the MIH mechanism discovers and pre-detects the available 
neighboring APs and sends the related information to the MS. The MS can process 
the registration to the neighboring APs in advance before disconnecting the 
association with the serving AP. As shown in Figure 5, for the MIH mechanism, the 
MS disconnects to AP1 at time 37.28s and immediately process an association to AP2 
at time 38.77s during the handover from AP1 to AP2. The handover delay is 1.5s 
which is much smaller than the MIPv6 mechanism. 
The overall comparison of throughput performance during handover for MIH and 
MIPv6 mechanism is shown in Figure 6. From the simulation result, we can see that 
the overall throughput of MIH mechanism has higher performance than the MIPv6 
mechanism. It can reach around 3.57Mbps based on our experimental scenario. 
 
www.ebook3000.com

 
A Handover Mechanism Using IEEE 802.21 in Heterogeneous Wireless Networks 
103 
 
 
Fig. 5. The performance of received packets for handover in WLAN homogeneous networks 
 
Fig. 6. The throughput performance in WLAN homogeneous networks 
Figure 7 shows a simulation scenario in WLAN and WiMAX heterogeneous 
networks. The MS roams across the heterogeneous networks with two WLAN APs 
and one WiMAX BS. The transmission radiuses of the WLAN AP and WiMAX BS 
are 50 meters and 500 meters, respectively. The MS moves from AP1 to AP2 with 
moving speed 5 m/s at time 5s. The MS sends out CBR TCP packets, with data rate 
1000 B/s, to the CN starting at time 4s. The total simulation time is 120s. 
Figure 8 shows the performance of received packets by using the MIH and the 
MIPv6 mechanisms in WLAN and WiMAX heterogeneous networks. For the MIPv6 
mechanism, the MS handovers from WLAN AP1 to WiMAX BS at time 23.02s. The 
MS disconnects the association with AP1 prior to making the connection with BS 
which results in significant packet loss and handover delay. The handover delay is 
around 25.5s. When the MS moves from BS to AP2, there is no perceived packet loss  
 

104 
L.-H. Chang, C.-C. Wang, and T.-H. Lee 
 
 
Fig. 7. WLAN-WiMAX heterogeneous network scenario 
 
Fig. 8. The handover performance in WLAN-WiMAX heterogeneous networks 
occur during handover. This is because AP2 is under the BS signaling coverage. 
Therefore, when the MS receives the beacon from AP2, it could process the AP2 
association smoothly while maintaining the connection with BS. The MS is able to 
receive connection information and update care of address (CoA) from AP2 prior to 
disconnecting the association with BS.  
On the other hand, the proposed MIH mechanism discovers and pre-detects the 
available neighboring APs and/or BSs and sends the related information to the MS 
which provides decision making and prior registration in handover. The handover can 
be a simple switch between different network interface cards (NICs). As shown in 
Figure 8, the handover delay for the proposed MIH mechanism is around 0.3s which 
again is much smaller than the MIPv6 mechanism. 
www.ebook3000.com

 
A Handover Mechanism Using IEEE 802.21 in Heterogeneous Wireless Networks 
105 
 
The overall comparison of throughput performance between the proposed MIH 
and MIPv6 mechanisms in heterogeneous Wi-Fi and WiMAX networks is shown 
in Figure 9. From the simulation result, again we can see that the overall 
throughput of the proposed MIH mechanism has higher performance than the 
MIPv6 mechanism. 
 
Fig. 9. The throughput performance in WLAN-WiMAX heterogeneous networks 
Finally, we further discuss the handover performance in different alpha and 
confidence values for our proposed MIH mechanism. The experimental environment 
is the same topology as shown in Figure 4. Again, the MS moves from AP1 to AP3 
with moving speed 1 m/s at time 5s. The MS sends out CBR TCP packets, with data 
rate 1000 B/s, to the CN starting at time 4s. Different alpha values, varied from 1.2, 
1.5, 1.8 to 2.0 and confidence values, varied from 60%, 70%, 80% to 90%, are 
simulated and analyzed for the proposed MIH mechanism. 
Figure 10 shows the transmission performance using the proposed MIH 
mechanism for the MS handover from AP1 to AP2 with different alpha values. As 
shown in Figure 10, larger alpha values will trigger the Link Going Down event 
earlier which result in faster handover procedure. Consequently, the handover delay is 
reduced for larger alpha values. 
Figure 11 shows the transmission performance using the proposed MIH 
mechanism for the MS handover from AP1 to AP2 with different confidence values. 
As shown in Figure 11, smaller confidence values will increase the possible 
disconnection. To avoid the disconnection, it will trigger the Link Going Down event 
earlier for the smaller confidence cases. Consequently, the handover delay is also 
reduced for smaller confidence values. 
 

106 
L.-H. Chang, C.-C. Wang, and T.-H. Lee 
 
 
Fig. 10. The performance of the proposed MIH mechanism with different alpha values 
 
Fig. 11. The performance of the proposed MIH mechanism with different confidence values 
From the simulation results, we have shown that our proposed MIH handover 
mechanism not only improves the handover efficiency but also reduces the handover 
delay and possible packet loss during handover in heterogeneous networks. 
6   Conclusion 
The IEEE 802.21 framework is a novel standard and the scope of this standard is to 
optimize and facilitate handover in heterogeneous networks. In this paper, we have 
www.ebook3000.com

 
A Handover Mechanism Using IEEE 802.21 in Heterogeneous Wireless Networks 
107 
 
proposed a handover mechanism integrated with the IEEE 802.21 to provide better 
handover efficiency and to reduce the handover delay and possible packet loss during 
handover in homogeneous and heterogeneous networks. The proposed MIH handover 
mechanism defined certain signal thresholds and probability confidence to trigger the 
Link Going Down event. This will provide useful information for upper-layer 
protocols or users to define their criteria in determining the optimized handover 
moment and path. 
More studies on different handover criteria for the MIH handover mechanism have 
been carried out. We will investigate in more detail on the handover algorithm to 
further increase the handover performance. The simulation analyses will also be 
compared with more other handover schemes. 
Acknowledgements 
This research is partially supported by the National Science Council of Republic of 
China, Taiwan under contracts NSC 97-2221-E-142-004 and NSC 98-2221-E-142 -
003 as well as the support from National Taichung University regarding the MoE 
project (No. 0970255610C), the National Innovative Communication Education 
program in Taiwan. 
References 
1. IEEE std 802.16e-2005 and IEEE Std 802.16-2004/Cor1-2005, “IEEE Standard for Local 
and metropolitan area networks Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband 
Wireless Access Systems Amendment 2: Physical and Medium Access Control Layers for 
Combined Fixed and Mobile Operation in Licensed Bands and Corrigendum 1” (Febuary 
2006) 
2. IEEE std 802.21-2008, Local and metro-politan area networks - Part 21: Media In-
dependent Handover Services (January 2009) 
3. Perkins, C.: IP Mobility Support for IPv4. IETF RFC 3220 (January 2002) 
4. Malki, K.E.: Low Latency Handoffs in Mobile IPv4. IETF RFC 4881 (June 2007) 
5. Koodli, R., Perkins, C.: Mobile IPv4 Fast Handovers., IETF RFC 4988 (October 2007) 
6. Johnson, D., Perkins, C., Arkko, J.: Mobility Support in IPv6, IETF RFC 3775 (June 2004) 
7. Koodli, R.: Mobile IPv6 Fast Handovers, IETF RFC 5268 (June 2008) 
8. Stewart, R., et al.: Stream Control Trans-mission Protocol, IETF RFC 4960 (September 
2007) 
9. Koh, S.J., Chang, M.J., Lee, M.: mSCTP for soft handover in transport layer. IEEE 
Communications Letters 8(3) (March 2004) 
10. Ma, L., et al.: A new method to support UMTS/WLAN vertical handover using SCTP. 
IEEE Wireless Communications 11(4), 44–51 (2004) 
11. Stewart, R., et al.: Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) Dynamic Address 
Reconfiguration, IETF RFC 5061 (September 2007) 
12. Wu, W., et al.: SIP-based vertical handoff between WWANs and WLANs. IEEE Wireless 
Communications 12(3), 66–72 (2005) 
13. Rosenbreg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Ca-marillo, G.: The Stream Control Transmission Protocol 
(SCTP) as a Transport for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP), IETF RFC 4168 (October 
2005) 

108 
L.-H. Chang, C.-C. Wang, and T.-H. Lee 
 
14. Dai, Z., et al.: Vertical handover criteria and algorithm in IEEE 802.11 and IEEE 802.16 
hybrid networks. In: 2008 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC 2008), 
Beijing, China, May 19-23 (2008) 
15. de la Oliva, A., et al.: A case study: IEEE 802.21 enabled mobile terminals for optimized 
WLAN/3G handovers. ACM SIGMOBILE Mobile Computing and Communications 
Review 11(2), 29–40 (2007) 
16. Melia, T., et al.: IEEE 802.21 reliable event service support for network controlled 
handover scenarios. In: IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference (GLOBECOM 
2007), November 26-30, pp. 5000–5005 (2007) 
17. Melia, T., et al.: Impact of heterogeneous network controlled handovers on multi-mode 
mobile device design. In: IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference 
(WCNC 2007), March 11-15, pp. 3884–3889 (2007) 
18. Melia, T., et al.: Toward IP converged heterogeneous mobility: A network controlled 
approach. Computer Networks 51(17), 4849–4866 (2007) 
19. Yang, S.F., Wu, J.S., Huang, H.H.: A vertical Media-Independent Handover decision 
algorithm across Wi-FiTM and WiMAXTM networks. In: 5th IFIP International Conference 
on Wireless and Optical Communications Networks, WOCN 2008, May 5-7 (2008) 
20. NS-2, The Network Simulator ns-2, http://www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns/ 
21. NIST, http://www.antd.nist.gov/seamlessandsecure.shtml 
www.ebook3000.com

 
C.-C. Chang et al. (Eds.): ACN 2010, CCIS 77, pp. 109–115, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Duplicate Address Detection Table in IPv6 Mobile 
Networks 
Farkhod Alisherov and Taihoon Kim* 
Multimedia Engineering, Hannam University, Daejeon, South Korea 
sntdvl@yahoo.com, taihoonn@empal.com 
Abstract. In IP networks, each computer or communication equipment needs 
an IP address. To supply enough IP addresses, the new Internet protocol IPv6 is 
used in next generatoion mobile communication. Although IPv6 improves the 
existing IPv4 Internet protocol, Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) mecha-
nism may consume resources and suffer from long delay. DAD is used to en-
sure whether the IP address is unique or not. When a mobile node performs an 
inter-domain handoff, it will first generate a new IP and perform a DAD proce-
dure. The DAD procedure not only wastes time but also increases the signaling 
load on Internet. In this paper, the author proposes a new DAD mechanism to 
speed up the DAD procedure. A DAD table is created in access or mobility 
routers in IP networks and record all IP addresses of the area. When a new IP 
address needs to perform DAD, it can just search in the DAD table to confirm 
the uniqueness of the address.  
Keywords: Duplicate Address Detection, DAD tabling. 
1   Introduction 
The evolution of mobile communications has been toward a converged network that 
integrates data networks and mobile communication systems. The merging of data 
and voice on a single network opens new possibilities and challenges to next genera-
tion mobile communications. 
Mobile communication is stepping toward the third generation and beyond. While 
Internet Protocol (IP) has become the common protocol on Internet, users can transfer 
multimedia data by using any kind of wired or wireless equipments anytime and any-
where in packet networks. Because of the economy scale and widespread acceptance, 
IP has been playing a central role for services delivery in next generation mobile 
networks. Consequently, the converged network moves toward an All-IP architecture 
[1, 2]. The All-IP network architecture [3, 4], as shown in Figure 1, integrates Public 
Switched Telephone Network (PSTN), Internet, and wireless networks. All-IP net-
work deploys a IP-based core network to integrate wireless networks, PSTN, and 
Internet. The wireless networks include 2G wireless access through Base Station 
Controller (BSC) and Base Transmission System (BTS), 3G wireless access through 
Radio Network Controller (RNC) and Node B,Wireless LAN (WLAN) access 
                                                           
*  Corresponding author. 

110 
F. Alisherov and T. Kim 
 
through Access Point (AP), and so on. Moreover, the next generation mobile network 
may also contain mobile ad-hoc networks which are lack of centralized control and 
make duplicate address detection much more complicated. 
In All-IP networks, each computer or communication equipment needs its own 
unique IP address. As the network users increase dramatically in All-IP mobile net-
works, the useful number of the current IPv4 addresses is insufficient. Consequently, 
IETF proposed IPv6 [5] as a replacement for the current version of the IP protocol 
(IPv4). IPv6 is a feasible scheme for the third generation and beyond because IPv6 
offer enough IP addresses. The major difference is that IPv6 adopts 128-bit IP ad-
dresses, while IPv4 uses 32-bit IP addresses. Neighbor Discovery (ND) [6] of IPv6 
allows hosts to discover what neighboring routers are present, while Neighbor Un-
reachable Detection (NUD) is defined to determine whether a neighbor becomes  
unreachable or not. Stateless auto-configuration [7, 8] allows a new IPv6 host to com-
municate with the network without any pre-configuration. The IPv6 link-local address 
consists of a 64-bit address prefix and a 64-bit interface identifier. When the newly 
formed address is initialized, the node will perform a duplicate address detection 
(DAD) mechanism for IPv6 to ensure that the new address is not already in use by 
other nodes in the attached network. If another node is already using the IP address, 
the auto-configuration process halts and manual configuration is required. 
The number of mobile devices will increase exponentially from time to time in 
next-generation mobile networks. As the number of mobile devices dramatically in-
creases, the efficiency of mobility support has been more and more important. In 
Mobile IPv6, each mobile node is always identified by its home address, regardless of 
its current point of attachment to the Internet. When away from its home IP subnet, a 
mobile node will be also associated with a care-of address, which indicates the mobile 
node’s current location. When a mobile node moves away from its home subnet (Link 
A) to a visiting subnet (Link B). The home agent will cache a care-of address associ-
ated with the mobile node’s home address. On receipt of packets, the home agent 
intercepts packets from a correspondent node and tunnels the packets to the mobile 
node. On the reverse link, the mobile node can send packets directly to the correspon-
dent node and informs its care-of address. Hereafter, the correspondent node will be 
able to have a direct connection, instead of passing through the home agent. There-
fore, Mobile IPv6 avoids triangle routing. It decreases the load and delay on the  
network for delivering packets 
IPv6 is inherent for route optimization. However, path optimization in IPv6 still 
has problems to support Quality of Services (QoS), e.g., over MPLS networks [10]. In 
addition, there are still some schemes affecting the transmission on the Internet, such 
as Duplicate Address Detection (DAD). The delay time caused by DAD reduces qual-
ity of service, especially for real-time multimedia data. Based on the handoff delay 
analysis in [11], performing a DAD procedure spends about at least 1500 ms. The 
DAD operation not only causes long delay time but also consumes wireless network 
resource. Due to the long delay, the multimedia transmission will be broken or de-
grade the quality of service when a mobile device performs an inter-domain handoff. 
Therefore, the goal of this paper is to support seamless inter-domain handoff. A fast 
DAD scheme is proposed to reduce the delay and to avoid waste of scarce wireless 
resource in DAD operation when a mobile node performs an inter-domain handoff 
and requests a new IP address. 
www.ebook3000.com

 
Duplicate Address Detection Table in IPv6 Mobile Networks 
111 
 
2   Related Works 
2.1   Fast and Lossless Handoff [12] 
In this research, the original router produces a new care-of address before handoff, 
and informs the new router of the new IP address. Consequently, the new router can 
carry out the DAD procedure in advance, and determine whether this address can be 
used in the new area or not, before the mobile node arrives. Moreover, this paper also 
adopts a temporary buffer to store packets before success of the handover. Thus, it 
can reduce the lost probability of packets when handover occurs. 
This way is suitable for an environment with few mobile nodes. However, the 
router might overload when there are an extremely large number of mobile nodes to 
hand over in All-IP mobile networks. Besides, the system may generate many unused 
IP addresses when the handover decision is not precise. It is unsuitable for next gen-
eration mobile networks which may have a huge number of inter-domain handoff and 
unpredictable users’ mobility behavior. 
2.2   Random Generation of Interface Identifiers [13] 
In this research, a 64-bit random number is generated to substitute the original 64-bit 
interface identifier. The authors estimated that the probability of duplication for ran-
domly generated numbers is quite low as 
P(n, k) = 1 − n! 
(n − k)!nk , (1) 
where k denotes the amount of randomly generated IP addresses, and n is the amount 
of total IP addresses. The authors reserve two bits for special purposes. Thus, n = 262. 
If we want to generate 5,000 IP addresses, its probability is P(262, 5000) < 5.4e−12. 
This method results in an extremely small probability of address duplication. There-
fore, the authors considered not to perform the DAD mechanism for saving resource. 
Because the IP addresses rarely duplicate, the authors cancel the DAD mechanism to 
reduce the delay. 
However, data packets will be mis-routed or dropped if the addresses duplicate. 
Moreover, this study violates IPv6 standard for stateless auto-configuration. 
2.3   Recommendations for IPv6 in 3GPP [14] 
In 3GPP network [14], the core network will send packets by a tunnelling protocol 
through an IP network. When a mobile node requests a data service, Gateway GPRS 
Support Node (GGSN) can provide an unique IP address via DHCP protocol. There-
fore, the mobile node neither performs stateless auto-configuration nor carries out the 
DAD mechanism. 
2.4   Weak and Passive DAD [15, 16] 
Vaidya [15] proposed a weak DAD mechanism. He assumed that each node has a key 
and distributes the key along with its address in all routing protocol packets. If a node 
receives a routing protocol packet with the same address as that in its routing table, it 

112 
F. Alisherov and T. Kim 
 
compares the key with that stored in the routing table. If they are with different keys, 
a duplicate address is detected. However, if two nodes generate the same address and 
key at the same time, the address duplication can not be detected. On the other hand, a 
passive DAD mechanism [16] was proposed for proactive link state routing protocols. 
Passive DAD will neither generate any keys nor distribute additional information in 
the routing protocol packets. If a node receives a packet with a bidirectional link to its 
own address and the originator is not its neighbor, an duplicate address is detected. 
This passive approach has an advantage of no additional protocol overhead, but may 
cause long delay in duplicate address detection. 
Most of the abovementioned ways attempt to cancel the DAD mechanism in  
advance. Although they may try to reduce the duplicate probability, the IP address 
duplication still possibly occurs. If the addresses duplicate, data packets will be mis-
routed or dropped and cause a serious problem. In this paper, we assume that the 
mobile device can generate its IP address via stateless auto-configuration regardless 
of the type of wireless media. Moreover, it is impossible to guarantee the uniqueness 
of the new IP address without performing DAD. 
3   Proposed DAD Tabling 
Since a node can generate its IP address by auto-configuration or by manual configura-
tion, duplicate addresses may occur although the probability of duplicated addresses 
will be small. Thus, we are unable to guarantee the uniqueness of the new address. 
Therefore, we must perform duplicate address detection (DAD). When a node wants to 
ensure the uniqueness of a new IP address, the node will initiate Neighbor Solicitation 
(NS) messages by broadcasting on the subnet. If there is a node using this address at the 
same time, it will reply a Neighbor Advertisement (NA) messages to notify that the IP 
address has been used already. If there is no NA message replied, the initiating node 
will send NSmessages again after waiting a certain period of time. If there is still no NA 
message replied at this time, the node can verify that the new address is unique. The 
DAD procedure is shown in Figure 3. Note that broadcasting NS messages will not only 
consume wireless resource but also waste the mobile’s power battery. 
 
Fig. 1. DAD Operation 
www.ebook3000.com

 
Duplicate Address Detection Table in IPv6 Mobile Networks 
113 
 
 
Fig. 2. DAD Tabling 
A DAD table to store all used IP address in the coverage area. The DAD table can 
be co-located with HLR/VLR databases or address binding caches in the access or 
mobility router which deals with inter-domain handoff . For example, we may estab-
lish a DAD table in RNC or GGSN as shown in Figure 2 for 3GPP IP network. The 
table records all IP addresses that are currently used under the same subnet. When a 
new mobile node enters this subnet, it can get a new IP address via stateless auto-
configuration. To check the uniqueness of this new address, the only thing we have to 
do is inspecting the DAD table to see whether there exists the same IP address. There 
are no longer needs to broadcast Neighbor Solicitation (NS) messages in the wireless 
link.We can determine whether this new IP address is useful or not immediately in the 
DAD table. Therefore, the mobile does not have to waste the time to wait for others’ 
responses. Consequently, we can not only save the scarce wireless resources, but also 
reduces the delay time. 
The operation of the DAD table is summarized as follows: 
1. Creation of a DAD table in the access or mobility router (e.g., RNC or GGSN), 
to store presently used IP addresses. When a mobile node generates a new IP address, 
it first sends a request to search the DAD table using its link-local address [5] which 
will be unique in this area. 
2. If there is no the same IP address stored in the table, then the new IP address is 
valid. Since no messages replied are considered as a success in DAD operation, the 
system can inform or not inform the mobile node of the successful information. At the 
same time, this new IP address will be recorded in the DAD table for subsequent 
duplicate address detection. 
3. If there exists the same IP address in the DAD table, then the new IP address is 
invalid. The system must send out a reject message to inform the mobile node of the 
address duplication. This reject message may be misrouted to another mobile node 
using the same IP address. 

114 
F. Alisherov and T. Kim 
 
Therefore, on receipt of this message or timeout, the mobile node could re-generate 
another address or ask for manual configuration. 
If a mobile node moves out the area, its IP address must be deleted from the DAD 
table after successful inter-domain handoff. If the mobile node powers off for a long 
time, the used IP address cannot be released properly. Therefore, the access or mobil-
ity router (RNC or GGSN) must perform unreachable detection periodically to ensure 
that all IP addresses in the DAD table are active. The unreachable detection will be 
resource consuming. Fortunately, all mobile nodes will periodically register their 
location to the system no matter in GSM, 3G, or wireless LAN. If a mobile node does 
not re-register its location for a long time, we can delete its entry in the DAD table. 
That is, no extra detection should be performed for garbage collection of the unused 
IP addresses. 
4   Search 
The common search methods are sequential search, binary search and hash search. 
Sequential search is unsuitable for a large number of data because it wastes a lot of 
time in traversal all of the data. Binary search outperforms sequential search, but the 
data must be sorted before searching. Sorting in the DAD table consumes time, espe-
cially in an environment with data changing frequently. Hash search can obtain the 
position of the record by means of key value computation. Without sorting as a prior-
ity, the hash search is quick and economizes the use of memory. 
The advantage of quick search makes hashing well suitable for searching in the 
DAD table. 
If the hash function is designed properly, we may avoid the collision situation and 
speed up the search rate. We need a suitable hashing method to reduce the number of 
search times and achieve the goal of fast duplicate address detection for inter-domain 
handoff. In fact, the probability of IP address duplication is probably very low. That 
means it is hard to find the same IP address in the DAD table. In other words, most of 
the search results are unsuccessful. 
Therefore, we choose a search method with the least average number of search 
times when search is unsuccessful. 
 5   Conclusion 
The goal of the proposed scheme is to decrease the time and resource consumed for 
seeking duplicate IP address in broadcasting and waiting for responses. In next gen-
eration mobile networks, the number of mobile node increases dramatically. As the 
inter-domain handoff is more and more frequent for mobile nodes, a mechanism for 
quick search has been increasingly important. So this research proposed a DAD ta-
bling for Fast DAD in All-IPv6 Mobile Networks. 
Acknowledgement. This work was supported by the Security Engineering Research 
Center, granted by the Korean Ministry of Knowledge Economy. 
www.ebook3000.com

 
Duplicate Address Detection Table in IPv6 Mobile Networks 
115 
 
References 
1. Lin, Y.-B., Huang, Y.-R., Pang, A.-C., Chlamtac, I.: All-IP Approach for Third Generation 
Mobile Networks. IEEE Netw. 16(5), 8–19 (2002) 
2. Lin, Y.-B., Pang, A.-C.: Wireless and Mobile All-IP Networks. Wiley, Chichester (2005) 
3. Zahariadis, T.B., Vaxevanakis, K.G., Tsantilas, C.P., Zervos, N.A., Nikolaou, N.A.: 
Global roaming in next-generation networks. IEEE Communi. Mag. 40(2), 145–151 
(2002) 
4. Bos, L., Leroy, S.: Toward an all-IP-based UMTS system architecture. IEEE  
Network 15(1), 36–45 (2001) 
5. Deering, S., Hinden, R.: Internet Protocol, Version 6(IPv6) Specification, IETF RFC 2460 
(December 1998) 
6. Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W.: Neighbor Discovery for IPv6. IETF RFC 2461 
(December 1998) 
7. Thomaon, S., Narten, T.: IPv6 Stateless Address Autocofiguration. IETF RFC 2462  
(December 1998) 
8. Weniger, K., Zitterbart, M.: Address Autoconfiguration in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks:  
Current Approaches and Future Directions. IEEE Netw., 6–11 (July/Auguest 2004) 
9. Perkins, C.E., Johnson, D.B.: Mobility support in IPv6. In: Proc. Intern. Conf. Mobile 
Computing and Networking (November 1996) 
10. Wang, T.-P., Tsui, C.-L.: Path Optimization under Delay Constraints in Mobile IP over 
MPLS Networks. IEICE Trans. Commun. 87(9), 2605–2612 (2004) 
11. Nakajima, N., Dutta, A., Das, S., Schulzrinne, H.: Handoff Delay Analysis and Measure-
ment for SIP based mobility in IPv6. In: IEEE Intern. Conf. Commun., vol. 2 (May 2003) 
12. Lee, C.-W., Lee, J.-H.: Fast and Lossless Handoff Method considering Duplicate Address 
Dection in IPv6-based Mobile Networks,Wireless and Mobile Communications. In: Proc. 
SPIE, APOC 2001, Beijing, China. vol. 4586 (2001) 
13. Bagnulo, M., Soto, I.: Random Generation of Interface Identifiers. Internet-Draft  
(July 2002) 
14. Wasserman, M.: Recommendations for IPv6 in 3GPP Standard. IETF RFC 3314  
(September 2002) 
15. Vaidya, N.H.: Weak Duplicate Address Detection in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks. In: Proc. 
ACM MobiHoc 2002, Switzerland, pp. 206–216 (June 2002) 
16. Weniger, K.: Passive Duplicate Address Detection in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks. In: Proc. 
IEEE WCNC 2003, New Orleans, LA (March 2003) 
17. Radke, C.E.: The use of quadratic residue research. Commun. ACM 13 (Febuary 1970) 
18. Knuth, D.E.: The art of computer programming, vol. 3, pp. 506–540. Addison-Wesley 
Publishing, Reading (1973) 

C.-C. Chang et al. (Eds.): ACN 2010, CCIS 77, pp. 116–123, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
A Hop-Sensitive Mechanism to Establish Route 
Optimization in Mobile Networks 
J. Isac Gnanaraj1, P. Calduwel Newton2,  
L. Arockiam3, and Tai-hoon Kim4 
1 Research Scholar, St. Joseph’s College (Autonomous) 
2 Lecturer in Computer Science, Bishop Heber College (Autonomous) 
3 Associate Professor in Computer Science, St. Joseph’s College (Autonomous) 
Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu, India 
4 Dept. of Multimedia, Hannam University, Korea 
calduwel@yahoo.com 
Abstract. The mobile network plays a vital role in mobile communications. It 
supports both host mobility and network mobility. The mobile network which 
supports network mobility can be called as NEMO. The NEMO refers to NEt-
work MObility or mobile network that moves. Though NEMO provides many 
supports, it also suffers due to Quality of Service (QoS) issues. One such issue 
is Route Optimization (RO). When a Mobile Node (MN) is away from Home 
Network (HN), it will send a binding update to Home Agent (HA) in HN to in-
form its movement. If the Correspondent Node (CN) wants to send data to MN, 
it will send data through HA. In this scenario, three networks such as HN, For-
eign Network (FN) and Correspondent Network are involved in data transfer. 
The involvement of these three networks affects the QoS. This paper concen-
trates on some of the QoS parameters to propose a QoS mechanism to establish 
RO among these three networks and significantly increases performance of the 
mobile network.   
Keywords: Hop, Delay, NEMO, Foreign Network, Route Optimization. 
1   Introduction 
The Internet consists of tens of thousands of autonomous systems and network of 
networks. The mobile communication is penetrating in all fields. The message sent by 
a MN typically traverses many networks and nodes. The performance of the commu-
nication depends on the traffic flow. In order to maintain the communication faster, 
optimized route has to be identified which should increase the performance of a net-
work. Finding the optimized route for the better performance of the data transfer is in 
research at many places. This process of optimizing the route is known as Route Op-
timization (RO). The host mobility is supported by MIPv6 [1] and network mobility is 
supported by NEMO [2].  
The mobile nodes are identified by its home address. When the node is away  
from the home network (HN) and present in a foreign network (FN) then it is associ-
ated with the Care-of-Address (CoA) which gives the information about the current 
www.ebook3000.com

 
A Hop-Sensitive Mechanism to Establish Route Optimization in MNs 
117 
location of the node. Whenever a node goes out from HN and reaches a FN, then the 
MN will intimate the home agent (HA) about its current location. In other words, MN 
will send a Binding Update (BU) to HA and HA in turn send Binding Acknowledge-
ment (BA). This process is called as binding process. When a mobile node (MN) is 
away from its home network, the HA forwards the packets by tunneling them to CoA. 
Correspondent  
Node (CN) 
Home 
Network 
Foreign 
Network 
 
Correspon-
dent 
Network 
BU / BA 
                                  Tunnel 
MN 
MN2 
HA 
CN_M
HN_M
FN_MR 
 
Fig. 1. Example Mobile Network  
Figure 1 shows example mobile network. A MN in HN is moved to a FN. Now, 
CN wants to send data to MN which is just moved to FN. The CN will send data to 
MN via all intermediate routers in the Correspondent Network, HN, and FN. This will 
increase number of hops as well as time needed to process and forward data. The next 
section proposes a mechanism to reduce this problem.  
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the related works and moti-
vations to write this paper. Section 3 explains the proposed mechanism to enhance RO 
in mobile networks. Section 4 discusses research findings with an example and shows 
the results in a graphical form. Section 5 concludes our research findings. Finally, 
references are listed. 
2   Related Work 
Sahibzada Ahmed Noor et al. analyzed the NEMO route optimization [3]. They tar-
geted network mobility issues from the scope of route optimization. Their aim was to 
explore route optimization schemes in NEMO. After discussing the need of route op-
timization in NEMO, available solutions are discussed and a quantitative analysis is 
provided.  

118 
J.I. Gnanaraj et al. 
Thomas Clausen et al. discussed in [4] that the NEMO working group has devel-
oped a protocol suite, extending the notion of edge-mobility on the Internet to include 
that of network mobility. This implies that a set of nodes, along with their mobile 
router, changes their point of attachment and that traffic to these nodes is tunneled to 
be delivered through their new point of attachment. This mechanism is transparent to 
applications in that existing traffic to a node is being encapsulated and tunneled, re-
gardless of where the network containing the destination node is attached.  
Thierry Ernst et al. addressed some of the problems in the MIPv6 [5]. 
V.Devarapalli et al. describe the Network Mobility (NEMO) Basic Support protocol 
that enables Mobile Networks to attach to different points in the Internet [6].  The 
protocol is an extension of Mobile IPv6 and allows session continuity for every node 
in the Mobile Network as the network moves.  It also allows every node in the Mobile 
Network to be reachable while moving around. Young Beom Kim et. al. explained 
that, in nested mobile networks, the undesirable effects due to non-optimal routing 
tends to get aggravated, leading to excessively long packet sizes and transfer delays. 
In order to resolve the non-optimal routing problem, also known as ‘pinball routing 
problem’ in the literature, he proposes a new route optimization scheme where the 
care-of address in each binding update message is recursively substituted by the in-
termediate mobile routers in the mobile network [7].  
P. Calduwel Newton, et al. proposed a mechanism to reduce the delay in establish-
ing RO by effectively maintaining a table that stores information about whether a 
node supports RO or not. In order to reduce the table size and search delay, informa-
tion about RO support is stored in binary value. The outcome of this paper reduces 
time taken for fall back procedure that in turn reduces excessive delay in establishing 
RO [8]. Jongkeun Na et al. proposed a unified route optimization scheme [9] that can 
solve several types of RO problems by using Path Control Header (PCH).  
The goal of the network mobility (NEMO) management is to effectively reduce the 
complexity of handoff procedure and keep the mobile devices connected to the Inter-
net. The customers not only need mobility but also quality. It is a great challenge for 
the service providers to offer Quality of Service (QoS) [10, 16]. Vehicle is moving so 
fast that it may cause the handoff and packet loss problems. Both of the problems will 
lower down the throughput of the network. To overcome these problems, Yuh-Shyan 
Chen et. al. propose a novel NEMO protocol for vehicular ad hoc network (VANET) 
[11]. There are different types of Internet applications and mobile network interfaces. 
The Internet applications are file transfer, telephony, video conferencing, etc. The 
QoS requirements will vary from one application to another application [12, 13]. 
From the above discussions, we find that there is a need to enhance RO which in turn 
helps internet applications to increase the Quality of Service of the mobile network. 
3   HoSMERO: A Proposed Mechanism  
This section describes our proposed mechanism. The HoSMERO refers Hop-
Sensitive Mechanism to Enhance Route Optimization in mobile networks. Figure 2 
shows three different networks such as HN, FN and correspondent network. The CN 
in Correspondent Network will send data to FN via HN. In other words, data will be 
transferred through all the intermediate routers that exist in all three networks. This 
will increase the number of hops which in turn increases the time needed to process 
www.ebook3000.com

 
A Hop-Sensitive Mechanism to Establish Route Optimization in MNs 
119 
and forward the data to next hop. Hence, there is a need to reduce the number of hops 
as well as time. The HoSMERO reduces the number of hops as well as time.  
The MANET approach [14] proposes that packets be forwarded between any nodes 
in the same MoNET using MANET routing. In this scheme, an ad-hoc routing proto-
col called OLSR is employed between mobile routers to find the shortest routes 
within the nested MoNET. The Home Agent uses Optimized Link State Routing 
(OLSR) protocol [15] to collect information about its neighbours. Based on this in-
formation, HN identifies the intermediate router very near to FN as well as correspon-
dent network in order to minimize the number of hops and time. The steps involved in 
HoSMERO are given below.  
1. HA receives BU from MN 
2. HA uses OLSR to identify optimum route between HA and FN 
3. If there are intermediate routers between FN and HA, authorize an Interme-
diate Router 1 (IR1) which is very near to FN to be an entry/exit point to HN  
4. CN sends signal to HA to send data to MN 
5. HA uses OLSR to identify optimum route between HA and Correspondent 
Network  
6. If there are intermediate routers between HA and CN, authorize an Interme-
diate Router 2 (IR2) which is very near to CN to be an exit/entry point to HN  
7. HA uses OLSR to optimize the route between IR1 and IR2 
8. Data will transfer through the optimized route : CN  ÅÆ CN_MR ÅÆ IR2 
ÅÆ IR1 ÅÆ FN_MR ÅÆ MN  
Instead of sending data through all the intermediate routers among correspondent 
network, HN and FN, HoSMERO finds optimum route which has minimum number 
of hops. This reduces the processing overload and performance overhead. It does the 
route optimization in three phases. They are,  
1. FN – HA RO (during BU) 
2. CN – HA RO (during connection setup) 
3. 
CN – FN RO (during connection setup) 
The optimization should take place between the routes of FN-HA, CN-HA and CN-
FN. In first phase, the route must be optimized between the FN and HA. The number 
of intermediate nodes between FN and HA must be minimized. Here, the HA finds a 
node which is located very near to the FN using OLSR algorithm. The HA authorizes 
this node which is found very near to the FN as an interface (IR1) between the FN and 
HA. Now, the IR1 is an interface between FN and HN instead of the HA. Hereafter, 
all the packets which are to be sent to the FN will be routed through IR1. The first can 
be performed during binding update process.  
In second phase, HA identifies a node which is very near to correspondent network 
using OLSR algorithm. Similarly, a node is identified as an interface (IR2) between 
CN and HA. The HA authorizes this node which is found very near to the correspon-
dent network as an interface (IR2) between the CN and HA. Now, the IR2 is an inter-
face between CN and HN instead of the HA. Hereafter, all the packets which are to be 
sent to the CN will be routed through IR2. In third phase, the outcome of first and 
second phases is combined to establish a RO between ultimate source (CN) and desti-
nation (MN).  The second and third phase can be performed during connection setup. 

120 
J.I. Gnanaraj et al. 
         HN_MR                 
                            IR1 
 
 
           
 
             IR2  
 
                FN_MR 
 
           MN 
        CN_MR 
 
 
         CN 
BU/BA 
HA 
FN 
HN 
Binding Process 
Connection Setup 
Data Transfer 
Correspondent       
Network 
 
Fig. 2. HoSMERO Mechanism  
Figure 2 elucidates the various steps involved in  HoSMERO mechanism. The 
three networks are given in three circles. The arrows show the three phases neatly. 
The MN is just moved to FN and starts sending BU and HA responds with BA.  
4   Research Findings 
This section discusses the results of the proposed mechanism. Figure 3 shows the 
three networks, traditional route and optimized route.   
 HN_MR                  
             t1             
IR1 
              
 
          t1                          
t1 
 
                FN_MR 
 
           MN 
        
CN_MR 
 
 
HA 
2t1 
Traditional Mechanism 
HoSMERO Mechanism 
FN 
HN 
2t2 
Correspondent                
Network 
 
Fig. 3. A NEMO Scenario 
www.ebook3000.com

 
A Hop-Sensitive Mechanism to Establish Route Optimization in MNs 
121 
According to Figure 3, the traditional route is CN ÅÆ CN_MR ÅÆ IR2 ÅÆ 
HN_MR ÅÆ IR1 ÅÆ FN_MR ÅÆ MN. But, optimized route that is found by 
HoSMERO is CN ÅÆ CN_MR ÅÆ IR2 ÅÆ IR1 ÅÆ FN_MR ÅÆ MN. In other 
words, number of hops in traditional route is 6 and number of hops in the proposed 
route is 5. It clearly shows the proposed mechanism gives better results. It also re-
duces the processing overload and performance overhead by not involving HA much. 
Equation (1) - (7) shows the time needed to reach from one node to another node.  
Let us assume, 
CN ÅÆ CN_MR = ½ t1 secs 
(1) 
CN_MR ÅÆ IR2 = 2t1 secs 
(2) 
IR2  ÅÆ  HN_MR  = t1 secs 
(3) 
HN_MR ÅÆ IR1 = t1secs 
(4) 
IR2 ÅÆ IR1 = t1 secs 
(5) 
IR1 ÅÆ FN_MR = 2t1 secs 
(6) 
FN_MR ÅÆ MN = ½ t1 secs 
(7) 
Where t1 = 2 secs 
Based on the above assumption, total time needed to reach ultimate source (CN) 
and destination (MN) using traditional mechanism is calculated using the following 
equation,  
CN ÅÆ CN_MR ÅÆ IR2 ÅÆ HN_MR ÅÆ IR1 ÅÆ FN_MR ÅÆ MN 
=  ½ t1 + 2t1 + t1 + t1 + 2t1 + ½ t1 = 14 secs 
(8) 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Traditional Mechanism
Proposed Mechanism
(HoSMERO)
No. of Hops
 
Fig. 4. Traditional Mechanism vs. Proposed Mechanism (Hops) 

122 
J.I. Gnanaraj et al. 
Total time needed to reach ultimate source (CN) and destination (MN) using proposed 
mechanism (HoSMERO) is calculated using the following equation,  
CN ÅÆ CN_MR ÅÆ IR2 ÅÆ IR1 ÅÆ FN_MR ÅÆ MN 
=  ½ t1 + 2t1 + t1 + 2t1 + ½ t1 = 12 secs 
(9) 
Comparing (8) and (9), the proposed mechanism gives better results than traditional 
mechanism.  
Figure 4 and 5 show that proposed mechanism gives better results with respect to two 
metrics such as hops and delay time. The X-axis shows the mechanisms and Y-axis 
shows the metrics. As per the result, proposed mechanism saves one hop and 2 secs.   
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Traditional Mechanism
Proposed Mechanism
(HoSMERO)
Delay Time (secs)
 
Fig. 5. Traditional Mechanism vs. Proposed Mechanism (Delay Time) 
5   Conclusion  
The usage of mobile communication is increasing exponentially. It also increases the 
challenges in mobile communication.  This paper has proposed a QoS mechanism to 
meet some of the challenges like decreasing the number of hops and delay in data 
transfer. The proposed mechanism, HoSMERO clearly shows the better results than 
the traditional mechanism. It takes minimum number of hops and minimum delay 
compared to traditional mechanism. It also reduces the overload of home agent which 
is very load-intensive node and overhead of mobile networks.  If the level of nesting 
is increased, HoSMERO gives even better results. It also avoids unnecessary encapsu-
lation of headers. In future, time needed to authorize a mobile node to act as an inter-
face can be identified and analyzed.  
www.ebook3000.com

 
A Hop-Sensitive Mechanism to Establish Route Optimization in MNs 
123 
References 
1. Johnson, D., Perkins, C., Arkko, J.: Mobility Support in IPv6. RFC 3775 (June 2004) 
2. Devarapalli, V., Wakikawa, R., Thubert, P.: Network Mobility (NEMO) Basic Support 
Protocol. RFC 3963 (January 2005) 
3. Noor, S.A., Janjua, K.A., Zhang, L.: Route Optimization Schemes in Mobile Networks: A 
Theoretical and Empirical Analysis. In: Proc. of the 4th Intl. Conf. on Mobile Technology, 
Applications and Systems Mobility (2007) 
4. Clausen, T., Baccelli, E.: NEMO Route Optimization Problem Statement., Internet Engi-
neering Task Force (IETF), draft-clausen-nemo-ro-problem-statement-00.txt (October 
2004) 
5. Ernst, T., Olivereau, A., Bellier, L., Castelluccia, C., Lach, H.-Y.: Mobile Networks Sup-
port in Mobile IPv6 (Prefix Scope Binding Updates). IETF Draft, draft-ernst-mobileip-v6-
network-03 (March 2002) 
6. Devarapalli, V., Wakikawa, R., Thubert, P.: Network Mobility (NEMO) Basic Support 
Protocol. RFC 3963 (January 2005) 
7. Kim, Y.B., Lee, K.-Y., Ku, H., Huh, E.-N.: A Route Optimization Via Recursive CoA 
Substitution for Nested Mobile Networks. In: Gavrilova, M.L., Gervasi, O., Kumar, V., 
Tan, C.J.K., Taniar, D., Laganá, A., Mun, Y., Choo, H. (eds.) ICCSA 2006. LNCS, 
vol. 3981, pp. 827–836. Springer, Heidelberg (2006) 
8. Calduwel Newton, P., Isac Gnanaraj, J., Arockiam, L.: A Delay-Sensitive Mechanism to 
Establish Route Optimization in Mobile Networks. International Journal of Future Genera-
tion Communication and Networking, Korea 2(3), 37–44 (2009) 
9. Na, J., Choi, J., Cho, S., Kim, C., Lee, S., Kang, H., Koo, C.: A Unified Route Optimiza-
tion Scheme for Network Mobility. In: Niemegeers, I.G.M.M., de Groot, S.H. (eds.)  
PWC 2004. LNCS, vol. 3260, pp. 29–38. Springer, Heidelberg (2004) 
10. Calduwel Newton, P., Arockiam, L.: Reliability Analysis for General Packet Radio Service 
with Quality of Service Support. CiiT International Journal of Wireless Communication, 
79–83 (May 2009), ISSN 0974 – 9756 
11. Chen, Y.-S., Cheng, C.-H., Hsu, C.-S., Chiu, G.-M.: Network Mobility Protocol for Ve-
hicular Ad Hoc Networks. In: IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Confer-
ence (WCNC 2009), Budapest, Hungary, April 5-8 (2009) 
12. Calduwel Newton, P., Arockiam, L.: An Intelligent Technique to Improve Quality of Ser-
vice (QoS) in Multihomed Mobile Networks. International Journal of Advanced Science 
and Technology 7, 11–19 (2009) 
13. Calduwel Newton, P., Arockiam, L., Kim, T.-h.: A Quality of Service Strategy to Select 
Coding Schemes in General Packet Radio Service System. International Journal of  
Advanced Science and Technology 7, 1–9 (2009) 
14. Baccelli, E., Clausen, T., Wakikawa, R.: Route Optimization in Nested Mobile Networks 
(NEMO) using OLSR. In: NCS 2005 (2005) 
15. Jacquet, P., Clausen, T.: Optimized Link State Routing Protocol (OLSR), IETF RFC 3626 
(October 2003) 
16. Calduwel Newton, P., Arockiam, L.: A Novel Prediction Technique to Improve Quality  
of Service (QoS) for Heterogeneous Data Traffic. Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing 
(November 2009), doi:10.1007/s10845-009-0361-z 

 
C.-C. Chang et al. (Eds.): ACN 2010, CCIS 77, pp. 124–133, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
A Novel Analysis of Single Mode Fiber for Reduction  
of Chromatic Dispersion Using 
Dispersion Compensated Fiber 
Laxman Tawade1, Shantanu Jagdale1, Munir Sayyad2,  
and Sanjay Nalbalwar3 
1 Vidya Pratishthan’s College of Engineering, Baramati, India 
2 Reliance Technology Innovation Centre, Mumbai 
3 Dr. B.A. Technological University, Lonere 
tawadelaxman@rediffmail.com, shantanujagdale@gmail.com, 
munir.sayyad@gmail.com, nalbalwar_sanjay@yahoo.co.in 
Abstract. All forms of dispersion degrade a light wave signal, reducing the data 
carrying capacity through pulse-broadening. Chromatic dispersion results from 
a variation in propagation delay with wavelength, and is affected by Fiber mate-
rials and dimensions. In this paper we briefly review limitation imposed by 
chromatic dispersion on optical fiber system. We have presented idea about 
how to design fiber optics system using dispersion compensated fiber to reduce 
chromatic dispersion. We are providing mathematical design for optical fiber 
system to reduce chromatic dispersion with bit rate 2.5 Gbps, for wavelength 
1550 nm. The use of dispersion compensating fibers (DCF’s) has now emerged 
as the most practical technique to compensate for the chromatic dispersion in 
the long-haul, optically amplified Standard fiber. 
Keywords: Dispersion Compensated Fiber (DCF), Chromatic Dispersion (CD), 
Single Mode Fiber (SMF), Refractive Index (R.I), Bit Error Rate (BER). 
1   Introduction 
The relationship between applied electric field (E) & dielectric polarization (P), due to 
nature of silica used in construction of optical fiber is the origin of two important ef-
fects related to the propagation of light in optical fiber, namely, dispersion & non li-
nearity. The relationship between P&E depends on nature of medium. The characte-
ristics of medium are 
1. Isotropic- isotropic medium is one which is having electromagnetic property like 
refractive index same in all directions. 
2. Homogenous- homogenous medium is one which is having electromagnetic 
property same at all points. 
3. Lossless-the medium having negligible loss. 
Chromatic dispersion is broadening of input signal while traveling down the length of 
optical fiber. While discussing CD, we should know about propagation constant 
(β).Propagation constant determines speed at which pulse energy propagates in the 
www.ebook3000.com

 
A Novel Analysis of Single Mode Fiber for Reduction of CD Using DCF 
125 
 
optical fiber. For propagation of electromagnetic wave in homogenous & monochro-
matic medium Propagation constant (β) = wn/c=2πn/λ, Where, n= R.I of homogenous 
medium. 
Wave number (k) =2π/λ   Unit of propagation constant is radian/length. Group ve-
locity dispersion (GVD) - it is second order derivative of propagation constant with 
respect to optical frequency. 
    ߚଶ=݀ଶβ/dݓଶ  ߚଶ  - it is the key parameter governing the evolution of pulse shape 
Group delay- it is first order derivative of propagation constant with respect to opt-
ical frequency. 
 
ߚଵ =dβ/dw 
 
1/ߚଵ  -it is the speed at which pulse propagates in optical fiber. 
As  ߚଶ = dߚଵ/dw 
So chromatic dispersion is also called as group velocity dispersion. In absence of 
chromatic dispersion  ߚଶ =0 
When ߚଶ > 0 then CD is normal 
When  ߚଶ < 0 then CD is anomalous. 
2   Chromatic Dispersion 
Single mode fiber chromatic dispersion has two components: 
1. waveguide dispersion 
2. material dispersion 
1. Waveguide dispersion- This occurs because of different R.I of core & cladding. 
Short wavelength light travels within core. Medium wavelength light spreads slightly 
into cladding and long wavelength light spreads much into cladding. 
2. Material dispersion- This occurs because different wavelength travels at differ-
ent speeds. Each wavelength arrives at different time because of dispersion. This 
causes propagation delay in wavelength relative to other.  
 
Fig. 1. Material, waveguide, total dispersion in SMF 

126 
L. Tawade et al. 
 
In figure 1, material, waveguide, total dispersion in SMF is shown.  Total chromatic 
dispersion (D) =  
Material dispersion   +   waveguide dispersion       
 
                    D = ܦ௠ + ܦ௪ 
 
Total chromatic dispersion (D) = - (2πc/ߣଶ)ߚଶ 
 
D = - (2πn/λ)ߚଶ 
 
Where λ- operating wavelength. 
3   Dispersion Compensated Fiber 
[1] Special chromatic dispersion compensated fiber (DCF) provides negative disper-
sion in 1550 wavelength range. Currently available DCF provides total chromatic 
dispersion between -340 &-1360 ps/nm-km.  
 
Fig. 2. Dipersion factor Vs  wavelength for DCF 
 
Fig. 3. R.I profile of  DCF from  centre  of core 
In figure 2. we have plotted dispersion factor  for different operating wavelength. 
[2] SMF has dispersion factor 17ps/nm-km at 1550 nm operating wavelength. If we 
use SMF of total length 70 km in optical fiber system then it will provide total 
dispersion factor 70×17 =1190 ps/nm. This  lagre chromatic dispersion factor limit 
www.ebook3000.com

 
A Novel Analysis of Single Mode Fiber for Reduction of CD Using DCF 
127 
 
optic fiber system. There is one solution to overcome on such limition. [3]DCF  
provides nearly -200 ps/nm-km in 1550 nm wavelength range. DCF with length 
nearly 5 km  in 1550nm wavelength range   is possible to provide  total dispersion 
factor 5×(-200)= -1000.Thus if we construct optic fiber system with SMF & DCF  
then it will provide very less dispersion factor.In figure 3 R.I profile of DCF from 
centre of core is shown. 
4   Effect of CD on Optic Fiber System 
In figure 4 optical fiber system with SMF length 70 km & 80 km is shown. Since our 
main focus here is to see the effect of chromatic dispersion induced, Penalties, fiber-
loss, non-linearity and PMD are ignored. Figure 4 shows that as the length of the fiber 
is increased, total accumulated dispersion increases resulting in dispersed (inter-
symbol interference) eye diagrams and deteriorated BER performance. As shown in 
figure 4 we have constructed optic fiber system with operating wavelength1550 nm, 
laser output power 0 dBm , SMF of length 70 km & 80 km. 
 
Fig. 4. Implemented optic fiber systems with SMF 
 
Fig. 5. Eye diagram for 70 km SMF 

128 
L. Tawade et al. 
 
When we apply data bit 
generator, the output of ele
laser diode, we get output
down SMF with length 70k
& eye diagram for optical s
positive dispersion factor o
bol interference occurs. Wh
70 km then at receiver side
1.52552
 
Figure 6 shows bit error 
at receiver side. As s
crease in length of optical 
maximum quality factor o
8.20568
 Figure 7 sho
F
݁ି଴଴ହ.
݁ି଴ଶ଼
݁ି଴଴଺. 
sequence from pseudo bit sequence generator to electr
ectrical generator is current. When we apply this curren
t as optical power. When this optical signal carries d
km & 80 km then at receiver side we have checked bit er
signal. In figure 5 eye diagram for 70km is shown. Due
of 70 km, SMF optical signal get broadened i.e. intersy
hen we constructed optic fiber system with SMF of len
e we found maximum quality factor 3.70532 & eye hei
 
Fig. 6. BER for 70 km SMF 
rate for 70 km SMF. We have got minimum BER 4.17
shown in figure 4, if we use 80 km SMF, then due to 
fiber, quality factor of the signal is affected. We have 
of signal for 80 km SMF as 2.55783 & eye height a
ows eye diagram for 80 km SMF. 
 
Fig. 7. Eye diagram for 80 km –SMF 
rical 
nt to 
data 
rror 
e to 
sm-
ngth 
ight 
896 
in-
got 
as -
www.ebook3000.com

 
A Novel Analysis
 
When we checked bit err
imum BER as 1.06835
As length of SMF increases
5   Mathematical Desi
We are providing mathema
dispersion with  
Bit rate = 2.5 Gbps, for w
Coupling loss (L) = 1 dB
System margin (M) = 5 d
Transmitter output powe
Receiver sensitivity (R) =
 
Figure 9, shows fiber opti
compensating fiber (DCF) p
chromatic dispersion factor
is connected in series w
Fig. 9. Imple
݁ି଴ହ
ܮ௦௠௙
s of Single Mode Fiber for Reduction of CD Using DCF 
ror rate at receiver side for 80km SMF, then we found m
 In figure 8 we have shown bit error rate for 80 km SM
s the bit error rate also increases. 
 
Fig. 8. BER for 80km SMF 
ign 
atical design for optical fiber system to reduce chrom
wavelength 1550 nm 
B 
dB 
er 
= 0 dBm 
= -35 dBm 
ics system with SMF & DCF to reduce CD. Dispersi
provides an optical medium with a relatively large negat
r (D (λ)) at the operating wavelength if a SMF of len
with a DCF of length 
. 
 
emented optical fiber systems with SMF & DCF 
ହସ. 
ሺܲ௧ሻ
ܮௗ௖௙
129 
min-
MF. 
matic 
ion-
tive 
ngth 

130 
L. Tawade et al. 
 
Maximum allowable fiber loss =   ܲ௧- (R+M+L) 
So maximum allowable fiber loss = 0-(-35+ 1+5) = 29  
Maximum allowable CD (t) = 1/ (4x Bit rate) 
       =1/ (4x2.5 10ଽ)= 100 ps                 
 
[3]Total CD=100 = ܮ௦௠௙ ܦ௦௠௙  ሺߣሻ Δλ + ܮௗ௖௙ ܦௗ௖௙ Δλ     .. (1) 
 Where Δλ – spectral width of a transmitted signal 
Total attenuation loss of two fiber combination is given by 
Loss=29=ܮ௦௠௙ܣ௦௠௙+ܮௗ௖௙ܣௗ௖௙                                ... (2) 
At λ=1550 nm 
Spectral width of transmitted signal = .1  
Attenuation for DCF (ܣௗ௖௙) = .5 dB/ km 
Attenuation for SMF (ܣ௦௠௙) = .19 dB/km 
Dispersion factor for DCFሺܦௗ௖௙ሻ = -200 ps/nm-km 
Dispersion factor for SMF ሺܦ௦௠௙  ሻ= 17 ps/ nm-km 
For given value solving equation (1) & (2), we got  
 ܮ௦௠௙=135 km & ܮௗ௖௙ = 6.5 km  
We have taken   ܮௗ௖௙ = 7 km. 
6   Result 
The constructed optical fiber system with SMF & DCF is as shown in figure 9. When we 
apply electrical current as input for laser diode, we get optical signal as output of laser 
diode. As shown in figure 9, we have connected optical time domain visualizer at trans-
mitter. With the help of optical time domain visualizer we can check power of the optical 
signal. We have got maximum amplitude of optical signal as 16.48 dBm & minimum as - 
105.55 dBm. Signal amplitude at transmitter output is as shown in figure 10. 
 
Fig. 10. Optical signal power at transmitter 
www.ebook3000.com

 
A Novel Analysis of Single Mode Fiber for Reduction of CD Using DCF 
131 
 
As shown in the figure 9, at transmitter output we have connected optical spectrum 
analyzer. With the help of optical spectrum analyzer we found spectral width of the 
transmitted signal which is 0.1 nm. In figure 11 optical signal amplitude Vs wave-
length is shown. 
 
Fig. 11. Optical signal spectrums at transmitter 
 
Fig. 12. Optical signal power after SMF 
After travelling signal down 135 km SMF, its strength gets decreased. As shown in 
figure 9, optical time domain visualizer is connected after SMF. With the help of opt-
ical time domain visualizer, it is possible to check strength of the optical signal. We 
found that the maximum amplitude of optical signal is -12.204 dBm & minimum am-
plitude is -104.18 dBm. This shows that there is decrement in amplitude of optical 
signal. In figure 12, the variation in amplitude of an optical signal with time is shown.  
As shown in figure 9, we have connected optical time domain visualizer after DCF. 
After the travelling of optical signal down (135+7) km fiber, we checked the strength 
of optical signal with the help of optical time domain visualizer. We found the  
maximum amplitude as -14.963 dBm & the minimum amplitude as -104.05 dBm. In 
figure 13, the variations in power of optical signal i.e. amplitude of optical signal with 
time is shown. 
       
     

132 
L. Tawade et al. 
 
 
Fig. 13. Optical signal power after DCF 
 
Fig. 14. Quality factor Vs bit period 
 
Fig. 15. BER Vs. Bit period 
In figure 14, the variation in quality factor with time is shown. As shown in  
figure 9, we have constructed optical fiber system with SMF of length 135 km & DCF 
with length of 7km. With the help of BER analyzer at the receiver side, we found the 
maximum quality factor for this as 9.37925. Already we have calculated maximum 
quality factor for optical fiber system with SMF of length 70km & SMF of length 80 
km as 3.70532 & 2.557833 respectively. From above results we can say that there is 
great improvement in the quality factor. 
www.ebook3000.com

 
A Novel Analysis of Single Mode Fiber for Reduction of CD Using DCF 
133 
 
When we constructed optical fiber system with SMF of length  135 km & DCF of 
length 7km & connected BER analyzer at receiver side, we found the minimum  bit 
error rate as  2.65599݁ି଴ଷ଻. When we compared this bit error rate with optic fiber 
system with only SMF then we found that there is great reduction in the bit error rate. 
In figure 15, variation in the bit error rate with time is shown. 
 
Fig. 16. Eye diagram at receiver 
With the help of BER analyzer connected at the receiver side, we recorded the eye 
diagram. In figure 16, eye diagram of receiver side is shown. We found the eye height 
as 4.08762݁ି଴଴଻. Previously we had recorded the eye height for optical fiber system 
with only SMF of length 70km & 80 km as 1.52552݁ି଴଴ହ &    -8.20568݁ି଴଴଺ respec-
tively. When we compared the eye diagram at receiver side of optical fiber system 
with SMF &DCF and the optical fiber system with only SMF then we found that there 
is a great improvement in the eye diagram. 
7   Conclusion 
We conclude that the mathematical analysis for SMF shows that the use of DCF 
achieves the advantage in terms of reduced BER & improved Quality factor which in 
result reduces CD and causes error free reception of data at receiver side in long haul 
for application. Hence, the proposed optic fiber system design can provide efficient 
dispersion compensation and suppression of the detrimental nonlinear effects. 
References 
1. Thyagarajan, K., Varshney, R.K., Palai, P., Ghatak, A.K., Goyal, I.C.: A Novel Design of a 
Dispersion Compensating Fiber. IEEE Photonics Technology Letters 8(11) (November 
1996) 
2. Knudsen, S.N., Pedersen, M.O., Griiner-Nielsen, L.: Optimisation of dispersion compensat-
ing fibres for cabled long-haul applications. IEE Electron. Lett. 36(25), 2067–2068 (2000) 
3. Grüner-Nielsen, L.(Member, OSA), Wandel, M., Kristensen, P., Jørgensen, C., Jørgensen, 
L.V., Edvold, B., Pálsdóttir, B., Jakobsen, D.: Dispersion-Compensating Fibers. Journal of 
Lightwave Technology 23(11) (November 2005) 
 

 
C.-C. Chang et al. (Eds.): ACN 2010, CCIS 77, pp. 134–143, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Image Tampering Detection and Recovery Using Dual 
Watermarks and Cyclic Redundancy Checks 
Chu-Hsing Lin, Jung-Chun Liu, Wei-Cheng Hsu, Hsing-Weng Wang,  
Wei-Chih Lin, and Jian-Wei Li 
Department of Computer Science, Tunghai University, 
Taichung 407, Taiwan, ROC 
{chlin,jcliu,g97350045,s952912,s952838,s952834}@thu.edu.tw 
Abstract. This paper is focused on the use of a dual watermark to achieve the 
goal of effective tamper detection and recovery of images. We combine a Cy-
clic Redundancy Check and an exclusive-or value from each block to generate 
watermarks. Information of each watermark is embedded in two blocks. This 
strategy ensures that if one block is tampered, there is still another block avail-
able for image recovery. Our proposed tamper detection algorithm not only uses 
CRC to detect tampering but also employ a strategy to increase the number of 
suspected invalid blocks to ensure fully detection and recovery of tampered 
blocks. The experimental results demonstrate that tampered blocks are correctly 
detected, and the recovered image has very high quality. 
Keywords: dual watermark, tamper detection, CRC, exclusive-or. 
1   Introduction 
With the rapid development of the Internet, digital technology revolution has shaped 
amazing changes on the media world in recent years. Because of computer capabili-
ties, Internet technology, and important applications on the electronic commerce, 
multimedia market, and medical imaging, authentication of images is increasingly 
important. Digital multimedia is easily obtained via the Internet. Since digital images 
can be easily tampered by most image processing tools, one cannot know whether the 
received image from the Internet is reliable without appropriate verification. For veri-
fication purpose, imperceptible watermarks are embedded into images.  
Imperceptible watermarks are classified into three categories according to their 
functionality: fragile, semi-fragile, and robust watermarks. Fragile watermarks [1-6] 
are easily corrupted by image processing methods, such as compression, rotation, 
stretching, blurring, sharpening, scaling, cropping, and many other malicious manipu-
lations. Since any slight change on fragile watermarked images produces sharp effect 
on the watermarks, fragile watermarks are often used to check whether the images are 
tampered. For Semi-fragile watermarks [7] [8], even if the watermarked image has 
been locally tampered, semi-fragile watermarks can still be reasonably reconstructed. 
Fragile watermarks [9-12] undermine watermark attacks, and their main purpose is to 
identify the ownership for copyright protection. However, unlike the other two types 
www.ebook3000.com

 
Image Tampering Detection and Recovery Using Dual Watermarks 
135 
 
of watermarks, robust watermarks are able to detect tampering of the images and 
recover the tampered images as well [13-16]. 
2   Related Work 
In 2008, Lee et al. [17] proposed a dual watermark scheme for image tamper detec-
tion and recovery. Their method focuses on embedding of watermarks, tamper 
block detection, and tamper block recovery. It provides a second chance for recov-
ery of the tampered image to have a better image restoration. By including more 
invalid tampered blocks, we modify their tamper detection algorithm to recover the 
tampered block more effectively. The detail will be discussed in the following two 
sections.  
2.1   Watermark Embedding 
The image is assumed to have a size of 
M
M ×
pixels, where M is a multiple of 2 ; 
the original image is divided into two equal parts as mapping blocks, and each block 
consists of 
2
2×
 pixels. First, feature of the original image is used to generate the 
watermark. Second, a look-up table is constructed to record the watermark in each 
mapping block. Third, the watermark is embedded in the three Least Significant Bits 
(LSB) of the pixel value in each block. The detail is discussed as follows. 
In the watermark generation phase, the original image is divided into two equal 
parts as mapping blocks shown in Fig. 1 (a), (b). As shown in Fig. 1 (c), we calculate 
the average intensity of each block. Then we take the five Most Significant Bits 
(MSB) from each two mapping blocks and use these ten bits to generate the first por-
tion of the watermark. Finally, we compute parity-check bits p  and v  by Eq. (1) and 
Eq. (2) respectively to produce a complete watermark shown in Fig. 2. 
 
Fig. 1. (a) Two mapping blocks A and B; (b) each block has four pixels; (c) average intensity of 
each block 

136 
C.-H. Lin et al. 
 
 
Fig. 2. (a) Average intensity of block A; (b) average intensity of block B; (c) the joint 12-bit 
watermark consisting of five MSB from avg_A and avg_B and parity-check bits p and v 
3
4
5
6
7
3
4
5
6
7
b
b
b
b
b
a
a
a
a
a
p
⊕
⊕
⊕
⊕
⊕
⊕
⊕
⊕
⊕
=
 
(1)
⎩
⎨
⎧
=
=
otherwise
p
if
v
0
0
1
 
(2)
In the look-up table generation phase, we perform a 1-D transformation scheme [18] 
according to Eq. (3) to generate a look-up table shown in Fig. 3 (b). Fig. 3 (a) shows 
the original table. 
1
]
mod
)
(
)
(
[
+
×
=
=
N
x
k
x
f
x
 
(3)
Where
[
]1
,0
'
,
−
∈
N
X
X
 are the block number, and k  is a prime number and 
{
}
factor
s
N
Z
k
'
−
∈
. Also k  is a secret key. 
{ }
0
−
∈Z
N
 is the total number of 
image blocks.  
Fig. 3 (a) shows the original table, and Fig. 3 (b) shows the look-up table generated 
by Eq. (3).  
Finally, a push-aside operation is made to modify the look-up table for robustness 
purpose as shown in Fig. 3(c). 
In the embedding phase, the watermark of two mapping blocks will be embedded 
into their neighboring blocks. For example, in Fig. 3 (c) watermarks of blocks 14 and 
46 will be embedded into blocks 53 and 21, respectively. We embed the watermark in 
the three LSB of each pixel as shown in Fig. 4.  
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
1
14
27
40
53
2
15
28
41
54
3
16
29
42
55
4
17
30
43
56
5
18
31
44
57
6
19
32
45
58
7
20
33
46
59
8
21
34
47
60
9
22
35
48
61
10
23
36
49
62
11
24
37
50
63
12
25
38
51
0
13
26
39
52
14
53
15
28
1
27
40
2
54
29
55
4
41
3
16
42
30
5
31
44
17
43
56
18
6
45
7
20
57
19
32
58
46
21
47
60
33
59
8
34
22
61
23
36
9
35
48
10
62
37
63
12
49
11
24
50
38
13
39
52
25
51
0
26
 
Fig. 3. (a) The original table; (b) the look-up table generated by Eq. (3); (c) the modified look-
up table generated by push-aside operation 
www.ebook3000.com

 
Image Tampering Detection and Recovery Using Dual Watermarks 
137 
 
 
Fig. 4. (a) block C; (b)block D; (c) the watermark is embedded in the three LSB of each pixel 
of blocks C and D 
2.2   Detection of Tampered Blocks 
A 3-level hierarchical tamper detection algorithm is used for tamper detection. In the 
Level-1 detection process, first, it will check the 3-LSB of pixels of the 12-bit water-
mark in each block. Second, it will generate parity-check bits p  and v  from the water-
mark. Third, it will calculate the exclusive-or value from the 10 bits of the watermark 
and record it as
'p . Finally, we mark the block valid if 
'p
p =
and 
v
p ≠
. Otherwise, 
we mark it invalid.  
After Level-1 detection, Level-2 detection is performed on every valid block by 
checking its neighboring blocks. Any block with more than three invalid neighbor 
blocks will be marked invalid.  
After Level-2 detection, Level-3 detection is further performed on every valid 
block by checking its neighboring blocks. Any block with more than five invalid 
neighboring blocks will be marked invalid.  
2.3   Recovery of Tampered Blocks 
After the tamper detection process, two-stage recovery algorithm is used to recover 
invalid blocks. At stage 1, it will retrieve the watermark from a valid block- either the 
neighboring block next to the invalid block, or the mapping of the neighboring block. 
Then the retrieved watermark will be used to recover the invalid block. At stage 2, it 
will recover the remaining invalid blocks after stage 1. It takes the surrounding pixel 
values of the invalid block to replace the pixels in the tampered block. 

138 
C.-H. Lin et al. 
 
2.4   The Disadvantage of Lee’s Scheme 
The tamper detection algorithm of Lee’s scheme checks the exclusive-or value from 
the 10 bits of its watermark
'p  with p , and the value of v  to determine whether the 
image has been tampered. However, a tampered block might be judged as a valid one 
by this tamper detection algorithm. This misjudgment will result in failure of recovery 
of the tampered block.  
An example is given here. Fig. 5 shows an original watermark, which is tampered 
in such a way as shown in Fig. 6. In this case, by Eq. (1), we find that
'p is equal to 
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
=
⊕
⊕
⊕
⊕
⊕
⊕
⊕
⊕
⊕
. But since we have 
1
=
p
, and so 
0
=
v
. 
Accordingly, 
'p
p =
 and 
v
p ≠
, the tamper detection algorithm will erroneously 
mark this block as valid and make misjudgment. 
In the following, we propose a modified scheme to solve this problem. 
 
Fig. 5. The original watermark 
 
Fig. 6. The tampered watermark 
3   The Proposed Scheme 
We propose a new watermark generation and tamper detection algorithm to replace 
Lee’s scheme. As the experimental results show, it is more effective in tamper detec-
tion and the recovered image has better quality. 
3.1   The Proposed Watermark Generation Scheme 
In Fig. 7, bits 7
a  to 3
b of the watermark are generated by the average of pixel values 
in the block, which is the same as Lee’s scheme, and bits 1
c , 2
c , 3
c , and 4
c  are 
generated by using CRC [19]. Eq. (4) is the CRC generation function, where c  stands 
for 1
c , 2
c , 3
c , and 4
c . Finally, these four bits will be filled into the watermark, 
with 1
c  and 2
c in the upper block, and 3
c  and 4
c in the lower block.  
)
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
(
3
4
5
6
7
3
4
5
6
7
b
b
b
b
b
a
a
a
a
a
CRC
c =
 
(4)
www.ebook3000.com

 
Image Tampering Detection and Recovery Using Dual Watermarks 
139 
 
 
Fig. 7. (a) Two mapping blocks; (b) the proposed watermark 
3.2   The Proposed Watermark Detection Scheme 
We proposed a 2-level tamper detection algorithm to check whether the block is valid 
or not. 
Level-1 detection: 
1. 
Retrieve the 3-LSB of 4 pixels in a block and its mapping block to get two 
groups of 12- bit watermarks. 
2. 
Get a CRC value ( 'c ) from the 2-LSB of these two groups of watermarks. 
3. 
Obtain two CRC values (
uc  and 
dc ) from the 10-MSB from two groups of 
watermarks according to Eq. (4). 
4. 
If 
uc
c =
'
 and 
dc
c =
'
, these two mapping blocks are valid. Otherwise, they 
are invalid. 
Level-2 detection: 
For each block, check whether it is valid or not. Then mark surrounding blocks of 
every invalid block as invalid as shown in Fig. 8. 
 
Fig. 8. The proposed Level-2 tamper detection strategy 
4   Experimental Results 
The following experiments have been done to prove that our scheme can correctly 
detect tampered block and the recovery image has better image quality than the Lee’s 
scheme. We use images of Lena and Pepper with size of 
512
512×
 pixels as shown in 
Fig. 9. The PSNR [20] value is used to assess the image quality.  

140 
C.-H. Lin et al. 
 
 
Fig. 9. Image of (a) Lena; (b) Pepper 
 
Fig. 10. (a) Small scale cropping attack; (b) result of Lee’s scheme (PSNR = 30.04 db); (c) 
result of our scheme (PSNR = 35.93 db) 
 
Fig. 11. (a1) 80% cropped image; (a2) result of Lee’s scheme (PSNR = 21.25 db); (a3) result of 
our scheme (PSNR = 23.41 db); (b1) 85% cropped image; (b2) result of Lee’s scheme (PSNR = 
21.04 db); (b3) result of our scheme (PSNR = 23.21 db); (c1) 99% cropped image; (c2) result of 
Lee’s scheme (PSNR = 18.14 db); (c3) result of our scheme (PSNR = 18.89 db) 
www.ebook3000.com

 
Image Tampering Detection and Recovery Using Dual Watermarks 
141 
 
Fig. 10 (a) shows a small scale cropping attack. One can obviously see that noise 
appears on the recovered image by Lee’s scheme in Fig. 10 (b), but it does not appear 
on the recovered image by our scheme in Fig. 10 (c).  
In Fig. 11, portions of the cropping attacks are varied. In Fig. 12, different shapes 
of cropping attacks are used. The experimental results show that the recovered images 
by our scheme are better than those of Lee’s scheme. 
a1
a2
a3
b1
b2
b3
c1
c2
c3
 
d1
d2
d3
 
Fig. 12. (a1)-(d1) Four different shapes of cropping; (a2) result of Lee’s scheme (PSNR = 27.35 
db); (a3) result of our scheme (PSNR = 33.57 db); (b2) result of Lee’s scheme (PSNR = 26.22 
db); (b3) result of our scheme (PSNR = 33.49 db); (c2) result of Lee’s scheme (PSNR = 29.20 
db); (c3) result of our scheme (PSNR = 29.52 db); (d2) result of Lee’s scheme (PSNR = 29.01 
db); (d3) result of our scheme (PSNR = 29.40 db) 

142 
C.-H. Lin et al. 
 
5   Conclusions 
The experimental results show that our proposed scheme is more efficient than Lee’s 
scheme. In the detection part, we use CRC technique and adopt strategy to increase 
invalid blocks for tamper recovery purpose. By this way, it can avoid misjudgment of 
tampered blocks and the recovered image quality is better. To sum of the above ad-
vantages, our method is effective in image tamper detection and recovery. 
Acknowledgement 
This work is supported in part by National Science Council under grants NSC 98-
2221-E-029-021, NSC 98-2218-E-029-005, and NSC 98-2221-E-029-028. 
References 
1. Chou, C.M., Tseng, D.C.: Affine-Transformation-Invariant Public Fragile Watermarking 
for 3D Model Authentication. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 29(2), 72–79 
(2009) 
2. Zhang, X., Wang, S.: Fragile Watermarking With Error-Free Restoration Capability. IEEE 
Transactions on Multimedia 10(8), 1490–1499 (2008) 
3. Wang, K., Lavoue, G., Denis, F., Baskurt, A.: Hierarchical Watermarking of Semiregular 
Meshes Based on Wavelet Transform. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and 
Security 3(4), 620–634 (2008) 
4. Ho, A.T.S., Zhu, X., Shen, J., Marziliano, P.: Fragile Watermarking Based on Encoding of 
the Zeroes of the -Transform. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Secu-
rity 3(3), 567–569 (2008) 
5. Jun, S., Alam, M.S.: Fragility and Robustness of Binary-Phase-Only-Filter-Based Frag-
ile/Semifragile Digital Image Watermarking. IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and 
Measurement 57(3), 595–606 (2008) 
6. Zhang, X., Wang, S.: Statistical Fragile Watermarking Capable of Locating Individual 
Tampered Pixels. IEEE Signal Processing Letters 14(10), 727–730 (2007) 
7. Wang, Y.P., Hu, S.M.: A New Watermarking Method for 3D Models Based on Integral 
Invariants. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 15(2), 285–294 
(2009) 
8. Cheung, Y.M., Wu, H.T.: A Sequential Quantization Strategy for Data Embedding and In-
tegrity Verification. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technol-
ogy 17(8), 1007–1016 (2007) 
9. Liu, K.C., Chou, C.H.: Robust and Transparent Watermarking Scheme for Color Images. 
IET Image Processing 3(4), 228–242 (2009) 
10. Wang, K., Lavoue, G., Denis, F., Baskurt, A.: Hierarchical Watermarking of Semiregular 
Meshes Based on Wavelet Transform. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and 
Security 3(4), 620–634 (2008) 
11. Zhang, C., Cheng, L.L., Zhengding, Q., Cheng, L.M.: Multipurpose Watermarking Based 
on Multiscale Curvelet Transform. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Secu-
rity 3(4), 611–619 (2008) 
www.ebook3000.com

 
Image Tampering Detection and Recovery Using Dual Watermarks 
143 
 
12. Pei, S.C., Guo, J.M.: High-capacity Data Hiding in Halftone Images Using Minimal-error 
Bit Searching and Least-mean Square Filter. IEEE Transactions on Image Process-
ing 15(6), 1665–1679 (2006) 
13. Lin, P.L., Hsieh, C.K., Huang, P.W.: A Hierarchical Digital Watermarking Method for Im-
age Tamper Detection and Recovery. Pattern Recognition 38, 2519–2529 (2005) 
14. Wang, C.L., Hwang, R.H., Chen, T.S., Lee, H.Y.: Detecting and Restoring System of 
Tampered Image Based on Discrete Wavelet Transformation and Block Truncation Cod-
ing. In: 19th International Conference on Advanced Information Networking and Applica-
tions, Taiwan (March 2005) 
15. Tagliasacchi, M., Valenzise, G., Tubaro, S.: Hash-Based Identification of Sparse Image 
Tampering. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 18(11), 2491–2504 (2009) 
16. Li, K.F., Chen, T.S., Wu, S.C.: Image Tamper Detection and Recovery System Based on 
Discrete Wavelet Transform. In: IEEE Pacific Rim Conference on Communications, Com-
puters and Signal Processing, Canada, August 2001, vol. 1, pp. 164–167 (2001) 
17. Lee, T.Y., Lin, S.D.: Dual Watermark for Image Tamper Detection and Recovery. Pattern 
Recognition 41(11), 3497–3506 (2008) 
18. Lin, P.L., Hsieh, C.K., Huang, P.W.: A Hierarchical Digital Watermarking Method for Im-
age Tamper Detection and Recovery. Pattern Recognition 38, 2519–2529 (2005) 
19. Ritter, T.: The Great CRC Mystery. Dr. Dobb’s Journal of Software Tools 11(2), 26–34, 
76-83 (1986) 
20. Huynh-Thu, Q., Ghanbari, M.: Scope of validity of PSNR in image/video quality assess-
ment. Electronics Letters 44(13), 800–801 (2008) 

Response Time Enhancement
of Sensor Network Using the Solid State Drive
Dae-Sik Ko and Yoon-Sik Kwak
Professor, Dept. of Electronic Engineering of Mokwon University, Korea
Professor, Dept. of Computer Engineering of Chungju National University, Korea
kds@mokwon.ac.kr
Abstract. In this paper, we proposed response time enhancement of
the large-scaled WSN(wireless sensor network) using the SSD(Solid State
Drive). In the large-scaled WSN, real-time processing is very important.
We proposed to solve real-time problem by using DRAM-based SSD.
SSD is a storage device that uses DRAM or NAND Flash as primary
storage media. Since the SSD stores and accesses data directly to mem-
ory chips, which results in storage speeds far greater than conventional
magnetic storage devices(HDD). Therefore SSD can be used to solve I/O
bottleneck of the large-scaled WSN as a storage system.
1
Introduction
In recent years, Wireless Sensor Networks(WSNs) has attracted a lot of atten-
tions from researchers in both academic and industrial communities. WSNs can
be used to form the underlying sensing and network infrastructure for pervasive
computing environments. A WSN consists a collection of sensor nodes and a
sink node connected through wireless channels, and can be used to build dis-
tributed systems for data collection and processing, the functions of on-ﬁeld
signal sensing and processing, in-network data aggregation, and self-organized
wireless communication. WSNs have found many applications in diﬀerent areas,
including environmental surveillance, intelligent building, health monitoring, in-
telligent transportations, etc. [1].
The storage system of general WSN is constructed by HDD which reads/writes
data and host interface such as LAN card and control part which controls
HDD with CPU and main memory. However, since general storage uses HDD
as primary storage media and reads/writes data mechanically, speed of read-
ing/writing is very low and therefore it causes IO bottleneck.
On the other hand, since SSD(solid state drive) has no mechanical part and it
accesses data electrically, the access speed of SSD is faster than that of the HDD
and there are two types which are Flash-based SSD and DRAM-based SSD. Flash
based SSD take advantagesof nonvolatile,high reading speed, low power consump-
tion, low price relatively cause of use Flash nonvolatile memory as primary storage
media. DRAM-based SSD take advantagesof high reading and writing speed and it
needs back-up system for reliability, and it is useful for enterprise application which
is requested high speed access and 24 hours nonstop operation. [2].
C.-C. Chang et al. (Eds.): ACN 2010, CCIS 77, pp. 144–148, 2010.
c
⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010
www.ebook3000.com

Response Time Enhancement of Sensor Network Using the Solid State Drive
145
In this paper, we analyzed problems of large-scaled WSN and proposed to
solve real-time problem by using DRAM-based SSD. SSD is a storage device
that uses DRAM or NAND Flash as primary storage media. Since the SSD stores
and accesses data directly to memory chips, which results in storage speeds far
greater than conventional magnetic storage devices(HDD). Therefore SSD can
be used to solve I/O bottleneck of the large-scaled WSN as a storage system
2
Architecture and Problems of the Wireless Sensor
Network
2.1
Architecture of the WSN
Figure 1 shows an example of an architecture of the WSN. The whole system can
be regarded as a three-tiered architecture as illustrated in ﬁgure 1. The WSN
tier (denoted as WSN) provides a communication interface for node control and
is implicit part of the middleware. The server tier is illustrated in the middle
in detail and acts as the central control instance of the network. The client
tier ﬁnally holds one administrator for the network conﬁguration and multiple
applications for parallel data gathering.[1]
Fig. 1. Architecture of WSN
2.2
Problems of the Large-Scaled WSN
- Real-world Protocols: we note that, in general, there is an excellent understand-
ing of both the theoretical and practical issues related to wireless communication.
For example, it is well known how the signal strength drops over distance. Ef-
fects of signal reﬂection, scattering and fading are understood. However, when

146
D.-S. Ko and Y.-S. Kwak
building an actual WSN, many speciﬁc system, application, and cost issues also
aﬀect the communication properties of the system.
- Power Management: the energy constraint of WSN is unlikely to be solved soon
due to slow progress in developing battery capacity.
- Security and Privacy: In contrast to traditional networks, sensor nodes are
often deployed in accessible areas, presenting a risk of physical attacks. Sensor
networks interact closely with their physical environment and with people, pos-
ing additional security problems. To achieve a secure system, security must be
integrated into every component, since components designed without security
can become a point of attack.[3]
- Response time: the need of runtime support in WSN comes from the facts that
the hardware and ﬁrmware of the sensor nodes may not always provide enough
support for the implementation of the middleware services described above.
The functionalities of the runtime support in WSN include local processing
support, communication support, and storage support. In large-scaled WSN, it
is important to note that most throughput bottlenecks are not caused by disk
I/O. After tuning other system parameters to eliminate common bottlenecks in
large-scaled WSN, eventually the seek times of disk become the key problem
causing the longest delays. The mismatch between CPU and HDD processing
speeds is the root cause of system I/O bottlenecks.
3
Response Time Enhancement of the WSN by Using
DRAM-Based SSD
Common solutions to I/O bottlenecks employed by WSN administrators have
included: endless application performance tuning, server upgrades, storage up-
grades (adding cache and more HDDs), and re-writing the application.
3.1
SSD
DRAM-based SSD is a new type of the storage devices that use RAM as pri-
mary storage media. Since SSD store and access data directly on RAM chips,
which results in storage speeds far greater than conventional, magnetic storage
devices. The solution to dealing with latency is to oﬄoad ”hot ﬁles” to a faster
storage medium, such as local RAM or a SSD. By incorporating RAM-based
storage, latency is reduced by a factor of 100 and CPU cycles previously spent
waiting for data are spent processing that data. Host servers of the WSN are
able to process more transactions, reducing the number of required servers and
eliminating wasted processing capacity. [4,5,6]
Figure 2 shows an example of an architecture of the DRAM based SSD. As
shown in ﬁgure, for DRAM is volatile storage, HDD module and self-battery
system are needed for back up.
Proposed DRAM SSD architecture is designed by separating data I/O device
part and data control part, which it is diﬀerent from existing HDD architecture.
Therefore the more enhancement of CPU performance is the more enhancement
www.ebook3000.com

Response Time Enhancement of Sensor Network Using the Solid State Drive
147
Fig. 2. Architecture of the DRAM based SSD
of storage performance. And we designed proposed system’s outport with FC
(4Gbps) and NIC(10Gbps) Interface for wide bandwidth and it is provided up
to 8 - 12 interfaces. And we designed 2n+1 redundant power supply for solving
DRAM’s volatile problem and we add self battery to main board to protect data
loss in case of unexpected power shutdown.
3.2
Response Time Performance of Proposed SSD
In order to measure performance of designed DRAM SSD with 256 GB, we con-
structed experiment system using UNIX, Windows/Linux server, SAN Switch,
Table 1. Experimental results of DRAM SSD (IOPS and bandwidth)

148
D.-S. Ko and Y.-S. Kwak
Ethernet Switch. We used IOmeter as the measurement tool. This is famous
program which measures performance of storage system such as Disk. [5,6]
Table 1 shows IOPS measurement results of our DRAM SSD. We can see that
IOPS of our DRAM SSD is very fast compared to HDD and Flash SSD. Because
IOPS of the HDD is about several thousand and that of Flash SSD is also about
200,000[9].
4
Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed response time enhancement of the large-scaled WSN
(wireless sensor network) using the SSD(Solid State Drive). In the large-scaled
WSN, real-time processing is very important. In large-scaled WSN, it is im-
portant to note that most throughput bottlenecks are not caused by disk I/O.
After tuning other system parameters to eliminate common bottlenecks in large-
scaled WSN, eventually the seek times of disk become the key problem causing
the longest delays. The mismatch between CPU and HDD processing speeds is
the root cause of system I/O bottlenecks.
We proposed to solve real-time problem by using DRAM-based SSD. SSD is
a storage device that uses DRAM or NAND Flash as primary storage media.
Since the SSD stores and accesses data directly to memory chips, which results
in storage speeds far greater than conventional magnetic storage devices(HDD).
Therefore SSD can be used to solve I/O bottleneck of the large-scaled WSN as
a storage system.
Acknowledgments. The research was supported by a grant from the Small
and Medium Business Administration(Korea).
References
1. Hermann, C., Dargie, W.: Senceive: A Middleware for a Wireless Sensor Network
2. Dae-sik, K., Seung-kook, J.: Enhancement oWeb Performance Enhanf E-business
System using the SSD
3. Wang, M., Cao, J., Li, J., Dasi, S.K.: Middleware for Wireless Sensor Networks: A
Survey, http://jcst.ict.ac.cn:8080/jcst/EN/article
4. Solid Data systems, Impact of Solid-state disk on high-transaction rate databases,
Solid data systems, Inc. White paper (Febuary 2005)
5. TMS, Increase Application Performance with Solid State Disks, TMS white paper
(Febuary 2008)
6. Schulz, G.: Achieving Energy Eﬃciency using FLASH SSD, The Storage IO group
white paper (December 2007)
7. Solid Data systems, Comparison of Drives Technologies for High-Transaction
Databases, Solid Data systems, Inc. White paper (August 2007)
www.ebook3000.com

Author Index
Alisherov, Farkhod
109
Alsharif, Mohammad Reza
74
Arockiam, L.
116
Balitanas, Maricel O.
23
Bandyopadhyay, Samir Kumar
30
Bhattacharyya, Debnath
23, 30
Chang, Lin-Huang
95
Chen, Chao-Chun
42
Das, Pradip K.
9
Das, Purnendu
23
Dutta, Poulami
23
Gnanaraj, J. Isac
116
Hossain, Md. Foisal
74
Hsu, Wei-Cheng
134
Jagdale, Shantanu
124
Kang, Mikyung
1
Kim, Taek-Hun
64
Kim, Tai-hoon
23, 30, 109, 116
Ko, Dae-Sik
144
Kwak, Ho-Young
1
Kwak, Yoon-Sik
144
Lee, Ju-Hee
64
Lee, Junghoon
1
Lee, Kwang-Jo
64
Lee, Sang Joon
1
Lee, Tsung-Han
95
Li, Jian-Wei
134
Lin, Chu-Hsing
134
Lin, Lien-Fa
42
Lin, Wei-Chih
134
Liu, Jung-Chun
134
Mao, Yuxin
56
Nalbalwar, Sanjay
124
Newton, P. Calduwel
116
Park, Gyung-Leen
1
Robles, Rosslin John
30
Sadhukhan, Pampa
9
Sayyad, Munir
124
Sen, Rijurekha
9
Song, Jin-Woo
64
Sun, Xiaocui
81
Tawade, Laxman
124
Wang, Chau-Chi
95
Wang, Hsing-Weng
134
Wang, Shih-Chia
42
Wang, Zhijun
81
Yamashita, Katsumi
74
Yang, Sung-Bong
64

