
New York   Chicago   San Francisco   Lisbon   London   Madrid   Mexico City
Milan   New Delhi   San Juan   Seoul   Singapore   Sydney   Toronto
ADVERTISING
MEDIA
PLANNING
seventh edition
JACK Z. SISSORS and ROGER B. BARON

Copyright © 2010 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the United States
Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in 
a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
ISBN: 978-0-07-173890-3
MHID: 0-07-173890-8
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN: 978-0-07-170312-3,    
MHID: 0-07-170312-8.
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a 
trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the beneﬁ t of the trademark owner, with no intention of 
infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or for use in 
corporate training programs. To contact a representative please e-mail us at bulksales@mcgraw-hill.com.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGrawHill”) and its licensors reserve all rights in and 
to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to 
store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create 
derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without 
McGraw-Hill’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work 
is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WAR-
RANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM 
USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA 
HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUD-
ING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR 
PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet 
your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be 
liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages result-
ing therefrom. McGraw-Hill has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no 
circumstances shall McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or 
similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility 
of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises 
in contract, tort or otherwise.

 
iii
CONTENTS
Preface 
 
vii
Foreword by David L. Smith, CEO and Founder, 
Mediasmith, Inc. 
 
xi
CHAPTER ONE 
Introduction to Media Planning: 
The Art of Matching Media to the 
Advertiser’s Marketing Needs 
1
Media: A Message Delivery System 
 
2
Media Planning 
 
3
The Changing Face of Media Planning 
 
4
The Changing Role of Media Planners 
 
8
Classes of Media 
 
10
General Procedures in Media Planning 
 
15
Principles for Selecting Media Vehicles 
 
19
Problems in Media Planning 
 
21
CHAPTER TWO 
Sample Media Plan Presentation 
27
Background to Hypothetical Plan 
 
28
Media Objectives 
 
29
Competitive Analysis 
 
30
Target Audience Analysis 
 
34
Media Habits 
 
35
Media Selection Rationale 
 
39
Media Strategy 
 
40
Flowchart and Budget 
 
41
Post-Buy Evaluation 
 
43

iv 
Contents
CHAPTER THREE 
The Relationship Among Media, 
Advertising, and Consumers 
45
How Consumers Choose Media: Entertainment 
and Information 
 
45
Interactive Television 
 
48
Varied Relationships Between Audiences and Media 
 
48
How Consumers Perceive Digital Advertising 
 
51
How Audiences Process Information from Media 
 
51
The Media’s Importance in the Buying Process 
 
53
Media Planning and the Marketing Mix 
 
54
Exposure: The Basic Measurement of Media Audiences 
 
55
Need for Better Media Vehicle Measurements 
 
57
Response Function 
 
58
Measuring Audiences to Advertising Vehicles 
 
59
The Top Five Perennial Questions That 
Media Research Cannot Answer 
 
63
CHAPTER FOUR 
Basic Measurements and Calculations 
67
How Media Vehicles Are Measured 
 
67
Nielsen Television Ratings 
 
68
Arbitron Radio Ratings 
 
73
Magazines and Newspapers 
 
74
Internet 
 
75
Out-of-Home 
 
77
How the Data Are Interpreted 
 
77
General Uses of Vehicle Audience Measurements 
 
78
Various Concepts of Audience Measurements 
 
79
CHAPTER FIVE 
Advanced Measurements and Calculations 
105
GRPs 
 
106
Gross Impressions 
 
107
Reach 
 
110
Frequency 
 
121
Brief History of Effective Frequency 
 
132
Summary 
 
138

 
Contents 
v
CHAPTER SIX 
Marketing Strategy and Media Planning 
139
What a Media Planner Needs to Know 
 
139
Situation Analysis 
 
140
Marketing Strategy Plan 
 
141
Competitive Media Expenditure Analysis 
 
154
Analyzing the Data 
 
164
International Competitive Analysis 
 
166
Managing Media Planning and Buying 
 
167
Sources of Marketing Data 
 
168
CHAPTER SEVEN 
Strategy Planning I: Who, Where, and When 
175
Target Selection 
 
176
Where to Advertise 
 
190
When to Advertise 
 
205
CHAPTER EIGHT 
Strategy Planning II: 
Weighting, Reach, Frequency, 
and Scheduling 
209
Geographic Weighting 
 
209
Reach and Frequency 
 
223
Effective Frequency and Reach 
 
227
Final Thoughts About Reach and Frequency 
 
232
Scheduling 
 
233
CHAPTER NINE 
Selecting Media Classes: 
Intermedia Comparisons 
237
Comparing Media 
 
237
Consumer Media Classes 
 
238
Other Media 
 
267
Intermedia Comparisons for Nonmeasured Media 
 
271
Media Mix 
 
272

vi 
Contents
CHAPTER TEN 
Principles of Planning Media Strategy 
277
Media Strategy Concepts 
 
277
What Media Planners Should Know Before Starting to Plan 
 
279
Other Elements of Media Strategy 
 
283
Creative Media Strategy 
 
286
Choosing Media Strategies 
 
294
Channel Planning Software 
 
300
CHAPTER ELEVEN 
Evaluating and Selecting Media Vehicles 
303
Determining Media Values for Magazines 
 
304
Target Reach, Composition, and Cost-Efficiency 
 
304
Other Media Values 
 
311
Qualitative Values of Media 
 
319
Ad Positions Within Media 
 
324
Internet Media Vehicles 
 
327
The Continuously Evolving Online World 
 
341
CHAPTER TWELVE 
Media Costs and Buying Problems 
343
Some Considerations in Planning and Buying Media 
 
344
Media Costs 
 
349
Media-Buying Problems 
 
369
CHAPTER THIRTEEN Setting and Allocating the Budget 
379
Setting the Budget 
 
380
Allocating the Advertising Budget 
 
389
CHAPTER FOURTEEN Testing, Experimenting, and Media Planning 
397
Tests and Experiments 
 
397
Test Marketing 
 
401
Media Testing 
 
410
Media Translations 
 
415
Appendix: Media-Planning Resources on the Internet 
 
421
Glossary 
 
429
Index 
 
471

 
vii
FOREWORD
T
hroughout history, the form of mass media has been determined and lim-
ited by the technology of the age. In 1439, Gutenberg’s printing press first 
delivered words to the masses on paper. Until the 1950s, short personal 
messages were printed on strips of paper that were pasted to forms and 
handed to recipients by Western Union delivery boys. The radio first delivered 
audio through a large piece of furniture in the living room, only to be eventually 
replaced by Sony’s Walkman delivering audio directly into the ear. Sight, sound, 
and motion used to be delivered primarily at the local movie theater or on a small 
black-and-white television screen in the living room.
 
The technology limited each of these forms to a single type of content: printed 
words, sound, still pictures, and moving pictures, at first in unnatural black and 
white. Each was limited to one-way communication from the few who produced 
the content to the masses who received it.
 
It could be argued that the digital revolution and the Internet changed all that—
words, pictures, moving pictures, and interactivity are all just different kinds of 
digital media that have converged on the three screens of video: the television set, 
the personal computer, and the nearly ubiquitous mobile cell phone. The nature of 
the content has changed also. In addition to professionally produced material, user-
generated content populates YouTube, social networks, blogs, Wikipedia, Twitter, 
. . . and new media forms are emerging every day. The Internet gives users the abil-
ity to search for and retrieve in seconds information about virtually any subject on 
earth, creating the opportunity to deliver advertising to people with a demonstrated 
interest in the product or service.
 
But the digital world is constantly changing. Media that were new in 2003, such 
as MySpace, are already beginning to show their age, challenged by newer options 
like Facebook, LinkedIn, and Twitter. Search engines like Google and Bing, now 
key drivers of online marketing, are vulnerable to start-ups that offer still further 
improvements. The list could go on and on. Furthermore, the research tools avail-
able to evaluate online media are evolving, with enhancements coming out seem-
ingly every month.
PREFACE

viii 
Preface
 
Given this constant state of change, the reader might reasonably ask, “How can 
the seventh edition of a 30-year-old text remain relevant to today’s media profes-
sional?” The answer lies in the characteristics of the traditional media that con-
tinue to meet the fundamental marketing needs of advertisers. They must deliver 
a message to a large percent of the population in a single day, give a piece of paper 
or a product sample to the residents of a community, quickly create awareness of a 
new product nationally or in one market, reach people in their car on the way to the 
store, deliver a detailed message to the people most likely to use a product, place the 
message within a compatible editorial environment, or quickly reach a large per-
centage of a niche marketing target, to name just a few of the nearly infinite mar-
keting needs.
 
Digital media cannot replace the ability of traditional media to meet all these 
needs. They will supplement traditional media’s capabilities, and in a few cases may 
even replace them, but only for those products and services where it makes market-
ing sense. Quick-serve restaurants, automobiles, and hotels have different market-
ing needs that the planner must match to the capabilities of the different media, 
regardless of whether they are traditional or digital.
 
As planners evaluate alternatives, they will rely on the same fundamental mea-
sures that Jack Sissors wrote about 30 years ago: coverage (the percent of the adver-
tiser’s target in the medium’s audience), composition (the percent of the medium’s 
audience in the advertiser’s target), selectivity (composition of the medium com-
pared to the population universe), campaign reach/frequency, effectiveness (how-
ever that is defined), and cost-efficiency. Planners must understand these basic 
characteristics of all media, including the new online venues, to ensure the most 
effective use of the advertising budget.
 
Accordingly, this seventh edition will continue to focus on the fundamen-
tals of media planning, with an emphasis on traditional media that continue to 
receive the great bulk of advertising dollars. It will cover the basics of planning 
and buying online display advertising (banners and rich media), and it will give an 
overview of planning and buying search advertising on sites such as Google and 
Bing. But a detailed discussion of the many new forms, from mobile to Twitter to 
social media to blogs is simply not possible, both because of the space required 
and because anything said today in the spring of 2010 is sure to be obsolete over 
the 10-year life of this book. We will, however, show examples of how the new 
media can be creatively used to enhance the effectiveness of advertising delivered 
by traditional media.

 
Preface 
ix
 
So it is in this spirit that I begin the seventh edition of Advertising Media 
Planning. I am indebted to the many people across the industry who have helped 
me with this project—especially to my wife, Margi, who put up with me disappear-
ing into the den for hours at a time, and to the people in the media department at 
DRAFTFCB Chicago, who continue to inspire me with their intelligence, creativity, 
and devotion to the media planning art.
Roger B. Baron

This page intentionally left blank 

 
xi
FOREWORD
I
t is said by many that Erwin Ephron invented media planning. This was back in 
the 1970s when, as those of us who were in the business remember, media had 
backroom status in agencies. Erwin said in the foreword to the last edition of 
this book, “For decades planning media has had a . . . modest persona.” This was 
true for long after the media planning concept was first practiced, but as he says, 
“That has changed . . . today media is one of the best career paths in advertising.” 
Or, as far as I am concerned, any practice that is marketing related.
 
But the role that Mr. Ephron described, that of planning and strategy being the 
reason “an agency can provide continuity in brand advertising management,” has 
been achieved today. Mr. Ephron’s many other thoughts on media can be read on 
his website at www.ephrononmedia.com.
 
So if you are opening this book to begin a career in media planning, further your 
professional or academic education, or use it as a tool to teach others, you will find 
it instructive and hopefully complete. Media options change so rapidly, even expo-
nentially, but the fundamentals you’ll find here are timeless.
How Has Media Planning Changed?
The first serious moves for digital advertising as we know it today started in 1995 
with Yahoo! (portal), I/PRO (metrics), and InfoSeek (search). But a bubble had to 
burst and then recover before there was enough consumer critical mass for media 
planners to take the Internet seriously. Today, options include Web display (HTML 
banners, rich media, flash, and streaming audio and video), search, social media, 
emerging media technologies, and many others we cannot begin to foresee, which 
will eventually become commonplace by the time you read this book.
Digitization
We have gotten to the point where the digitization of TV is a fait accompli. The way 
three-dimensional television will further unfold, whether the medium will have the 
ability to deliver a custom creative message to individual homes or neighborhoods, 
whether it will be primarily delivered through cable companies, phone companies, 

xii 
Foreword
or Internet service providers—these are among the many interesting battles that 
have yet to be fought during the age of digitization. The fastest growing of all digital 
media types are digital out-of-home displays in gas stations, shopping malls, retail 
stores, and so on. Other media, in fact, all media will leverage all of their digital 
capabilities in the upcoming years.
 
Digital advertising also brings with it new challenges when it comes to met-
rics and measurement. Historically, media research has emphasized the front-end 
metrics of audience and audience effectiveness. Back-end metrics have been left to 
market research (attitude, usage, and awareness research) and the world of direct 
response for sales purposes. The Web allows for more sophisticated options on the 
front end, although getting industry agreement on a standard way of measuring 
these options is still a challenge.
 
Types of targeting abound. Just a short time ago, targeting was primarily about 
demographics. It still is, especially in traditional media, but the types of targeting 
available in the digital space include demographic, product usage, sociographic (life-
style/psychographic), contextual, behavioral, relevancy, social (birds of a feather), 
retargeting people who have previously responded, keyword search, and more.
 
Digitization is inherently about technology; media planners today must be tech-
nologically astute. They must know how to deploy ad-serving tags, understand the 
value of rich media versus banners, and be able to advise creative groups on these 
issues. They must understand the technical considerations regarding banner spec-
ification and be prepared to lead the team, including the creative group, account 
management, and clients, on their execution.
 
The media planner must also understand the back-end metrics that define 
return on investment (ROI), because they represent the success or failure of a 
campaign in the eyes of the advertiser and the agency. These do not include just 
sales, but engagement metrics such as Cost-Per-action, CPinquiry, CPdownload, 
CPregistration, CPvisitation, or CP whatever other metrics are deemed relevant.
Search
Search is today the largest and fastest-growing part of the interactive marketplace, 
yet it is not necessarily controlled by the media planner or even the chief marketing 
officer (CMO). For many companies, the website and search are the responsibility 
of the information technology (IT) department. We expect this to change over time 
as advertisers recognize their importance to the overall marketing plan.
 
Emerging media technologies abound. It is problematic to predict which will 
receive critical mass, but for some the future is clear. There is not much adver-
tiser acceptance yet, but mobile has consumer critical mass and is sure to grow. 
Applications, also known as apps, widgets, or gadgets, have the potential to become 

 
Foreword 
xiii
major advertising units. We are also sure to see video everywhere (on smart phones, 
mobile, and out of home). Nevertheless, television is expected to remain the princi-
pal place where video is watched, although the ways in which it is delivered to your 
living room or family room may change.
 
Social media has become a fact of life for the advertiser. The biggest aspect of 
social media turns out not to be as a major advertising medium, however. It is that 
consumers now feel they have permission to comment on everything from ad cam-
paigns to products and services to corporate policy. The consumer engagement in 
communications will probably affect creative more than media, although the media 
planners’ tools for measurement should come in handy here.
How Has Media Planning Stayed the Same?
As much as it is popular to talk about how media has changed or evolved, it is 
important to realize how much has remained the same—the basics and fundamen-
tals of media planning still need to be practiced. It has never been more important 
to understand who your target audience is and then to properly implement the plan 
to reach them. Accurately translating the advertiser’s marketing objectives into 
the advertising message and then into the media objectives and strategy remains 
crucial.
 
While many new metrics for measuring media effectiveness have been proposed, 
such as the continued “fuzzy” metric of engagement, tools like reach (how many 
of your target has the opportunity to see your message) and frequency (how many 
times are they exposed) remain the best way to compare the impact of alternative 
plans. Reach and frequency and their building block, the gross rating point (GRP), 
are expected to survive in the new world of digital metrics, as are important con-
cepts like audience composition and the value of a medium’s content. Digital media 
have learned from their traditional media forbearers the value of having commonly 
accepted, standard ways of defining and measuring advertising exposure.
 
At first, the Web planners resisted standards; they wanted to talk about the 
improved metrics that the Web could provide. Over time, the digital industry has 
come to realize that standards do not reduce the value of the new media. Instead, 
they bring comparability and order to the marketplace so that all are talking 
the same language and are on the same page. Efforts to standardize metrics are 
expected to continue through important organizations such as the Interactive 
Advertising Bureau (IAB), American Association of Advertising Agencies (4As), the 
Media Rating Council (MRC), and many others. A budding media planner could do 
no better for his or her career than to get involved with these organizations as they 

xiv 
Foreword
work to develop standards. It not only represents a great learning opportunity, but 
also provides exposure to the leaders in the industry.
What About a Career in Media Planning?
As mentioned earlier, this book is a great resource if you are contemplating a career 
in media.
 
Starting a career as a media planner can prepare you for many different market-
ing and advertising roles, including that of a media strategist, media researcher, or 
media director on either the agency or client side. Many go on to successful careers 
in advertising sales. More than a few CMOs had their first job in media.
 
Some benefits you gain with a career in media planning include the following:
1. An understanding of marketing and media data and analytics. The business 
world is driven by data today; data is the new creative in the media business.
2. An understanding of marketing strategy.
3. An understanding of the creative process and the knowledge of what works 
and what doesn’t. Even CEOs need this.
4. Some great lessons on dealing with others. Everything is a learning experience, 
a negotiation experience, or both.
5. How to prepare an effective and persuasive written or oral presentation. After 
all, you have to sell your work every day.
As a media planner and buyer, you will be responsible for ensuring that the sub-
stantial amounts of money you are entrusted with are properly spent and accounted 
for. Beyond that, you will come to understand the value of honesty and fair dealing 
as you work with your client, your coworkers, and the media sales representatives.
 
Enjoy this book—it is a great resource. For those of us who have spent a career 
in media and love it, the book Jack Sissors started has been and always will be a 
primary reference because of its solid and in-depth information on everything you 
want to know about advertising media planning. This new edition is expected to 
carry on that tradition. Thanks to Roger Baron for making this happen.
David L. Smith
CEO and Founder
Mediasmith, Inc.

 
1
CHAPTER ONE
Introduction to Media Planning
The Art of Matching Media to 
the Advertiser’s Marketing Needs
I
t was the client’s annual advertising review at a large Midwestern advertising 
agency. The creative team was presenting digital animatics of the new campaign 
from the flat-screen monitor on the wall. The media director was glancing at the 
BlackBerry in his lap below the table, waiting for a response from ESPN about 
the base package for this client. The light in the corner was still blinking green as 
the creative director finished up, but he could see from the smile on the client’s 
face that it was a success. The creative director had sold the campaign. Now it was 
media’s turn.
 
The client turned to the media director and said, “This creative is great. Now 
I want to know how you’re going to spend the $100 million I’m giving you so my 
customers will see it. I want to know what my competition is doing, who you are 
targeting, what media you are going to use and why, where it will run, and when it 
will run. I want to know how many of the target audience will see the campaign and 
how often they will see it. But mainly, I want to see how you plan to creatively inte-
grate this campaign across all the different platforms we have today—the conven-
tional TV set, the PC, the online search, and the mobile, social, and other oppor-
tunities from emerging media that didn’t exist just a few years ago. If you make a 
good case, I’ll authorize the $100 million. So let’s see your media plan.”
 
A bit overdrawn perhaps, but it is the job of the media planner to answer these 
questions and to develop a plan that delivers the creative message to the target as 
effectively and efficiently as possible. It is a fascinating job that combines market-
ing, psychology, show business, law, research, technology, and the planner’s sensi-
tive, creative insights into the human condition. It has the planner playing the dual 
roles of both salesperson and client—sometimes alternating between the two from 
one minute to the next. In the sales role, planners must convince the advertiser 

2 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
and his or her own agency team that they have developed the most effective media 
plan. Then with a ring of the telephone, a planner becomes the client of the media 
sales representatives who want their website, cable television network, magazine, or 
other medium included on the plan—that is, included so they receive an order for 
some of that $100 million budget. These are the outward manifestations of the core 
job of the media planner: to make the most effective use of the advertiser’s media 
budget.
Media: A Message Delivery System
Media exist primarily to deliver message content—entertainment, information, and 
advertisements to a vast audience. Media should be thought of as both carriers and 
delivery systems. They carry advertisements and deliver them to individuals who 
buy or choose media first on the basis of the kind and quality of entertainment and 
information and second on the kinds of advertisements they deliver. Advertisers 
find media to be convenient and relatively inexpensive delivery systems compared 
to direct mail or other channels that do not carry entertainment and information.
 
This definition applies to online media as well as traditional mass media—the 
banner ads on websites and the sponsored links that accompany paid search key-
words serve the same function as the commercials and printed advertising that 
accompany information and entertainment in traditional media.
 
It is important to recognize that consumers have specialized needs that media 
can meet, such as providing information about certain kinds of products and 
brands. Readers can browse a magazine or newspaper, stopping to look at any 
advertisement that seems interesting. When there is a clear need for information, 
15 minutes spent with Google, Bing, Wikipedia, and the other search engines will 
give a person top-line knowledge about any topic on earth.
 
Advertisers who want to reach both a mass and a specialized audience find it is 
more expensive to buy media that reach the specialized audience. However, no mat-
ter which kind of audience advertisers want to reach, it is imperative that someone 
plans the purchase of media as far ahead of publishing or broadcast dates as pos-
sible. Advertisers cannot afford to buy media impulsively or capriciously. Therefore, 
the planning function is a major operation in advertising and media agencies and 
at client companies. There is too much money involved to not plan ahead of time, 
and this book concentrates on the planning function.
 
Two words are sometimes used as if they mean the same thing: medium 
(the plural is media) and vehicle. They are not exactly the same. A medium 
refers to a class of carriers such as television, newspapers, magazines, and 

 
Introduction to Media Planning 
3
so on. In other words, it refers to a group of carriers that have similar char-
acteristics. A vehicle is an individual carrier within a medium. For example, 
the website CNN.com is a vehicle within the online medium. “60 Minutes” 
is a vehicle within television. Martha Stewart Living and People are vehicles 
within the magazine medium.
Media Planning
Media planning consists of the series of decisions made to answer the question, 
“What are the best means of delivering advertisements to prospective purchasers 
of my brand or service?” This definition is rather general, but it provides a broad 
picture of what media planning is all about.
 
A media planner attempts to answer the following specific questions:
How many prospects (for purchasing a given brand of product) do I need or 
• 
can I afford to reach?
In which media should I place ads?
• 
How many times a month should prospects see each ad?
• 
During which months should ads appear?
• 
Where should the ads appear? In which markets and regions?
• 
How much money should be spent in each medium?
• 
When all the questions have been asked and the decisions made, the recommenda-
tions and rationales are organized into a presentation (usually PowerPoint) and a 
written document called a media plan. The plan, when approved by the advertiser, 
becomes a blueprint for the selection and use of media. Once the advertiser has 
approved the plan, it also serves as a guide for actually purchasing the media.
 
It would be a mistake, however, to think of media planning as nothing more 
than finding answers to a list of questions about media. Such a view is too narrow 
to provide the necessary perspective. Rather, it is better to assume that each ques-
tion represents certain kinds of problems that need to be solved. Some problems 
are relatively simple, such as, “On which day of the week should television commer-
cials be shown?” Other problems are much more difficult, such as, “In which media 
will ads most affect the prospect’s buying behavior, resulting in the most additional 
sales?”
 
Media planning should be thought of as a process or a series of decisions that 
provides the best possible answers to a set of problems. It is the planner’s recom-
mended way to balance the many trade-offs within a given budget. A planner might 

4 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
find that a recommended solution to a given marketing problem does not make 
sense when other factors are considered. Finding the best solutions to a set of mar-
keting problems represents the main task of planners. That is what makes media 
planning such an intellectually challenging activity. In a sense, media planners are 
marketing professionals with media expertise.
The Changing Face of Media Planning
Some marketers believe the traditional media forms such as television, newspapers, 
magazines, and radio are passé. This is a mistake. Although the Internet as a whole 
is now accessible to 86 percent of the U.S. population,1 its fragmentation across 
thousands of sites (the so-called Long Tail) makes it costly to deliver advertising to 
large numbers of people with enough frequency to communicate the message. Mass 
media, especially the top-rated television programs and large-circulation magazines 
such as People, continue to define popular culture in the United States and in the 
world. Mass media are essential to create broad awareness of new products and 
services and to reinforce awareness of existing brands. But today’s consumers want 
more information than can be communicated with the traditional media. Because 
they expect to get this information from the Internet, marketing plans must con-
sider how this medium, and especially search tools such as Google and Bing, will be 
used to build on the awareness that has been created with mass advertising.
 
At the same time, advertisers want to reinforce awareness with frequent brand 
mentions in media that are part of the target audience’s daily life. Exhibit 1-1 on 
pages 6–7 presents the example of Coors Light’s use of ESPN cable television, ESPN: 
The Magazine, mobile advertising on cell phones, and online exposure to men 
of legal drinking age during the annual personnel draft of the National Football 
League (NFL).
 
Traditionally, media planning has asked questions revolving around how media 
can reach the right persons. The “right” persons came from broadly aggregated 
data, such as “women ages 18–49” or “men ages 25–54.” But these broad demo-
graphic characterizations were developed to accommodate the sale of broadcast 
media, radio, and television, where the available research dictates that age and gen-
der demographics are the currency of a buy. They obscure an almost unlimited 
array of lifestyles, interests, and even media habits that are relevant to marketers 
if they want to deliver advertising to their best prospects. Today’s media planning 
requires planners to identify smaller groups of product users and the media that 
1.  Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, Spring 2009.

 
Introduction to Media Planning 
5
best reach them. Online advertisers can use behavioral targeting to direct ads to 
people who visit related websites. Sponsored search on Google and many other 
venues allows delivery of advertising to people who, by definition, have shown an 
interest in a product or service.
 
Technology has made it economical to deliver program content that appeals 
to smaller and smaller groups of people. Audience fragmentation has become the 
dominant characteristic of media, especially television, in the 21st century. Today 
the average home can receive 119 channels, up from 61 channels in 2000.2 Cable 
television networks, delivered either by wire or by satellite, can now be seen in 90 
percent of U.S. households.3 This proliferation of viewing choices has significantly 
eroded the audience to the traditional broadcast networks, but total hours of view-
ing have remained essentially constant.
 
The result is a splintering of the audience among channels whose content may or 
may not be relevant to advertisers. For example, marketers of vacation destinations 
will certainly advertise on the Travel Channel, but the majority of their customers 
never watch it. Although the target audience composition of the Travel Channel 
is very high (just about all the viewers are interested in travel), its coverage is very 
low—there are a great many travelers who never watch the Travel Channel. The 
planner’s challenge is to develop a balanced plan that includes some vehicles that 
offer high coverage to ensure every product user will see the message, and others 
with high composition that will minimize waste. This coverage/composition trade-
off will be a recurring theme throughout this book.
 
The expansion of video content to pre-roll commercials before streaming video 
on the PC, mobile cell phones, and other platforms will further fragment the audi-
ence into hundreds, if not thousands, of video sources that reflect the media equiv-
alent of what has been called the Long Tail. The term was first coined by Chris 
Anderson in a Wired magazine article in October 2004. It expresses the concept, 
exploited by Amazon.com and other online retailers, that business can make a 
profit by selling relatively small quantities of a large number of items, versus the tra-
ditional model that relies on quantity sales of a relatively short product line. Applied 
to media, it means that an advertiser needs to spread the message across many 
small channels to reach the widely scattered audience. The typical cable advertiser 
will buy time on 20 to 30 cable networks in addition to schedules on the broader- 
reach broadcast networks.
2.  Nielsen Television Audience 2007, updated June 26, 2009.
3.  The Nielson Company, ADS Counts, March 2009.

6 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Coors Light Beer’s Use of Online and Mobile Internet 
to Extend the Impact of Traditional Media
To kick off the summer, Coors Light used its status as the official beer of the NFL to 
connect the brand to the NFL Draft. The intent was to increase exposure during the 
off-season through TV, digital, mobile, outdoor, and on-site hospitality. So as the exclu-
sive presenting sponsor of the draft on ESPN and the NFL Network, Coors Light ran 
NFL-themed creative and received in-program features and enhancements.
Mobile alerts were created to provide customized content on players and teams, 
• 
and they played a key role in keeping on-the-go fans informed while reinforcing 
Coors Light’s official sponsor status.
Through NFL.com, ESPN.com, and Yahoo Sports, customized video features were 
• 
deployed, reinforcing the branded messaging present across other media. These 
included out-of-home advertising placements, collateral materials in restaurants 
and bars, and the appearance of retired NFL players in drinking establishments 
to promote and drive traffic to the NFL-themed Coors Light website, while raising 
awareness of Coors Light’s NFL Draft partnership.
Hospitality events for distributors and retailers were hosted in New York, includ-
• 
ing a flag football game with retail partners as players and retired NFL athletes as 
coaches.
EXHIBIT 1-1
Source: MillerCoors LLC. Used with permission. Image 
quality is due to the requirements of the medium.

 
Introduction to Media Planning 
7
Source: MillerCoors LLC. Used with permission. Image quality is due to 
the requirements of the medium.
Coors Light sponsored 
• 
ESPN: The Magazine events and an EA Sports luncheon dur-
ing the draft weekend, providing consumers access to Coors Light products, event 
tickets, and an opportunity to meet NFL players.
At the NFL Draft event, Coors Light hosted interactive press conference booths 
• 
on-site. For those not able to attend, remote events were hosted for the New York 
Giants and Jets, including watching parties at respective stadiums and several 
Dave & Buster’s restaurants in the New York area as well as team training facility 
locations.
Results
The campaign was seen as a big success. Hundreds of thousands of individuals 
signed up to receive mobile SMS alerts, and millions of branded alerts were sent out 
over the draft weekend. In total, Coors Light received tens of millions of impressions 
across all NFL Draft–related media.
 
A regional manager of a major retail chain responded positively to the overall NFL 
Draft experience, “Wow, it was awesome. Everyone loved it and would love to do more 
things like this. It was by far the best thing we have done as a team in a very long 
time.”

8 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
The Changing Role of Media Planners
As a result of technological advancements and audience fragmentation, the role of 
media planners has changed in advertising and media agencies. Today, media plan-
ning ranks in importance along with marketing and creative planning, but in the 
early days of advertising agency operations, media planning consisted of simple, 
clerical tasks. There were fewer media available in those days, and little research on 
media audiences had been done to guide planners in decision making.
 
Today, planning has become much more complex and important. Planners must 
have a greater knowledge base from which to formulate media plans. They not only 
must know more about media, which have increased tremendously in number over 
the past 10 years, but also must know how the media plan can contribute to the 
overall marketing plan. And most important, planners must have an almost intui-
tive sense of their target’s life so they can select media that will expose the adver-
tising at the most opportune time. This makes media planning today a more chal-
lenging, but also a far more creative, process than ever before.
 
Exhibit 1-2 presents a campaign created by McCann Erickson, Detroit, the ad 
agency for Travel Michigan (the state department responsible for promoting tour-
ism to Michigan) as a good example of this. As part of a multimedia effort, the 
group ran advertising on the sides of tour buses in Chicago, knowing that peo-
ple who visited the city would be good candidates for extending their vacation to 
include neighboring Michigan. Their marketing rationale follows:
At the heart of the Pure Michigan campaign is a simple idea: Your time off should 
feel a world away from your everyday life. Applying the idea to out-of-home gave 
the state of Michigan a powerful tool for drawing a contrast between daily life and 
the idealized vacation getaway: putting a little piece of Pure Michigan right in the 
middle of the everyday world. Whether alongside a suburban interstate, on a city 
wallscape, or wrapped around a downtown Chicago tour bus, each out-of-home ad 
showcases a glimpse of Michigan’s natural beauty. This startling contrast creates an 
oasis-like feel in the middle of an ordinary day—giving consumers a sample of what 
their Michigan vacation will feel like.
  What brought about this need for a broader knowledge base? Foremost was the 
rise of the marketing concept, which changed media planning from an isolated 
activity to one closely related to marketing planning. In fact, one way to evaluate 
a media plan is to measure how effectively it helps attain the advertiser’s market-
ing objectives. Another cause of the change was the development of new and more 
definitive media audience research techniques. As a result, more research is avail-
able to help planners choose from myriad alternatives.

 
Introduction to Media Planning 
9
 
The change is also due to the universal availability of the Internet and low-cost, 
high-speed computers that make routine the physical acquisition and manipulation 
of vast amounts of data. The Microsoft Excel spreadsheet is the workbench that 
planners use to compare and cost out media alternatives. Planners are expected to 
have a thorough knowledge of this tool, including the most commonly used func-
tions and the four methods of database management (sort, filter, subtotal, and pivot 
table). Finally, the Microsoft PowerPoint presentation system is used to develop the 
presentation that will ultimately sell the plan to the client.
 
Media planning, then, is not so much a matter of being able to answer such rela-
tively simple questions as where to place advertisements or how many advertise-
ments to run each week. It is a matter of proving that optimal decisions were made 
under a given set of marketing circumstances. Advertisers demand such explana-
tions, and media planners must be able to provide them. Today’s media planners 
have changed as requirements for planning have changed. The new planner must 
have a breadth of knowledge, marketing understanding, research familiarity, com-
puter literacy, creative planning awareness, and media acumen to do the job com-
petently. It is within this framework that media planning now takes place.
Michigan Tourism Out-of-Home Tour Bus Advertising
Source: Travel Michigan. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 1-2

10 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Classes of Media
Planners like to separate media into various classes as a form of shorthand for the 
capabilities and characteristics that derive from their physical form. Typically, plan-
ners identify traditional media, nontraditional media, online media, and specialized 
media. However, even these distinctions break down with the convergence of media 
forms. Video is displayed on three screens: the television set, the personal computer 
in the form of streaming video, and the mobile platform that displays information 
and video on the cell phone. Magazines and even newspapers (their news content) 
are delivered electronically, posing a threat to the advertiser-supported business 
model that has sustained them for 100 years. Digital billboards vastly expand the 
capabilities of the oldest mass medium.
 
In the interest of convenience and common usage, we will stay with the four-
way classification: traditional mass media, nontraditional media, digital media, and 
specialized media.
Traditional Mass Media
Mass media such as newspapers, magazines, radio, and television are especially 
well suited for delivering advertisements—as well as news, entertainment, and 
educational content—to a widespread general (or mass) audience. Planners find 
mass media valuable because (1) such media are able to quickly deliver large audi-
ences at a relatively low cost, (2) they can deliver advertisements to special kinds of 
audiences who are attracted to each medium’s editorial or programming, and (3) 
they tend to develop strong loyalties among audiences who return to their favorite 
medium with a high degree of regularity. Over the years, traditional mass media 
have developed systems and practices that respond directly and efficiently to the 
marketing needs of advertisers. They get the bulk of the advertising dollars, and 
they are the meat and potatoes of media planning. Online and the new digital 
media are joining them, but as of this writing, they have a long way to go before 
they will replace traditional media.
 
Television is the traditional mass medium that most people think of first. The 
digital revolution has resulted in a convergence of platforms on which people watch 
their favorite programs. While we may still call it television, video is a more appro-
priate term, with the only difference being the platform on which it is displayed. 
Nielsen refers to the “Three Screens” of video: conventional television, streaming 
video displayed on a computer screen, and mobile that displays video content on 
a cell phone screen. Although there may be little difference to the viewers, there 
are substantial differences in the way their audiences are measured and in the way 
advertising is planned and bought.

 
Introduction to Media Planning 
11
 
Media planners, however, also know that mass media have their limitations in 
delivering advertising messages. The most serious is that mass media audiences do 
not see, hear, or read a medium solely because of the advertising content. Media 
vary in their ability to expose both editorial and advertising material.
 
Broadcast media, such as radio and television, are seldom sought out by consum-
ers for the advertisements alone. Broadcast commercials have an intrusive charac-
ter, breaking into the play or action of a program and compelling some attention 
to the advertising message. Whether any given viewer will or will not watch a par-
ticular commercial is determined more by the ingenuity and value of the message 
than by its appearance on an interesting program.
 
As of March 2010, 36 percent of U.S. homes have a digital video recorder 
(DVR),4 and on playback, most viewers skip the commercials of programs they have 
recorded. However, this negative consequence on ad exposure affects primarily 
scripted high-rated prime-time programs, daytime soaps, and late-night entertain-
ment. Very few people record news, sports, most cable channels, and syndicated 
programs like “Oprah” and “Access Hollywood.” And even for the highly recorded 
prime-time programs, the impact of DVRs has been greatly mitigated by the indus-
try shift to the C3 rating, which reports the audience to the average commercial 
minute watched at normal speed live or within three days of telecast. Much more 
about this later on.
 
Newspapers have news, entertainment, information, and catalog values for their 
readers. A newspaper generally has excellent readership of local news editorial and 
advertising material, serving as a buying guide for readers who are looking for many 
different kinds of products. People often check newspaper ads immediately before 
their regular food shopping day to find the best grocery bargains. For frequently 
purchased products, where prices are prominently displayed, newspapers can be a 
very effective selling medium.
 
Surprisingly, newspaper circulation is up 7.4 percent according to the latest fig-
ures (2008 daily circulation: 50.7 million versus 47.2 million in 2000, according to 
the Editor and Publisher International Year Book). However, advertising revenue 
is down dramatically due to the shift of classified advertising to the Internet. As 
of summer 2009, ad revenue to local newspapers was 12.0 billion, down 2 percent 
from $12.2 billion in 2000, according to Nielsen Monitor-Plus. Flat revenue after 10 
years of rising costs has forced bankruptcies, led to editorial staff cutbacks, reduced 
publishing days, and other problems. Despite this severe challenge to its business 
model, the newspaper remains a viable media option that continues to offer good 
4.  The Nielsen Company, April 2010.

12 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
value to advertisers. The medium will be presented in this book with the same 
capabilities as it has in the past.
 
Newspapers are relatively untargeted mass media. Magazines, on the other 
hand, are much more selective in their ability to precisely target advertising expo-
sures. Some, such as fashion, home, and special-interest publications, are bought as 
much for their advertising as for their editorial matter. Other more general-interest 
publications, such as newsweeklies and personality and sports magazines, appeal 
to readers who are looking for interesting articles and stories rather than product 
information.
 
Billboards are the oldest form of traditional media. They offer the opportunity 
to reach consumers immediately before they enter a retail store, provide reminder 
advertising, and have been proven to create broad, immediate brand awareness of 
new products. Unfortunately, the medium has long suffered from inadequate mea-
surement. The Traffic Audit Bureau, using GPS technology, aims to replace the old 
traffic count with modern measurement that they hope will allow the medium to be 
planned in a way similar to broadcast. We’ll discuss this topic in more detail later.
 
Obviously, the creative quality of the commercial or advertisement affects its 
impact on the consumer and the numbers of consumers who will read, see, or hear 
it. This is true regardless of which medium is used.
Nontraditional Media
Traditional mass media all engage in one-way communication—from the source 
to great numbers of viewers, listeners, and readers using technology that has been 
around for decades. Almost any other innovative way of delivering ad messages to 
consumers is considered a nontraditional medium. These media disseminate adver-
tising messages through means not usually called media. For example, the combi-
nation of magazines and sales promotion is sometimes called nontraditional media, 
even though sales promotion has not historically been categorized as a medium. 
Digital advertising, though certainly not traditional, is generally viewed in its own 
category.
 
Nontraditional media include the vast array of out-of-home venues where the 
advertising will stand out from its competition. In addition to providing a place for 
advertising, they also satisfy the need for additional revenue from companies that 
have exposure to the public and feel that their unique location offers an opportu-
nity to sell advertising. The most commonly used nontraditional media include 
television screens in airport waiting areas, elevators, the top of gas pumps, in doc-
tor’s offices, and any other place where a video screen will display content to the 
public. Nontraditional media also include posters in health clubs, signage on a golf 
course, and banners at public events. Some locations, such as the walls of public 

 
Introduction to Media Planning 
13
restrooms, the floor of grocery stores, and overhead luggage bins of commercial 
airliners may be driven more by a proprietor’s desire for additional income than by 
the advertiser’s need for an alternative venue.
 
Many media planners recommend using nontraditional media, but there have 
been some problems in determining what the advertiser receives for the money. 
The problems are caused by the lack of continuing measurements of the audience 
delivered by these less-established media. In addition, what information does exist 
is typically provided by the media themselves, raising questions about its accuracy 
and objectivity. In most instances, planners have to guesstimate the sizes of audi-
ences. The Digital Place-based Advertising Association (www.ovab.org) has devel-
oped measurement standards that are intended to resolve or at least mitigate these 
problems.
Online Media
The proliferation of online media options in the last 10 years justifies its own clas-
sification. It includes any communications medium where there is a real-time inter-
action between the user and the content producer via the Internet. The content 
is accessed with a Web browser or device functioning as a Web browser. So this 
includes conventional websites viewed on a personal computer; streaming video; 
social media such as Facebook or LinkedIn; search engine marketing (SEM) with 
Google, Bing, or others; Web-enabled cell phones; long-form high-definition video 
delivered to a television set functioning as a computer monitor; and other online 
forms that are sure to be developed after this book has gone to press.
 
The fundamental principles of online planning are the same as for traditional 
media, but there are two schools of thought regarding where it fits in the media 
department organization. One approach is to think of online as simply another 
medium to be planned by the traditional media planning group. This has the 
advantage of consolidating all media planning in the hands of a single person 
or group, allowing them to choose whatever media make the most sense for the 
advertiser (sometimes referred to as “media agnostic” planning). The downside of 
this approach is that online media and measurement tools change so rapidly that 
it takes full-time involvement to stay current. In the online world, six months is a 
long time.
 
The other approach is to create a separate online unit within the media depart-
ment or even as an outside company specializing in online media planning and 
buying. Although this group might be organized by client, their day-to-day involve-
ment with the medium and support from others in the group who can answer 
questions allow these specialists to do a better job of planning online display and 
search advertising than is possible by a generalist. On the other hand, specialists 

14 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
must guard against becoming narrow advocates of online in a world where adver-
tisers are looking for the best media to meet their marketing objectives, regardless 
of which that turns out to be.
 
In the experience of David L. Smith, president of Mediasmith, the practice is 
evenly split: “Some have separate groups within a media department. Some are 
integrated and some are a separate company. Take your pick. There is no most.”
Specialized Media
Special-interest consumer magazines appeal to specific reader interests such as ski-
ing, money management, photography, or antiques. These magazines are read as 
much for their advertising as they are for their editorial content. Therefore, these 
magazines often attract readers who purchase the magazine not only for the edi-
torial material, but also for information on the kinds of products advertised. Such 
media are often referred to as niche media because of their special-interest focus.
 
A large category of media also exists to meet the specialized needs of industrial 
manufacturers, service companies, wholesalers, retailers, and professional workers 
such as physicians, attorneys, and teachers. These media take the form of publica-
tions that contain editorial matter as well as advertising pertaining to the special-
ized market, but they also include films, trade shows, convention exhibits, CDs, and 
even flash drives containing a file with the promotional message and stamped with 
the advertiser’s logo that can be used by the recipient long after the initial presenta-
tion. Business-to-business advertisers are typically the advertisers most interested 
in these forms of media.
 
Other specialized media exist exclusively for the purpose of delivering advertis-
ing messages. They carry no editorial matter and are not sought after by readers as 
are other forms of media. Such advertising-oriented media include handbills, direct 
mail, outdoor billboards, car cards that appear on buses or trucks, and freestanding 
inserts (FSIs) in newspapers.
 
Another specialized medium is the catalog. Although consumers often request 
catalogs, they look at catalogs less frequently than they do mass media. At the same 
time, many advertisers find catalogs productive because consumers use them as 
shopping guides. One form of catalog is the telephone book, which carries advertising 
but also carries editorial matter—telephone numbers. Plumbers, for example, might 
justifiably use telephone book advertising exclusively, because plumbers are not usu-
ally called until an emergency arises. On such occasions, the consumer will search 
ads in the Yellow Pages to find a plumber but probably will not notice such ads at any 
other time. Although still widely used today, the rise of the Internet and sources such 
as Craigslist have severely impacted the Yellow Pages and newspaper classified adver-
tising, calling into question the long-term survivability of the medium.

 
Introduction to Media Planning 
15
General Procedures in Media Planning
Marketing considerations must precede media planning. Media planning never 
starts with answers to such questions as, “Which medium should I select?” or 
“Should I use television or magazines?” Planning grows out of a marketing problem 
that needs to be solved. To start without knowing or understanding the underlying 
marketing problem is illogical, because media are primarily a tool for implement-
ing the marketing strategy.
 
As you will see in the hypothetical media plan presented in Chapter 2, the 
starting point for a media plan should be an analysis of a marketing situation. This 
analysis is made so both marketing and media planners can get a bird’s-eye view of 
how a company has been operating against its competitors in the total market. The 
analysis serves as a means of learning the details of the problem, where possibilities 
lie for its solution, and where the company can gain an advantage over its competi-
tors in the marketplace.
 
After analyzing the marketing situation, marketing and media planners devise 
a marketing strategy and plan that state marketing objectives and spell out the 
actions to accomplish those objectives. When the marketing strategy calls for 
advertising, the usual purpose is to communicate to consumers some information 
that helps attain a marketing objective. Media are the means whereby advertise-
ments are delivered to the market.
 
Once a marketing plan has been devised, an advertising creative strategy must 
also be determined. This consists of decisions about what is to be communicated, 
how it will be executed, and what it is supposed to accomplish. A statement of 
advertising copy themes and how copy will be used to communicate the selling 
message is also part of that strategy. Media planning decisions are affected by the 
advertising creative strategy because some creative strategies are better suited to 
one medium than to any other. For example, if a product requires demonstration, 
television is the best medium. If an ad must be shown in high-fidelity color, maga-
zines or newspaper supplements are preferable. Creative strategy also determines 
the prospect profile in terms of such demographic variables as age, sex, income, or 
occupation. These prospects now become the targets that the planner will focus 
on in selecting media vehicles. Modern channel planning software can aid in the 
process of selecting the best media channels. (See Chapter 10 for more on this 
subject.)
 
Up to this point, persons other than the media planner have been making 
decisions that will ultimately affect the media plan. The marketing or market-
ing research people are responsible for the situation analysis and marketing plan, 
although media planners are sometimes involved at the inception of the marketing 

16 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
plan. Copywriters and art directors are generally responsible for carrying out the 
creative strategy. Sometimes a marketing plan is as simple as a memorandum from 
a marketing executive to the media planner or even an idea in an advertising execu-
tive’s mind. In such informal situations, media planning begins almost immediately, 
with little or no marketing research preceding it. Exhibit 1-3 summarizes the pre-
planning steps.
Scope of Media Preplanning Activities
EXHIBIT 1-3
Media Planning
Creative Strategy Plan
Purpose: To determine what 
to communicate through 
advertisements. Include 
the determination of: 
1. How product can meet 
consumer needs
2. How product will 
be positioned in 
advertisements
3. Copy themes
4. Specific objectives of 
each advertisement
5. Number and sizes of 
advertisements
Marketing Strategy Plan
Purpose: To plan activities 
that will solve one or more 
of the marketing problems. 
Includes the determina-
tion of:
1. Marketing objectives  
2. Product spending 
strategy
3. Distribution strategy
4. Which elements of the 
marketing mix to use
5. Identification of “best” 
market segments
Marketing Problem
All media planning starts with a problem in the context of 
national, local, or business-to-business marketing/advertis-
ing. Examples of the kinds of problems could be how much to 
spend for advertising next year, how to increase sales vol-
ume, or how to stop eroding market share.
Situation Analysis
Purpose: To understand 
the marketing problem. A 
company and its competi-
tors are analyzed on the 
basis of:
1. Size and share of the 
total market
2. Sales history, costs, and 
profits
3. Distribution practices
4. Methods of selling
5. Use of advertising
6. Identification of 
prospects
7. Nature of the product

 
Introduction to Media Planning 
17
 
The media planner begins work as soon as a marketing strategy plan is in hand. 
This plan sets the tone and guides the direction that the media decisions will follow.
 
The first item to come out of such a plan is a statement of media objectives. 
These are the goals that a media planner believes are most important in helping 
attain marketing objectives. Goals include determination of which targets (persons 
most likely to purchase a given product or service) are most important, how many 
of those targets need to be reached, and where advertising should be concentrated 
at what times.
 
Objectives form the basis for media strategies. A media strategy is a series of 
actions selected from several possible alternatives to best achieve the media objec-
tives. Media strategies will cover such decisions as which kinds of media should 
be used, whether national or spot broadcast advertising should be used, how ads 
should be scheduled, and many other decisions.
 
After the strategy is determined, the implementation of the media plan begins. 
Some planners call all these subsequent decisions tactics. Whatever they are called, 
many decisions still have to be made before tactics culminate in a media plan. As 
indicated in Exhibit 1-4, these decisions might include the selection of vehicles in 
which to place ads, the number of ads to be placed in each vehicle, the size of each 
ad, and the specific position within each vehicle that an ad will occupy.
 
A media plan is custom tailored—designed expressly to meet the needs of an 
advertiser at a given time for specific marketing purposes. A media plan should never 
be a copy of last year’s plan with new costs, nor should it be simply a blank form with 
spaces that can be filled in quickly with selected dates or times for running ads. Each 
media plan should be different from preceding ones for the same product.
 
Plans are custom tailored because the marketplace is rarely the same from year 
to year. Competitors rarely stand still in their marketing activities. They change 
their messages, change their marketing expenditures, introduce new brands, or dis-
continue distribution of old brands. Consumers also change, moving to different 
geographical areas, getting new jobs, retiring, getting married, adopting different 
leisure-time activities, or buying new kinds of products. As a result, each marketing 
situation presents new opportunities as well as new problems.
 
Because marketing situations change, new approaches to planning are constantly 
needed to keep up with or ahead of competitors. Media planning is also affected by 
the new kinds of research or analysis needed to keep abreast of a changing business 
world. Media planning requires a great sensitivity to change. For this reason, even 
direct competitors may decide on very different media strategies. Exhibit 1-5 shows 
the allocation of calendar 2008 media dollars by the six leading vacuum cleaner 
companies.

18 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Kinds of Questions That Lead to Decisions About 
Media Objectives and Strategies
The following is an overview of some of the many questions that lead to media objec-
tives and strategies. Note that strategies grow out of objectives.
Media Objectives
Media Strategies
What action should we take 
as a result of media used by 
competitors?
Should we use same media mix as competitors? Should 
we allocate weight the same way as competitors? 
Should we ignore competitors?
What actions should we take as 
a result of our brand’s creative 
strategies? 
Which media/vehicles are best suited? Any special 
treatments (gatefolds, inserts)? Which dayparts?
Who should be our primary and 
secondary targets? 
Which product usages patterns should we consider? 
Heavy/medium/light users? What distribution of strate-
gic impressions? Which dayparts?
What balance of reach to fre-
quency is needed? 
What levels of reach and frequency? What levels of 
effective reach/frequency?
Do we need national and/or 
local media? 
What proportions should go into national media?
What patterns of geographical 
weighting should we use? 
Should we weight by dollars or GRPs? Where should 
we place weights? When should we weight (weeks/
months)? What weight levels for each market?
What communication goals 
(or effectiveness goals) are 
needed? 
Which criteria of effectiveness should we use?
Which kind of scheduling pat-
terns suit our plans: continuity, 
flighting, or pulsing? 
Should we use one or more? When should we weight 
more heavily?
Do media have to support pro-
motions? Why? 
What proportion of the budget should be used? What 
media mix?
Is media testing needed? How 
should it be used? 
How many tests and in which markets? How should we 
translate (Little USA or As Is)?
Is budget large enough to 
accomplish objectives? 
Do we need to set priorities? Which must we achieve, 
and which are optional? Do we need more money than 
is available?
EXHIBIT 1-4

 
Introduction to Media Planning 
19
Is There a Best Media Strategy?
BRAND A
BRAND B
BRAND C
BRAND D
BRAND E
BRAND F
Network TV
60%
0%
0%
0%
18%
0%
Cable TV
19
79
44
0
24
1
Syndicated TV
4
8
0
0
32
0
Spot TV
0
2
0
2
6
0
National Magazine
17
1
53
63
0
99
Network Radio
0
0
0
20
0
0
Spot Radio
0
0
0
7
0
0
Internet
1
10
3
8
19
0
Total
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
Comments:
1. Media expenditures often provide more insight into strategy than any other data.
2. From the data, one can conclude that there is no one best media strategy for all advertisers, because 
each perceives the market in slightly different ways based on its own marketing needs. Some marketers 
want to increase market share—others want simply to maintain their present position. Such differences 
play a major role in media selection. Also, some advertisers see one medium as being more effective 
than others.
3. In this case, four of the six vacuum cleaner brands use television, but Brand B places almost 80 percent 
of its budget in cable TV, while Brand A concentrates in network TV. Brand C uses only cable TV with a 
strong consumer print campaign, while Brand D uses almost no TV, splitting its budget between national 
magazines, radio, and the Internet. Brand E uses television and the Internet. Brand F puts virtually the 
entire budget in national magazines. The 1 percent spending in cable TV is probably a test.
4. Occasionally, one sees all competitors using the same media, but the competitors in this seemingly 
routine product have widely differing views of the value of alternative media.
Principles for Selecting Media Vehicles
Of all the media decisions, one of the most important is selecting individual vehi-
cles. Planners tend to select one or more vehicles that effectively reach the target 
audience prospects (1) with an optimum amount of frequency (or repetition), (2) at 
the lowest cost per thousand impressions, (3) with a minimum of waste (or non-
prospects), and (4) within a specified budget.
 
These principles apply most when selecting vehicles for mass-produced and 
mass-consumed products such as food, clothing, or automobiles. Yet even though 
EXHIBIT 1-5

20 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
they are more difficult to execute, the principles should be the same in selecting 
vehicles for such products as noncommercial airplanes or yachts where prospects 
are distributed unevenly throughout the population. It may be less cost-efficient 
to reach those prospects than it would be to reach prospects for mass-consumed 
products, because planners must select vehicles that contain large amounts of 
waste to reach such selective markets. There are other times when the principles 
have to be modified. For example, if a creative strategy calls for producing TV 
commercials in high definition, then cost or waste must be disregarded in favor 
of meeting creative goals. Most often, however, these principles are followed con-
sistently in planning.
 
When planners apply media selection principles, they use media delivery statis-
tics as one piece of evidence that they have achieved the reach required. Delivery 
means simply the number of audience members reached by, or exposed to, a vehicle 
or a combination of media vehicles.
 
When the goal is to expose the greatest number of people possible for the avail-
able budget, the planner starts by looking among the many media alternatives that 
will reach prospects. A planner does this using media audience research data for 
individual vehicles. The data are in the form of numbers classified by audience 
types, and the numbers listed for each medium can be used as proof of audience 
delivery. In other words, the planner uses this statistical evidence to prove that the 
best vehicle(s) for reaching the targeted prospects has been selected. Obviously, 
there are other considerations in making this decision. Costs of media might be so 
high per prospect reached that the planner has to reject the first choice in favor of 
other media that reach smaller numbers of prospects but at lower costs.
 
Once audience delivery numbers have been found, they are related to the total 
number of prospects in the market. If a market consists of 35 million women in the 
United States who purchased a given kind of product within the last month, then 
the size of the market is 35 million. The planner might place the ad in an assort-
ment of magazines that reach 17.5 million purchasing women, or 50 percent of the 
market. Is 50 percent enough? It depends on the marketing objectives. If 50 percent 
isn’t enough, and if there is still money in the budget, the planner might place the 
ad in additional magazines to extend the reach of the print portion of the plan. Or 
the planner might decide that 50 percent reach of print, when added to the reach of 
the other media in the plan, satisfies the marketing objectives. Because no decision 
is made in a vacuum, the planner must also take into consideration the creative, 
promotional, and executional goals of the marketing strategy while evaluating the 
vehicle’s ability to deliver prospects.

 
Introduction to Media Planning 
21
 
This discussion applies primarily to the traditional mass media. The selection 
of websites to carry digital advertising is based on some of the same criteria, plus 
additional measures that are unique to the online medium. So planners look at the 
number of prospects who visit the site, time spent on the site, the concentration 
of those prospects among all the site’s visitors, the cost that the site charges for 
each thousand impressions delivered, and historical records of the number of visi-
tors who click through the banner to the advertiser’s own website. This represents 
a major change from traditional planning. Thus the media planner of the future 
needs to understand not only the traditional media planning techniques, but also 
the new ones that are now emerging.
Problems in Media Planning
Although media planning has become very important within advertising agency opera-
tions, it is not performed as efficiently as one might suppose. The planner faces many 
different kinds of problems that make it difficult to arrive at objective decisions.
Insufficient Media Data
Media planners almost always require more data about markets and media than 
are available. Some data never will be available, either because audiences cannot be 
measured or the data are too expensive to collect. For example, no complete and 
inclusive research service measures the audience exposure to outdoor advertis-
ing, to television viewing in hotel rooms, or to portable television viewing. Why? 
Because such media are too expensive to adequately measure, given their com-
plexity and the amount of advertising revenue they produce. Both outdoor expo-
sure and out-of-home TV viewing have been measured, but not on a continuous 
basis in all cities. There is also inadequate research showing the amount of money 
that competitors spend yearly for outdoor advertising, local cable TV advertising, 
regional sports TV networks, sponsored search advertising on Google, and many 
other advertising venues.
 
The Nielsen television rating service measures the audience size only in terms 
of individuals whose people meter button is pushed or who wrote in a diary that 
they are watching television. But even if there are people in front of the television 
set who say they are watching the program, there is no guarantee that they are pay-
ing attention to the commercials. Numerous studies have attempted to measure 
engagement with television programs, but have come up short, beginning with 

22 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
finding an acceptable definition for the term. Joe Plummer, the chief research offi-
cer of the Advertising Research Foundation (ARF), put forth this not entirely satis-
factory definition, “Engagement is turning on a prospect to a brand idea enhanced 
by the surrounding context.” A council of the ARF has been formed to study the 
question in more detail and issue reports of research findings on the subject.5
 
Another problem in television planning is that decisions about the future per-
formance of television programs must be based on past performance. If the future 
is radically different from the past, then the data on which a decision is based may 
be worthless.
 
Although advertising impressions delivered on the Internet are counted with 
extreme precision, it takes a special effort to know if a banner ad actually appeared 
on the user’s screen or if the viewer clicked away before it had a chance to come up, 
especially if the ad appears near the bottom of the page. Even then, it is impossible 
to know if any attention was paid to the ad. With click-through rates typically well 
below 1 percent, the impact of a banner ad is likely to be minimal. Greater atten-
tion is paid to the highly creative “rich media” that include streaming video, audio, 
animated cursor, and so on. But there is no data on “how much” more attention will 
be paid to this particular rich media execution.
 
The problem of obtaining sufficient information is especially acute for small 
advertisers, many of whom cannot afford to buy research data. They must rely on 
published guides, such as Mediaweek’s Marketer’s Guide to Media, that give an 
indication of costs and audiences, but they are typically a year or more old and lack 
the detail of a paid research subscription. They also may lack sales and market-
ing information, even about their own products, if they sell only to distributors or 
wholesalers. Since an advertiser’s detailed sales information is highly confidential, 
often from their own agency, media planners typically must estimate the client’s 
sales position from published sources or simply go without that information in the 
preparation of their plans.
 
Measuring how people read newspapers and magazines is another problem. 
How much of any given magazine or newspaper is read? How many advertisements 
are read? How thoroughly are they read? What is the value of placing an advertise-
ment in one vehicle versus another? How does each vehicle affect the perception 
of an advertisement that it carries? What percent of the people who read a Sunday 
newspaper open up the Parade or USA Weekend Magazine?6 Answers to these and 
5. www.thearf.org/assets/engagement-council.
6. A 2003 MRI study reported that 75 percent of carrier newspaper readers read Parade, 
while 55 percent of the carrier paper readers read USA Weekend. There are no plans to 
repeat the study.

 
Introduction to Media Planning 
23
many other questions are not available on a continuing basis, so the media planner 
must make decisions without knowing all the pertinent facts.
Time Pressures
A problem that affects media planning in an entirely different way is that of the 
time pressure involved in making decisions. This is compounded by the universal 
availability of e-mail that leads to the expectation of an instant response. Gone are 
the days when a planner had a few days’ grace from the time it took for a written 
response to be delivered by the postal system.
 
When the agency and advertiser are ready to start their advertising program, the 
planner often is faced with a lack of the most recent information needed to solve 
problems thoroughly. For example, in many cases the planner requires competitive 
media expenditure analyses showing how much each competitor spends in major 
markets throughout the country. Although modern systems can deliver the raw 
data in seconds, the systems for gathering the data from the television networks, 
magazines, radio stations, and so forth have not changed in decades. Today’s plan-
ners must wait six to eight weeks to learn about the competitor’s spending in these 
media.
 
Another time-related problem is the limited number of broadcast times and 
programs available to be purchased by advertisers at any given time. This problem 
is compounded if the client is slow to approve the budget, in which case the most 
desirable broadcast time periods and programs might be sold before the advertiser 
enters the marketplace.
 
In other situations, research data are so plentiful that there are neither person-
nel nor time to analyze them. This is especially true for the large amounts of com-
puterized data on media audiences and brand usage. Computers are able to pro-
duce masses of cross-tabulations at lightning speeds, but often such data go unused 
because there is insufficient time to analyze them. This is especially true for online 
media research. Josh Chasin, the research director of comScore, said, “One of the 
consequences of being the most measurable medium is that the Internet ends up as 
the medium with the most measures.” The online planner’s challenge is to decide 
which of the many measures are most useful for selecting websites for an online 
campaign, or which measures are most relevant for the advertiser’s marketing 
objectives.
Institutional Influences on Media Decisions
One of the less obvious external sources of influence on media decisions is the 
effect of client pressure to use or not use certain media vehicles or to use them 
in certain ways. Often these pressures are well known by everyone working on a 

24 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
client’s account; the client continually reminds everyone of the restrictions. But 
there are times when these influences are known by relatively few persons, perhaps 
only those who regularly visit the client and are constantly communicating directly 
with him or her. Other subtle influences also affect planners. Directors or assistant 
directors in the media department or in account executive positions often influ-
ence decisions.
 
The problem with these institutional influences is that little or no information is 
available concerning the extent to which they exist or how much they affect deci-
sions. These influences probably vary from client to client.
Lack of Objectivity
One of the continuing problems in media decision making is the sterility of think-
ing about strategy. Planners are not always objective. For example, an overdepen-
dence on numbers can affect objectivity. Media executives often think that when a 
decision is substantiated by numbers, such as television ratings, the decision must 
be valid because the numbers prove it so. It is often difficult to argue with decisions 
proved by numbers, yet the numbers can be misleading. The methods of measure-
ment might be imprecise, the sample size might be too small, or the technique of 
measurement might be biased or too insensitive to really measure what it is sup-
posed to. Or there might be a set of numbers of major significance that are not 
available to the media planner—all of which can affect the objectivity of the deci-
sion maker. Uncritical acceptance of numbers is a dangerous practice and can lead 
to decisions that common sense indicates are wrong.
 
Objectivity is also affected when a planner accepts relative data as absolute. For 
example, the sizes of television audiences reported through ratings are not absolute 
measurements. When a television rating service shows that 5 million homes tuned 
in to a given television program, this does not necessarily mean that precisely 5 
million homes actually tuned in to the program. It is an estimate that is based on 
a sample. For this reason, there is a margin of error around the number that varies 
depending on the size of the sample and the size of the audience being measured—
the smaller the sample and the smaller the audience, the larger the margin of error. 
Planners must be aware that there is no significant difference between two media 
vehicles that have almost the same audience. For example, a TV show with a 2.4 
rating is not necessarily more popular than another show with a 2.3 rating. Rating 
services provide guidelines to help users know if the difference between audience 
estimates is significant. They also provide indications when the sample is too small 
to give statistically reliable ratings.

 
Introduction to Media Planning 
25
 
Although the audience ratings are only estimates, a planner cannot ignore the 
numbers and make decisions entirely on the basis of experience. Clients are certain 
to challenge the basis upon which media decisions are made.
Measuring Advertising Effectiveness
The effectiveness of direct response online advertising can be measured very accu-
rately with the use of click-through rates and the number of leads generated. But for 
consumer package goods and the many other products whose advertising objectives 
go beyond an immediate response, there is no generally accepted way of measuring 
advertising effectiveness. This makes it difficult to prove the correctness of media 
decisions beyond the audience information reported in the research sources.
 
For many years, advertisers have attempted to measure the return on invest-
ment (ROI) that they get from their advertising dollars. This seemingly intuitive 
measure is complicated by the lack of clear definitions. Does it mean sales? Profit? 
Brand awareness? Trial? How is the return on the advertising investment differen-
tiated from that of the entire marketing plan? The “investment” part of the metric 
is also ambiguous. Is it just the money spent in media? Or is it the money spent on 
promotions, coupons, packaging, sales incentives, and all the marketing expenses 
other than paid advertising?
 
Consequently, decision making has not advanced to the point where there is 
always substantive proof that one medium is much better than another. Often a 
media planner has biased preferences in favor of one media class over others and 
will favor the medium regardless of what statistics or other objective evidence 
might indicate. In this writer’s experience, specialty agencies, particularly those 
dealing exclusively with online planning and buying, tend to be advocates of online 
media—a frame of mind that differs from generalist media planners who recom-
mend whatever medium best meets the needs of the advertiser.
 
Notwithstanding these problems, decision making is improving and will 
undoubtedly improve as long as the people in charge realize there are problems 
and attempt to improve the situation.

This page intentionally left blank 

 
27
CHAPTER TWO
Sample Media Plan Presentation
A 
media plan is the blueprint for how the advertising message will be deliv-
ered to the target audience. It is also a persuasive document that com-
municates the rationale behind a recommendation to spend significant 
amounts of money. To provide a broad overview of the media planning 
process and the topics of this book, this chapter presents a hypothetical plan along 
with explanations about why particular actions were taken.
 
Typically presented by the planner at a meeting with the advertiser, a media 
plan summarizes weeks or months of behind-the-scenes work—evaluating alterna-
tives, meeting with media representatives, and developing the understanding of the 
consumer and marketplace that is necessary to produce the most effective media 
plan.
 
As a blueprint for action, a media plan must be organized so each set of actions 
flows smoothly in the readers’ minds. Media plans have two main audiences: the 
clients (including the account executives) and the media buyers. Most likely the 
clients will be the first persons outside the agency to see the plan. They will prob-
ably pay most attention to determining whether the recommended media plan can 
do what it is supposed to do in solving the original marketing problem. The plan 
should also enable the buyers—who eventually have to implement the strategies—
to proceed quickly and accurately. The media plan can help all this by being well 
organized, well written, and simply presented.
 
Although there is extensive backup documentation in a “leave-behind,” the pre-
sentation itself is relatively straightforward, and not especially long—often only 10 
to 15 minutes. It talks in human terms about the people the advertiser is trying to 
reach. The following pages show a typical (but hypothetical) media plan as it might 
be presented to a brand’s marketing director. It is a simple, “plain vanilla” plan, 

28 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
yet it illustrates concepts that will be discussed in greater detail in the following 
chapters.
 
At the barest minimum, a media plan should include (possibly, but not neces-
sarily, in this order) the following elements:
Media objectives—what tasks the media is expected to carry out
• 
Competitive analysis—spending levels, media used, timing
• 
Target audience analysis and recommendation
• 
Media habits of the target audience
• 
Recommended media selection rationale—reasons for selecting the various 
• 
media elements and vehicles
Media strategy—how the media plan will accomplish the stated objectives
• 
Flowchart, budget, and expected reach and frequency
• 
 
Depending on the particular situation, the media plan may also contain the fol-
lowing elements:
Magazine selection rationale—cost, coverage, composition, and cost per thou-
• 
sand (CPM) of publications that were recommended and those considered but 
not recommended
Spot market list and media dollar allocation rationale
• 
Product seasonality
• 
Detailed broadcast cost estimates
• 
Other media considered but not recommended
• 
Alternative print and broadcast plans considered but not recommended
• 
Detailed newspaper list
• 
Alternative plans at varying budget levels above and below established level
• 
Decision dates/cancellation flexibility
• 
Responses to earlier client questions
• 
Anything else the planner thinks may become a question or an issue dur-
• 
ing the presentation based on earlier discussions with the client and account 
group (either incorporated into the presentation or held in reserve in case the 
question comes up)
Background to Hypothetical Plan
Let’s say that the fictitious RBB Sporting Goods Company has been a leading pro-
ducer of sporting products for more than 20 years. In anticipation of baby boomer 

 
Sample Media Plan Presentation 
29
retirements, the company plans to expand into products for golfers, beginning with 
Power Flight golf clubs. These newly engineered clubs promise to improve the aver-
age golfer’s game. The Power Flight’s core is made of titanium dioxide, making it 
more flexible than other clubs. It is also lighter and stronger than other models. The 
product will be in full national distribution in time for golf season.
 
RBB will be hiring a new advertising agency to handle the Power Flight golf club 
introduction. They have told the agency to assume a total advertising budget of $11 
million, of which $10 million is for working media, and they have asked for a rec-
ommended media plan. The account group says the creative department is work-
ing on 30-second television commercials and page-four/color (P4/C) magazine ads. 
The online creative team is developing banners to drive golfers to the company’s 
website.
Media Objectives
Media plans typically begin with a statement of the media objectives—that is, what 
goals the media are expected to accomplish. In this case, the first and most impor-
tant objective is to create awareness of the new golf clubs and sustain that aware-
ness throughout the golf season.
 
Because the product will be sold nationally, there must be advertising every-
where in the country. If the client had said they needed additional weight in certain 
cities, that goal would be included as an additional objective. Similarly, if RBB had 
made plans for a professional golfer to demonstrate the product at a local country 
club, a media objective would be to announce this event with local media. If the 
clubs were going to be introduced at a trade show, there might be a need for adver-
tising in the show’s catalog. In short, the media objectives reflect the advertiser’s 
marketing objectives.
 
Media objectives specifically identify the marketing target and how many times 
those people should see the advertising message during the introductory and sus-
taining periods. This reflects a balance between how many people will see the ads 
and how many times they will see it (i.e., a few people many times or many people 
a few times.) The need to balance trade-offs is a key recurring theme in media 
planning.
 
Finally, the client has indicated there is a strong technical story that explains 
how the Power Flight clubs improve golfers’ accuracy. In addition to creating aware-
ness, the media plan must effectively communicate this relatively complex message. 
The media objectives for the introduction of the Power Flight golf club are shown 
in Exhibit 2–1.

30 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Media Objectives
Within the $10 million budget, create national awareness of RBB Power Flight golf 
• 
clubs prior to the start of the golf season.
Following introduction, provide sustaining support through the remainder of the 
• 
warm-weather months.
Target advertising to regular golfers who play at least one a month.
• 
During the introductory period, reach 80 percent of target golfers an average of 
• 
five times and 50 percent three or more times.
Following the introduction, sustain awareness by reaching 30 percent of golfers at 
• 
least once a month.
Use media that can create awareness and effectively communicate the technical 
• 
advantages of the Power Flight clubs.
Competitive Analysis
Knowledge of the competitive environment is critical to any media plan. The com-
petitive analysis includes budgets, media selection, and timing of media delivery.
Budgets
First, knowing the planner has $10 million to work with is meaningful only when 
compared to the spending levels of RBB’s competitors. Exhibit 2-2 shows how much 
money was spent by the leading brands and the whole golf club category in the pre-
vious year, 2008. It indicates that the budget should be adequate to do the job, but 
RBB will still trail two of the TaylorMade brands that together will have almost $24 
million in TaylorMade exposure. The introductory $10 million will have to work 
hard to overcome this competitive noise
Media Selection
How much the competitors spent is only part of the story. The planner also needs 
to know which media the competitors used. Exhibit 2-3 indicates that the major-
ity of the dollars were in network television and magazines. Backup charts show 
spending by medium for each advertiser. They show which television programs 
were used (mostly weekend golf tournaments) and which cable networks (mostly 
EXHIBIT 2-1

 
Sample Media Plan Presentation 
31
Competitive Environment
Leading Golf Club Competitors
BRAND DETAIL
JAN. 2008–DEC. 2008 
$ (000.00)
TaylorMade Golf Clubs Driver
$12,409.60
TaylorMade Tour Burner Golf Clubs Driver
11,400.50
Ping G10 Golf Clubs Iron
5,394.50
Titleist AP1 Golf Clubs Iron
4,892.50
Nike IC Golf Clubs Putter
4,639.80
Nike SQ Golf Clubs XLS/Driver
4,542.20
Cleveland Hibore Golf Clubs XLS/Driver
4,459.60
All Others (160 brands)
105,529.60
Total Golf Clubs
$153,268.30
Source: The Nielsen Company, Monitor-Plus. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 2-2
Leading Competitors’ Media Use
Golf club competitors concentrate spending in national consumer magazines and net-
work television.
Percent of $153.3 million in 2008
Spot radio
0.7%
Newspapers
0.7%
Internet
0.5%
Network TV
21.2%
Cable TV
3.8%
Spot TV
0.3%
National
magazines
72.8%
Source: The Nielsen Company, Monitor-Plus. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 2-3

32 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
ESPN). Backup charts also show which magazines were used and other details 
about competitors’ plans.
 
Exhibit 2-4 shows how TaylorMade used display banners on the Internet to pro-
mote their clubs.
 
Exhibit 2-5 shows the websites where Callaway Golf Company bought links 
adjacent to the results of selected search terms. Sponsored search has become an 
important advertising medium because the ads appear only to people who have 
demonstrated an interest in the product.
TaylorMade Use of Online Display Advertising
SITE/SUBSITE
IMPRESSIONS
ESTIMATED SPENDING ($)
ESPN.com (General)
16,743,000
$138,700
Golf.com (All)
13,943,000
144,800
CBSSports.com (General)
13,858,000
101,600
PGA Tour (All)
1,866,000
15,900
CBSSports.com MLB
1,225,000
8,100
PGA (All)
593,000
2,300
ThatsRacin.com (All)
439,000
3,400
ESPN.com NFL
321,000
2,500
ESPN.com Baseball
317,000
2,100
NHL.com Network (All)
187,000
1,300
TheGolfChannel.com (All)
106,000
700
Total
49,598,000
$421,400
Source: The Nielsen Company, Nielsen Online AdRelevance. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 2-4

 
Sample Media Plan Presentation 
33
Callaway Golf Company’s Use of Online Sponsored Search Impressions
Impressions by company for Callaway Golf Company in consumer goods sports and 
exercise equipment industry during most recent month for sponsored search link 
ads.
COMPANY
IMPRESSIONS
SITE/SUBSITE
IMPRESSIONS
Callaway Golf Company
2,837,000
PGA (All)
1,739,000
Total
2,837,000
CNN (General)
411,000
Yahoo! Search
242,000
Google (General)
136,000
About.com Sports
48,000
AOL.com Search
30,000
Shopzilla (All)
29,000
MapQuest.com
24,000
Epinions (All)
21,000
BizRate.com (All)
19,000
ConsumerREVIEW Network
18,000
BNET (All)
18,000
CNET Download.com
14,000
All Other Sites
88,000
Total
2,837,000
Source: The Nielsen Company, Nielsen Online AdRelevance. Used with permission.
Timing of Media Delivery
Timing of media delivery is critical, as well. In the case of golf, competitive advertis-
ing naturally follows the seasons, as shown in Exhibit 2-6. Note the peak in spend-
ing between March and June, as the weather turns warm and golfers start to think 
about the clubs they will use when the golf courses open for business. But also note 
that money is spent throughout the year, even in winter. This reflects the need to 
maintain awareness among golfers on warm-weather vacations. The continuation 
of advertising through December suggests advertising to support the purchase of 
golf clubs as a gift for the holidays.
EXHIBIT 2-5

34 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Leading Competitors’ Timing of Delivery
Golf club advertising is concentrated in the spring in preparation for the summer golf season.
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
Jun.
Jul.
Aug. Sep.
Oct.
Nov. Dec.
$ (Millions)
Source: The Nielsen Company, Monitor-Plus. Used with permission.
Target Audience Analysis
Another part of every media plan is an analysis of the target audience. RBB has said 
they believe their best prospects are “frequent golfers—those who play more than 
12 rounds of golf a year.” This reflects the advertiser’s market research, but their 
studies typically provide little useful information about the consumer’s media hab-
its. For this purpose, ad agencies purchase syndicated research (one study that is 
sold to many different buyers, as distinguished from custom research tailored to 
a single company). This research provides information on product usage, demo-
graphics, and media behavior.
 
For example, Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC (MRI, www.mediamark
.com), asks respondents about their personal participation in golf and more than 50 
other sports, ranging from aerobics to whitewater rafting. Respondents are asked 
how often they engage in each activity: “two or more times a week, once a week, 
two to three times a month, once a month, less than once a month, or never.” The 
planner makes the judgment that “once a month or more” is comparable to the cli-
ent’s “frequent” golfer. This definition yields a group that accounts for 5.08 percent 
of all adults—a small enough target to be selective, but large enough to be statisti-
cally valid. (See Exhibit 2-7.)
EXHIBIT 2-6

 
Sample Media Plan Presentation 
35
The Target Audience
11.4 million (5.08 percent) adults are regular golfers (play 1 times/month). 79.8 
percent of them are men. They tend to be 55–74 years old and college graduates, 
work in professional/managerial jobs, and earn more than $100,000/year.
U.S. POPULATION
REGULAR GOLFERS (PLAY 1 TIMES/MONTH)
(000)
(%)
(000)
(%)
INDEX
Total adults age 18
224,899
100.00%
11,423
100.00%
100
(5.08%) 
Men
108,644
48.30%
9,116
79.80%
165
Women
116,235
51.70
2,307
20.20
39
224,900
100.00%
11,423
100.00%
100
Ages 18–34
68,760
30.60%
3,063
26.80%
88
Ages 35–54
86,599
38.50
4,184
36.60
95
Ages 55–64
32,911
14.60
2,064
18.10
123
Ages 65–74
19,414
8.60
1,375
12.00
139
Ages 75
17,216
7.70
735
6.40
84
244,900
100.00%
11,423
100.00%
100
College graduates
59,704
26.50%
5,129
44.90%
169
Professional/
managers/
administrators
52,326
23.30%
3,836
33.60%
144
Employee income 
$100,000
12,108
5.40%
1,839
16.10%
299
Source: Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, Spring 2009. Used with permission.
Media Habits
In addition to demographics, MRI tells planners which television programs are 
watched by regular golfers. Although MRI data are not as timely or as detailed as 
the Nielsen ratings, they offer insights into the kind of programs that this group 
enjoys.
 
Exhibit 2-8 illustrates the concept of media selectivity. Comp, or composition, 
represents the percent of adults or program viewers who are regular golfers. As 
EXHIBIT 2-7

36 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
noted before, 5.08 percent of all adults are regular golfers. If the viewers of “The 
Tour Championship” were the same as all adults, we would expect 5.08 percent of 
them to be regular golfers. But the MRI research shows that 47.8 percent of them 
fall in this group. So, 47.8/5.08  9.42  100  942. By convention, the planner 
would say that the program’s viewers are 842 percent (or 8.4 times) more likely to 
be regular golfers than the average adult. We subtract 100 from the calculated 942 
to account for people who are as likely to be regular golfers.
Target Audience’s Media Habits: Watching Golf on TV
ADULTS
REGULAR GOLFERS (PLAY 1/MONTH)
(000)
(000)
COMP
INDEX
Total Adults
224,889
11,423
5.08
100
The Tour Championships
4,927
2,357
47.8
942
Wachovia Championship
4,667
2,123
45.5
896
World Golf Championships—Accenture
4,839
2,148
44.4
874
Deutsche Bank Championship
4,143
1,803
43.5
857
World Golf Championships—Bridgestone
5,117
2,219
43.4
854
Memorial Tournament—Morgan Stanley
3,803
1,645
43.3
852
World Golf Championships—Mission Hills
4,217
1,799
42.7
840
Honda Classic
4,982
2,108
42.3
833
Senior PGA Championships
4,812
2,018
41.9
826
The Players Championships
9,199
3,844
41.8
823
BMW Championships
3,836
1,595
41.6
819
EDS Byron Nelson Championships
4,008
1,642
41.0
807
Senior British Open
4,410
1,786
40.5
797
LPGA Tour Championship
4,680
1,890
40.4
795
AT&T Pebble Beach National Pro-Am
8,922
3,559
39.9
785
Source: Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, Spring 2009. Used with permission.
 
The media behavior analysis continues in Exhibit 2-9 by showing regular golfers’ 
selectivity to other sports programs on TV. These analyses show which programs 
have concentrations of the target audience (regular golfers) and guide the planner 
in selecting the best media to reach them.
EXHIBIT 2-8

 
Sample Media Plan Presentation 
37
Target Audience’s Media Habits: Other Sports on TV
ADULTS
REGULAR GOLFERS (PLAY 1/MONTH)
(000)
(000)
COMP
INDEX
Total regular golfers
224,889
11,423
5.08
100
Basketball—college games
55,407
6,170
11.1
219
Football—college games
73,448
7,739
10.5
207
Baseball
68,440
6,954
10.2
200
Tennis
34,024
3,417
10.0
198
Basketball—professional games
57,377
5,548
9.7
190
Football—Monday night professional
85,732
8,257
9.6
190
Bowling
23,679
2,255
9.5
187
Football—weekend professional
90,382
8,431
9.3
184
Soccer
31,438
2,701
8.6
169
Source: Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, Spring 2009. Used with permission.
 
The same research can show us which websites are most visited by regular golf-
ers. Clearly they are attracted to sporting sites, but they are also attracted to finan-
cial services. Exhibit 2-10 shows the top websites for golfers.
 
The same concept applies to golfers’ readership of consumer magazines. Readers 
of Golf Digest are seven times more likely to be regular golfers than the average 
adult; readers of Men’s Fitness are 77 percent more likely to be regular golfers.
 
Although composition is important, planners must also consider coverage—
the percent of the target that reads a magazine, watches a TV show, or uses other 
media. Golf Digest, for example, is read by 2,295,000 regular golfers. Expressing 
numbers in thousands, 2,295,000 readers/11,423,000 golfers  20.1 percent. We say 
that Golf Digest “covers,” or is read by, 20.1 percent of regular golfers. Composition 
shows the percent of the magazine’s readers who are in the target. In this case, 40.9 
percent of Golf Digest readers are regular golfers. (Total Golf Digest readers are not 
shown on this report.) Sports Illustrated covers virtually the same number of golf-
ers, but its low 10.1 percent composition indicates there would be a great deal of 
waste if this magazine was selected. (Because 89.9 percent of its readers are not 
regular golfers, they would have little interest in ads for the new Power Flight clubs.) 
This need to find a balance between coverage and composition is a recurring theme 
in media planning and is even more relevant when we consider the Internet.
EXHIBIT 2-9

38 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
Planners must also consider the cost-efficiency of the media they select. This 
is typically evaluated as cost-per-thousand target people exposed, or CPM. A page 
in Golf Digest costs $110,080 and is read by 2,295,000 regular golfers. To find 
the cost per thousand, divide the cost by the number of target readers: CPM  
$110,080/2,295  $47.97 per thousand golfers.
 
Exhibit 2-11 illustrates the trade-offs that media planners must make among 
coverage, composition, and media cost-efficiency.
Top Websites Visited by Regular Golfers
Target: Golf Sports Personally Participated 1 Times a Month
Population: 11,423,000
AUDIENCE
(000)
COMP.
COVERAGE
INDEX
Regular Golfers (1+/month)
11,423
5.08%
100%
100
USAToday.com Sports
307
15.5
2.6
293
The History Channel Websites
213
13.6
1.8
258
CBS College Sports Network
554
12.4
4.7
234
Motley Fool
384
11.6
3.3
220
PGA Tour
188
11.6
1.6
220
FT.com
201
11.5
1.7
217
USAToday.com Money
212
11.0
1.8
208
CBS Sports
995
10.9
8.4
206
Wall Street Journal Online
792
10.9
6.7
205
SI Digital Sales
677
10.7
5.7
202
FNFL.com
203
10.5
1.7
198
CNBC.com
283
10.4
2.4
196
Bloomberg.com
408
10.1
3.5
191
NFL Internet Network
442
10.1
3.7
190
ESPN
1,763
9.9
14.9
187
NASCAR Online
381
9.7
3.2
184
CNNMoney
803
9.7
6.8
183
NHL.com
315
9.7
2.7
183
CBSSports.com
439
9.6
3.7
182
NHL.com Network
326
9.5
2.8
180
Source: The Nielsen Company NetViews, MRI Media Fusion  Product (5-09/F08), 2009. 
Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 2-10

 
Sample Media Plan Presentation 
39
Target Audience’s Media Habits: Magazines
AUDIENCE 
(000)
COMP 
COVERAGE
INDEX
4C COST
4C CPM
Regular Golfers (1/month)
11,423
5.08%
100%
100
—
—
Golf Digest
2,295
40.9
20.1
806
$110,080
$47.97
Golf Magazine
2,198
39.2
19.2
772
159,000
72.34
PGA Tour Partners
516
32.9
4.5
647
40,545
78.58
Forbes
645
11.7
5.7
230
114,509
177.53
BusinessWeek
489
10.4
4.3
205
112,000
229.04
Sports Illustrated
2,119
10.1
18.6
198
320,000
151.01
Kiplinger’s Personal Finance
271
12.6
2.4
274
67,970
250.81
Fortune
456
11.6
4.0
228
159,600
350.00
Money
811
10.3
7.1
203
192,200
236.99
Men’s Fitness
680
9.0
6.0
117
84,640
124.47
Popular Mechanics
772
8.8
6.8
173
125,770
162.91
U.S. News & World Report
779
8.0
6.8
158
154,448
198.26
Newsweek
1,241
7.0
10.9
138
215,800
173.89
Source: Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, Spring 2009. Used with permission.
Media Selection Rationale
Planners are theoretically free to choose any mass medium (television, radio, maga-
zines, newspapers, outdoor, Internet), but in practice the choice reflects a general 
understanding of the category by the advertiser, the agency’s account team, and 
media management. Because the decision in this example has been made to start 
the creatives working on 30-second television commercials and full-page four-color 
magazine ads, the plan is expected to reflect these media. To a large extent, the 
rationale for selecting the primary media is obvious and reflects the media/market-
ing objectives and the competitive practices of the category.
 
Although the broad media to be used may be predetermined (in this case, TV 
and consumer magazines), the planner needs to show the rationale for selecting 
different vehicles and components. For television, this includes program types, day-
parts, cost-efficiencies, the reach and frequency of alternative weight levels, and the 
scheduling options considered. In the stand-up presentation, the media planner will 
EXHIBIT 2-11

40 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
provide this rationale by referring to the preceding charts on media habits as well 
as more detailed analyses.
 
For magazines, the plan needs to show publications that were considered and 
those that were and were not recommended. This latter information can be useful 
to advertiser and agency management if they need to explain to sales representa-
tives why a given magazine did not get the order. Again, this information is pro-
vided by the chart that shows the target’s readership and cost-efficiencies of the 
candidate and selected magazines. (Note that an actual plan would show many 
more publications than this sample.)
Creative Media Options
In the Power Flight example, television and print are the meat-and-potatoes media 
that—in an academic setting—would earn a grade of C. But advertisers expect 
something more: a creative fillip that will separate them from their competitors. 
This is an opportunity for planners to show their initiative and imagination. They 
might recommend an unusual use of conventional media, such as, in this case, a 
multipage insert in golf magazines to give a detailed explanation of the new club’s 
technical advantages. Or because one of the objectives of the Power Flight media 
plan is to create awareness, planners might recommend placing introductory ads 
on the hood of golf carts or in the hitting area of practice facilities. See www.pin
pointgolf.com for a broad range of media directed to golfers. A full listing can be 
found in the Out-of-Home Advertising Source from SRDS (formerly known as 
Standard Rate & Data Service). Interestingly, these golf course advertising venues 
have virtually no ads for golf products; instead, they carry primarily financial ser-
vices, business consultants, international airlines, and other advertisers who want 
to reach an upscale target.
 
While not in the final plan, the planning group also considered running the 
commercial as preroll video on Hulu, NBC.com, and the many Internet sites that 
offer streaming video of popular programs or clips.
 
Creative media are generally less expensive than mainstream media, and they 
add interest and excitement to the plan. Also, they mark the planner as a person 
who gives more than just what is expected.
Media Strategy
The plan now draws on the background material presented to lay out the proposed 
strategies that will accomplish the stated media objectives, as shown in Exhibit 2-12. 
Television will be the primary medium to create awareness. A media objective is to 
direct advertising to regular golfers, but the Nielsen program ratings that are needed 
by time-buyers count audiences only in terms of age and gender. From the targeting 

 
Sample Media Plan Presentation 
41
analysis, it is clear that the most selective target is men age 35 to 64 years of age. 
The strategy identifies the recommended dayparts and program types that will be 
selected. It indicates the general timing of the introductory and sustaining weight, 
but specifics will be presented later in the flowchart. Finally, the strategy identifies 
consumer magazines and RBB’s website on the Internet as the recommended media 
to deliver the technical information about the Power Flight golf clubs.
Flowchart and Budget
The last key element of a media plan is the flowchart. This single document, shown 
in Exhibit 2-13, summarizes the action elements of the media plan. It shows what 
media will be used, how the ads will be scheduled, how much weight will be given 
to each, the reach and frequency of the plan, ad sizes, and the cost of each element 
that adds to the total budget. Each of these is an estimated cost that will not become 
final until the negotiations are complete. Buyers are expected to purchase each 
medium for the stated cost, plus or minus 10 percent, but the bottom line total can 
never exceed the $10 million budget authorized by the advertiser.
Media Strategy
Use television as the primary medium to create awareness.
• 
—Target men 35 to 64 years of age.
Use network and cable television golf and weekend sports programs to achieve 
• 
broad national reach of target regular golfers.
Concentrate introductory weight in February and March to lead the golf season.
• 
—Purchase TV golf tournament sponsorships to achieve high frequency during 
the introduction.
Provide sustaining support in cable and network weekend sports programs 
• 
throughout the warm-weather golf season.
Use golf-oriented consumer magazines and selective newsweeklies to communi-
• 
cate the technical advantages of Power Flight golf clubs and to maintain aware-
ness during the holiday season.
Use RBB’s website to provide additional technical details about the Power Flight 
• 
clubs. Highlight the website’s Internet address in print and TV.
EXHIBIT 2-12

42 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Media Plan Flowchart
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
27
3
10 17 24 31
7
14 21 28
6
13 20 27
3
10 17 24
1
8
15 22 29
5
12 19 26
3
10 17 24 31
7
14 21 28
4
11 18 25
2
9
16 23 30
6
13 20 27
4
11 18
GRPs
Cost
NATIONAL TELEVISION :30
Network golf/nonprime sports
220
$4,969
Cable sports networks
320
$2,724
Television GRPs
540
$7,693
Reach/average frequency
Reach 3
CONSUMER MAGAZINES Pg 4/c
Golf Digest
$672
Golf Magazine
$528
Golf World
$128
Newsweek
$322
Sports Illustrated
$360
U.S. News & World Report
$217
INTERNET
Website
Magazine GRPs/reach/avg. frequency
Magazine cost $(000)
$2,227
Flight GRPs/reach/avg. frequency/3
Grand total cost $(000)
$9,920
10
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
Men 35–64 GRPs
Tournament Sponsorships
20
240
180
120
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
63 / 3.8
55 / 3.3
47 / 2.6
124 / 50% / 2.5
100 / 47% / 2.1
65 / 30% / 2.2
41 / 28% / 1.5
$892
$759
$354
$222
364 / 81% / 4.5 / 50%
280 / 73% / 3.8 / 40%
185 / 61% / 3.0 / 27%
41 / 28% / 1.5 / 2.6%
$4,064
$2,858
$2,776
$222
32
25
16
RBB Sporting Goods
Power Flight Golf Clubs
Introductory Media Plan
EXHIBIT 2-13

 
Sample Media Plan Presentation 
43
Post-Buy Evaluation
At some time after the advertising has run, the planner and buyer prepare a post-
buy evaluation that reports the number of television rating points that were actually 
delivered according to the Nielsen ratings, and the final price that was paid. These 
numbers are then compared to the originally planned goals. The post-buy evalua-
tion is generally prepared as a top-line report, but may include detail down to the 
individual telecast level if the actual buy greatly over- or underdelivers the planned 
goal, in which case an explanation from the buyer is required.
 
For magazines, the post-buy report shows on what page each ad appeared (to 
ensure that the advertiser got a fair rotation when there was more than one inser-
tion in a given magazine), presence of any neighboring competitive advertising, 
right-hand or left-hand page, adjacency to compatible editorial material, and other 
characteristics that the advertiser and agency consider important. In addition to 
advising the client, this report is used as background for future negotiations with 
the publications.
 
Note that the media post-buy evaluation is a numerical analysis of the way the 
media buy was executed versus what was planned. It typically does not deal with 
the larger issues, such as whether awareness was actually created or the campaign 
was successful. These relate to the effectiveness of the whole advertising program, 
which is the shared responsibility of the creative agency, the media planning and 
buying group, the advertiser, and everyone else associated with the business.

This page intentionally left blank 

 
45
CHAPTER THREE
The Relationship Among Media, 
Advertising, and Consumers
T
his chapter addresses the relationship among media, advertising, and con-
sumers. This relationship affects the manner in which consumers perceive 
media as well as advertising. It also affects the manner in which media is 
measured, planned, and delivered. This chapter sets the stage for Chapter 
4, “Basic Measurements and Calculations.”
How Consumers Choose Media:
Entertainment and Information
Most advertising is delivered to consumers by mass media such as newspapers, tele-
vision, magazines, or radio. Audiences are not, however, waiting for mass media to 
come to their doors. They have many other activities that compete for their time 
and interest, such as business, family, church, and leisure.
 
Audiences become interested in certain subjects because a need or want is devel-
oped. They choose the television programs they watch and the magazines they read 
because they expect to see certain subjects that satisfy their interests quickly. For 
their favorite TV shows, they will set their digital video recorder (DVR) to record 
or will watch at their leisure from their cable system’s video on demand (VOD) or 
online from Hulu or another video service. Sometimes they are willing to waste a 
bit of time watching television programs of little interest while waiting for their 
favorite programs to come on or leafing through a newspaper or magazine casually 

46 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
as they wait to go on to some other activity, but they probably pay less attention to 
these intervening media than they do to their favorites.
 
What audiences usually want from media is either entertainment or informa-
tion. To what extent does any media vehicle provide what audiences want? The 
degree of intensity among audiences in evaluating media content depends on sev-
eral variables, including those discussed in this section. This difference in intensity 
will most likely affect the degree of attention paid to the medium itself or to adver-
tising placed therein.
Strong Feelings
Many audience members have strong or weak feelings about a medium. They 
express some of the feelings using adjectives that describe what they like, such as 
being a leader, authoritative, provocative, warm, cold, strong, or weak. Some media 
are difficult to describe, suggesting that the relationship between audience mem-
bers and the media is confusing, negative, or indifferent. When media images are 
measured, feelings often show up for some media. Media that take political stands 
are usually perceived to have clear images. An image represents feelings, attitudes, 
opinions, and facts about a medium.
Loyalty
Audiences often like some media so much that they develop loyalties that go beyond 
economic constraint. An April 2009 study by the Pew Research Center found that 
52 percent of the people questioned rated a television set as a necessity, slightly 
ahead of a home computer (50 percent) and a cell phone (49 percent).1
 
Loyalty to certain media, however, does not necessarily mean that the loyal audi-
ence will perceive media advertisements similarly or buy more of the advertised 
products. Other factors affect buying, including the need to have more information 
about a brand. If the audience already has a great deal of brand knowledge, the audi-
ence might respond to the advertising. Generally, when changes have been made in 
the brand or there have been changes in the content or creative style of advertising, 
then the message will influence buying behavior to some extent.
Media Usage and Subsequent Behavior
Advertisers who buy space in a magazine generally assume they are reaching all 
readers of that particular periodical, but some subscribers do not read each issue 
1. Pew Research Center’s Social & Demographic Trends survey, April 2–8, 2009. 

 
The Relationship Among Media, Advertising, and Consumers 
47
immediately and many have back issues at home they have not even opened. The 
Audience Accumulation study by Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, (MRI) 
found that as many as 10 percent of a magazine’s audience can occur six months 
after the issue date.2 If asked why they have not read magazines they are paying for, 
they might respond that they do intend to read them when they have some free 
time. The potential for reaching these people exists, but it takes a long time for 
some magazines to achieve their ultimate potential audience.
 
There is a widespread assumption that television sells better than print media 
because television is intrusive and its audiences tend to react to the medium more 
regularly than they read magazines. Television programs featuring famous persons 
or interesting national events do draw huge audiences. Yet audience response varies 
greatly to ads carried in these programs. Some advertisers seem to sell their prod-
ucts well; others don’t.
 
For example, in 2000, at the height of the new technology bubble, the Super 
Bowl featured 19 dot-com advertisers—accounting for almost one-third of all the 
commercials in the game. A year later the majority of these companies were bank-
rupt due to poorly thought-out business plans and the general decline of the tech-
nology sector. Only four online companies placed ads in Super Bowl 2001. By 2010, 
Super Bowl XLIV had 9 dot-com advertisers out of the total 75 commercials.3 All of 
this suggests that there is more to a successful advertising campaign than selecting 
media vehicles that deliver large audiences.
 
It is difficult, however, to assess the effectiveness of one media vehicle’s ability 
to sell the advertised products on the basis of the size of its audience or the number 
of advertisements it carries. Large audiences do not automatically buy more than 
smaller audiences. In the end, the quality of an ad’s creative message and how mem-
orable it is has more influence on the ad’s ability to sell products than any inherent 
qualities of the medium that delivers it.
 
Consumers simply do not pay attention to commercials if they do not need the 
brand or product and they already know a lot about the brand. They have devel-
oped the ability to see and hear a message and then forget it. Perhaps this is caused 
by an overload of communication, known as semantic satiation. Furthermore, 
sometimes audiences pay attention to commercials or print ads but don’t respond 
immediately.
2. Julian Baim, Martin R. Frankel, and Joseph Agresti, “Magazine Audience Accumulation: 
Development of a Measurement System and Initial Results,” Worldwide Readership 
Research Symposium, Florence, 1999. 
3. The Nielsen Company, Monitor-Plus. 

48 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Interactive Television
Interactive television has been talked about for many years and is a reality today 
on cable television or online streaming video. In the context of media planning, it 
is an advertising message in conventional television that allows the viewer, with 
the click of a button on the remote, to order a product, request additional informa-
tion, or initiate other communication with the advertiser. The leading supplier of 
this service is TiVo, the first and now the largest branded user interface with DVR. 
Cable services like Comcast have their own generic interface, but TiVo is the most 
widely known branded service.
 
Interactive advertising appears in the form of a small graphic, or tag, that 
appears on the screen during commercials in specially prepared programming or 
during long-form infomercials for such products as automobiles, vacation destina-
tions, financial services, and so on. By clicking on the tag, viewers notify the adver-
tiser of their interest in the product. Because their name, address, and other con-
tact information are registered with the cable company or TiVo, the information or 
further entertainment is automatically forwarded.
 
In February, 2010, Canoe Ventures (www.canoe-ventures.com) introduced 
its Request-For-Information (RFI) interactive platform that allows cable network 
viewers to interact with commercials using their remote control. For an additional 
charge, advertisers can add a banner on the bottom of the screen where viewers 
can respond to opinion polls; request additional information; receive coupons, dis-
counts, or promotional giveaways; or provide other feedback to the advertiser.
 
Exhibit 3-1 shows how one local cable system uses interactive TV to promote a 
series on one of its channels.
Varied Relationships Between Audiences and Media
Relationships between audiences and media run the gamut from casual to intense. 
When sports teams are playing, the reason for watching any game depends on the 
team’s chance of making the play-offs. If the team has a good chance, the audience 
will return each week with a sense of loyalty and anticipation for the game. Die-hard 
Chicago Cubs fans notwithstanding, if a team has a losing record, then the number of 
viewers will most likely drop because the relationship with the event is not as strong.
 
Even if a vehicle has a large and interested audience, the numbers might not be 
the critical determination of its effect. Relationships today are not strong, especially 
among certain demographically defined audiences. For example, teenagers seem 
uninterested in reading newspapers, and all the techniques that have been used to 
attract them still have not changed the very loose relationship between the two.

 
The Relationship Among Media, Advertising, and Consumers 
49
 
Mass media today tend to be rejected by some media planners in favor of more 
specialized media with smaller, more selective audiences. Data from single-source 
research often indicate that small market segments account for a large proportion 
of sales. This is the Long Tail phenomenon referred to earlier. The relationship 
between audiences and media, however, is more important: If the relationship is 
Charter Communications Uses Its Interactive 
Capability to Promote a TV Series
Charter Communications in Los Angeles has been a pioneer in the field of interactive 
television, offering the service to its 300,000 digital subscribers since 2002. In the 
fall of 2008, they created an interactive microsite containing video and other mate-
rials that would enhance the viewing experience of History Channel’s “Cities of the 
Underworld” series. One industry observer commented, “It’s the ability to have inter-
activity with a series . . . the different information on the different pages of the micro-
site give you a different perspective on the show . . . it’s all about giving the consumer 
that 360-degree experience, being a part of it, instead of just being a voyeur.”*
Source: Charter Communications. Used with permission.
 
Advertisers using interactive television must be aware of technical and business 
model differences among the various cable companies, be sensitive to privacy con-
cerns, ensure that interactive responses come from responsible adults, control the 
geographical distribution of the requests, and ensure that the interactive content 
does not interfere with the television program.
*  Mark Garner, VP for Distribution, Marketing, and Business Development at A&E Television. Quoted on 
http://www.cable360.net/blog/?p=56. 
EXHIBIT 3-1

50 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
casual, then advertising may not be as effective. If the relationship is close, then 
smaller audiences will account for a large proportion of sales, although this requires 
purchasing advertising on a large number of vehicles. With the fragmentation of 
the television audience across more than 80 measured cable networks, advertisers 
with broad targets typically buy time on more than 20 cable channels in addition 
to buying the major broadcast nets.
Video Consumer Mapping Study
In 2009, the Nielsen-funded Council for Research Excellence published the largest 
study to date that was specifically designed to provide a broad understanding of video 
media. The Video Consumer Mapping study4 is based on a 24-hour period of direct 
observation (in the person’s home, at work, in the car, etc.) using a specially designed 
portable computer where the observer recorded all media exposure in 10-second 
increments. The study was built on pioneering methodological research by Ball State 
University’s Center for Media Design, called the Middletown Media Studies.5
 
There were 10 key findings:
 1. Although the composition of consumers’ screen media time varied across age 
groups, their total screen time was strikingly similar, except among those 
45–54, whose screen time was highest.
 2. The degree of concurrent screen media exposure (multitasking) was equiva-
lent for all age groups under 55.
 3. The study confirmed that more than 99 percent of Nielsen’s three-screen 
time is TV. Even among those 18–24, TV represented more than 98 percent.
 4. Live TV leads all video time by a large margin, followed by DVD, with DVRs 
third.
 5. The study suggests that computing has displaced radio as the number-two 
media activity. Radio is now number three, and print is number four.
 6. New HDTV ownership (first and second set) led to higher TV exposure, 
though some of this increase appeared to be temporary.
 7. Early DVR owners spent much more time with DVR playback than new DVR 
owners.
 8. A higher percentage of TV time was spent as sole medium compared to com-
puters, print, or audio. DVR playback time was even more likely than live TV 
to be a sole medium.
 9. TV users were exposed to, on average, roughly an hour a day of live TV ads 
and promos.
4. www.researchexcellence.com/vcmstudy.php. 
5. www.bsu.edu/middletown. 

 
The Relationship Among Media, Advertising, and Consumers 
51
 10. Serious caution needs to be applied in interpreting self-reported data for 
media use. TV was substantially underreported, while online video and 
mobile video usage was overreported.
How Consumers Perceive Digital Advertising
The Internet has greatly expanded the ability to sell products by providing virtu-
ally unlimited information to the prospective buyer. It has blurred the line between 
advertising as pure salesmanship and advertising as a provider of product infor-
mation. This is especially true for high-cost, considered purchases such as auto-
mobiles, travel services, computer systems, and financial services, where a vast 
amount of information is needed to make a reasoned decision. Even advertising 
for food products can include detailed recipes and nutritional values. The Internet 
can then go beyond salesmanship to take the order, collect payment, and arrange 
shipping. According to MRI, by spring 2009, 85.9 percent of adults had access to 
the Internet, 72.6 percent went online every week, and 35.3 percent had bought 
something online in the last 30 days for personal or business use.6 Also, according 
to MRI, 63.5 percent of U.S. homes access the Internet via a high-speed broadband 
connection, a penetration that is likely to grow to near total coverage over the life 
of this book. Given this broad penetration, a number of retailers, including the Best 
Buy consumer electronics chain, consider the Internet their largest store.7
 
For this reason, the Internet must be seriously considered for every media plan. 
Despite this, the Internet has yet to challenge traditional media as the primary 
advertising venue. In 2008, digital advertising accounted for only 6 percent of total 
measured media spending. Television continues to dominate, capturing 62.2 per-
cent of media dollars with national consumer magazines second at 13.5 percent.8
How Audiences Process Information from Media
Much of the information received from media is stored in people’s short-term 
memory. Such information, like the last few words of a sentence just heard or read, 
or a telephone number found in an online search, can be recalled for only a short 
time. Advertisers have observed that audiences who want to remember some part 
of an advertising message can do so by spending time and effort in rehearsing 
6. Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC (MRI), Spring 2009 survey. 
7. www.gomez.com/download/cs_best_buy.pdf. 
8. The Nielsen Company, Monitor-Plus, 2008. 

52 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
the message. They can repeat it mentally until it is learned. Then the message is 
remembered longer, because it has been transferred to long-term memory.
 
The point is that media often do not do any more than deliver advertising to 
consumers. Media planners are sometimes called on to help consumers remember 
a message by buying media vehicles repeatedly within a given period. If audiences 
are not interested, they will not pay attention and the repetitions will be wasted. 
Audiences can be very selective in what they hear or see.
 
Can a media planner do any more to deliver advertising messages? There is a 
widespread disagreement among media professionals about this question. Some 
say much can be done by strategic media planning. By careful media selection and 
timing, by placing ads in markets where sales opportunities are best, by repeating 
the advertising, and by other strategic activities, a planner can help the advertisers 
achieve their goals. Others say that a media planner’s job is done when the message 
is delivered to the right targets, at the right time, and in sufficient quantities.
 
It is clear that media work with the creative message and the appeal of a prod-
uct to get the message through to consumers. When the audience wants or needs 
a product for any reason, they tend to pay attention to an ad for that product. They 
may not notice an ad the first time it is broadcast or printed, but their attention will 
presumably alert them to find that ad inevitably. Audiences are not waiting for an 
ad to appear; however, creative effort can take ordinary ideas and dramatize them 
to such an extent that the audience will pay attention to the ad for a short time at 
least.
 
Audiences accept commercials as a necessary evil they must put up with to 
view free program content. However, the growth of DVRs and their ability to 
fast-forward through commercials shows that people will gladly avoid commercials 
if given the tool. Although estimates vary, there is agreement that more than 70 per-
cent of the people watching a program via DVR playback skip through the commer-
cials. On the national television venues of network broadcast, cable, and syndication 
(not local spot TV), this is accounted for in the C3 ratings that show the number of 
people watching a TV program and its commercials at normal speed live or within 
three days of telecast. Because of this metric, advertisers get what they are paying 
for and have avoided the dire consequences that were predicted when the DVR first 
came out. There will be more about this in Chapter 4.
 
Yet great creative efforts do not necessarily translate into positive results in the 
marketplace. For example, in the late 1990s, widely viewed advertising for the Taco 
Bell restaurant chain featured a talking Chihuahua whose signature “¡Yo Quiero!” 
became a national icon. The campaign was dropped in 2001 after marketers 

 
The Relationship Among Media, Advertising, and Consumers 
53
realized that it was not effectively driving customers into the restaurants. It was a 
popular and creative success, but a marketing failure. This runs counter to the gen-
eral belief that any product can be sold by clever advertising.
The Media’s Importance in the Buying Process
It is assumed that the power of media advertising to influence sales depends on 
where in the purchasing process a consumer happens to be. The classic Engel/Kollat 
model of the buying process tells us that the order of purchasing is as follows:9
1. Problem recognition—For example, an auto needs new tires, or an individual 
wants a new suit of clothes.
2. Search for alternatives to solve a problem—For example, a consumer reads, 
hears, or sees advertising; talks to a friend about the problem; or goes shopping 
for a product or brand.
3. Alternative evaluation of different brands—For example, a consumer has 
found two or three brands that could solve a problem. The consumer is decid-
ing which one to choose.
4. Purchase made through a choice of a brand—This is the buying action.
5. Postpurchasing evaluation—After buying, the consumer evaluates whether the 
product and brand meets his or her expectations for solving the problem.
6. Feedback about how satisfying the purchase was—Unsatisfactory purchases 
can be returned, or the consumer might keep the product and look for con-
firmation that he or she made a good buying decision. Frustration about the 
quality of the purchase can result in anger against the brand or the store where 
the purchase was made.
 
If consumers do not perceive that they have a problem, then presumably they 
will not react much to either media or advertising. On the other hand, when con-
sumers do have a problem, they are receptive to both. Some problems are simple, 
such as finding that there is no ketchup in the house when hamburgers are being 
served. Others, such as buying a new home, are complex.
9. James F. Engel, Roger D. Blackwell, and Paul W. Miniard, Consumer Behavior, 8th edi-
tion (Hinsdale, IL: Dryden Press, 1997). 

54 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Media Planning and the Marketing Mix
It is important for anyone studying media planning to understand the relationship 
between media planning and the marketing mix. The marketing mix is a group of 
elements that a firm uses to sell a product. This mix was once called the “four Ps”: 
product, place (or distribution), price, and promotion. It has been suggested that the 
four Ps are dead, but the marketing mix is as important as ever. It has always taken 
more elements than the four Ps to describe the marketing process. A fuller account 
is listed in Exhibit 3-2.10 Marketing strategy is discussed more fully in Chapter 6, 
“Marketing Strategy and Media Planning.”
 
Although media are not always considered to be a fundamental element of the 
marketing mix, they play a significant role in the selling process when advertis-
ing is required. The key to understanding the relationship between media and the 
marketing mix is that media do not work alone; they are part of a team of selling 
variables. Planners often get so involved with the complexity of their work that they 
forget this. In addition, media’s role is important because it controls the efficient 
delivery of advertisements to those who will probably buy.
The Four Ps of Marketing
PRODUCT
PLACE
PRICE
PROMOTION
Quality
Distribution channels
List price
Advertising
Features
Coverage
Discounts
Copy and art
Options
Locations
Allowances
Media
Style
Inventory
Payment period
Personal selling
Brand name
Transportation
Credit terms
Sales promotion
Packaging
Public relations
Direct marketing
Integrated marketing
Event marketing
Local area marketing
10. Modified from Philip Kotler, Marketing Management (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
Hall, 1984): 69. 
EXHIBIT 3-2

 
The Relationship Among Media, Advertising, and Consumers 
55
 
Therefore, targeting prospects correctly is one way that the media/marketing 
team effort is fulfilled. Inefficient targeting means wasted effort and money. Media 
adds a qualitative value to an advertisement because of some quality in the medium. 
An example is Good Housekeeping’s “Seal of Approval,” which is given after adver-
tised products pass various quality tests in the company’s laboratory, and which is 
intended to give the reader more confidence in their quality. Other qualitative val-
ues exist for specialized media that contribute to the medium’s integral role in the 
advertising message.
Exposure: The Basic Measurement of Media Audiences
Industry leaders have chosen a measurement of media audiences—exposure—that 
is less than perfect, but that can differentiate media vehicles on the basis of their 
audience sizes. Audiences also can be measured and compared with competitive 
media at a reasonable cost. Exhibit 3-3 shows many other means of measuring 
media audiences.
Ways That Media Audiences Could Be Measured
MEDIA MEASUREMENT
WHAT IT MEASURES
WHAT IT MEANS
Vehicle 
exposure
Exposure to TV or print media 
(not ads)
Open eyes facing a vehicle (or opportuni-
ties to see ads)
Print media 
circulation
Numbers of copies distributed
People/families receiving newspaper 
vehicles (no exposure counted)
Advertising 
exposure
Number of ads exposed per 
issue or per TV program
A gross (or crude) counting of total num-
ber of ads exposed in a vehicle
Advertising 
perception
Number of ads that consum-
ers remember having seen in 
a vehicle
The smallest amount of communication 
remembered of ads in a vehicle
Advertising 
communication
The total amount of recalled 
material from ads in a vehicle
Feedback from ad messages in vehicles
Response function: 
media effectiveness
The number of responses 
to specific advertising in a 
vehicle
The effects of advertising on consum-
ers of responses such as sales, brand 
awareness, attitude change, and recall 
of messages
EXHIBIT 3-3

56 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
Technically, exposure means “open eyes (or listening ears) facing the medium.” 
However, the research that measures (quantifies) exposure is different for each 
medium. So the meaning of an exposure is different. In magazines, for example, a 
person is counted as a reader if he or she says it was read or just looked into during 
the most recent publication period (month for monthlies, week for weeklies, etc.). 
Persons exposed to a television program are counted only if they press their own 
designated button on a measuring device known as a people meter. Of course, not 
every home has such a device, and even when the device is available and a person 
is watching a program, the failure to press the button will mean that a viewer is not 
counted. In midsize and smaller local markets, television viewing and radio listen-
ing are measured when people fill in a diary. In the larger markets, radio listening 
is recorded on the Portable People Meter (PPM) that counts stations within earshot 
of the radio’s loudspeaker. On the Internet, exposure occurs when the user is served 
an ad banner, pop-up, or a page of content from a website.
 
People who are not acquainted with measurements of media audiences are 
always surprised when they are told that audience numbers obtained from the 
media research such as Experian Simmons, MRI, or The Nielsen Company are 
based on the average issue of a magazine or telecast of a TV program and not the 
number of people who are exposed to the individual advertisements in the vehicles. 
Even some experienced professionals forget or never knew that media exposure 
measurements do not show how many persons have read advertisements. Also, it 
cannot be assumed that a large audience for a media vehicle automatically means 
a large number of individuals saw a client’s advertisement. The exception, as noted 
earlier, is the audience to the three national television venues, network, cable, and 
syndication, where the audience is reported as the number of people watching the 
average commercial minute, including all DVR playback at normal speed for up to 
three days after the initial telecast. Local television, including markets using the 
Local People Meter (LPM), continues to be measured in terms of the average quar-
ter-hour audience.
 
Magazine audiences are reported in terms of the number of people who read the 
average issue, regardless of whether they saw the ads or not. In 2009, MRI offered 
a new service called AdMeasures that adjusts the average-issue audience by a fac-
tor that accounts for the number of people who read each specific issue, and then 
further adjusts that audience by the number of people who recall “noting” each ad. 
This yields the number of people exposed to each specific advertisement in a maga-
zine. The AdMeasures service must be purchased as another product of the MRI 
research company. 
 
Its availability illustrates the dilemma facing advertising and media agencies that 
must decide whether the substantial additional expense of this new research tool 
is justified by the additional precision it offers, and more important, whether that 

 
The Relationship Among Media, Advertising, and Consumers 
57
additional knowledge can be applied to future plans. The industry has gone from 
a situation in past years where the information simply didn’t exist, to the present 
time when research companies are offering a growing list of innovative research 
products for sale, forcing the agencies to decide if they are worth the cost.
Need for Better Media Vehicle Measurements
Despite all the new data coming from the research companies, planners continue 
to need better tools to help them find the best medium or vehicle for their client’s 
advertising messages. If it could be shown that one medium sells more of a brand 
than any other medium, and if the cost were not prohibitive, then that medium 
would be the one in which to place advertising.
 
Unfortunately, no measurement available today can provide precisely that kind 
of information. Some planners have conducted customized research to guide them 
in finding a medium that has the greatest sales potential. The problem with that 
kind of research is that it is difficult to parse out each individual medium’s con-
tribution to a sale because after all, media are not the only factors contributing to 
sales. Every element of the marketing mix contributes a little, and some contribute 
a great deal. For example, sometimes the factor that is most responsible for selling 
a product is a reduced price; media that carry news of the price reduction in an ad 
play a secondary role in the sale. Other media mix factors that contribute to a sale 
are distribution, positioning, personal selling, sales promotion, public relations, and 
packaging. And the most important elements in the selling of a brand generally are 
its product quality and uniqueness.
 
Many planners are dissatisfied with using exposure for media comparison pur-
poses. They argue that media are not passive carriers of ads; rather, each medium has 
some power to affect an audience in some way, and this power should be measured.
 
The problem is that advertisers have been unable to separate the effect of the 
medium from the effect of the quality of the creative message. Research compa-
nies can measure the persuasive power of individual commercials and compare the 
results to the average (norms) of all the commercials that they have ever measured. 
But these tests are conducted after the commercials have been created. Some score 
high, some score low. In the end, developing persuasive advertising is far more an 
art than a science.
 
To be effective, a commercial must be seen—it must reach the target. But see-
ing an ad only once is not enough. To be effective, a commercial or magazine ad 
must be seen a number of times. Determining how many times a person needs to 
see an ad for it to elicit the desired response is one of the basic challenges of media 
planning.

58 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Response Function
A response function quantifies the perceived ability of multiple exposures of an ad 
to elicit a response from the viewer. If we broadcast a commercial 20 times, some 
people will see it only once, others will see it 5 times, others 8 times, and a few 
might even see it all 20 times. The response function shows what percent of the 
people who are exposed to an ad varying numbers of times are expected to respond 
to that ad. For instance, we might say that only 10 percent of the people who see a 
commercial once will respond, but 50 percent of the people who see it eight or more 
times will respond. Exhibit 3-4 illustrates a sample response function. It reads, “10 
percent of the people exposed to the ad once will respond; 25 percent of the people 
exposed twice to the ad will respond,” and so on.
Sample Response Function
NUMBER OF EXPOSURES
PERCENT RESPONDING
1 time
10%
2
25
3
35
4
40
5
44
6
47
7
49
8
50
 
Media research can tell the planner with great accuracy how many people are 
exposed to a campaign different numbers of times. But deciding what percent of 
those people will respond is a subtle judgment that depends on the product being 
sold, the ad’s creative quality, the medium in which the ad appears, and a variety of 
other factors. We will go into this subject in more detail in Chapter 6. Exhibit 3-5 
shows the hypothetical gauntlet that a marketing communication must run before 
it results in a sale.
EXHIBIT 3-4

 
The Relationship Among Media, Advertising, and Consumers 
59
How Consumers Could React to Media and Advertising
How can a planner think about the effect of a media plan in terms of the ultimate sales 
response? One answer is to estimate what happens after the ads appear in the media 
vehicles. The following is a hypothetical example of such an estimate:
TARGET AUDIENCE
Number of targets in the United States
10,000,000
Percent of U.S. targets exposed to media vehicles
50%
5,000,000
Percent of those reached who saw any ad in vehicles (ad exposure)
25
1,250,000
Percent of targets who saw any ad and who read our ad(s)
25
312,500
Percent of those who read our ads and who bought our brand because 
of our ad(s)
10
31,250
Percent of those who bought our brand once and who bought it a 
second time (a rough measure of brand loyalty)
10
3,125
Measuring Audiences to Advertising Vehicles
Some media planners believe that vehicles are nothing more than passive carriers 
of ads to consumers. A simple measurement such as exposure, therefore, is consid-
ered adequate for comparing media vehicles. In other words, identifying the vehi-
cle that delivers the largest number of the target audience is a good enough way to 
select media. But cost-efficiency is equally important. This requires that the media 
selected reach the largest number of prospects at the lowest cost. Cost-efficiency 
simply means that audience size must be related to media costs. Measuring this 
efficiency is done through cost per thousand, cost per rating point, or both.
Cost per Thousand
The statement, “Potatoes: $2.00” is meaningless until it is expressed as “Potatoes: 
$2.00/pound.” To compare the cost-efficiency of different media options, the cost of 
an ad is expressed in terms of the cost-per-thousand targets exposed. Specifically, 
cost per thousand (CPM) is the cost to deliver 1,000 people or homes. It is calcu-
lated by dividing the cost by the audience delivered and multiplying the quotient by 
EXHIBIT 3-5

60 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
1,000. The audience base can be circulation, homes reached, readers, or number of 
audience members of any kind of demographic or product usage classification.
 
CPM is a comparative device. It enables planners to compare one medium or 
media vehicle with another to find those that are the most efficient. It can be used 
for either intramedia or intermedia comparisons.
 
Following are various formulas that can be used to compare vehicles or media 
on the basis of cost per thousand:
1. For print media (when audience data are not available):
CPM  Cost of 1 page  1,000
Circulation 
CPM circulation tells planners how much it costs to deliver 1,000 copies of the 
print ad, but it tells them nothing about the people who read those copies. It is 
used as a fallback measure to evaluate publications that do not have audience 
research.
2. For print media (when audience data are available):
CPM  
Cost of 1 page  1,000
Number of prospects reached
3. For broadcast media (based on homes or audience reached by a given program 
or time):
CPM  
Cost of 1 unit of time  1,000
Number of homes or persons reached by a given program or time
4. For newspapers:
CPM  Cost of 1 ad  1,000
Circulation 
Wherever precise demographic classifications of the audiences are available, these 
data should be used in the denominator of the formula.
 
The procedure for using any of the preceding formulas is to compare media on 
the basis of the two variables: audience and cost. The medium with the lowest CPM 
is the most efficient, other things being equal. Since each medium is measured dif-
ferently, CPM analysis is most typically applied to vehicles within a single medium, 
that is, one magazine versus another or one television program versus another.

 
The Relationship Among Media, Advertising, and Consumers 
61
 
Media planners should be cautious about automatically accepting or rejecting 
media vehicles on the basis of slight differences in CPM; a difference of 10 percent 
one way or another is meaningless. And people such as David Poltrack, director of 
research at CBS, note that the range of error in television sample audiences is so 
great that a true calculation of the room for error would tell us that even a CPM 
variation of a dollar or more might not be real.11 Unfortunately, planners often 
ignore this advice in day-to-day practice.
 
Generally, the media vehicle with the lowest CPM is selected, but not always. If 
the advertiser requires a special kind of target audience and few or no media reach 
them exclusively, then the CPM comparisons are ignored. Rather, media selections 
are based on the principle of reaching the largest number of targets, regardless of 
cost.
 
For example, the target audience sometimes is individuals with annual incomes 
of more than $100,000. A few media vehicles reach a small proportion of these 
audiences, but even if many such vehicles were used, the total number of persons 
reached might be relatively small. On the other hand, a very large number of these 
persons might be reached with mass media such as a network television program 
or a national magazine. It is obvious that either of these two media would also 
include a large amount of waste because of the low target audience composition. 
Therefore, when the CPMs are computed, they will seem unduly high. Yet the waste 
and the high CPM might have to be ignored to maximize the size of target audi-
ences reached.
 
Mass-produced and mass-consumed products, such as fast food, breakfast cere-
als, and automobiles, usually have target audiences for whom media are selected 
primarily on a CPM basis. Specialized products such as yachts, private airplanes, 
and international travel have specialized target audiences. Selecting media to reach 
them requires less attention to cost-efficiencies and more to audience sizes. The 
concepts of coverage (how many people are exposed to the medium) and composi-
tion (the percent of all exposed people who are in the target) will be discussed in 
more detail in Chapter 4.
Cost per Rating Point
Another method of comparing the cost-efficiency of radio and television vehicles is 
the cost per rating point (CPP). Essentially, CPP measures the cost of one household 
or demographic rating point in a given market. It is calculated by dividing the cost 
per commercial, or spot, by the rating. In television, a rating is the percent of the 
11. Erick Larson, “Watching Americans Watch TV,” Atlantic Monthly (March 1992): 72. 

62 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
target audience in a market that is tuned in during the average minute or quarter 
hour of a program. A market is the geographic area that can receive the program; it 
can range from the entire United States down to a local market called a designated 
market area (DMA). This will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 4. Both CPM 
and CPP are measurements of relative value, but each uses a different base. The 
formula for calculating CPP is as follows:
CPP  Cost of a commercial
Rating
For example, if the cost of a prime-time network TV commercial is $200,000 and 
the national women 25–54 rating for that announcement is 4 (that is, 4 percent of 
all the 25- to 54-year-old women in the United States were watching during the 
average minute of this program), then the CPP would be $200,000/4  $50,000.
 
How does a CPP compare with a CPM for the same station and commercial? The 
following example shows the differences as they might relate to a local market:
Population: women 25–54  900,000
Program’s women 25–54 viewers: 36,000
Cost of a 30-second commercial: $1,100
DMA Rating
Viewers  100/population  rating
36,000  100/900,000  4.0
CPM  Cost  1,000/Viewers
Cost of 30-second commercial: $1,100
Number of women ages 25–54 delivered at 8:00 p.m.: 36,000
$1,100  1,000/36,000  $30.56
Cost Per Point (CPP)
Cost/rating
Cost of 30-second commercial: $1,100
DMA rating at 8:00 p.m.: 4.0
$1,100/4.0  $275.00
 
Is there any preference for using one measurement method over the other? 
Generally, CPM is used to compare the efficiency of individual vehicles, while CPP 
is the tool most often used to calculate the cost of an entire broadcast plan.

 
The Relationship Among Media, Advertising, and Consumers 
63
Is There a Better Way of Measurement?
We use CPM to compare media efficiency because we have to. Advertisers would 
much prefer to compare media on the basis of their ability to generate sales. 
Unfortunately, no one has been able to correlate the size of a medium’s audience 
with the number of additional sales that an ad produces, because advertising is only 
one of many factors that determine how much of a product will be sold. Researchers 
cannot measure sales, but they can measure the number of people exposed to the 
ad, allowing planners to evaluate the cost per thousand people exposed.
 
The Internet provides a much more direct link between exposure and action by 
reporting back to the advertiser the number of people who are exposed to the ban-
ner ad as well as the number who click through a banner to the advertiser’s web-
site. It also allows an advertiser to know exactly how many sales were generated for 
products and services that can be sold online. This is a dramatic leap forward, but 
for the majority of day-to-day low-interest products, advertisers will continue to 
evaluate media in terms of CPM.
The Top Five Perennial Questions 
That Media Research Cannot Answer
Up to now we have discussed the general concepts and methodologies of media 
research and the concepts that are unique to each of the major media. The meth-
odologies that are based on a random sample have a statistical margin of error. 
All methodologies have nonsampling error caused by the real-world challenges of 
producing research. But these sources of error can be identified and accounted for. 
In the course of a planner’s work, other questions come up for which there are no 
simple answers. These are the most important questions in media because they 
involve subtle judgments about what is best.
 
The following frequently asked questions cannot be definitively answered, 
because they depend on what is happening in the mind of each consumer. They are 
presented here as “impossible” questions to sensitize planners to the inevitable day 
when one of these questions comes up in the course of their work, and to provide 
something to say and ways to think about helping the advertiser make a reasonable 
judgment.
1. How Much Is Enough?
This is the most common question, and it takes many forms. What is the least I 
can spend and still have an effective campaign? If I have X number of gross rating 

64 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
points (GRPs) against my primary target, am I delivering enough weight against 
the secondary target? My last campaign was wildly successful. I ran XX number of 
GRPs and actually had to turn away customers. Next time, how much weight can I 
cut back and still be successful?
 
Several approaches will put the advertiser in the ballpark. If the advertiser has 
competitive sales and spending information, it is common to match the share of 
voice to the share of market. An advertiser with a 10 percent share of a market 
should be spending at least 10 percent of the media dollars spent in that industry.
 
Certainly an advertiser should look back at the experience with comparable 
products. For example, some industries have a historic advertising-to-sales ratio.
 
An industry rule of thumb is that an ad must be seen three or more times for it 
to be effective. While this sounds like a reasonable prescription, it evades the ques-
tion, “How many people can I afford to reach 3 times?” In the end, and unfortu-
nately, many advertising budgets are simply what remains after all other costs have 
been accounted for.
2. Which Medium Is Most Effective?
Effective at doing what? Different media have different strengths. Effectiveness 
depends heavily on the creative quality. Many people think television is the most 
effective medium, but this question comes up when television is not appropriate or 
affordable. There are virtually no independent, public domain studies of cross-media 
effectiveness. Advertisers who do conduct these studies treat the results as highly 
confidential. The publicly available research that does exist comes from industry 
associations whose studies are designed to promote the value of their medium. As 
they say, “Don’t ask your barber if you need a haircut.” The best advice is to ensure the 
advertiser has matched the strength of the media to the marketing objectives.
3. What Is the Best Environment?
This question assumes there is a rub-off effect between the medium and the adver-
tising message. However, as noted earlier, numerous studies have failed to quan-
tify that effect or even to confirm that it exists. We know that high-rated televi-
sion programs attract more light viewers, but these iconic programs have a heavy 
cost premium. The first position in a commercial break has a larger audience than 
midbreak positions, but pod position is usually beyond a buyer’s control. In maga-
zines, an ad on the back cover is more likely to be read than one inside the book, but 
advertisers pay a premium for that position. Some advertisers believe a magazine ad 
near the front of the book is preferable, but since most insertion orders request “far 
forward, right-hand page,” these assumed-to-be desirable positions are more likely 

 
The Relationship Among Media, Advertising, and Consumers 
65
to be given to advertisers running a heavy schedule. At the least, planners should 
ensure that multiple ads are given a fair rotation.
4. Which Is Better: Flighting or Continuity?
This age-old question concerns how a limited advertising budget should be sched-
uled over the year: in short bursts of heavy media weight followed by hiatus weeks 
of no activity, or continuous advertising at low weight. If the budget allows the 
advertiser to buy 1,600 GRPs a year, should they be scheduled in 4-week flights 
(total 16 weeks on-air) of 100 GRPs per week? Or would it be more effective to run 
for 40 weeks at 40 GRPs per week?
 
For products that are sold more or less evenly throughout the year, advertis-
ers are guided by the recency theory of advertising that was proposed by media 
guru Erwin Ephron. In contrast to the theory that three exposures are needed, 
the recency theory is based on research that shows a single exposure close to pur-
chase is most effective. Since there is a steady demand for nonseasonal products, 
the advertiser should maintain a continuous presence on-air. The goal should be 
to maximize the total weekly reach points (the annual sum of each week’s reach 
points). This is achieved by continuity scheduling.
 
However, this ignores the effect of a competitor’s advertising that may be 
flighted. Also, synergy is needed between the advertising and seasonal consumer 
or trade promotions.
 
Finally, there is a reluctance to go below a perceived minimal level of about 50 
GRPs per week. Most advertisers appreciate the importance of continuity, but given 
this minimum, they find continuity scheduling to be an ideal that is beyond their 
brand’s budget.
5. When Is My Commercial Worn Out?
It is hard enough to know what a commercial “does” when it is fresh. Commercial 
wearout is really a variation of the “How much is enough?” question. An indus-
try rule of thumb is that a commercial is worn out when the heaviest viewers are 
exposed 26 times—somewhere around 1,000 to 1,500 GRPs. This has become a 
benchmark for judging a given situation, but many questions remain. Does that rule 
apply to a single execution or to an entire campaign of similar but different creative 
executions? Over what period of time? What is the effect of hiatus periods? Does 
this guideline refer to demographic target rating points (women ages 25 to 54) or 
household points, which are usually larger?
 
One researcher sees a political agenda behind the question. The agency wants 
to make a new commercial and the advertiser doesn’t, or vice versa. People who are 

66 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
closely involved with the lengthy creative process may be so close to the commer-
cial that they will think it is worn out when in fact it hasn’t even been on air.
 
It should be clear by now that there is no simple answer to these “How much is 
enough?” questions of effective frequency, flighting versus continuity, minimum 
GRP levels, maximum hiatus weeks, media effectiveness, wearout, and so forth. 
Research can provide guidance, but in the end, it requires agency and advertiser 
judgment to apply these general findings from the past to specific plans for the 
future.

 
67
Basic Measurements 
and Calculations
T
his chapter describes and explains the basic measurements and calcula-
tions used in media planning. These explanations serve as the foundation 
for understanding media strategy decisions, which will be discussed in 
Chapter 6. The measurements and calculations discussed in this chap-
ter are by no means all that are available. They represent only those used most 
often.
 
It is vital to understand how media audiences are measured and what those 
measurements mean. Media planners can, and sometimes do, make strategy deci-
sions without using measurement data as a guide, but such decisions are difficult 
to defend because they tend to be too subjective. Measurement data, on the other 
hand, provide a degree of objectivity that is hard to refute.
How Media Vehicles Are Measured
Most media audiences are measured through sample surveys, using data about a 
small group to find out about a larger universe’s exposure to a particular medium. 
The research companies take a sample because measuring the entire audience (a 
census) is generally not practical. Sample sizes can vary from as few as 200 to as 
many as 26,000 individuals for single-source services such as Mediamark Research 
and Intelligence, LLC (MRI), and Simmons. Online samples and samples using TV 
set-top boxes (STBs) can run in the hundreds of thousands or even millions, but 
even these immense samples have limitations that will be discussed later.
CHAPTER FOUR

68 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
Given the widespread availability and use of the Internet, researchers have been 
tempted to shift away from traditional telephone and direct-mail sample recruit-
ment to obtain the necessary sample. However, while an Internet survey may be 
acceptable for some purposes, it is not representative enough for audience estimates 
that must reflect the total population. As noted in Chapter 3, 85 percent of people 
have access to the Internet, meaning that the viewing habits of 15 percent cannot 
possibly be accounted for. Statisticians call this sample frame bias. In addition, the 
sample is limited to people who volunteer to participate. Their media behavior is 
likely to be different from those who do not sign up, but there is no way to know or 
quantify the difference. This is called response bias. So-called representative sam-
ples or quota samples keep recruiting until the researchers have enough people of 
each age and gender cell to match the U.S. population. But the relatively few young 
adults who do accept may not have the same media habits as the great many in their 
cohort who refuse. A random sample based on household addresses, where every-
one has an equal chance to be included and where extra effort is made to recruit 
those who initially refuse, is the best methodology for research used as “currency” 
by the billion-dollar broadcast and print media.
 
Some research, such as Nielsen’s national television ratings, are ongoing and 
report the audience to every program 24/7/365. Most others are made at specified 
intervals and produce reports annually or several times a year. Changes in measur-
ing technology are continually being made as new ideas or methods are developed, 
and planners are always looking for better ways to measure audiences. The methods 
presented in this chapter simply represent those used most often today.
Nielsen Television Ratings
Nielsen is currently the primary supplier of television ratings that are used as the 
currency of advertising sales. It uses three methodologies:
1. Nielsen People Meter (NPM)—for national television and the largest local 
markets
2. Integrated set meter/diary—midsize markets—due to be replaced by the 
People Meter
3. Diary only—small markets
 
The NPM is the most precise and accurate method for measuring television 
audiences. The Nielsen Company (http://en-us.nielsen.com) employs a single sam-
ple of more than 18,000 homes that are equipped with a people meter to produce 

 
Basic Measurements and Calculations 
69
all national (network, cable, and syndicated program) television ratings and local 
ratings in the top 26 markets, called designated market areas (DMAs), covering 50 
percent of the population. These 26 markets are referred to as Local People Meter 
(LPM) markets.
 
The NPM consists of two parts. The human interface is a small box that sits 
on top of each set in the house that has a screen five inches or larger (see Exhibit 
4-1). Household members use this or a remote control to record who is watching. 
Each person is assigned a button, and there is a place on top where visitors can 
enter their age and gender. A row of lights on the front blinks red when the set is 
first turned on. 
 
Household members are instructed to push their button when they are “watch-
ing television.” So when Dad watches the football game, he punches his button and 
his light changes from red to green. Mom, who may be in the room but is doing 
something else, does not punch hers. Her looking up from time to time, and even 
watching a commercial, would not be recorded. From the moment when someone’s 
button is pushed, every channel the set is tuned to is recorded. The meter reports 
viewing in one-minute increments, allowing Nielsen to report the number of view-
ers in the average minute of the program (the AA rating).
The Nielsen People Meter
Source: The Nielsen Company, the Nielsen People Meter. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 4-1

70 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
The second part of the people meter is another, larger box off in a closet 
somewhere that identifies which channel the set is tuned to and sends the data 
by telephone line to Nielsen’s computers in Florida. This is a challenge in today’s 
500-channel television environment. The Active/Passive (A/P) Meter identifies 
the station being watched with an inaudible code imbedded in its audio signal 
(the active part). A wire carries the signal from each set’s loudspeaker or audio 
output jack to the meter. Passive digital signal matching is used to identify 
channels that are not encoded. Together they achieve almost 100 percent accu-
racy in identifying what the viewer is watching. The A/P Meter was specifically 
designed to handle today’s digital environment, including cable boxes, satellites, 
digital video recorders (DVRs) like TiVo, high-definition television (HDTV), 
video games, PC viewing, and other forms of video delivery that have not even 
been invented.
 
In an initiative called “TVandPC,” by the end of 2010 Nielsen will have installed 
meters on all the personal computers in a 7,500 home subset of the people meter 
sample. Users will sign in to their computer in the same way that they push their 
people meter buttons. Then all online activity will be recorded, including watch-
ing news, sports, or entertainment TV programs via Hulu or other Internet video 
services. With this information, Nielsen will be able to report the total audience 
to programs, whether that viewing occurs on the television set or on the PC. The 
viewing data will be carefully monitored to ensure that the addition of computer 
tracking will not affect Nielsen’s ability to recruit its people meter sample.
 
In the 26 largest markets, television audiences are measured with the people 
meter and are known popularly as local people meter (LPM) markets. The hard-
ware and all of the procedures are identical to the way Nielsen measures national 
television. The only difference is that the sample is weighted to represent the 
local market’s population instead of the nation’s. The LPM has minute-by-minute 
granularity that would allow reporting the average minute (AA) audience, but by 
long-standing practice all spot markets, even LPM markets, continue reporting the 
average-quarter-hour (AQH) audience. In addition to providing local ratings, the 
people meters in these markets are included in the sample for the national ratings, 
although they are then reweighted to the national population.
 
While the largest DMAs are measured with the people meter, in 31 midsize 
markets (20 percent of the country), audiences are measured with a combination 
of meters and diaries. A device called a Recordimeter provides continuous data 
on what programs the set is tuned to. A diary is used to record demographic data 
(see Exhibit 4-2). This meter-diary integration is the same methodology that has 
been used since 1956 and is scheduled to be replaced with the A/P Meter by 2012, 
at which time local television in 70 percent of the United States will be measured 
with the modern people meter technology.

 
Basic Measurements and Calculations 
71
 
Nielsen is working on simpler, less expensive versions of the A/P Meter for mar-
kets ranked 57 to 125. But until it is released, and indefinitely for markets ranked 
126 and higher, all viewing will be captured in a diary. Respondents write down 
what station and program they are watching in quarter-hour increments, causing 
ratings to be defined in terms of the number of viewers during the AQH of a pro-
gram or daypart.
 
While researchers are quick to admit that Nielsen’s diary is the least accurate 
methodology, especially in today’s world, it is also the least expensive. Like all media 
research, the bulk of the cost is borne by the media that use the data to support 
their sales efforts. Buying agencies pay relatively little. In the smaller markets, the 
fixed cost of research becomes a heavy burden on stations that have limited ability 
to raise their ad rates. So although the diary methodology is deeply flawed, it is all 
that stations in the smaller markets can afford.
Nielsen TV Viewing Diary
Source: The Nielsen Company, Nielsen Station Index. Used with permission.
Copyrighted information of The Nielsen Company, licensed for use herein.
EXHIBIT 4-2

72 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
On the other hand, the diary has the advantage of providing a direct link to 
the viewers in the form of written comments on the last page. These are a popular 
source of information for station managers who make an annual visit to specially 
provided reading rooms in Nielsen’s Technology Center near Tampa, Florida. For 
more information about how TV ratings are produced, go to http://en-us.nielsen
.com/tab/product_families/nielsen_tv_audience.
Proposed Set-Top Box (STB) Alternatives for Measuring Television
Researchers are constantly looking for ways to improve television measurement, 
and in the process, they are developing a service that would compete with Nielsen. 
The international research firm of Taylor Nelson Sofres (TNS) is developing a ser-
vice that would use the set-top cable or satellite box to record television viewing. 
TiVo (the DVR company)1 and Rentrak, a multimedia measurement company,2 are 
also developing STB systems. Not to be left out, Nielsen is working on a way to 
incorporate STB measurement into its rating service.
 
Cable and satellite television systems now serve 90 percent of the United States,3 
opening the possibility of tapping the STB to learn what programs are being 
watched. This has the advantages of accessing an exceptionally large sample, poten-
tially in the tens of millions, and total passive measurement: the viewing household 
doesn’t need to do anything for its viewing to be reported. On the negative side, 
since 10 percent of homes do not have cable or satellite, their viewing would not be 
accounted for. The STB doesn’t identify who in the household is watching the set, 
so this measure doesn’t provide demographic rating points. It is a measure of tun-
ing, not viewing—that is, the set may be on, but there is no certainty that anyone 
is watching. Since many homes keep the cable box on all the time, researchers are 
forced to estimate when the TV set itself is turned on and being watched. Finally, 
the many cable systems serving the country have different technical standards and 
varying degrees of cooperation, making it difficult to aggregate them into a single, 
unified sample.
 
Whether any of these will replace or even become sufficiently developed to sup-
plement the people meter remains to be seen. Until these questions are resolved, 
the television ratings used for the currency of buying and selling will continue to 
be measured with a sample.
1. www.tivoadvertising.com. 
2. www.rentrak.com. 
3. The Nielsen Company, Nielsen Answers, July 2009. 

 
Basic Measurements and Calculations 
73
Arbitron Radio Ratings
There are more than 270 radio markets in the United States because the geographic 
areas measured are smaller than television DMAs. Because of its low cost, radio 
has traditionally been measured with a seven-day diary. Since 2001, the Arbitron 
Company has been deploying a pager-sized personal meter that responds to special 
codes in the radio station’s audio signal. Because it is totally passive, this Portable 
People Meter (PPM) not only greatly improves radio audience measurement, but 
also changes the definition of audience from people who consider themselves “lis-
tening to the radio” to people who are within earshot of the loudspeaker, regardless 
of whether they are paying attention to the set. Following exhaustive tests, Arbitron 
is replacing the diary with the PPM. As of December 2009, they expect to have it 
operational in 33 radio markets, representing 47 percent of the United States.4 The 
remaining markets will continue to be measured with a diary. The PPM potentially 
could be used to measure television viewing, but a series of technical and opera-
tional difficulties have prevented that from happening. Nevertheless, it remains a 
possible methodology in the future.
 
Although Nielsen is primarily known for its television audience ratings, it is 
moving into the radio measurement business with a diary that uses stick-on labels 
to identify which stations are being listened to. Nielsen is starting out in 50 small to 
midsize markets, but if successful, they are expected to expand the service to larger 
markets, providing significant new competition to Arbitron.
 
Radio has traditionally been thought of as an entertainment medium delivered 
by local stations that are licensed by the Federal Communications Commission 
(FCC). The growth of broadband Internet has led to another medium: streaming 
audio, sometimes called Web radio. According to Arbitron/Edison research,5 by 
summer 2009, 49 percent of adults had ever listened to Web radio, and 17 percent 
had listened to the medium in the last week. Content is mostly an online feed from 
terrestrial stations that may or may not include the advertising. As of this writing 
there is no ongoing national measurement, but that is expected to change if inter-
est in the medium increases.
 
National satellites provide yet another venue for delivering audio content. Sirius 
XM Satellite Radio has more than 180 channels that can be accessed from any-
where in the continental United States. This pay service is available online, but the 
majority of its subscribers listen in their car. Measurement has proven to be a chal-
lenge because the satellite audience is so fragmented that no single channel amasses 
4. Arbitron, estimate as of September 2009 at www.arbitron.com. 
5. AdweekMedia, July 20, 2009. 

74 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
enough listeners to be reportable, and advertisers are reluctant to scatter their mes-
sage across the whole demographically diverse network. Unless the company can 
survive on subscription fees, the lack of measurement may undermine the advertis-
ing business model of what, on the surface, is an attractive media option.
Magazines and Newspapers
At least three different techniques are commonly used to measure magazine and 
newspaper audiences: recent-reading and frequency-of-reading techniques for mag-
azines, and the yesterday-reading technique for newspapers.
Recent Reading
MRI is today the sole user of the recent-reading technique. In this method, inter-
viewers visit a national random sample of adults. Each interviewer has the black-
and-white logotypes of more than 200 magazines printed on individual cards. 
These are screened to about 12 to 15 magazines that the respondent claims to have 
read or looked into within the last six months. For these magazines, respondents 
are shown the cards one at a time again and asked if they have read or looked at the 
magazine within the last month, week, or other publication period, which includes 
browsing a magazine while waiting in the checkout line of a grocery store. Those 
who say they are “sure they have” are considered readers of the publication. After 
this questioning, respondents are asked for demographic information about them-
selves and their family. The interviewer then leaves behind a 115-page question-
naire booklet that asks respondents to fill out details about various products they 
have used and how often they used them. This booklet includes virtually every 
consumer product and service sold in America. Upon completion, the interviewer 
returns, collects the booklet, and gives the respondent a modest check as thanks 
for participating in the survey.
 
Today, the recent-reading technique used by MRI is the most widely used source 
of magazine audience estimates. It is considered single-source research because it 
captures media behavior, product usage, demographics, and attitudes, all from a 
single sample. This technique has the advantage of being able to quickly survey a 
large number of publications with a reliability that has been proven in more than 
30 years of practice.
 
There are several disadvantages. First, by showing just the logo, the respondents 
may become confused about which magazine they have read, especially if the title 
is similar to other magazines (e.g., Parents versus Parenting). Also, since just the 
logo is shown, readership could apply to any issue of a magazine, inflating the over-
all readership of the publication (a source of error called “telescoping”). Finally, this 

 
Basic Measurements and Calculations 
75
technique is more costly than mailed surveys because it must be administered in 
person by the interviewer. Nevertheless, the readership estimates are consistent 
from year to year, and because every magazine is treated equally, this technique is 
viewed as the best measure of the relative audience size of different magazines.
Frequency of Reading
The frequency-of-reading technique is the most commonly used method for deter-
mining the number of people who read a magazine. In this procedure, the respon-
dent is shown a list of magazine logotypes or cover pictures and is asked to record 
for each magazine the number of copies they have read out of the last four issues—
one out of four, two out of four, and so on. It is the least expensive methodology 
because the survey can be conducted through the mail.
 
The frequency-of-reading technique is used by Simmons Research, a division 
of the Experian Company. It offers single source research that is similar to, and 
in fierce competition with, MRI. Simmons’s National Consumer Survey measures 
the same behaviors, but its survey is conducted entirely by mail. These method-
ological differences—MRI in person, Simmons by mail—give each service different 
strengths and weaknesses that agency media researchers must account for. Most 
media planners use MRI’s service as the primary source for magazine audience 
estimates. Simmons is stronger in its measurement of demographic segments such 
as Hispanics and gay/lesbian populations. Simmons has traditionally had more 
detailed psychographic information. A more detailed comparison of the two ser-
vices is beyond the scope of this book.
Yesterday Reading
In the yesterday-reading technique, respondents in a selected sample are asked 
which newspapers they read yesterday. The procedure is much the same as the 
recent-reading technique for magazines. Because relatively few newspapers are read 
in any given market, this interview is quite short.
Internet
Nielsen Online (www.nielsen-online.com) and comScore Media Metrix (www
.comscore.com) are the two most widely used companies that measure the number 
of visitors to Internet websites. Both services maintain a large nationally represen-
tative sample of Internet users who allow the researchers to place software on their 
computers that record every site visited. In addition to determining the number 
of unique visitors, the services can tell how long people stay with each page, how 
deeply they go into a site, and the number of times they return. Both services are 

76 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
considered “passive” measures because the data are collected automatically, without 
any conscious effort by the respondents. This allows them to report on many more 
sites than would be possible in a survey that relies on respondents’ memories.
 
In addition to the basic demographics of people who visit different websites, 
advertisers want to know which sites are best for users of the advertiser’s prod-
ucts. comScore provides this information, as it asks its respondents which prod-
ucts they use. This information is linked to the sites they visit as they browse the 
Web. Nielsen Online has a competing service called @Plan, which asks respondents 
which products they use and then electronically tracks which websites they visit. 
Mobile Internet Measurement
In addition to their Internet measurement services, both Nielsen and comScore 
have systems that measure Internet browsing on smart cell phones. comScore 
reports that more than 22.4 million people access the Internet every day via their 
mobile phones.6 As mobile usage expands and changes, the measurement systems 
are forced to change with it, raising the business question, “Is there enough adver-
tiser demand for the medium to justify the cost of measuring it?” This cost-benefit 
analysis for producing the research is a constant challenge throughout the rapidly 
evolving media landscape.
Data Fusion
To supplement the @Plan service, Nielsen has an agreement with MRI to create a 
fused database that combines the Nielsen Online and MRI samples based on key 
demographic hooks. Each Nielsen Online respondent is matched to an MRI respon-
dent with the same age, gender, income, presence of children, Internet usage, and 
other demographic variables. The result is a single record that consists of every 
website the Nielsen respondent visited and every product the MRI respondent 
used. 
 
Fusion is necessary because it is not humanly possible for a single respondent to 
provide all the information contained in both the Nielsen Online and the MRI sur-
veys. Fusion has been used for many years in Europe and is now becoming widely 
accepted in the United States. The result is a system that can tell the user which 
websites are visited. Exhibit 2-10 shows which websites are visited by regular golf-
ers—information that would not be possible without the fused database. On the 
other hand, users must keep in mind that fusion relies on the accuracy and, more 
important, the relevance of the demographic hooks that link the online and prod-
uct usage behavior. The “one size fits all” demographic hooks used by syndicated 
services are less relevant for individual products than more specific characteristics. 
6. http://searchenginewatch.com/3633213. 

 
Basic Measurements and Calculations 
77
So for websites visited by frequent business travelers, occupation would be a better 
hook than income.
Out-of-Home
Outdoor audiences are measured by the Traffic Audit Bureau (TAB) (www.tabon
line.com), which counts the number of cars passing each billboard on the average 
day. This is translated into “daily circulation,” which is the basis for media sales. In 
2009–2010, the TAB introduced their new Eyes On system, which combines auto 
and pedestrian traffic counts with route destination surveys and in-person inter-
views to report the number of people likely to see an advertiser’s message. This 
enables outdoor audiences to be segmented according to demographics, including 
age, gender, race, and income, based on people who actually see the ads. Because 
this is a totally new way of thinking for both media buyers and sellers, the TAB 
expects it will take time to be adopted.
 
Other out-of-home media such as ads on buses, airport posters, signage in base-
ball stadiums, and mass-transit advertising estimate their audience with a variety of 
techniques ranging from ticket sales to proprietary surveys. Because these studies 
generally are conducted by the media themselves, they are considered less reliable 
than research conducted by independent companies such as the TAB, Nielsen, and 
MRI. The Digital Place-based Advertising Association (DPAA, www.ovab.org) is a 
new organization created to develop guidelines and best practices for measuring 
the many forms of out-of-home media.
How the Data Are Interpreted
All audience measurement techniques involve interacting with a sample of people 
who live in the geographic area being measured, whether that is a local market such as 
Chicago or the entire United States. Researchers calculate the percent exposed by divid-
ing the number of sample respondents who read a magazine, watched a TV show, or 
were exposed to an Internet banner by the total number of people in the sample. Then 
they project this percentage to the total population by simple multiplication.
 
For instance, if the NPM sample has 18,000 households, and if 370 of those 
homes watched “30 Rock” on a given Thursday night, the percentage is 370 divided 
by 18,000, which equals 2.1 percent. This is the household rating of the program. To 
find out how many households this represents nationwide, multiply the 114,900,000 
U.S. television households by 2.1 percent to get 2,412,900 households. The 18,000-
home sample has been projected to the 114.9 million U.S. homes that have a 

78 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
working television set. About 1 percent of homes do not have television, and so are 
not included in the ratings. This same process is used for demographics by simply 
substituting the appropriate number of viewers and population base.
General Uses of Vehicle Audience Measurements
One of the most significant problems facing media planners is deciding in which 
medium to place advertisements, because there are so many options—and the num-
bers of available media keep growing. The size and cost of reaching target audiences 
in these alternative media are important measurements for comparison purposes.
 
The result of all these attempts at measurement is a large volume of numerical 
data, produced at regular intervals. However, the effect of such a quantity of data 
on media planners and others involved in marketing/media operations sometimes 
produces a sense of confidence that is perhaps unwarranted. Despite the quantita-
tive aspect, media planning is not scientific in the same manner as, say, physics is.
 
Media audience numbers are the best that can be attained at a reasonable cost, but 
they do not represent the kind of measurement data planners would ideally like to have, 
such as information about which media vehicle produces the most sales. Because the 
numbers often take on undue importance, users of measurement data are warned that 
the numbers are only rough estimates for interpretive purposes, not absolutes.
 
Planners should also understand that the numbers are, in fact, the manufactured 
product of the research companies. Like all companies, they must sell their num-
bers and make a reasonable profit for their investors. As a result, there is a constant 
stream of new research services that all purport to give planners a better under-
standing of the media they are planning and buying. So on the one hand, planners 
are faced with salesmen offering new and better research for a price, and on the 
other, they face the practical constraints of their own budgets and the reality that 
in the end, all media planning decisions are judgments. In this book we will focus 
on the core metrics that every planner must know, recognizing that although other 
measures are available that provide supplemental information, they are too numer-
ous to be considered here.
 
Planners use audience measurement and product usage data for the following 
comparative purposes:
1. To learn the demographics of product or brand users
2. To learn the audience demographics of various kinds of media vehicles—who 
reads, sees, or hears the vehicles
3. To learn the way purchasers use a product or brand (How many are heavy, 
medium, or light users?)

 
Basic Measurements and Calculations 
79
4. To learn whether audience members of a particular media vehicle are heavy, 
medium, or light users of the product
5. To learn how many people were exposed to vehicles
All of this information has one basic goal: to help planners and buyers match media 
with target markets.
 
Two main concepts guide planners in their use of measurement data. The first is 
to find vehicles that reach the largest numbers of prospects for a product category 
or a brand within that category. But planners do not always select the vehicle that 
delivers the largest number of prospects. Sometimes they choose a second concept, 
which is finding the vehicle that delivers the greatest concentrations of prospects, 
even if there are relatively few of them.
Various Concepts of Audience Measurements
One difficulty in matching markets with media is that no single measurement can 
be used to determine the audience sizes for all media. Therefore, it is difficult to 
make intermedia comparisons (such as comparisons between the audience sizes 
of a television program and a magazine). As is apparent from the previous discus-
sion of methodologies, audience size numbers do not mean the same thing from 
medium to medium, even when they are measured on the same base. A base is a 
demographic group, such as total women or men ages 35–49. All media can be 
properly measured against the same base, but the methodology and the meaning 
of exposure is different for each medium. The audience numbers mean different 
things because the measurement methodology is different, not because they are 
measured against different bases.
Actual or Potential Audience Size Measurements
Those who use media audience research should be careful not to confuse data that 
show the actual size of a vehicle’s audience with other data that look similar but 
show only potential audience size. The division of audience measurement data into 
classifications of actual versus potential, or vehicle distribution versus vehicle expo-
sure, depends on how the audience is measured.
 
Before statistical sampling was widely accepted, media owners simply used dis-
tribution counts of their vehicles as evidence of audience size. Circulation of print 
media (number of copies printed) is one of these older measurements. It represents 
only potential audience size of the measured vehicle, because it does not measure 
how many people will actually read a given copy of the periodical. In the last 30 
years, as media research techniques have become more sophisticated, print media 

80 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
have been able to define their readership in terms of numbers of people who actu-
ally read the publication, in addition to pure circulation or distribution counts. 
The VISTA Service from Affinity Research (www.affinityresearch.net) and the 
AdMeasures service from MRI go beyond readership of the magazine and report 
the number of people who actually read the advertising. Nevertheless, the starting 
point and the core metric for most planners is the number of people who read the 
average issue, or the average issue audience.
Print Circulation Measurements
Circulation measurements are available for most newspaper and magazine vehicles, 
but these data are of limited use in selection decisions. Although they tell how many 
copies were printed and distributed, they do not provide the planner with information 
about the number of readers. One unit of circulation means one copy of a periodi-
cal distributed, but for every copy distributed, there could be as many as six different 
readers. Needless to say, this can be confusing. Furthermore, circulation data tell the 
planner nothing about the demographics of the audience, such as the readers’ age, 
gender, household income, education, and other crucial pieces of information that are 
needed to select vehicles that will reach precise marketing targets.
 
As a result, circulation data are seldom used alone in selecting magazines in 
which to place ads. However, such data are often used in making decisions about 
newspapers because they are chosen primarily for their ability to reach a certain 
geographic area. Also, generally the demographics of newspapers, as a true mass 
medium, are well-known.
 
When circulation data must be used, the most reliable are measurements veri-
fied by the Audit Bureau of Circulation (ABC, www.accessabc.com). The accuracy 
of ABC audits is widely accepted throughout the advertising industry. They are the 
legal basis for a magazine’s rate. That is, a magazine charges a certain amount of 
money to carry a page of advertising with the guarantee that it will deliver a certain 
number of copies, as reported by the ABC. If the magazine falls short of this “rate 
base” circulation, it owes the advertiser a rebate. So while MRI is used to compare 
the readership of alternative magazines, the ABC audit is the legal and financially 
accountable underpinning of the medium. The ABC is a nonprofit, cooperative 
association of about 1,100 advertisers and advertising agencies and 2,100 daily and 
weekly newspapers, consumer magazines, business publications, and farm publica-
tions in the United States and Canada. It audits and reports the circulation of these 
publications at regular intervals.
 
In addition to total circulation, ABC data include circulations categorized for 
newspapers by city zone, trading zone, and outside areas. Circulation is also catego-
rized for newspapers by metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) and television DMAs, 

 
Basic Measurements and Calculations 
81
making it possible to determine how the distribution of copies matches the selling 
and marketing areas of advertisers.
 
Magazine data from ABC show circulation categorized by size of metropolitan 
areas, by states and regions of the United States, and by other geographic divisions, 
all aimed at helping the planner choose the medium that best reaches geographic 
targets. No demographic data about the reading audience are available from ABC.
 
The ABC releases the publisher’s statement twice a year (June and December) as 
“the Pink Sheet.” It has a wealth of information about the magazine, including single 
copy sales, cover price, circulation by issue, public place copies, five-year circulation 
trend, and other statistics about the magazine. A full description of the Pink Sheet 
and extensive free tutorials are available on the ABC website.
 
Many planners think of the Pink Sheet as an audit, but it is not—it is the pub-
lisher’s claim of how many copies they distribute. After the Pink Sheet is released, 
the ABC auditors physically travel to the magazine’s offices and audit the books to 
verify that the publisher’s statement is correct. Their findings are released as the 
Audit Report. It lacks the detail of the Pink Sheet, but it validates the total circula-
tion that is used as the basis for the publication’s rates. A short report, referred to 
as the white audit, is released showing only those magazines whose audit is more 
than 2 percent different from the publisher’s statement. In the event of a shortfall, 
advertisers have the right to go back and claim a rebate, but only for publications 
that guarantee their rates. Some publications avoid this risk by not stating a rate 
base. Also, since the white audit may not be available for more than a year after the 
issue date, planners need to keep a record of insertions and make an effort to claim 
the rebate when it is deserved.
Audience Accumulation
Audience accumulation is the buildup of total audiences over time (usually a 
month). A major part of the accumulation concept is that audience members are 
counted only once, no matter how many additional times they are exposed to a 
particular vehicle or commercial. The number of different people who see an ad at 
least once is called reach. Some people who are reached will see an ad only once; 
others will see it many times. The number of times the average person who was 
reached sees the ad is called frequency. The concepts of reach and frequency apply 
to all media and will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 5.
 
It is of utmost importance to know that the vehicle exposure is not about adver-
tising, per se. Its main purpose is to learn how many persons looked at something 
inside the magazine. When the planner wants to know how many persons saw 
advertisements, then a different measurement based on number of reading days, 
number of issues read, and percent of pages opened can be used. This measure is 

82 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
called advertising page exposure, but there is disagreement among planners about 
the validity of the estimates. So exposure is a broad measurement of the vehicle. 
The point is that when a vehicle is seen, it has potential for selling through ads.
Audience Accumulation in Magazines In magazines, audience accumulates in three 
ways:
1. When advertising is placed in successive issues of the same magazine
2. When advertising is placed in the same month’s issue of different magazines
3. Over the issue life of the publication, as the magazine is read by more and 
more people, passing it along from one reader to another
 
In 2000, MRI released the first modern study of how quickly a single issue of a 
magazine accumulates readers. As expected, it revealed that a time-sensitive maga-
zine such as TV Guide accumulates virtually all of its audience within a week, while 
newsweeklies such as U.S. News and World Report take almost a month to reach 
90 percent of their total readership. Monthly magazines take almost three months 
to accumulate the same readership level.7 This study is updated with each MRI 
survey.
 
Within a magazine’s total audience, researchers distinguish between primary 
readers (those who either have purchased the magazine themselves or are members 
of the purchaser’s household) and secondary, or pass-along, readers (those not in 
the purchaser’s household). Typical pass-along readers are the purchaser’s friends 
and people reading in doctors’ offices, beauty salons, or on airplanes.
 
In addition to the type of reader, syndicated research companies also provide 
data showing where people read magazines. MRI cites in-home and out-of-home 
readership for all the publications in their reports. Several isolated research stud-
ies have indicated that the in-home reader, whether a primary or pass-along reader, 
reads more pages of a magazine and spends more time reading than the person 
outside of the home. Media planners sometimes use this information to give dif-
ferent values, or weights, to each type of reader to compare one media vehicle to 
another.
Audience Accumulation in Broadcast Although the concept of reach accumula-
tion is the same in broadcast as with magazines, the mechanics differ widely. 
This is because once a TV or radio program is broadcast, it is finished (unless it is 
recorded). Those people who viewed or listened to the show are the only audience 
7. Mediamark Research, Inc. “Magazine Audience Accumulation: Development of a 
Measurement System and Initial Results,” 2000. 

 
Basic Measurements and Calculations 
83
the program will have; there is no pass-along audience as with magazines. Time is 
a major element in broadcast accumulation.
 
Nevertheless, TV and radio programs do accumulate audience in three ways:
1. Within the program audience while it is being broadcast
2. With successive airings of the same program within a four-week period
3. With the airing of different programs within the same four-week period
Viewers are counted by the NPM if they press the buttons designating themselves 
as viewers of a given program. If new viewers watch a program after the first tele-
cast, they are added to those who viewed it previously. Radio listeners are so des-
ignated if they write in a diary that they listen to five minutes or more of the pro-
gramming. If they are carrying a PPM in one of the markets using that methodol-
ogy, they are counted if they are within earshot of a loudspeaker carrying a radio 
program. Each week that a program is aired, new audience members will tune in 
for the first time, and thus the program’s reach grows. Another way accumulation 
grows is by advertising on different programs or radio stations that appeal to the 
same audience, such as women ages 18–49.
 
In the real world, people tune in and tune out programs at different times dur-
ing the program broadcast. Ten people might tune in a particular program in the 
first five minutes, but some of them will tune out, and some new people will tune 
in. This phenomenon occurs throughout the program.
 
Exhibit 4-3 shows how the accumulated total audience of a single episode varies 
for several programs compared with the audience who viewed the program during 
an average minute. In every case, the tuned-in audience is greater in number than 
Comparison of Program Ratings: 
Average Minute Versus Total for Entire Program
HOUSEHOLDS VIEWING (%)
PROGRAM
PROGRAM LENGTH
DAY OF TELECAST
AVERAGE MINUTE
TOTAL PROGRAM
“American Idol”
60 min.
Tuesday, May 19, 2009
14.1
19.5
“30 Rock”
30 min.
Thursday, May 21, 2009
2.4
3.0
“60 Minutes”
60 min.
Sunday, May 24, 2009
5.4
8.3
Source: The Nielsen Company, NTI Pocketpiece, May 18–24, 2009. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 4-3

84 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
those who tuned out. In other words, the bucket is being filled faster than it is being 
emptied. This results in a gradual buildup of audience over the entire program.
Coverage
Audiences can be analyzed in two broad ways: in total numbers of people (e.g., the 
evening news audience) and as a percentage of the demographic universe of which 
they are a part (e.g., all women ages 35–49). One might compare the audience size 
of 10 magazines or television programs on the basis of which delivers the greatest 
number of people in a target audience or on the basis of which delivers the highest 
percentage of the total population in that target audience. Either method will reveal 
the same relative differences between the media vehicles.
 
Coverage is a convenient term planners use to assess the degree to which a 
media vehicle delivers a given target audience. The higher the coverage, the greater 
the delivery—the more people who will be exposed to the medium and presumably 
the advertising. Coverage is usually expressed as a percentage of a market popula-
tion reached.
 
To calculate coverage, researchers divide a given medium’s delivery of a specific 
demographic group (or target audience) by the total population of that demographic 
group (the market size, or universe). For example, suppose a magazine is read by 2.5 
million women ages 25–54, and the total population of women ages 25–54 is 62.9 
million. Then the magazine has a 4 percent coverage of that target audience (i.e., 
2.5 million divided by 62.9 million).
 
Unfortunately, the term coverage can be confusing, because it is used in different 
ways for different media forms (see Exhibit 4-4 for a summary). The term is most 
typically applied to magazines. For example, according to MRI, 56.1 million adults 
in the United States live in a household that owns cats,8 and 11.4 million of them 
read People magazine. So a planner would say that People’s coverage of cat-owning 
adults is 20.4 percent (i.e., 11.4 million divided by 56.1 million). This 20.4 percent 
represents actual exposure to the vehicle. Put simply, an ad in People would be 
delivered to about a fifth of all cat owners. In newspapers and television, coverage 
represents only the potential for exposure, not actual exposure (or reach). Because 
coverage can mean a number of different things, it is important for anyone who uses 
this term to know and understand its alternative meanings. Following is a discus-
sion of how coverage is defined in specific media.
Newspaper Coverage Newspaper coverage is the number of copies circulated com-
pared to the number of households in the circulation area. Most newspapers mea-
8. Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, Spring 2009. 

 
Basic Measurements and Calculations 
85
Different Meanings of the Term Coverage
KIND OF COVERAGE
MEANING
USES
General concept 
(more accurately 
called “market 
coverage”)
The number of prospects deliv-
ered (exposed) by a given medium. 
Coverage expressed as a percentage 
of the universe of prospects.
Serves as a goal in planning. Used 
to determine whether media 
selected are delivering enough 
prospects.
Newspaper 
coverage
The number of circulation units as a 
percentage of the number of house-
holds in an area. If the readers of news-
papers in a local market are measured, 
then coverage is the number of read-
ers in a demographic segment (such 
as men ages 18–24) as a percentage 
of all men 18–24 in the local market.
For local markets. A goal to deter-
mine whether enough households 
are reached with one or more news-
papers. This represents potential 
audience size.
Magazine coverage 
(sometimes called 
“reach”)
Same as the general concept. 
Prospects are demographically 
defined.
Same as the general concept. This 
represents estimated actual audi-
ence size.
Spot TV and radio 
coverage (local 
market)
The number of TV (or radio) homes 
within the signal area of station that 
can tune in to that station.
Serves as a basis for potential deliv-
ery in planning. Indicates the maxi-
mum size of the potential audience 
of radio or TV homes.
Spot TV coverage 
for a national cam-
paign (also for spot 
radio)
Total number of TV homes in selected 
markets that are part of a campaign, 
that can tune in (or can be reached).
It can show the percentage of U.S. 
TV homes that may be potentially 
delivered by a spot plan. Maximum 
number and percentage of potential 
exposure.
Network TV pro-
gram coverage
The number and percentage of U.S. 
TV homes for all stations in a network 
carrying a given program, compared 
to total TV homes in the United States.
An indication of the maximum 
potential of TV homes that a TV pro-
gram can reach.
Outdoor advertis-
ing and transit 
coverage
The number of people who pass and are 
exposed to a given showing of billboards 
in a local market, expressed as a per-
centage of the total people in the market.
To determine the size of an audi-
ence that might look at each show-
ing of billboards.
Cable TV channel 
coverage
The number and percentage of U.S. TV 
homes that can receive a given cable 
channel from any source: wired cable, 
direct broadcast satellite, apartment 
cable system, or other system.
An indication of the maximum audi-
ence that can be reached by an indi-
vidual cable network.
Internet coverage
All members (two years of age or older) 
of U.S. households that currently have 
access to the Internet. Some services 
define coverage as the percent of per-
sons who used the Internet or other 
digital media at home, work, or college 
in the last 30 days.
Provides the maximum num-
ber or percent of persons who 
can be exposed to an Internet ad 
campaign.
EXHIBIT 4-4

86 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
sure the number of copies sold or distributed and call this circulation. This is the 
number audited by the ABC.
 
If the circulation of a newspaper is 500,000, and the number of households in 
the area (the household universe) is 2,000,000, then the coverage is 25 percent. 
The assumption is that each unit of circulation equals one household covered. 
Newspaper coverage represents potential rather than actual exposure, because 
not everyone in a household that receives a copy of a newspaper actually reads it; 
exposure to the medium is not necessarily assumed. Therefore, coverage based on 
circulation is only a rough measure of newspaper audience size related to the total 
number of households in that area.
 
When using newspaper coverage, planners sometimes suggest that a minimum 
coverage level in any individual market should be at least 50 percent. If it can be 
assumed that not all persons in all households will be exposed to any given edition 
of a newspaper, then 50 percent is the lowest level that seems practical. Perhaps 
only two-thirds of that 50 percent will be exposed. Some media planners set much 
higher limits on local market coverage, such as at least 70 percent. In such situa-
tions, it may take a number of newspapers in that community to attain 70 percent 
gross coverage (i.e., double-counting homes that subscribe to two or more papers 
as opposed to net coverage that counts each home only once).
 
When a newspaper has research of its readership and provides a breakdown 
of that audience by demographic segments, then coverage will mean something 
different. In this case, it will mean the number of individuals exposed to news-
papers compared to the total number of individuals (rather than households) 
in the market. Because such measurements are not always available on a regu-
lar basis, newspaper coverage usually means potential exposure. Scarborough 
Research (www.scarborough.com) is the primary source of newspaper reader-
ship in more than 80 DMAs. In addition to newspaper readership, Scarborough 
provides information about local sports teams, shopping malls, movie theaters, 
community events, and even product usage. Scarborough can be thought of as 
a local market MRI.
Magazine Coverage Magazine coverage is simply the number of prospects who read 
a publication divided by the size of a target market. This is sometimes referred to as 
a magazine’s average issue audience. The concept is directly comparable to a broad-
cast rating; however, the standard methodology used by the research companies 
cannot measure the audience to each issue. Hence the need to report the numbers 
of readers to the average issue.
 
Another way to look at magazine coverage is to look at total users of a given prod-
uct class. For example, as shown in Exhibit 4-5, MRI reported that 31,981,000 adults 
were dieting to maintain their weight or physical fitness. This figure represents the 

 
Basic Measurements and Calculations 
87
size of the total market of such consumers. If 7,279,000 readers of People magazine 
are controlling their diet, that number represents 22.8 percent market coverage by 
People (7,279,000 divided by 31,981,000).
Magazine Coverage and Composition
NUMBER (000)
COVERAGE
COMPOSITION
INDEX
Total adults dieting for weight control
31,981
100.0%
14.2%
100
High-Coverage Magazines—Low Composition
People
7,279
22.8
16.7
117
AARP The Magazine
5,921
18.5
16.6
117
Reader’s Digest
5,186
16.2
16.3
115
Parade Carrier Newspapers
10,875
34.0
15.0
105
High-Composition Magazines—Low Coverage
First
908
2.8
29.9
210
Shape
1,558
4.9
28.8
203
Self
1,529
4.8
25.2
177
Working Mother
498
1.6
24.3
171
Fitness
1,266
4.0
22.7
160
Source: Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, Spring 2009. Used with permission.
 
Earlier in this chapter, we discussed the ways that researchers determine how 
many people read a given magazine. But the number of readers, as a number by 
itself, is of little value until it is put into context as a percent of both the target (cov-
erage) and of the medium’s total audience (composition.)
 
Exhibit 4-5 illustrates the concept. Mass magazines, such as People, are read by such 
a large percent of the whole country that they can’t help also being read by a large per-
cent of target dieters. They offer high coverage, but there is a great deal of waste; more 
than half the circle of People readers is outside the target audience. In this case, we 
would say that People has high coverage of our target but low composition.
 
Small, selective magazines such as Fitness, on the other hand, cover only a rela-
tively small part of the target, but a larger percent of the magazine’s (few) readers 
fall within the target. There is far less waste. We would say Fitness has low cover-
age but high composition.
EXHIBIT 4-5

88 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
Exhibit 4-6 shows the differences in coverage and composition for magazines 
that might be used to reach this dieting target audience. The indices quantify the 
target audience selectivity of each magazine.
Coverage Versus Composition
Target
Audience
People
Fitness
Selective Magazine
• Low coverage
• High composition
• Low out-of-pocket cost
• Little waste
Mass Magazine
• High coverage
• Low composition
• High out-of-pocket cost
• High waste
 
Planners must be careful to avoid either extreme. This balance between coverage 
and composition is a key trade-off in all media, especially in view of today’s heavily 
fragmented environment. Using only high-coverage mass magazines, prime-time 
television programs, or website portals will certainly reach the target, but a signifi-
cant part of the budget will be wasted on people who have little or no interest in 
the advertised product. On the other hand, using only high-composition magazines, 
selective cable networks, and niche websites runs the risk of missing people who 
buy product but who do not happen to be attracted to the highly selective media 
vehicles. Planners typically use a mixture of high-coverage and high-composition 
media to ensure adequate reach while minimizing waste.
Local Television and Radio Coverage For local radio and television, coverage means 
the number (or percentage) of homes that can physically receive a usable televi-
sion or radio signal over the air. This technical definition applies primarily to radio 
stations and to the 10 percent of homes that do not subscribe to cable or satellite. 
Furthermore, the coverage area of television stations was defined using the old 
EXHIBIT 4-6

 
Basic Measurements and Calculations 
89
analog signal that could provide an acceptable, if snowy, picture to fringe areas. 
Since the June 2009 conversion to digital television, over-the-air reception is all or 
nothing, changing the size of the area where a station provides acceptable service.
 
Although the signal strength contour is important for the licensing of broadcast 
stations, for media planning purposes the coverage area of stations in a given mar-
ket is defined by viewing patterns, not engineering signal coverage.
Spot Radio and Television Coverage in Multiple Markets An advertiser who buys spot 
announcements in a number of markets located in various geographic regions of 
the United States will be interested to know what percentage of all television (or 
radio) homes in the country the commercial could potentially reach. Perhaps a 
planner has selected 50 of the largest markets in the country in which to advertise. 
To determine the percentage of coverage, it is only necessary to add the percent of 
the United States represented by each of the 50 markets. Exhibit 4-7 lists the per-
centage coverages for the largest U.S. markets.
 
For example, by buying spot announcements in the largest 50 markets, planners 
can potentially reach 67.8 percent of the television homes in the country. The plan-
ner then knows that the maximum audience size (expressed in terms of homes that 
can tune in to a station’s signal) is no larger than 67.8 percent.
Coverage of Top U.S. Markets Using Spot TV
MARKETS
U.S. COVERAGE
Top 10
29.4%
Top 20
43.8
Top 30
53.4
Top 40
61.7
Top 50
67.8
Top 60
72.8
Top 70
77.0
Top 80
80.6
Top 90
83.8
Top 100
86.6
Source: The Nielsen Company, U.S. TV Household Estimates, September 2008. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 4-7

90 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Network Television Coverage In network television, coverage is defined as the num-
ber and percentage of all U.S. television households that are able to receive a given 
program. Generally speaking, the degree of coverage is affected by the number of 
stations in a network lineup. The more stations, the more coverage. Exhibit 4-8 
indicates the coverage of several network programs. Although these statistics are 
of interest to the television networks, which want to see their programs carried on 
as many stations as possible, buyers and planners are typically not concerned with 
such data, because coverage is automatically accounted for in a program’s rating.
Network Program Coverage
NETWORK
PROGRAM
HOUSEHOLD COVERAGE
NUMBER OF STATIONS IN 
NETWORK LINEUP
ABC
“20/20”
98%
381
NBC
“30 Rock”
98
379
CBS
“Old Christine”
98
389
FOX
“24”
98
373
Univision (Hispanic)
“Sabado Gigante”
80
93
MNT
“Jail”
87
250
Source: The Nielsen Company, NTI Pocketpiece, May 18–24, 2009. Used with permission.
Cable Television Coverage Cable coverage is defined as the percent of U.S. house-
holds that can receive a cable network by any means, including cable, large satellite 
dish, direct broadcast satellite, microwave, or other distribution methods.
 
Unlike network television signals, which are carried by broadcast stations that 
can reach all television households, individual cable networks must secure clear-
ance on thousands of local systems. Although some can offer hundreds of channels, 
others are limited to only a few dozen, resulting in strong competition to secure 
clearance. Large, established channels, such as ESPN, CNN, and USA Network, are 
carried by virtually all cable systems (and so report near 90 percent coverage of U.S. 
television households), but newer channels must fight for every household—many 
cover less than 25 percent of the United States.
 
Because cable channels must compete with the broadcast networks for adver-
tising dollars, they prefer to report their ratings as a percent of the households in 
their coverage area, instead of the total U.S. For example, a cable channel that can 
EXHIBIT 4-8

 
Basic Measurements and Calculations 
91
be seen in 20 million homes may have a program that is seen in 500,000 house-
holds. This is only 0.4 percent of the 114.9 million U.S. TV households. It makes a 
stronger sales story to say that the program has a 2.5 percent rating in its coverage 
area (to the base of the 20 million coverage area households).
Internet Coverage By 2009, more than 86 percent of all adults had access to the 
Internet at home or at work, and 73 percent go online in the average month.9 Like 
cable networks, Internet websites prefer to express their audience as a percent of 
these active Internet users, rather than of the larger total U.S. population. Internet 
websites also promote their coverage in terms of the number of unique visitors per 
month. This can be a useful relative statistic, but it is meaningless to planners who 
buy a fixed number of impressions that represent only a small fraction of what is 
available on the site. Planners must be careful not to apply the assumptions of tra-
ditional mass media where advertising impressions equal the media audience, to 
the Internet where advertising impressions are determined by how many the plan-
ner wants to buy.
Out-of-Home Media Coverage Out-of-home media include all media that are located 
outside a person’s home, such as billboards, posters in shopping malls, advertise-
ments in and on buses, and so forth. Coverage for out-of-home media is the per-
centage of the population that passes one or more out-of-home media in a given 
period of time. Coverage for out-of-home media, therefore, represents the potential 
for advertising exposure.
 
Out-of-home media are generally purchased by advertisers on the basis of 
daily showing, or gross rating points (GRP). A gross rating point is a measure of the 
total (duplicated) number of people delivered by an advertising vehicle or vehicles. 
Suppose a market has 200 different billboards erected in and around the city, each 
of which is passed by an average of 1,000 cars each day, which is the daily effec-
tive circulation (DEC). If an advertiser purchases 50 of these billboards, a total of 
50,000 cars will pass one or more of these boards each day (50 multiplied by 1,000). 
If the market has a population of 100,000, then these 50 boards would constitute 
50 GRPs/day, or a 50 showing. We call the data “gross” or “duplicated” because a 
car that passes 2 of the 50 boards will be counted twice. Other showing sizes can 
also be purchased, such as a 100 showing (comprising twice as many exposures as 
in a 50 showing), a 25 showing (half as many exposures), and so on. They can also 
be expressed as 100, 50, and 25 GRPs/day.
 
Since DEC is based on the number of cars passing the boards, the outdoor com-
panies have never been able to clearly define these GRPs in terms of a demographic 
9. Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, Spring 2009. 

92 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
target or with the kind of precision that planners are accustomed to receiving from 
other media. The TAB’s new Eyes On research is intended solve this problem by 
providing daily target audience impressions, GRPs, reach, and frequency. It will take 
time to convert the outdoor industry, both buyers and sellers, to this new metric, 
from a start in 2009. Visit www.eyesonratings.com to get the latest information 
about this new way of measuring the outdoor audience.
 
An outdoor medium is able to generate very high coverage, and therefore 
high reach, over time. Exhibit 4-9 shows an estimate of accumulated reach over 
a 30-day period for different sizes of outdoor showings using the traditional DEC 
methodology.
Households Using Television (HUT)
One important television measurement is households using television (HUT). This 
can also be expressed as persons using television (PUT). HUT/PUT represents the 
total percentage of homes or people in a market that are watching television at a 
given point in time. Because it includes a time consideration, HUT/PUT can be 
classified as a measurement of net potential audience size.
 
Remember that coverage data in television represent only audience potential. 
If a station covers (i.e., is watched in) 1,410,000 TV homes, this does not mean an 
advertiser will reach all of those homes with a commercial on that station. But what 
determines how many homes will be reached? To a great extent, the HUT at any 
time of day provides a clue to the possible tune-in. As a measure of the net potential 
audience, HUT indicates what percentage of households with a television set have it 
turned on at any given time of day, such as morning, early afternoon, late afternoon, 
prime time, or late evening.
 
Television viewing is affected by living habits. In the morning, tune-in tends to 
be low, with many men and women at work and children in school. Primary viewers 
Reach of Outdoor Showings
100 SHOWING
50 SHOWING
25 SHOWING
REACH
FREQUENCY
REACH
FREQUENCY
REACH
FREQUENCY
91.5%
27.9
90.6%
14.3
87.4%
7.7
Source: Simmons Market Research Bureau, 1991. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 4-9

 
Basic Measurements and Calculations 
93
are stay-at-home parents and small children. When children return home from 
school at about 4:00 p.m., the tune-ins rise dramatically. After 6:00 p.m., when many 
people have returned home from work, the rise in tune-ins is even greater. After 
10:00 p.m., viewing drops again. Exhibit 4-10 indicates the variations in viewing for 
different time periods, as well as by seasons of the year.
 
Media planners can study HUT data and estimate potential audience size bet-
ter than by studying coverage figures alone. In the evening hours, more viewers are 
available than at any other time of day, because both children and adults are usu-
ally at home. But variations in viewing occur not only during a single day, but also 
during a given week and month. During the summer, for example, when people 
spend more time outdoors, television viewing is lower in early fringe (4–6 p.m.) and 
prime time than it is in winter. Despite these variations, television is still able to 
reach well more than 90 percent of the population each week in summer because 
viewing of the other dayparts is relatively constant over the year. As we will see, 
the cost of advertising varies from daypart to daypart, with prime time being the 
most expensive. Most television plans include a mixture of dayparts, washing out 
Variations in TV Viewing by Daypart and Season
 
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
Jun.
Jul.
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Prime time Mon.–Sun. 8:00–11:00 P.M.
Early fringe Mon.–Fri. 4:30–7:30 P.M.
Late fringe Mon.–Sun. 11:00 P.M.–1:00 A.M.
Weekday daytime 10:00 A.M.–4:30 P.M.
% of Homes 
Using Television 
(HUT)
Source: The Nielsen Company, Households Using TV Summary Report, 2nd Qtr., 2009. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 4-10

94 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
the differences among them. Many schedules on cable television are bought “run 
of station” (ROS), meaning the spots rotate through all the dayparts.
Broadcast Impressions and Ratings
These key concepts begin with the impression: a single person watching television, 
listening to the radio, or otherwise exposed to the medium during the average min-
ute or quarter hour of the program. So if one million people were watching a pro-
gram that carries our commercial, the program (and presumably our commercial) 
would have delivered one million impressions. Since millions are hard to work with, 
a more useful way of handling them is to divide the impressions by the population. 
The result is a rating.
 
A broadcast rating (television or radio) represents an estimate of the percent of 
people who view a program or have tuned in during a specific time period. This 
rating is determined through sampling procedures. It is financially and physically 
impossible to measure the viewing habits of every person in the United States, but 
it is possible to measure a small sample of viewers. This information, however, is 
only an estimate of the size of the actual viewing audience.
 
These estimates are reported in the form of percentages of the demographic uni-
verse being considered. For households tuned in to a network television program, 
the base figure usually includes all households in the United States that have at least 
one television set. The geographic area for local television stations is based on the 
time residents spend watching stations of a given market, or DMA.
 
Nielsen research shows which city (and which TV stations) the residents of 
each county spend most of their time watching. For example, this research shows 
that the residents of Cook County, Illinois, spend 51 percent of their weekly view-
ing hours watching stations that are licensed to the Chicago television market.10 
Accordingly, Cook County is assigned to the Chicago DMA. DeKalb County spends 
43 percent of its time watching Chicago stations and 5 percent of its time watching 
stations in neighboring Rockford. Because the majority of its viewing is to Chicago 
stations, DeKalb County is also assigned to the Chicago DMA. Boone County, how-
ever, spends 36 percent of its time watching Rockford but only 6 percent watching 
Chicago. Thus, it is assigned to the Rockford DMA. Nielsen uses this procedure 
to assign every county in the United States to one DMA or another. Each of these 
counties spends 40 to 50 percent of their time watching the national cable television 
stations, which does not figure into their DMA assignment. Exhibit 4-11 shows the 
counties of the Chicago DMA bounded by a heavy line. Although fringe counties 
may shift from one DMA to another following Nielsen’s annual review, the general 
10. The Nielsen Company, 2008 County Coverage Study. 

 
Basic Measurements and Calculations 
95
outlines of each market are relatively constant. The counties in the Chicago DMA 
have not changed from 2001 when the last edition of this book was written.
 
Ratings are made for both households and individuals. The universe for network, 
cable, and syndicated programs consists of all persons of a given age group living in 
national television households. For example, for women ages 18–49, the broadcast 
network program base would be all women ages 18–49 in television households in 
the United States. A rating for women ages 18–49 in the Chicago DMA would be 
based on the women of that age group who live in any of the counties that make up 
the Chicago DMA.
 
Local television and radio ratings are expressed as the percent of the DMA’s 
population who are watching or listening to the average quarter-hour of a pro-
gram or daypart. This is different from the national audience that is expressed as 
the audience to the average minute. Television ratings reflect the percent of people 
in the DMA who are tuned in; radio ratings reflect the percentage of the people in 
the MSA—essentially the largest counties in the market. Exhibit 4-11 identifies the 
counties in the DMA and the Radio Metro Area (RMA).
 
Rather than talk about a rating of 5 percent, it is common practice to talk about 
a program having a 5 rating. This custom assumes the understanding that a rating 
is a percentage. Because the audience is so fragmented, the rating of most cable net-
Counties of the Chicago DMA
Kendall,
Ill.
DMA
RMA
Grundy,
Ill.
DMA
RMA
La Salle,
Ill.
DMA
DeKalb,
Ill.
DMA
McHenry,
Ill.
DMA
RMA
Lake,
Ill.
DMA
RMA
Kane,
Ill.
DMA
RMA
Du Page,
Ill.
DMA
RMA
Kankakee,
Ill.
DMA
Will, Ill.
DMA  RMA
La Porte,
Ind.
DMA
Jasper,
Ind.
DMA
Porter,
Ind.
DMA
RMA
Lake,
Ind.
DMA
RMA
Newton,
Ind.
DMA
DMA
RMA
Lake Michigan
Cook, Ill.
TV DMA—16 counties
Radio Metro Area (RMA)—11 counties
Kenosha, 
Wis.
RMA
Source: The Chicago DMA Television Market. Copyright: The Nielsen Company, 2009.
EXHIBIT 4-11

96 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
works is less than 1.0, and very frequently, less than 0.5 percent—less than one-half 
of 1 percent of the target population.
Average Audience Rating For national broadcasts on network, cable, and syndicated 
programs, The Nielsen Company provides an average audience rating, which rep-
resents the percentage of homes (and people) tuned in to the average minute of a 
program.
 
To learn how many households (or people) have tuned in to a program, one 
need only multiply the rating by the total number of TV households in the United 
States. This is called a projection. For example, if a program had a 3.0 average audi-
ence (AA) rating, and the total number of households in the United States was 
114,900,000, then 114,900,00  0.03  3,447,000 households tuned in. A com-
mercial on that program would develop 3,447,000 impressions, typically expressed 
as 3.4 million impressions. Exhibit 4-12 illustrates the method by which the aver-
age audience rating is calculated for a 15-minute segment of a program. On a local 
market level, the base would be relatively smaller, but the procedure for projection 
would be the same. Also, local demographic ratings are expressed in terms of aver-
age quarter-hour audience because of limitations in the diary where viewing is 
recorded.
 
The average minute audience reported for national television is referred to as the 
program audience because it is the average of all the minutes in a program—those 
with entertainment and those that have advertising.
The Three-Day Commercial Audience (C3) Rating In February 2010, household pene-
tration of the DVR was 37 percent and was still growing at a rate of about 1 percent 
per month.11 Recording is heavily concentrated in the high-rated scripted prime-
11. The Nielsen Company, Npower. 
Computing an Average Audience Rating
MINUTES IN A PROGRAM
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Percentage tuned in
30 30 30 31
31
31
31 32 32 32 33 33 33 33 33
Total tuned in for 15 minutes  475
Average percentage tune-in for 15 minutes  475  15  31.7
EXHIBIT 4-12

 
Basic Measurements and Calculations 
97
time programs such as “Desperate Housewives,” “30 Rock,” “The Office,” “Lost,” 
and others. Daytime soap operas and late fringe entertainment are also heavily 
recorded. Conversely, there is virtually no recording of live sports events, news, and 
most cable network programs.
 
Numerous studies have shown that more than 70 percent of the viewers watch-
ing a prerecorded program on their DVR fast-forward through commercials, yield-
ing a much smaller audience to the commercials than to the average minute of the 
entire program. Other research showed that 85 percent of the recorded programs 
were played back within three days of the original telecast. This includes a substan-
tial amount of viewing within an hour of the telecast, caused by viewers starting to 
play back a program half an hour after it starts, and then fast-forwarding through 
the commercials—the so-called near-live phenomenon. Exhibit 4-13 shows the dra-
matic effect that this fast-forwarding during the commercials has on the minute-
by-minute audience.
 
The program in Exhibit 4-13 was watched by 1.98 percent of adults ages 18–34 
who live in a household with a DVR during the average minute of the program, 
including any playback within three days of the telecast. But the normal-speed audi-
ence to the average commercial minute was only 1.53.12 Some advertisers want an 
even more precise measure—the number of viewers to their particular 30-second 
12. The Nielsen Company, Npower. 
C3 Ratings Versus Live3 Program Rating
1.53% of A18–34 in DVR households watched the average commercial minute.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
Minute of the program
Commercial minutes
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
A18–34 rating
DVR HH
1.98
Live+3
Program
rating
1.53
Commercial
rating
Source: The Nielsen Company, Npower. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 4-13

98 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
commercial—not just the average commercial minute. While such a precise mea-
sure is technically possible, for all practical purposes the C3 rating has become the 
industry standard for national television.
 
Advertisers demanded to pay only for viewers during the commercial minutes 
that were being played back at normal speed within three days of the original tele-
cast. This led to the C3 rating, which has become the standard metric for national 
television ratings. The audience to each minute of the telecast is multiplied by the 
percent of seconds devoted to commercials that are played back at normal speed. 
This commercial audience for each minute is totaled and divided by 60 to get the 
number of viewers to the average commercial minute. Exhibit 4-14 shows how the 
C3 rating is calculated.
 
Exhibit 4-15 shows the effect of DVR recording. It compares the live audience 
(average of all minutes in the program, including entertainment) with the total 
audience (live  DVR playback) on the same day (a few minutes delay), after one 
day (live1), after two days (live2), after three days (live3), after seven days 
(Live7), and with the audience after three days to just the minutes with a commer-
cial played at normal speed (the C3 rating). This not only illustrates the dramatic 
effect of DVR playback, but also shows how the C3 rating compensates for fast-
forwarding through the commercial and so is an accurate measure of how many 
people will be effectively exposed to the advertising.
 
Spot television ratings, even in LPM markets, remain tied to the average quarter-
hour audience, including all playback up to seven days after telecast. This greatly 
inflates the audience to the commercial minutes, but as of this writing, that is how 
the audience is reported. Since local news is the most important program to the 
stations and there is virtually no DVR recording of the news, the effect of this over-
statement is probably minimal.
Share of Audience Share of audience reflects the percentage of homes tuned in to 
a program based on only those homes that had their sets turned on. This is used 
as a measure of program popularity that is not affected by the seasonal changes in 
HUT we saw earlier. The sum of the shares is 100 percent, just like the total of all 
the slices of a pie. The relationship between rating, HUT, and share is expressed by 
the following simple equations:
Rating  HUT  Share
Share  Rating
HUT
HUT  Rating
Share

 
Basic Measurements and Calculations 
99
How the C3 Commercial Audience Is Calculated
The commercial audience is the audience to each minute multiplied by the percent of 
seconds that have a commercial.
COMMERCIAL AUDIENCE
MINUTES OF 
PROGRAM
A18–34 
RATING IN 
DVR HH
A18–34 
AUDIENCE IN 
DVR HH
COMMERCIAL 
SECONDS IN EACH 
MINUTE
(000)  
COMMERCIAL 
SECOND / 60
CALCULATION DETAIL
  1
1.91
317,632
0
—
  2
1.97
327,519
0
—
  3
2.06
342,799
0
—
  4
2.29
380,888
0
—
  5
2.28
378,117
0
—
  6
2.28
378,925
0
—
  7
2.37
394,100
0
—
  8
2.54
420,940
0
—
  9
2.58
428,556
16
114,282
428,556  16/60  114,282
10
1.68
279,330
60
279,330
11
1.52
251,650
44
184,543
12
2.00
332,158
0
—
13
2.23
369,650
0
—
14
2.17
359,542
0
—
15
2.11
350,071
0
—
16
1.74
289,401
47
226,698
17
1.67
276,967
43
198,493
18
1.50
248,224
0
—
19
2.21
366,082
0
—
20
2.27
377,273
0
—
21
2.28
378,208
0
—
22
2.20
364,631
0
—
23
1.96
325,244
0
—
24
1.66
274,781
26
119,072
25
1.12
185,882
60
185,882
26
1.22
201,952
60
201,952
27
1.36
225,510
4
15,034
28
2.14
355,683
0
—
29
1.94
321,645
0
—
30
2.04
338,194
0
—
1.98 Program 
Rating
360 sec
1,525,286/6 minutes  254,214 viewers to average 
commercial minute
6 minutes
254,214 / 16,602,000 (A18-34 in DVR HH population) 
 1.53 commercial rating
Source: The Nielsen Company, Npower. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 4-14

100 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
The relationship among these three is illustrated in Exhibit 4-16. It shows that in 
40 percent of the homes, the TV set was not turned on—the people were not at 
home, they were reading a book, or they were doing something else with their life 
besides watching television. Conversely, 60 percent of the homes were using tele-
vision. The viewers were divided among the various broadcast stations and cable 
networks, with each program getting its share of the pie. The sum of all the shares 
is 100 percent; the sum of the ratings equals the HUT, or 60 percent. The share 
statistic enables the media planner to compare the relative popularity of two pro-
grams that compete for viewers at the same time of the day. Since the HUT for a 
given month and daypart is relatively stable year to year, media buyers use the share 
to calculate the estimated future rating. More about this later when we talk about 
buying television.
Comparison of Program and C3 Ratings
ADULTS 18–34 AVERAGE MINUTE RATING
PROGRAM
PROGRAM 
LIVE
PROGRAM 
LIVE  
SAME DAY
PROGRAM 
LIVE  1
PROGRAM 
LIVE  2
PROGRAM 
LIVE  3
PROGRAM 
LIVE  7
COMMERCIAL 
LIVE  3
Total A18–34
“Desperate 
Housewives”
3.2
4.1
4.6
4.8
4.9
5.1
3.8
“Scrubs”
2.0
2.5
2.7
2.8
2.9
2.9
2.1
“24”
2.7
3.4
3.7
3.8
3.8
4.0
2.9
“Grey’s 
Anatomy”
4.3
5.3
5.8
6.1
6.3
6.6
4.8
Adults 18–34 in DVR Households
“Desperate 
Housewives”
3.4
6.3
7.8
8.5
8.8
9.3
5.8
“Scrubs”
1.5
2.9
3.8
4.0
4.1
4.3
2.3
“24”
2.4
4.8
5.7
5.9
5.9
6.5
3.6
“Grey’s 
Anatomy”
4.2
7.2
8.8
9.7
10.7
11.5
6.2
Source: The Nielsen Company, NPower, week of Jan. 12, 2009. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 4-15

 
Basic Measurements and Calculations 
101
 
Exhibit 4-17 shows sample pages from Nielsen Television Index to illustrate the 
various kinds of ratings used by media analysts. Note the average audience and 
share for each program listed. The Pocketpiece has been largely replaced by com-
puter access to the ratings with extensive detail by demographic group. However, 
the basic information is the same as pictured in Exhibit 4-17.
 
It is important to remember that although ratings can be reported for house-
holds, planners most often use ratings for people viewing programs. Such ratings 
usually are broken down by various age and gender demographic groups that have 
been cross-tabulated with other demographics such as household income, head-of-
household education, number of children, and so on. These cross-tabulations allow 
a media planner to have a better understanding of who views each program and 
thus better match markets with media.
 
Although ratings, HUT, and share help planners understand broad patterns of 
television usage, these audience statistics are used most commonly by media buyers 
The Relationship Among Rating, HUT, and Share
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Households (%)
Not
Watching
TV
ABC
CBS
NBC
FOX
Ad-
Supported
Cable
All Other
SUM of Ratings = HUT = 
100%
60.0%
40%
Rating
Share of
HUT
4.2%
4.2%
7.2%
27.6%
6.0%
10.8%
7%
7%
12%
46%
10%
18%
EXHIBIT 4-16

102 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Sample National Nielsen TV Audience Estimates
EXHIBIT 4-17
Source: The Nielsen Company, Pocketpiece, August 
24–30, 2009. Used with permission.

 
Basic Measurements and Calculations 
103
who must decide on which specific program to place the ads. In this context, the 
ratings provide a critical measure of the media value received for the cost of the ad. 
In essence, ratings are the “currency” of broadcast negotiation and buying worth 
more than $60 billion per year. To ensure the quality of these estimates, the sur-
vey methodology and execution are closely scrutinized by an independent indus-
try organization, the Media Rating Council (www.mediaratingcouncil.org), which 
reports its findings to the users.

This page intentionally left blank 

 
105
Advanced Measurements 
and Calculations
T
he preceding chapter introduced the concept of audience accumulation, 
along with other measurements of a single telecast or print insertion. But 
broadcast commercials and print ads are repeated many times to develop 
sufficient weight to achieve the advertiser’s marketing goals. This chapter 
introduces the more advanced numerical tools used to manage this weight and 
develop media plans: gross rating points (GRPs), gross impressions, reach, fre-
quency, and effective frequency. These tools answer the most commonly asked 
questions about a media plan, such as the following:
How many people will see the ad? (Reach)
• 
How often will they see it? (Frequency)
• 
How many people will see it at least three times? Four times? 
• 
N times? 
(Effective reach)
 
Reach and frequency are parts of strategy planning and to an extent can be 
manipulated to help attain certain marketing and media objectives. Generally, 
when the advertiser needs broad message dispersion, high levels of reach will be 
planned. To achieve a great deal of repetition, the plan will call for high frequency 
or effective frequency levels. Sometimes a plan will have to attain both high reach 
and high frequency.
CHAPTER FIVE

106 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
GRPs
Recall from Chapter 4 that when planners want to know the audience size for a 
single TV program, they use either a program rating or a calculation of the num-
ber of viewers exposed to the program. For a single ad in a magazine, they use 
either a target audience measurement in thousands or a percentage that repre-
sents coverage of the market. Internet planners want to know how many different 
people will be exposed to a banner or pop-up ad that is presented after a given 
number of impressions on a certain website. Planners typically speak in terms of 
the weekly or even the total campaign weight across all the media vehicles they 
use. To do that, they simply add ratings or audience size numbers from each time 
the commercial is broadcast and disregard the duplication that results. GRPs 
are the simple addition of ratings each time the commercial is shown. The sum 
of audience sizes, generally reported in thousands, is called gross impressions. 
Both numbers are duplicated—that is, they are sums of measurements that can 
overlap.
 
Using GRPs or gross impressions allows the planner to use a single number that 
describes the quantity of message weight. Message weight is a number that quickly 
tells the planner the duplicated audience for many programs within a given time 
period. Planners often deal with the number of GRPs per week or per month. But 
one also can discuss the message weight of an entire year, using either GRPs or 
gross impressions. The user of these numbers, however, must always remember that 
they represent duplicated audiences.
 
When using GRPs, it is important to specify the demographic group that they 
apply to. Without that qualifier, it is like saying you went to the store and bought 
10 pounds. It is far more meaningful to say you bought 10 pounds of potatoes. So 
when referring to GRPs, the planner would say 100 women 25–54 GRPs, 125 men 
18–49 GRPs. Fast-food advertisers typically run more than 200 adult 18–34 GRPs 
per week.
 
Some planners use GRPs when they refer to household rating points and use 
target rating points (TRPs) when referring to demographic points. Both terms are 
correct, but whichever is used must include the applicable demographic base to be 
meaningful.
GRPs in Broadcast Media
In planning for television, GRPs are often used to describe the message weight 
delivered each week or month, although they could be used for any number of 
weeks or months. Following is an example of commercials that constituted 120 
adult 18–34 GRPs a week:

 
Advanced Measurements and Calculations 
107
4 commercials in a program with a 5 A18–34 rating 
 
20 A18–34 TRPs
15 commercials in a program with a 2 A18–34 rating 
 
30 A18–34 TRPs
20 commercials in a program with a 1.5 A18–34 rating 
 
30 A18–34 TRPs
40 commercials on a cable network with a 1.0 A18–34 rating  
40 A18–34 TRPs
Total weekly weight 
 120 A18–34 TRPs
These are percentages, so when adding GRPs, they must always refer to the same 
demographic. Five percent of adults 18–34 plus 5 percent of women 35–64 isn’t 10 
percent of anything.
GRPs in Other Media
In recent years, planners have extended the GRP concept to other media such as 
magazines, newspapers, and outdoor. In magazines, for example, GRPs equal the 
percentage of market coverage of a target audience times the number of ad inser-
tions, as in the following example:
People magazine’s coverage of target dieters: 22.8 percent
Number of ads to be placed in People: 5
Dieter GRPs (22.8  5): 114.0
 
Another way to use GRPs for magazines (or newspapers) is to add the target cov-
erage for one insertion in a number of different magazines.
 
One last way to calculate GRPs is to multiply reach times frequency for a given 
time period. For example, a schedule that reaches 60 percent of the target an aver-
age of five times will have 300 GRPs (60  5).
 
For outdoor, the Outdoor Advertising Association of America (www.oaaa.org) 
adopted the “showing” as the basic unit of sale. It reflects daily GRPs, so a 100 
showing delivers 100 GRPs per day and is the number of poster panels required in 
each market to produce a “daily effective circulation” equal to its population. Other 
units of sale are expressed as fractions of the basic unit: a 75 showing equals 75 
GRPs daily, a 50 showing is 50 GRPs daily, and so on. This change in no way alters 
the 30-day period of sale and measurement. The new Eyes On measure of outdoor 
advertising promises to change the unit of sale to demographic GRPs. 
Gross Impressions
Gross impressions is the same concept as GRPs, with the exception that the audi-
ence is expressed in terms of thousands of viewers instead of as a percent of the 

108 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
population. So gross impressions is the simple addition of the viewing audience in 
thousands each time the commercial is shown. Assuming we are talking about a 
national schedule, the previous example for 120 A18–34 GRPs would look like this. 
Note that the adult 18–34 population is 68.1 million.
 
Note the calculation. For 20 TRPs, 0.2  68.1 million  13.62 million 
impressions:
4 telecasts in a program with a 5 A18–34 rating 
 20 TRPs  13.62 MM Impr
15 telecasts in a program with a 2 A18–34 rating 
 30 TRPs  
20.43
20 telecasts in a program with a 1.5 A18–34 rating 
 30 TRPs  
20.43
40 telecasts on a cable network with a 1 A18–34 rating  40 TRPs  
27.24
Total weekly A18–34 weight 
 120 TRPs  
81.72
 
There are two methods of calculating gross impressions. One method is to 
multiply GRPs by the target audience base. The other is to add the target audience 
impressions delivered by each vehicle.
 
The same math applies to each of the programs. So, again using this example, 
each telecast of the program with a 5 adult 18–34 rating is watched by 3.405 mil-
lion viewers (0.05  68.1  3.405). So four telecasts multiplied by a 5 rating equals 
20 TRPS, which equals 13.62 million impressions (4  3.405).
 
In short, GRPs or gross impressions are the simple addition of the ratings or 
impressions each time the ad appears. Because they do not account for duplication, 
GRPs can, and frequently do, exceed 100. Heavy campaigns for movies and political 
campaigns often run much higher than 500 GRPs per week. The rating each time 
the commercial appears is added to the total points for the week.
 
The concept of GRPs is central to media planning because it is the basis for 
determining the cost of a broadcast campaign. In this example, if a planner wishes 
to run 120 A18–34 GRPs per week, and if the cost is $2,000 per GRP, the campaign 
will cost the advertiser $240,000 per week (120  $2,000). This will be discussed 
in more detail in Chapter 6.
 
The use of gross impressions for print media is much the same as it is for broad-
cast. Exhibit 5-1 shows how total gross impressions would be calculated for three 
magazines with varying numbers of ads to be purchased. The number of impres-
sions delivered by a media plan usually runs into the millions. Because the number 
is so large, it is called a boxcar figure. (This expression is used from time to time 

 
Advanced Measurements and Calculations 
109
to indicate that we are using big, coarse, crude measures of media “tonnage”—
numbers so large as to be almost meaningless in human terms but impressive to 
the unsophisticated—like when politicians talk about “trillions of dollars.”) Alone, 
gross impressions have limited meaning. But if (rarely) they can be related to some 
measure of campaign effectiveness such as sales volume, brand awareness, or com-
petitive media plan effectiveness, they can be used to compare media.
 
Gross impressions also are useful in comparing the weight given to geographic 
areas or demographic segments of a market. For example, if the planner wants to 
be sure a given media plan reaches a number of different geographic areas in the 
correct proportions, the gross impressions could be added for each vehicle in the 
plan, and then the proportions of each could be compared with a weighted goal. 
Exhibit 5-2 shows an example of how this works. This table indicates that the gross 
impression distribution of the vehicles selected comes fairly close to the goals set 
for the plan in terms of percent of impressions by county size. It might not be worth 
the extra effort to make the gross impression totals come any closer to the stated 
goals.
 
There is one more thing to remember: when working with different geographic 
areas, it is correct to add impressions. So 1 million A18–34 impressions in Los 
Angeles plus 500,000 A18–34 impressions in San Diego equals 1.5 million total 
impressions. Los Angeles’s A18–34 population is 4,376,000; San Diego’s is 716,100. 
So the 1 million L.A. impressions equals 22.8 TRPs (1,000,000/4,376,000). The 
500,000 San Diego A18–34 impressions equals 70 TRPs (500,000/716,100).
 
Because these are percentages of different bases, planners cannot add the 
GRPs. 22.8 percent of Los Angeles plus 70 percent of San Diego isn’t 92.8 percent 
Total Gross Impressions for Three Magazines 
MAGAZINE
NUMBER OF 
TARGETS 
REACHED AT 
LEAST ONCE
NUMBER OF 
ADS TO BE 
PURCHASED
GROSS 
IMPRESSIONS
A
5,000,000

5

25,000,000
B
2,100,000

3

6,300,000
C
7,000,000

2

14,000,000
Total gross impressions
45,300,000
EXHIBIT 5-1

110 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
of anything. The correct method is to add the impressions and then divide by the 
sum of the populations (4,376,000  716,100  5,092,100). Then 1.5 million/5,092.1 
million  29.5 combined market A18–34 TRPs.
Reach
Reach is a measurement of audience accumulation. Reach tells planners how many 
different prospects will see the ad at least once over any period of time the planner 
finds relevant. Reach is usually expressed as a percentage of a universe with whom 
a planner is trying to communicate. If the universe is women ages 18–49, then all 
women ages 18–49 represent the universe.
 
Note also that reach differs from GRPs because it is an unduplicated number: 
each person is counted only once. To understand the difference between GRPs 
and reach, consider that a popular weekly television program might have an A25–
34 rating of 4.5. That is, the average minute of the program is watched by 4.5 
percent of adults ages 25–34. An advertiser who buys one spot on this program 
each week over a four-week period delivers 18 A25–34 GRPs (4.5  4  18). But 
the GRP statistic double-counts people who see the commercial several times. 
Reach takes out duplication to tell the planner how many different people will 
see the commercial at least once. A special analysis on Nielsen computers could 
tell us these commercials have a four-week reach of 12 percent (or 12). Reach, as 
Distribution of Gross Impressions in Media Plan for Brand X 
GROSS IMPRESSIONS DELIVERED (000)
COUNTY SIZE
VEHICLE 1
VEHICLE 2
VEHICLE 3
TOTAL
TARGET 
GOAL FOR PLAN 
A
308,582
246,972
471,342
1,026,896
47.0%
51.0%
B
276,980
151,370
153,981
582,331
26.7
24.1
C
187,752
72,764
78,796
339,312
15.5
17.3
D
156,150
60,016
18,796
234,962
10.8
7.6
TOTAL
2,183,501
100.0%
100.0%
EXHIBIT 5-2

 
Advanced Measurements and Calculations 
111
a percent of the target, can never exceed 100 percent, while GRPs can continue 
building without limit.
Why Audience Is Counted Only Once
The reason audience members are counted only once in a reach measurement lies 
in the history of media research. When early planners were trying to decide which 
kind of measurement to use to count the size of a vehicle’s audience, some believed 
an audience member would have to be exposed several times to an ad before it 
would have any effect. Other planners disagreed, saying it could not be known how 
many exposures would be required. Planners decided to compromise and count one 
exposure to a vehicle as evidence of reach, because whether or not the ad was seen, 
there was a significant difference between being exposed and not being exposed. 
To be exposed at least once means that audiences then had an opportunity to see 
ads within the vehicle. There obviously would be no opportunity to see ads if there 
were no exposure.
 
Another historical reason for the development of reach concerned the inven-
tion of a statistic for radio and television that would parallel the audience reach 
of a monthly magazine. Planners realized it would be unfair to compare a one-
week broadcast rating with the reach of a monthly issue of a magazine. Obviously, 
the magazine reach would be higher, but by using a four-week reach for broad-
cast media, the planner now had a statistic that was fairly comparable to that of a 
monthly magazine in terms of audience size.
 
Exhibit 5-3 illustrates the measurement of reach using a sample of 10 persons. 
The sample size for measuring reach is actually much larger, but using 10 simplifies 
the concept. Four weeks is the usual measuring period, but reach can be measured 
for almost any period of time. Four weeks happens to have become a standard mea-
suring unit, easily conforming to a monthly accounting period.
 
Exhibit 5-3 is interpreted this way: Viewers 3, 5, 8, and 9 saw the program in 
week 1, so the one-week rating is 40 percent (4 out of 10). Because viewers are 
counted only once, the one-week reach is the same as the one-week rating. In week 
2, only one new person was added to the audience (Viewer 7), so the second-week 
rating was 10 and the two-week reach was 50 (or 40 for week 1 and 10 for week 2). 
In week 3, only one new viewer was added (Viewer 6), so the rating was 10, but the 
three-week reach was 60. In week 4, again, only one new viewer was added (Viewer 
10), and the four-week reach was 70. Note that Viewers 3, 5, 6, and 9 viewed the pro-
gram more than once in the four-week period but were counted only once for the 
purpose of calculating reach. Also note that the one-week rating is unduplicated, so 

112 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
it would be correct to call that rating the one-week reach, although common prac-
tice usually refers to it as a rating.
Kinds of Reach
There are two ways of looking at reach in broadcast planning:
1. The four-week reach of an individual vehicle, such as a television program
2. More commonly, the combined reach of dozens of television programs and 
cable networks that would be bought in an ad campaign
No matter how reach is defined, the same principle applies, namely, that audience 
members are counted only once, no matter how many times they see the vehicle 
within a four-week period. If four television programs are being considered for one 
campaign package, some audience members will be exposed three or four times to 
only one television program, and other audience members will be exposed to all 
A Four-Week Reach Measurement for Program X
VIEWER
WEEK 1
WEEK 2
WEEK 3
WEEK 4
 1
—
—
—
—
 2
—
—
—
—
 3
⊗

—

 4
—
—
—
—
 5
⊗
—

—
 6
—
—
⊗

 7
—
⊗

—
 8
⊗
—
—
—
 9
⊗

—

10
—
—
—
⊗
Ratings each week
40
30
30
40
For a weekly evening program:
  Viewed the program;
⊗  Counted only in reach measurement.
GRPs  140, reach  70, frequency  2.
EXHIBIT 5-3

 
Advanced Measurements and Calculations 
113
four television programs a different number of times. But if they see any one of the 
four programs at least once, they are counted as having been reached in a four-week 
period. In either case, the concept of exposure is the same. We don’t know whether 
those exposed to the vehicle saw the ads (or our ads), so we can only say that reach 
means “opportunities to see” ads, not ad exposure.
 
Suppose, for example, the reach of four programs was 35 million men ages 
18–34. If the planner places a commercial in each of the four television programs, 
it is estimated that 35 million men ages 18–34 will have an opportunity to see at 
least one of those four vehicles and, the planner hopes, one of the four commercials 
within the vehicle. The word hope is a reminder that reach is concerned only with 
vehicle exposure, not exposure to a given commercial. The Nielsen NPower pro-
gram can be used to give the reach to a campaign of specific commercials, but this 
report is available only after the ads run.
 
Exhibit 5-4 shows another way how the concepts of GRPs, reach, frequency, and 
frequency distribution apply to a schedule of four television programs. Six homes 
viewed one of the four programs at least once in the measured week. A home 
or person is counted only once, regardless of how many programs were viewed. 
Therefore, the first home has received two impressions (one from “America’s Got 
Talent” and one from “The Office”) but is counted only once toward reach. The 
second home didn’t see any of the telecasts. The third home was exposed once, the 
fourth home three times, and so on.
 
At the end of the one-week schedule of four telecasts, 6 of the 10 homes have 
been reached one or more times. Other terms that are sometimes used to describe 
the net reach of four television programs are cumulative audience, audience accu-
mulated by four television programs, and net unduplicated audience. Each term is 
correct, but in popular usage people are more likely to say, “The reach of these four 
programs is 60 percent.” Note how GRPs and reach increase with each telecast. 
Average frequency (the number of times the average home saw a commercial) is cal-
culated as GRPs divided by reach.
Relationship Between Reach and Coverage
It can be confusing to know whether to use the term coverage or reach when refer-
ring to audience accumulation data. The terms can be interchangeable because cov-
erage sometimes is synonymous with reach. A better answer is that coverage and 
reach are quite different, because coverage could mean potential to be exposed to 
the advertising, and reach refers to those people who actually are exposed.
 
Popular usage of these terms provides the basic answer. Coverage usually refers 
to potential audience for broadcast media and to actual delivered audience for print 

114 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
media. Reach always refers to the audience actually delivered by any advertising 
vehicle. Exhibit 5-5 summarizes the distinction.
How Reach Builds Over Time
Reach for television programs accumulates, or builds, in a fairly consistent pat-
tern over time as a commercial is broadcast over and over again. The first time a 
Reach/Frequency of a TV Schedule
“HOUSE”
6/22
8:05 P.M.
“AMERICA’S GOT 
TALENT”
6/23
10:14 P.M.
“THE OFFICE”
6/25
8:23 P.M.
“LAW & ORDER: 
SVU”
6/28
10:45 P.M.
TOTAL IMPRESSIONS
✓
✓
2
0
✓
1
✓
✓
✓
3
✓
✓
2
✓
1
0
✓
✓
2
0
 
 
 
 
0
Ratings
30%
20%
40%
20%
Freq. distribution 
Not exposed: 40%
GRPs
30
50
90
110
Exposed once: 20%
Reach 
30%
40%
50%
60%
Exposed twice: 30%
Frequency
1.0
1.25
1.8
1.83
Exposed 3+ times: 10%
EXHIBIT 5-4

 
Advanced Measurements and Calculations 
115
commercial is telecast, it accumulates the largest number of viewers. The second 
time it is telecast, most of the viewers are repeat viewers, although some new view-
ers are added. The third and subsequent telecasts accumulate even fewer new view-
ers. Exhibit 5-6 shows the classic pattern of diminishing returns as a commercial is 
repeated and GRPs are added across many programs on many broadcast and cable 
networks.
 
In this illustration, after 500 GRPs have been delivered, approximately 68 per-
cent of viewers will have seen the commercial at least once. Does reach ever level 
out over a year? No. The curve is asymptotic to the maximum reach—that is, the 
curve is never perfectly horizontal, but it comes close after about 2,000 GRPs.
Reach in Print Media
Whereas the telecast of a commercial is the basic advertising unit in broadcast 
media, in print media the basic unit is an issue of a magazine or newspaper. One 
does not usually speak of the four-week reach of a magazine, although there are 
measurements that estimate audience accumulation over time for the average issue 
of a magazine. Generally speaking, monthly magazines have a longer issue life than 
How to Use the Terms Reach and Coverage
Use reach to express a whole number or percentage of different people actually 
exposed only once to a media vehicle or combination of vehicles.
Example: Television program X reaches 9 million men ages 18–34 within a four-
week period.
Example: Magazine Y has a reach of 25 percent of men ages 18–34 with an aver-
age issue.
Use coverage to express the potential audience of a broadcast medium or the actual 
audience of a print medium exposed only once.
Example: A network television program has a coverage of 95 percent of TV homes 
in the United States.
Example: Magazine Y has a 25 percent coverage of men ages 18–34. (Means the 
same as reach.)
EXHIBIT 5-5

116 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
weeklies, and general-content magazines have a longer life than news-oriented 
magazines.
 
Magazine reach can be expressed in a number of ways:
The total number of people who read the average issue of a magazine, also 
• 
called the average issue audience of a magazine like Newsweek
Target audience reach of multiple issues of the same magazine (e.g., the 
• 
reach—or net unduplicated audience—of the July 1, July 8, July 15, July 22, and 
July 29 issues of Newsweek)
Target audience reach of single issues of different magazines within the same 
• 
month (e.g., the reach—or net unduplicated audience—of the July issues of 
Oprah, Real Simple, Cooking Light, and Better Homes & Gardens)
The reach of single or multiple issues of different magazines occurring 
• 
throughout the advertising campaign (e.g., the reach of Popular Mechanics in 
June and August, Field & Stream in July and August, and Sport in June and 
July)
 
Because a reach measurement can express many qualities, knowing them all 
becomes important. Exhibit 5-7 summarizes these qualities.
The Relationship Between GRPs and Reach in Prime Time
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
 
300 
500 
700 
900 
1,100 
1,300
 
Gross Rating Points
Reach
(%)
Source: DRAFTFCB, Reach-2007. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 5-6

 
Advanced Measurements and Calculations 
117
Meaning of Reach, Summarized
Reach is
 1. A measurement of audience accumulation over a specified period
 2. An unduplicated statistic
 3. Measured, although it can sometimes be estimated
 4. Measured for a single vehicle or a group of different vehicles
 5. Measured for subsequent issues of the same magazine (e.g., the seven-issue 
reach of TV Guide is . . .)
 6. Reported for a four-week period of television watching
 7. Reported for almost any period in broadcast measurements
 8. Reported by the issue in print media
 9. Reported either as a raw number or as a percentage of some universe
 10. Reported for households or for individuals in a demographic category
 11. Another term for coverage in print media
 12. Measured on the basis of exposure to a vehicle or vehicles
 13. Not routinely measured for exposure to specific ads in vehicles. Possible with 
custom analysis of TV and print schedules.
 14. A measurement that tells how many different people had an opportunity to see 
ads in vehicles
 15. A media strategy that shows dispersion of audiences
Combined Reach of Multiple Media
Planners are frequently asked to show the combined reach of all the media in a 
plan. For example, if 65 percent of the target was reached by the television com-
mercial, and 54 percent of the target saw the magazine ad at least once, what per-
cent of the target saw either one or the other? In short, what was the total reach of 
the campaign?
 
In a sense, this common question asks planners to mix apples and oranges, 
because each medium is measured differently. The 65 percent reach of the televi-
sion campaign represents people who actually saw the commercial that week. The 
magazine reach, on the other hand, represents all the people who ever saw the issue, 
even if that readership occurred many weeks later from an old copy at the barber 
shop or doctor’s office. Note also that the TV rating is the percent who saw the 
average minute of the program or the average commercial minute (the C3 rating), 
while the magazine audience is the percent who read the issue, not necessarily the 
particular page where the advertiser’s ad appeared.
EXHIBIT 5-7

118 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
Despite these technical issues, advertisers want to know the net reach of the 
campaign, and planners are expected to create fruit salad out of these different 
media elements.
Random Duplication Numerous studies have shown that duplication between dif-
ferent mass media is random. Using the previous example, assume the reach of the 
TV commercial was 65 percent and the reach of a magazine campaign was 54 per-
cent. Random duplication assumes that if 65 percent of the target saw the TV com-
mercial, then 65 percent of the people who saw the magazine ad also saw the TV. 
Some saw only the TV commercial, some saw only the magazine ad, and some, the 
duplicated piece, saw both the TV and the magazine advertising. This last section 
must be subtracted so we don’t count them twice.
 
The basic equation, sometimes called the Sainsbury model, is:
Reach  a  b  (ab)
where a  reach of the first medium (expressed as decimal)
 
b  reach of the second medium (expressed as a decimal)
 
Reach  decimal percent of the target exposed to either of the two media
So in this example: Reach  a  b  (ab)
Reach  TV  Magazines  (TV  Magazines)
Reach  0.65  0.54  (0.65  0.54)
Reach  1.19  0.351
Reach  0.839  100  84%
Even though we carried the math out to three decimal places for the calculation, the 
final reach should be reported to the client as a whole number (84 percent, not 83.9 
percent). This indicates that reach is an estimate and avoids giving the impression 
of greater precision than is warranted. To get frequency, add the GRPs and divide 
by the reach. Assume there were 120 TV GRPs and 177 magazine GRPs.
TV GRPS: 120  Magazine GRPs: 177  297 total GRPs
Frequency  GRPs / Reach
Frequency  297 / 84
Frequency  3.5

 
Advanced Measurements and Calculations 
119
The campaign reached 84 percent of the target audience, and the average person 
who was reached saw the ad (either the TV commercial or the magazine ad) an 
average of 3.5 times.
 
For three or more media, calculate the reach of the two highest-reach media. 
Then repeat the process, using this calculated reach and the third-highest medium, 
and so on. This is true for broad media: prime-time television, broad Internet web-
sites, radio across multiple stations. So the net reach of Google and Bing can be 
calculated with random duplication, while the net reach of SI.com and ESPN.com 
would involve more than random duplication. If there is 20 percent more duplica-
tion, the equation would read:
a  b  1.2(ab)
We would subtract 20 percent more than the random ab combination. Note that 
the exact level of duplication has to come from a computer system. There is no way 
for a planner to estimate nonrandom duplication.
Duplication Between Media Vehicles Planners are frequently asked to provide the 
duplication between different media vehicles, especially magazines. First it is impor-
tant to remember that duplication analysis is only possible between two magazines. 
As Exhibit 5-8 shows, even with three magazines there are seven possible answers; 
the possible combinations of more than three magazines are mind-boggling.
The Seven Pieces of Three Magazine “Duplication”
3
6
4
2
1
5
7
EXHIBIT 5-8

120 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
For multiple magazine schedules, planners use conventional software to obtain 
the net reach—the percent of the target that sees at least one of the vehicles. The 
magazine names are entered as rows and as columns.
 
Duplication is frequently calculated for two magazine combinations. But 
even this can be confusing. Exhibit 5-9 illustrates duplication between Good 
Housekeeping and Real Simple magazines for women ages 25–54. Note that 34.4 
percent of Real Simple’s readers read Good Housekeeping, while only 14.9 percent 
of Good Housekeeping’s readers read Real Simple. What is the duplication? 34.4 per-
cent or 14.9 percent?
 
The best way to calculate duplication is to show the percent of people who read 
either magazine who have read both. From Exhibit 5-9, a straight cross tab, we 
know that 12,129,000 women ages 25–54 read Good Housekeeping, 5,252,000 read 
Real Simple, and 1,806,000 read both. The calculation is: 
Duplication  
Readers of both Magazine A 
and Magazine B
Readers of Magazine A  Readers 
of Magazine B  readers of both
So in this case,
Two Magazine Duplication
WOMEN AGES 25–54
TOTAL WOMEN 
25–54
GOOD 
HOUSEKEEPING
REAL SIMPLE
Totals 
(000)
64,062
12,129
5,252
Vertical %
100
100
100
Horizontal %
100
18.9
8.2
Good Housekeeping
(000)
12,129
—
1,806
Vertical %
18.9
—
34.4
Horizontal %
100.0
—
14.9
Real Simple
(000)
5,252
1,806
—
Vertical %
8.2
14.9
—
Horizontal %
100.0
34.4
—
Source: Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, Spring 2009. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 5-9

 
Advanced Measurements and Calculations 
121
Duplication  
1,806 readers of both
12,129 GH readers  5,252 RS readers  1,806 both
Duplication  
1,806
15,575  11.6%
This calculation allows the planner to report duplication as a single number: 11.6 
percent of the women 25–54 who read either Good Housekeeping or Real Simple 
actually read both.
Frequency
Frequency is the companion statistic to reach. It tells the planner the number of 
times that the average person who was reached saw the advertising campaign, gen-
erally within a four-week period. Some of the people who were reached saw the ad 
only once, while others were reached many times. Frequency tells the planner how 
often the average person saw it. Reach is a measure of message dispersion, indicating 
how widely the message is viewed by the target universe. Frequency is a measure of 
repetition, indicating to what extent audience members were exposed to the same 
vehicle or group of vehicles. Both reach and frequency are valuable decision-making 
tools, because they give the media planner different options for arranging message 
delivery in a media plan.
The basic equation is:
GRPs  Reach  Frequency
Frequency  
GRPs
Reach
Reach  
GRPs
Frequency
 
Let’s apply this to an example in broadcast. Suppose a Taco Bell commercial is 
telecast 80 times in a given week on programs whose commercials had an average 
adult 18–34 rating of 1.5. Some telecasts were on special-interest cable networks 
where the rating is 0.4 or even less; other telecasts ran in prime time on the broad-
cast networks where the rating might be 2.5 or higher. In short, the commercial 
appeared in 80 telecasts across many different programs whose average commer-
cial rating was 1.5, giving a total of 120 GRPs. This schedule had a four-week reach 

122 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
of 55 percent. (Note that this number comes from Nielsen research or computer 
models; it cannot be calculated by hand.) The average frequency is calculated from 
the equation:
GRPs  Reach  Frequency
Frequency  
GRPs
Reach
Frequency  
120
55  
Frequency  2.2
To summarize, the advertiser ran the commercial 80 times that week across a broad 
range of programs on broadcast and cable television. The commercial was watched 
by 1.5 percent of adults ages 18–34 on the average telecast, yielding 120 A18–34 
GRPs. By the end of the week, 55 percent of this target had seen at least one of 
the 80 telecasts, and the average person who was reached saw the commercial 2.2 
times. Some saw it more often than that, some saw it less, but the average person 
who was reached saw it 2.2 times.
 
Conversely, 45 percent of adults 18–34 were not reached: they never saw the 
commercial and wouldn’t have anything to say if their friend asked, “What did you 
think of that new Taco Bell ad?”
 
For print, the calculations are similar. Suppose Magazine Y has a reach of 54 
percent after six consecutive issues. The average issue of the magazine is read by 
29.5 percent of the target (its average issue audience). First calculate GRPs; then use 
that value to find average frequency:
GRPs  29.5  6  177
Frequency  
177 GRPs
54 Reach  3.3
Again, the average issue audience (29.5) and the six-issue reach (sometimes called 
“cumulative audience” or “cume”) comes from computer models and cannot be 
estimated by hand. Also, because reach is an estimate, it is usually displayed as a 
whole number.

 
Advanced Measurements and Calculations 
123
Frequency Distribution
Media planners sometimes forget that frequency is an average, not an absolute num-
ber. It is subject, therefore, to the characteristics of all statistical averages. Averages, 
for example, are affected by extreme scores in a distribution. A few very high num-
bers can bring up the average of the scores, and a few very low ones can drag down 
the average. The only way to guard against being deceived by a frequency statistic 
is to look at a frequency distribution and see whether some segments of a sample 
are getting disproportionately more frequency than others.
 
Exhibit 5-10 shows a sample divided into fixed quintiles and each group’s 
reach and frequency. (Fixed quintiles means that the sample of audience members 
exposed was divided into five equal groups, each with 20 percent of the total num-
ber exposed.) The distribution of frequency is obviously unequal in Exhibit 5-10. 
Some of the quintiles received much more frequency than others. This phenom-
enon is known as skew.
 
Exhibit 5-11 dramatizes the skew by showing the frequency distribution in 
graphic form. Daily Program X had a 5.2 average frequency, but some segments 
were receiving more frequency than others. The average frequency of 5.2 does not 
indicate the disparity. The planner could be deceived by the average frequency level 
of Program X, thinking every home in the sample tuned to the program 5.2 times 
during a four-week period. The illustration shows otherwise. Frequency distribu-
tions with a large skew are called unbalanced.
Quintile Analysis of Tune-Ins for Program X
DIVISIONS OF VIEWER SAMPLE
REACH
FREQUENCY
GRPS
Heaviest 20%
17%
11
187
Next 20%
17
6
102
Third 20%
17
5
85
Next 20%
17
3
51
Lightest 20%
17
1
17
Totals*
85%
5.2 avg.
442
* Reach of entire sample, 85; frequency of entire sample, 5.2; GRPs, 442.
EXHIBIT 5-10

124 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Frequency Distribution for Program X
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
12
Number of Times
Each Group Tuned
in to Program X
 
20% 
20% 
20% 
20% 
20%
 
Lightest 
Heaviest
1
3
5
6
11
Average frequency 5 5.2
 
Frequency distributions can be arranged according to quintiles, but they can 
also be arranged according to single increments of exposure, giving the planner a 
more detailed picture of exposure. Exhibit 5-12 shows a frequency distribution of 
exposure for all media in a given plan. Subtracting the number reached from the 
universe size shows that 8,227,000 of the universe of 29,356,000 did not see any of 
the vehicles used. Some 3,125,000 were exposed only once out of the 12 opportuni-
ties for exposure, and 2,269,000 were exposed to any 2 out of the 12 exposures. The 
number exposed at any frequency is unduplicated, meaning that these people are 
counted only once. A person receiving 12 exposures would not be counted at any 
other frequency level.
 
Frequency distributions therefore provide planners with a method of determin-
ing the pattern of repetition that the plan provides. Alternative plans will provide 
more or fewer repetition patterns. More important, however, is that the distribution 
will show whether repetition is spread widely or among only a very few prospects.
 
The example in Exhibit 5-13 shows how a frequency distribution can help a 
media planner decide among alternative plans. Plan A has a 4.0 average frequency 
and Plan B a 3.6. If the frequency is important, then Plan A would seem to be the 
better plan.
EXHIBIT 5-11

 
Advanced Measurements and Calculations 
125
Frequency Distribution of Media Plan
FREQUENCY OF 
EXPOSED
NUMBER EXPOSURES 
(000)
Reach
72%
0
8,227
Frequency
4.01
1
3,125
Gross impressions
84,749
2
2,269
Number reached
21,129
3
3,632
Universe
29,356
4
5,236
5
2,474
6
1,201
7
1,462
8
771
9
622
10
135
Calculations
11
104
21,129  29,356  72%
12
98
84,749  21,129  4.01
21,129
EXHIBIT 5-12
Four-Week Reaches and Frequencies of Two Media Plans
FREQUENCY OF EXPOSURE
PLAN A
REACH
PLAN B
REACH
1
24%
20%
2
16
15
3
9
12
4–5
6
13
6–8
5
30%
10
40%  3 reach
9–12
5
4
13
5
1
Average frequency
4.0
3.6
Total reach
70%
75%
Reach at 3 frequency
30%
40%
EXHIBIT 5-13

126 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
Upon studying a frequency distribution such as the one in Exhibit 5-13, however, the 
planner learns something that could change the decision: Plan A delivers more audience 
members at exposure levels 1 and 2, but for exposures 3 through 8, Plan B is superior. 
Plan B reaches more persons than does Plan A at the 3-or-higher exposure level. If the 
advertising effort requires that people receive high levels of exposure (higher frequency), 
then Plan B is the obvious choice. Approximately 75 percent of the target will see the 
commercial at least once, while 40 percent will see it three or more times.
Weighted Frequency Distribution Planners often decide that the likelihood of a 
message being communicated depends on how many times the viewer is exposed. 
They believe that a single exposure doesn’t do much good, making the people who 
are exposed only once worth less than those exposed more times. They may also 
believe that after a certain number of times, additional exposures won’t be any 
more effective, that the 12th exposure is as good as the 10th.
 
They handle this by weighting the frequency distribution. Suppose in the pre-
ceding example the planner decides that people exposed only once are worth 
25 percent of the maximum, people exposed twice are worth 50 percent, people 
exposed three times are worth 75 percent, and with four exposures or more, all are 
equally and maximally effective with a weight of 1.0.
 
Exhibit 5-14 shows that same analysis with frequency weighting taken into 
account. Plan B, with 49.5 percent weighted reach, is still the preferred plan, but 
now the decision reflects a more complete view of the value of each exposure. As 
Weighted Frequency Distribution Reflects Communication 
at Different Levels of Exposure
FREQUENCY 
OF EXPOSURE
PLAN A
REACH
WEIGHT
WEIGHTED 
REACH
PLAN B
REACH
WEIGHT
WEIGHTED 
REACH
1
24
0.25
6.0
20
0.25
5.0
2
16
0.5
8.0
15
0.5
7.5
3
9
0.75
6.8
12
0.75
9.0
4–5
6
1
6.0
13
1
13.0
6–8
5
1
5.0
10
1
10.0
9–12
5
1
5.0
4
1
4.0
13
5
1
5.0
1
1
1.0
70%
41.8
75%
49.5
EXHIBIT 5-14

 
Advanced Measurements and Calculations 
127
with so much of media planning, the weight that should be applied to each fre-
quency level is the planner’s judgment, taking into account the creative message, 
the objectives of the advertising, and all the other factors that go into the commu-
nications plan.
 
Note that the frequency distribution that planners see on their computer runs 
is not a real count of the number of people exposed varying numbers of times. 
Instead, it is produced by a computer model—mathematics—that takes for its input 
the number of units bought, the GRPs, and the average frequency. For this reason, a 
planner cannot do much to alter the 2 or 3 effective reach or the quintile analy-
sis, which are directly calculated from the frequency distribution. These numbers 
become a fact of life, a characterization of the media plan that does little more than 
help the planner understand its delivery to different audience segments.
Relationship of Reach to Frequency
It is necessary to understand that reach and frequency occur at the same time but 
at different rates and in an inverse relationship. Within a given number of GRPs, 
as one goes up, the other goes down. To understand how these companion terms 
relate to each other, let us first look at the mathematics:
Reach  Frequency  GRPs
According to this equation, an advertising schedule composed of a 50 reach with a 
2.0 frequency yields 100 GRPs. If these same 100 GRPs were obtained in a differ-
ent mixture of media, the reach might increase, but the frequency would decline. 
Conversely, a 100 GRP schedule in still other media mixtures might produce higher 
frequency, but less reach.
 
In a classic explanation, Seymour Banks, formerly vice president of Leo Burnett 
Company, discussed the dynamics of reach and frequency relative to rating size and 
number of telecasts:
Reach is not directly proportional to either ratings or the number of telecasts. 
Rather, as ratings increase or as the number of telecasts used increases, reach also 
rises but at a decreasing rate. This is more easily understood when we consider that 
the companion of reach is frequency. When the rating or the number of telecasts 
increases, some of this increase goes towards boosting reach, while some of it con-
tributes to an increase in frequency.1
1. Seymour Banks, “How to Estimate Reach and Frequency” (Leo Burnett Company, 
1960): 5. 

128 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
Up to a certain point, it is relatively easy to build reach. By selecting different day-
parts in which to place commercials, it is possible to reach different kinds of people. 
But there is a point of diminishing returns, where each attempt to build more reach 
by selecting more and different kinds of programs results in reaching the same per-
sons over and over again, with an increase in frequency rather than in reach. Some 
homes may never tune in their television sets over an entire month, so they are 
impossible to reach with TV in that month. Reach will increase as ratings and num-
ber of telecasts increase, but it will begin to decline in rate (not total) over time.
 
The point of diminishing returns can be seen in Exhibit 5-15, which illustrates 
reach accumulation among adults 18–49. It shows, for example, that when 500 
GRPs are split evenly among prime time, late fringe, cable, and syndication, the plan 
will reach 78 percent of target adults one or more times. This includes 53 percent 
of target adults who are reached three or more times, and 38 percent five or more 
times. We see that 1 reach rises rapidly until about 400 GRPs (74 percent reach), 
and that additional weight beyond this point produces proportionately less reach 
and more frequency. The percent exposed 3 and 5 times continues to rise, but 
at some point, these curves too will flatten in the same manner as the 1 curve.
Effective Reach Versus GRPs and Cost
Even mix: prime time, late fringe, cable, syndication
1+
3+
5+
1+
3+
5+
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Reach
(% Adults 18–49)
Adults 18–49 GRPs 250
500
750
1,000
1,250
1,500
Cost ($Millions) @ $25,000/GRP 12.5
18.8
25.0
31.3
37.5
Source: DRAFTFCB Reach, 2007. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 5-15

 
Advanced Measurements and Calculations 
129
 
The challenge for planners comes when they must relate the desired reach to 
the cost of buying the GRPs necessary to achieve that reach. In Chapter 3 we dis-
cussed the concept of cost per rating point (CPP). In this example, the average cost 
per adult 18–49 rating point for 30-second commercials is $25,000, with weight 
split equally among prime time, late fringe, cable, and syndication. Using this price, 
it will cost $25 million to buy 1,000 points. Note that the CPP and the shape of the 
reach curves are different for each demographic target and daypart or combination 
of dayparts.
 
To summarize, reach and frequency are inversely related, but at a changing rate. 
When a campaign starts out, very few people have seen the advertising. Each new 
telecast reaches mostly people who have never seen it before, and reach rises quickly. 
As the campaign becomes more mature, there are fewer and fewer new prospects 
to expose. Reach rises more slowly with additional rating points. Meanwhile, the 
number of people exposed more than once increases, and frequency increases. That 
frequency can be expressed either as average frequency (GRPs/reach) or as the per-
cent of the target exposed at least a certain number of times.
 
This latter form is used to show the “effective reach” of a campaign. If planners 
decide their commercial must be seen at least three times to be effective, then in 
the preceding example, a planner would say, “At 500 GRPs, 53 percent of the target 
is reached effectively at 3 times.” This takes a more realistic approach to describ-
ing the delivery of a campaign than using the 78 percent 1 reach, which includes 
many people who will not see the commercial often enough to be effectively 
exposed. Most media plans will show all four numbers when describing media 
weight: GRPs, 1 reach, average frequency, and reach at the recommended effec-
tive frequency level.
 
In the context of the weighted frequency distribution described earlier, for a 3 
reach the people exposed once or twice would be given a weight of 0—worthless—
while every frequency level from three and beyond would be given a weight of 1.0. 
This way of setting the frequency distribution weights could be viewed as simplis-
tic, but in the absence of better data, it may be more practical than arbitrarily set-
ting a different weight for each frequency level.
Effective Frequency
Effective frequency can be defined as the amount of frequency (or repetition) the plan-
ner judges to be necessary for advertisements to be effective in communicating. The 
underlying assumption, of course, is that the average frequency statistic used in most 
media plans does not tell enough about a plan’s delivery to be useful. Therefore, effec-
tive frequency can represent a great improvement over the ordinary 1 reach and 
average frequency numbers used in traditionally created media plans.

130 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
Another problem with reach and frequency analysis is that it doesn’t tell the 
planner anything about the effectiveness of the media plan or the adequacy of 
alternatives. The 1 reach simply represents the opportunity to see advertise-
ments. There is no guarantee that those who are reached actually see any of the 
ads. The C3 rating, while better than the average program minute, doesn’t account 
for people not paying attention to the TV set even if they are physically in the room 
when the commercials are run. Put another way, although reach shows how many 
people are exposed to the ads, it does not tell the planner whether the ads will lead 
to increased sales or other desired results of the ad campaign. Ordinary frequency 
generated by a plan is the average number of times the target audience is exposed 
to the campaign. Average frequency, too, is not related to the plan’s effectiveness.
 
Planners who use effective frequency attempt to correct for both situations by 
estimating the number of repetitions that are needed to attain communication 
goals. Those goals might be achieving brand awareness, attitude changes, brand 
switching, and recall of messages, to name a few. For example, if someone sets 
a communication goal of building 70 percent brand awareness, a media planner 
should ask, “How much repetition will help accomplish the task?”
Response Curves and Effective Frequency
The number at which frequency can be called “effective” depends on ideas of how 
much repetition is needed to communicate with consumers. Media planners find 
or estimate this number by observing what happens at varying repetitive levels. 
The analysis is common for digital advertising, where the number of exposures 
delivered to a given computer and the resulting click-throughs are easy to track. It 
is much more difficult to observe for traditional media.
 
Over many years, practitioners have hypothesized about how advertising works. 
Most believe that advertising does not work immediately. According to Herbert 
Krugman, author of the “three hit” theory, audiences may respond to their first per-
ception of an advertisement by raising questions about the brand, such as, “What is 
it?” After audiences have perceived the same ad a second time, they will ask, “What 
of it?” On the second exposure, consumers then react to the commercial and begin 
to compare alternative brands. The third exposure is a reminder of the other two 
and the beginning of a time where consumers tune out the additional exposures. 
Krugman hypothesized that when audiences are in the market to buy a product, 
they will respond to that second repetition.
 
Therefore, effective frequency begins after the second repetition, but only when 
a consumer is ready to buy a given product. Many other practitioners have hypoth-
esized that audiences begin to respond to advertising at about the third repetition. 
Beginning with the third repetition, the number of responses begins to grow with 
each additional repetition, but at a declining rate. If this hypothesis is plotted on 

 
Advanced Measurements and Calculations 
131
a graph, it will have an S shape (see Exhibit 5-16). The first two repetitions are a 
threshold that audiences have to pass before advertisements become effective.
 
However, most researchers of advertising response curves have not found the 
S-shaped curve to occur very often. In fact, they have more often found a different 
kind of curve, often called a convex curve (see Exhibit 5-17). Many media planners 
who have adopted the concept of effective frequency believe that a convex curve 
represents a graphical picture of how repetition works in advertising. This curve is 
similar to the reach accumulation curve in Exhibits 5-6 and 5-15.
S-Shaped Response Curve
Response
Frequency
Threshold
Convex Response Curve
Response
Frequency
EXHIBIT 5-16
EXHIBIT 5-17

132 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Effective Reach: The Other Side of the Coin
Once an effective-frequency level has been decided on, the planner needs to know 
effective reach—that is, the percent of the target audience exposed at the frequency 
level that is effective in the planner’s judgment. If the planner thinks three expo-
sures is enough to be effective, then the plan will need to show what percent of the 
target is exposed at this level. Saying, “We want to reach the target at least three 
times” is meaningless, compared to saying, “We want to reach 55 percent of the tar-
get at least three times.” Typically, a planner wants to reach as many people at this 
level as possible within the authorized budget. Exhibit 5-15 is a useful way to show 
the relationship between cost and effective reach.
Brief History of Effective Frequency
To this point, effective frequency has been discussed as a simple numerical concept. 
In fact, it relates to a far subtler question: How many times does a person need to 
see an ad before “getting” the message? The answer depends on the nature of the 
product, the creative message, the advertising objectives, the medium being used, 
and a wide variety of other marketing factors. But in the end, the answer requires 
a judgment, because it really depends on what happens in the mind of the target 
consumer. Over the years, numerous research studies have been conducted to help 
planners make this judgment. The two most important are Michael Naples’s semi-
nal work on effective frequency and Erwin Ephron’s Recency (Shelf Space) Model 
of Media Planning.
Naples Study
Probably the greatest impetus to establishing the concept in the United States 
was the publication of Effective Frequency: The Relationship Between Frequency 
and Advertising Awareness, by Michael J. Naples.2 Published by the Association 
of National Advertisers, this book became required reading for almost every U.S. 
planner. The concept spread throughout the media departments of U.S. advertising 
agencies and is still widely used.
 
After presenting many research studies that supported the idea of effective 
frequency, Naples arrived at some conclusions about the implications for media 
planners:
2. Michael J. Naples, Effective Frequency (New York: Association of National Advertisers, 
Inc. 1979).  

 
Advanced Measurements and Calculations 
133
One exposure of an advertisement to a target consumer group (within a pur-
• 
chase cycle) has little or no effect.
Because one exposure is usually ineffective, the main thrust of media planning 
• 
should be on emphasizing frequency rather than reach.
Most of the research studies suggested that two exposures within a purchase 
• 
cycle are an effective threshold level.
Three exposures within a purchase cycle, however, are felt to be optimal.
• 
After three exposures within a purchasing cycle, advertising becomes more 
• 
effective as frequency is increased, but at a decreasing rate. If this were drawn 
on a graph, it would appear as a convex curve rising from a zero point.
Wearout of an advertising campaign is not caused by too much frequency, per 
• 
se. It is caused by copy and content problems.
Generally, small and lesser-known brands will benefit most from increased fre-
• 
quency. Larger, well-known brands might or might not be helped by increasing 
frequency, depending on how close they are to advertising saturation levels.
Different dayparts on television are affected by different frequency levels. A 
• 
similar idea applies to thin versus thick magazines, with the thinner ones hav-
ing better response effects than the thicker ones.
Frequency responses are affected by the amount of money an advertiser 
• 
spends as a percentage of the product category total. Brands with the greatest 
proportion of exposures within their categories should also gain great effect 
when frequency is increased.
The responses due to increased frequency are not affected by different media. 
• 
What is true for one medium is true for others.
Each brand might require a different level of frequency of exposure. One 
• 
cannot generalize from a given brand’s experiences to some other brand. 
Specialized research is required to find the unique frequency level for a brand.
Two brands spending the same amount of money for advertising can have dif-
• 
ferent responses to their frequencies.
Questions Regarding Effective-Frequency Research
As time has passed, planners have challenged this effective-frequency research. 
These concerns are summarized and discussed in the following paragraphs.
Is There a Need for Product Category Differentiation? One major problem of 
effective-frequency research was that most of it failed to show much difference 
between frequency effects for various product categories. This lack of differentia-
tion tended to mislead planners into thinking that effective frequency is the same 

134 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
for all product categories. Now a growing number of planners are saying this idea 
cannot be correct. Frequency levels should vary from one product category to 
another.
 
Unfortunately, no measurements exist to show just which levels are needed for 
different kinds of products. Until this problem is resolved, media planners will have 
to make subjective decisions about how much frequency is enough. There is, how-
ever, some speculation that high-involvement products need less frequency and 
low-involvement products need more. The same idea applies to frequency levels of 
interesting and uninteresting products. The role of frequency then might be to help 
break through consumers’ perceptual inertia for certain kinds of products.
Is There a Threshold? Another problem with the concept is determining whether a 
threshold exists before consumers begin to respond to advertising messages. Most 
of the research on the subject has suggested there are relatively few responses to the 
first few impressions of an advertising campaign. Advertising in these studies began 
to work with the second or third impression. Those who believed in the three-plus 
frequency concept believed that advertising began to be effective with the third 
impression. But many direct-marketing practitioners objected, noting that in their 
business, the first impressions often drew tremendous responses. Gus Priemer, then 
director of advertising service and media at S. C. Johnson & Son, Inc., also noted 
that in his experience of new-product introductions, the first impression had been 
able to generate noteworthy responses.
 
Attendees to a “Symposium on Effective Frequency” held in April 1986 at 
Northwestern University also questioned whether a threshold was realistic. The 
consensus at that meeting was that most response curves are convex, not S-shaped. 
The S-shaped curve was the one that indicated there was a threshold. Nevertheless, 
many planners still believe in a threshold. (The 1986 conference is cited here to 
illustrate that these perennial questions are as relevant today in the 21st century as 
they were more than 20 years ago.)
What Is the Relationship Between Good Advertising and Effective Frequency? A 
great many questions have been asked about whether effective frequency could be 
influenced by the quality of advertising messages. Why, for example, should the 
ad message not play a more important role in determining how much frequency 
is effective? Dull, uninteresting copy could require a great deal more frequency 
than scintillating creative messages. Since advertising agencies are expected to 
always produce top-quality creative product, they have little incentive to pre-
cisely define any relationship between creative quality and sales, assuming that 
was even possible.

 
Advanced Measurements and Calculations 
135
Does Advertising Wear Out When There Is Too Much Frequency? Some of the research 
cited by Naples showed that negative responses occurred after using too much 
repetition. Some consumers will even forget an advertising message if frequency 
is too high. The research of Valentine Appel and L. Jacobovits (also reported in 
Naples’s book) suggests that the shape of a wear-out curve looks like an inverted U. 
But among media planners, there seems to be no wide-ranging concern about this 
potential problem.
 
The effective-frequency concept for media planners relates most importantly to 
this point: How much media vehicle frequency is necessary to achieve the advertis-
ing exposure frequencies found in most of the research studies? Radio and televi-
sion ratings and magazine audience exposures represent only exposures to vehicles. 
To go beyond vehicle frequency, we need research that either relates vehicle fre-
quency to advertising frequency or directly shows the effects of vehicle exposure 
frequency to a given response. Some research studies have tried to do the latter, but 
more research is necessary.
Recency and the Shelf-Space Model of Media Planning
The subject was explored in detail at the Effective Frequency Research Day con-
ducted by the Advertising Research Foundation in November 1994 and from which 
the following highlights were drawn.3 Using Nielsen Household Panel data from the 
early 1990s, Professor John Philip Jones of Syracuse University challenged the con-
ventional wisdom that three exposures are necessary for an ad to be effective. He 
said, instead, “Effective frequency is provided by a single exposure . . . one exposure 
generates the highest proportion of sales.”
 
Although Jones found differences from one campaign to another in the incre-
mental effectiveness of the second, third, and subsequent exposures, in all cases the 
first exposure had the largest effect on sales. He concluded, “Additional exposures 
add very little to the effect of the first.” Media consultant Erwin Ephron expressed 
the concept more colloquially:
If you tell a kid, “Remember to wash your hands before each meal” three times at 
11 a.m., you are using frequency to teach. If you tell him once, right before dinner, 
you’re using presence to remind. A reminder at the right time is a more effective way 
to influence behavior.
 
Being there with a message for the consumer who is ready-to-buy, and being 
there continuously is what I call “presence”—the media equivalent of “renting the 
3. “Effective Frequency Research Day Proceedings,” Advertising Research Foundation, 
November 2, 1994. 

136 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
shelf.” . . . Not being there with a message when the consumer is ready-to-buy is the 
advertising equivalent of being out of stock—which is why I call this the “shelf-space 
model of media planning.”4
 
Ephron relates this concept to media planning. Each week of the year, people are 
shopping and buying; they should be continuously exposed to a brand’s message. 
Therefore, media plans should be evaluated in terms of weekly reach points deliv-
ered. The familiar convex curve of “diminishing returns” shows that reach builds 
rapidly at first, but beyond a certain point, additional GRPs yield mostly (wasted) 
frequency. Ephron compares two ways of scheduling 2,600 GRPs:
Plan 1
100 GRPs/week for 26 weeks
Weekly reach: 50 percent
Total reach points: 26  50  1,300
Plan 2
67 GRPs/week for 39 weeks
Weekly reach: 40 percent
Total reach points: 39  40  1,560
Both plans cost the same, and both deliver 2,600 total GRPs, but Plan 2 delivers 20 
percent more weekly reach points. This, according to Ephron, is the most effective 
way to schedule weight—if we assume one hit is enough.
 
The recency model would suggest that consistent advertising is preferable to 
concentrating weight in flights. Taken to the extreme, the planner would simply 
divide the available budget by 52 weeks, then purchase as many GRPs per week as 
the budget permits. But this approach runs up against the long-standing belief that 
there is a threshold, a minimum number of GRPs per week that are necessary to 
be effective. A study of media plans by Helen Johnston, former vice president and 
director of media analysis at Grey Advertising, found minimum levels in the range 
of 70 to 100 GRPs per week:
There was no relationship to budget. All planners felt there was a level below 
which advertising would be ineffective. Compromises were affected by limiting 
4. Erwin Ephron, “The Shelf Space Model of Advertising,” February 1, 1995, www.ephron
 onmedia.com. 

 
Advanced Measurements and Calculations 
137
hiatus lengths. The average hiatus was 2.7 weeks, and there was an average of 7.6 
hiatuses. As a result, only the richest brands attained true continuity or 52 weeks 
of advertising.
 
In summary, planners have a formidable task of weighing alternatives when they 
schedule media. Our task is not to persuade them of the importance of continuity. 
They fully appreciate that importance. However, they believe continuity to be an 
ideal that is beyond their brand’s means.5
 
Despite these shortcomings, the shelf-space theory has become the starting 
point for media plan scheduling for sustaining support of existing brands:
Begin assuming continuity scheduling for as many weeks as possible at what-
• 
ever the planner thinks is the minimum number of TRPs per week.
Then adjust the plan to reflect seasonality, promotional opportunities, product 
• 
enhancements, and anything else you can specifically identify as bearing on 
the effectiveness of the campaign.
Recent Studies of Effective Frequency
Research companies like TRA (www.traglobal.com) can link the number of times 
a household is exposed to a campaign with product purchase from grocery store 
frequent-shopper cards. But no matter how sophisticated, these studies are always 
based on past behavior from the past creative and the past media plan. Advertisers 
question the actionability and the value of this expensive research.
 
Nielsen’s Project Apollo attempted the same thing by linking television expo-
sures to product purchase from their Homescan panel that records sales by ask-
ing panelists to scan the UPC code as products are brought home from the store. 
The study received support from the largest package goods advertisers, including 
Procter & Gamble and S. C. Johnson. It was viewed as the first serious attempt to 
answer advertising’s perennial questions. However, because of the cost and the 
limited ability to act on the data, the study failed to progress beyond the pilot 
stage.
 
The key point is that it is difficult to prove the relationship between effective 
frequency and brand awareness, sales, or any other advertising or marketing objec-
tive. The relationship is subtle, not a simple cause-and-effect relationship.
5. Helen Johnston, “Research and Media Scheduling,” Journal of Advertising Research, 
Nov./Dec. 1995: RC2–4. 

138 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Summary
It should be clear from this and from the five perennial questions described in 
Chapter 3 that there are no simple answers to these “How much is enough?” ques-
tions of effective frequency, flighting versus continuity, minimum GRP levels, max-
imum hiatus weeks, response function shape, and the like. Research can provide 
guidance, but in the end, planners must use judgment to apply these general find-
ings from the past to specific plans for the future.
 
Finally, it should be noted that these concepts apply mainly to traditional mass 
media where the relationship between GRPs, reach, frequency, and frequency dis-
tribution is well known. They are largely irrelevant for online search advertising, 
where the goal is to present the ads to people who are looking for information 
about certain key words. They are equally irrelevant for the many nontraditional 
out-of-home media that lack research about frequency of exposure. Online banner 
campaigns that use behavioral targeting (e.g., sending ads for children’s products to 
people whose browsing behavior indicates they are parents) are effective at reaching 
the target, even though the reach and frequency to an age/gender target audience 
such as women 25–54 may be quite low. It is important to understand the con-
cepts, but planners are cautioned not to apply them wholesale to all the new media 
opportunities.

CHAPTER ONE
 
139
Marketing Strategy 
and Media Planning
T
here are many ways to start the media-planning process, but the best way 
is by analyzing the situation of a brand in the marketplace. The reason for 
making such an analysis is to learn how successful a brand has been against 
its competition, with the objective of finding opportunity areas to exploit 
or problem areas to correct. Ultimately, the findings of a situation analysis should 
lead to the establishment of marketing objectives and strategies, which in turn lead 
to the establishment of media objectives and strategies.
 
Although the responsibility for conducting a marketing situation analysis sel-
dom rests with a media planner, someone from the agency’s media department, 
such as a media researcher, is often involved to some extent in the research activi-
ties. Media planners often are involved in the marketing situation analysis, particu-
larly an examination of the consumer, the competitive weight, and geographic and 
seasonal sales.
What a Media Planner Needs to Know
Every media plan is built around a brand’s most important marketing problem. That’s 
what marketing plans exist for: as a prelude to media/marketing planning. Other 
research about competitors and the market itself will be done later. However, recog-
nizing the main problem is a problem in itself. Problems can come in all degrees of 
importance for a brand of product or service. If many interrelated problems are facing 
a planner, finding a solution could require a detailed situation analysis.
CHAPTER SIX

140 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
To help a brand achieve solutions, a planner must do a number of things. A good 
first step is to carry out a situation analysis. The following examples illustrate a few 
of the problems that could be critical for media planning:
Sales are declining in the Southwest for Brand X.
• 
Consumers like Brand B better in the Southwest because they say it is lighter.
• 
The newest brand on the market has reduced its price below ours in the 
• 
Southwest.
The kinds of people who formerly used our brand have switched to Brand D.
• 
Once the main problems have been identified, other details of the situation analysis 
should be decided on. Each can help the planner make significant decisions.
 
Along with the main problems, planners need to assess other elements of mar-
keting, such as product quality, product uses, pricing, distribution methods, pack-
aging, sales promotion use, personal selling activities, public relations, and adver-
tising. From a practical standpoint, the planner does not need to know every detail, 
but only those items that are thought to contribute to product sales. These are ele-
ments of a situation analysis.
Situation Analysis
A situation analysis is research prepared in document, Excel spreadsheet, or 
PowerPoint presentation format to provide the background for a media planner to 
prepare a plan. It provides perspective on where a brand has been and where its 
potential lies in the future. Here are essential parts of a situation analysis:
History of the market. 
• 
This deals with sales of all brands in the market, 
including the brand for which planning is to be done. The analysis includes 
geographic sales distribution, market size in dollars and units, market shares, 
seasonal effects, and price effects. The goal is to find out where brands are 
now in terms of market share and how they got there. An important item, for 
example, might be pricing history. What happened to prices for various brands 
over the years, and how did these price manipulations affect sales? Another 
concern might be an analysis of cost history and profit related to sales, both 
for the brand under consideration and for competitors’ brands, if known.
Distribution channels. 
• 
The objective here is to learn how a brand and its 
competitors distribute products. This includes the following information 
about each distribution channel: shelf-facings, inventories held, out-of-stock 

 
Marketing Strategy and Media Planning 
141
situations, methods of selling, display and advertising allowances, and how and 
why promotions are used. Problems of selling are sometimes caused by poor 
distribution, not advertising. Distribution information often affects media 
strategy because it can help the planner decide where to advertise.
Consumer of the product. 
• 
A profile of users of the generic product type 
includes personal demographics such as age, gender, income, and occupation, 
as well as geographic location. Psychographics—lifestyles and attitudes—also 
should be included. A consumer profile of those who buy a specific brand ver-
sus those who buy competing products is important as well. Buying habits also 
should be analyzed in terms of when products are purchased, in which kind of 
retail outlets, and which sizes, models, and colors are purchased most often. 
How and when consumers use these products also should be known. Finally, 
it would be helpful to know about the buyer, the user, and the persons who 
motivate buyers and users. All of this “attitude and usage” information helps 
the media planner select targets for media. A thorough understanding of the 
target includes a feeling for their lifestyle and interests that can lead to media 
opportunities. Exhibit 6-1 shows an online branding campaign for Taco Bell 
that is directed to their core adult 18–34 target audience.
Product. 
• 
A history of the product and how it was developed is included in the 
product section of the analysis. When and why product changes were made 
and the effects of such changes on each competitive brand could be impor-
tant. Consumer perceptions of the values of various brands also are important 
background information for the media planner.
Advertising and media analysis. 
• 
Probably the most important informa-
tion for a media planner is an analysis of media expenditures for competing 
brands. This includes media classes used, names of individual vehicles, cre-
ative size, number of creative executions, gross rating points (GRPs) in total 
and by daypart, flighting patterns, when advertising ran during the year, dollar 
and percentage allocated to each medium and market, and many other factors 
that help the advertiser understand the competitor’s marketing strategy.
Marketing Strategy Plan
Once a situation analysis has been completed and the problems of a brand in the 
marketplace have been identified, the next step is a search for selling opportuni-
ties. Opportunities are marketing facts that exist and, without much money or 
effort, sell the product naturally. Here are some examples of selling opportunities 
for Brand X:

142 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Taco Bell’s Feed the Beat™ Campaign
Taco Bell has the marketing objective of reinforcing brand awareness created by the 
television advertising to their adult 18–34 target audience. The Internet is a natural 
medium to reach this group, and music is a central part of their life. The marketing 
team created the Feed the Beat™ website, which allows visitors to listen to music that 
has been uploaded by the top 100 independent bands as nominated by fans or cho-
sen by Taco Bell. Fans also had the option to vote for their favorite bands as part of the 
“Virtual Battle of the Bands.” An online campaign drives visitors to the www.feedthe
beat.com website and further reinforces awareness of Taco Bell. In the 2008 cam-
paign, more than 180,000 votes were received.
 
The following is a sample banner and landing page of the campaign.
Source: Taco Bell Corp. Used with permission.
TACO BELL, TACO BELL LOGO and FEED THE BEAT are trademarks of Taco Bell Corp.
EXHIBIT 6-1

 
Marketing Strategy and Media Planning 
143
Example 1: Brand X is outselling competitors by a wide range in key mar-
• 
kets but spends less for advertising than the next three competitors. Is it pos-
sible that with a budget equal to or greater than any other single competitor in 
those markets, our sales and share can be considerably enhanced?
Example 2: Brands C and D are manufactured in smaller packages, which con-
• 
sumers tend to buy more often than Brand X’s larger package. Can we produce 
our brand in smaller sizes without expending much money or effort?
 
In contrast to opportunities, problems demand some action to correct the situa-
tion. A problem area might be a situation in which a brand does not have a competi-
tive advantage or one in which a brand has been steadily losing its share of market 
for any number of reasons. Finding the causes for the decline is a first step toward 
changing the situation. Most situation analyses turn up more problem areas than 
opportunities, but the delineation of each problem area is a necessary preliminary 
step to marketing and media planning. Some advertisers call this phase a SWOT 
analysis: strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats.
 
Marketing strategy planning consists of planning marketing actions that will 
solve the major problems and take advantage of the opportunities. In effect, a mar-
keting strategy and plan is a blueprint for action geared to selling the product, with 
the ultimate goal of gaining an advantage over a competitor.
 
Perhaps the weakest part of many advertising campaigns is the lack of a sound 
selling strategy. Arthur Tatham, formerly chairman of the board of Tatham-Laird 
& Kudner, once said, “Brilliant copy and art will never make a weak selling strat-
egy succeed. But . . . once there is a sound selling strategy, then good copy and art 
will multiply its effectiveness.” Tatham’s statement also applies to media selection 
and use. Without a sound selling strategy, media planning represents wasted effort. 
Media planning does not exist as an activity unrelated to marketing; it is a service 
function of marketing and selling. The fact that media are often selected and used 
without being based on a sound selling strategy demonstrates poor logic and inef-
ficient modes of operation. Selling strategy is the heart of a marketing strategy and 
plan.
 
In summary, the major goals in a strong marketing strategy and plan are as 
follows:
Setting objectives that will help solve existing problems and take advantage of 
• 
opportunities
Deciding how the product should be sold
• 

144 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Determining to whom the main selling effort (the selling strategy) should be 
• 
directed
Determining what role various elements of the marketing mix should play in 
• 
the sale of a brand
Determining what adjustments should be made in package shapes or sizes
• 
Determining how much should be spent
• 
 
Most often, the marketing plan is written by someone other than the media 
planner. Yet even if the latter is not directly involved in drawing up the plan, there 
are a number of reasons why the marketing strategy plan is a significant document 
to media planners. The foremost reason is that the marketing plan serves as a uni-
fying and organizing force for all activity within an agency on a given brand’s mar-
keting and advertising plans.
 
This means that the account planners, account executives, and creative people, 
as well as media planners, must all be working from a single source of information. 
Coordinating the various disciplines can be a challenge when the advertising func-
tions are split between the creative and the media agency. And giving the respon-
sibility for online planning and buying, especially online display and search, to yet 
another organization further complicates the job of coordinating the marketing 
effort.
 
Once the plan has been written, it becomes easier to visualize the whole scheme 
of operations for a given brand. All proposed plans should be evaluated for their 
logic and completeness to avoid information gaps or contradictions. If a marketing 
plan exists only in someone’s mind or in bits or scraps of memoranda, then errors 
are hard to locate, because no one has an overview of the entire operation.
 
Perhaps the key to the success of a marketing plan is the degree to which it spells 
out all tactics. Marketing consultant Herbert Zeltner long ago cautioned that many 
marketing plans are “either glossed over in the rush of hammering together a mar-
keting program, or merely slapped together as a collection of ponderous clichés.” In 
words still applicable today, he noted:
To be truly useful, the market strategy statement should not merely reflect some 
happy generalities about an increase in volume or share of market for the coming 
fiscal period.
 
But establishing the requirement that a specific percent volume increase is to be 
achieved—through the expenditure of a precise sensible sum of money—and that 
this increase can most realistically be expected through more aggressive develop-
ment of certain stated territories or segments of the market . . . is the type of state-

 
Marketing Strategy and Media Planning 
145
ment which gives a properly astute media planner the challenge he needs to create 
both a perspective and workable media recommendation.1
 
The media planner needs specific direction, explicitly stated, to begin making 
decisions. The media plan grows directly out of the marketing strategy whenever 
it requires advertising to be used. The various segments of the strategy statement, 
however, are not all equally significant to the media planner. Foremost in impor-
tance are the marketing objectives, the basic selling idea, sources of business, overall 
sales strategy, and spending strategy. Each of these will be discussed in more detail 
on the following pages. Exhibit 6-2 shows an outline of a basic strategy statement.
Marketing Objectives
The marketing goals that the company and agency agree upon should, if achieved, 
result in the solution of a marketing problem. Marketing goals are measurable in 
most cases and provide a means of determining whether the strategy employed has 
been effective. For the media planner, the objectives will undoubtedly affect the 
kinds of media selected and the ways media are used. In a sense, then, marketing 
objectives serve as controls for media planning.
 
Most marketing objectives relate directly to achieving share of market for a 
brand; others relate to communication objectives. Here is a sample of marketing 
objectives for different brands (taken from various strategy statements):
To increase share in an expanding segment of the X market
• 
To regain lost volume—increase sales a maximum of 5 percent and, in turn, 
• 
shoot for a 14 percent share of market
To acquire a 20 percent share of market the first year after national introduc-
• 
tion, 25 percent the second year, and 30 percent the third year
To introduce the product so that we have at least 5 percent share in each sales 
• 
division
To increase share of market and increase the morale of the sales force in the 
• 
face of many competitive new-product introductions
To find and persuade new customers for our product
• 
To maintain national coverage
• 
To provide regional and local impact where two-thirds of sales are made
• 
To increase the overall visibility of the product name against the potential cus-
• 
tomers and the trade across the country
1. Herbert Zeltner, “Marketing Strategy Statement,” Media/Scope (August 1964): 10. 

146 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Outline for Basic Marketing Strategy Statement
 
I. Major Strategy
This should be the briefest possible statement of the major one or two strategies 
recommended for the planning period, with just enough statement of the problem 
to explain the strategy. If you can write this section in one or two sentences or para-
graphs, do so. If it takes you more than a single-spaced page, it is probably too long.
 II. Basic Objectives
A. Short term (next fiscal 12 months, unless otherwise stated):
1. Increase share of total market
2. Arrest decline in share
3. Develop added volume
4. Increase total market
5. Achieve profit goal
6. Reduce losses
Translate objectives into approximate sales and/or profit goals.
B. Long term (any prescribed period beyond the next planning period):
1. Increase share of total market
2. Increase total market
3. Increase profits
4. Position goal, i.e., gain leadership
5. Develop and establish a brand or corporate image
6. Expand line of service or products
Translate objectives into approximate sales and/or profit goals.
 III. The Basic Selling Idea
A one- or two-sentence statement of the key selling idea. This is the base from 
which the creative strategy evolves.
 IV. Presentation of the Basic Selling Idea
The creative strategy in its briefest form
 V. Use or Uses for Which the Product Will Be Advertised
A. Major
B. Minor
 VI. Sources of Business and Relative Importance of Each
A. Consumer sources—What are the characteristics of the people who are the best 
prospects?
 1. Regional factors
 2. City size
 3. County size
 4. Income groups
EXHIBIT 6-2

 
Marketing Strategy and Media Planning 
147
 5. Age of homemaker
 6. Occupation of head of household
 7. Family size
 8. Seasonal
 9. Gender—men, women, children
10. Who is principal purchaser?
B. Dealer sources—What is the relative importance of various types of outlets?
C. Competitive sources—Important competitive brands or companies: national, 
regional, local
 VII. Overall Sales Strategy
A. Relative importance of price
1. To the consumer
2. To the trade
B. Relative importance of personal selling
C. Relative importance of dealers
D. Relative importance of advertising
E. Relative importance of promotion
F. Relative importance of publicity
 VIII. Product Strategy
A. The need for product improvement—Analysis of product superiorities and weak-
nesses compared to competitive products
B. The need for related products
C. The need for adding new sizes or deleting unprofitable sizes
D. The need for improving
1. Packaging
2. Package design
 IX. Spending Strategy
A. Is there a need for higher or lower margins? What effect will this have on price, 
quality, and quantity of the product?
B. What is the proper amount to spend
1. On introduction?
2. On reintroduction?
3. On an ongoing basis?
C. Is an extended payout plan indicated, and if so, what is the optimum time?
 X. Facts and Documentation
The pertinent facts needed to define the problems and to document the strategies 
outlined in the strategy sections

148 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
Whenever marketing objectives require advertising in specific geographic areas, 
then the planner must select media that best reach those areas. Sometimes the 
objectives call for added promotional effort in a geographic region such as the West 
Coast. Or the objectives might call for a special advertising effort in a given market, 
such as Los Angeles or Portland. Such objectives will limit media choices, because 
desired media vehicles may not be available in some areas. The marketing objec-
tives give the planner direction in selecting media, but it is up to the planner to find 
media that best deliver the target audience specified. These marketing objectives 
provide critical input to computerized “channel planning” systems, which will be 
discussed later in this chapter.
 
Occasionally, objectives deal with some area other than market shares (e.g., to 
increase the image of authority among adults). In this situation, the planner might 
feel that adults, especially those aged 21–34, are good prospects, yet they are not 
buying the product. Media habits of the target audience become the key factor in 
the selection of media channels and media vehicles. Online and social media would 
be seriously considered for a plan directed to this target given their above-average 
use of these media.
Marketing Mix and Strategy
The tools that marketers use for implementing strategy were discussed in Chapter 
3. Recall that each element of the mix is a selling tool. A good product that meets 
consumers’ wants and needs is one of the best selling tools. Price is a selling tool, as 
is distribution. If a grocery store does not carry a given brand of product, many cus-
tomers will ask for some other brand instead. They usually will not go to some other 
store in search of the brand. Promotion in general, and sales promotion specifically, 
are each selling tools. Other forms of promotion are public relations (including 
event marketing), direct marketing, advertising copy and art, and media.
 
The idea of a marketing mix is that it takes a number of different marketing 
mix elements to sell a product. Selling bottled water requires a good product as 
well as price, distribution, advertising, and sales promotion. But selling automo-
biles requires a different mix: product, price, distribution, sales promotion, public 
relations, and advertising. In short, the idea of a mix is important in terms of find-
ing the optimum elements for selling. The use of many marketing mix commu-
nication elements usually requires integration, because each element could con-
vey a different message and thereby reduce the effectiveness of communication. 
Integrated marketing communications (IMC) is one buzzword for this age-old con-
cept. Another buzzword for the process is cross-channel communication, where the 
advertiser uses a combination of conventional television, video advertising on the 
personal computer, and video on mobile devices such as smart phones. Although 

 
Marketing Strategy and Media Planning 
149
each is, technically, just another screen on which to display video advertising, the 
planning and buying process is quite different for each.
Budget
Once the marketing objectives have been stated, it is necessary to know how much 
money will be available to attain them. It is not realistic to make a grandiose mar-
keting plan and then find that the advertiser is unwilling or unable to provide suf-
ficient funds to make the plan successful. (Budgeting and allocations to markets 
and media will be discussed in Chapter 13.) At this point, the media planner can 
be called in to help estimate the costs of the media strategy, even before the main 
portion of the plan has been started. If enough money is not available to accomplish 
a given set of objectives, then the objectives must be reduced or revised.
 
Estimating the cost of a marketing plan usually involves two separate activities: 
estimating media costs and estimating production costs. Media costs are obtained 
from research services that provide this information, such as SQAD for radio and 
television costs2 and SRDS3 for the cost of magazine and newspaper advertising. 
Planners should also talk to professional broadcast and online buyers who know 
the latest costs and ultimately are responsible for buying the planned rating points 
and online impressions within the specified budget. Production costs are estimated 
either by arbitrarily allocating a given percentage of the total budget for that pur-
pose or, if the advertising is relatively simple, by obtaining estimates on specific 
kinds of production pieces that are needed, such as artwork, typography, videotape, 
or film. Generally, the media planner is responsible for estimating only the media 
cost portion of the marketing plan.
 
Planners are sometimes asked to estimate how much money needs to be spent 
in media to achieve a given marketing objective or sales target. This is, frankly, an 
unfair question because sales are dependent on a constellation of factors that go 
far beyond the media plan—creative quality, product performance versus its com-
petitors, distribution, price to the consumer, promotion, and all the other factors 
that go into the marketing plan. This is another variation of the perennial question, 
“How much is enough?”
 
A planner can tell the advertiser how much money the competitors are spending 
in order to identify the cost of entry into the competitive set. Media planners can 
also share their experience with other brands and products. But planners should 
never imply that a given expenditure will result in a certain level of sales. At best, 
a planner can estimate the awareness of a new product that will be generated from 
2. www.sqad.com. 
3. www.srds.com. 

150 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
a given amount of media weight, but it is beyond the planner’s ability to say how 
many of those who become aware of a new product will go on to try it. The planner 
is even less able to say how many of those who tried the product will become repeat 
purchasers.
 
Market-mix modeling companies use mathematical models based on past his-
tory to estimate the effect of various spending levels. Experience might show, for 
example, that an advertiser increased its national share of market by three per-
centage points by spending $10 million. It could then be roughly estimated that it 
would cost $3.3 million to raise the share one percentage point. This linear rela-
tionship of spending and share of market, however, is seldom witnessed in the real 
world. And any reference to experience is open to the challenge that “this situation 
is different.”
 
Sometimes the competitive spending analysis shows that the amount of money 
needed to compete in the category is beyond the means of the advertiser. The rev-
enue produced by the expected sales (even the most optimistic estimate) will not 
support the media spending needed to be competitive. In such cases, either the 
objectives have to be changed, or the advertiser must realize that spending the 
available dollars will not produce the desired results. The planner’s role is to pre-
sent the documentable facts and avoid implying that budget X will produce sales Y 
on the grounds that media spending is only one of the many factors that influence 
sales.
Creative Strategy
A major part of the marketing strategy plan is an explanation of how the product 
will be sold: the creative platform that is generally developed by the account plan-
ning group. From that basic selling idea comes the creative strategy, possibly the 
single most important influence on the planner during the media selection process. 
The creative strategy often directs the planner to choose one medium over another 
or to select a combination of media.
 
A creative strategy in which color is an integral part requires magazines, direct 
mail, newspaper supplements, television, streaming video, or other media that offer 
quality color. Newspapers accepting freestanding inserts (FSIs) offer additional 
alternatives to the media planner. Where the creative strategy calls for the use of 
cartoon characters, then either comic strips or television will be most appropriate. 
Again, the creative strategy gives direction to the selection process and input to the 
channel planning system.
 
Where a strategy calls for demonstration, one might first think of television. 
However, it is possible to demonstrate the use of a product in print advertisements 

 
Marketing Strategy and Media Planning 
151
with sequential panels showing the various steps in using the product. Radio also 
is capable of demonstration through the use of words, sound effects, and music, 
which play on the listener’s imagination. Sometimes the creative strategy calls for 
the use of an announcer or salesperson who can exude a feeling of warmth and sin-
cerity. Either television or radio is required here, because each excels at conveying 
emotional impact.
 
If the creative strategy calls for music, media choices are limited to radio or tele-
vision. An alternative is to record the music and advertising message on a CD and 
have it inserted into magazines. In this case, however, the creative strategy must 
give way to the budget, which might not accommodate the expense of recording 
and inserting the CD.
 
Occasionally, creative strategy calls for large illustrations. This suggests bill-
boards to the media planner, although direct mail or a two-page spread in newspa-
pers or magazines might be equally acceptable.
 
Some advertising messages seem to have more impact on consumers in one 
medium than they do in another. However, impact is a hazy concept. It is gen-
erally assumed to mean that advertising does something to audience members, 
such as make the message memorable, change attitudes toward the brand, impart 
significant bits of information, or perhaps serve as a motivating factor in buying. 
The assumption is not always valid, because there is often little proof that what is 
claimed to happen actually does. In any case, where creative strategies call for tradi-
tional media because of their perceived impact, the planner might find it difficult to 
break with tradition—essentially the agency and client’s expectations of what media 
should be used, coupled with their inherent desire to avoid risk.
 
The media planner for a consumer package good (CPG) that had traditionally 
used primarily television recommended putting the entire budget in print, convert-
ing a weak but conventional television plan into a very strong but unconventional 
print plan. After many long meetings the client eventually accepted the change, 
but when sales in the first quarter of the plan were a little below expectations, 
the unconventional media plan was blamed (fairly or unfairly). All the remaining 
money was moved into television.
 
The creative strategy also influences the role of online display advertising and 
search (the purchase of advertising adjacent to selected keywords in search engines 
such as Google and Bing). For some products, such as hotels, travel, automobiles, 
and financial services, the role of online is obvious. For others, such as low-interest 
consumer package goods, online media is another way to extend the brand message 
to light users of traditional media. Regardless of its role, the online creative must 
incorporate the same creative message as the traditional media.

152 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Dealers and Distribution
A major factor in media decision making is the product’s geographic distribution, 
as it makes sense to limit advertising to areas where the product is sold. To do oth-
erwise is to waste effort and money. There are, of course, exceptions, such as when 
a manufacturer will advertise in an area where the product is not distributed, in 
an effort to “force” distribution on the dealers in that area. Perhaps dealers have 
refused to handle a new brand because they feel they already have too many similar 
products on their shelves. Some grocery chains even practice a one-for-one policy, 
in which they refuse to take on a new brand unless the manufacturer removes an 
existing brand from the shelves. By advertising in an area where a product is not yet 
distributed, the manufacturer hopes to create such a demand for the product that 
the dealers and distributors will be forced to carry the brand. This strategy, how-
ever, sometimes backfires because consumers who seek the brand and cannot find 
it might be alienated as future consumers of the brand.
 
For most products, however, advertising is limited to areas where the product is 
distributed and, even then, only to the markets that produce the most sales or have 
the greatest potential for sales.
 
Because dealers are important sources of business, the ability to select media 
that best communicate with dealers represents another aspect of that planner’s 
job. For Business-to-Business (B2B) advertising, the trade press is the most fre-
quently used medium, but a planner could also choose to communicate with deal-
ers through direct mail, trade shows and conventions, or even mass media.
 
Dealers also influence media decisions because they are so important in sell-
ing at the local level. They are on the firing line and often know which medium 
works best in their markets. At times they may communicate with the agency indi-
rectly through distributors, wholesalers, or salespeople. Their influence can be very 
important for their own markets. Furthermore, they often dislike agency media 
choices, feeling that the media planner is too distant from the scene of action to 
know which local or national medium works best. In any case, the media planner 
must pay a great deal of attention to dealers and to the importance of distribution 
in the media plan.
Overall Sales Strategy
The media planner should examine each element of the marketing mix to deter-
mine how it might affect media selection and use. Foremost, of course, is the role 
to be played by advertising. Although one can conceive of a situation where sales 
promotion, for example, might be more important in attaining objectives, adver-
tising usually plays a significant role in the marketing strategy, and its role should 

 
Marketing Strategy and Media Planning 
153
be defined. The more specific this definition is, the better the media planner can 
plan strategy. Generally, advertising is assigned a communication task that must be 
accomplished before a product can be sold effectively.
 
When pricing tactics are important in marketing strategy, a special media effort 
might be needed either to announce the price or keep the news in front of the con-
sumers. Special prices to dealers may require special trade media selections and 
use.
 
Sales promotion, too, has special significance to media planners. Many promo-
tions call for inserts, such as coupons, booklets, or sample CDs, in magazines or 
newspapers. All of these inserts require careful planning, especially in estimating 
their cost and timing. Marketing or creative plans might also require gatefolds, die 
cuts, or special inks, all of which require additional media considerations such as 
cost, production lead time, and availability. Furthermore, the media planner must 
often select media to announce and keep a special promotion in front of consum-
ers. Contests, cents-off deals, and premiums can lose their impact if consumers do 
not notice them. To maintain the desired impact, the general media strategy is to 
buy media so as to get the largest reach possible.
 
For other promotions, it is necessary to tie in local store information with 
national advertising so the audience in any given market knows where to buy an 
advertised national brand. The names and addresses of stores carrying the product 
are usually listed at the end of commercials or next to or near newspaper or maga-
zine ads. The local dealers are expected to split the cost with the national advertiser 
in a cooperative arrangement, or “co-op” advertising.
 
Other parts of the marketing mix, such as personal selling, public relations, or 
packaging, are of less importance in media planning. But the planner should know 
as much as possible about the whole marketing strategy to maximize the effective-
ness of media decisions.
Test Marketing
Whenever a marketing strategy plan calls for test marketing, there is likely to be 
media involvement. For example, a test-marketing situation might use three mar-
kets to test whether the following objectives can be attained:
To gain a substantial share of each market’s sales
• 
To determine whether the total market for the product can be expanded
• 
To determine how many repeat purchases will be made
• 
To accomplish the first three objectives within a reasonable length of time at a 
• 
reasonable profit (this requires special media planning)

154 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
To carry out the test, the company would introduce the new brand in the three 
markets, using different marketing tactics in each test market. For example, in 
Market A, 50 percent of the households would be given a free sample. In Market B, 
100 percent of the households would be given a free sample. And in Market C, local 
newspapers would carry a coupon redeemable for a free sample at local stores. Each 
test market requires local advertising to call attention to the offers, especially to the 
coupon offer. Sales in each market would then be measured and compared to see 
which performed best.
 
As another example, test marketing could affect media planning if media weight 
varied in each of the three test markets. Market A might receive 100 television 
GRPs per week; Market B, 150 per week; and Market C, 200 per week. Sales would 
then be measured to see how the different weights affected volume.
 
Still another way to test media weights in several markets would be to give each 
market a specified advertising weight for a limited time. Sales would be measured 
for that period, then a heavier weighting might be applied to each market equally or 
in different proportions, and sales would again be measured. (Test-marketing strat-
egy affects media planning in ways ranging from simple dissemination of advertis-
ing to special testing situations within all or portions of the test markets. For more 
details on test marketing, see Chapter 14.)
 
In summary, the marketing strategy affects the media planner’s operation in 
many ways. The media plan itself grows out of a marketing plan. It is inconceivable 
for the media planner to operate without first having some kind of marketing strat-
egy as a basis on which to select and use media. The ideal situation occurs when the 
marketing strategy is written and available for all personnel who work on a product 
or brand within the agency. The plan then serves as a unifying force and directs 
action toward a common goal.
Competitive Media Expenditure Analysis
Once the planner understands the marketing strategy that determines how media 
will be involved, it is time to consider the kinds of media and the way they are used 
by the competition.
 
Identifying the competitors is an important and often subtle marketing judg-
ment. A regional fast-food restaurant certainly competes with McDonald’s, but 
knowing that McDonald’s spends hundreds of millions of dollars a year on national 
television is not relevant to their small regional budget. Wal-Mart is the leading 
seller in many product categories, but should an advertiser even try to compete 
directly with that retail giant? A company that sells automobile insurance competes 

 
Marketing Strategy and Media Planning 
155
with larger companies for whom auto is just one of many policy lines. Should the 
competitive analysis focus on these competitors’ automobile insurance or on the 
brand awareness created by advertising their whole line of products?
 
In short, identifying relevant competitors is just one of the many marketing 
judgments that inform a media plan. Most planners will look at the top five spend-
ers individually and a single line that adds up all the remaining competitors in order 
to see total category spending.
 
Once the competitors are identified, it is easy to find out how much they spend 
in each medium if the advertiser or agency subscribes to the syndicated research 
sources that provide this information (discussed later in this chapter). But when 
such research services are not purchased, it is a challenge to discover who the com-
petitors are and how much they are spending. Some information can be obtained 
from news in the trade press about competitive media expenditures, but products 
produced and sold locally might not be identified very well, especially products that 
are not advertised much. Other sources of information are local media salespeople, 
media representatives, local media research departments, and the company’s own 
sales staff.
 
In determining the effect of competitors’ media plans and devising strategies 
to counter such effects, the key piece of information is the share of market held by 
each competitor as compared with the advertiser’s brand. Brands that lead or are 
close behind the advertiser pose a threat. As far as media planning is concerned, 
the question is, Should we use the same media our competitors use or make special 
efforts to use different media? Another question is, How much advertising should 
we put into a market to counter competitors’ advertising effects?
 
The answers to these and other questions about competitors depend greatly on 
an advertiser’s marketing objectives and an evaluation of what effect competitors 
will have in preventing the attainment of such objectives. Each situation is different. 
Whether to use the same media that competitors use might not be as important as 
identifying which medium or combination of media most effectively reaches the 
kind of prospects who are likely to buy the advertiser’s brand. These media might 
happen to be identical to the media used by competitors. The media planner should 
consider what the competitors do but should not necessarily imitate them simply 
because they happen to have a larger share of market.
 
Planners should try to assess weaknesses in competitors’ media tactics. Perhaps 
a competitor is not using a medium properly, or has dissipated advertising money 
in too many media, or is missing an important segment of the market. These errors 
represent opportunities in media selection and use, and such opportunities should 
be exploited. Marketers do not analyze a competitor’s activities and their effects on 
a brand in order to copy the competitor’s tactics, but rather to assess its strengths 

156 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
and weaknesses in light of the marketing objectives. Plans for attaining objectives 
are based on problem as well as opportunity situations.
 
In essence, the planner must know at least the following information about com-
petitors before making plans:
What are the total advertising dollars spent by the industry, and how has that 
• 
changed over the past five years?
How much money and what share of total industry spending comes from the 
• 
largest competitors?
Which media are used, and how much is spent in each medium?
• 
How is the advertising weight distributed over the year?
• 
In which markets are media concentrated?
• 
How much weight in GRPs is placed nationally and in each market? What TV 
• 
dayparts? What commercial lengths?
Based on their media selection (cable networks, magazines, websites carrying 
• 
display and search advertising), who is their likely target audience in terms of 
age and gender?
Principal Sources of Expenditure Data
Media spending information can be obtained by subscription to the two most 
widely used reporting services: Kantar Media Intelligence and Nielsen’s Monitor-
Plus. For additional information, see www.kantarmediana.com and http://en-us
.nielsen.com/tab/product_families/nielsen_monitorplus. These services do not 
provide a perfect picture of competitive media expenditures, however, because 
it is economically unfeasible to measure every dollar spent in every medium for 
every product. Expenditure analyses are therefore never quite complete for several 
reasons:
The expenditures reported do not incorporate negotiated discounts on the 
• 
purchase of space or time. There may be large variations between what the 
syndicated services report and what buyers actually spend, especially for 
online media.
It takes time for the information to be gathered and processed. The delay var-
• 
ies depending on the medium. Television occurrences (date, time, and pro-
gram) can be available within a week for the standard reports or overnight as 
a custom request. Television GRPs are available in a few weeks, but expendi-
tures can take as much as two months to be reported, again depending on the 
medium.
Some widely used media are not reported, such as spending for spot cable TV 
• 
and regional sports networks. At this writing, both Nielsen and Kantar Media 

 
Marketing Strategy and Media Planning 
157
have plans to add local cable expenditures to their services in the next few 
years. The services do not report spending for online search because prices are 
set by auction and can change hourly. The services do report the number of 
impressions and the websites that carry them.
The best way to assess the accuracy of competitive media reports is to compare 
the findings of these reports to the actual media used for the product you have 
planned and placed in media. But when preparing a competitive expenditure analy-
sis, always show the reported spending for your product, never the actual. That way, 
whatever biases or shortcomings exist in the data will apply equally to your product 
and to the competitors’.
 
It is important to keep in mind that accuracy depends on the level of granular-
ity—how close you look. The photo of a teenager’s face taken five feet back looks 
terrific. A close-up reveals all the acne and other blemishes typical of that age. So 
the report of a brand’s annual spending in television is generally within 10 percent 
of actual because the measurement errors over the year tend to cancel each other 
out. Spending by the same brand in Cleveland during the week of May 4th could 
be wildly out of line as compared to the actual.
 
These limitations simply mean that competitive media expenditure data are not 
to be interpreted literally. Nevertheless, coupled with other marketing and media 
information, such data provide a more complete picture of a competitor’s spending 
activities.
 
Kantar Media and Monitor-Plus both measure competitive media expenditure 
data for the following 17 major media, with some variations in source comprehen-
siveness between the two services:
 1. Network TV
 2. Spot TV
 3. Cable TV networks
 4. National syndication TV
 5. Hispanic network TV
 6. Hispanic cable TV
 7. Network radio
 8. Spot radio (nationally placed)
 9. Spot radio (locally placed)
 10. National consumer magazines
 11. Local consumer magazines
 12. Sunday supplements
 13. Local newspapers
 14. National newspapers

158 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 15. Outdoor
 16. Free-standing inserts (FSI)
 17. Online display advertising (for search, impressions only)
Both services also monitor business-to-business advertising. Spending for online 
display advertising (banners, rich media, GIF/JPEG graphics, flash) is reported by 
Kantar Media’s Evaliant and Nielsen Online’s AdRelevance service. These feed 
spending data to their multimedia services while providing additional information 
on websites used, impressions, and display of the advertising itself.
Nielsen Monitor-Plus Syndicated Reports
Now let’s examine each of the 17 media reported by Monitor-Plus. Kantar Media  
and Monitor-Plus are fiercely competitive services, especially because most agen-
cies subscribe to only one. And once a service is chosen, agencies tend to stay with 
it for many years, even decades, because switching from one to the other is highly 
disruptive.
 
Kantar Media’s heritage goes back 50 years, and today has the largest number 
of subscribers. Monitor-Plus links seamlessly with a variety of other Nielsen ser-
vices. Each service has strengths and weaknesses, but there are no deal breakers. 
Put another way, this service has whistles, that one has bells. This one has dan-
druff, that one has bad breath. An agency contemplating the purchase of a competi-
tive research service must do a thorough comparison of their respective capabili-
ties, cost, and appropriateness for the agency’s client mix. Our analysis focuses on 
Monitor-Plus for the simple reason that it is the service my agency, DRAFTFCB, 
now subscribes to.
 
Monitor-Plus data are delivered with two online computer programs: Ad*Views 
provides highly granular information about a competitor’s television schedule, 
including spot-by-spot detail, GRPs by daypart, commercial length, weight by mar-
ket, and so on. It even provides a second-by-second storyboard of the commercial 
with audio. Similar granularity, including pictures of the ads, is available for mag-
azine campaigns. In short, Ad*Views provides as much granularity as a planner 
might need.
 
A second system, Quick*Views, provides a top-line summary of the spending 
information by advertiser, by medium, by month—the same dollars as Ad*Views, 
but no GRPs, no detail by market, no information about ad size, just spending and 
number of units. This is usually the first place a planner should go to learn about 
the competitive environment. Then as questions arise, Ad*Views provides the 
additional needed detail. For the Kantar Media service, the comparable software 
is StrADegy.

 
Marketing Strategy and Media Planning 
159
 
An overview of the Monitor-Plus service is available online at http://en-us
.nielsen.com/tab/product_families/nielsen_monitorplus. The following summarizes 
the information currently available from the service:
National TV
10 broadcast networks: ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC, UPN, WB, PAX, MNT, CW, 
• 
ION
89 general market cable networks
• 
200
• 
 syndicated programs
Five Hispanic broadcast networks: Telemundo, Univision, Telefutura, Azteca, 
• 
MTV Tr3s
Six Hispanic cable networks
• 
24/7/365 monitoring
• 
Local clearance available by market (the audience and estimated value of the 
• 
weight delivered to each market by the national television networks)
Monitored since 1992
• 
Ratings are available in terms of Live, Live
• 
Same Day, Live7, and C3
The delivery schedule varies by media type. For television, occurrence informa-
tion (date, time, and advertiser, but no spending or audience information) generally 
is available within two weeks after the end of the monitored week or overnight as a 
custom report. National ratings are reported 21 days after the end of the week, and 
national dollars come in six to eight weeks after the end of the month. It takes that 
long because the information comes from the networks, which don’t begin total-
ing expenditures until the month is over. They take four weeks to pull the numbers 
together and send to Nielsen, which then takes another two to three weeks to process 
and load the data late Sunday night. Since the occurrences and ratings are completely 
under Nielsen’s control, they are delivered sooner. The complete calendar is available 
to Ad*Views subscribers in the “Data Availability” section of the software.
 
For all television venues, Monitor-Plus identifies and tracks commercials with 
its video signature technology. In simple terms, think of the TV picture as made 
up of tens of thousands of dots, pixels, that each second are either on or off. By 
recording the on-off status of a pixel each second, Nielsen creates a 30-byte binary 
number: on, on, on, off, on, off  111010 . . . and so on. The actual code is made up 
of 128 such pixel identification points. Professional television coders look at each 
commercial to identify the product being advertised. Once a commercial (and its 
electronic fingerprint) has been coded, it will be accounted for wherever the com-
mercial appears: on network TV, on any of 89 cable networks, in any market, or on 
any syndicated program.

160 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
To estimate brand spending, Monitor-Plus assigns a dollar value to each pro-
gram and applies this rate to each monitored brand’s television commercial. 
Broadcast-network cost estimates are developed from information provided by 
the networks. Syndicated program rates are based on cost data supplied by the 
SQAD company (see www.sqad.com) and proprietary models. Cable costs are 
based on the Nielsen rating multiplied by the cable network’s cost per rating point 
furnished by SQAD.
Spot TV
210 television markets—in 128 markets, Nielsen monitors all announcements; 
• 
in the remaining markets it electronically reports commercials previously 
recorded in another market or nationally
Ratings in terms of Live
• 
7
Spot TV costs obtained by multiplying the program’s rating times the SQAD 
• 
average cost per GRP
Monitored occurrences, spending, and ratings available 14 days after the end 
• 
of the week
Monitored since 1992
• 
Network Radio
Service includes three radio sales networks (Citadel Media [formerly ABC], 
• 
Premiere, and Westwood).
Spending only, based on calendar month—dollars assigned to first day of the 
• 
month
Reports available eight weeks after the end of the month
• 
Spot Radio
39 markets monitored 24/7/365, approximately 20 stations per market
• 
Airplay detected and identified by a patented and automated recognition 
• 
process
Expenditures estimated from Arbitron radio rating 
• 
 SQAD average cost per 
GRP
Consumer Magazines and Sunday Supplements
National measurement of 200
• 
 consumer magazines based on analysis of sub-
scription copies from various markets across the country
Five national Sunday supplements—
• 
New York Times Magazine, Los Angeles 
Times Magazine, Parade, USA Weekend, and Wall Street Journal Magazine 
(Saturday)

 
Marketing Strategy and Media Planning 
161
Data available eight weeks after end of the month
• 
Magazine costs estimated using the published rates, adjusted for corporate fre-
• 
quency discounts (does not include special negotiated rates)
Local Newspapers
157 daily and Sunday newspapers in 59 DMAs
• 
Reports available 8 to 10 weeks after the end of the month
• 
Actual measured advertising is multiplied by the one-time rate (Standard 
Advertising Unit [SAU] open rate per column inch) adjusted by an advertiser’s vol-
ume discounts for each newspaper measured. Costs also reflect rates for premium-
space portions of a newspaper, such as group supplements, preprinted inserts, color 
comics, and rotogravure and color advertising.
National Newspapers
New York Times
• 
, Wall Street Journal, and USA Today
Reports available eight weeks after the end of the month
• 
Outdoor
Expenditure information is provided by outdoor advertising companies and 
• 
includes all outdoor advertising, such as posters, painted bulletins, transit, 
kiosks, and so on.
Data available 8 to 10 weeks after the end of the quarter
• 
Digital Advertising
Online expenditures are provided by Nielsen’s online division, which produces 
• 
the AdRelevance competitive tracking service.
AdRelevance dollars and display advertising impressions are reported by the 
• 
AdRelevance software. Dollars are also fed over to the Monitor-Plus division’s 
software and are incorporated into the Ad*Views reports. For search advertis-
ing, AdRelevance reports only impressions, not spending, because the auction 
market for search does not have a fixed rate card.
Nielsen Mobile provides competitive expenditure information for display 
• 
advertising on mobile platforms.
Custom Competitive Reports
Often an advertiser needs more detail than is provided by these standard reports. 
These include advertising in community newspapers, detailed advertising for a 
product category such as cell phone carriers, advertising for local retail stores in one 

162 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
neighborhood, advertising on local cable television, ethnic media, and so on. The 
largest supplier of custom competitive information is Competitrack.4
Online Buzz
Advertisers need to keep up with consumer attitudes as expressed in blogs, news-
groups, social networks, YouTube videos, and any other place where consumer 
opinions are posted. Nielsen Buzzmetrics5 was created to monitor these postings 
and report to its subscribers. This service can be especially useful during pub-
lic relations challenges, new-product introductions, or any other time when it is 
important to know what is being said in the blogosphere. Numerous other ser-
vices are becoming available that provide similar analyses of consumer-generated 
content.
Gathering and Assembling the Data
Studying competitive expenditures involves two major tasks. The first of these tasks 
is to gather and assemble the data. The second is to analyze the data.
 
What kinds of data should the media planner seek? The first thing is to deter-
mine how much each competitor spends annually in each medium and the five-
year trend of spending. Such data provide a bird’s-eye view of the industry and the 
key competitor’s media activities. To make such data more meaningful, the planner 
should analyze expenditures for individual brands, rather than total expenditures 
for a company. Because each brand is competing with others for a share of total 
market sales, specific expenditures by brands are most meaningful.
 
A good starting point is a three-way analysis:
Five-year trend of total spending in the category by advertiser
• 
Last year’s spending by medium by advertiser
• 
Last year’s spending by month by advertiser
• 
 
Exhibit 6-3 shows this analysis for the top seven restaurants in the QSR (Quick 
Serve Restaurant) category. There is a remarkable amount of information in these 
three tables:
How category spending has changed over the past five years
• 
Who the leaders are, and how much of category spending they account for
• 
Which QSRs are increasing their spending and which are decreasing
• 
Which QSRs are using Hispanic national television, and which are not
• 
4. www.competitrack.com.
5. http://en-us.nielsen.com/tab/product_families/nielsen_buzzmetrics. 

 
Marketing Strategy and Media Planning 
163
SUBSIDIARY
JAN. 2008–
DEC. 2008 
$(000)
JAN. 2007–
DEC. 2007 
$(000)
JAN. 2006–
DEC. 2006 
$(000)
JAN. 2005–
DEC. 2005 
$(000)
JAN. 2004–
DEC. 2004 
$(000)
5-YEAR TOTAL
PERCENT OF 
5-YEAR TOTAL
 
 
 
 
 
 
McDonalds
$813,561
$746,041
$841,168
$757,545
$677,825
$3,836,138
19.7%
 
Subway
420,968
383,496
409,807
362,912
334,900
1,912,084
9.8
 
KFC
291,081
294,279
316,558
305,893
264,276
1,472,087
7.6
 
Wendy’s
276,392
293,569
371,781
379,238
360,104
1,681,084
8.6
 
Burger King
271,618
233,646
282,306
278,259
313,338
1,379,167
7.1
 
Pizza Hut
262,513
230,182
250,070
266,364
233,441
1,242,570
6.4
 
Taco Bell
258,028
238,956
271,459
244,463
209,244
1,222,151
6.3
 
All Other QSR
1,535,973
1,327,089
1,384,625
1,326,176
1,142,430
6,716,293
34.5
 
Total Category
$4,130,135
$3,747,258
$4,127,773
$3,920,850
$3,535,558 $19,461,574
100.0%
 
SUBSIDIARY
2008 TOTAL 
$(000)
NETWORK TV 
$(000)
CABLE TV 
$(000)
SYNDICATED 
TV $(000)
SPOT TV 
$(000)
SPANISH- 
LANGUAGE 
NETWORK TV 
$(000)
SPANISH- 
LANGUAGE 
CABLE TV 
$(000)
NATIONAL 
MAGAZINE 
$(000)
OUTDOOR 
$(000)
NETWORK 
RADIO $(000)
SPOT RADIO 
$(000)
INTERNET 
$(000)
ALL OTHERS 
$(000)
McDonald’s
$813,561
$232,031
$78,073
$21,870
$236,562
$52,350
$3,108
$27,842
$76,701
$3,168
$61,138
$16,561
$4,157
Subway
420,968
132,483
66,982
4,461
152,272
19,350
2,233
14,793
5,064
6,302
12,339
3,015
1,672
KFC
291,081
99,816
56,938
--
115,878
11,219
--
--
1,737
--
3,211
1,105
1,177
Wendy’s
276,392
133,542
59,435
5,427
30,940
19,730
1,686
679
4,899
35
17,587
2,104
329
Burger King
271,618
105,096
66,669
9,484
23,733
21,806
2,275
8,446
8,169
860
22,914
2,008
159
Pizza Hut
262,513
80,308
76,329
5,394
83,096
11,603
784
--
232
507
839
2,988
433
Taco Bell
258,028
109,809
63,903
--
57,924
--
39
8,524
2,488
--
10,194
4,848
299
All Other QSR
1,535,973
126,307
268,758
3,473
980,034
31,812
4,454
6,909
45,945
7,367
42,848
9,569
8,497
Total Category
$4,130,135
$1,019,391
$737,086
$50,110
$1,680,438
$167,871
$14,579
$67,193
$145,235
$18,239
$171,071
$42,199
$16,723
Percent of total
100.0%
24.7%
17.8%
1.2%
40.7%
4.1%
0.4%
1.6%
3.5%
0.4%
4.1%
1.0%
0.4%
SUBSIDIARY
2008 TOTAL 
$(000) 
JAN. 2008 
$(000) 
FEB. 2008 
$(000) 
MAR. 2008 
$(000) 
APR. 2008 
$(000) 
MAY 2008 
$(000) 
JUN. 2008 
$(000) 
JUL. 2008 
$(000) 
AUG. 2008 
$(000) 
SEP. 2008 
$(000) 
OCT. 2008 
$(000) 
NOV 2008 
$(000) 
DEC 2008 
$(000) 
McDonald’s
$813,561
$60,066
$61,847
$62,944
$64,469
$68,087
$77,854
$66,072
$97,426
$65,200
$64,863
$62,272
$62,460
Subway
420,968
40,451
37,501
39,519
30,781
29,369
28,914
42,568
38,996
30,622
34,164
34,725
33,357
KFC
291,081
23,650
27,840
31,580
26,987
28,882
25,945
22,408
26,273
25,113
21,049
13,629
17,725
Wendy’s
276,392
21,621
17,354
26,706
29,148
19,311
20,219
22,280
22,680
29,226
22,471
24,452
20,923
Burger King
271,618
19,951
15,492
22,436
32,179
21,316
19,885
21,925
16,365
23,923
26,386
26,061
25,699
Pizza Hut
262,513
21,574
19,487
24,990
27,181
19,872
16,826
19,197
23,364
20,961
19,296
29,667
20,098
Taco Bell
258,028
29,537
23,338
21,421
18,490
22,579
22,023
19,445
14,584
20,381
28,200
21,852
16,178
All Other QSR
1,535,973
119,255
101,176
139,521
157,244
142,774
133,837
114,847
101,299
126,123
136,620
138,992
124,285
Total Category
$4,130,135
$336,106
$304,035
$369,117
$386,479
$352,191
$345,503
$328,742
$340,988
$341,548
$353,050
$351,649
$320,726
% of total
100.0%
8.1%
7.4%
8.9%
9.4%
8.5%
8.4%
8.0%
8.3%
8.3%
8.5%
8.5%
7.8%
Source: The Nielsen Company, Monitor-Plus. Used with permission.
Sample Report from Nielsen Monitor-Plus Quick*Views
EXHIBIT 6-3

164 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
How online spending compares to traditional media
• 
Which months have above-average spending and which have below
• 
These data are the raw material for virtually unlimited additional analysis keyed to 
an advertiser’s needs. For instance, a competitor’s target audience can be revealed 
from its GRP weight by cable network and its selection of Internet websites. It is 
best to download the data in this raw form and then calculate shares and other per-
centages on the spreadsheet.
 
In gathering expenditure data by brand, it is always advisable to include the 
planner’s brand as well as all the competitive brands in the category, so all are com-
pared on the same research basis. Even though planners may know actual spend-
ing for their own brand, it should never be compared with the measured activity 
of their competitors. As stated earlier, planners should always compare measured 
spending for their own brands to that of the competitors.
 
The study of total national expenditures is only one approach to analyzing com-
petitors’ marketing and media strategies. If you see a substantial amount of spend-
ing in local media (spot TV, spot radio, local newspapers, or outdoor), it would be 
useful to compare the media weight of a brand with its competitors on a market-
by-market basis. Since the dollars spent in a market will vary depending on the size 
of the market, planners must run an Ad*Views report showing GRPs to understand 
strategic differences. In Chicago, $500,000 will have a very different consumer 
impact from $500,000 in Rockford, Illinois. That difference will be revealed by the 
GRP delivery, which in turn can be used to estimate the reach and frequency of a 
competitor’s campaign.
 
Finally, it is important to know how much was spent in each medium during 
each month of the year. Most brands have peak selling seasons and vary the weight 
of their advertising accordingly. This kind of analysis helps establish timing and 
scheduling plans for the media selected later in the planning process.
Analyzing the Data
One worthwhile use of media expenditure analysis is to examine spending by 
advertisers who lead in share of market. Those with smaller shares might want 
to learn which media, markets, and audiences are most important to the leaders. 
Sometimes it is possible to find that leading competitors ignore one or two media 
entirely. In such a case, it is possible for advertisers with lesser shares to preempt a 
medium for themselves. For example, if all of the share leaders emphasize network 
television, then a planner can select radio as a medium in which a brand could be 

 
Marketing Strategy and Media Planning 
165
significant. We saw this earlier in Oreck vacuum cleaner’s use of radio. The plan-
ner should keep in mind, however, that a competitor’s avoidance of a medium might 
signal the possibility that the medium is not appropriate for the product’s advertis-
ing. Furthermore, as noted earlier, an advertiser may not want to risk a radically 
different media strategy, even one that may make sense to the planner.
 
Competitive expenditure analysis is helpful as a means of knowing what com-
petitors have done, but not necessarily as a means of knowing what to do as a result. 
These analyses might show, for example, that a competitor is test-marketing a prod-
uct, calling for a revised market strategy to combat the situation.
 
Probably the greatest danger in analyzing expenditure data comes from simply 
copying the leaders blindly. If a leading competitor places 10 percent of its budget in 
Market A, then other competitors often follow the leader. But the followers’ prod-
ucts and market strategies might not lend themselves to such weight in Market A. 
Furthermore, the share leader might establish its weight proportions for reasons 
quite different from those that followers should use.
 
The best use of an expenditure analysis is as part of an organized intelligence 
system that includes other kinds of marketing information to tell a clear story of the 
competitors’ strategies. Although some advertising agencies tend to deprecate the 
use of expenditure analysis as not being worth the investment in money or time, 
most large agencies find it valuable if used properly as an indication of spending 
strategy. When used intelligently, expenditure data are well worth the time and 
money invested.
Using Competitive Media Expenditure Analyses
Following is a list of uses of a competitive media expenditure analysis devised many 
years ago by the staff of Media Decisions.6 It reviews the most important uses and 
values to be obtained by completing such an analysis:
1. The expenditure figures can show you the regionality and seasonality and 
how these factors are changing for all competitive and potentially competitive 
brands.
2. The data can give you a fix on ad budget size and media mix, market by 
market.
3. You can use the data to spot new-product tests and to track new-brand 
rollouts.
6. “Do You Know Your Competitive Brand Data?” Media Decisions (August 1975): 60. 

166 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
4. You can infer from where the money is being spent how competitors view 
their target audiences, how they profile their brands, and where they seek to 
position themselves in your marketplace.
5. You can watch spending patterns of the opposition—TV flighting, radio sta-
tion rotation, position practices in magazines, or day of week in newspapers.
6. Once you have complete knowledge of what your enemies are up to, you can 
make better decisions about where to meet them head-on and when to out-
flank them.
7. In new-product and line-extension planning, expenditure data are essential 
to estimate how much it will cost to get into a market, who is already there, 
and which competitive product types are growing fastest in the new product’s 
market segment.
International Competitive Analysis
Competitive spending analysis in the United States is relatively straightforward, 
whether from Nielsen Monitor-Plus or Kantar Media. All the major media are mea-
sured, the services routinely cover all products advertised in those media, and the 
information is delivered to the planner’s desktop with easy-to-use software. Both 
services can be expected to give the planner a complete picture of the competitive 
landscape, with only minor differences in emphasis, convenience, and quality.
 
International competitive analysis is quite different. Where the U.S. services are 
standardized, international competitive analysis is completely customized. Three 
companies provide international competitive analysis: Nielsen Global Ad*View,7 
Kantar Media,8 and Xtreme Information.9 No single service covers the entire world, 
so a multicountry report requires piecing together the capabilities of the three 
monitoring services. Typically the order is placed with one of the services, which 
acts as the coordinator, drawing on its capabilities in countries it measures and 
working with “partner” suppliers in the countries that it lacks.
 
An important service is harmonizing the reports from the different countries. 
There is no country-by-country coordination among the researchers who compile 
the data. Each may give a slightly different name to the same international adver-
tiser. So a report on advertising by aircraft manufacturers in the UK might show 
spending by “Airbus Corporation,” spending in France may be reported for “Airbus 
Corp,” in Germany it may be “Airbus,” and in Spain “Airbus-Aircraft.” These are 
7. http://nl.nielsen.com/products/documents/NielsenGlobalAdView_000.pdf. 
8. www.tnsglobal.com/media. 
9. www.xtremeinformation.com/services.htm. 

 
Marketing Strategy and Media Planning 
167
all the same company, but because the words are presented with slight differences, 
they must be reexpressed in a single form to allow rolling up to a multicountry total 
in an Excel spreadsheet.
 
Planners seeking an international competitive report need to prepare a request 
for proposal from the three services, listing the countries, inclusive dates, report fre-
quency (annual, quarterly, monthly), the media to be reported, and the advertisers 
or the product category to be tracked. Note if the report is to include specific media 
vehicles as well as the total by medium and if you require examples of the creative 
executions—the print ads, TV commercials, and so on. Keep in mind that each 
element will add to the cost, which can be substantial—many tens of thousands of 
dollars, depending on how much detail is needed and how many countries. Often 
the proposal will be presented as a lump sum, without the country-by-country cost 
detail. Specify the form of the report (an Excel spreadsheet and pivot table is best). 
Once the contract is signed, assume it will take several months to deliver the report 
after the end of the report period (the report for January activity would be delivered 
in March or April).
 
Finally, there is no such thing as a worldwide estimate of spending. That would 
require a competitive report covering many dozens of countries at a cost of hun-
dreds of thousands or even millions of dollars. The three suppliers can provide an 
estimate of worldwide spending, but it will represent only the countries they indi-
vidually monitor and only for the most commonly used international product cat-
egories such as financial services, airlines, hotels, etc.
Managing Media Planning and Buying
Most simple media plans are laid out in an Excel spreadsheet. Its infinite flexibility 
makes it an ideal platform. But this same strength is problematic for large adver-
tisers that have multiple brands and large planning groups that need a single cost 
database, common words to describe each medium (one planner’s “Network Prime 
Time” would sort differently in a corporate roll-up with another planner’s “Net 
Prime”), an organizational structure that reflects different divisions or product 
groups, password-controlled security, and the ability to customize flowchart dis-
play and reporting to the needs of an individual advertiser. Advertisers often want 
online access to the plans for internal reports (but not to change the numbers!).
 
The two leading providers of these systems are Workhorse Software (develop-
ers of Mediatools)10 and Nielsen-IMS (developers of Brandfx), http://en-us.nielsen.
com/tab/product_families/nielsen_ims. Both systems have been in use for many 
10. www.workhorsesoftware.com. 

168 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
years, serving the largest and most complex advertisers. While lacking Excel’s infi-
nite flexibility, their structure and discipline will pay benefits that well justify their 
cost.
 
These flowchart computer programs are different from the housekeeping sys-
tems that manage the three functions of all media buying: estimating (the listing 
of what has been purchased), billing (documentary support for the media agency’s 
bill to the advertiser), and paying (the database that validates invoices from the 
media and supports their payment). The two companies that provide this ser-
vice are Donovan Data Systems11 (the oldest and most widely used service) and 
MediaBank12 (a more recent entry into the field, but still with decades of expe-
rience). Since these housekeeping systems tie directly into the agency’s financial 
management programs and affect the day-to-day work of virtually every depart-
ment, the buying decision should involve the entire agency.
Sources of Marketing Data
Size and share of market for a brand and its competitors, and other information 
contained in a situation analysis, can be obtained from a number of syndicated 
research services. Other data can be obtained from periodicals, association reports, 
government, and media. The following paragraphs provide brief descriptions of the 
major syndicated services and other sources of data, including Internet addresses, 
when available. Many of these companies maintain websites that provide limited 
but often highly useful data in exchange for a no-charge registration.
Major Data Services
The most widely used syndicated research services are those of The Nielsen 
Company; Information Resources, Inc.; Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC 
(MRI); and Experian Simmons. Numerous other research companies provide spe-
cialized lifestyle and other marketing information.
The Nielsen Company (www.nielsen.com) In 2002, when the previous edition of this 
book was published, A. C. Nielsen market research and Nielsen Media Research 
were two separate companies. Even within the companies, their divisions operated 
as independent silos with few if any direct contacts. Since then, all of the divisions 
11. www.donovandata.com/index.html. 
12. www.mbxg.com. 

 
Marketing Strategy and Media Planning 
169
and marketing services have been combined into a single worldwide organization, 
The Nielsen Company, with a universally known name, international scope of 
operation, and a mandate to integrate its many services in whatever way possible 
to meet the marketing needs of its clients. It is safe to say that if there is a research 
need, Nielsen has a product or division that deserves to be considered. Media plan-
ners will primarily use the TV ratings. The full range of services can be found on 
its website.
Information Resources, Inc. (IRI) The InfoScan Census offered by Information 
Resources, Inc. (www.infores.com), is a syndicated tracking service for grocery 
industry data at the national, local market, and chain store levels. It integrates scan-
ner sales, feature ad, coupon, display, and price data from more than 45,000 super-
markets, drugstores, and mass merchandisers with scanner panel data from 90,000 
households. The InfoScan Census database comprises weekly feedback on 3.2 mil-
lion products from stores representing the total movement of some 70 percent of all 
commodity volume in the United States. Data are available for more than 190 retail 
chain and market geographies in addition to the retail trading areas of participating 
accounts. For additional detail on IRI’s test-market capabilities, see Chapter 14. Like 
Nielsen’s market research division, IRI sells data only to advertisers.
Single-Source Research Two services, MRI and Simmons, provide product and 
media usage data from a single survey. Each company uses its own nationally 
projectable sample that lets a planner identify the demographics, attitudes, and 
behaviors of heavy, medium, and light product users. Since the two services are 
fierce competitors for the agency’s research business, each has written their own 
description.
Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC (MRI). 
• 
Since 1979, MRI has been 
the dominant voice in media and consumer research in the United States. 
No other organization—not even the Census Bureau—knows more about 
American consumers. MRI’s Survey of the American Consumer™, used in 
most media and marketing plans in the country, is the primary source of audi-
ence data for the consumer magazine industry and the most comprehensive 
and reliable source of multimedia audience data available. The survey’s multi-
dimensional database provides marketers with a view of audiences of all major 
media, their demographics, lifestyles, attitudes, and product usage informa-
tion on close to 6,000 brands, covering more than 500 categories. MRI con-
ducts in-depth personal interviews with more than 26,000 adults ages 18 and 

170 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
older from an area probability sample covering 26,000 individual house-
holds throughout the United States. The sample is refreshed every six months 
to provide unique insights into the media consumption and product usage 
behavior of U.S. consumers. Go to www.mediamark.com.
Experian
• 
® SimmonsSM (Simmons). The former Simmons Market Research 
Bureau is now a division of Experian, the multinational consumer information 
and credit reporting company. Simmons provides, four times per year, syndi-
cated reports on consumer behavior, including media use, brand purchases, 
frequency of purchases, and an array of psychographic, opinion, and attitudi-
nal measures. Simmons measures the full-spectrum of consumers, reporting 
on adults (18), teens (12–17), and kids (6–11) and provides detailed informa-
tion concerning Hispanic consumers. SimmonsLOCAL is the localized ver-
sion of the flagship National Consumer Survey (NCS) that reports on virtu-
ally all of the variables contained within the NCS for every DMA in the coun-
try. In addition, Simmons has custom measurement capabilities that provide 
direct linkage from proprietary research or customer databases to the syndi-
cated products. With Experian Simmons, planners can understand brand use, 
consumer attitudes and opinions about categories, products, and media, and 
determine the best media choices for reaching the desired audience.
Zip Code Marketing. There are two major providers of zip-code-based lifestyle data: 
Nielsen Claritas, at www.claritas.com, and Experian Mosiac (www.experian.com). 
Both provide marketing data at every microgeographic level, including zip codes, 
census tracts, census block groups, compiled list cells, and postal carrier routes. 
These services, too, are fiercely competitive. Following are their self-descriptions:
Nielsen Claritas PRIZM is the industry-leading consumer segmentation sys-
• 
tem that yields the richest, most comprehensive, and precise insights available. 
Nielsen PRIZM combines demographics, consumer behavior, and geographic 
data to help marketers identify, understand, and target their customers and 
prospects. PRIZM defines every U.S. household in terms of 66 demographic 
and behavior types or segments to help marketers discern those consumers’ 
likes, dislikes, lifestyles, and purchase behaviors. Used by thousands of market-
ers in Fortune 500 companies, PRIZM provides a common language for mar-
keting in an increasingly diverse and complex marketplace.
ExperianMosaic
• 
® USA, classifies all American consumer households and 
neighborhoods into one of 60 segments and 12 groups to help understand 
the multiple dimensions of their socioeconomics, behaviors, and preferences 

 
Marketing Strategy and Media Planning 
171
driving their lifestyles. Mosaic USA is available at the household, Zip4, Block 
Group, and Zip Code levels to allow matching to whatever market approach is 
required to help target the best audience.
Other Sources of Data
The sources of data just described provide specific and pertinent data for a situa-
tion analysis but are relatively expensive. The cost might be too high for many small 
manufacturers or agencies, so it becomes necessary to find substitute sources of 
data. There are a number of relatively inexpensive sources, although they do not 
provide the same amount of detail, especially about competitors’ sales and dis-
tribution practices. When the information is incomplete, advertisers must make 
assumptions about the missing data. Astute observers can, however, check these 
assumptions by taking note of the marketing actions of their own company and 
competitors. The following paragraphs, meanwhile, identify major sources of data 
for the situation analysis.
Sales & Marketing Management Survey of Buying Power Marketing and media plan-
ners often use this survey (www.salesandmarketing.com) as a convenient source of 
three kinds of data about markets:
1. Population and household data for all major geographic markets in the United 
States
2. Effective buying income and spending statistics about markets
3. Retail sales data by broad product classes: (a) food stores; (b) eating and drink-
ing places; (c) general merchandise stores; (d) automotive dealers; (e) furniture, 
home furnishings, and appliances; (f ) drugstores; (g) apparel and accessory 
stores; (h) gasoline service stations; (i) building materials and hardware stores
No individual brand sales are shown, and the only classifications of consumers are 
by population and income. However, the report is convenient in locating and evalu-
ating geographic markets by state, by metropolitan statistical area, by county, or by 
city. Furthermore, the three factors (population, income, and retail sales) have been 
combined into a multiple-factor index number for each market, which simplifies 
comparisons among markets.
 
Convenient tables ranking markets by sales potential also facilitate compari-
sons by each of the nine retail product categories. A user trying to find and evalu-
ate markets for a drug product, for example, will find a table that ranks markets 
from best to poorest on the basis of sales of drugs. Sales & Marketing Management 

172 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
publishes its Survey of Buying Power annually. This publication is now part of 
Nielsen Business Media. Additional information is available at their website.
SRDS SRDS (www.srds.com) publishes media rate books for all major media. In 
its local media books (newspaper, spot radio, and spot television) are market data 
sections similar to those in the Survey of Buying Power. SRDS also shows geo-
graphic markets by state, metropolitan statistical area, county, and city, but not in 
as much detail as the Survey of Buying Power. Local media rate books are published 
monthly, and the market data are revised annually.
 
SRDS publishes a quarterly TV and cable source, which contains a market pro-
file for each local TV market in the United States, including demographics, sales 
data, and local media data. It also provides a reference for information on TV sta-
tion representatives, owners of multiple TV stations, network TV personnel, com-
mercial TV stations, TV syndicators, national and local cable TV representatives, 
and TV trafficking specifications. Since radio and television rates are negotiated, 
there are no prices in SRDS.
 
In addition to the hard-copy books, SRDS makes available some of its informa-
tion on the Internet. Subscribers receive one password for each paid subscription. 
As of this writing, SRDS makes online reports available on the following topics: 
consumer magazines, Internet, business-to-business magazines, radio, newspapers, 
out-of-home, TV/cable, and the International Media Guide, which includes busi-
ness magazines, consumer magazines, and newspapers worldwide.
Marketer’s Guide to Media Every year Mediaweek publishes a handy reference 
resource titled Marketer’s Guide to Media, which includes current rates and audi-
ence estimates for the major media. This guide describes trends in total advertising 
expenditures, costs, and audiences for network, cable, syndication, and spot tele-
vision; radio; out-of-home; magazines; newspapers; and online services. It can be 
bought online at www.adweek.com/adweek/news_stand/directories.jsp.
TV Dimensions Another annual, TV Dimensions, provides advertisers, ad agencies, 
and the media with a 500-page analytical and reference tool that covers all aspects 
of the television medium. Sections include a history of television; the growth of 
cable, VCR usage, and the Internet; program type appeals; reach and frequency; 
qualitative factors regarding viewer interest and attentiveness; commercial expo-
sure and impact; and intermedia comparisons. There are similar publications for 
magazines, Internet, intermedia comparisons, and radio. They can be bought online 
at www.mediadynamicsinc.com.

 
Marketing Strategy and Media Planning 
173
Census Data The Census Bureau (www.census.gov) of the U.S. Department of 
Commerce publishes many census analyses that are helpful in marketing plan-
ning. Most useful have been the Census of Business and Census of Population. But 
other census data, too numerous to list here, are available for special industries. The 
Statistical Abstract of the United States, published once a year, has been considered 
helpful as a quick source of data for media market planning. It is available online 
at the Census website.
Media Studies of Special Markets Often local and national media conduct special 
market studies that are helpful resources for learning about geographical as well as 
special markets. Although the purpose of these reports is to show a given medium 
in a favorable light, the researcher should not assume that all such studies are 
biased. Often a medium will sponsor a study that represents a significant contri-
bution to the understanding of markets and media. Sometimes the only research 
available on a special market or medium is these studies.
Advertising Trade Publications A number of publications offer market and media 
data on a regular basis. The most useful ones are Advertising Age (www.adage.com), 
Adweek (www.adweek.com), Mediaweek (www.mediaweek.com), and Broadcasting 
& Cable (www.broadcastingandcable.com). Information can be obtained by using 
search tools in the publications’ websites to locate studies published in their past 
issues, which can be purchased online.
Associations Many trade associations report market data for their members. In 
some cases, these data show sales by brands, but others tend to be rather general. 
Because there are so many different trade associations, it is advisable to determine 
whether the associations in a particular industry can be of aid in compiling the 
situation analysis.
Miscellaneous Sources Yet other sources of data are available at relatively low cost 
to the market/media planner. Federal, state, and local governments all produce vari-
ous kinds of research that can be helpful. Federal data can be found by contacting 
the Government Printing Office in Washington, D.C. (www.gpo.gov) or by inquir-
ing at a government depository library.
 
Chambers of commerce, both national and local, can be helpful in finding the 
right kinds of data needed for marketing situation analyses. Obviously, data from 
these sources will be rather general, but the information might be useful for pre-
liminary portions of the analysis.

174 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
Finally, for analysis of products and product values, Consumer Reports (www
.consumerreports.org), which is published by Consumers Union, provides monthly 
and annual publications for a small cost. Consumer’s Digest, published six times a 
year, is a similar source. The magazines also produce an annual buyer’s guide. Both 
of these organizations put various brands of products through tests to determine 
quality and the best buy for the money. Not all brands or models are tested, but 
many of the most popular brands on the market are analyzed. Ordinarily, this kind 
of information is difficult to obtain except by special research services, so these two 
publications make the job of finding product values relatively easy.

 
175
CHAPTER SEVEN
Strategy Planning I
Who, Where, and When
O
nce the advertiser has an overall marketing strategy, a media strategy 
can be developed. The first three parts of the strategy answer three 
questions:
1. To whom should we target our advertising?
2. Where, geographically, should we advertise?
3. When should we advertise?
The answers to these questions will drive other decisions made later in the develop-
ment of a media strategy. For example, if it has been agreed that advertising should 
be directed primarily to women 18–34, then media alternatives such as sports 
magazines or TV programs directed primarily to men would not be appropriate. 
(Obviously, there are some exceptions—but not many.) Because they will affect 
every aspect of the media plan, decisions about the target market must be made 
early. The remaining parts of the media strategy—weighting, reach, frequency, and 
continuity—will be discussed in Chapter 8.
 
Sometimes the media planner makes these decisions alone, but more often the 
process includes input from creative, the account group, and marketing planners, 
as well as from the client. Most often, the decision making is a team process.
 
Answers to each of the three big questions rely most heavily on numerical anal-
ysis of marketing and media data, but they also involve judgment and subjective 
appraisal. Numbers that are evaluated literally are subject to error. One must know 
where the numbers came from, that is, how they were obtained or calculated. The 
best planners know the value of research methodology as well as how to analyze the 
numbers. The search for objectivity in planning requires both abilities.

176 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Target Selection
A media plan’s target audience is the group of people whom the advertising is 
attempting to influence. Most typically, advertising is directed to current users 
of the product or service. Although targeting information is available for prod-
ucts that appeal to specialized markets such as upper-income households, which 
are surveyed by IPSOS/Mendelsohn,1 and teens, who are surveyed by Teenage 
Research Unlimited,2 the most commonly used services are Experian Simmons3 
and Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC (MRI).4 Both studies begin with a 
survey of product usage and media behavior from a random sample of homes in the 
48 contiguous states, and cover virtually every product or service sold in America. 
Exhibit 7-1 shows the MRI survey’s question dealing with the use of bottled water 
and seltzer.
 
The results of the survey are made available to subscribers on a computer data-
base that allows custom cross tabulation of the data. Exhibit 7-2 shows the format 
of these tabulations. Although this example is from MRI, it illustrates the universal 
concepts of horizontal (percent of the medium’s audience in the advertiser’s target), 
vertical (percent of the advertiser’s target in the medium’s audience), and selectiv-
ity index that compares the product’s users to the average adult. In the analysis of 
media vehicle audiences, “vertical” equates to coverage; “horizontal” equates to 
composition.
 
The goal is to identify and define the targets—those who are most likely to buy 
the product or service. Targets are defined on the basis of one or more demographic 
characteristics of consumers who have purchased the product or brand in the past. 
Purchasers are typically described in terms of age, income, occupation, education, 
and so forth. Custom research can provide this kind of information, but it is usually 
quite expensive and time-consuming. The services listed earlier are known as “syn-
dicated” research because they cover a broad range of products and services with 
a single questionnaire, spreading the cost across multiple buyers. Virtually every 
advertising agency subscribes to these services as a cost of doing business.
 
One of the first media-planning action steps is to decide whether to concentrate 
on all users or a narrower product usage category. A great deal depends on whom 
the advertiser wants to reach. This is a marketing as well as a creative and media 
decision. Most likely, the creative personnel, the account planning team, the agency 
1. www.ipsosmediact.com/media/mendelsohn.aspx.
2. www.teenageresearch.com. 
3. www.experiansimmons.com.
4. www.mediamark.com. 

 
Strategy Planning I 
177
account representative, and certainly the advertiser will all have an opinion of who 
they believe can be convinced to buy the brand. Sometimes the goal is to convince 
consumers to switch brands; other times it will be to convince persons not using 
the product category to try it. But once the buying category has been decided, the 
targets will then be found by studying demographic and lifestyle data. Planners use 
indexes to show how the demographics of product users compare to the popula-
tion as a whole.
MRI Survey on Bottled Water and Seltzer
Source: Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 7-1

178 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Demographics of Medium/Heavy Bottled Water or Seltzer Users
BASE: ADULTS
TOTALS
MEDIUM/HEAVY 
BOTTLED WATER 
OR SELTZER—
LAST 7 DAYS
Total adults
(000)
224,899
107,113
Vert%
100.0
100.0
Horz%
100.0
47.6
Index
100
100
Men
(000)
108,664
48,895
Vert%
48.3
45.7
Horz%
100.0
45.0
Index
100
94
Women
(000)
116,235
58,218
Vert%
51.7
54.4
Horz%
100.0
50.1
Index
100
105
Ages 18–24
(000)
28,550
14,433
Vert%
12.7
13.5
Horz%
100.0
50.6
Index
100
106
Ages 25–34
(000)
40,210
21,160
Vert%
17.9
19.8
Horz%
100.0
52.6
Index
100
110
Ages 35–44
(000)
42,681
22,186
Vert%
19.0
20.7
Horz%
100.0
52.0
Index
100
109
Ages 45–54
(000)
43,918
22,807
Vert%
19.5
21.3
Horz%
100.0
51.9
Index
100
109
Ages 55–64
(000)
32,911
15,111
Vert%
14.6
14.1
Horz%
100.0
45.9
Index
100
96
Ages 65+
(000)
36,629
11,416
Vert%
16.3
10.7
Horz%
100.0
31.2
Index
100
65
Source: Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, Spring 2009. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 7-2
47.6% of adults are M/H bottled water 
users (107,113/224,899).
There are 14,433,000 18–24-year-old 
M/H bottled water users.
1
10
There are 28,550,000 adults ages 18–24 
in the United States.
50.6% of 18–24-year-olds are M/H 
bottled water users (14,433/28,550).
14,433
12.7% of all adults are ages 18–24 
(28,550/224,899).
13.5% of M/H bottled water users are 
ages 18–24 (14,443/107,113).
Adults 18–24 are 6% more likely to be 
M/H bottled water users than the average 
adult. (13.5/12.7–1).
Adults ages 65+ are 35% less likely to be 
M/H bottled water users than the average 
adult. (10.7/16.3 –1).
107,113
There are 224,899,000 adults in the 
United States.
There are 107,113,000 medium/ heavy 
bottled water users.

 
Strategy Planning I 
179
 
Case Study 7-1 shows a corporate advertising campaign whose target audience 
was opinion leaders, both in government and across the country. The advertiser 
used a multimedia campaign of television, magazines, and online media with high-
impact, large creative units (60- and 90-second television, spreads, online rich 
media), concentrated in the media vehicles used by this target.
The Dow Chemical Company “The Human Element” Campaign
Background
In the past, Dow Chemical was a faceless company. The true story needed to be told—
the story of a company that is helping create solutions for affordable and adequate 
food supply, decent housing, improved personal health and safety, and sustainable 
water supplies.
Marketing Goals
The three specific marketing goals were to:
1. Forge new and unlikely relationships with key influencers, educators, current and 
potential employees, and the general public.
2. Increase overall awareness and knowledge of Dow and its policies, products, and 
initiatives.
3. Improve Dow’s reputation among key stakeholders.
The Concept
The big idea was the understanding that change lies at the intersection of chemistry 
and humanity. The most important element of all was missing from the standardized 
periodic table of elements. This was the “Human Element.” When you have that, any-
thing is possible.
The Media Plan
The media plan was designed to reach the marketing target in a variety of selective 
venues with a mixture of traditional and digital media. The message was carried by 
90-, 60-, and 30-second spots on NBC broadcast television and 16 cable networks 
including CNN, National Geographic channel, Fox News, Discovery, and the History 
Channel.
CASE STUDY 7-1

180 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
CASE STUDY 7-1   The Dow Chemical Company 
“The Human Element” Campaign (continued)
 
In print, the campaign ran in high-impact two- to six-page spreads, gatefolds, and 
barn-door ads in 28 opinion leader magazines such as The Atlantic, Fortune, The New 
Yorker, Time, Newsweek, The Economist, and National Geographic.
 
Online advertising followed the same pattern, with banner ads and rich media cre-
ative units on 16 online sites such as BusinessWeek.com, CNN.com, NewYorkTimes
.com, WallStreetJournal.com, NationalGeographic.com, Forbes.com, and Time.com.
Results
The campaign resulted in dramatic progress in building relations with Congress as 
well as with nongovernmental organizations involved with energy, climate change, 
and the global water supply. Key influencers have publicly recognized Dow, proving 
that the campaign not only was being seen by the target but also impacted percep-
tions in a positive manner.
 
This is an example of the campaign’s local print creative:
Source: The Dow Chemical Company. Used with permission.

 
Strategy Planning I 
181
 
In addition to demographics and product usage, MRI and Simmons have clas-
sified their respondents according to various lifestyles based on the products they 
use and their attitudes. Simmons segments include GreenAware, Tipping Point, 
Waistband, Political Persona, and others. MRI has Consumer Innovators, Leisure 
Styles, Diet Control Attitude, Civic/Political Engagement, Financial Attitude, and 
other groups.
Index Number Analysis
In analyzing numerical data, there are three commonly used bases: raw numbers, 
percentages, and index numbers. Raw numbers are used least often because they 
are so large and because it is difficult to compare the raw numbers of one brand 
with those of another brand, each of which can have radically different bases. 
Percentages are a means of equalizing the bases of numbers from two or more 
companies, so they are usually preferred over raw numbers for making compari-
sons. Index numbers are the ratio of two percentages and are most preferred for 
comparisons.
 
An index is a number that shows a relationship between two percentages or 
between two raw numbers. Generally, index numbers are printed as whole numbers. 
The value of an index is that it relates sales or product usage to population demo-
graphics, enabling one to have a convenient common method for comparison. If the 
population segment is considered to be “average,” then an index number for sales tells 
how much above or below average sales are, in absolute terms. An index number of 
100 is equal to the average; 125 is 25 percent above average, and 80 is 20 percent below 
average. Exhibits 7-3 and 7-4 provide an example of using index numbers.
Medium/Heavy Users of Bottled Water by Age Segment 
AGE SEGMENT
NUMBER OF ADULTS IN 
UNITED STATES (000)
PERCENTAGE OF 
U.S. ADULTS
NUMBER OF M/H 
BOTTLED WATER USERS
PERCENT OF 
ADULT USERS
18–24
28,550
12.7%
14,433
13.5%
25–34
40,210
17.9
21,160
19.8
35–44
42,681
19.0
22,186
20.7
45–54
43,918
19.5
22,807
21.3
55–64
32,911
14.6
15,111
14.1
65
36,629
16.3
11,416
10.7
Total adults
224,899
100.0%
107,113
100.0%
Source: Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, Spring 2009. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 7-3

182 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Calculating Index Numbers (Based on Exhibit 7-3)
AGE SEGMENT
CALCULATION
INDEX
18–24
13.512.7
106
25–34
19.817.9
110
35–44
20.719.0
109
45–54
21.319.5
109
55–64
14.114.6
   96
65
10.716.3
   65
Source: Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, Spring 2009. Used with permission.
 
Which demographic segments should be selected as target markets for media 
to reach? The usual answer is to select those demographic segments with the larg-
est volume of sales or the largest number of users. In other words, advertise where 
the brand has a history of success. The 25–34 age group accounts for 19.8 percent 
of users and 17.9 percent of the population. Using the 110 index (19.8/17.9), we see 
that people this age are 10 percent more likely to use bottled water than the average 
adult. While this age group is the most selective, we see that the 35–44- and the 
45–54-year-old age groups have a 109 index, which is statistically identical to 110. 
We also see a clear fall-off in usage by the 55–64 and 65 age groups. Obviously, 
income, occupation, education, and other demographic categories would also have 
to be checked before a final decision could be made.
 
In this example, we compared the percentage of usage in each age segment to 
the percentage of population in that segment. (One could compare the raw numbers 
of usage and population distribution in each segment, but such comparisons are 
more difficult than those made using percentages.) When the percentage of usage is 
compared with the percentage of population distribution in each segment, an index 
number can be calculated to make the comparisons easier to analyze. The formula 
for calculating such numbers is as follows:
Index number  
Percentage of users in a demographic segment
Percentage of population in the same segment   100
Using the formula to calculate index numbers for the data in Exhibit 7-3 yields the 
index numbers in Exhibit 7-4. The index numbers in Exhibit 7-4 show how much 
the product is being used compared with the potential (or population proportion) 
EXHIBIT 7-4

 
Strategy Planning I 
183
in each segment. An index number below 100, as seen in the 55–64 and 65 age 
groups, indicates lower than average usage. So even though the groups together 
account for almost one-fourth of all users, they represent less than would be 
expected, given the size of the 55 population. Clearly the younger age segments 
represent the best prospects—both because they account for the largest percent 
of users and because they are far more likely to use bottled water than the popu-
lation as a whole. In this sense, index numbers more accurately indicate potential 
for usage or sales. One cannot easily see this kind of relationship, however, without 
first calculating the index numbers. Given the demographic skew shown here, the 
advertiser would probably make adults 25–54 the primary target, with a secondary 
target of women 25–54.
 
It is helpful to think of index numbers as measures of central tendency, just as 
averages or means are in the statistical world. An average does not describe any one 
person in a group, only the group as a whole. Likewise, an index number higher 
than 100 means that the usage of the product is proportionately greater in that 
segment than one that is average (100) or below average (any number below 100). 
Segments with index numbers higher than 100 do not necessarily have numerically 
more users in them than in other segments; they might only have proportionately 
more. Theoretically, the segment with the highest index number represents the 
best potential for usage. In analyzing marketing data, one should calculate index 
numbers for all demographic groups, such as age, sex, income, occupation, and 
education. As is shown in Exhibit 7-3, tables should always show 100 percent at 
the bottom to tell the user that these numbers do add up to 100. It is a good idea 
for planners to double-check to be sure the numbers do, in fact, add to 100 when 
appropriate. Some tables, such as presence of children by age, add to more than 100 
because households with both young and older children will, correctly, be double-
counted.
 
While looking at the demographic profile, planners should concentrate on 
indexes that are greater than about 110 or less than about 90. Indexes of 98 or 102 
are so close to the average that they might be caused by statistical bounce. Planners 
should also look for a pattern in the numbers. Here, bottled water users are concen-
trated in the 25–54 age group. The 55–64 age group is slightly below average, and 
the 65 group is well below average. Products with above-average usage by people 
ages 25–54 can be expected to have children and larger than average households. 
These patterns help the planner identify the product user’s lifestyle.
 
Although the technique of calculating index numbers shown in Exhibit 7-4 
can be used, there is a simpler way to compute the numbers, shown in Exhibit 
7-5. Briefly stated, the method starts with a measurement of the total number of 
users in a market. A percentage of the universe is then computed. This percentage 

184 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
indicates that, of the total population, x percent are users. The number of users is 
divided by the number of individuals in each population segment, and percentages 
are calculated. Finally, each of these segment percentages is divided by the total per-
centage of users to obtain an index number. Note that the index numbers obtained 
by this method are identical to those obtained in Exhibit 7-4.
Another Method of Calculating Index Numbers
Step One: Find the total number of users compared with the total population in the 
market:
Total number of users in all segments (000): 107,113
Total number of adults in the United States (000): 224,899
Percentage of total adults who are users (users/adults): 47.6
Step Two: Divide to find the percent of users in each demographic segment.
AGE 
SEGMENT
NUMBER OF USERS 
(000)
POPULATION 
SIZE
USERS/
POPULATION
18–24
14,433
28,550
50.6%
25–34
21,160
40,210
52.6
35–44
22,186
42,681
52.0
45–54
22,807
43,918
51.9
55–64
15,111
32,911
45.9
65
11,416
36,629
31.2
Total adults
107,113
224,899
47.6%
Step Three: Divide each of the percentages in Step Two by the percentage in Step One.
AGE 
SEGMENT
USERS/
POPULATION
USERS/
ADULTS
INDEX
18–24
50.6%
47.6%
106
25–34
52.6
47.6
110
35–44
52.0
47.6
109
45–54
51.9
47.6
109
55–64
45.9
47.6
96
65
31.2
47.6
65
Total adults
47.6%
47.6%
Source: Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, Spring 2009. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 7-5

 
Strategy Planning I 
185
 
Be careful not to be misled about index numbers: the demographic segment 
with the highest index number does not always represent the best potential. Aside 
from the fact that one segment might have some other qualification of great mar-
keting value, it is also possible that a segment with a high index number has a low 
degree of product usage or sales or a low population size for that segment. If so, the 
segment with the highest index number would not represent the best potential for 
continued usage.
 
To illustrate, Exhibit 7-6 shows marketing data for a fictitious brand. Although 
the 18–24 age segment has the highest index (134), it also has the lowest percentage 
of product usage and the lowest population percentage of any segment. It would not 
be very meaningful, therefore, to limit the selection of media to those reaching the 
18–24 segment and ignore the other segments, especially because 85 percent of the 
usage is in the 25-and-older segment. First examine the volume of usage or sales in 
each demographic segment to determine whether the volume warrants inclusion 
as a media target. Only then will index numbers help locate good potential target 
segments.
Lifestyle Analysis
Demographics paint a general picture of the target and are needed for buying 
broadcast media, but by themselves, these dry statistics mask the human side of 
product users. To add some personality, media planners also analyze product users’ 
lifestyles—that is, how they spend time and money. Following are the most com-
monly used lifestyle analysis tools that give planners a more intuitive understand-
ing of their target.
Storyfinder The previous example of an MRI cross tabulation (or cross tab for 
short) showed demographics, but it is also possible to cross tabulate product usage 
An Example of Misleading Index Numbers
AGE 
SEGMENT
POPULATION IN 
EACH SEGMENT
PRODUCT USAGE IN 
EACH SEGMENT
INDEX
18–24
11.1%
15.0%
134
25–34
19.3
17.8
   92
35–49
30.2
29.2
   97
50
39.4
38.0
   96
Total
100.0%
100.0%
EXHIBIT 7-6

186 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
with all of the answers in the survey. A Storyfinder (“Golddigger” in MRI software) 
is essentially a large cross tab. The column represents the product user that the 
planner is studying, and the rows (more than 3,000 of them) reflect every product 
and service that is measured. The planner then sorts the analysis by index to iden-
tify the most selective behaviors that might shed light on the user’s lifestyle. In set-
ting up the computer run, the planner also excludes behaviors that have fewer than 
50 respondents and so are statistically unstable.
 
Exhibit 7-7 shows the results of a Storyfinder for adults who are medium–heavy 
users of bottled water and seltzer. It is clear from these activities that the target 
users enjoy an active and energetic lifestyle, use the Internet, are concerned about 
their health, and have the financial resources to enjoy the finer things in life. These 
insights are not apparent from demographic analysis alone.
 
In this table, the “Unwgt.” column is the unweighted sample size—the number 
of people (respondents) who actually filled out the questionnaire. Note that some 
of the groups are so small that the data are unstable and should be used with cau-
tion. The asterisk indicates that the sample consists of fewer than 50 respondents. 
This represents the practical limit to a planner’s ability to fine-tune the target, 
although samples of less than a few hundred should be viewed as providing direc-
tional information.
Psychographics Both MRI and Experian Simmons ask respondents a series of 
questions about their attitudes toward various products, services, and aspects of 
their life. Exhibit 7-8 shows the most selective psychographics (“Agree Mostly”) for 
medium–heavy users of bottled water or seltzer. This analysis tells planners that 
their target is technologically savvy, is willing to try new products, and wants to be 
perceived as a person who reflects the latest fashion.
Leisure Styles and Consumer Innovators The Storyfinder is a simple cross tab of 
every measured behavior, although it fails to combine a number of behaviors that 
may, taken together, signal a lifestyle or consumer interest. MRI’s Leisure Styles 
and Consumer Innovators codes were developed from a factor analysis of the 
MRI database. Like the psychographics, these groupings can offer insights into 
the consumer, but they are seldom used to select specific media vehicles. Experian 
Simmons has similar segmentations that group people by a broad range of behav-
iors and attitudes.
 
Exhibit 7-9 shows the selectivity of MRI’s Consumer Innovators and Leisure 
Styles for medium–heavy bottled-water users. They are above average in all of 
the Innovator groups (30 percent more likely than the average adult to be a “Super 
Innovator”). They also score significantly above average in the Leisure Style groups: 

 
Strategy Planning I 
187
Storyfinder Analysis of Medium–Heavy Bottled Water or Seltzer Users
Total Sample
Target: Medium–Heavy Bottled Water or Seltzer Users
Population: 107,113 (000)
UNWGT.
(000)
VERT%
HORZ%
INDEX
TOTALS
12,764
107,113
100.00
47.63
100
Bought instant-developing camera in last 
12 months
52
433
0.40
79.89
168
Bought pasta machine in last 12 months
21
299*
0.28
78.07
164
Heavy user of meal/dietary/weight-loss suppl.
148
1,399
1.31
76.95
162
Ordered baby accessories by mail in last 
12 months
121
1,085
1.01
76.19
160
Used home/herbal remedy to treat muscle 
ailments
75
667
0.62
73.95
155
Bought last 35mm point & shoot camera in last 
12 months
53
485
0.45
73.60
155
Bought sport watch as gift in last 12 months
131
1,178
1.10
72.31
152
Participated in casino gambling in Caribbean 
146
1,159
1.08
72.26
152
Referred to Internet Yellow Pages for home 
improvement in last 12 months
118
1,017
0.95
70.92
149
Referred to Internet Yellow Pages for profes-
sional counselor services in last 12 months 
86
780
0.73
70.46
148
Used a branded prescription to treat ailments
77
672
0.63
70.00
147
Participated in casino gambling in Connecticut 
177
1,205
1.12
69.90
147
Referred to Internet Yellow Pages for copier 
(electrical equipment) in last 12 months
101
992
0.93
69.86
147
Heavy user of prepared mixed drinks with 
liquor
181
1,679
1.57
69.78
147
Referred to Internet Yellow Pages for music 
stores (leisure/equipment) in last 12 months 
180
1,512
1.41
69.17
145
Bought receiver-amp audio equipment in last 
12 months
104
961
0.90
68.45
144
Referred to Internet Yellow Pages for personal 
care products and services (child) in last 12 
months
159
1,421
1.33
68.42
144
Bought low-ticket sports & recreation equip-
ment (elbow/knee) in last 12 months
90
631
0.59
68.29
143
*Projections relatively unstable—use with caution.
Source: Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, Spring 2009. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 7-7

188 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Sports Enthusiasts, Outdoor Speedsters, and Collectors, confirming the earlier 
observations of their active lifestyle seen in the Storyfinder.
Focus Groups While not a statistical tool, media-oriented focus groups can provide 
insights into the target that are unavailable from questionnaire-based research. 
Selective Buying Styles and Psychographic Attitudes of Medium–Heavy 
Bottled Water or Seltzer Users
Base: Adults
Target: Medium–Heavy Bottled Water or Seltzer Users
Population: 107,113 (000)
“AGREE MOSTLY” WITH 
STATEMENTS
VERT%
HORZ%
INDEX
TOTALS
100.0
47.6
100
Text messaging is an important part of my daily life.
16.3
56.7
119
Others ask my advice about vacation travel.
7.0
56.1
118
I often spend more money than expected on my fashion purchases.
13.3
54.3
114
I like to live a lifestyle that impresses others.
7.3
53.7
113
I often try different ways to style my hair.
10.7
53.4
112
I am willing to pay more for a flight on my favorite airline.
6.4
53.3
112
I’m willing to use the Internet to shop for fashion products.
15.4
53.3
112
I often find myself in a leadership position.
18.6
53.1
111
Others ask my advice when it comes to food.
11.1
52.9
111
I buy new clothes at the beginning of each season.
7.8
52.6
111
I would rather book a trip over the Internet than meet a travel agent.
22.7
52.6
110
I consider my fashion style to be trendy.
7.7
52.4
110
I advise when others are buying technology/electronics products.
8.0
52.3
110
I enjoy customizing the look and sound of my cell phone.
10.4
52.3
110
I consider myself sophisticated.
9.1
52.3
110
My goal is to make it to the top of my profession.
15.9
52.1
109
If I find a food product I like, I recommend it to others.
19.5
51.8
109
I’m among the first of my friends to try new technology products.
6.4
51.6
108
I purchase products to help organize my life.
14.9
51.4
108
Source: Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, Spring 2009. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 7-8

 
Strategy Planning I 
189
Using DRAFTFCB’s “Mind, Mood and Moment” process, media planners talk 
to target consumers in their natural surroundings (e.g., men drinking beer in a 
bar). This relaxed but carefully structured meeting probes the target’s daily life 
patterns—these consumers’ interests, what they do for fun, what frustrations they 
experience, their social life, their goals for the future. Of special importance is a 
discussion about their involvement with and attitudes toward the media.
Consumer Innovators and Leisure Styles of 
Medium–Heavy Bottled Water or Seltzer Users
Target: Medium–Heavy Bottled Water Users
Population: 107,113 (000)
UNWGT.
(000)
VERT%
HORZ%
INDEX
TOTALS
12,764
107,113
100
47.63
100
Consumer Innovators
Super Innovators 
(3 of above segments)
888
6,275
5.86
61.74
130
Electronics
1,753
14,716
13.74
61.62
129
Food
2,130
17,239
16.09
58.89
124
Leisure
1,152
8,926
8.33
54.25
114
Home Appliance
1,203
9,511
8.88
52.72
111
Personal Care/Health
2,543
20,975
19.58
52.79
111
Financial
1,886
12,411
11.59
49.30
104
Leisure Styles
Sports Enthusiasts
853
7,408
6.92
56.70
119
Outdoor Speedsters
400
3,573
3.34
54.93
115
Collectors
831
6,693
6.25
52.35
110
Cultured Nesters
2,217
15,018
14.02
50.37
106
Outdoor Adventurers
767
5,647
5.27
49.30
104
Puzzles and Games
1,271
11,311
10.56
48.04
101
Hunters and Fishers
378
3,726
3.48
45.76
96
Passives (May not participate/partic-
ipates at lower levels)
6,047
53,738
50.17
44.94
94
Source: Mediamark Research & Intelligence, Spring 2009. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 7-9

190 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
For example, a Mind, Mood and Moment session on behalf of a state tourism 
association revealed that respondents look forward to the weekends when they can 
get away from their busy and hectic weekdays. This observation led to a campaign 
that suggested weekend automobile trips to points of interest in the state. Media 
weight was concentrated on Thursday and Friday evenings when people were plan-
ning their weekend activities, as well as Sunday newspaper ads that contained spe-
cific travel directions.
 
The use of focus groups illustrates the value of understanding the marketing tar-
get’s human side, as well as the cold statistical characteristics of these consumers.
Where to Advertise
The question of where to advertise has a number of answers. The simplest, of 
course, is to advertise wherever the brand is distributed. Obviously, advertising in a 
geographic market where the brand is not distributed is usually a waste of money. 
Occasionally, however, the objective might be to “force” distribution by creating a 
demand for a brand through advertising, even though the brand is not yet distrib-
uted in the market. When the planner has this objective, it makes sense to advertise 
before distribution is available.
 
However, beyond the obvious answer is the question of whether it is better to 
advertise in geographic markets where sales for a given brand have been good or 
to advertise where sales have not been good. Some planners believe that to adver-
tise where sales have been good is a solid defensive strategy. One should protect 
what one has and also try to build on it. Additionally, one should ask, Have sales in 
the good markets been fully exploited? If not, it could make sense to spend more 
money there, rather than going to some other market where the risks would be 
greater. After all, many customers like the brand well enough to buy it repeatedly, 
and their word-of-mouth influence could well prompt sales to people who have 
not purchased the brand in the past. Also, distribution and retail acceptance of the 
product are well established.
 
Choosing where to advertise is really a matter of risks. Despite the observation 
that “it is always good sense to fish where the fish are,” is an advertiser missing pro-
ductive new markets by placing most advertising in the best markets? Conversely, can 
the advertiser afford the risk of losing the best markets to sound out new, unknown 
markets? The “defensive strategy” minimizes risks and maximizes potential.
 
Advertising in markets where a brand’s sales are low is called an “offensive strat-
egy,” because success will require heavier advertising expenditures than previously 
used. Again, the risks must be carefully weighed. If competitors have been sell-
ing well in these markets but the brand in question has not, the question is why? 

 
Strategy Planning I 
191
Are the poor sales a result of poor distribution? Or have advertising expenditures 
in the market been insufficient? Are there other reasons? Can these problems be 
corrected?
 
A planner selecting a market with a low sales history should be able to answer 
the following question: is there any evidence that increased advertising in this mar-
ket will produce a corresponding increase in sales? This question is difficult but 
necessary to answer. Students in practice exercises often want to increase advertis-
ing because they believe “advertising sells.” But they usually cannot find any other 
strong reason for doing so except that competitors are selling well in the market. 
One must understand, however, that once a competitor becomes entrenched in a 
market with a good brand that meets the needs of consumers, consumers might 
not see a reason to switch brands. In fact, getting them to switch brands might be 
impossible, unless the new brand has some superior attribute. The risks of try-
ing to exploit such a market are great, and the likelihood of success is, at best, 
indeterminable.
 
Finally, the greatest risk is to select new markets where neither the designated 
brand nor competitive brands have been exploited through advertising. These 
markets might have great sales potential, but they could also be difficult places 
to sell a given product. It also might be assumed that if these markets really had 
great potential, competitors would have known about it, too, and would have made 
efforts to exploit that potential.
 
Aside from these basic guides for market selection, other factors should be 
considered, such as selecting one or perhaps more markets in each of the cli-
ent’s sales territories. Almost all companies with nationally distributed products 
divide the country into sales territories, and these in turn are usually subdivided 
into small groups. The names of such territories vary from company to company. 
Some use the terms divisions and districts; others use regions and divisions, or 
other designations. No matter what the territories are called, it might be neces-
sary to include at least one market in each of these divisions, depending on the 
needs of the company. The weight (or amount of advertising used) in these areas 
will vary, however, so the better markets receive more dollars of advertising than 
the poorer markets.
 
Planners should be careful to understand the exact area of an advertiser’s sales 
territory. The author once presented a plan for San Francisco and was asked, “What 
about Sacramento?” This meeting with the client was not a good place to learn that 
the San Francisco sales territory included all of Northern California.
 
To answer the question of where to advertise, planners study distribution, sales 
records, or brand and product usage. Simmons and MRI provide data on users. 
Nielsen and similar companies provide advertisers (but not their agencies) with 
data on sales.

192 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Classification of Geographic Areas
Sales should be analyzed by different geographic patterns, from the largest—that is, 
regions of the country—to the smallest neighborhoods possible. (In some situations, 
analysis by neighborhood is impossible because of the lack of research data.) The 
idea behind geographic analysis at all levels is to learn precisely where prospects 
live. This information guides media selection. The following geographic categories 
are the most commonly used:
Regions
• 
States
• 
TV market delineations such as DMAs
• 
Metropolitan or nonmetropolitan areas
• 
Counties
• 
 
In studying marketing and media research data, the analyst will find a number 
of different methods used to divide the country geographically. The U.S. Census 
Bureau divides the country into four regions and nine divisions. The Nielsen 
Company uses a division consisting of six geographic territories, although it will 
divide the country in almost any way most suitable for a specific client. Exhibit 
7-10 compares these divisions. Exhibit 7-11 maps the states in Nielsen’s six 
territories.
Comparison of Geographic Divisions
4AS MEDIA AUDIENCE 
RESEARCH COMMITTEE 
DIVISIONS
TELEVISION INDEX NIELSEN’S 
TERRITORIES
CENSUS BUREAU’S NINE 
DIVISIONS
CENSUS BUREAU’S FOUR 
REGIONS
1. North East
1. Northeast
1. New England
1. Northeast
2. North Central
2. East Central
2. Middle Atlantic
2. Midwest
3. South
3. West Central
3. East N. Central
3. South
4. Pacific
4. Southeast
4. West N. Central
4. West
5. Southwest
5. South Atlantic
6. Pacific
6. East S. Central
7. West S. Central
8. Mountain
9. Pacific
EXHIBIT 7-10

 
Strategy Planning I 
193
Nielsen Television Index Territories and Time Zones
Source: The Nielsen Company. Used with permission.
 
What is a local market to a media planner? A market is a group of people living 
in a certain geographic area who are likely to buy a given product or brand. But that 
definition is unsatisfactory for planners when it comes to determining the nature of 
a local market, because definitions vary depending on the research company pro-
viding the data for a given area.
 
Different research companies define markets differently to meet the needs of 
their users. A local retailer advertising exclusively in newspapers in a given city 
might prefer to think of its market as a retail trading zone, which includes the cen-
tral city and surrounding suburbs. But a national advertiser using all media might 
prefer that a market be defined in terms of the entire metropolitan area and might 
use a government-defined area. Another manufacturer using television almost 
exclusively might prefer to use Nielsen’s DMA. Each of these local market defini-
tions is somewhat different.
 
As a result, it becomes important for the planner to know the various defi-
nitions of what constitutes a local market when planning media. Which defini-
tion is most suitable? Some media planners have asked for standardizing defini-
tions, but without much success. Until standardization becomes acceptable, the 
EXHIBIT 7-11

194 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
differences should be clearly understood. Explanations of the definitions used 
most often follow.
Designated Market Area (DMA) The designated market area (DMA) is The Nielsen 
Company’s definition of a television market. There are 210 DMAs in the United 
States. A DMA is an exclusive geographic area consisting of all the counties in 
which the home market television stations hold a dominance of total hours viewed. 
Since a DMA is based on viewing habits, the counties of a DMA do not necessar-
ily have to be contiguous. The Denver DMA includes counties in Wyoming that 
are distant from the block of Colorado counties that make up most of the mar-
ket. These Wyoming counties happen to spend the largest share of viewing hours 
watching Denver stations.
 
Each county is assigned to one DMA, except where a mountain range or other 
geological feature divides viewing. In California, Contra Costa East spends most 
of its time watching Sacramento stations while Contra Costa West watches San 
Francisco.
Core-Based Statistical Area (CBSA) This data set contains the boundaries for metro-
politan and micropolitan statistical areas in the United States. The data set contains 
information on location, identification, and size. The database includes metropoli-
tan and micropolitan boundaries within all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and 
Puerto Rico.
Metropolitan and Micropolitan Statistical Area (MSA and SA) “The United States 
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) defines metropolitan and micropolitan 
statistical areas according to published standards that are applied to Census Bureau 
data. The general concept of a metropolitan or micropolitan statistical area is that of 
a core area containing a substantial population nucleus, together with adjacent com-
munities having a high degree of economic and social integration with that core. . . . 
The 2000 standards provide that each CBSA must contain at least one urban area of 
10,000 or more population. Each metropolitan statistical area must have at least one 
urbanized area of 50,000 or more inhabitants. Each micropolitan statistical area must 
have at least one urban cluster of at least 10,000 but less than 50,000 population.”5
 
The following analysis is shown to better explain how these designations look 
for Chicago. The Chicago Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area (PMSA) consists 
of the following Illinois counties, according to the 2000 census:6
5. www.census.gov/population/www/metroareas/aboutmetro.html.
6. www.december.com/places/chi/cmsa.html. 

 
Strategy Planning I 
195
Cook 
Kendall
Du Page 
Lake
Grundy 
McHenry
Kane 
Will
The Chicago-Gary-Kenosha CMSA consists of the following principal metropolitan 
statistical areas (PMSAs):
Chicago, IL PMSA
Kankakee, IL PMSA
Gary, IN PMSA
Kenosha, WI PMSA
City Zone and Retail Trading Zone Newspapers define their markets in terms of city 
zones and retail trading zones. A city zone represents the corporate city limits plus 
heavily populated areas adjoining a city in which the newspaper is sold, as designated 
by an agreement between the publisher and the Audit Bureau of Circulations (ABC). 
A retail trading zone is an area beyond the city zone from which retailers draw suf-
ficient customers to warrant spending advertising dollars to reach them. This area is 
also determined by an agreement between the publisher and the ABC.
Newspaper Designated Market Another newspaper classification, a newspaper des-
ignated market covers the geographic area in which the newspaper provides pri-
mary editorial and advertising services. The ABC, in consultation with the pub-
lisher, decides which areas to include and the boundary lines. Newspapers can also 
define markets by counties in which coverage percentages are computed. Data show 
where newspapers have at least 50 percent coverage, 20 percent coverage, and so 
forth. The circulation of every ABC-audited newspaper in every county is reported 
in the annual SRDS publication, Circulation (2010).7
 
To illustrate how market definitions vary, even within one geographic market, 
Exhibit 7-12 shows different definitions in the city of Chicago and outlying areas. 
The DMA includes 16 counties in Illinois and Indiana. The Chicago MSA (which 
is the same area as the PMSA) covers 8 counties. And for the Chicago Tribune, the 
newspaper designated markets include 8 counties in Illinois and Indiana.
 
For practical purposes, spot-market media plans are generally based on the 
DMA when television is the primary medium and on the MSA when radio is used. 
7. www.srds.com. 

196 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
When newspapers are the primary medium, the coverage area is defined by the area 
of each newspaper’s regional sales editions.
Sales Analysis
Gathering data about the sales volume of a brand and its competitors makes it pos-
sible to start deciding where to advertise. One approach is to select geographic mar-
kets on the basis of sales or market share produced in the past. In this situation, the 
deciding factor is the volume of past sales, rather than the index of potential sales. 
Without a doubt, the volume of sales produced by a geographic market in the past 
must be the first consideration in making the selection. The question of whether to 
go to high-index potential markets depends to some extent on whether sales have 
been optimized in the existing high-volume markets. Perhaps an increase in adver-
tising in current markets will result in an equivalent increase in sales.
 
Exhibit 7-13 shows the sales of a company and its competitors reported on the 
basis of seven regions plus three large metropolitan areas: New York, Chicago, and 
Los Angeles. The index numbers in this table were computed by comparing sales 
percentages for each brand with total industry sales by region.
 
Does Exhibit 7-13 tell the planner precisely where to advertise? No, but it tells 
where the brand is doing well relative to competitors: in East Central, West Central, 
DMA, MSA, and Newspaper Designated Markets of Chicago by County
Kendall,
Ill.
DMA
MSA
Grundy,
Ill.
DMA
MSA
La Salle,
Ill.
DMA
DeKalb,
Ill.
DMA
McHenry,
Ill.
DMAMSA
NDM
Lake,
Ill.
DMANDM
MSA
Kane,
Ill.
DMA
NDM
MSA
Du Page,
Ill.
MSADMA
NDM
Kankakee,
Ill.
DMA
Will, Ill.
DMANDMMSA
La Porte,
Ind.
DMA
Jasper,
Ind.
DMA
Porter,
Ind.
DMA
NDM
Lake,
Ind.
DMA
NDM
Newton,
Ind.
DMA
DMA
NDM
MSA
Lake Michigan
Cook, Ill.
TV DMA—16 counties
MSA-PMSA—8 counties
Newspaper Designated Markets (NDM)—8 counties
EXHIBIT 7-12

 
Strategy Planning I 
197
Chicago, Los Angeles and remaining Pacific. The planner needs to obtain and 
understand this kind of information before proceeding to more specific informa-
tion that will help pinpoint markets in which to advertise.
 
When information is available, sales analysis by regions is usually followed by a 
county analysis, which provides another dimension for the media planner to con-
sider in selecting the best media to reach these markets. To deal with county sizes 
conveniently, Nielsen classifies them with an A, B, C, D system:8
A counties—All counties belonging, as of June 30, 1999, to the largest met-
• 
ropolitan areas, which together account for 40 percent of U.S. households 
according to the 2000 census
B counties—All counties in the next largest set of metropolitan areas, which 
• 
together account for 30 percent of U.S. households
8. Nielsen National Reference Supplement, 2008–2009. 
Sales of Brand X and Competitors, by Region
TOTAL INDUSTRY SALES
BRAND X
BRAND Y
BRAND Z
REGION
U.S. 
HOUSEHOLDS
SALES
INDEX
SALES
INDEX
SALES
INDEX
SALES
INDEX
New England
5.8%
      3.4%
59
3.5%
60
3.5%
60
2.4%
71
New York
8.4
   5.0
60
4.6
92
4.5
90
6.5
130
Middle Atlantic
11.4
10.8
94
11.0
102
10.1
94
12.9
119
East Central
15.8
 17.6
111
19.5
111
16.8
95
18.3
104
West Central
14.0
16.0
115
17.5
109
16.2
101
16.4
103
Chicago
3.7
   5.4
144
7.1
131
5.4
98
5.3
98
Southeast
15.7
13.3
85
13.1
98
12.1
91
14.0
105
Southwest
9.9
   8.8
89
9.4
104
9.2
105
7.5
85
Los Angeles
5.1
    7.0
138
4.7
67
9.1
130
5.8
83
Remaining Pacific
10.2
12.7
124
9.6
76
13.2
104
10.9
86
Total
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
Source: Data provided by a major advertiser.
EXHIBIT 7-13

198 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
C counties—All counties in the next largest set of areas—including both met-
• 
ropolitan areas and nonmetropolitan counties, which account for 15 percent of 
U.S. households
D counties—All remaining counties
• 
 
Exhibit 7-14 shows a sales breakdown by county size for liquid and powdered forms 
of a given product. For the total market, county size C has the best potential. For the 
liquid market segment, county size A shows the best potential, followed closely by C 
counties. For the powdered market segment, C counties have the best potential. Once 
again, note the potential for sales shown by index numbers and the actual sales vol-
ume shown for the total market and its segments. In all cases, county size A has the 
highest percentage of sales. The decision should weigh both volume and potential.
Product Usage by DMA The major syndicated services are primarily designed to 
provide product usage, media behavior, demographics, and all the other services 
on a national basis. Product usage at the DMA level is available from Scarborough, 
which has respondents in the top 81 markets. Their competitor, Media Audits, pro-
vides similar measures in 86 markets. These are the only sources for information 
about local sports teams, local retailers, local newspapers, and so on. MRI esti-
mates product usage in all 210 DMAs from a combination of regional usage, county 
size, and metro/nonmetropolitan city classification. But since it is modeled from 
the broad area usage, it is not able to provide information about local retailers or 
other detail. MRI does provide sample-based product usage in the top 10 markets. 
Simmons provides similar information in the top 14 DMAs.
Sales of Brand X and Competitors, by County Size
TOTAL 
MARKET
POWDERED 
MARKET 
SEGMENT
LIQUID 
MARKET 
SEGMENT
COUNTY SIZE
POPULATION 
DISTRIBUTION
SALES
INDEX
SALES
INDEX
SALES
INDEX
A
41.4%
42.3%
102
39.1%
94
45.4%
110
B
27.2
26.9
99
27.6
101
26.2
96
C
16.3
19.2
117
20.6
126
17.9
109
D
15.1
11.6
76
12.7
84
10.5
70
Total
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
Source: Data provided by a major advertiser.
EXHIBIT 7-14

 
Strategy Planning I 
199
Addressability Media tend to cover large areas: total U.S., broad regions, or com-
plete DMAs. Recent technology has allowed advertisers to focus local cable televi-
sion weight on communities or even individually addressable television sets. This 
would allow an advertiser to run different creative executions in different parts 
of a market, reflecting local habits or demographic characteristics. But there have 
been bumps in the road. One system, Canoe Ventures, planned to deliver advertis-
ing to communities via six large cable operators. It was forced to scrap the service 
due to operational flaws. Another company, Invidi, has technology that can target 
individual households served by cable companies or satellite. At this writing, the 
service is too experimental to be called an operational medium. But as technology 
advances, addressability could add a significant capability to the television medium 
and greater responsiveness to advertisers’ marketing needs.
Heavy-User Data
Although a geographic analysis begins to answer the question of where to advertise, 
an examination of data about heavy users will provide additional insights. Often, a 
small percentage of heavy users account for the largest percentage of product usage. 
This is true for many product categories, but not for all.
 
Studying heavy users gives a different dimension of a market’s location. If the 
marketing strategy calls for heavy users, then their whereabouts becomes impor-
tant. Exhibit 7-15 shows that medium–heavy users of bottled water or seltzer 
strongly tend to live in metropolitan areas. Stated more specifically, medium–heavy 
users of bottled water are slightly (3 percent) more likely to live in CBSA metro-
politan areas than is the average adult. The significant below-average index in the 
non-CBSA (rural) areas is another indication of the young, active, upscale lifestyle 
of bottled-water users.
Total Versus Light and Medium–Heavy Users of Bottled Water 
by Type of CBSA (Index to Total Adults)
INDEX TO TOTAL ADULTS
TOTAL 
USERS
LIGHT 
USERS
MEDIUM–
HEAVY USERS
Metropolitan CBSA
103
103
103
Micropolitan CBSA
87
84
88
Non-CBSA
76
91
72
Source: Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, Spring 2009. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 7-15

200 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Buying Power Indices
Another method for determining where to advertise is to use buying power indi-
ces. These indices help a planner evaluate sales and product usage or general sales 
potential in certain geographic areas. Buying power indices include the brand devel-
opment index (BDI) and category development index (CDI), as well as weighted 
BDIs and CDIs.
Brand Development Index (BDI) One useful tool available for helping a media plan-
ner decide where to advertise is the brand development index (BDI). This index 
measures the number of cases, units, or dollar volume of a brand sold per 1,000 
population. It is calculated from data for each individual market in which the brand 
is sold, according to the following formula:
BDI  Percentage of a brand’s total U.S. sales in Market A
Percentage of total U.S. population in Market A
  100
Following is an example of how the BDI would be calculated for a brand in 
Seattle:
Sales of the brand in 
Seattle (% of U.S.)
Population in Seattle 
(% of U.S.)
  100  3.09/1.58  100  1.96  100  196
The BDI is an index number representing sales potential. It conforms to the same 
basic characteristics of index numbers discussed earlier. The larger the sales in a 
market relative to its population percentage, the higher the BDI in that market.
Category Development Index (CDI) The category development index (CDI) is similar to 
the BDI, except that it is based on the percentage of sales of a product category, rather 
than a brand, in a given market. The method of calculating the CDI is as follows:
CDI  
Percentage of product category’s 
total U.S. sales in Market A
Percentage of total U.S. 
population in Market A
  100
An example of the CDI in Seattle would be set up as follows:
Category Sales in 
Seattle (% of U.S.)
Population in Seattle 
(% of U.S.)
  100  2.71/1.58  100  1.72  100  172

 
Strategy Planning I 
201
 
Both the BDI and CDI are useful in decision making. One tells the planner the rel-
ative strengths and weaknesses for the brand, and the other the relative strengths and 
weaknesses for the category. These indices should be calculated for any market where 
the brand is sold. As summarized in Exhibit 7-16, the following results are possible:
High BDI and high CDI—This kind of market usually represents good sales 
• 
potential for both the brand and the category.
High BDI and low CDI—Here the category is not selling well, but the brand is. 
• 
This is probably a good market in which to advertise, but surely one to watch 
to see whether the brand’s sales decline in time.
Low BDI and high CDI—This kind of market shows potential for the cate-
• 
gory but demands that someone study the reason why the brand is not doing 
well here. Is it because of poor distribution? Not enough advertising dollars, 
GRPs, or reach in the market? To advertise in this market without knowing the 
answer would be a risk.
Low BDI and low CDI—This kind of market represents a risk for any brand. 
• 
Here, too, a planner might want to know why the category does not sell well. 
Such a market would probably not be a good place to advertise under most 
circumstances.
 
In using BDI/CDI data for each market in decision making, the planner has a 
number of ways to proceed. One is to set arbitrary criteria for each market. For 
example, a planner could decide that for a market to be selected, it would have to 
meet at least one of the following requirements:
BDI/CDI Relationships
HIGH BDI
LOW BDI
High CDI
High share of market
Low share of market
Good market potential
Good market potential
Low CDI
High share of market
Low share of market
Monitor for sales decline
Poor market potential
EXHIBIT 7-16

202 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
A BDI of 125 or greater
• 
A BDI at least 10 points higher than the CDI
• 
A certain percentage sales increase over a previous year in that market, a sales 
• 
volume of x dollars in the market, or both
Market selection on such a basis might seem arbitrary, but it could be based on the 
experience of a planner who, over a period of years, simply knows which market 
characteristics have been the most profitable.
Weighted BDIs and CDIs Another method of selecting markets might be to weight 
the BDI and CDI to arrive at a single combined index. Before this weighting is done, 
however, a marketing strategy decision must be made to guide the media planner in 
the proper weighting of the two indices. A marketing strategy that calls for x dollars 
of advertising spending in direct proportion to sales (a basically defensive posture) 
requires that the percent of brand sales component of the BDI be used exclusively in 
allocating media expenditures to each market. At the other extreme, if a marketing 
strategy requires that brand advertising be allocated only on the basis of category 
development (a basically offensive posture, generally used for new brands without 
a sales pattern), the media planner would have to use only the percent of category 
sales component of the CDI in deciding spending by market.
 
Any mixture of these two strategies requires a mixture of weights for the BDI 
and the CDI. For example, suppose the marketing strategy states that brand sales 
should be protected in all high-sales areas but that spending should be increased 
where category development is high and brand development is low. In that situa-
tion, the planner might elect to weight the BDI 75 percent and the CDI 25 percent 
(weights must add up to 100 percent). The following example illustrates how that 
calculation would be made in a typical market:
Weighted BDI  165  0.75  124
Weighted CDI  140  0.25  35
Weighted BDI  Weighted CDI  159
All markets would be evaluated on the basis of a similar weighting, and only those 
that reach a certain level would be selected.
 
Weighting is risky, however, unless the planner knows exactly what each weight-
ing signifies. A safer procedure would be to weight BDI and CDI 50 percent each 
and then combine them. Nevertheless, some kind of arbitrary decision would have 
to be made. The cutoff point might be set at 125—that is, any market indexed at 
higher than 125 would be selected and any less than 125 rejected, at least until 
experience dictates otherwise.

 
Strategy Planning I 
203
Using Buying Power Indices Sometimes an advertiser does not know a product’s 
sales volume in each geographic market, possibly because the advertiser sells 
through distributors and wholesalers. Although many manufacturers in the food, 
drug, and appliance fields know, from their own records, how large their sales are 
to wholesalers or distributors, they often do not know how well sales are going 
at the retail level, or there is a long time lag between wholesale and retail sales. 
Furthermore, even if a manufacturer should eventually learn how consumer sales 
are going, this information might not be indicative of a brand’s share of total sales 
compared to its competitors.
 
The best these advertisers can do is examine the number of wholesale shipments 
into each market and prepare their media plans on such a basis. However, these data 
could be misleading because of shipments to regional distribution centers operated 
by large retail chains. As a result, the number of shipments by a manufacturer into 
a given market might not be equivalent to the sales potential of that market. Lack of 
sales volume and share, market by market, handicaps the media planner in deciding 
where to place advertising.
 
The retail sales division of The Nielsen Company, and its competitor, Information 
Resources, Inc. (IRI), survey retail sales throughout the country and sell the result-
ing data to virtually every large package goods advertiser. Typically, these advertis-
ers will make the critical numbers available to their ad agencies. Nevertheless, many 
small advertisers simply cannot afford to purchase this sales volume and share data 
from the syndicated research services. They have to use shipments or sales poten-
tials determined through other ways.
 
One source available to all advertisers and agencies is Demographics USA (www
.tradedimensions.com), which can help determine the sales potential of geographic 
markets. This book is published annually and is available at a relatively low cost. The 
data are based on census measurements plus updated projections. The survey com-
putes a multiple-factor index for every major U.S. metropolitan area. A factor is a 
market quality that affects sales. Therefore, it is possible to examine the general sales 
potential of every geographic market. Generally, the more people there are in a mar-
ket, the greater the sales potential, so population is a factor. Another factor is effective 
buying income, based on total income after taxes (similar to disposable income). A 
third factor in the survey’s index is total retail sales. The three factors are judgmen-
tally weighted to indicate that some factors are more important than others in mak-
ing sales. Population could be weighted double, total retail sales weighted three times, 
and effective buying income weighted five times. When added together, the result is a 
single number reflecting these judgments that can be used for market selection.
 
On the one hand, the indices described help the planner determine the rela-
tive value of each market. These values in turn can be used to determine budgets 
or media weights. On the other hand, the indices might be too general for certain 

204 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
kinds of products. Some specialized products will need additional or more specific 
marketing data. However, the information in Demographics USA can be used with 
data from other sources to provide a better and more selective index. Taking the 
market for air conditioners as an example, the planner could combine survey data 
with information on average maximum annual temperature and average annual 
humidity to create a special index number for each market. Furthermore, factors 
could be weighted in any way necessary to get a better perspective of the relative 
value of each market. One can use the buying power indices for a quick evaluation 
of alternative geographic markets.
 
The question of where to advertise is based on an analysis of sales and product 
usage or general sales potential, plus consideration of the marketing objectives. The 
users of the buying power data will find that the index numbers are an easy way to 
compare a large number of categories. If raw numbers or percentages are needed, 
they are usually provided so that users need not make any further preliminary 
calculations.
Cutoff Points
In selecting markets for advertising, it is often difficult to judge at which point to 
drop markets at the bottom of the list. The place at which the list is divided is called 
the cutoff point. One way to establish a cutoff point is to select markets on the basis 
of some arbitrary number, usually in multiples of 10, 25, or 50. This is a widespread 
practice in the industry. Using this method, whatever markets are listed as number 
51 or lower are eliminated. Yet most media planners would agree that there is not 
always much difference between the 50th market and the 51st market.
 
A more logical way to set the cutoff point is to determine how much weight (in 
terms of dollars) should be assigned to the best markets. Once these dollars have 
been allocated, then all remaining money is distributed to the poorer markets based 
on a weighting system. Usually such weighting would be based on spending a mini-
mum amount of money in a market. If a market’s potential does not justify such an 
expenditure, then advertising to that market might not be worthwhile. Weighting 
systems divide markets into groups titled A, B, C, and so on. An A market might 
receive a given number of dollars of advertising per thousand population. The B 
markets receive somewhat less, and C markets receive much less.
 
At times, a system of gross rating points (GRPs) is used to determine how much 
money will be spent in a market. The money is allocated from the top of the list 
down, until it runs out, thereby automatically establishing the cutoff point. In many 
cases, media planners and client representatives have, through experience, devel-
oped a minimum number of markets that must be on any list. Then they add mar-
kets with whatever money is left after allocating money to the basic list.

 
Strategy Planning I 
205
 
One problem in establishing cutoff points is that often a few markets account for 
a large percentage of sales. For example, 25 markets might account for 75 percent of 
a brand’s sales. The next 25 largest markets might account for only 8 percent addi-
tional sales. Usually media planners prefer to have fewer markets and spend enough 
money on each to fully exploit the selected markets.
 
Often, too, marketing objectives affect the length of a list. For example, if an 
objective is to protect the brand’s share of market from inroads of competitors, then 
more money might be put into markets where competitors are trying to sell against 
the brand. Usually a brand has its best markets, so the list has to be reduced some-
what to allocate extra money at the top of the list.
 
The process of selecting markets and determining cutoff points is not the sole 
responsibility of the media planner. Usually, the account executive and a client 
representative share this responsibility. In such cases, decisions are made by com-
promise as well as by logic. In a personal conversation, one media planner once 
explained the situation this way:
This give-and-take process between the account executive, the client, and myself 
is often logical, but sometimes ludicrous. For example, I’ll have both Rochester and 
Albany on my market list. The account man may take Albany off but leave Rochester 
in. But the client puts Albany back in and removes Rochester. Why? Well it could be 
that we can’t afford both, or the client feels that he has to back a stronger sales force 
at Albany. But the whole process of selecting markets is an “editing” operation, in 
which we each edit the others’ recommendations until a market list takes shape.
 
In summary, market lists and cutoff points are established on the basis of sub-
jective factors as well as objective criteria. The most important criteria are the sales 
goals and the money needed to attain them in each market. Experience, compro-
mise, and some arbitrary factors also influence the process at various times.
When to Advertise
Decisions about when to advertise depend on a number of important consider-
ations, including the following:
Monthly sales patterns
• 
Budget constraints
• 
Competitive activities
• 
Specific goals for the brand
• 

206 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Product availability
• 
Promotional requirements
• 
Each of these points deserves individual discussion, but one point underlies them 
all: advertise when people tend to buy the product in question. It is difficult if not 
impossible to make them buy at any other time. Studying sales by product category 
over a period of 20 or more years shows that buying takes place at fairly regular 
intervals and not capriciously. Therefore, it is important to learn when people tend 
to buy and to capitalize on these buying habits.
Monthly Sales Patterns
The most important consideration in deciding when to advertise is to know when 
sales peaks occur for the product category compared with when sales peaks occur 
for the brand. Exhibit 7-17 shows category sales indexed to brand sales by month. 
Sales for the category in question tend to be rather flat month by month, but the 
brand tends to have rather clear-cut highs and lows. Theoretically, the brand should 
advertise more heavily in months when its sales have been higher.
Category and Brand Sales, by Month
MONTH
CATEGORY SALES
BRAND SALES
INDEX*
January
8.2%
6.8%
83
February
7.7
6.5
85
March
8.5
8.2
96
April
8.2
7.5
91
May
8.5
8.9
105
June
8.2
8.9
109
July
8.5
9.4
110
August
8.5
10.3
121
September
8.2
8.2
180
October
8.5
8.8
103
November
8.2
7.6
93
December
8.5
9.5
112
*Brand sales  category sales  100
EXHIBIT 7-17

 
Strategy Planning I 
207
 
The answer is not always so clear-cut, however. Perhaps the category sells well 
in a particular month, but the brand does not. Thus the dilemma: should the brand 
advertise more heavily in months when the category is selling well or in months 
when the brand is selling well? Usually, one would advertise more heavily in the 
months when the category is selling well. Although other considerations can 
require a change in this strategy, some planners use only category sales as their 
guide in planning.
 
Usually a monthly sales analysis for a product category will indicate a seasonal 
effect. Thus, in studying monthly sales records, a planner should keep in mind 
the effect of certain seasons on sales. Back-to-school or graduation months cer-
tainly influence the sales of certain kinds of products, as do Christmas or Easter. 
January and August have become the “white sale” months to sell bed linens, towels, 
and tablecloths. If a brand belongs to a category that is affected by seasons, then 
monthly sales should be more carefully studied so as not to miss an opportunity.
Budget Constraints
Often the advertising budget is not large enough to permit year-round advertising. 
In such a situation, the planner will probably allocate the advertising dollars to the 
best selling months. Whether to maintain continuity (continuous advertising all 
year long) or flights (periodic advertising interspersed with no advertising) depends 
on the recency theory discussed in Chapter 5 as well as other considerations that 
will be discussed later.
Competitive Activities
In planning a media schedule, it is important to consider when competitors adver-
tise. If their timing pattern is different from that of the overall category, then the 
planner will have to decide how important the difference is. Does it put the plan-
ner’s own brand in a weaker position? If so, the planner will want to copy a com-
petitor’s timing. Most often, however, competitors tend to follow category sales pat-
terns fairly closely.
Specific Goals for the Brand
At times, a marketing or media objective is to react aggressively to competi-
tive strategies. Perhaps such a strategy will be necessary to attain a market share 
increase. In such a situation, one might time heavy advertising to begin before 
most competitors start. As a result, a brand can achieve greater and quicker vis-
ibility before the normal buying season starts. Another specific goal might be to 
outspend competitors in some particular month. This could require withdraw-
ing money allocated to the yearlong advertising effort for the concentrated attack. 

208 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Other marketing/media goals also affect timing. New-product introductions, for 
example, require a timing pattern of heavy initial advertising (first quarter of sales 
year) and relatively lighter weights later on.
Product Availability
In certain marketing situations, marketing demand outstrips a manufacturer’s abil-
ity to supply the product. Even if a company is building a new plant to keep up with 
demand, the added capacity will not be ready for some time. In such a case, the tim-
ing of advertising has to be related to production availability. Most often a problem 
with availability occurs when new products are introduced, but it occasionally hap-
pens when there is a surge in sales of existing products.
Promotional Requirements
If the advertiser plans an aggressive sales promotion campaign for a brand preced-
ing or during the brand’s regular advertising campaign, this will affect timing. A 
cents-off deal, for example, might require aggressive advertising when the cam-
paign to announce the promotion starts.

 
209
CHAPTER EIGHT
Strategy Planning II
Weighting, Reach, Frequency, and Scheduling
C
hapter 7 discussed three major media-planning strategy decisions: to 
whom to advertise, where to advertise, and when to advertise. These deci-
sions must be made early in the planning process because they control 
other strategy decisions. The additional decisions discussed in this chapter 
include choices about geographic weighting, reach and frequency, and scheduling.
Geographic Weighting
Geographic weighting is the practice of giving extra consideration to one or more 
markets that have more sales potential than other markets, due to location, demo-
graphics, or other reasons. A record of good sales or good potential for sales for 
the product category and the brand being advertised can make one market more 
important than others. If all geographic markets had an equal record of sales or 
sales potential, then there would be no need to add extra advertising weight. But 
markets are rarely equal in value, so weighting is necessary.
 
There is another reason for weighting markets. Advertisers who buy national 
media usually find that the gross impressions delivered by a media plan do not align 
with differences in local sales potential. Some markets might have good sales poten-
tial but receive relatively few impressions from national media, whereas others have 
weak sales potential but receive many more impressions than required.
 
Exhibit 8-1 illustrates the difference in gross rating points (GRPs) delivered by a 
nighttime network TV schedule in different markets. As the table shows, the deliv-
ery of GRPs by a national medium such as network television is generally distrib-
uted unevenly among markets. The delivery of cable television impressions is simi-
larly skewed. If the delivery of these GRPs happened to closely match sales potential 

210 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
in each market, there would be no need for adjustment. Unfortunately, this rarely 
happens, so advertising weights must be adjusted.
 
The final determination of the need for weighting is the wide variance in media 
costs—again, not necessarily in relation to sales potential. On one hand, a plan-
ner who allocates dollars on a proportional basis might be unable to buy as much 
advertising as required in the best markets because costs are too high. On the 
other hand, the planner might be able to buy more impressions than needed in less 
expensive markets.
 
To illustrate the variation in media costs, Exhibit 8-2 analyzes cost per thou-
sand (CPM) for several spot TV markets. Recall that CPM numbers can reflect 
the relationship between target audiences delivered and the costs of media in 
delivering those targets. Exhibit 8-2 shows that media CPMs for reaching women 
ages 25–54 in various markets are inversely proportional to the size of each mar-
ket. Smaller markets (e.g., Wilmington, Albany, Utica, Charlottesville) often have 
a higher CPM than larger markets (e.g., New York, Chicago, San Francisco) to 
reach a given target audience. This difference is because the fixed costs of run-
ning a television station are relatively constant, but stations in the larger markets 
can amortize those costs over a larger population base and so charge less per 
thousand impressions.
An Index of How Network Television Delivery of GRPs Varies by Market
NETWORK PRIME-TIME 
HOUSEHOLD GRPS: INDEXED
National average
100
New York
113
Miami
96
Lansing
89
Chicago
106
Corpus Christi
78
Minneapolis–St. Paul
103
Huntsville
90
Source: The Nielsen Company, Network Programs by DMA Report, Volume 2, all networks, May 2009. 
Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 8-1

 
Strategy Planning II 
211
CPM Analysis
MARKET
% U.S. 
HOUSEHOLDS
SPOT TV CPM, WOMEN 
25–54 (PRIME TIME)
New York
6.49
$74.81
Chicago
3.05
74.11
San Francisco
2.16
93.49
Wilmington, Del.
0.16
79.91
Albany, Ga.
0.14
114.47
Utica, N.Y.
0.09
110.63
Charlottesville
0.07
194.25
Source: SQAD Inc. Used with permission.
Forms of Weighting
Different weighting techniques will accomplish the same objectives. The simplest 
way, the dollar allocation technique, allocates proportionately more money to good 
markets. Therefore, if Market A accounts for 10 percent of total sales, it receives 
10 percent of the advertising budget. This technique, however, does not consider 
varying media costs.
 
A second technique, gross impression weighting, does consider varying media 
costs. The planner calculates the total number of impressions that can be bought 
for the budget based on the average CPM and then allocates these impressions in 
proportion to sales. Low cost (low CPM) markets receive more impressions (more 
GRPs) while more expensive markets receive fewer.
 
Exhibit 8-3 illustrates the differences between the first and second weighting 
techniques. The table shows that when dollars are allocated proportionately, gross 
impressions vary. When gross impressions are allocated proportionately, dollars 
vary.
 
Why do these two techniques differ? Dollar allocation does not consider media 
gross impressions. Therefore, 10 percent of the available dollars buys more impres-
sions in Market A than in Market B, because cost per thousand is lower in Market 
A. So the dollar allocation technique leaves Market B with fewer gross impressions 
per year than Market A, even though sales potential is equal. To equalize the num-
ber of gross impressions in A and B, the planner will tend to favor gross impres-
sion allocation.
EXHIBIT 8-2

212 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
Nevertheless, each technique has different values. Dollar allocation tends to gen-
erate the following results:
More impressions in cost-efficient markets—that is, markets where the cost 
• 
per thousand is relatively low
Fewer impressions in less efficient or high-CPM markets
• 
The opportunity for good markets to develop their potential because more 
• 
gross impressions are received in these markets, presumably generating more 
sales
A slightly unbalanced advertising weight-to-sales ratio
• 
Gross impression allocation tends to generate the following results:
Proportional communication pressure, regardless of cost
• 
Balanced reach and frequency based on sales potential, meaning 
• 
well-developed markets get proportionately more reach and frequency than 
poor markets
The opportunity for good markets to develop their potential because more 
• 
gross impressions are received in these markets, presumably generating more 
sales
A slightly unbalanced advertising-to-sales ratio
• 
 
When deciding which weighting techniques to use, the planner should consider 
which best meets the marketing objectives. In many instances, gross impression 
Differences in Weighting Methods
DOLLAR WEIGHTING
GROSS IMPRESSION WEIGHTING
TOTAL SALES
CPM
10% OF DOLLARS
NUMBER OF 
GROSS 
IMPRESSIONS 
10% DOLLARS BUY
10% OF 
IMPRESSIONS
COST OF 10% 
OF IMPRESSIONS
Market A
10%
$2.50
$100,000
40.0 million
32 million
$80,000
Market B
10
3.75
100,000
26.7 million
32 million
120,000
Total
$200,000
66.7 million
64 million
$200,000
Source: Ogilvy & Mather.
EXHIBIT 8-3

 
Strategy Planning II 
213
weighting is considered better because it is more directly related to communica-
tion goals. One central goal of media strategy planning is to reach large numbers 
of target audiences with a certain amount of repetition. Within a given budget, 
gross impression weighting accomplishes this goal best because it considers media 
costs. In the dollar allocation technique, even if costs are directly proportional to 
sales, audiences still might not be reached often enough or in sufficiently large 
numbers.
 
Exhibits 8-4 and 8-5 provide another picture of the relationships of both pro-
cesses. Exhibit 8-4 shows again that even when dollars are matched perfectly 
How U.S. Dollar Allocation Matches Sales Distribution
DOLLAR ALLOCATION
MARKET
SALES (%)
COST (THOUSANDS)
TOTAL COST (%)
GROSS IMPRESSIONS 
THAT CAN BE 
BOUGHT (MILLIONS)
TOTAL GROSS 
IMPRESSIONS (%)
A
45%
$ 675
45%
343
48%
B
30
450
30
214
30
C
15
225
15
93
13
D
10
150
10
64
9
Total
100%
$1,500
100%
714
100%
Source: Ogilvy & Mather.
How Gross Impression Allocation Matches Sales Distribution
MARKET
SALES (%)
GROSS IMPRESSIONS 
PLANNED FOR 
(MILLIONS)
TOTAL GROSS 
IMPRESSIONS (%)
COST OF GROSS 
IMPRESSIONS 
PLANNED 
(THOUSANDS)
TOTAL COST (%)
A
45%
318
45%
$637
42%
B
30
212
30
444
30
C
15
106
15
251
17
D
10
71
10
168
11
Total
100%
707
100%
$1,500
100%
Source: Ogilvy & Mather.
EXHIBIT 8-4
EXHIBIT 8-5

214 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
against sales percentage, gross impressions do not match (except in Market B). 
Exhibit 8-5 shows that when gross impressions are matched perfectly against sales 
percentages, dollar costs do not match (again, except in Market B).
Share of Voice (Message Weight Distribution)
A planning concept that is sometimes used in making media decisions is called 
share of voice or more appropriately, message weight distribution. This concept 
requires a planner to determine how much advertising is being done for a brand 
relative to the amount being done for competitive brands. A share of voice is a per-
centage of total advertising weight for each brand.
 
The assumption underlying share of voice is that if a brand is not spending an 
amount equal to or exceeding the expenditures of competitors, then it might not 
be able to achieve its goals. This assumption is not necessarily valid, because many 
variables other than media spending affect the success of an advertising campaign. 
Success likely depends at least in part on the superiority of the brand, the unique-
ness of the copy, the amount and quality of distribution, or the frequency and qual-
ity of promotions, to name a few variables. In fact, many planners do not use the 
share-of-voice concept at all, and others think of it as a general ideal that can help 
in determining allocations, budgets, or both.
 
If, however, one is inclined to determine share of voice, it is important to 
do so on other bases than comparing the percentage of dollars spent. “Dollars 
spent” do not buy a constant number of gross impressions or target rating 
points. Thus it would be better to begin by finding how many gross impres-
sions or target rating points can be purchased for a given number of dollars, 
and then convert this information into percentages. Comparisons can be 
made, for example, on the basis of the actual number of messages (or com-
mercials) delivered.
 
Exhibit 8-6 shows the share of TV messages to women 18–49 for nine brands. It 
is important to note that the share of voice (TV messages) does not match share of 
TV dollars in the example shown. Exhibit 8-6 also analyzes nine competitors and 
their message weight deliveries. The table shows that Brand A has 35 percent of the 
market but spends only 25 percent of the total TV dollars and has a relatively lower 
percentage of message delivery than does Brand B.
 
The planner should ask a number of questions to determine why Brand A has 
such a high ratio of market share to message share. Is Brand A inherently superior 
in quality to B? Does Brand A have better distribution? Better copy? Most other 
brands show a high degree of consistency between market share and message share. 

 
Strategy Planning II 
215
Additional message weight analysis should be made of individual markets to see 
how they, too, relate to market share.
Guidelines for Geographic Weighting
No one formula is used for determining advertising weights to apply in different 
geographic areas; instead, weighting decisions are usually a result of many factors. 
Using one or the other of the techniques described, a planner can weight advertis-
ing in geographic markets in a number of ways. The following guidelines are impor-
tant considerations in weighting.
 
A general concept is to apply extra weight to markets where sales volume or 
market share is high. In a market-by-market analysis, a planner might look at the 
brand development index (BDI) and compare it with a category development index 
(CDI). At times, more weight is added to markets with high BDIs. More often, how-
ever, when a CDI is high and a BDI is low for a given market, additional weight is 
added to bring the market up to its potential (as shown in the CDI).
 
Market potential, as a basis for weighting, depends on any one, or perhaps all, of 
the following considerations:
Share of Voice (Message Weight Distribution) for Nine Competitors
BRAND
SHARE OF
MARKET
SHARE OF TV 
DOLLARS
SHARE OF TV 
MESSAGE TO 
WOMEN 18–49
A
35%
25%
19%
B
26
25
28
C
17
16
16
D
8
8
12
E
7
4
6
F
4
3
6
G
3
2
4
H
N/A
14
8
I
N/A
3
1
Total
100%
100%
100%
Source: Paul Roth, “How to Plan Media,” Media Decisions (1976): 26.
EXHIBIT 8-6

216 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
History of each market’s responsiveness to advertising—If a local market has 
• 
not responded well to advertising in the past, then additional weight might not 
help.
History of profitability—Although additional weight in a local market can 
• 
improve sales volume or market share, it might do so at an unprofitable level. 
There is a point of diminishing returns relative to profits as extra weight is 
added to a market.
Pipeline problems—If distribution levels in a market are low or difficult to 
• 
increase, or if there are other marketing channel problems, then these prob-
lems will influence the amount of extra weight to apply.
Sales force input—Some companies use salespeople as sources of market-
• 
ing intelligence at the local level. Their information can affect the manner in 
which weight is applied.
Local market idiosyncrasies—Some local markets have problems in commu-
• 
nication or selling that may not exist in other markets. For example, an adver-
tiser might find that an equal number of GRPs applied to both large and small 
markets usually produces greater awareness in smaller markets, regardless of 
other factors. If such idiosyncrasies exist, then the weighting decision should 
account for them.
Competitive noise levels—If competitors advertise heavily in a market, the net 
• 
effect of the noise level will require heavier weight in that market.
Cost-efficiency of advertising in the market—Additional weight could cost too 
• 
much or result in cost-inefficiency.
After evaluating these considerations, the planner should decide on a course of 
action to influence the final weighting. Does the advertiser want to defend strengths 
in good markets? Improve weaknesses in problem markets? Develop opportunity 
markets? After making this decision and considering other factors, the planner can 
make weighting decisions for local geographic areas.
 
Case Studies 8-1, 8-2, and 8-3 are examples of how different advertisers have 
used weighting techniques. No single method is used to the exclusion of all others. 
Each technique meets the needs of individual advertisers.

 
Strategy Planning II 
217
Allocating Weights to Spot TV Markets on Pro-Rata Basis
This example shows weights by the amount of money allocated to each spot TV mar-
ket in a media plan. Only five markets are shown, but this technique could be used for 
more than 100 markets if necessary.
 
For purposes of illustration, assume that a manufacturer sells a product in five 
geographic areas (or markets). Exhibit A shows sales percentages for each of the 
five areas, along with a proportional allocation of the budget to each sales area. Also 
shown is the percentage of network television delivery in each sales area.
EXHIBIT A
A Budget Allocated Proportionately to Sales Made by Each Area
AREA
SALES MADE BY 
EACH AREA
BUDGET GOAL
NETWORK 
DELIVERY*
A
30%
$1,500,000
25%
B
15
750,000
15
C
10
500,000
20
D
10
500,000
10
E
35
1,750,000
30
Total
100%
$5,000,000
100%
*Delivery is based on a number of selected network programs that cover targets.
Source: J. Walter Thompson Company, Allocating Advertising Weight Geographically (1973): 9.
 
The table shows that each area received a proportional amount of dollars equal 
to the percentage of sales made in the area. However, a close look at the relationship 
between sales and network delivery percentages shows some anomalies. For exam-
ple, Area A delivered 30 percent of total sales but has only 25 percent of total network 
delivery. As a result, the advertiser might have to allocate some of the budget to local 
television.
 
The problem that arises is how to divide the television budget between network 
and spot so that each area receives an equitable portion of the budget. Ideally, a plan-
ner would like the percentage of network television delivery to match sales percent-
ages in each market. Therefore, if a market provides 20 percent of total U.S. sales, 
then it should receive 20 percent of the budget. Unfortunately, when advertisers 
use network television, the delivery in some markets is more than is needed, and the 
delivery in other markets is less than is needed.
 
For example, if sales in Market A are 30 percent and the percentage of total U.S. 
network program delivery is 20 percent, then the advertiser needs some way to bring 
CASE STUDY 8-1

218 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
television delivery up to the 30 percent level. One way to do this would be to add a 
certain amount of dollars to local spot television. However, if a market accounts for 
10 percent of sales and network television delivery is 20 percent of the U.S. total, one 
cannot easily cut network, market by market. So a technique has been created to 
take dollars from network television in certain markets and add them to spot televi-
sion to bring each market up to a percentage equal to its sales. The following steps in 
this technique apply to Exhibit B.
EXHIBIT B
Allocation of Budget to Network and Spot TV
SALES AREA
SALES MADE BY 
EACH AREA
BUDGET 
GOAL
TOTAL NETWORK 
DELIVERY
INDEX: 
NETWORK TO 
SALES DELIVERY
NETWORK 
BUDGET
SPOT TV 
(LOCAL)
A
30%
$1,500,000
25%
83
$ 625,000
$ 875,000
B
15
750,000
15
100
375,000
375,000
C
10
500,000
20
200
500,000
—
D
10
500,000
10
100
250,000
250,000
E
35
1,750,000
30
86
750,000
1,000,000
Total
100%
$5,000,000
100%
$2,500,000 $2,500,000
Source: J. Walter Thompson Company, Allocating Advertising Weight Geographically (1973): 9.
1. A national advertiser buys a regional feed of network television advertising in five 
markets. (It is rare to buy so few markets with network TV, but it illustrates the 
solution that would work for all 210 markets.)
2. The planner starts by allocating a predetermined national budget of $5,000,000 
for the five markets. The pro-rata system would allot each market the same per-
centage as it accounted for in sales. Market A received $1,500,000 (i.e., 0.30  $5 
million); B received $750,000 (0.15  $5 million), etc.
3. Now the marketer has to know how much network delivery went into each mar-
ket. This can be obtained from Nielsen’s Network Programs by DMA Report. All the 
impressions for all the markets are added, and a percentage of delivery is cal-
culated. These percentages are the data in the column labeled “Total Network 
Delivery.” Although this information is readily available for network TV, the delivery 
of cable and syndication must be estimated.
CASE STUDY 8-1   Allocating Weights to Spot TV Markets 
on Pro-Rata Basis (continued)

 
Strategy Planning II 
219
4. The planner now can see some anomalies. For example, Market A was underde-
livered, because it developed 30 percent of sales but received only 25 percent of 
national television delivery. It should have received 30 percent. Market B was right 
on target with 15 percent sales and 15 percent network delivery. Theoretically, B 
does not need additional spot television. Market C is overdelivered. It had 10 per-
cent sales but received 20 percent network delivery.
5. To clarify over- or underdelivery, an index is calculated for each market:
Index of delivery  Percentage of network TV delivery in a market
Percentage of sales in the same market
Here are indices of delivery: A  83; B  100; C  200 (C is the most over-
delivered market); D  100; and E  86.
6. At this point, the planner calculates the total for the five markets based on Market 
C’s overdelivery (with only 10 percent of sales). The formula for this would be as 
follows:
x(0.20)  $500,000
Solving for x, the answer is $2,500,000, which becomes the network budget. 
Another $2,500,000 would be used for the spot TV budget. So $2,500,000 is the 
budget based on Market C’s TV delivery.
7. To find the amount that would go into a new network allocation, multiply each mar-
ket’s pro-rata budget by delivery percentage. That number has been recorded in 
the column labeled “Network Budget” and was obtained as follows:
Market A: 0.25  $2,500,000  $625,000
Market B: 0.15  $2,500,000  $375,000
Market C: 0.20  $2,500,000  $500,000 (unchanged)
8. Each market’s new network budget is subtracted from its pro-rata budget, and 
this amount is now a first estimate of how much money to allot to spot TV to 
enable each market to match sales percentages with delivery. Check the math for 
the spot TV budget. Note that Market C received no money for spot TV. Why?

220 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Weighting Markets on the Basis of Minimum BDIs and CDIs
The previous chapter discussed how BDIs and CDIs are generally used in selecting tar-
get markets. These two evaluative statistics can also be used to weight markets on the 
basis of minimum standards. This method begins with setting sales goals for each indi-
vidual market. Then 5 percent of the budget is cut from each market and reallocated to 
problem and/or opportunity markets. A problem market might be defined as follows:
At least 1 percent of brand sales
• 
CDI and BDI less than 100
• 
An unfavorable sales trend
• 
In contrast, an opportunity market would meet criteria such as the following:
At least 1 percent of brand sales
• 
CDI higher than 100, but BDI lower than CDI
• 
Client’s brand showing an unfavorable sales trend within a successful product 
• 
category
In general, when CDI is higher than 100, the category is doing well. A BDI lower than 
100 usually indicates a brand is not doing well.
 
The 5 percent that was cut from each market’s budget is now distributed to both 
problem and opportunity markets. The idea underlying this practice is that prob-
lem markets are strengthened by additional dollars, but opportunity markets need 
extra dollars to optimize potential. At the same time, all markets were allocated some 
money based on potential.
 
In this example, all markets will receive some advertising weight through the use 
of network television or national magazines. The weights discussed in this case are 
added to national weights.
CASE STUDY 8-2

 
Strategy Planning II 
221
Weighting Markets by Combining Quantitative and 
Qualitative Values for Each Market
Advertisers can also use the technique of weighting by combining quantitative and 
qualitative values for the markets. An advertiser used this technique to purchase 
network TV to provide national coverage and spot TV to weight the best markets. The 
value of each market was determined as follows:
1. Calculate the cost index. The cost index is simply the CPM for each individual mar-
ket divided by the average CPM for all spot TV markets in the country. If the aver-
age CPM for the country is $2.50 and the CPM for Market A is $3.50, then the cost 
index would be 140:
Cost index  $3.50
$2.50  140
2. Calculate the CDI/CPM value for each market. If Market A has a CDI of 120, then the 
CDI/CPM value for each market would be 86:
120
140  86
Market A now has less value than it had before, because the CDI/CPM value is so 
low.
3. Determine each market’s responsiveness to advertising. This is primarily a quali-
tative judgment. If sales last year rose by more than 15 percent in a market, that 
market could be described as responsive. If sales rose between 3 percent and 15 
percent, it might be described as somewhat responsive. If sales rose less than 3 
percent, it might be described as not responsive. (An alternative method for mak-
ing this decision is at the end of this section.)
4. Judgmentally assign extra weight on the basis of the following criteria. Group 
A markets receive 50 percent more weight than average because of these 
conditions:
CDIs are high.
• 
CPMs are reasonable.
• 
Network delivery is low.
• 
Responsiveness to advertising was good in the past.
• 
CASE STUDY 8-3

222 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
Group B markets receive 25 percent more weight than average because combina-
tions of the considerations with Market A yield a lower number but show that the mar-
ket is important. Group C markets receive no spending for spot TV.
 
Exhibit C shows three sample markets assigned extra weight as just described:
EXHIBIT C
Sample Markets Assigned Extra Weight
MARKETS
SHARE OF U.S. 
POPULATION
INDUSTRY 
SALES 
(MILLIONS)
NETWORK TV 
DELIVERY
CDI
CDI/SPOT CPM
SALES TREND 
LAST YEAR
WEIGHTING 
USED
Chicago
4.0%
4.7
97
117
158
 19%
A—add 50%
Seattle
1.2
1.8
85
150
117
 6
B—add 25%
Indianapolis
1.1
1.2
109
101
83
 1
C—none
Responsiveness to advertising could be determined differently. For example, an 
advertising-to-sales ratio (or A/S index) could be calculated as follows: If sales in 
Market A were $1,450,000 and advertising in that market were $340,000, then the 
ratio of advertising to sales would be 340/1,450  0.235. Then an index of adver-
tising to sales could be calculated, dividing the A/S index for Market A by the A/S 
index for the entire country (e.g., 0.235/0.405 0.58). These indices could be 
added to the CPM average for each market and the CDI for each market, resulting in a 
multiple-factor index, as shown in Exhibit D:
EXHIBIT D
Market A Multiple-Factor Index
MARKET A
CDI/CPM index
86
CDI
120
A/S index
58
Total
264
Average for Market A (264  3)
88
Population of Market A as % of total U.S.  Average index  Percent of the total 
allocation for Market A
0.05  88  4.4% of total allocation
This technique could be used to allocate spot dollars proportionately throughout the 
country.
CASE STUDY 8-3   Weighting Markets by Combining Quantitative 
and Qualitative Values for Each Market (continued)

 
Strategy Planning II 
223
Reach and Frequency
Recall that reach refers to the number of people exposed to a vehicle at least once, and 
frequency refers to how often the average person who was reached is exposed over a 
given period of time (often four weeks). Almost all media plans show their reach and 
frequency because advertisers need to know how many people will see the ads. But 
some plans emphasize reach more than frequency, and others do the opposite. This 
section describes the different types of situations for emphasizing each.
When to Emphasize Reach
As a general rule, emphasizing reach is appropriate whenever anything new is being 
planned in the marketplace. The meaning of “new” can be applied to announcing 
a new price, for example. Consumers usually will not respond to a message until 
something has been changed in the marketplace in a way that benefits them. A new 
price can be a benefit if it is lower than it was. Old marketing practices do not need 
to be changed if they are judged to be successful in selling. Like a reduced price, 
the following examples of new marketing factors that require a reach strategy can 
benefit some consumers to some degree:
New distribution (stores that now carry the brand)
• 
New features of a product that meet consumers’ needs
• 
New advertising copy (new words or pictures)
• 
New sales promotion incentives
• 
New packaging
• 
New models of the brand being introduced
• 
New media being used for the first time
• 
New positions in the store where the brand is to be found
• 
New servicing opportunities
• 
New home-delivery patterns
• 
New marketing or advertising objectives for the brand
• 
 
One difficult decision facing a media planner is setting the level of reach needed 
for a media plan. It is difficult because there is little hard evidence from research 
or experimentation that provides the necessary direction. What is known about 
how much reach to use is the product of tradition, experience, common sense, and 
research done for particular brands in certain market situations. But there is little 
evidence to indicate that a given reach level is correct for a given marketing situa-
tion. Therefore, the guidance provided here—based as it is on widely held beliefs—
has to be general. Even with all these qualifiers, some planners will disagree with 
this approach.

224 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
New-Product Introduction/Brand Awareness It is generally held that high reach is 
necessary for introducing a new product, the rationale being that few people know 
the name of the brand or its value. As many people as possible must be informed, 
thus the need for high reach. But determining just how much reach is necessary is 
difficult.
 
The purpose of high reach is to generate awareness of the new brand. The reach 
level depends to some extent on the objectives for brand awareness level. Is the goal 
to make 65 percent of the targets aware of a brand name? Some people will need only 
one exposure to a vehicle to become aware of that brand. Others will need multiple 
exposures, so a certain level of frequency will be needed in addition to reach.
 
Some planners might opt for a reach level higher than the desired level of 
brand awareness, on the assumption that not everyone exposed to a vehicle will 
be exposed to the ad and the brand name. Others will want reach and frequency, 
which for planning purposes can be expressed in GRPs. Within a given number 
of GRPs, the reach and frequency levels can be juggled to bring either one to a 
required level. Some available research has attempted to relate GRP levels to brand 
awareness levels. For example, one study conducted by a well-known advertising 
agency found that about 2,400 household GRPs (about 1,500 target rating points) 
had a 60 percent chance of producing about 70 percent brand awareness. Although 
the research failed to indicate the time period over which the weight was delivered, 
many consider this GRP level effective for a new-product introduction and would 
schedule it over 13 weeks.
Advertising Support for Sales Promotion Activities Sales promotion activities also 
need a high degree of reach because consumers must be made aware when certain 
deals or promotional options are available. In planning media to advertise a cents-
off deal, a high level of awareness is a requirement. As before, the precise amount 
of reach needed at the necessary frequency level is a judgment.
Competitors’ Levels One media-planning strategy might be to set a reach level 
equal to or surpassing that of competitors who are deemed to be vulnerable to 
attack. Presumably these competitors have products that are not as good as the 
brand in question, or perhaps they are not advertising enough or to the right tar-
gets. Setting a reach level equal to or higher than that of certain competitors offers 
a potential advantage to the planner, who may use it as one way to determine how 
much reach ought to be attained.
Budget Another consideration in planning reach is the budget. No matter which 
media are chosen, a fixed budget size limits the amount of reach possible. To set 

 
Strategy Planning II 
225
a reach level, the planner simply calculates the amount of target reach that can be 
afforded within the available budget, plus the amount of continuity desired. (Review 
Exhibit 5-15 for the trade-off among reach, effective frequency level and budget.)
 
Another media strategy stretches media dollars and reach as well. This strategy 
is to cut ad unit sizes so more money will be available to buy new reach. (The same 
strategy can be used to buy more frequency.) If the planned ad unit is 30-second 
commercials or full-page ads, the advertiser can stretch media dollars by run-
ning 10-second IDs or half-page ads. But there is a penalty for cutting unit sizes. 
The cost of smaller unit sizes usually is not exactly proportional to larger sizes. A 
15-second spot on network TV costs half as much as a 30-second unit, but in spot 
TV, 15-second commercials cost from 65 to 75 percent as much. Likewise, a half-
page ad costs 55 to 65 percent of a full-page ad.
Previous Levels Probably the best level of reach is determined by looking at what 
levels were used previously. If a brand has successfully achieved certain marketing 
goals in the past with a given level of reach, this same level (or proportional adjust-
ment) should probably be used again.
 
In essence, the amount of reach needed for a media plan is based more on judg-
ment and experience than on research evidence. Because media plans almost always 
require a certain amount of frequency, the combination of reach and frequency can 
be calculated in terms of GRPs. But research on GRPs and communication effects 
is inconclusive, and what may exist is probably old and irrelevant. As before, the 
“How much is enough?” question of setting the GRP level is a matter of judgment 
and experience.
When to Emphasize Frequency
Whenever repetition, not dispersion, is the key selling strategy, the planner should 
emphasize frequency. This has implications for reach, too, because reach and fre-
quency are inversely related: at a given GRP level, as frequency is increased, reach 
will decrease. Consider the following examples of these relationships:
High reach: 60 reach 
• 
 2.3 frequency  140 GRPs a month
High frequency: 9.3 reach 
• 
 15 frequency  140 GRPs a month
As seen in the second example, it is possible to have very high frequencies and yet 
reach less than 10 percent of the market. This would happen if the buyer placed the 
entire schedule on one, very targeted cable network or radio station. It could hap-
pen, for instance, if a radio salesman offers an attractive special promotion featur-
ing its top on-air personality, causing the advertiser to put its entire budget on that 

226 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
one station. So it is possible, but not a very smart use of this mass medium. Can a 
planner tolerate failing to expose 90 percent of the target even once, although the 
remaining 10 percent will see it an average of 15 times? Deciding how much fre-
quency is enough to do the job and the related budgetary question of how many 
people can be exposed at this level (effective reach) are the most challenging issues 
facing media planners. Despite a great deal of thinking and research on this subject, 
there is still no simple answer beyond the cliché, “It all depends.”
 
The bottom line is, frequency should be emphasized over reach whenever rep-
etition of a message is necessary. Generally, high frequency is necessary to compete 
in a highly competitive market or when a product is sold frequently. Most planners 
find that there are practical reasons for needing more than minimum amounts of 
frequency.
 
Determining the optimal frequency level is a challenge: many media planners 
believe that for effective communication to take place, the target audience should 
receive at least three exposures. Other planners disagree, saying that the frequency 
level must vary depending on the situation. The following paragraphs describe con-
ditions that can affect the amount of frequency needed.
Uniqueness of Message The uniqueness of the advertising message, for example, 
can affect the necessary frequency. The more innovative and unusual the message 
is, the more likely consumers will notice it and pay attention to it. The converse is 
also true: a rather ordinary ad message might need many more than four exposures 
to be seen and remembered. (In all discussions on frequency levels, the planner 
must be aware that creative executions vary from brand to brand, and the creative 
element can argue for more or less frequency than the competition uses.)
Perceived Value of the Brand Another consideration affecting the frequency level is 
the perceived value of a brand as compared with the values of competitors’ brands. 
When a brand has an important and easily perceivable benefit not shared by com-
petitors, then less frequency is called for. In other words, the brand has an easily 
exploited advantage over competitors. But when a brand is very much like all other 
brands in a product category, more frequency is necessary for the message to be 
noticed or remembered.
Noise Level The noise level in a product category also plays a role in deciding how 
much frequency is needed. If many similar brands are being advertised simultane-
ously, consumers will find it difficult to recall the message for any one brand amid 
the confusion caused by the noise level of competitors. When few competitors 
advertise, less frequency is required.

 
Strategy Planning II 
227
Competitors’ Levels Some planners think a frequency level should be based on the 
level of that used by a brand’s most serious competitive threat. A similar tactic is 
to single out the competitor who is the most vulnerable to a brand’s promotional 
attack efforts. This view calls for a frequency level that equals or surpasses that 
competitor’s level, with the objective of gaining an advantage.
Media Values Media values can also be used in conjunction with GRP planning to 
determine frequency (as well as reach) levels. Media value is simply the judgment 
that a given medium has been found, through experience, to be more effective for 
a brand and its creative message, thus justifying more frequency in that medium. 
The chief problem, however, in combining media evaluations and frequency levels 
is that of making too subjective an evaluation of each medium. Is daytime television 
always less than 35 percent as effective as prime-time television? To say it is always 
less effective is an unreasonable assumption. For certain brands, in certain market-
ing situations, at certain times, the 35 percent differential is true, but generalizing 
is dangerous. The method is a good one, however, when research evidence can be 
used to back up a generalization about media values.
 
Frequency levels in media plans therefore range quite a bit. When planners base 
decisions on the threatening or vulnerable competitor technique, frequency levels 
average as many as 15 exposures a month. But these levels are not selected in a sci-
entific manner in terms of a cause-and-effect relationship. Even when various fre-
quency levels are tested in three or four local markets and one is found to be better 
than others, there is no guarantee this level can be projected nationally. Among 
many national advertisers who have used test marketing for setting frequency lev-
els, the experience varies from a few who have had excellent results to many who 
have had costly failures.
Effective Frequency and Reach
The question of how to set effective-frequency (and effective-reach) levels cannot 
be answered very well. Although the three-plus level has been used for a number of 
years, planners should not automatically assume this should be the goal for every 
media plan. The reason, as discussed in Chapter 5, is that it is oversimplified. The 
three-plus concept overlooks too many variables in planning.
 
One way to estimate the number of exposures needed for communication to 
take place is to begin by reviewing the different variables that can affect it. Then 
starting with a frequency level needed to account for these variables, add them to 
what is already known about effective frequency. In other words, considering all 

228 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
the variables that affect normal frequency, one might arrive at a two-plus level. 
Adding that to the three-plus level arrived at by some research on effective fre-
quency results in a five-plus level. However, a planner could end up with a one-plus 
plan just as well, depending on these variables.
 
Joseph Ostrow, in a talk at a 1982 Advertising Research Foundation conference, 
spelled out the variables that planners should first consider. Ostrow’s ideas are pre-
sented in Case Study 8-4, along with some numbers that could be applied for every 
consideration that Ostrow recommends.
How to Set Effective-Frequency Levels
One problem facing media planners is deciding how much effective frequency a media 
plan should have. Although the research can be interpreted to suggest a three-plus 
level, there is great dispute about it.
 
One suggestion about how to set a frequency level was made by Joseph W. 
Ostrow, former executive vice president of the Foote, Cone & Belding agency, at 
the 1982 Effective Frequency Conference sponsored by the Advertising Research 
Foundation.1 Although this concept was presented almost 30 years ago, it is still used 
today and has found its way into the planning philosophies of numerous top advertis-
ing agencies.
 
Ostrow specified a number of conditions that should influence the decision, based 
on considerations about marketing, media, and creative strategy. He pointed out that 
“the right level of frequency for a media plan is the point at which effective communi-
cation takes place.” These conditions might include, for example, “getting consumers 
to understand the message; helping consumers become more positive about a prod-
uct (or service) or influencing the purchase decisions directly.”
 
Some additional suggestions are provided here for Ostrow’s model to help solve 
the problem of setting the correct frequency level. The planner should add a certain 
amount of frequency points to a base if the marketing, media, or creative condition 
meets his or her needs. (These additional frequency points are only suggestions.) The 
planner should use these additional points by starting with a base, such as a three-
plus level, then adding or subtracting points as the situation dictates.
 
Here is an example of how to use these suggestions. Suppose a planner is faced 
with the following situations for a new-product introduction:
1. Joseph W. Ostrow, “Setting Effective Frequency Levels,” Effective Frequency (New York: 
Advertising Research Foundation, 1982): 89–102. 
CASE STUDY 8-4

 
Strategy Planning II 
229
 1. The introduction is in a highly competitive market.
 2. The product has a short purchase cycle.
 3. The brand will be among those that are less well known.
 4. The product is not used daily.
 5. The ad copy is somewhat complex.
 6. The copy is more unusual than competitors’.
 7. The copy will be in large ad units.
 8. There is high ad clutter in category media.
 9. The media environment is compatible with the product.
 10. Advertising will be continuous.
 11. Many media will be used.
 12. There will be many opportunities for repetition.
The planner should consult Ostrow’s considerations and note the suggested point lev-
els to add for setting effective frequency levels, as shown in Exhibit E.
 
The next step is to determine how many additional points beyond three-plus 
should be added to arrive at an effective frequency level. Ostrow’s criteria are the 
source of these considerations; we have used the criteria to suggest points. Note that 
not all of Ostrow’s criteria apply to a given situation. However, it is conceivable that a 
planner’s own criteria should be added to the list to make it more relevant.
EXHIBIT E
Factors That Affect Effective Frequency
FACTOR
FREQUENCY 
NEEDED
COMMENTS
Marketing Factors
Established brands
Lower
Repetition helps consumers learn a message.
New brands
Higher
New brands need to be learned.
High market share
Lower
High market share assumes that brand loyalty 
must be high, so less frequency needed.
Low market share
Higher
Dominant brand in market
Lower
Large brands do not benefit from more repetition 
if the market is saturated.
Smaller, less well-known brands
Higher
Smaller brands can benefit from more frequency.
High brand loyalty
Lower
An inverse relationship usually exists between 
frequency and brand loyalty.
Low brand loyalty
Higher

230 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
FACTOR
FREQUENCY 
NEEDED
COMMENTS
Long purchase cycle
Lower
Consumers think more about products with lon-
ger purchase cycles.
Short purchase cycle (High-volume 
segments)
Higher
Product used daily
Higher
Products used daily, or more than once daily, 
probably need higher frequency.
Product used occasionally
Lower
Needed to beat competition
Higher
In heavy-spending categories, more frequency 
is needed above the level that achieves effective 
communication.
Advertising to older consumers 
or children
Higher
Special targets need higher frequency levels.
Copy Factors
Complex copy
Higher
Copy research augmenting good copy is needed 
to determine how copy is perceived.
Simple copy
Lower
Copy less unusual than 
competition’s
Higher
Copy uniqueness translates to less frequency.
Copy more unusual
Lower
New copy campaign
Higher
Just as a new-product introduction needs higher 
frequency, so does new copy.
Continuing campaign
Lower
Image type copy
Higher
Image campaigns are deemed more complex and 
subtle, needing more frequency.
Product sell copy
Lower
More different kinds of messages
Higher
This covers the question of how much message 
variation there is, and is tied to the number of 
commercials in a pool of commercials.
Single kind of message
Lower
To avoid wear-out: New messages
Higher
Has advertising worn out? Measurements will 
need to be made to learn the answer.
Older messages
Lower
Small ad units
Higher
Advertising units, in either broadcast or print, will 
need more or less frequency.
Larger ad units
Lower
Media Factors
High ad clutter
Higher
This is an oddity, because high clutter requires 
more frequency, which adds to the clutter.
Lower ad clutter
Lower
CASE STUDY 8-4   How to Set Effective-Frequency Levels (continued)

 
Strategy Planning II 
231
FACTOR
FREQUENCY 
NEEDED
COMMENTS
Compatible editorial environment
Lower
An example of compatible environment would be 
a dog food ad appearing in a television pet show.
Noncompatible environment
Higher
Attentiveness high
Lower
Some media vehicles have higher attentiveness 
levels than others.
Attentiveness low
Higher
Continuous advertising
Lower
Interruptions in advertising, such as in pulsing or 
flighting, need more frequency.
Pulsed or flighted advertising
Higher
Few media used
Lower
Each medium used requires a minimum level of 
frequency.
More media used
Higher
Opportunities for media repetition
Lower
Certain media offer better and more oppor-
tunities for repetition, and these require less 
frequency.
Fewer opportunities for repetition
Higher
Marketing Factors
Established brands
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
New brands
High market share
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
Low market share
Dominant brand in market
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
Smaller, less well-known 
brands
High brand loyalty
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
Low brand loyalty
Long purchase cycle
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
Short purchase cycle (high-
volume segments)
Product used daily
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
Product used occasionally
0.1
0.2
Needed to beat competition
0.1
0.2
Advertising to older consum-
ers or children
Copy Factors
Simple copy
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
Complex copy
Copy more unusual than 
competition’s
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
Copy less unusual than 
competition’s
Continuing campaign
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
New copy campaign
Product sell copy
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
Image type copy
Single kind of message
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
More different kinds of 
messages
To avoid wear-out: New 
messages
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
Older messages
Larger ad units
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
Small ad units

232 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Media Factors
Lower ad clutter
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
High ad clutter
Compatible editorial 
environment
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
Noncompatible environment
Attentiveness high
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
Attentiveness low
Continuous advertising
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
Pulsed or flighted advertising
Few media used
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
Many media used
Opportunities for media 
repetition
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
Fewer opportunities
Source: Joseph W. Ostrow, “Setting Effective Frequency Levels,” Effective Frequency (New York: Advertising 
Research Foundation, 1982). Reprinted by permission.
 
As discussed in Chapter 5 and best illustrated in Exhibit 5-15, setting the 
effective-frequency level is just the first step. Planners must also decide what per-
cent of the target will be exposed at this level. For instance, the Ostrow method 
might suggest that a person must be exposed five times for effective communica-
tion to take place. But at this level, as Exhibit 5-15 shows, it would cost almost $20 
million to expose half the target at that level—a cost that may be out of line with 
the brand’s budget.
Final Thoughts About Reach and Frequency
Although a media planner is expected to show how many people will be reached 
by an ad campaign and to know the effect on reach of various strategies, the num-
ber that is produced by the computer is primarily determined by the GRP level—
the more weight, the more reach. Reach can be increased by scattering the weight 
across more vehicles, but that may require going into those that are less efficient or 
less well targeted. Multimedia campaigns with more than 500 GRPs of television 
will be operating in the flattened part of the reach curve—additional GRPs add 
mainly frequency at the rate of about one exposure per 100 GRPs. In short, while 
it is important for a planner to understand how reach and frequency work, there is 
relatively little a planner can do to influence it, so reach tends to be of less interest 
to most advertisers than the other variables of a media plan.
CASE STUDY 8-4   How to Set Effective-Frequency Levels (continued)

 
Strategy Planning II 
233
Scheduling
An important part of timing advertising is scheduling it so that it appears at the 
most propitious selling times. A major objective of scheduling is to control when 
advertising appears by plotting advertising timing on a yearly flowchart. There are 
three major methods of scheduling advertising, each with a somewhat different pat-
tern: continuity, flighting, and pulsing. Exhibit 8-7 shows yearly time period graphs 
for each pattern.
 
The media planner must decide, as part of the strategy, which pattern to use. 
The first step in selecting a pattern is to examine purchasing patterns for the prod-
uct category. Because most product categories have unique purchasing patterns, it 
is important to learn what they are before thinking about a scheduling pattern. An 
unusual example of a purchasing cycle is the market for Christmas trees. They are 
rarely purchased at any time of the year other than November or December. This 
would suggest the need for a seasonal flighting, or bursting, advertising pattern. In 
contrast, face soap is a product purchased throughout the year, though with heavier 
consumption in the summer. For such a product, the best scheduling plan might be 
pulsing (year-round advertising with “heavy-up,” or extra weight, in the summer).
Advertising Time Patterns
Continuity Pattern
Yearly Time Period
Flighting Pattern
Yearly Time Period
Pulsing Pattern
Yearly Time Period
EXHIBIT 8-7

234 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Continuity
As its name suggests, the continuity pattern (sometimes called straight-through 
advertising) is continuous, sometimes with short gaps at regular intervals when no 
advertising is done. One continuity pattern would be to run one ad every day for 
365 days. Another continuity pattern would be one ad a week for 52 weeks. The 
time gaps show up in a pattern of dashes on a flowchart.
 
Continuity is necessary when an advertiser has a message that it does not want 
consumers to forget. Continuous advertising works as a reminder, keeping the mes-
sage always before the consumer. That is a strong argument for continuity. Another 
advantage of continuity is that it covers the entire purchase cycle, because there 
will be no gaping holes in time. This assures the planner that most of the custom-
ers are reached at all times, both when they will be purchasing and during times 
when they might not be buying. The recency theory of advertising, as presented 
in Chapter 5, suggests this is the most effective strategy, and many service and 
packaged-goods advertisers begin their plan with continuity scheduling and then 
modify it as needed to account for clearly identified reasons.
 
Another reason for using continuity is that it permits the advertiser to take 
advantage of larger media discounts granted when so much advertising is pur-
chased. Such discounts provide cost-efficiencies, because the cost per target 
reached will tend to be lower than in plans that do not contain such discounts. In 
addition, the advertiser will have an advantage in obtaining certain kinds of desir-
able positioning within media. Because the advertiser is buying a fairly large block 
of advertising, it is easier to find the broadcast programs or times that are most 
favorable. There can also be positioning advantages in print, where certain parts of 
the magazine or newspaper become more readily accessible to anyone who will buy 
a great deal of advertising over a long period.
Flighting
Flighting (sometimes called bursting) is an intermittent pattern with gaps of time 
when no advertising is done. Advertising done once a month might be called flight-
ing. Most often, however, flighting patterns are more irregular, with heavy concen-
trations of advertising at certain times interspersed with no advertising for shorter 
lengths of time, called hiatus periods.
 
An advantage of flighting over continuity is that it allows the advertiser to meet 
competition better by placing advertising at the most favorable times relative to 
competition. Advertising can be concentrated in periods of high sales potential, 
either in broadcast time or print space. Advertising can be timed precisely to reach 
the best purchasing cycle periods with little waste when buying is slow.
 
Ostensibly, flighting is used when there are budgeting limitations or sharp sales 
fluctuations. The advertiser buys ads only when sales are growing and drops out 

 
Strategy Planning II 
235
when sales trends are declining. This tends to save money. Furthermore, flighting 
allows the planner to support advertising in one medium by using another medium 
simultaneously. If an advertiser plans to use television as the basic medium, then 
flighting allows concentration of radio and newspaper support at the same time.
 
Finally, flighting allows a series of commercials to appear as a unified campaign 
rather than as a series of unrelated ads. Concentrating them at certain times of the 
year causes the ads to appear to the consumer as part of a single communication 
entity. By concentrating advertising, an advertiser can sometimes catch competitors 
off guard and gain an advantage over them, especially if the competitors tend to use 
continuity rather than flighting in their strategy. The advantage is simply that the 
advertiser buys much heavier weight than competitors for a relatively short time.
 
But there are risks in flighting, too. The first is that so much advertising may 
be concentrated in one time period that the commercial’s effectiveness wears out 
before the flight is over. Great amounts of flighting in concentrated periods tend to 
build high frequency.
 
A second drawback of flighting is that so much time may elapse during the 
hiatuses between flights that consumers might forget the essence of the advertis-
ing message. However, the effectiveness of advertising does not stop the moment 
advertising is stopped. The continuing effectiveness of advertising after the flight 
ends can be thought of as a stockpile of awareness that market mix modelers call 
“adstock.” This stock of awareness decays over time at an average rate of about 10 
percent per week. So if awareness at the end of a flight is 10 percent, after one hiatus 
week awareness would be 90 percent, after two weeks 81 percent, after three weeks 
72.9 percent, and so on. This 10 percent weekly decay is what researchers consider 
the average case, but the rate of decay for a specific product or campaign can be 
determined only by a custom awareness tracking study.
 
Finally, competitors sometimes take advantage of the advertiser by placing heavy 
ad weights at precisely the time the advertiser is not advertising. During those 
times, competitors have an advantage over the advertiser.
Pulsing
Pulsing is a mixture of continuity and flighting, and represents the best of both 
techniques. With pulsing, all of the advantages of continuity and flighting are pos-
sible, with none of the disadvantages. Pulsing is the safest of the three because it 
covers different marketing situations. Not all advertisers, however, are advised to 
use pulsing. It best fits product categories that are sold year-round but have heavier 
concentrations of sales at intermittent periods.
 
Both continuity and flighting can develop the same reach and frequency over a 
long period (such as 16 weeks), as shown in Exhibit 8-8. However, there will be con-
siderable differences of reach and frequency over the short run, as shown in Exhibit 

236 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
8-9. The table shows that for a four-week on-air period the flighting pattern had a 
considerably larger reach than continuity had. The reason is the larger concentration 
of GRPs.
GRPs in Continuity Versus Flighting
WEEK NO.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Continuity pattern
GRPs
Total 640
Flighting pattern
GRPs
*
*
Total 640
40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40
80 80 80 80
80 80 80 80
*Higher four-week reaches due to higher GRPs.
Source: Ogilvy & Mather.
Reach and Frequency of Continuity Versus Flighting
CONTINUITY
FLIGHTING
Monthly GRPs
160
320
Reach
57
76
Frequency
2.8
4.2
CUMULATIVE REACH
FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION: 
NUMBER OF TIMES REACHED
CONTINUITY
FLIGHTING
1
57.1
75.8
2
39.1
61.5
3
25.8
49.4
4 or more
15.7
39.0
Source: Ogilvy & Mather.
 
The question of flighting versus continuity is one of the age-old debates in 
advertising. In the end, the planner must resolve this dilemma by using judgment 
and experience with the advertised brand.
EXHIBIT 8-8
EXHIBIT 8-9

 
237
CHAPTER NINE
Selecting Media Classes
Intermedia Comparisons
T
he preceding chapters covered broad, major strategy decisions comprising 
a part of the activities involved in media planning. This chapter and the 
next deal with the selection of media, including decisions that usually fol-
low marketing strategy decisions, such as the selection of media classes—
whether to use television, magazines, newspapers, Internet display, Internet search, 
or some other medium. This chapter focuses on the selection of media classes, and 
the next chapter covers decisions about selecting specific vehicles within classes.
Comparing Media
To make decisions about media classes, a planner must make intermedia compar-
isons—that is, comparisons among different media. Comparisons among media 
vehicles in the same class—such as among Magazines A, B, and C—are called intra-
media comparisons. Obviously, intermedia comparisons should precede intramedia 
comparisons.
 
The main question with intermedia comparisons is whether they can logically 
be made on a statistical basis. Although it is sometimes valid to compare media 
classes statistically, in most cases it is not. The numbers for one media class are 
usually not comparable to those of another class. Comparing readers, viewers, and 
listeners is like comparing apples, roast beef, and sushi. The definition of a reader 
is so different from that of a television viewer or a radio listener that comparing 
these numbers is misleading. For example, would it be correct to compare the cost 
per thousand viewers of a television program with the cost per thousand readers of 
a magazine? Only partially. Audience numbers tell us if one vehicle delivers more 
audience at a better cost-efficiency than another in a different media class.

238 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
But it is questionable whether a television commercial, which is measured in 
terms of the number of people who are watching during the average commercial 
minute of a program, can be compared to the total number of people who have read 
or looked into a magazine during its 30-day publication period or the time it takes 
to accumulate the desired number of impressions from a website. Besides, there are 
obvious differences in creative impact between a television commercial, with its 
sight, sound, and motion; the static appearance of a four-color print advertisement; 
or a banner displayed on a website.
 
Yet such comparisons must be made whenever it is necessary to choose among 
the many different media classes. Although the planner provides important input, 
the decision about which media to use is shared by all who work on a campaign: the 
agency account team, the creative group, the media planner, and most important, 
the advertiser who must give final approval before any work begins.
Consumer Media Classes
Following is a brief review of reasons for and against using major measured con-
sumer media—newspapers, magazines, newspaper supplements, television, cable 
TV, radio, Internet display, Internet search, direct response (including direct mail 
and telemarketing), outdoor, and transit. The pros and cons of each medium are 
summarized in Exhibit 9-1. The pros and cons of using a medium often grow out 
of a planner’s perceptions and impressions rather than from objective evidence. 
Therefore, some media experts might take exception to the reasons or limitations 
stated here.
Pros and Cons of Consumer Media Class
MEDIA CLASS
REASONS TO USE
LIMITATIONS
Newspapers
Sense of immediacy
Lack of target audience selectivity
Local emphasis
High cost
Flexibility
Limited coverage
Higher national advertising rates
Small pass-along audience
Variation in ROP color quality
EXHIBIT 9-1

 
Selecting Media Classes 
239
MEDIA CLASS
REASONS TO USE
LIMITATIONS
Magazines
Selectivity
Early closing dates
Access to light TV viewers
Lack of immediacy
Fine color reproduction
Slow building of reach
Long life
Pass-along audience
Controlled circulation
Newspaper 
supplements
Local market impact with 
magazine format
Little pass-along or secondary 
readership
Good color fidelity
No demographic selectivity
Depth of presentation
Limited readership
Broadened coverage area
High cost
Less competition on 
Sundays
High readership
Flexibility
Television
Sight, sound, and motion for 
dynamic selling
High cost
Low attention
Flexibility
DVR commercial skipping
Reach of both selective and 
mass markets
Short-lived messages
High commercial loads (clutter)
Cost-efficiency
No catalog value
Cable TV
National audience
Fragmented audiences
Added reach and frequency
Less than full national coverage
Relatively low cost
Less susceptible to 
DVR recording
Precisely defined target 
audiences
Broader spectrum of 
advertisers
Reduced total and average 
spending costs
Product 
Placement TV
Less expensive than 
paid commercial 
advertising
Lack of control by the advertiser
Limited communication value
Not overtly presented 
as advertising
(CONTINUED)

240 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
MEDIA CLASS
REASONS TO USE
LIMITATIONS
Implied endorsement by 
entertainment characters 
using the placed product
Variable exposure time
Obsolescence
Ability to select program 
environment consistent with 
product’s image
Radio
Reach of narrow demographic 
target audiences
Many stations in one market
No catalog value
High frequency
Low attentiveness for some formats
Supporting medium
Excellent for mobile 
populations
High summer exposure
Flexibility
Geographic flexibility
Active medium
Internet 
display
Low-cost corporate 
legitimacy
High cost to achieve adequate 
reach
Great creative flexibility
Constantly changing medium
Precise targeting by behavior, 
geography, timing, or other 
factors
Lack of consistent research
Conflict between Internet sales and 
traditional sales channels
A great many ways to evaluate 
alternative sites
Low response (click-thru) rate
Limited penetration
Supplemental information
Easy documentation of 
effectiveness
Low-cost marketing research 
tool
Sponsored 
search
Proven interest in product or 
service
Direct link to advertiser’s 
website
Two-line sales message
Requires target interest
Requires active management of buy  
due to auction-based pricing
Requires previous knowledge of the 
advertiser
Complete response metrics
Plain text only—no graphics, logo, 
or picture
No exclusivity—side-by-side appearance 
with competition
(CONTINUED)
EXHIBIT 9-1

 
Selecting Media Classes 
241
MEDIA CLASS
REASONS TO USE
LIMITATIONS
Mobile 
advertising
Most personal marketing 
channel available
Small screen size limits creativity
Slow network speeds
Measurable for return on 
investment (ROI) purposes
Lack of standards across carriers 
and platforms
Permission-based opt-in
Opportunity to reach 
consumers on the road 
prior to retail store purchase
Success of the medium depends on the 
primary carriers
Privacy
Ability to deliver coupons 
with a UPC code
Direct mail
Easy verification of response
High cost
Personal quality
Inaccurate and incomplete lists
Flexibility
Variance in delivery dates
Long life for certain mailings
Clutter and consumer resistance
Potential savings
Outdoor 
advertising
Wide coverage of local 
markets
Limited to simple messages
No guarantee of high recall
High frequency
High out-of-pocket cost
Low CPM
Largest print ad available
Limited availability in upscale 
neighborhoods
Geographic flexibility
High summer visibility
Around-the-clock exposure
Simple copy theme and 
package identification
Mass coverage of 
metropolitan area
Transit media
Mass coverage of a 
metropolitan area
High frequency
Limited message space
High competition from other media and 
personal activities
Relative efficiency
Frequent inspection
Flexibility
Opportunity to position 
messages to consumers 
on the way to their points 
of purchase
(CONTINUED)

242 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
MEDIA CLASS
REASONS TO USE
LIMITATIONS
Out-of-Home 
Video
Additional brand exposure
Flexibility
Lack of standardized research across 
all venues
Sight and motion
Builds reach
Availability varies market-by-market and 
within markets
Highly targeted
Limited reach potential
Production efficiency
Fragmentation of suppliers
Proof of play and proof of performance 
reporting varies by supplier
Complex creative production due to 
multiple suppliers and venues
Newspapers
In recent years, the business model of large city newspapers has been challenged by 
the Internet—especially websites such as Craigslist—that have cost newspapers the 
very profitable classified advertising. Circulation is also down as young adults turn 
to the Internet and mobile phone displays to get the latest news. This is having the 
greatest effect on the big city dailies and less of an impact on community news-
papers that report on local high school sports, town council meetings, the police 
blotter, and so forth.
 
Despite these negative trends, as of the summer of 2009, the following reasons 
for using newspapers and their limitations are still relevant. At the same time, 
newspaper owners and managers are in the process of reevaluating their product 
to maintain their appeal in the new communications environment. In short, they 
are making whatever changes are necessary to continue their long-term viability 
as a business.
Newspapers—Reasons for Using
Sense of Immediacy Readers tend to perceive newspapers as being the most imme-
diate local medium in the market. Every day a newspaper contains something new, 
and with the news come new advertisements. Newspapers are considered to have a 
“now” quality at all times. This quality is important when advertisers want to com-
municate something immediately to a mass local audience. When manufacturers 
(CONTINUED)
EXHIBIT 9-1

 
Selecting Media Classes 
243
introduce new products to the market, they usually include newspapers as part of 
the media mix.
Local Emphasis Almost all daily newspapers have a local quality that is important 
to advertisers. Even if advertisers use a national medium such as network or cable 
television, they might also want to use a medium with local impact. All selling is 
local, and the newspaper helps emphasize that fact by advertising local merchants’ 
names and addresses.
Flexibility Newspapers are geographically flexible—they can be used nationally, 
regionally, and locally in a media plan. Even when a manufacturer’s markets are 
widely scattered, it is possible to reach them by using local newspapers.
 
Production flexibility allows copy to be changed easily and quickly. For 
example, some national advertisers want to have different prices for the same 
products in different markets. Special production techniques are also avail-
able. Perhaps an advertiser wants to include preprinted inserts in newspapers 
in certain geographic markets. Newspapers offer these and other production 
alternatives.
Preprinted Color Inserts Through the use of preprinted inserts, newspapers can 
compete favorably with magazines in given markets. Color printing gives the 
advertiser brilliant, lifelike colors similar to those that enhance the brand’s adver-
tisements in magazines. Furthermore, any printing technique can be used on any 
quality paper to provide high-fidelity color.
Sampling Ability Many advertisers use home-delivered copies of newspapers to 
deliver a sample of a new product. These can include small packages of breakfast 
cereal, laundry detergent, skin cream, or virtually any other product that can be 
easily packaged and safely delivered to a mass audience. The sample is frequently 
contained in the brightly colored wrap that keeps the newspaper dry and is the first 
thing readers see when they go to pick up the newspaper from the driveway. The 
sample is invariably accompanied by a cents-off coupon to encourage purchase 
once the product has been tried.
Broad Appeal Because newspapers are read by so many individuals in each mar-
ket, total reach per market can include many individuals in each family. When a 
product’s target audience includes adults and children alike, then newspapers are 
an ideal medium.

244 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Catalog Value A newspaper often serves as a catalog for consumers who are doing 
comparison shopping. Many consumers search their daily newspapers before they 
go shopping. The effect of such a search is that consumers are presold before they 
walk into a store to buy the product. Some readers even cut out ads and bring them 
along as a reminder.
Ethnic Appeal Although newspapers are considered a mass medium, they have the 
power to reach selective ethnic classes as well. If the local newspaper does not reach 
these markets, however, then an ethnic newspaper might do the job.
Newspapers—Limitations
Lack of Target Audience Selectivity Although individuals can be targeted through 
the use of various sections of the paper (investors in the business section, male tire 
buyers in the sports section), the advertiser must pay for the copies that are deliv-
ered to people who do not read these sections. This makes newspapers a relatively 
inefficient media buy for targeted campaigns. Newspapers are high-coverage but 
low-composition media vehicles.
High Cost Although newspapers are indeed a flexible medium, the cost of buying 
national coverage is very high and is prohibitive for national advertisers with lim-
ited budgets. National coverage can be achieved with the Wall Street Journal, USA 
Today, and the New York Times; however, these are upscale, targeted publications 
whose combined coverage is only about 3 percent.
Limited Coverage Achieving adequate coverage in major markets through news-
papers can be challenging and expensive. The large-circulation daily newspapers 
seldom cover more than a third of major-market designated market area (DMA) 
households. Placing an ad in all the papers in a market may fail to cover even 50 
percent. For example, the Seattle Times/Post-Intelligencer combination covers 19 
percent of the Seattle DMA (circulation  DMA HH). An ad in all 14 newspapers 
serving Seattle covers only 38.4 percent of the market.1
Higher National Advertising Rates Most daily newspapers charge more for national 
advertising than they do for merchants with a local address. Of course, an adver-
tiser that must advertise in a particular local market will pay the premium rate 
without question.
1. SRDS Circulation 2008. 

 
Selecting Media Classes 
245
Small Pass-Along Audience Newspapers are rarely passed along to other readers as 
are magazines. Therefore, advertisements in yesterday’s editions have a limited time 
value. Relatively few other people will see the newspaper after family members have 
finished reading it.
Variation in ROP Color Quality An advertiser buying advertisements printed in run-
of-press or run-of-paper (ROP) color will find great variations in color fidelity from 
market to market. This variance means the message may be more effective in one 
market than in another, even though all markets have the same value.
Magazines—Reasons for Using
Selectivity Magazines are very successful in reaching certain kinds of selected 
audiences. Every year, special-interest magazines are started to meet the needs of 
niche groups such as tennis or chess players, cooking enthusiasts, hobby fans, those 
wanting to know more about investing in the stock market, and so forth. The list 
is endless and can be appreciated by a visit to the magazine section of local book-
stores, where they sell hundreds of these special-interest publications. In addition, 
some magazines have demographic editions, such as a physicians’ edition, a college 
students’ edition, or one limited to chief executive officers. Finally, magazines often 
have geographic editions that enable the planner to reach broad or narrow markets. 
This versatility and flexibility enable the planner to use magazines in many differ-
ent ways.
Access to Light Television Viewers Advertisers often use magazines to provide addi-
tional media weight to people in upper-income, upper-education demographics who 
tend to be light television viewers.
Fine Color Reproduction Many magazines are able to reproduce advertisements 
with excellent color fidelity. The necessity for fine color reproduction is obvious 
for certain kinds of product advertising such as ads for food, clothes, and cosmet-
ics. Magazines also outdo newspapers in controlling color variations from copy to 
copy.
Long Life Magazines usually have a long life—at least a week and sometimes a 
month or even years. The effect of long life is that the advertiser can continue to 
build reach long after the present campaign has formally ended. Even if the product 
featured in the ads has been discontinued, the effect on a person who reads an ad 
years after it originally ran is to build brand awareness for long periods. However, 

246 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
long-term exposure to the advertising will not help the planner attain short-range 
goals, so in some situations this advantage can be a disadvantage.
Pass-Along Audience Magazines usually have pass-along audiences, which increase 
the reach to people in barbershops, waiting rooms, in-flight, and so on. The size of 
the pass-along audience varies from magazine to magazine.
Controlled Circulation Because magazines are able to locate and meet the needs 
of special-interest groups, many of them can offer controlled circulation. In this 
arrangement, the publisher is able to identify a special group of targets, typically 
by profession or occupation, and then send each of these individuals the magazine 
free of charge. The publisher then informs advertisers that its audience consists of 
people in a given industry as reported by BPA (www.bpaww.com). The audit report 
shows circulation by job classification, function, or title. However, since each maga-
zine has its own definition of the various job functions, comparing magazines, even 
in the same field, can be a challenge. Most controlled-circulation magazines are in 
the business field.
Magazines—Limitations
Early Closing Dates Some magazines require advertisers to have their artwork 
and type for four-color ads in the printing plant as much as two months before 
the cover date. Consequently, the marketing, creative, and production work on the 
campaign must be completed so far ahead of publication date that the advertiser 
loses the advantage of timeliness. It is even possible for a marketing situation to 
have changed by the time an ad appears in print.
Lack of Immediacy With the exception of weekly newsmagazines, most magazines 
lack a sense of urgency and immediacy. In other words, readers might not even look 
at the latest issue of a given magazine until some time after it has reached their 
homes. Not even newsmagazines have the sense of immediacy associated with 
newspapers, broadcast media, and the Internet.
Slow Building of Reach Because some readers do not open their magazines quickly, 
reach tends to build slowly in this medium. Some readers read a small portion of 
a magazine immediately and then continue at later dates and times, whenever it is 
convenient. Active, busy people sometimes will scan through a number of issues at 
one time, to catch up with their reading. At other times, they just ignore a number 
of issues and read only the most current one.

 
Selecting Media Classes 
247
Newspaper Supplements—Reasons for Using
Local Market Impact with a Magazine Format Newspaper supplements such as 
Parade, USA Weekend, and American Profile in the small C and D counties offer 
an advertiser the advantage of being able to reach local markets with a format that 
closely resembles magazines. Therefore, many of the qualities of magazines are also 
qualities of supplements. Most important, however, is the ability of the planner to 
reach many local markets with a magazine format, although there are limitations 
on a planner’s ability to buy supplements on a market-by-market basis.
Good Color Fidelity Newspaper supplements are usually printed on gravure presses. 
This gives them high color fidelity. The Wall Street Journal Magazine is printed in large 
format 11.5” by 10” slick-coated stock, comparable to the finest consumer magazines—
quality that is appropriate for its fashion, jewelry, and other upscale advertisers.
Depth of Penetration Whereas magazines usually have limited penetration in any 
given market because of their specialized natures, supplements have high penetra-
tion because they are distributed with Sunday newspapers. Thus, supplements 
reach large numbers of individuals for whom the editorial features are of general 
interest.
Broadened Coverage Area One bonus of using supplements is the ability to reach 
some markets normally covered by daily newspapers that do not carry the supple-
ment. This is possible because newspapers serving large metro areas often have 
extensive area coverage far beyond the metropolitan area. Consumers in these 
bonus markets carrying the supplement usually read their local newspapers on 
weekdays but a large metro paper on Sunday.
Less Competition on Sundays Supplements usually have less competition for the 
reader’s attention from other media on Sunday mornings when they are relaxed and 
spend more time reading than on other days.
High Readership Because supplements have large penetration in individual markets, 
it is not surprising that they are widely read, especially by women. Working women 
tend to have the time to read this format—because it is available on Sunday, it is 
part of a newspaper, and many features tend to cover women’s interests.
Flexibility Supplements allow the planner to place advertising locally, regionally, or 
even nationally. But supplements also allow production flexibility such as the option 

248 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
of running a full-page ad in some markets while running smaller ads simultane-
ously in other markets. This flexibility is limited to larger markets.
Newspaper Supplements—Limitations
Little Pass-Along or Secondary Readership Because supplements come with week-
end newspapers, they inherit some of the weaknesses of newspapers. One of these is 
that supplements are rarely passed along to others; instead, they usually are thrown 
away after the family has read them. In addition, one rarely finds supplements left 
in hair salons or doctors’ or dentists’ offices for secondary (pass-along) readers, as 
one finds magazines.
No Demographic Selectivity Newspaper supplements, like the newspapers that 
carry them, have virtually no demographic selectivity. The new demographically 
targeted supplements such as Relish and Spry target women; however the adver-
tiser must still pay for copies delivered to those households and readers who are 
not interested.
Limited Readership Not everyone in a home that receives a Sunday newspaper reads 
the inserted supplement. A 2004 study by Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC 
(MRI) found that 75 percent of the people in homes receiving the carrier newspaper 
read the Parade supplement, and 55 percent of the homes receiving USA Weekend 
read the supplement.2 DRAFTFCB media research recommends a 65 percent fac-
tor for USA Weekend.
High Cost Because of the supplement’s high circulation and coverage, the cost of an 
ad is two to four times more than in mass-circulation women’s magazines such as 
Better Homes & Gardens or Good Housekeeping. Advertisers can buy half the cir-
culation for a little more than half the price, but that is still a sizable investment for 
a publication that is primarily a one-day read.
Television—Reasons for Using
Today video is displayed on three platforms: conventional television, the personal 
computer, and the mobile smart phone. While the content may be the same, the 
way viewers approach and access the video differs substantially. For most planners, 
the word television refers to the traditional medium—a set in the family room or 
2. Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, “Measuring Sunday Magazine Readership,” 
2004.

 
Selecting Media Classes 
249
other place where viewers relax and are entertained with news, sports, and other 
produced programs.
Sight, Sound, and Motion for Dynamic Selling Audiovisual demonstrations are one 
of the best teaching methods known. The combination of sight, sound, and motion 
gives the advertiser the benefit of a technique that comes closest to personal selling. 
Television selling is very dynamic. It is also one of the best methods of demonstrat-
ing the uses or advantages of a given product.
Flexibility Network, cable, and syndicated television offer broad national coverage, 
while spot television allows the planner to use markets in any number of combina-
tions. Spot cable allows geographic targeting down to the neighborhood level.
Reach of Both Selective and Mass Markets Television can be used to attract both 
selective and mass markets through program and cable channel selection. When 
professional football games are broadcast, the audience is largely male. Children’s 
programming on Sunday morning or cable channels and daytime television tend 
to reach selected audiences. On the other hand, some programming such as mov-
ies, comedies, or special events will attract audiences consisting of many different 
kinds and ages of people.
Cost-Efficiency Television can be cost-efficient at times. Daytime television and 
cable, for example, usually have low costs per thousand, as does fringe time. 
Although the overall costs are high, the audiences are large.
Television—Limitations
High Cost The cost of commercial time is beyond the means of some advertisers. 
The widespread use of 15-second and even 10-second commercials reflects adver-
tisers’ need for lower total cost. TV commercial production is also expensive com-
pared to other media.
Low Attention Only about 60 percent of the people who watch prime-time pro-
grams report paying full attention to the TV set. Attentiveness is even lower in 
other dayparts, especially early morning, when only about 25 percent of viewers 
pay full attention.3
3. Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, Spring 2009. 

250 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
DVR Commercial Skipping Typically, more than two-thirds of the time, viewers fast-
forward through the commercials on programs they have recorded on their DVR. 
The effect of this is minimized by the use of the C3 ratings, which only count peo-
ple viewing the commercial minutes at normal speed up to three days after telecast. 
It can be further minimized by concentrating weight in news, sports, and cable that 
viewers are more likely to watch live. DVR recording is most concentrated in the 
high-rated prime-time programs, late fringe, and daytime soap operas.
Short-Lived Messages Although audiovisual messages have the potential for high 
recall, the nature of television commercials is such that viewers either pay attention 
or miss the message entirely. The commercial’s life tends to be fleeting.
High Commercial Loads (Clutter) There are 15.5 to 16 minutes of nonprogram mate-
rial per hour in prime time on the broadcast and cable networks. Daytime television 
has substantially more.4 Although there is limited research into the specific effects 
of clutter on commercial effectiveness, advertisers are becoming more and more 
concerned as commercialization increases.
No Catalog Value It is evident that viewers do not search for commercials when they 
are in the market for a product. Although they pay greater attention to a commer-
cial if they are in the market for the product advertised, they usually have little idea 
of the exact time such commercials will be broadcast.
Cable TV—Reasons for Using
Cable television has shown dramatic growth in the past 15 years, caused in part by 
the 2009 conversion to all-digital television. Cable is now a national medium with 
a stature that complements network television. 90.3 percent of U.S. homes can now 
receive the national broadcast and cable networks. About 62 percent are wired for 
cable, and an additional 28 percent have a satellite dish or other service that allows 
them to receive the national cable networks.5 Because of this high penetration, the 
number of advertisers who have added cable to their media plans has grown enor-
mously. Over the past 10 years, spending in cable has more than doubled: from 
$12.6 billion in 1999 to $27.5 billion in 2008. Over the same period, spending on 
the general-market broadcast networks increased 23 percent, from $14.0 billion to 
$17.2 billion in 2008.6
4. Mindshare analysis of TNS data, 2008. 
5. The Nielsen Company, National Media Related Universe Estimates, July 2009. 
6. Universal McCann, Robert J. Coen estimates, 2009.

 
Selecting Media Classes 
251
 
Cable is now a readily accepted and even expected part of any national televi-
sion plan. In prime time, advertiser-supported cable accounts for 47 percent of all 
household television viewing.7 Advertisers with a broad target audience, such as 
women ages 25–54, will typically employ more than 25 cable networks.
National Audience With over 90 percent penetration by wire or satellite, cable net-
works represent a truly national medium, whether used alone or in combination 
with more traditional media.
Added Reach and Frequency Although advertisers can use cable in lieu of network 
TV, it can also be added to network TV and any other media chosen for a media 
plan. The effect of this strategy is to add more reach and frequency. When cable 
is used this way, some of the weight goes to increasing reach, while impressions in 
cable homes already reached by other media add frequency to the plan.
Relatively Low Cost Although cable’s rates are rising, it still costs less than advertis-
ing on the major television networks. National cable cost per rating point is roughly 
30 percent that of broadcast TV.
Less Susceptible to DVR Recording Analysis of DVR viewing records shows that 
people are far less likely to record programs on the cable networks than they are 
the high-rated prime-time programs on the networks. Since there is less recording, 
there is also less commercial skipping during playback.
Precisely Defined Target Audiences Cable programmers have been better able than 
broadcast networks to define the kinds of audiences who watch their programs—
whether for sports, music, or education. This enables advertisers to focus more 
accurately on targets they want to reach; however, planners face the familiar trade-
off between high composition and low coverage from these highly selective cable 
channels.
Broader Spectrum of Advertisers When competitors are advertising on certain cable 
networks, it is sometimes strategically important for other competitors to be in the 
same medium. As more advertisers use cable, it will draw other product category 
advertisers, and audiences can expect to find certain kinds of products there.
7. The Nielsen Company, Total Viewing Sources, May 2009. 

252 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Reduced Total and Average Spending Costs National cable television, costing less 
than network television, can help reduce total and average spending costs for adver-
tisers who need effective media at a lower cost. Shifting even as little as 20 percent 
of an advertising budget to cable can reduce costs.
Cable TV—Limitations
Fragmented Audiences As noted earlier, cable today accounts for 47 percent of all 
television viewing,8 but with almost 90 advertiser-supported channels reported by 
Nielsen, the audience is so fragmented that the average channel receives less than 
a 1.0 rating, and many receive less than 0.5. So although each cable network goes 
to great lengths to promote its unique personality, the average cable channel is 
watched in only 14 percent of U.S. households over the course of a week. The most 
popular cable channel is watched in 39 percent of homes even though it is available 
on cable and satellite systems covering 86 percent of households.9
Less than Full National Coverage Although 90 percent of homes can receive cable 
channels, penetration varies by cable network. Some, such as ESPN, CNN, and 
USA, do reach just about all cable households. Newer channels may cover less than 
5 percent of the United States. This must be taken into account when placing ads 
on networks that appear to be selective to the marketing target, but may offer only 
limited reach potential.
Product Placement—Reasons for Using
Less Expensive than Paid Commercial Advertising Advertisers get the brand men-
tion, the package, and possibly continuing reference to the product over the entire 
program. Total on-screen time could be even more than a paid commercial.
Not Overtly Presented as Advertising This kind of advertising appears to be part of 
the entertainment content, as contrasted with conventional advertising that might 
be ignored.
8. The Nielsen Company, Total Viewing Sources, May 2009.
9. The Nielsen Company, Television Activity Report, 2nd Quarter 2009, Monday–Sunday 
24-hour total. 

 
Selecting Media Classes 
253
Implied Endorsement by Entertainment Characters Using the Placed Product 
Positive feelings toward the actors or characters can carry over to the named 
products they use.
Ability to Select Program Environment Consistent with Product’s Image A product 
can be placed on comedy programs, drama, reality, and so on, as desired. Use of the 
product is a natural element of the program’s content (Sears Craftsman tools used 
on ABC’s “Extreme Makeover: Home Edition”).
Product Placement—Limitations
Lack of Control by the Advertiser Control by the advertiser varies depending on the 
particular contract, but ultimately the program’s producer and director determine 
how the product will be shown, for how many seconds, and in what context.
Limited Communication Value There are no opportunities for copy points, image, 
multiple messages, and so on.
Variable Exposure Time On-screen time can vary from just a few seconds to mul-
tiple exposures over the length of the program. Delivery is out of the advertiser’s 
control.
Obsolescence Packaging and graphics may change over time, but once a program 
is syndicated, the placement is forever.
Radio—Reasons for Using
Reach of Special Kinds of Target Audiences Radio is able to reach narrow target 
audiences very well (ethnic, youth, upscale financial, etc.). Through program-
ming specialization, a radio station becomes known for its “sound” and attracts 
special kinds of audiences, such as men, women, teens, farmers, ethnic popula-
tions, or the elderly. Many ethnic groups have programs dedicated to their inter-
ests. Religious groups, too, have found radio to be an excellent communication 
medium.
High Frequency Where a great deal of repetition is necessary, radio is the ideal 
medium. The total cost is relatively low, and usually many stations have time avail-
able to permit building a media plan with high frequency.

254 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Supporting Medium Because of the low cost and good reach of special target mar-
kets, radio is often used as a supporting medium. Often, when a plan uses print 
predominantly, radio can be added at low cost to bring sound into the plan.
Excellent for Mobile Populations Because most Americans own and drive auto-
mobiles, radio becomes a means of reaching them while they are traveling. Many 
people drive long distances to and from work, and the distances are getting lon-
ger as suburbs develop farther from cities. Listening to the radio in what is known 
as “drive time” helps pass the long commuting time and is an excellent means of 
reaching commuters.
 
But commuters are not the only ones who travel every day. Homemakers often 
take their cars to shopping centers that are located far from their homes. They, 
too, will often turn on the radio to help pass the traveling time. In fact, radio is the 
last medium that homemakers are exposed to before they enter retail stores. Local 
retailers might very well carry on a campaign to communicate with these custom-
ers before they arrive at the stores.
High Summer Exposure Because we are a mobile population and so many people 
travel during the summer months, radio is an excellent medium to reach them en 
route. Some experts dispute this, however, claiming that radio tune-in is no higher 
in the summer than it is at any other time. The time when listeners tune in, how-
ever, does change during the summer, especially among teenagers, who are not in 
school during the day.
Flexibility Radio, like television, can be used locally, regionally, or nationally. Radio 
also offers a number of production advantages, because copy can be changed 
quickly and added to or eliminated from a program quickly. Despite these advan-
tages, radio is not highly regarded for its great production flexibility.
Local Coverage Availability Advertisers usually purchase local radio, because it 
reaches a given market well. But AM radio signals can be carried far from the origi-
nating market into other geographic areas, especially at night. For a national adver-
tiser trying to build brand awareness in many different markets, this added feature 
is perceived as a bonus when a planner buys local radio.
Radio—Limitations
Many Stations in One Market In many large metropolitan markets, so many radio 
stations are vying for attention that only a relative few are listened to by even 20 
percent of a market’s adult population. For example, the New York metropolitan 

 
Selecting Media Classes 
255
area has 42 AM and 54 FM stations.10 A planner who wants to build large reach via 
radio will have to buy more than one station—usually at least five stations.
 
Another consequence of the large number of stations available is the fragmenta-
tion of audiences caused by specialized programming. On the one hand, specialized 
programs waste few exposures because the program structure is not attractive to 
everyone. On the other hand, they fragment the audience too much for an adver-
tiser who wants a mass—not class—audience.
No Catalog Value Like television but even more so, radio messages are fleeting. 
Listeners miss many advertisements, and they forget others that they only partially 
hear.
Low Attentiveness for Some Formats Listeners treat some radio formats as “back-
ground” music. They may give the messages on these stations less attention than 
messages on stations that feature all news or talk. Listening to the radio is rarely a 
person’s primary activity.
Internet
As seen in Exhibit 9-2, in the first six months of 2009, Nielsen Online reported over 
1.4 trillion advertising impressions. These are divided into two broad categories: 
sponsored search accounts for almost one-third of impressions; the balance are 
display ads, divided into flash, standard GIF and JPEG images, compound images/
text and rich media.
Digital Advertising Impressions by Technology
TECHNOLOGY
IMPRESSIONS (BILLIONS)
PERCENT
Sponsored Search
444.8
31.3%
Display
 
Flash (Generic)
383.3
26.8
 
Standard GIF/JPEG
327.1
23.0
 
Compound Image/Text Ad
225.7
15.9
 
Rich Media Vendors
42.3
3.0
 
Total Display
978.3
68.7%
Grand Total
1,423.0
100.0%
Source: The Nielsen Company, Nielsen Online, AdRelevance, Jan.–June 2009. Used with permission.
10. SRDS Radio Advertising Source, August 2009.
EXHIBIT 9-2

256 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Internet Display—Reasons for Using
Active Medium Unlike television or radio, which are relatively passive media used 
primarily for entertainment, the Internet requires active participation. The user 
enters the address of the website he or she wants to visit, and the Internet delivers 
the page to the user’s computer. Nothing happens until the user again takes action 
by clicking on a link or entering a response. But once a request has been made to 
a website, it can search through virtually unlimited files to return data, pictures, 
audio, and video. This ability makes the Internet ideally suited to the transactional 
communications that are part of most businesses.
Great Creative Flexibility As of summer 2009, 81.7 percent11 of active Internet 
users go online via high-speed Internet, opening the medium to a broad range of 
rich media creative options in addition to the conventional banners. While these 
creative units account only for 3 percent of the digital advertising impressions, 
they allow for a broad range of creative options, including full motion video in the 
banner, peel-back ads that open to reveal a video message, a video player that runs 
when the user’s mouse rolls over the ad, and even the opportunity to have a lead 
generation form that is revealed by the mouse. To see the latest examples of creative 
digital advertising, go to www.pointroll.com/showcase.html.
Low-Cost Corporate Legitimacy Today, virtually every company has a website that 
introduces its product or service to potential customers, suppliers, employees, and 
anyone else wishing to do business with them. A website is the first place to go for 
information. Lack of an Internet presence sends a strong message that a company 
either doesn’t exist or is so far behind the times that any dealings with it would be 
suspect.
Supplemental Information The Internet is heavily used as a medium for publishing 
information. Virtually all major consumer magazines, newspapers, television sta-
tions, and cable networks have a website that supplements their traditional media 
product. In addition to reinforcing the medium’s brand image, these sites bring in 
revenue from advertising placed by companies that want to deliver a message to the 
site’s visitors. Although some sites have attempted to charge a subscription fee in 
exchange for a password that grants access, the great majority offer their editorial 
content for free.
11. Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, Spring 2009. 

 
Selecting Media Classes 
257
 
Websites also can be used to provide detailed information about a manufac-
turer’s entire product line. Because there are no size constraints, sites can provide 
product information, technical specifications, operating instructions, dealer loca-
tions, answers to frequently asked questions (FAQs), and telephone numbers and 
addresses of company offices. Websites can also provide customers with an oppor-
tunity to give feedback, ask questions, and make comments. In this way, a website 
becomes a strong additional element in the advertiser’s marketing plan.
Easy Documentation of Effectiveness Because the Internet is a transactional 
medium, the advertiser knows exactly how many prospects were delivered by each 
website where an ad is placed. There are also reports showing the time of day when 
a site is visited, how much time a visitor spends, how deeply the visitor goes into the 
site, and many other characteristics of the visitor’s contact.
Low-Cost Marketing Research Tool The Internet is an inexpensive, fast-turnaround 
medium for conducting marketing research. This methodology has become so 
attractive that even the large research companies like Nielsen and MRI are employ-
ing it, though not for their primary services because of concerns about the repre-
sentativeness of the sample (non-Internet users are excluded) and because of a high 
percentage of “professional respondents” who participate in many surveys for the 
enjoyment or incentives.
Internet Display—Limitations
High Cost Having a website is similar to having a toll-free telephone number: it is 
open to anyone, but advertising is needed to create awareness that the site exists. 
This requires a possibly expensive conventional advertising campaign in traditional 
media, as well as digital advertising in the form of buttons and banners that will 
lead prospects directly to the advertiser’s website.
Conflict Between Internet Sales and Traditional Sales Channels Advertisers must be 
careful not to undercut conventional sales from their own stores or distributors. 
Yet if the price offered online is the same as local retail, there is no incentive to buy 
from the Internet, especially if the company charges additional fees for shipping 
and handling.
Variable Value The Internet is most valuable for products that are information 
based—travel, financial services, hotel reservations, online auctions, and the like. 
When the dot-com bubble burst in late 2000, companies offering information-

258 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
based products were more likely to survive than companies that merely took a retail 
sales model online.
Limited Penetration Although 86 percent of adults have access to the Internet, only 
73 percent go online in the average month.12 Their lack of exposure is a drawback 
when they are prospects for the advertiser’s products.
Sponsored Search (Search Engine Marketing [SEM])
In the past 10 years, Internet search has become a medium in its own right, offered 
by Google, Microsoft Bing, and the search option in many conventional websites. 
While advertisers cannot control where their product will appear in the natural 
(sometimes called “organic”) list of URLs that comes up in response to a search 
term, they can buy a two-line text ad that appears in the sponsored-search box adja-
cent to the natural search listing. More about planning and buying search advertis-
ing will be in Chapter 10.
Sponsored Search—Reasons for Using
Reaches People with Proven Interest in Product or Service People who enter a key-
word are, by definition, looking for information about a product or service. They 
are in the market and are looking for the best way to meet their needs. It’s also the 
lowest cost per lead of any medium.
Direct Link to Advertiser’s Website People who are introduced to the advertiser can 
get additional information with the click of a mouse.
Ability to Deliver a Short Brand Message for Little or No Cost Since the advertiser 
pays only for clicks, it is possible to have virtually free brand exposure by purchas-
ing keywords that have little likelihood of being clicked on.
Complete Response Metrics Advertisers know exactly how many impressions were 
served and what percent of those resulted in a click-through to the advertiser’s web-
site. This is comparable to the response rate metrics provided by direct mail and 
other direct response media.
12. Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, Spring 2009. 

 
Selecting Media Classes 
259
Sponsored Search—Limitations
Requires Target Interest in the Product or Service Sponsored-search advertising 
assumes the user is in the market for the product now. While that person may be 
the best prospect, his or her short-term need is not appropriate for building a long-
term relationship or establishing a base of awareness and trust that may not be 
needed for months or years.
Auction-Based Pricing, Requiring Active Management of the Buy As will be discussed 
later, sponsored-search advertising is sold as an auction, with the order of place-
ment on the list depending on how much a buyer is willing to pay. This can change 
from day to day and even hour to hour, requiring much more attention than is nec-
essary for a conventional media buy. Also, because of this auction pricing, there is 
no way for the competitive monitoring services to show sponsored-search spend-
ing—only impressions.
Requires Previous Knowledge of the Advertiser Although the ad may be displayed to 
someone interested in the product, since it will appear in a list with its many com-
petitors, the user will be more likely to click on the link of a product that he or she 
is already familiar with.
Plain Text Only—No Graphics, Logo, or Picture This may change as time goes by, but 
as of the summer of 2009, there is no opportunity to show the brand’s logo, sales 
tag line, or other brand identification beyond its name.
Side-by-Side Appearance with Competition In a world where every advertiser 
wants their ad to appear alone, sponsored-search advertising appears in a list 
side-by-side with its competitors, many of whom the user may be equally familiar 
with. Being present is better than not, but this is something to consider in using 
the medium.
Mobile Advertising—Reasons for Using
Most Personal Marketing Channel Available People consider their cell phone to be 
a necessary part of their daily dress. Advertising on mobile devices can be more 
impactful than other mass media, but the advertiser must be sensitive not to 
intrude on the user’s “space.”

260 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Measurable for Return on Investment (ROI) Purposes Just as on a personal computer, 
every keystroke is recorded and can be used as a measure of response for advertis-
ing media that are paid on a cost-per-click basis.
Permission-Based Opt-In For SMS (simple media/message system) text advertis-
ing, the opt-in requirement ensures the ads go to people who want them. While a 
strength, it could also be a limitation by cutting down the number of people who 
can be exposed.
Opportunity to Reach Consumers on the Road Prior to Retail Store Purchase  Smart 
phones that are equipped with mapping capability can direct customers straight to 
the store or can show where the nearest location of a given retailer is.
Ability to Deliver Coupons with a UPC Code The high resolution of today’s mobile 
phones allows the advertiser to send a coupon with a UPC code on the mobile dis-
play screen, which can be scanned at the checkout counter.
Mobile Advertising—Limitations
Small Screen Size Limiting Creativity Advertising is limited to a simple banner or 
brand identification unless the user clicks through to the advertiser’s website that 
fills the whole screen.
Slow Network Speeds In some areas, wireless technology is expensive. At this writ-
ing, a few cities are served with fourth generation (4G) technology and many more 
have 3G, but large parts of the country are not even that fast. Slower speeds and 
spotty coverage reduce the value of the medium, though with the near-universal 
use of smart phones and the users’ demand for speedier access, this limitation will 
become less of a factor over the life of this book.
Lack of Standards Across Carriers and Platforms This complicates the buying pro-
cess across multiple hardware platforms and carriers. With any new technology, 
different companies will find different ways to accomplish the same tasks. Although 
the result looks the same to the user, the differences under the hood add complexity 
for the media planner and advertiser.
Success of the Medium Depends on the Primary Carriers The business model 
of the primary carriers does not yet value mobile advertising. Their revenue 
comes primarily from selling long-term, highly profitable service contracts. 

 
Selecting Media Classes 
261
This reduces their incentive to develop systems and support services that will 
aid advertisers.
Privacy Potential privacy legislation regarding security, unsolicited messages, 
location-based ads, advertising to children, and so on may limit the medium’s abil-
ity to reach its potential.
Direct Mail—Reasons for Using
Direct response is a marketing strategy that often uses direct mail or telemarketing. 
This discussion of direct mail and telemarketing refers only to outbound advertis-
ing, whereby the marketer contacts the consumer. A direct-response strategy may 
also include inbound advertising, in which the consumer seeks out the marketer 
(e.g., calling the toll-free number on a package).
 
Direct mail can be the most selective of all media, provided that the advertiser 
knows the names and addresses of a target audience and has a list that is up-to-date 
and complete. When such a list is available, there is minimal waste, so the adver-
tiser pays only for targets that are reached. Another list source can be a marketer’s 
own database of names. Lists of names and addresses can also be purchased from 
brokers. The SRDS Direct Marketing List Source provides direct-mail lists for virtu-
ally any target.
Easy Verification of Response It is relatively easy to learn whether a direct-mail 
piece was effective: one simply counts the number of responses to an offer. The 
number of inquiries from direct mail might or might not be related to sales, but 
inquiries from direct mailings do constitute one form of measurement. Often the 
advertiser sends alternative copy treatments by direct mail, and the most effective 
one is easily verified. It is relatively simple to measure response functions in direct 
mail compared to traditional media.
Personal Quality Most advertising is impersonal because it is impossible to address 
anyone by name. Direct mail, using specific names and addresses, comes closest to 
overcoming this problem. Of course, not all recipients of direct-mail pieces appre-
ciate advertisers calling them familiarly by name. But many people do appreciate 
seeing their names in print and often pay more attention to the offer as a result.
Flexibility Direct mail is probably the easiest of all media to tailor precisely to the 
geographic marketing needs of an advertiser. The beauty of this flexibility is that 
direct mail can be adjusted to small markets (by block or even by household) and 
also can be adjusted to as large an area as needed.

262 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
The medium is also flexible in terms of production. Almost any size and kind of 
paper and any kind of ink or special printing technique is possible. Advertisers with 
special creative problems turn to direct mail because it is so versatile. Samples of a 
product can be mailed with ads, special die cuts can be made, and special kinds of 
foldings and packaging are available only in this medium.
Long Life for Certain Mailings Consumers tend to keep direct-mail catalogs for a 
long time and share them with friends. If the advertising material has value, it will 
be kept. Some educational materials also share this quality. If the educational mat-
ter has value, such as a chart showing how to administer first aid or a booklet on 
how to eliminate stains on clothing, consumers might retain it for a long time.
Potential Savings No special envelope, special addressing, or extra postage is nec-
essary when direct-mail advertising is sent along with bills or other packages. The 
bills must be sent anyway, so the addition of a direct advertisement might not even 
cost extra postage. There are creative limitations, however, due to weight restric-
tions and size of the contents of an envelope or package. Printing costs must be 
borne as well, but even when the total weight of advertising enclosed with a bill is 
greater than the bill alone, there will still be substantial savings because there are 
no extra costs for the envelope and addressing. The addition of the advertising usu-
ally increases the total cost only slightly.
Direct Mail—Limitations
High Cost Unless it is being piggybacked with another mailing, direct mail can be 
expensive. The main factor is, of course, the cost of postage. Beyond this, there are 
at least two additional situations where direct mail can be more expensive than 
any other medium. The first is when a production technique requires the use of 
heavy embossed or other expensive papers, or some unusual method of engraving, 
artwork, or printing. The second is when large mailings are made that cannot take 
advantage of bulk mailing privileges. There is no reason to think that postage rates 
will decline in the future, and these high costs will continue to affect direct-mail 
usage.
Inaccurate and Incomplete Lists Without an accurate and complete mailing list, 
direct mail cannot do its best. So many Americans move frequently that it is diffi-
cult and expensive to keep lists up-to-date or develop new ones. In the past, it was 
possible to buy large mass mailings at low cost and not be concerned about the 

 
Selecting Media Classes 
263
accuracy of the list. But today’s high postage and production costs require the use 
of accurate and complete lists.
Variance in Delivery Dates Even if a large mailing is taken to the post office at one 
time, the pieces will be delivered at widely different times. If time is not essential 
to the marketing objectives, then the lag does not matter. But timing of an adver-
tising message is often critical, and the direct-mail user cannot control it very well. 
Compared with other media, direct mail comes off second-best in respect to timing. 
When ads are placed in newspapers, they are printed on the day requested. When 
broadcast commercials are purchased, they are delivered not only on the day, but at 
the hour requested. In comparison, direct-mail delivery dates are unpredictable.
Clutter and Consumer Resistance With the increasing popularity of direct-mail 
advertising, special techniques and more costly packaging are needed to entice con-
sumers to even open the envelope.
Outdoor Advertising—Reasons for Using
Wide Coverage of Local Markets Outdoor advertising is able to build large local 
coverage of the mobile population in many markets in a 30-day period. However, 
this coverage does not represent reading of the messages, only potential exposure 
to them.
High Frequency Billboards also have high frequency in reaching the mobile popu-
lation of a market. It is in this area that billboards are strongest. Although the dif-
ferences in reach of a 100 versus a 50 showing are not great, the frequency levels 
are quite different.
Largest Print Ad Available Size is a powerful attraction. Outdoor advertising allows 
the advertiser to buy the largest print ad available. The use of attractive color print-
ing plus dramatic lighting and at times, moving portions and even live models, offer 
the advertiser great attention-getting power.
Geographic Flexibility Outdoor advertising can be used locally, regionally, and 
nationally. Even within any given market, it is possible to add emphasis wherever 
desired. Movable billboards enable an advertiser to concentrate messages in places 
where there are no fixed positions, such as a city’s financial district or areas that are 
not zoned for outdoor advertising.

264 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
High Summer Visibility Media plans often include billboards in the summer because 
they increase the visibility of a brand name at a time when people are traveling. 
Warmer weather encourages people to take to their cars, and it is possible to reach 
them through billboards and other outdoor signs.
Around-the-Clock Exposure Because many billboards on main thoroughfares are 
lighted, anyone passing at any time of day or night can see the message. As long as 
there is a mobile population, this is an opportunity for exposures.
Simple Copy Theme and Package Identification When the message is relatively short 
and simple and the package is distinctive, outdoor advertising can be an excellent 
way to attract attention and build frequency for the message. Building brand aware-
ness is a strength of the medium.
Outdoor Advertising—Limitations
Simple Messages The best use of outdoor advertising is for a simple message with 
a simple typeface; complex or long messages, especially with the small printing 
necessary to accommodate a lot of words, do not work well and are a waste of the 
advertiser’s dollars. The best way to ensure readability is to use the copy testing 
services of the outdoor companies.
No Guarantee of High Recall Outdoor provides high reach and sometimes good 
recall of ad messages, but it is not necessarily true that high reach means high 
recall. The creativity of the message is an important criterion in assessing people’s 
ability to remember the message. Because of the nature of this medium, people 
often look at billboards but are unable to recall what they saw.
High Cost Although the cost per thousand (CPM) is low, outdoor advertising has 
a high out-of-pocket cost when compared to some other media, according to the 
Institute of Outdoor Advertising. For a 100 showing nationally (top 50 markets), the 
cost is more than $5 million for a month.13 Considering that outdoor advertising is 
a medium often in the background, that it requires very short messages, and that 
drivers’ interests are focused primarily on the road ahead, this cost is prohibitive 
for many advertisers.
13. OAAA/SRDS Out-of-Home Advertising Source, reported in 2009 Marketer’s Guide to 
Media. 

 
Selecting Media Classes 
265
Limited Availability of Best Locations Prime outdoor-advertising locations on free-
ways or high-traffic roads often are held by long-term advertisers who are given 
the right of first refusal when their contracts expire. Key positions are available to 
occasional advertisers who allow their boards to rotate to a different location every 
month—some are excellent, some are not as good, but they eventually give the 
advertiser total market coverage. Also, zoning restrictions limit the availability of 
billboards in upscale neighborhoods.
Transit Media—Reasons for Using
Transit media involve interior and exterior displays on mass-transit vehicles and 
terminal and station platform displays.
Mass Coverage of a Metropolitan Area When an advertiser wants to reach individu-
als in the heart of a market, then mass-transit advertising is desirable. It is primar-
ily a vehicle for reaching adults either on their way to or returning from work. But 
its reach is extensive.
High Frequency Transit media take advantage of normal travel patterns that are 
duplicated many days throughout the year. As a result, it presents an opportunity 
for a great deal of repetition of message delivery.
Relative Efficiency Based on potential exposures, transit can deliver large numbers 
of individuals at low unit costs.
Flexibility An advertiser can select transportation vehicles in which to place ads 
that reach certain kinds of demographically defined groups. The advertiser does 
not have to select all mass-transit systems, only those that are known to have large 
numbers of the target audience.
Opportunity to Position Messages to Consumers on the Way to Their Points of 
Purchase Local advertisers can buy messages that reach consumers on their way 
to their retail stores. Therefore, it is possible that for some consumers the transit 
ads will be the last medium they are exposed to before making a purchase.
Transit Media—Limitations
Limited Message Space Most often, large or complex messages cannot be dissemi-
nated in this medium. Transit advertisements rarely have enough space available 
to carry such messages.

266 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Heavy Competition from Other Media and Personal Activities Transit is not an 
intrusive medium. Instead, it largely competes for attention with other things 
such as the attractiveness of scenery, the nature of the transit vehicle, or other 
people. The person who travels to and from work on the same transportation 
vehicle is often tired, bored, reading, doing e-mail, or browsing the Internet on 
a smart phone. Exterior displays often require extra creative pulling power to 
attract attention.
Frequent Inspection Because transit advertising is exposed to the natural elements 
as well as graffiti, care must be taken to replace posters that become dirty, defaced, 
or otherwise unacceptable. This requires frequent inspection, a cost that must be 
included in budgets for outdoor media.
Out-of-Home Video—Reasons for Using
Additional Brand Exposure Video display near product purchase at grocery stores 
and other retail outlets can reinforce other advertising immediately before the 
shopper is ready to buy.
Flexibility Video allows for flexibility in terms of creative message, time of deliv-
ery, geographic location, and creative format. Creative can be changed quickly and 
often as needed. For instance, the board could advertise winter clothing immedi-
ately after a snowstorm.
Sight and Motion A moving video display, with sound in some venues, is far more 
impactful than a fixed board. The medium attracts attention in a way that a con-
ventional board cannot.
Builds Reach Video builds reach beyond what is possible with in-home media. 
This is especially valuable for reaching young adults who are light television view-
ers. Video units can be place in restaurants, bars, health clubs, and other locations 
frequented by young adults.
Highly Targeted Geographic, demographic, and product usage targeting is an easily 
accomplished and an obvious strength of the medium.
Production Efficiency The ability to use creative that was produced for other video 
media provides for efficiency. Standard video formats allow using existing creative, 
saving the cost of custom production.

 
Selecting Media Classes 
267
Sophisticated Research In some venues, research can be customized to the indi-
vidual venue, showing how long the viewer is in the area of the display, how many 
people pass it, and then how many people are exposed to the ad.
Out-of-Home Video—Limitations
Lack of Standardized Consistent Research Across All Venues Because there are so 
many different forms of out-of-home video, from gas station pump tops to restroom 
walls to movie theater lobbies, there is no consistent way to evaluate the medium. 
The Digital Place-based Advertising Association (DPAA) at www.ovab.org is work-
ing to create guidelines for audience measurement.
Availability Varies Market-by-Market and Within Markets Out-of-home video depends 
on custom hardware that must be manufactured and installed in each location. This 
is costly and leads to strong but spotty coverage of a market. Planners considering 
video in grocery stores should ask, “What percent of a market’s All Commodity 
Volume (ACV) is accounted for by the stores that are installed with this video dis-
play?” ACV is the annual dollar volume of all sales in a market’s retail stores.
Limited Reach Potential Traffic past any one unit is low compared to traditional 
mass media or even traditional out-of-home venues. Substantial reach requires the 
costly installation of units across a market, as hardware must be installed in each 
location.
Fragmentation of Suppliers Each medium is a different company, requiring a sepa-
rate contract. Companies such as SeeSaw Networks (www.seesawnetworks.com) 
have been formed to facilitate planning out-of-home video campaigns across mul-
tiple venues and out-of-home video suppliers.
Proof of Play and Proof of Performance Reporting Varies by Supplier This is another 
consequence of the fragmentation of the medium. It is being addressed by DPAA 
and companies such as SeeSaw Networks.
Other Media
Numerous other media options give planners additional ways to reach target audi-
ences that may be more selective and have even more impact than traditional media. 
Another quality of the new media is that they often provide a means for making 

268 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
media planning more creative. Some of these techniques are innovative and more 
interesting than the techniques available for traditional media. They can help make 
media more effective in delivering an advertiser’s messages to a particular target.
 
This section explains details of some of the major new media. However, this 
text will not evaluate all such media in detail. The media options discussed here 
are some of the best known or most widely discussed.
Place-Based Media
A large number of new media are distinguished by the fact that they are located out-
of-home in a particular place. Exhibit 9-3 lists a small sample of some of the best-
known categories of place-based media and a brief explanation of each. A complete 
listing is available in the SRDS Out-of-Home Advertising Source (www.srds.com).
 
Each of these specialized media has its own advantages and limitations, but the 
general advantage of place-based media is that advertising can be seen in areas rele-
vant to the products or services offered. Therefore, these media have more meaning 
for audiences than ads seen out of context. Often consumers are already motivated 
to buy, but these ads provide added impetus.
 
In general, a disadvantage of place-based media is that they are not available 
whenever wanted, as traditional media are. Timeliness of the message suffers. 
Furthermore, when consumers are tired, the message is not always seen or heard as 
when audiences are rested. Also, sometimes the advertisements are seen as intru-
sions rather than as helpful product information. Some consumers simply do not 
want to see these media and ignore them whenever they can, no matter what kind 
of information and entertainment are offered.
 
Another problem with place-based media is nonstandard measurement. The 
new Digital Place-based Advertising Association (DPAA) at www.ovab.org has been 
created to help marketers and agencies evaluate, plan, and buy out-of-home video. 
The organization has the support of many industry organizations and is expected 
to bring more discipline and accountability to this new medium.
Database Media Planning
Database media planning (sometimes called data mining) is a technique of build-
ing a list of individuals who are known to be purchasers of a given brand. Each per-
son on this list is known by name, address, phone number, and sales potential, as a 
minimum. Then the data are placed in a computer to form the database. In essence, 
advertisers can theoretically eliminate waste in advertising because they know who 
the targets are and how to reach them. Limitations are privacy concerns and the 
high cost of direct response advertising.

 
Selecting Media Classes 
269
Categories of Place-Based Media
Aerial
Banner-towing airplanes
Airport/airplane
Displays inside airports
In-flight video programming
Bar news network located in airport bars
Video monitors located throughout airports carrying entertainment 
and commercials
Laser billboards (rear-screen projection billboards)
Convenience stores
Ads attached to waste containers in stores
Convenience store media (from ceilings, above coolers, etc.)
Golf courses
Colored posters framed behind Plexiglas, featuring golf subjects in 
clubhouses
Colored ads on redwood tee-markers
Ads on front and side of golf carts
Grocery stores
Ads on grocery carts inside stores
Checkout channel: commercials on TV sets mounted above checkout 
aisles
Pop radio: commercials interspersed with music and information 
heard throughout store
Aisle ads: posters in aisles or ads on shelf (shelf talkers)
Health clubs
Full-color ads displayed on wallboards in general traffic areas and/or 
locker rooms
Movie theaters
Colored ads displayed in lobbies of movie theaters
On-screen entertainment during intermission
Physicians’ waiting rooms Integrated multimedia system consisting of TV, magazines, wall-
boards, and take-home booklets
Schools
Newspaper dispensers with ads on them
Campus media boards: posters framed and displayed in cafeterias, 
residence halls, etc.
Shopping malls
TV advertising shown between feature clips in malls and stores
Stadia/arenas
Use of giant, color-TV-quality matrix with instant replay of sports 
plays and commercials
Advertising in motion
Full-color decals and signs applied to sides and rear of trucks
Mobile ad units
EXHIBIT 9-3

270 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Cross-Media (or Multimedia Integration)
Cross-media (also called multimedia integration) partnerships have received a great 
deal of coverage in the trade press. The basic idea of cross-media planning is the 
assembly of a select number of different media for the purpose of reaching spe-
cific target audiences for clients. The media are put together as a package that can 
include network television, cable, magazines, the Internet, and other media, tailored 
to meet diverse target audience needs.
 
The package, therefore, is an alternative to the more typical practice of dealing 
exclusively with one medium, like network television, or a group of media that tend 
not to be selective. The goal is to do a better job of communicating with hard-to-
reach audiences and to take advantage of multimedia opportunities that combine 
promotions with advertising. But there are other appeals, too. For example, cross-
media is a way to implement the principle of integrated marketing communica-
tions, plus value added and synergy.
 
Value added is closely aligned with cross-media planning. These terms are used 
to describe any element of a cross-media deal beyond the actual media buy, includ-
ing special events. These are offered at a discount rate or no charge at all. Examples 
include premium positioning and bleed ads at no extra cost; tie-ins with other 
media such as direct mail and cable; in-store promotions or product sampling; 
bonus pages, custom publishing, and exposure on the vehicle’s website. Media, for 
example, will often add to a cross-media deal by printing booklets or providing trips 
to tennis or golf tournaments. Clients have come to expect value-added programs, 
and media companies are quite willing to give them.
 
Determining the cost–value relationship of cross-media deals is tricky. The 
reason is that they are supposed to have synergy beyond values offered by tradi-
tional media. In other words, the totality of media values is supposed to be greater 
than the sum of each medium’s contribution alone. But as some experts have com-
mented, nobody yet knows how to calculate how much greater.
 
Cross-media deals are typically offered by large multimedia companies that 
hope to bring more revenue to the entire corporation than would be possible by 
negotiating one medium at a time. Since these packages sometimes mix very attrac-
tive properties with other venues that are struggling for business or may even be 
off target, planners must ensure that each piece meets the advertiser’s marketing 
objectives. When done correctly, packages of highly targeted, desirable venues can 
be very beneficial for an advertiser. Review Exhibit 1-1 for an example of a success-
ful cross-media campaign using the ESPN properties for Coors Light beer.
Advantages of Cross-Media In a survey, 31 percent of respondents cited lower CPMs 
on cross-media deals as the primary advantage, and 27 percent cited the ability to 

 
Selecting Media Classes 
271
deliver a single message in a variety of media as a secondary advantage. Low CPMs 
represent media cost-efficiency. In effect, those who choose cross-media for effi-
ciency are looking for better media buys for the money.
Disadvantages of Cross-Media The value of cross-media deals varies case-by-case. 
However, cross-media plans certainly are more interesting communication vehicles 
to both consumers and advertisers, especially when the deal is designed for a par-
ticular client’s needs.
Intermedia Comparisons for Nonmeasured Media
Almost every medium in existence has some qualities that are useful for one or 
another advertiser. As such, there are times when nonmeasured media are useful. 
A nonmeasured medium is one that lacks a periodic measure of who is exposed to 
it by a recognized research firm. The word periodic here is key. Often a nontradi-
tional medium will hire a reputable firm like Nielsen to conduct a one-time-only 
study that provides its demographics and exposure metrics. Unfortunately, even 
reputable firms are suspected of being biased in favor of the company that pays for 
the research, because the company has a vested interest in the outcome. The way 
the sample is chosen, the way the questions are asked, the particular location cho-
sen, and the time of year can all be selected to paint the most optimistic picture. An 
important part of DPAA’s mission is to provide standards for the conduct of these 
studies. Whether they are accepted depends on whether the industry is willing to 
pay the higher cost for this higher-quality research.
 
One way to approach the dilemma of noncomparable measuring techniques for 
intermedia comparisons is to use response to advertising as a criterion of effective-
ness. If it could be shown that an ad in one medium generates more recall than an 
ad in another medium, then a planner might assume that the medium with the 
higher recall is better. However, the ad or ads used for comparative purposes cannot 
be indiscriminately chosen. Nor can recall of one medium versus another be mea-
sured as the average recall of many ads, because some products or brands are inher-
ently more interesting than others and therefore generate higher recall scores.
 
To prevent such bias, researchers usually measure the same ad in two different 
media. As a result, researchers hope, any variation in the recall scores is the effect 
of the medium rather than the ad. For example, if a cola product is being tested on 
television and a similar ad is tested in a print medium, it would be difficult, if not 
impossible, to keep the copy and creative elements constant. A commercial for a 
cola drink usually features an announcer’s voice, whether on or off camera. Most of 

272 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
the time, the message features action and music rather than still scenes. Then, too, 
the audience sees the message on many different-sized television screens, some in 
large screen HD, others on a small set on a desktop.
 
If a similar cola ad were placed in print, the size of the ad would probably be 
constant from magazine to magazine, and there would be no sound of a well-known 
personality’s voice and no music. Furthermore, if the print ad were placed in a mag-
azine, there would be competition for attention from other ads, whereas the televi-
sion program in which the commercial was placed would have no competition for 
attention at the same time (unless the viewer zapped a commercial while playing 
back the program on a DVR).
 
Therefore, any results of recall measurements could not be considered unbiased. 
Any one of the variables exclusive to the ad in a given medium could account for 
the greater or lesser recall scores. Although such techniques are helpful for other 
purposes, they are not entirely valid for use in intermedia comparisons. In addition, 
by the time the ad agency has gone to the expense of developing creative execu-
tions, it is a foregone conclusion that the medium will be used. Since any research 
would cost time and money (possibly even more than the cost of the media itself), 
and since planners would ignore any research that suggests a medium is ineffective, 
it is doubtful that such a study would be conducted in the first place. The concept 
is presented here to illustrate the practical difficulties inherent in the common but 
simplistic belief that copy testing research will help an advertiser decide which 
medium is most effective.
 
Often a medium in one class, such as magazines, will spend a great deal of money to 
prove that it is better than a medium in another class. Although the results are interest-
ing, they cannot be considered valid for intermedia comparisons because of the prob-
lem of vested interests. As they say, “Don’t ask your barber if you need a haircut.”
 
Finally, the overall subject of recall scores is controversial within the research 
community. The question is whether a high recall score indicates that product sales 
will increase. Does high recall necessarily relate to changing the consumer’s atti-
tude in a positive way toward the product? Does recall relate to persuasion? Many 
research professionals believe that recall does not relate to sales effectiveness.
Media Mix
In planning strategy, the planner must decide whether to use a single medium or 
a number of media. When more than one medium is used, the result is called a 

 
Selecting Media Classes 
273
media mix, meaning that the plan mixes a number of media classes to reach cer-
tain target audiences.
 
Most media plans employ a mix of media because a single medium, such as 
television, cannot reach the target market in sufficient numbers or with sufficient 
impact to attain a media objective. When a planner does not define the target mar-
ket narrowly, the targets represent such a broad spectrum of consumers that the 
only way to reach them is through multiple vehicles. Most planners narrow the 
definition of targets to reach only those with the best potential. Another situation 
that might call for a media mix strategy occurs when a planner has segmented tar-
gets into two key groups, each of which is about equal in importance.
 
During the process of deciding which media to use, a media planner ought to 
ask, “What part of the market cannot be reached with a single medium?” Generally, 
vehicles within one media class can reach a substantial part of a market, perhaps 
90 percent. The percentage of the market not covered might not be worth the extra 
cost of employing an additional medium. If 20 percent of the population accounts 
for 80 percent of product consumption, and this 20 percent is within the reach of 
a single medium, it is inefficient to try to reach more with additional but differ-
ent media. Inefficiency means that the additional media have substantially higher 
CPMs than the original medium. See Chapter 5 for how to calculate multi-media 
reach and frequency using random duplication.
When to Use a Media Mix
The following objectives are some important reasons for using a media mix:
To extend the reach of a media plan (adding prospects not exposed by using a 
• 
single medium)
To flatten the distribution of frequency so there is a more equal number of 
• 
people who are exposed to a medium for varying numbers of times
To add gross impressions, assuming, of course, that the second or third 
• 
medium is cost-efficient
To reinforce the message or help audience members remember it by using dif-
• 
ferent kinds of stimuli (a process called “creative synergy”)
To reach different kinds of audiences, perhaps differentiated by lifestyle as well 
• 
as demographics
To provide unique advantages in stressing different benefits based on the dif-
• 
ferent characteristics of each medium
To allow different creative executions to be implemented
• 

274 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
An Evaluation of Traditional Media for Different Uses*
KIND OF USE
LEAST VALUE
LITTLE VALUE
SOME VALUE
MORE VALUE
BEST VALUE
Authority
Outdoor
Radio
TV
Newspapers
Magazines
Beauty
Radio
Newspapers
Outdoor
TV
Magazines
Bigger than life
Radio
Magazines
Newspapers
TV
Outdoor
Demonstration
Outdoor
Radio
Newspapers
Magazines
TV
Elegance
Newspapers
Radio
TV/outdoor
TV/outdoor
Magazines
Entertainment
Outdoor
Magazines
Newspapers
Radio
TV
Events
Outdoor
Magazines
Radio
Newspapers
TV
Excitement
Newspapers
Outdoor
Radio
Magazines
TV
Features
Radio
Newspapers
TV
Magazines
Outdoor
Humor
Outdoor
Magazines
Newspapers
Radio
TV
Imagination
Outdoor
Newspapers
Magazines
TV
Radio
Information
Outdoor
Radio
TV
Magazines
Newspapers
Intimacy
Newspapers
Outdoor
TV
Magazines
Radio
Intrusion
Radio
Newspapers
Magazines
Outdoor
TV
Leadership
Newspapers
Outdoor
Radio
Magazines
TV
News
Outdoor
Magazines
Radio
TV
Newspapers
One-on-one
Outdoor
Newspapers
Magazines
Radio
TV
Package 
identification
Radio
Newspapers
TV
Magazines
Outdoor
Personal
Outdoor
Newspapers
TV
Magazines
Radio
Prestige
Outdoor
Radio
TV
Newspapers
Magazines
Price
Outdoor
Magazines
TV
Radio
Newspapers
Product in use
Radio
Outdoor
Newspapers
Magazines
TV
Quality
Newspapers
Radio
Outdoor
TV
Magazines
Recipes
Outdoor
Radio
TV
Newspapers
Magazines
Sex appeal
Newspapers
Radio
Outdoor
TV
Magazines
Snob appeal
Outdoor
Radio
TV
Newspapers
Magazines
Tradition
Outdoor
Newspapers
TV
Radio
Magazines
*Evaluations are subjective.
Source: DDB Needham Worldwide, Which Media Do It Best? (promotional brochure).
EXHIBIT 9-4

 
Selecting Media Classes 
275
Criteria for Media Selection Beyond the Numbers
Media usually are selected on the basis of quantified data showing the abilities of 
alternative media to reach select target audiences.14 In many cases, however, media 
planners make comparisons on an objective and subjective basis, covering materi-
als cited in this chapter. The latter two criteria deal with the strengths of media to 
do certain things better than others. Unfortunately, these latter criteria are subject 
to debate and sometimes are simply the idiosyncratic perceptions of either a plan-
ner or the client.
 
DDB Needham Worldwide, Inc., presents the criteria in Exhibit 9-4 as a means of 
promoting the message and the medium in making selection decisions. If a planner dis-
agrees with these decisions, at least the chart will encourage more thought about just 
what makes one medium more useful than another for achieving a client’s objectives.
14. This section is adapted from DDB Needham Worldwide, Which Media Do It Best? 
(promotional brochure).   

This page intentionally left blank 

 
277
CHAPTER TEN
Principles of Planning 
Media Strategy
T
his chapter explains important principles that affect the creation and 
implementation of media plans. Some advertising practitioners consider 
media planning to be a few notes on the back of an envelope. Our approach 
is to have enough detail in the plan to implement the marketing strategy, 
so that the advertiser has as complete control as possible of a desirable outcome. 
In fact, our goal is to have the media plan implemented so that media and market-
ing objectives are fulfilled as planned. If this takes place, part of a desirable solu-
tion to the problem should be attained. The other part is control of the advertising 
message.
Media Strategy Concepts
Earlier, this book defined media strategy as a series of actions that planners take to 
attain media objectives. In addition, media strategies should achieve an advantage 
over competitors. If media objectives are achieved, it is because optimum strate-
gies were employed. Thus, it is necessary to first state the objectives and follow with 
correct media strategies.
 
Will media strategies that have advantages over competitors always succeed? 
Not necessarily. Other factors—lower prices, good distribution, or better quality—
also play a role in determining success. However, media strategies that have more 
weight, spend more money, and have better coordination across media classes are 
examples of gaining an advantage over competitors. This idea assumes that most 

278 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
other factors in the media plan are equal between competitors and the advertiser. It 
is hard to see how a plan with less reach, less frequency, and so on can make much 
difference in a competitive battle. Several prevailing media strategies are discussed 
in the following paragraphs.
Dominant Brand Presence in Media
A common practice in planning is to buy small amounts of media, presumably to 
save money. The result is that audiences do not notice the advertisements. In other 
words, small bits of media rarely accomplish much. Although setting the exact 
number is a matter of judgment, most planners agree there is a certain minimal 
amount of weight needed to cross the threshold and have an effect. It is better to 
combine media units into a few large media units to achieve presence.
 
Usually, being “big” in media is better. However, being dominant, or spending 
more money than a competitor, does not always guarantee success. The idea is to be 
visible and have a noticeable presence. This gives advertising a chance to be seen.
Advertise When People Are Buying
The uninitiated think advertising can make people buy a given product or brand. 
This belief is not supported by experienced advertisers. For seasonal products like 
tire chains, lawn mowers, or Christmas trees, it is almost impossible to sell out of 
season. Occasionally, fur coats are sold in the summer when drastic price reduc-
tions are made. However, when large numbers of consumers are buying the com-
petition’s brand at a certain time of the year, that is usually a good time for you to 
sell your brand. The combined effect of all the advertisers will boost awareness of 
the product category, to the benefit of all advertisers.
 
Most advertisers have track records of sales by month, and these will show the 
optimum times for advertising. The strategy is to find these times and “heavy up” 
(increase) media weight to take advantage of the natural selling opportunity. On 
the other hand, for the many products that are sold at a steady rate throughout the 
year, the recency theory would suggest it is best to schedule media continuously, 
without heavy-ups.
Creative Strategy’s Impact on Media Strategy
Creative strategy is a significant consideration in planning strategy. In fact, it is 
often the starting place for all media planning. Creative indicates that some media 
are much more appropriate to the message than others. For example, when full 
color is needed, then print media are best because there is little variation in an ad’s 
appearance from one carrier to another. (In contrast, consider the differences in 

 
Principles of Planning Media Strategy 
279
color from one television set to another.) Sometimes creative can be written so that 
it will be effective in all media. At other times, creative is restricted to a small mar-
ket segment or is designed to be run in nontraditional media.
Alternative Media Strategies
Media planners should always assume that when they are choosing a suitable 
strategy, usually more than one is available. Some alternative courses of action are 
equally viable, and a few are usually better than others. Exhibit 10-1 lists alternative 
media strategies that might be used to achieve a given media objective.
 
One problem with planning strategies, however, is finding the best from among 
the alternatives. Sometimes it is necessary to justify that the best one was chosen, 
by writing a rationale in the media plan that explains why one was chosen over oth-
ers. If it is not written, someone in the client’s organization might ask for an oral 
explanation of the choice.
What Media Planners Should 
Know Before Starting to Plan
Although planners might want to start writing a media strategy from the moment 
they are assigned to a product and brand, they should first fully understand the 
other elements of the overall marketing strategy. These other considerations are 
discussed in the following paragraphs.
Alternative Media Strategies
National coverage (buying all stations in a network television lineup)
Large national reach
Buying different dayparts to reach women at home and women who work out of 
the home
Buying national magazines or national newspapers
Buying local advertising in top 100 markets
Buying network radio
Buying national cable (e.g., ESPN)
EXHIBIT 10-1

280 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Marketing Problems
Almost all marketers have one or more marketing problems that require relatively 
quick solutions. These problems could be national, regional, or local in scope and 
might deal with many different aspects of business, such as advertising, sales, 
manufacturing, and sales promotion. However, marketing or advertising problems 
usually include the advertising message (or creative), sales volume, market share, 
and profits.
 
The marketer is responsible for devising solutions to these problems. Solutions 
are usually marketing mix elements (product, price, place, and promotion, which 
includes advertising, sales promotion, public relations, and direct marketing). When 
a solution calls for advertising, then media automatically become an important 
ingredient in the solution.
 
A careful and complete analysis of the problem often helps make a proposed 
solution obvious. On the other hand, a loose or careless definition provides a bare 
minimum of direction. The media planner should know precisely what the mar-
keting problem is, including a history of the brand that is relevant to the present 
problem and the solutions that have been proposed.
 
Once the marketing problem is understood and the role of advertising has been 
identified, planners can determine the role of media in solving the problem. The 
next step is the development of media objectives and the strategies that will be used 
to achieve them.
Recommended Actions
The marketer who uses advertising recommends courses of action (strategies) to 
solve the problems. Exhibit 10-2 shows alternative solutions to a marketing problem 
of declining sales. Each solution requires a different media strategy. If, for example, 
one solution is reducing prices, then the media planner could recommend large target 
reach and high frequency as two strategies. Reach will provide broad dissemination 
of advertising messages—the marketing strategy cannot work well if few consumers 
know that prices are lower. With greater reach, more consumers are more likely to 
take advantage of the offer. Furthermore, high frequency is necessary to help the mes-
sage overcome the clutter of commercials that appear on television and radio.
Complexities of a Strategy
Strategy decisions are rarely simple, and their effects occur in many different ways. 
Neither of the two media strategies previously mentioned would always be feasible. 
The planner would need a different strategy if these require more money than the 
client is willing to spend, for instance. In that case, the planner must create a strat-
egy to fit the budget. One way to do this is to limit the high reach and frequency to 

 
Principles of Planning Media Strategy 
281
the three or four months when sales responses for the product have traditionally 
been high. Beer advertising, for example, could require a strategy that limits adver-
tising to summer months or that uses a flighting strategy.
 
If the situation is more complex (e.g., consumers who regularly bought a certain 
brand have switched brands), the solution would require an explanation of just how 
these consumers are supposed to respond to advertising communication. In this 
example, the marketer should try to motivate the consumer to switch back to the 
original brand.
 
Marketing situations requiring the use of different media for public relations, 
sales promotion, and advertising have a unique problem: all of the communications 
objectives must appear seamless to consumers. The media strategist should remind 
creative personnel that multiple communications objectives can be confusing to 
consumers, because each was produced with a different communication technique. 
The goal should be to help the advertising speak with one voice in its use of various 
media.
How the Product Will Be Sold
A media planner should know how the product will be sold and which marketing 
mix elements will be used. The term how refers to the creative department’s percep-
tion of the proposed advertising: will it communicate with consumers? Generally, 
this is part of creative strategy. Specifically, it applies consumer behavior principles 
and research to explain how consumers might react to advertising.
Declining Sales: Possible Marketing Solutions
Reduce prices
Get wider, larger, or better product distribution
Reduce price and use advertising to publicize
Use advertising to announce
Use innovative advertising messages to attract attention and communicate offer
Use sales promotion incentives
Use integrated marketing communications
Improve product quality
Use more attractive packaging
Choose new target segments (with different demographics or lifestyles)
EXHIBIT 10-2

282 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
How Advertising Sells a Product to One Customer
Gus Priemer, former marketing and media manager of S. C. Johnson & Son, Inc., 
urged media planners to first understand how to sell a product to one customer 
before planning large-scale media. Priemer also noted that planners should be able 
to describe how advertising communication is expected to work to influence the 
consumers’ behavior toward a brand. The failure to do both is often the cause of 
unsuccessful strategies, because no one is sure how the consumers will respond 
to marketing efforts. If a planner cannot perceive how one person buys, how can 
he or she know what will happen when the advertiser is dealing with millions of 
consumers?
 
When a product’s price is reduced, three elements can affect the consumer: 
price, communication method, and media choice. Simply telling consumers that 
a product’s price is reduced often has little or no effect. Sometimes this is because 
the price is obtuse, such as when advertising features only the percentage discounts 
given. This type of information makes the consumer work to figure out the dol-
lar value of the discount and can create doubt that the offer is genuine. Sometimes 
the price reduction is so insignificant that it has no motivational impact on the 
consumer.
 
The second factor in determining the success of the communication is the way 
the offer is announced. If the ad is dull and unnoticeable among more interesting 
ads or lacks audience appeal, then the communication will fail. Even the personal-
ity of a presenter can make a difference in getting communication through.
 
The third element of a successful communication is media choice. Television 
probably has the best chance of getting a message to consumers, because it provides 
emotional and factual presentation techniques to help it sell. Media work best when 
combined with a motivating force—like price reduction—and an attractive message 
placed in a strong medium.
 
Sometimes the solutions are so obvious that no written rationale is needed. If, 
for example, the selling technique is to lower prices, the consumer motivation will 
be that because prices are lower (perhaps lower than all competitors’ prices), the 
consumer will buy the product to save money and get a good or superior product 
value at the same time. In this case, the motivation does not really require that 
someone write every strategy statement about selling.
How to Neutralize the Competition’s Strategy
Media strategies take place in a dynamic marketing environment in which competi-
tors try to outsell each other and gain a larger market share. Planners of a media 
strategy cannot ignore these competing approaches, especially when any one of 

 
Principles of Planning Media Strategy 
283
them is directly attacking their brand. How can a media planner neutralize the 
competition’s strategy? In the area of media planning, certain successful strategies 
can be devised. Here are some examples:
Reach more members of a target market than competitors do
• 
Reach a different demographic target market
• 
Use higher average frequency
• 
Reach targets in new and different media formats
• 
Run a special promotion in conjunction with a medium
• 
Use media creatively
• 
Cost of Strategies
Once general strategies have been determined, the planner will provide a rough 
estimate of the cost to implement them and compare that to the amount of money 
in the media budget. If the advertiser has already given the planner a number that 
represents the most the client will spend, then the planner has to devise the solu-
tion with strategies that do not go higher than the budgeted amount.
 
At times, a planner might devise two different strategies. One strategy will cost 
about the amount the client wanted. Another strategy, called an investment spend-
ing strategy, will cost more because the planner believes more money will return 
more in sales than the smaller budget.
Other Elements of Media Strategy
The media strategy section must reveal the decisions about the way the objectives 
will be accomplished. These decisions reflect the demographic characteristics of the 
people the advertising is supposed to reach (target audience), the way the choice of 
media complements the creative strategy, the balance between reach and frequency, 
the need for continuity, and the need to implement the plan within the budget.
Media Targets
To whom will advertisements be directed—users, persons who influence users, or 
both? The typical plan states the target in two ways: as a planning target and as a 
buying target.
 
The planning target is usually stated in terms of users or purchasers of the 
product as reported in Mediamark Research and Intelligence, LLC (MRI) or other 
research. Here are some examples:

284 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Female homemakers in households that use frozen pizza
• 
Regular golfers who play at least once a month
• 
Working women
• 
Heavy users of low-calorie domestic beer
• 
 
The planning target can be used to select print vehicles because MRI will tell 
the planner how many “regular golfers,” for example, read various magazines. 
But broadcast media are bought only on the basis of age and sex demographics. 
Therefore a buying target—that is, a target categorized by age and sex demograph-
ics—must also be defined. Exhibit 10-3 shows suitable broadcast buying targets to 
match the planning targets in the previous list.
 
The more specifically a planner identifies targets by demographic or other 
means, the easier it will be to find media that will reach those targets. Occasionally, 
planners use some other descriptor, such as psychographics. The goal, however, is 
to be as specific as possible. Too broad a target, such as adults 18–64, means the 
plan will waste exposures on individuals who never buy a given product or brand 
under any circumstances.
 
Once the media target has been specified, all subsequent decisions are based on 
how well the media being considered will reach this target. Media objectives often 
include a statement indicating where targets are located geographically, when that 
is a strategic consideration. Sometimes this information is stated in the strategy 
portion, rather than the objectives portion, of the plan.
Creative Strategy
The creative strategy and creative executions are the heart of an advertising cam-
paign, whether one is planning a national campaign for an automobile manufac-
turer or a local campaign for a retail store. The reason should be obvious: copy 
Broadcast Buying Targets That Match Planning Targets
PLANNING TARGET
BROADCAST BUYING TARGET
Principal shoppers in households that use frozen pizza
Women 25–54
Regular golfers who play at least once a month
Men 35–64
Working women
Women 25–49
Heavy users of low-calorie domestic beer
Men 21–34
EXHIBIT 10-3

 
Principles of Planning Media Strategy 
285
and art are the communication that drives advertising. They sell! Media might or 
might not sell, depending on the marketing situation, but unless the copy has been 
well planned and written, the product is unlikely to sell. Copy (including words, 
pictures, sound, color, white space) is a motivating force; copy is what gets into the 
minds of consumers and affects sales in many ways.
 
Because of creative’s importance, planners should not proceed until they know 
what the creative is and which media the creative people think would best suit the 
message. In fact, creative personnel should discuss their strategies before planning 
begins with media personnel. If they do not, then it is up to media planners to seek 
out creatives and learn which media are preferred. In fact, media planners can have 
worthwhile suggestions for creatives.
 
The creative strategy affects the choice of media classes and individual media. 
It also affects the degree of creative media planning that can result (discussed 
later in this chapter). It is inconceivable that a planner would ignore the creative 
plan.
Reach and Frequency
When planners select media they are, in effect, choosing those that will deliver a 
given number of target audience impressions. Delivery, however, is nothing more 
than exposures. Because all research data represent measurements taken in the 
past, the data therefore represent only estimates of exposures. The future will be 
somewhat different. But the number of estimated exposures contracted for in a 
media plan can be patterned in such a way as to maximize either reach or fre-
quency, or to attain a given level of effective reach and frequency.
 
More explicitly, media objectives should state the frequency goal and the percent 
of the target that will be reached this number of times. Here, too, an explanation is 
needed to justify, logically, why any given level is desired.
Continuity
It should be apparent that media objectives will affect the kinds of strategies that 
later evolve. One important goal that will affect the timing of advertising during 
weeks and months of a year is continuity—the consistency of advertising place-
ment. The various scheduling options were discussed in Chapter 8. Like reach and 
frequency, continuity results in many contradictory patterns of placement if not 
controlled.
 
One placement pattern, for example, consists of advertising that appears every 
day of the year; another is limited to placing ads once a week. Which is better? 
The answer depends on a number of factors. What is the brand’s marketing goals 
and strategy? Do they require a given pattern? Does the creative strategy require 

286 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
a different pattern? For example, if the creative strategy includes a very complex 
message in television commercials, will audiences be able to grasp the meaning if 
the commercials are shown once a week, or will a pattern of frequent showings be 
required? If the latter, then the media goals will have to be based, to some extent, 
on flighting and exposure concentration.
Budget Constraints
Even though the relationship of marketing objectives to media objectives is clear, a 
number of constraints often temper the planner’s decision. The size of the budget, 
if known ahead of time, is one such constraint. Many times, the marketing budget 
is set before any media planning takes place. In such a situation, the media objec-
tives will have to be written with the budget in mind.
 
If no budget is available, then media objectives can guide the setting of a budget, 
at least as far as the cost of time or space is concerned. Once planners have a gen-
eral idea of their goals, they are in a position to estimate what it will cost to achieve 
them. Sometimes a budget cannot be set at the stage of developing media objec-
tives, but must wait until the strategy has been worked out.
 
In such cases, media objectives will have to be rewritten later to accommo-
date the size of the budget. A series of marketing/media priorities should be set so 
that the planner achieves the most pressing goals, while secondary goals wait for 
another day. The client might reduce the size of a budget recommended by a media 
planner after examining marketing/media objectives and strategy.
Creative Media Strategy
In Chapter 1, we discussed the creative media plan as a problem to be solved. In this 
chapter, we will suggest ways to implement a creative media strategy that will help 
solve this problem to a great extent. First, the media planner should understand 
what is meant by the term creative media strategy. There is no universally agreed-
upon definition of this term, but in general, such a strategy is innovative enough to 
secure for an advertised brand some advantage over competitors’ brands. The strat-
egy might accomplish this by helping the advertising stand out against competitors’ 
advertising, giving the messages a better chance of being absorbed.
Guidelines for a Creative Media Strategy
Many advertised brands in a product category tend to use similar media strate-
gies. If all brands in a category are also similar, then consumers will have difficulty 

 
Principles of Planning Media Strategy 
287
distinguishing one brand from another. Perhaps a creative media strategy will help 
solve the problem. More specifically, we offer four guidelines for implementing a 
creative media strategy.
Make Your Media Strategy Different from and More Innovative than Competitors’ A 
creative strategy is easily distinguished from competitors’ strategies. However, 
simply being different is not enough. There is no evidence that a plan that is dif-
ferent from competitors’ plans will accomplish anything. But media and mar-
keting planners will testify that truly innovative plans can accomplish key goals 
and attain competitive advantages. The key elements of innovation are ideas 
that make a brand’s advertising stand out from the competitors’ advertising. The 
most effective plans are based on insights into the day-to-day lives of consumers 
as people and the ways they relate to the product being advertised. This assumes 
advertising messages have something to say that is meaningful to consumers. 
This also means the creative media dollars should return more than a typical 
brand’s media strategy.
The Ability to Be Creative Does Not Depend on Additional Dollars Innovative strate-
gies that cost more than what is considered normal are not valuable unless there is 
evidence that the increased spending will result in superior returns. Fortunately, it 
is possible to be creative without spending more.
Media Strategy Should Start with Quantitative Proof . . . Then Go Beyond Numbers A 
creative media strategy is not a substitute for quantitative proof that the best media 
have been selected and used. Without measures of reach, frequency, effective fre-
quency, and other kinds of useful numerical data, a planner would have to rely on 
instinct. It is difficult to convince clients who are spending large amounts of money 
for media to rely on instincts as proof. A solid media plan is built on good quantita-
tive proof and a good creative strategy.
Creative Media Strategy Should Be Relevant to the Problems of the Brand Being cre-
ative is sometimes interpreted as being “offbeat” or “new.” It is important to make 
a creative media plan relevant to the marketing situation, not just “different.” A 
media planner should contribute to the overall marketing plan with creative media 
strategies. Planners typically are thought of as “number crunchers,” or people with 
only quantitative skills. Both stereotypes ought to be dismissed. When given an 
opportunity to be creative, a media planner should be able to think of innovative 
ways to solve problems.

288 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Examples of Creative Media Strategies
The following examples summarize creative strategies that various advertisers used 
to achieve special attention for their messages.
Problem: Kodak’s headquarters is in Rochester, New York. Its competitor in 
the copier field, Xerox, was about to sponsor the U.S. Open golf tournament in 
Rochester. The planner’s challenge was to offset this competitive (and embarrass-
ing) local Xerox exposure.
Solution: On the first day of the tournament, Kodak’s agency published an ad in 
USA Today that looked just like the newspaper’s real front page, except that all the 
stories were about Kodak’s copiers. The single-page ad appeared in a special sec-
tion on the U.S. Open and wrapped around the front page so that the first thing 
readers saw was the Kodak copier line; the real front page was underneath. The 
Kodak page appeared only in the Rochester area but was circulated at the tourna-
ment site, airports, and hotels. Kodak’s planners were creative because they saw 
an opportunity that had not been apparent before.
Problem: Kodak needed a big media event without taxing the advertising budget.
Solution: Kodak’s advertising agency suggested it buy and be the sole sponsor 
of a special issue of Time magazine. The issue had a theme that fit with the client 
and the medium: “150 Years of Photojournalism.” This special issue went to sub-
scribers free, as a bonus. It was also supported with a special ad campaign that 
appeared in key markets—a traveling photo exhibit that worked as a public rela-
tions event and received extra publicity from the local press.
Problem: An advertising agency had difficulty finding enough money to commu-
nicate with consumers in 10 of the client’s key markets. The budget was only 
$250,000. Among those markets were Cincinnati, Cleveland, and Detroit.
Solution: The agency found an hour-long TV program on art in ancient China, pro-
duced by a station in Seattle. It bought the rights to that program and scheduled it 
in the 10 key markets. The agency localized the program to fit each market sepa-
rately. It then got most stations in the markets to broadcast the show for free, 
arguing that it had a strong cultural-affairs type of appeal.
Media Strategy Is Not Science
In practice, planners have to remember that media strategy is not a science in the 
same manner as physics or medicine. Its outcomes cannot always be predicted with 

 
Principles of Planning Media Strategy 
289
great accuracy. One significant reason for this is that the marketplace is constantly 
changing as competitors use many different tactics to gain an advantage over each 
other. In addition, the original marketing problem might not be solved after strate-
gies have been implemented.
 
The outcomes of some media strategies, such as reaching 70 percent of a target 
market by placing ads in a certain group of vehicles, can be achieved quite well. 
However, it would be incorrect to assume that everyone reached saw an adver-
tisement in the selected medium or that all those who saw an ad will respond as 
intended. Therefore, planning strategy includes knowing precisely what each strat-
egy means and implies.
 
For the most part, planners learn what each individual strategy will accom-
plish from personal experience. When planners have worked with a given prod-
uct category or a brand for many years, they learn what a strategy will accomplish 
under certain marketing conditions. As time goes by, they modify their findings to 
develop a body of knowledge that enables them to make better predictions of the 
results. Exhibit 10-4 lists questions that cover basic media strategies. They should 
be included in a typical media plan. For complex strategies, they should be accom-
panied by a rationale.
Relationships Among Reach, Frequency, Continuity, 
Number of Markets, and Ad Size
In planning strategy, usually five elements are closely related: reach, frequency, con-
tinuity, the number of markets to be used, and ad size. Because of their close rela-
tionship, a person cannot plan for one of these elements without simultaneously 
considering the others. The relationship grows out of a fixed budget size, which 
means, in effect, that the planner must balance trade-offs: when one of these ele-
ments is emphasized, the others will have to suffer.
 
The size of the ad affects media planning because it is directly related to the cost 
of advertising. A magazine spread costs more than a page, which in turn costs more 
than a half page. A 15-second commercial on network or cable TV is typically half 
the cost of a 30-second commercial, while in spot TV a 15-second commercial is 
about two-thirds the cost. So although the shorter commercials would have less 
impact, if the goal of a campaign was simple brand awareness, a mixture of :15s 
and :30s would allow longer flights, more markets, and more reach and frequency. 
Typically the ad size or ratio of ad sizes has been determined by the account team 
and the creative department, leaving the media planner to work with the four other 
elements.
 
Each of these elements costs a considerable amount of money to maximize. 
Emphasizing reach, for example, usually requires dispersing advertising messages 

290 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Questions for Planning Media Strategies
Marketing
1. What are the marketing problems that require media?
2. What marketing objectives and strategies have been planned?
Media
1. What are the creative strategy and recommendations for best use of creative?
2. What are the media objectives?
Strategy
1. Who should targets be (demographic, product usage, and lifestyle description of 
prospects)?
2. Which media classes are recommended? What percentage of the budget should go 
to each media class (e.g., 60 percent network TV, 20 percent spot TV, 10 percent 
cable, and 10 percent magazines)?
3. How much reach and frequency do we need? Effective reach and/or frequency? 
Why? How much reach, frequency, and GRPs are needed per quarter?
4. How large is the media budget? What percentage spending per month and quarter 
is required? Why?
5. What is the best timing and scheduling for this year?
a. What pattern of continuity is recommended?
b. Is there an introductory period? For how many weeks? Why?
c. How heavy should introductory weight be compared to sustaining parts of the 
plan?
d. Is there a heavy-up period? When? Why?
6. Geographic concentration:
a. In which media should it occur? Why?
b. What are the criteria for selecting markets?
c. What is the importance of BDIs and CDIs?
d. How many markets should we be in?
e. What are the names of individual markets?
f. How much weight should we plan for in each market?
g. What are the seasonal variations in weighting?
7. Which daypart should be selected for broadcast media?
8. Media units:
a. Sizes needed? 30 seconds or 15 seconds? Page or partial-page units?
b. Use of special color or treatments (gatefold, etc.)?
EXHIBIT 10-4

 
Principles of Planning Media Strategy 
291
widely so that many different persons in the target audience will have an opportu-
nity to see the messages. Generally, one single media vehicle, such as one television 
program or one magazine, will not deliver a high reach. This emphasis requires 
multiple vehicles, greater message dispersion, and additional media weight. As the 
cost for reach goes up, the amount of money available for the other three elements 
becomes more limited.
 
The same holds true for continuity. If an advertiser wants to plan continuous adver-
tising over 52 weeks, the cost will be high, leaving minimal amounts of money for the 
other three elements. Often as much as six or more months of advertising must be 
sacrificed for the reach to attain a high enough level in the remaining six months. The 
trade-off between flighting and continuity was discussed in Chapter 5.
 
Likewise, the number and size of individual markets in a plan, where national 
media are used in conjunction with local media, clearly affect overall costs. Even if 
only local media are used, the same concept prevails. The more markets used, the 
higher the cost, and the less money available for the other elements.
 
Exhibit 10-5 shows to some extent what happens when a planner manipulates 
the four elements within the constraints of a fixed budget. The figure shows some 
ways to vary the weights of reach, frequency, continuity, and number of markets. 
One part of a planner’s job is to weigh each of the four alternatives and decide 
which needs more emphasis (usually at the expense of the others). Of course, if 
the budget size can be increased (unfortunately, it usually cannot), then different 
emphases can be achieved. As a consequence of this dilemma, the planner needs 
some criteria for weighing the alternatives.
Weighing Alternatives
The two most important elements of a media plan are reach and frequency. Because 
they occupy such an important position in a plan, they are usually considered 
before continuity or number of markets. When a media budget is larger, it is pos-
sible to achieve both high reach and high frequency levels. But most often, the cost 
is too high to do both.
 
If high reach is planned, it will probably cause the frequency level to decline some-
what, because reach and frequency are inversely related. If, however, reach is very high 
(more than 90 percent), then frequency can be increased by extra dollar expenditures, 
because most of the money will go into building frequency and a very small incre-
ment will go to building reach. This is the natural consequence of trying to reach new 
people who have not already been reached by some other mass vehicle.
 
Higher reach will be necessary when the media objectives call for anything new. 
Reach is also needed for building brand awareness. If a brand awareness level is now 
at 25 percent and an objective is to raise it to 50 percent, then higher reach will 
be required and frequency will be sacrificed. Another objective calling for higher 

292 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
reach is the announcement of various kinds of promotions, such as cents-off deals, 
special coupon promotions, or refund offers. Such promotions must build a great 
deal of awareness so that consumers will take advantage of the offer. Still another 
high-reach situation occurs when changes in the brand or changes in the creative 
strategy are important. Finally, more reach is needed when it becomes necessary to 
meet or exceed competitive reach levels. One goal could be to steal customers from 
a competitor by showing them that the advertised brand better meets their needs, 
in which case enough reach is needed to equal or better the competitor’s reach.
 
More frequency is needed, at the expense of reach, when the brand awareness 
levels are already high due to the cumulative effect of past advertising. At that 
point, more frequency is needed to meet or surpass frequency levels of competitors. 
Alternative Strategies Within a Fixed Budget
Reach
Frequency
Continuity
Number
of Markets
Reach
Frequency
Continuity
Number
of Markets
Reach
Number
of Markets
Fre-
Continuity
quency
Reach
Fre-
quency
Number 
Con-
of Markets
tinuity
To buy heavy amounts of
continuity or markets, you must
sacriﬁce reach and frequency.
You cannot plan for equal
strategies on a ﬁxed budget.
Most media plans do not have
enough money to reach all 
goals.
Other combination strategies
must sacriﬁce one or another 
of the goals.
EXHIBIT 10-5

 
Principles of Planning Media Strategy 
293
When the advertising noise level of all competitors is already high, then more fre-
quency is needed to meet or surpass frequency levels of competitors. There are cer-
tain marketing situations in which a minimum judgmentally determined frequency 
threshold must be passed before consumers start paying attention to the message. 
The effectiveness of the media plan is then directly related to high frequency, but 
the planner must also consider what percent of the target will be exposed at that 
level for a given budget.
 
Even if brand awareness is a campaign or creative objective, the campaign might 
require advertising in a pattern that matches the purchasing cycle of a product 
class. Some products are not sold to any great extent at certain times of the year. 
Computers, for example, require heavy media usage in spring, early fall, and at 
Christmastime. Reach levels also will probably be high at those times. In contrast, 
beer is sold all through the year, with summer peaks. For this product, reach lev-
els might have to be sacrificed at some times of the year to have enough money to 
cover the year and at the same time spend heavily during the summer. When high 
reach is necessary, continuity sometimes needs to be sacrificed. In some situations, 
advertisers drop out of advertising for as long as six months, allowing the product 
to keep selling at lower volume levels, to have sufficient money to advertise at high 
levels during peak-volume seasons.
 
The final variable affecting the budget allocation is the number of markets to 
be used. Planners arrive at a number by using either of two methods. The older 
method consisted of creating national media plans in which the number of mar-
kets would not be considered until after other strategies were decided. Another 
technique starts with a market-by-market analysis and sets strategies for each mar-
ket. To simplify planning, markets are then grouped into tiers that reflect differ-
ent reach/frequency goals. For example, Group A markets would receive high-level 
support, Group B markets would get intermediate-level weight, and Group C mar-
kets would receive minimum-level sustaining support via what spills in from the 
national media.
Setting Priorities
An important step in weighing the strategy trade-offs is that of setting priorities. A 
planner should do this early so that it will be easier to decide which element is most 
or least important. Priorities come from media objectives, and some objectives are 
obviously more important than others. If there is any doubt, then a planner must 
not only state the priorities but also explain why one objective is more important 
than another and how much more important. Once the priorities are clear, the allo-
cation of a budget to the five variables should be relatively clear.

294 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Choosing Media Strategies
The discussion in this chapter to this point has been on elements that affect the 
planning of media strategies. Now the question arises, Which strategy from among 
the alternatives is the most appropriate? Many strategies could be used in one 
media plan, so planners need guidelines for studying alternatives. This section dis-
cusses a select group of strategies that media planners often confront.
Prevailing Wisdom
Remember that media strategy is not a science. There is little evidence one can refer 
to in trying to make the best decision. Many of what are called “best strategies” 
have not been proven to be best objectively, but are judged to be best by a planner 
based on the facts available. Many times, however, strategists speak with so much 
conviction that it is assumed they must be correct. On the other hand, many strat-
egists have learned by experience what works best, and they use this learning in 
future decision making. In these cases, they are using their experience as a differ-
ent form of research.
 
One must realize that the effects of some strategies cannot be measured. As an 
example, it is almost impossible for most marketing and media planners to prove 
how many sales were actually delivered as a result of a media strategy’s contri-
bution, because the strategy cannot be parsed out separately. What seems to be 
working might instead be the product of other variables that are difficult to mea-
sure. Furthermore, media responses are mostly affected by advertising’s creative 
efforts.
 
Media’s effectiveness is probably the most difficult of all advertising variables 
to measure. Ads are responded to, but mostly as a result of creative efforts. We can 
find out how many magazines were subscribed to, how many were sold on news-
stands, how many readers there were, and even whether audiences saw a given ad 
in certain magazines. But how many sales did the magazine produce? That is not 
known, and it is probable that we will never know precisely this kind of informa-
tion. The exception to this is direct-response advertising. With the use of toll-free 
and 900 telephone numbers or business reply cards, it is possible to directly attrib-
ute sales to a distinct media vehicle. The effect of digital advertising can also be 
precisely measured in terms of click-through from the banner to the advertiser’s 
website, and from there to product inquiry or actual online sales.
Typical Media Strategies and Alternatives
The following discussion covers selected marketing or media problem situations 
and the prevailing strategy opinions about them. It examines some of the major 

 
Principles of Planning Media Strategy 
295
strategies that planners have to deal with, shows how and why these strategies are 
used, and discusses alternatives.
Scheduling When the market for a brand seems flat during the entire year (i.e., 
sales are approximately even during all 12 months), the scheduling strategy and 
the recency theory suggest that advertising should be done every month. This 
implies that because consumers buy a product category evenly, the scheduling 
should reflect this evenness. This kind of scheduling therefore would call for even 
continuity during all 12 months at a minimum 50 target GRPs per week when 
on air.
 
What is missing from a high-continuity strategy is the effects of all competi-
tors’ advertising. Even continuity means that spending is approximately the same 
during each month. But this strategy ignores the competition, unless the competi-
tion is also supporting its brand throughout the year. The net effect of even spend-
ing is to have lower reaches and frequencies (communication opportunities) each 
month unless a huge amount of money is spent. On the other hand, the strategy 
is certain to deliver advertising to buyers who would be missed during hiatuses if 
media weight was flighted. See the shelf-space model of media planning presented 
in Chapter 5.
Flighting If the competition concentrates its advertising support during certain 
times of the year, a better scheduling strategy can be to sacrifice even continuity to 
concentrate money at certain periods during the year. The advertiser would choose 
periods when its own brand can be prominent compared to competitors’ brands. 
This strategy is called flighting and is based on the assumption that advertising will 
be more effective with additional frequency over a short period of time. A sched-
ule might concentrate advertising into bursts of four to six weeks at a time at about 
100–125 target GRPs per week, with a two- to three-week hiatus between each 
burst. The effect of this strategy is that (assuming the budget is a fixed amount) 
more money is available to be spent during the bursts. The planner assumes that 
the accompanying positive effect on sales from greater reach and frequency when 
the bursts occur will exceed the loss of sales during hiatus periods.
Heavy Introductory Effort If a brand is just being introduced, it has the problem 
of breaking through consumers’ mental sets that have endured without this new 
brand. Competitive brands might have a strong hold on the market, making it dif-
ficult for the new brand to establish a foothold. A strategy here would require heavy 
spending at the beginning of a campaign, sacrificing advertising during the latter 
part of the year to ensure that enough money is available to properly launch the 

296 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
brand. The introduction could run from one to three months and would deliver 
1,200–1,500 target GRPs over the period.
 
The Information Resources, Inc., research mentioned earlier confirmed that 
“the concentration of higher TV weight into fewer weeks is related to an increase 
in sales.”1 The study concentrated only on television advertising, but the same con-
cepts would apply for other advertising media, with the exception that television is 
more dynamic.
 
In most new-product introductions, the client is willing to spend more money to 
get the product launched in the marketplace. But this additional money might not 
be enough. Beginning media planners are often surprised to learn that as much as 
70 percent of an advertising budget is recommended to be spent in this introduc-
tory period. You might ask, “What happens to advertising during the rest of the 
year, when so little money is left?” The experienced planner will usually respond 
by saying, “If sales are not strong with an introductory heavy-up, the client is likely 
to cut the budget planned for sustaining support.” One of the principles of strategy 
planning is to make advertising appear as large as possible for maximum effect. So 
the up-front strategy for a new-product introduction is the best alternative.
Heavy-Up Scheduling Most planners spend more on advertising when consumer 
buying is heaviest and spend less at other times. This is known as heavy-up sched-
uling. Many brands have two to four months a year of heavy buying activity. The 
opportunity to get competitors’ customers to switch brands during these heavy-
buying seasons is greater at this time if advertisements say something worthwhile.
 
Advertising should show a brand’s superiority over others. These heavy buy-
ing seasons are usually the best times to advertise because consumers are more 
responsive to advertising for the product category than at other times. It cannot be 
assumed that heavying up for two or three months will automatically cause sales 
to increase proportionately. Most consumers are looking for good values to meet 
their needs and wants.
 
However, a planner can have an advantage over competitors who also recognize 
that the buying season is the time to advertise. If all competitors are spending more 
at the same time, they might nullify each other. This could require a strategy for 
one competitor to start a month or two before all the others start heavy spending, 
and thereby get a jump on the market.
1. Information Resources, Inc., 1991; summary from FCB/Chicago Media Matters, 
February 1992. 

 
Principles of Planning Media Strategy 
297
Geographic Market Weighting Geographic market weighting means adding either 
dollars, GRPs, or a larger number of advertisements in a geographic market because 
that market has greater sales potential than others. Each of these dollars, GRPs, 
or ads represents the same idea to some extent. When any of them is added, it is 
assumed, advertising has a better chance of being more effective than the same 
market with lesser weights.
 
The need for extra weighting in certain markets is based on market potential, 
which is usually uneven nationally. A brand might be selling well in some markets 
and poorly in others. The assumption is that adding weight to low-volume sales 
markets represents a bigger risk than adding weight to markets that have already 
been producing good sales.
 
One principle of weighting, then, is to add extra weight to a market equal to 
its relative sales contribution. This is called pro-rata budgeting, which suggests 
that a market that produces 6 percent of a company’s sales should receive at least 
6 percent of the advertising budget. Under this principle, the weighting of markets 
can be based on the relative sales volume each market has already produced. Pro-
rata budgeting has established a positive track record that serves as a guideline for 
weighting.
 
When some markets have done poorly and there is reason to believe that one 
of the reasons for the poor sales is the lack of advertising weight, then the pro-rata 
technique might not be adequate. A planner could experiment with added weight 
to see what will happen. Without evidence that sales would increase with more 
advertising weight, the pro-rata technique is a low-risk alternative.
Combining Media or Vehicles Another strategy deals with how many different vehi-
cles or media are optimum for achieving a media goal. In answering this question, 
the nature of the goal is a consideration. However, if the goal is building reach (e.g., 
70 percent of a target market), then the media and dayparts or vehicles should be 
selected with consideration for the diversified audiences they reach. There are many 
ways to achieve the desired 70 percent reach, both within an individual medium 
and across media. For example, the use of multiple media means there is less dupli-
cation within each individual medium. This is one way to build reach.
 
Planners also use multiple media to build concentrated reach of a demographi-
cally defined target market. Each medium will bring new audience members to a 
plan. But as each additional vehicle is added to a list, more weight goes into build-
ing frequency than reach, because the target audiences of the latest-added medium 
have already been reached by the media selected first.

298 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
Conversely, if the media goal is to build frequency, then it is appropriate to con-
centrate weight on a small number of vehicles. As weight is added to the same vehi-
cles, frequency increases as the same people see the ad over and over again.
 
One consequence of the inverse relationship between reach and frequency is 
that it is possible to buy high frequency and have reaches that are so small as to be 
of questionable value. A media mix that produces an average frequency of 20 might 
have a reach of only 12 percent. The value of high frequency would be lost on such 
a small market reach. This is something a planner has to avoid.
 
Going beyond the numbers, multimedia campaigns can be used to increase 
the impact of the advertising by presenting the product’s story with many differ-
ent voices. Exhibit 10-6 presents one example: in 2006, the S. C. Johnson company 
introduced a new kind of shower cleaner with an integrated multimedia campaign 
that surrounded the target with the brand’s message.
S. C. Johnson Scrubbing Bubbles Automatic Shower Cleaner Introduction
Scrubbing Bubbles Automatic Shower Cleaner was a new kind of product that cleaned 
showers with an automatic spray. The target was older than for most consumer pack-
age goods, the message more complex, and the product more expensive than tra-
ditional shower cleaners. The marketing objective was to introduce the brand, cre-
ate excitement among the consumers, and, given the price commitment, provide an 
incentive that would spark trial.
 
The solution was to use a combination of media that would surround the con-
sumer, providing the needed reach and depth of communication with the theme “MAID 
for your shower.”
National Television—Prime Time, Daytime, News, Cable
Three creative executions strongly increased brand awareness.
• 
Tags were used to promote freestanding insert (FSI) and Web coupons and 
• 
Refreshing Spa Refill.
Direct Response Television
“Mommy’s Secret” :60 drove consumers to the product website.
• 
Various incentive offers included starter kits, coupons, and free caddies.
• 
EXHIBIT 10-6

 
Principles of Planning Media Strategy 
299
Spot Radio
Three creative executions used tags to promote FSI and Web coupons.
• 
Partnering with radio stations for local radio promotion “Singing in the Shower” 
• 
generated thousands of promotional mentions.
Print—Consumer Magazines
“Maid Arms” and “Touch Your Shower Clean” ran in various weekly and monthly 
• 
magazines during summer 2006.
Overall ad awareness for print increased dramatically.
• 
Online Promotion
The website www.DirtyShower.com generated excitement by redirecting consum-
• 
ers to the brand’s website during prelaunch period.
The website attracted many thousands of visitors in four months.
• 
Skymall Placement
This included cover placement and full-page content.
• 
In-flight magazines resonate with older and more affluent consumers.
• 
It was the third-greatest Skymall success story ever!
• 
Source: S. C. Johnson, Inc. Illustration: James Shepard. Photo: Glen Gysler. Used with permission.

300 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Share of Voice In developing a competitive media strategy, the most common, if 
most simplistic, measure is share of voice (SOV), expressed as percent of dollars 
spent. Knowing that our brand spent $30 million last year out of total category 
spending of $150 million (SOV  20 percent) tells us a great deal about the brand’s 
relative position in the marketplace and in the minds of our consumers. Our brand 
accounts for only 20 percent of total category advertising. Put another way, the con-
sumer sees four competing commercials for every one of ours.
 
Dollars are a crude measure because they do not tell us how they affect the many 
important marketing variables. It would be more precise to describe share of voice 
in terms of national GRPs. But that hides geographic differences in media weight, 
as well as possible creative differences in the commercial message. Yet a market-by-
market competitive analysis by commercial length will hide possible differences in 
impact across different dayparts and program venues.
 
From this it should be clear that as the competitive analysis becomes more 
detailed, the planner runs the risk of getting lost in the numbers. These factors 
should be examined when they are directly relevant to the media strategy of the 
brand. Otherwise, the more general share-of-voice statistic is going to give the tru-
est picture of the forces that drive the marketing situation.
Channel Planning Software
The process of balancing trade-offs and determining which media are the best for 
a given product and set of marketing objectives has been characterized as “channel 
planning.” Pointlogic, a Netherlands company,2 has developed software that allows 
a planner to quantify the many variables that go into media planning and produce a 
relative ranking of media based on that input. The Pointlogic tools are used in more 
than 65 countries. In the United States, Pointlogic’s Compose process and com-
puter software begins with consumer research into the characteristics that drive 
the purchase decision of 58 products and services. Those drivers include price, 
convenience, customer service, high quality, and so on, and the ability of each of 35 
media (channels) to communicate those drivers.
 
A survey of media experts then identifies how well each channel satisfies vari-
ous marketing objectives: reach people in the home, provide high frequency, allow 
market selectivity, deliver a consumer coupon, create immediate awareness, and 
so on. To use the system, the planner enters the target audience, the product, the 
2. www.pointlogic.com.  

 
Principles of Planning Media Strategy 
301
marketing objectives (create awareness, encourage trial, stimulate conversation, 
etc.), and the channels that might be considered. Using a graphic interface, plan-
ners input the relative importance of the various drivers and the characteristics that 
are needed from the candidate channels. Exhibit 10-7 shows the result: a graphic 
display that ranks each of the candidate channels based on all the various inputs. 
The statistical engine at the heart of the generic Compose system is called Chorus, 
which can be modified to reflect an agency’s custom research, unique planning 
style, and graphic treatment. Like any computer system, its results should be viewed 
Sample Channel Ranking Output from Compose System
Source: Pointlogic USA. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 10-7

302 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
as one of many inputs to the media planning process. Typically the results confirm 
the planner’s expectations. However, agencies find it useful as additional, indepen-
dent support for the recommendation.
 
The channel planning program is best run in a meeting with all the stakehold-
ers, possibly even including the client. It serves as a focal point of (often controver-
sial) discussions on the relative importance of the many factors that go into select-
ing the best media. In the author’s opinion, this meeting is the most valuable aspect 
of using channel planning software.

 
303
Evaluating and Selecting 
Media Vehicles
A
fter devising strategies, the next step in media planning is to evaluate 
and select media vehicles. In this step, media buyers come into the pic-
ture. The planner provides criteria for buying, and the buyers follow the 
criteria as closely as possible. This kind of activity helps keep a number 
of different people working on the account closely orchestrated toward common 
goals and efforts.
 
With the exception of print and online, vehicle selection is determined primar-
ily by professional buyers. Although the primary factor is cost, there are other con-
siderations, which vary depending on the medium. For television, for example, the 
media plan specifies which dayparts are to be used, but buyers select stations and 
programs within those dayparts on the basis of cost (cost per thousand [CPM]), 
rating size (coverage), and audience composition for the age/sex target audience. 
For radio, buyers choose stations on the basis of cost, format, average quarter-hour 
rating, and cumulative audience. The buyer’s goal for both TV and radio is to pur-
chase a schedule of vehicles (programs, stations, time periods, etc.) that deliver the 
planned gross rating points (GRPs) within the authorized budget. Newspapers are 
selected primarily according to their geographic coverage of the market under con-
sideration. Outdoor billboard locations are selected on the basis of visibility, traffic 
flow, and market coverage. Online websites are selected on the basis of their com-
position for the target audience, the appropriateness of the website for the product, 
engagement (time spent) with the site, CPM cost efficiency, and technical ability to 
target advertising to specific audiences.
CHAPTER ELEVEN

304 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
Unlike broadcast and outdoor advertising, magazine vehicles are usually selected 
by the planner on the basis of a variety of considerations in addition to media cost-
efficiency. These considerations will be discussed in detail in the following section.
Determining Media Values for Magazines
An elementary principle for selecting media is to select vehicles that reach as much 
of the target audience as possible at a cost-efficient price. Although this principle 
seems to suggest that this is all there is to the selection process, nothing could be 
further from the truth. A more advanced principle is to determine each vehicle’s 
value in terms of the desired criteria and then select those that best meet these cri-
teria. Some of them can be measured quantitatively, and the numerical values of 
various criteria can be combined into a single number. Others are qualitative, and 
it is more difficult to assign numerical weights to these. But the selection should 
consider both. Exhibit 11-1 lists the most important objective and subjective criteria 
usually considered in magazine selection.
Target Reach, Composition, and Cost-Efficiency
The most important criterion in determining media values is a combination of 
three principles: (1) finding vehicles that reach a large number of targets with (2) a 
high enough composition to avoid waste and (3) at a low CPM. The logic of using 
these three principles in combination should be obvious. Advertising and market-
ing today are directed to certain demographic targets. Assuming these targets can 
be identified precisely, it follows that media vehicles should be selected to reach the 
largest number of targets efficiently with minimum waste. There is no reason to 
think that these principles will change as new media forms are developed.
Magazine Planning Process
How do magazines get selected for a media plan? Most planners follow a six-step 
process that leads to the final magazine schedule. Note that several of these steps 
require the use of proprietary computer systems that are available only by subscrip-
tion from the data suppliers or third-party software vendors such as IMS or Telmar. 
Their use is shown here to illustrate these real-world processes.
1. Determine the List of Candidate Magazines. This is the time to cast a broad net 
to include any magazine that might be appropriate for the plan. Candidates can be 

 
Evaluating and Selecting Media Vehicles 
305
identified by looking at the advertiser’s experience in prior years, magazines used 
by competitors, and industry sources such as SRDS. Media planners also become 
aware of candidates through their frequent contacts with sales representatives 
from magazines that might be appropriate. Planners see sales presentations that 
give reasons why a particular magazine should be considered. As part of their 
efforts to maintain goodwill, sales representatives treat planners to luncheons, 
after-work parties, and other social events that are designed to make them aware of 
Criteria for Determining Media Values of Magazines
Primary Objective Criteria
1. Composition and coverage
2. Delivery of demographic targets
3. Cost-efficiency of delivered targets
4. Delivery of product-class user targets
5. Delivery of strategic targets
6. Delivery of psychographic targets
Secondary Objective Criteria
1. Primary versus pass-along readers
2. Editorial features or other content related to brand’s image
3. Special editions, issues, or sections in print
4. Media imperatives
5. Color reproduction
6. Circulation trends in print vehicles
7. Geographic flexibility
8. Production flexibility
9. Positioning opportunities within print vehicles
Subjective (or Qualitative) Criteria
1. Writing tone
2. Reader respect
3. Leadership in media class
4. Believability
EXHIBIT 11-1

306 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
the sponsoring magazines and encourage planners to include them in the prelimi-
nary analyses. Through these contacts, planners learn of magazines that should be 
included on the candidate list.
2. Identify the Most Efficient Magazines with the CPM Ranker. In this step, the plan-
ner ranks all candidate magazines according to their CPM efficiency against the 
target audience. Typically, costs are based on the open rate of a four-color bleed 
ad without any consideration for negotiation. This puts all of the candidates on an 
equal footing at this early stage in the process.
 
Exhibit 11-2 shows a sample CPM ranker for a magazine plan directed to female 
principal shoppers in households that are heavy users of frozen pizza. Recall that 
composition is the percent of the magazine’s total audience who are heavy users of 
frozen pizza. Coverage is the percent of heavy users who read the magazine. The key 
to this ranker is the CPM. Magazines are ranked from most to least efficient, but 
be aware that differences of a few pennies are generally not significant. In this case, 
the planner made the judgment to continue considering all the magazines with a 
CPM of less than $100. Working Mother has a high 139 composition index, but its 
high CPM against this target makes it far less efficient than the other books. So it 
is out of the running for this campaign.
 
Although a subscription to the research is needed to get the product user reader-
ship and CPM, total adult CPM can be calculated from information that is available 
at no registration cost on the Internet at www.mriplus.com.
3. Create a Plan That Delivers the Most Reach for the Given Budget. All proprietary 
planning software has an optimizer function. Planners enter the budget, the target 
audience, and the list of candidate publications (with costs). The optimizer looks at 
thousands of alternatives and arrives at the plan that offers the most reach for the 
budget. Be aware that this is only a numerical solution based on the rate-card price; 
it doesn’t account for any qualitative measures such as special positioning, addi-
tional exposure on the magazine’s website, promotional opportunities, or a variety 
of other factors that need to be considered. But it does establish a benchmark that 
shows how much reach can be achieved.
 
Exhibit 11-3 shows the results of an optimization run—the theoretical highest-
reaching plan for a $3 million budget. Notice that the planner drew the cutoff line 
at Good Housekeeping. All the magazines above that line are included in the optimi-
zation, while those below the line are out of consideration for this campaign. This 
plan costs $2,956,909. It will reach 74.1 percent of target heavy frozen-pizza users 
and deliver that target at an average $58.95 CPM impressions. Other statistics such 
as the net reach in thousands and the CPM net reach are presented, but they are 
seldom used and can be suppressed in the display if desired.

 
Evaluating and Selecting Media Vehicles 
307
4. Refine the Optimal Schedule to Reflect Marketing Judgment. The planner now 
adjusts the optimal plan to reflect any marketing factors that would suggest 
emphasizing one magazine over another. For instance, one might decide that it is 
important to have both of the “store” magazines in the plan (i.e., both Family Circle 
and Woman’s Day). The planner notes that the six pages in People will add more 
CPM Analysis of Female Principal Shoppers Who Are 
Heavy Users of Frozen Pizza
Base: Female principal shoppers
Population: 98,276 (000)
Target: Heavy users of frozen pizza, 4 packages in the last 30 days
Population: 16,481 (000)
Percent of base: 16.77%
AUDIENCE 
(000)
COMP (%)
COVERAGE 
(%)
INDEX
4-COLOR 
BLEED COST
4-COLOR 
BLEED CPM
Total heavy users 
of frozen pizza
16,481
16.8%
100%
100
—
—
Magazines Included in Optimizer
   1.
People
4,910
19.9
   29.8
119
$241,975
$49.28
   2.
Parents
2,902
25.8
    17.6
154
162,900
56.13
   3.
Woman’s World
1,354
21.6
8.2
129
95,565
70.58
   4.
Family Circle
3,300
20.7
   20.0
123
247,200
74.91
   5.
O, The Oprah Magazine
1,983
16.9
   12.0
101
150,730
76.01
   6.
Woman’s Day
3,295
18.5
   20.0
110
252,390
76.60
   7.
In Touch Weekly
1,158
23.4
7.0
139
100,496
86.78
   8.
Redbook
1,589
22.5
9.6
134
148,200
93.27
   9.
Good Housekeeping
3,626
19.1
   22.0
114
344,475
95.00
Magazines Excluded from Optimizer
10.
Everyday with 
Rachael Ray
1,162
22.1
7.1
132
127,500
109.72
11.
In Style
1,219
17.5
7.4
104
138,600
113.70
12.
Real Simple
1,051
15.4
6.4
   92
160,000
152.24
13.
Working Mother
393
23.3
2.4
139
67,935
172.86
Source: Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, Spring 2009. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 11-2

308 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
frequency than reach and can be cut back. With this in mind, the planner drops one 
insertion in People and replaces it with an insertion in Family Circle.
 
The planner makes these changes and reflects them as an alternate schedule 
(Exhibit 11-4). Notice that the alternate plan is slightly less efficient ($61.01 CPM 
versus $58.95 CPM), but it does a better job of meeting the marketing objectives, 
while marginally reducing the reach. At $2,962,134, the alternate plan is still under 
Magazine Optimization Model
Target: Female Principal Shoppers/Frozen Pizza: Heavy Users 
(4 Packages/Last 30 Days)
Population (000): 16,481
MAGAZINE
OPTIMAL
People
6
Parents
1
Woman’s World
4
Family Circle
—
O, The Oprah Magazine
1
Woman’s Day
1
In Touch Weekly
3
Redbook
—
Good Housekeeping
1
Total insertions
17
Total cost
$2,956,909
Gross impressions (000)
50,158
GRPs
304
CPM gross impressions
$58.95
Reach percent
74.1%
Average frequency
4.10
Net reach (000)
12,209
CPM net reach
$241.98
Source: Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, Spring 2009. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 11-3

 
Evaluating and Selecting Media Vehicles 
309
budget. Note that all these rates are “open rates” and do not reflect substantial addi-
tional savings that are possible with negotiation.
5. Negotiate Position, Cost, and Merchandising with the Magazine Sales 
Representative. Media planners are responsible for recommendations that involve 
millions of their clients’ advertising dollars. But their decisions also represent 
Magazine Optimization with Marketing Adjustments
Target: Female Homemakers/Frozen Pizza: Heavy Users 
(4 Packages/Last 30 Days)
Population (000): 16,481
MAGAZINE
OPTIMAL
ALTERNATE
People
6
5
Parents
1
1
Woman’s World
4
4
Family Circle
—
1
O, The Oprah Magazine
1
1
Woman’s Day
1
1
In Touch Weekly
3
3
Redbook
—
—
Good Housekeeping
1
1
Total insertions
17
17
Total cost
$2,956,909
$2,962,134
Gross impressions
50,158
48,548
GRPs
304
295
CPM gross impressions
$58.95
$61.01
Reach percent
74.14
73.74
Average frequency
4.1
3.99
Net reach
12,219
12,153
CPM net reach
$241.98
$243.74
Source: Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, Spring 2009. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 11-4

310 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
success or failure to the representatives of the magazines whose job it is to sell 
advertising pages. In step 4, the decision to drop an insertion in People represents 
the loss of almost $242,000 for that magazine’s sales representative. On the other 
hand, it meant an additional $247,200 order for the representative from Family 
Circle. The planner uses these competitive forces to obtain the best media place-
ment and lowest cost for the advertiser.
 
Note that for broadcast media, planners develop the goals in terms of GRPs, 
reach, frequency, scheduling, and market selection. But decisions regarding par-
ticular programs, TV stations, and broadcast networks are handled by professional 
buyers and negotiators who often live in another city and may belong to another 
company that has “agency of record” responsibility for all of the advertiser’s prod-
ucts. An advertiser with many products may split media planning responsibili-
ties among many agencies, but consolidate the buying to maximize clout with the 
broadcasters. For magazines, on the other hand, the planner and buyer are typically 
the same person.
 
Starting with the revised “optimal” schedule, the planner now talks to the sales 
reps to see which magazine will give the best price. Although advertisers who buy 
only a few pages typically pay the open rate, steep discounts are offered for heavy, 
continuing schedules. These negotiated rates are highly confidential and specific 
to each advertiser. Even planners in the same agency working on different accounts 
would never compare notes on what they actually paid.
 
The other area open to negotiation is position. Traditionally, advertisers request 
in their insertion order for their ads to appear “far forward, right-hand page.” 
Research indicates that ads in the front of the book are slightly more likely to be 
remembered than those in the middle or back, but despite the small advantage, 
those words have become a standard by which magazine negotiations are mea-
sured. There will be more about position effects later in this chapter. Magazines 
also compete for the business by offering merchandising such as contests, propri-
etary research, new-product sampling opportunities, tickets to sports events, lun-
cheons with key reporters, and other inducements.
6. Present the Recommended Schedule to the Client and Adjust as Necessary. 
Although magazine sales representatives deal primarily with the media planner, 
they also make sales calls on the advertiser. Most clients accept the planner’s rec-
ommendation as presented, but it is not uncommon for the planner to be told to 
add an insertion in a different magazine because the advertiser has made a side deal 
with the representative. This is no reflection on the ability of the planner; it just 
serves as a reminder that, in the end, it is the advertiser’s money, and advertisers are 
free to spend their money as they see fit.

 
Evaluating and Selecting Media Vehicles 
311
Other Media Values
Many other factors besides CPM should be considered when evaluating and select-
ing media vehicles, especially at steps 3 and 4 in the process. Some of these factors 
are discussed in the following paragraphs.
Secondary Audiences
The total audience reported by research services such as Mediamark Research & 
Intelligence, LLC (MRI) includes two kinds of readers. Primary readers are those 
who purchased the magazine themselves or who live in a household where some-
body subscribes. Secondary, or pass-along, readers come upon the magazine in 
a public place such as their doctor’s office or read a friend’s copy. Early studies 
reported less ad recall among secondary readers, suggesting that they are less valu-
able to the advertiser. A few planners reflect this in their analysis by scaling down 
(discounting) the secondary readership. If secondary audiences are deemed less 
valuable, then it seems reasonable to discount them in some way.
 
One method for discounting the pass-along or secondary audience is simply to 
cut their numbers in half. For example, suppose Magazine A has a total audience 
of 37 million, of which 75 percent is primary and 25 percent is pass-along readers. 
The latter group (25 percent of 37 million) is discounted 50 percent.
 
Exhibit 11-5 shows an example that treats the pass-along audience first at full 
value and then at a 50 percent discounted value. The example is based on the total 
audience. Typically, media planners discount only the demographic group that 
comprises the target audience, such as men ages 18–34 or women who graduated 
from college.
 
Not everyone agrees that the pass-along audience should be discounted. In a 
classic paper on the subject, Seymour Marshak, formerly manager of advertising 
Two Bases for Analyzing the Audiences of Magazine A
FULL-VALUE BASIS
NUMBER 
(MILLIONS)
OUT-OF-HOME AUDIENCE 
DISCOUNTED 50% BASIS
NUMBER 
(MILLIONS)
Primary audience
27.75
Primary audience
27.75
Pass-along audience
9.25
Pass-along audience
4.63
Total audience
37.00
Total audience
32.38
EXHIBIT 11-5

312 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
and distribution research for the Ford Motor Company, said it would be better to 
determine the value of a pass-along reader on the basis of how important that indi-
vidual was in the target audience and then determine what opportunities he or she 
had to see a given advertisement in a given medium.1 For example, pass-along read-
ers might be even more important than primary readers when they receive only 1 
or 2 exposure opportunities compared to primary readers who might receive more 
than 20 opportunities. This assumes that high frequencies (or many exposure 
opportunities) are not automatically good media strategy. Each marketing/media 
situation is different. Foremost in this kind of evaluation is the assumption that 
pass-along readers are the most important target audiences and have to be reached 
if the advertising message is to have the proper effect. In conclusion, although there 
are good reasons for and against discounting the pass-along audience, most adver-
tisers give them full value. Where possible, the decision should be based on logic 
and clearly identified marketing reasons, rather than subjective judgment alone.
Editorial Environment
Occasionally vehicles that reach targets efficiently are not suited to an advertiser’s 
message, because the editorial environments of the vehicles under consideration 
are incompatible with the ad message or with the advertiser’s content restrictions 
(no sexually explicit, violent, or other undesirable editorial content). This concept 
is related to the need for psychographic data to fit demographic data. Two college 
graduates of the same age and in the same income class could lead radically dif-
ferent lives. Similarly, two media vehicles can reach the same demographic tar-
gets with about the same cost-efficiency, but each will feature editorial material of 
interest to different kinds of readers. This difference is important in determining a 
media vehicle’s advertising value.
 
For example, suppose an advertiser for women’s shampoo is considering nine 
potential vehicles, each of which reaches the demographic targets fairly well. 
But the editorial environments differ widely, as Exhibit 11-6 shows. A maga-
zine’s editorial environment can be evaluated in detail with Hall’s Reports (www
.hallsreports.com). Hall’s categorizes the editorial content of more than 170 pub-
lications using a classification system that incorporates more than 250 editorial 
categories. These include Apparel, Beauty, Business, Health, Travel, World Affairs, 
and many more. This system is updated every year to reflect current trends. Data is 
updated monthly and is delivered via a Web-based data retrieval system.
1. Seymour Marshak, “Forum Question: Generally Speaking, What Value Do You Place on 
the Secondary or Pass-Along Reader?” Media/Scope (February 1970): 26. 

 
Evaluating and Selecting Media Vehicles 
313
Hall’s Reports of Consumer Magazine Editorial Content
January 2009–July 2009
Report Criteria: Cross-tab report, One-time category list, Women beauty 
magazines
WOMEN’S HAIR 
CARE TOTAL
WOMEN’S SHAMPOOS/
CONDITIONERS/COLOR
WOMEN’S STYLES/
ACCESSORIES
WOMEN’S 
STYLING PRODUCTS
MAGAZINE
PAGES
PERCENT
PAGES
PERCENT
PAGES
PERCENT
PAGES
PERCENT
Allure
52.2
8.4%
11.3
1.8%
30.5
4.9%
10.4
1.7%
Cosmopolitan
40.7
4.4%
9.9
1.1%
20.3
2.2%
10.5
1.1%
Elle
13.3
1.6%
4.1
0.5%
5.8
0.7%
3.4
0.4%
Glamour
43.4
5.1%
3.3
0.4%
26.3
3.1%
13.8
1.6%
Marie Claire
30.5
3.6%
6
0.7%
17.4
2.1%
7.1
0.8%
More
7.4
1.3%
3.2
0.6%
2.6
0.5%
1.6
0.3%
Seventeen
59.2
10.2%
3.6
0.6%
36.3
6.3%
19.3
3.3%
Vogue
17.9
2.1%
4.5
0.5%
11.6
1.4%
1.8
0.2%
W
4.6
0.6%
0.8
0.1%
2.9
0.4%
0.9
0.1%
Source: Hall’s Reports, LLC, January–July 2009. Used with permission.
 
As this example shows, Seventeen magazine devoted almost 60 pages, 10.2 per-
cent of all editorial, to women’s hair care in the six months from January to June 
2009, but the pages were concentrated in women’s styles and accessories. On the 
other hand, Allure had more editorial pages related to shampoos, conditioners, and 
color than Seventeen, and so might be a better match for that specific product.
 
By including these qualitative measures in the analysis, the planner can account 
for more subtle influences on advertising effectiveness than just the relatively sim-
plistic measures of reach and cost-efficiency.
Special Opportunities in Magazines
Media planners who want to reach special or limited markets will find that 
magazines can be adapted to meet their needs. This is because some media have 
devised special demographic or geographic editions for just that purpose. Exhibit 
11-7 lists some of the demographic breaks that are available in major consumer 
magazines.
EXHIBIT 11-6

314 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Some Demographic Editions of Magazines
PUBLICATION
NAME OF EDITION
TARGET
Better Homes & Gardens
Better by Design
Upper-income homes
AARP
Age 59 & Under
Preretirement adults
AARP
60
Retirement age adults
Parenting
Early Years
Parents of toddlers
Parenting
School Years
Parents of school-age children
Reader’s Digest
Family
Adults under age 55 with children
Reader’s Digest
Mature
Adults over 55
Prevention
Family
Adults under age 55
Prevention
Masters
Adults over age 55
 
In addition to offering special demographic and geographic breakouts, most of 
the larger-circulation magazines offer two-way (and in some cases even four-way) 
copy splits. Reader’s Digest, for example, can distribute special copy to one out of 
every four subscribers across the nation through the use of zip coding and block 
coding. Other magazines use sophisticated printing and binding techniques that 
allow advertisers (for an extra charge) to print directly on the bound-in page the 
name and address of neighborhood stores where a product can be purchased.
 
These capabilities vary by magazine and in many cases are known only to 
the sales representatives. Maintain a positive relationship with the sales reps and 
inform them of your marketing objectives so they will best be able to match their 
magazine’s capabilities to your needs.
Media Comparatives
Although some vehicles reach target audiences very well, the data on reach some-
times hide important facts. For example, a planner may find that television best 
reaches a given target audience, but those reached are light television viewers and 
heavy magazine readers. In other words, reach figures do not indicate the degree of 
exposure to a given medium. Media comparatives is the name given to an analy-
sis by MRI that provides information on the degree of exposure to television and 
magazines.
 
Television comparatives show the percent of the target and selectivity index 
for people who are heavy television viewers and light magazine readers. Magazine 
EXHIBIT 11-7

 
Evaluating and Selecting Media Vehicles 
315
comparatives show the same statistics for persons who are heavy magazine readers 
and light television viewers.
 
Thus media comparatives are a means of comparing magazines and television 
based on the degree of exposure to each medium. They also show how many users 
of various product categories are accounted for by the four groups measured. Exhibit 
11-8 provides an MRI media comparative analysis for heavy users of frozen pizza. 
 
This analysis shows that heavy users are 13 percent more likely to be heavy 
consumers of both magazines and television than the average female homemaker. 
It suggests that a media plan directed to this target group should use both media, 
rather than concentrating all weight in one or the other. The data do not answer all 
questions, but rather add another quantitative dimension to help solve the selection 
problem, as well as the problem of allocating money.
Position Alternatives
During negotiation, some print vehicles offer advertisers selected positions such as 
front-of-book or next to compatible editorial material, which if accepted can help 
the advertiser reach the target with more impact. Sometimes the vehicle charges 
premium rates for a preferred position, but the buyer’s goal should be to get it 
Media Comparatives for Female Principal Shoppers 
Who Are Heavy Users of Frozen Pizza
FROZEN PIZZA: HEAVY USERS (4 PACKAGES/LAST 30 DAYS)
POPULATION
TARGET 
(000)
HORZ%
VERT%
INDEX
Media comparatives: heavy magazines, 
heavy TV
24,218
4,584
18.92%
27.81%
113
Media comparatives: heavy magazines, 
light TV
24,662
4,698
19.05
28.51
114
Media comparatives: light magazines, 
heavy TV
24,766
3,306
13.35
20.06
80
Media comparatives: light magazines, 
light TV
24,630
3,892
15.80
23.62
94
Total
98,276
16,481
16.77% 100.00%
100
Source: Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, Spring 2009. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 11-8

316 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
without paying extra. The planner should consider the availability of favored posi-
tions as a factor in weighing one vehicle against another. Vehicles that offer selected 
positions can be a better buy than those that do not. The value of certain positions 
will be discussed later in this chapter.
Advertising Clutter and Product Protection
In both television and print media, it is possible to measure the amount of clutter 
that occurs. Presumably, the medium that reaches the maximum number of targets 
at the best cost-efficiency and with the least clutter would be the most desirable. 
There are, however, exceptions to this assumption. For example, in certain maga-
zine classes (e.g., fashion and shelter), readers buy the magazine specifically to shop 
through the advertising.
 
But if all competitors are in the same magazine and many other ads are also in 
the magazine, it is questionable whether that vehicle is the most desirable for a spe-
cific advertiser. Brands with a clear-cut competitive advantage over other brands 
should prosper when placed near competitors. Other brands, perceived as less 
desirable, suffer from such competition. Generally, clutter is undesirable, and prod-
uct protection is something to seek. This means keeping competitive ads within the 
vehicle at a reasonable distance from the advertised brand.
 
In evaluating clutter in a print medium, one should consider the Starch studies, 
which show that the readership of the average advertisement in a magazine declines 
as the number of ads in the vehicle increases. In television and radio, product pro-
tection, although desirable, is usually available only to advertisers who buy enough 
minutes in a program to qualify as a sponsor.
Circulation Trends
An objective measurement of a magazine’s value is its trend in circulation. Because 
advertising is sometimes planned more than a year ahead of time, media planners 
might want to study the latest Audit Bureau of Circulations (ABC) figures for the 
last five years to see what has been happening. If a magazine under consideration 
has shown a decline, it may be dropped from the list. On the other hand, magazines 
with increasing circulation trends are considered more valuable, although they can 
be expected to charge more in anticipation of increased readership.
Advertising Copy Checking and Product Restrictions
Some media have a reputation for examining the veracity of all advertising copy 
and claims and annually reject many pages of advertising. They publicize this fact 

 
Evaluating and Selecting Media Vehicles 
317
regularly. The assumption here is that readers, knowing of this practice, will prefer 
to read ads in such a vehicle rather than other vehicles that do not have this policy. 
Good Housekeeping, many newspapers, and network television organizations are 
among those that check copy carefully. Planners should allow time for this review, 
especially for new products or new creative.
 
As part of their effort to maintain a quality reputation, some magazines refuse 
all advertising from potentially controversial product categories such as tobacco, 
alcohol, and direct-mail personal products. These policies are spelled out in the 
magazine’s sales material and in SRDS. Planners working for these types of prod-
ucts must be aware of these policies and avoid recommending magazines that will 
ultimately refuse to carry the ads.
Response to Coupons, Information, or Recipes
Measurements of the number of readers who ask for information or clipped recipes 
is available in MRI and can provide a planner with the type of qualitative data that 
help him or her differentiate one magazine from another. On the other hand, reader 
response to a particular advertiser’s coupons is not public and can be difficult, if not 
impossible, to obtain. Some advertisers will share the general direction of coupon 
response, but they typically hold detailed response rates by magazine confidential, 
even from their own advertising agency and media planners.
Available Discounts
Sometimes the value of a medium is directly affected by the nature of the discounts 
that it offers. If a number of ads are planned for a calendar year in several vehicles 
that are otherwise about equal, the best value is the vehicle offering a substantial 
discount. Although target coverage and composition are important criteria, if all 
else is equal, the magazine with the greatest discount (hence the lowest CPM) will 
get the order.
 
The pressure of cost negotiations caused most magazines to provide unpub-
lished discounts to high-volume advertisers. Those buying only one or two pages 
can expect to pay rate card, but for larger schedules, the published prices are just 
the starting point for negotiations. Large companies will use their clout by adding 
up the pages from all of their divisions to negotiate a single, extremely favorable 
(and highly confidential) corporate rate that can be used by all planners working 
on the account. The advertiser assigns a print “agency of record” the task of keeping 
track of all corporate pages, conducting these rate negotiations, and keeping plan-
ners informed of the negotiated price of each magazine.

318 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Geographic Flexibility
This reflects the degree to which a medium can be used to precisely reach geo-
graphically superior markets while at the same time avoiding relatively weak mar-
kets. Generally, local media such as newspapers, spot radio, spot television, outdoor, 
and to some extent online are considered flexible media in the geographic sense. 
Magazines have some flexibility with their regional editions, but advertisers want-
ing to limit coverage to individual markets use an independent company, Media 
Networks, Inc. (www.mni.com), whose business is placing national advertising in 
local markets.
Issue-to-Issue Volatility
MRI’s new Issue Specific Readership Study provides a factor that adjusts the audi-
ence of each issue to the average. The readership to some issues was above the 
average, others were below. Using three years of this data for 176 magazines, Baron, 
Klein, and Jacobs calculated the standard deviation of these scores and so identi-
fied magazines whose readership was relatively stable versus those that were highly 
volatile.2 Exhibit 11-9 shows the scores for the business category. The authors sug-
gest this gives planners the margin of error in the number of people who will see a 
given issue of a magazine.
 
As with any standard deviation, the Volatility Score quantifies the amount of 
variation. In this example, the readership of 68 percent (1 standard deviation) of the 
issues of Kiplinger’s Personal Finance magazine fluctuates plus or minus 7.5 percent 
from the average. This contrasts with a more volatile magazine like Inc. that has a 
volatility score of 15.7. The readership of a given issue of Inc. could be as much as 32 
percent above or below the average. In seeking to explain the differences in volatil-
ity from one magazine to another, the researchers found a strong negative correla-
tion between volatility and MRI’s Reader Quality measures that will be discussed 
later in this chapter. The less volatile (more stable) magazines tended to have higher 
reader quality scores. The volatility score is useful as a tiebreaker when CPM and 
other factors are roughly equal. In addition to the higher qualitative measures, the 
less volatile magazines are preferable because the audience for future issues will be 
closer to the average-issue audience that was used for the CPM and reach/frequency 
calculations.
2. Roger Baron, Caryn Klein, and Lori Jacobs, “The Volatility Score: A New Measure 
of the Issue-to-Issue Stability of a Magazine’s Audience.” Worldwide Readership 
Research Symposium, Valencia, Spain, October 2009, www.readershipsymposium
.com.

 
Evaluating and Selecting Media Vehicles 
319
Qualitative Values of Media
As stated earlier, media selection is based mostly on the ability of specific media 
vehicles to reach precise target audiences with high cost-efficiency and little waste. 
Other considerations in planning include the total cost of the medium plus the 
reach and frequency to be generated. Before making a final decision for or against 
any medium, however, the planner should also consider the qualitative values of 
each medium and decide how important these values are for the plan.
 
A qualitative value is some characteristic of a medium that enhances the 
chances that an advertising message carried within it will be effective. Comparing 
the qualitative merits of one medium versus another (e.g., TV versus magazines) is 
Volatility Score of Business Magazines
EDITORIAL CLASS
MAGAZINE
VOLATILITY 
SCORE
Business
Kiplinger’s Personal Finance
7.47
Business
Money
7.71
Business
Smart Money
10.79
Business
Wired
11.08
Business
Forbes
14.40
Business
The Economist
15.16
Business
U.S. News & World Report
15.26
Business
Inc.
15.74
Business
BusinessWeek
15.97
Business
Entrepreneur
15.97
Business
Newsweek
16.09
Business
Time
16.22
Business
Fortune
17.72
Business Average 
Volatility Score
13.81
Source: Baron, Klein, and Jacobs, “The Volatility Score: A New Measure of the Issue-to-Issue Stability of a 
Magazine’s Audience,” Worldwide Readership Research Symposium (Valencia, Spain: October 2009), www
.readershipsymposium.com.
EXHIBIT 11-9

320 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
a highly subjective exercise. The relative characteristics are obvious, but the deci-
sion that one is more appropriate than the other for a given campaign is the kind of 
judgment planners avoid, since it cannot be supported with research. Furthermore, 
the choice of which media to use has such far-reaching consequences that it is typi-
cally a joint decision of the account group, the creative team, the client, and the 
media planner.
 
Qualitative distinctions are based on the assumption that media are not simply 
passive carriers of advertisements; they also play an active role. These distinctions 
assume that a magazine offers a unique environment, with a personality that can 
rub off on its advertisements and make them more effective in communicating 
their messages.
 
The problem with studies of magazine environment is deciding what to do with 
the results. Knowing that one magazine has a different and presumably better 
image than another does not tell the planner anything about the magazine’s adver-
tising effectiveness—if its image is even related to effectiveness. In addition, quali-
tative studies conducted by one magazine seldom mention its competition, making 
side-by-side comparisons impossible. They were conducted to support the maga-
zine’s sales effort. Therefore, image studies conducted by the magazine’s research 
department, though a form of determining a qualitative value, have little impor-
tance in media planning.
Types of Qualitative Values
Notwithstanding early research on general qualitative values, there is still little 
consensus about the matter. When planners do use such values, they are apt to 
prepare the following kind of statement for their plans: “We feel that Magazine A 
reflects greater authority and prestige than other magazines, so we recommend 
purchasing x number of ads in it.” Other terms that are used in the same manner 
as authority and prestige are impact, mood, believability, atmosphere, excitement, 
and leadership.
 
The expression “we feel” and the absence of numerical support are the tip-off 
that a planner has no data or solid research to back up the statement. However, 
qualitative measures still have a place in media planning. MRI and other research 
companies ask their respondents several questions that can suggest qualitative dif-
ferences among magazines. These are discussed in the following paragraphs.
Reading Days How many days in total are alternative magazines read? If a magazine 
is opened at any time on a given day, this constitutes a reading day. If, for example, 
there is evidence that Magazine A is read more total days than magazines B, C, D, 

 
Evaluating and Selecting Media Vehicles 
321
and E (all under consideration), then the planner has one more qualitative reason to 
select A. More reading days represent more opportunities to see ads.
Time Spent Reading In a similar manner, MRI respondents estimate how much 
time they spend reading each magazine that they say they read or looked into in 
the last publication period. These measurements indicate that the magazine with 
the largest number of reading hours is more attractive than others. This conclusion 
assumes that audience members have more opportunities to see ads if they spend 
more time reading.
 
MRI provides a number of qualitative measures that are all plausibly related to 
the likelihood that an ad will be noticed, but planners have needed a single mea-
sure that will represent all of them. In their study of the Volatility Score described 
earlier, Roger Baron, Caryn Klein, and Lori Jacobs found a significant inverse cor-
relation between the qualitative measures and volatility. So the more a magazine 
is read at home, the less volatile. The more days that a magazine is picked up, the 
less volatile. The more time spent reading an issue, the less volatile, and so on. 
This significant correlation allows planners to use volatility as a single metric sur-
rogate for the many reader quality measures. In short, the less volatile the issue-
to-issue readership, the higher the reader quality. This is summarized in Exhibit 
11-10.
Subjective Qualitative Values
Planners and magazine sales representatives sometimes use subjective (gener-
ally unquantifiable) qualitative terms to characterize the value of a media vehicle. 
Probably the most misused of all media qualitative value terms is impact. Print 
media executives often claim that their magazine has more impact than other 
magazines. If they mean that an ad in their magazine will sell more of the product 
than an ad in any other magazine, this cannot be proved and is therefore conjecture 
on the part of the executives. It is generally impossible to determine the effect of a 
media vehicle and a single ad on sales.
 
Conceivably, a careful testing program could be conducted for one advertiser, 
with strict controls, to prove that more people recalled a given ad in one magazine 
than in any other. But recall and sales are quite different. How can one prove that 
what sold the product was not the price, the packaging, the distribution, or the sales 
promotion? Some vehicles are better than others, but not on the basis of impact, 
which is too vague a concept to be used in media planning. Only when a clear-cut 
cause-and-effect relationship can be established for the brand and the vehicle on 
sales can the concept of impact be used.

322 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
The core reader is another measure that is sometimes used, although researchers 
disagree on exactly what is meant by the term. According to one definition, a core 
reader is anyone who says he or she read at least three out of four issues. This seems 
logical enough until we realize that the definition helps magazines that derive a 
Correlation Between Reader Quality Measures and Readership Volatility
VARIABLES
PEARSON CORRELATION 
WITH VOLATILITY
TWO-TAILED SIGNIFICANCE 
(BOX  	 0.05 
PROBABILITY CORRELATION 
IS DUE TO CHANCE)
% Read in home
0.362
0.000
Median reading days
0.327
0.000
Average reading days
0.323
0.000
Average issues read out of four
0.312
0.000
Median issues read out of four
0.310
0.000
Median reading time
0.277
0.000
Average reading time
0.266
0.000
Three-year average circulation
0.253
0.001
Average magazine quality rating
0.213
0.005
Median magazine quality rating
0.208
0.006
Median age
0.207
0.006
Any of nine actions taken
0.181
0.016
Ad page exposure (APX)
0.170
0.024
Number on cover (“5 Best Ways to . . .”)
0.164
0.030
Total readers
0.161
0.033
Percent primary readers
0.140
0.063
Average interest in advertising
0.132
0.081
Median interest in advertising
0.123
0.104
Celebrity on the cover
0.106
0.161
Percent single-copy sales
0.078
0.303
Readers per copy
0.072
0.344
Percent women
0.012
0.872
Unnamed person on the cover
0.129
0.088
Advertising percent of pages
0.189
0.047
Publication frequency (issues/year)
0.193
0.010
Source: Baron, Klein, and Jacobs, ibid.
EXHIBIT 11-10

 
Evaluating and Selecting Media Vehicles 
323
large percent of their circulation from subscriptions, as compared to those that are 
distributed primarily through newsstand sales.
Using Qualitative Values
Qualitative rationales for selecting media have a place in planning procedures. But 
users of such measures should keep in mind some reasonable guidelines:
Qualitative, or subjective, rationales should never totally replace quantitative 
• 
CPM and reach substantiation.
Qualitative consideration should be used after quantitative analysis has been 
• 
made.
If possible, more than one person should contribute to making the subjective 
• 
analysis, to reduce the possibility of individual bias.
Planners should be suspicious of media-sponsored research concerning quali-
• 
tative values such as “high impact,” “liked most,” and so forth. Much of this 
kind of research is highly promotional, rather than objective. It is very difficult 
to transfer the findings from one medium to another or from one media vehi-
cle to another.
 
A 2005 study by Roger Baron, Britta Ware, and Justin Edge attempted to iden-
tify which of more than 30 qualitative and quantitative measures of magazine cir-
culation and audience were most highly associated with ad recall. These variables 
accounted for 27 percent of the variance in ad recall. Put another way, almost three-
quarters of the difference in recall from one magazine to another were due to fac-
tors that were not measured. Furthermore, ad quality accounted for the largest (11 
percent) share of the variance that was explained. A group of variables, character-
ized as “Involvement,” accounted for 7.9 percent of the variance, but no single vari-
able accounted for more than 1 percent.3
 
Conversely, data from the VISTA Print Effectiveness Rating Service shows a 
consistent relationship between qualitative measures and ad recall. The typical 
ad generates 63 percent recall among readers who rate the publication “one of my 
favorites” compared to just 29 percent of those rating a magazine as “poor.” A simi-
lar relationship was observed for time spent reading, number of issues read out of 
3. Roger Baron, Britta Ware, and Justin Edge, “Identifying Key Metrics for Magazine 
Planning,” Worldwide Readership Research Symposium, Prague, 2005, www.readership
symposium.org/papers/736.pdf. 

324 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
the last four, number of times an issue was read or looked into, and copies obtained 
by subscription versus in a public place.4
 
In conclusion, qualitative values of media do exist, but their relationship to ad 
effectiveness is inconclusive. They are simply not objective enough to be used alone 
for decision making. Perhaps ways will be found to prove that one medium indeed 
has more impact than others, but at present it cannot be proved. Experts can only 
agree that media are not passive carriers of ads. They do have qualitative values, but 
their use in planning is highly judgmental.
Ad Positions Within Media
Assuming that media vehicles have been selected, the budget allocated, and a 
schedule worked out, media planning could, in theory, end at this point. In prac-
tice, however, planners and others interested in media still have questions: Is there 
nothing else that can be done to help in the advertising communication process? 
Are reach, frequency, and cost-efficiency all there are? The problem is to find ways 
for the media planner to go beyond delivery and not only get vehicles exposed, but 
also get ads within those vehicles exposed, and finally, get the ads read.
 
To a great extent, this last responsibility belongs to the creative people—account 
planners, writers, and art directors who have special talents for getting advertis-
ing communication through to the reader. The copy people, for example, can write 
scintillating headlines and meaningful words. The art director can devise fasci-
nating layouts. The creative people can ask for four-color ads, bleed pages, reverse 
printing, gatefold-size ads, two-page spreads. They can print ads on unusual stock 
such as acetate or aluminum foil. They can use unusual inks such as DayGlo or per-
fumed inks. These are but a few of the many options open to the creative personnel 
in getting ads noticed and read.
 
What, then, can media planners do to help the situation? As part of the buying 
negotiations, they can ask for certain positions within media that are thought to 
be better than other positions. This, however, leaves them open to questions about 
positioning research and strategy.
Problems of Positioning Research
A number of media positions are thought to be better than others. For example, 
the fourth cover (the outside back cover) of a magazine is generally conceded to be 
4. Affinity, LLC, VISTA Print Effectiveness Rating Service Database, January 2007–June 
2009, as reported in Magazine Dimensions, 2009. 

 
Evaluating and Selecting Media Vehicles 
325
the best place in a magazine for an ad. In fact, research confirms that the fourth 
cover is indeed one of the best positions. One study found that ads on the fourth 
cover have 30 percent higher recall.5 But since the back cover is sold for a premium 
price, there is a question whether the additional impact is worth the additional cost. 
Nonetheless, there is some logic, even without research, to suggest that a fourth-
cover position is valuable. There is not much agreement among experts about other 
media positions. The research tends to be inconclusive.
 
Perhaps the foremost problem of position research is that it is difficult to sepa-
rate measurements of position from copy effects. Most research techniques used to 
establish the effects of position are really a mixture of copy and position. In some 
research studies, another dimension, that of size, is added. Then, too, averaging 
data for position effects that contain widely varying degrees of copy effectiveness 
do not truly represent the effects of position. Averaging tends to be unduly affected 
by extreme copy-effect scores. Some media experts question whether there is any 
totally valid copy-measuring device. Even assuming that most are valid, there is still 
no way, through present-day measurements, to know the effect of position alone.
 
A solution would be to design experiments involving ad copy that is held con-
stant with the only variable being position. Because the same ads would be mea-
sured in different positions in different media vehicles, the effects of position alone 
could be found. However, there still is dissatisfaction with much research devised 
to measure position, because it is not carefully controlled to eliminate bias. Because 
the advertiser’s primary concern is selling product, there is little incentive to test 
alternative position options. Samples are often nonrandom and selected haphaz-
ardly. Questionnaire design and interviewing controls are not always the best. As a 
result, much position research is suspect.
 
A major consideration in deciding whether to use a special position in a vehi-
cle is the premium cost. Some positions are not worth the extra cost. And even 
if a position seems to be worth the cost, the questionable nature of the existing 
research can make it difficult to support a decision one way or the other.
Some Position Effects
Following is a brief summary of position effects that some media planners accept. 
The reader is cautioned about accepting them as valid evidence. They are presented 
to show a sample of the kinds of positions that could affect the communication 
power of advertisements placed in vehicles.
5. Undated Gallup & Robinson report in Magazine Dimensions, 2009. 

326 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Position in Magazines Using Starch Adnorm data as a guide, fourth-cover positions 
are usually considered better than any inside positions. Early studies suggest that 
second-cover and page-one positions are about equal and are the next best after 
fourth-cover positions. Front-of-the-magazine positions (from page 3 to about page 
20) are the next best positions, and right-hand pages are somewhat better than left-
hand pages, with some exceptions. These studies conflict with some planners’ belief 
that ads are more effective if they appear near compatible editorial (e.g., a food ad 
placed near a recipe) that is usually farther back in the magazine. More detailed 
information on the effects of position and ad size are available on the website of the 
Magazine Publishers of America (MPA) at www.magazine.org.
 
Although there is virtually no research to substantiate the value of these posi-
tions for a given campaign, advertisers have come to expect that their agencies will 
have sufficient “clout” with the magazines that they will be given the choice spots. 
Because, obviously, only one advertiser can run on the back cover or page one or 
opposite the table of contents, planners compete fiercely to secure those premier 
positions—if not page one, then at least somewhere near the front. Planners keep 
track of the positions they are given by each magazine, and they use this informa-
tion in subsequent negotiations. At a minimum, planners should expect an even 
rotation of their ads throughout the magazine.
Position in Newspapers Ads near the front of newspapers are considered better 
than those near the back, but the differences are small. There is no significant dif-
ference between right-hand and left-hand pages. Inside a newspaper section is bet-
ter than the last page of the section. There is little difference between ads above or 
below the fold. Editorial environment affects the readership of ads—obviously, ads 
for male products do better on sports pages, and ads for female products do better 
on women’s pages.
Position in Television Attention to TV programs is greatest during prime time and 
late fringe and poorest in early morning when the family is getting ready for work 
and school.6 Research suggests that a 30-second commercial has about 60–75 per-
cent the recall of a 60-second commercial, and a 15-second commercial has about 
60–75 percent as much recall as a 30-second commercial.
 
Second-by-second analysis of television commercial pods shows that the first 
position retains the largest share of the audience from the preceding entertainment, 
while seconds later in a pod show sharp declines as people tune to other channels 
6. Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, “Percent of Viewers Paying Full Attention,” 
Spring 2009. 

 
Evaluating and Selecting Media Vehicles 
327
or fast-forward their DVR through the break. This was apparent in Exhibit 4-13, 
which shows the declining audience during each minute of a commercial break. 
Since the first pod position is acknowledged as most desirable, some broadcasters 
hold out that position for their program promotion spots. Broadcast buyers should 
check the pod position of every spot in their schedule to ensure, at a minimum, that 
they are given a fair rotation.
 
In the past, it was thought that people paid more attention to high-rated than 
to low-rated programs, and more attention to commercials that were inside the 
show compared to those in breaks between shows. Recent studies have cast doubt 
on these generalizations regarding position effects, most likely due to changes in 
television formatting that place many local commercials within the program.
 
To sum up, research on position effects, with a few exceptions, is inconclusive, 
and in any case, is largely beyond the control of the media planner or buyer. As 
good stewards of the advertiser’s dollar, at a minimum planners should keep track 
of the positions where their advertising runs. In print, record the page number of 
the ad and the total number of pages in the issue. In broadcast, record the minute of 
the program where the ad appears and the position in the pod. These data are read-
ily available from the competitive research services. They just need to be recorded 
and acted upon at the next negotiation.
Internet Media Vehicles
Many of the processes and considerations discussed in this chapter are germane to 
evaluating, selecting, and buying Internet media. However, the processes are dif-
ferent enough to bear separate consideration.
Evaluating and Selecting Internet Media
As with any media plan, the first step is to identify the campaign objectives as they 
relate to the Internet. In short, the planner must clearly identify the value of the 
Internet for this advertiser. For hotels, financial services, automobiles, consumer 
electronics, and advertisers of high-ticket considered purchases, the value of the 
Internet is obvious. The Internet’s role is to drive consumers to the advertiser’s 
website, where they will find detailed product information and an opportunity for 
direct sales via a secure online order.
 
The task of finding appropriate sites for digital advertising is directly comparable 
to the task of vehicle selection in traditional media. The planner must answer the 
question, “Where on the Internet can I find people who would be interested in the 
advertiser’s product?”

328 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
This can include maximizing direct-response sales and return on invest-
ment, building brand awareness, referring visitors to the advertiser’s website, 
obtaining research from online questionnaires, or giving visitors additional sales 
information.
 
A key element in this process is determining the “metrics of success.” That is, 
how will the effectiveness of the Internet campaign be measured? Some options 
include dollar volume of sales from the advertiser’s website, sales profitability, 
number of visitors clicking through to the site, and change in brand awareness or 
attitude toward the advertiser before and after the campaign. There must be agree-
ment on this point before the campaign begins. This agreement avoids the all-too-
common situation where the advertiser starts with one objective, perhaps to build 
brand awareness, but then considers the campaign a failure if sales or website visi-
tation are below expectations despite strong awareness growth.
 
Once there is agreement on the target audience, campaign objectives, and suc-
cess metrics, the next step is to identify websites that are selective to the target. 
There are three general approaches to online targeting: contextual, behavioral, and 
demographic.
Contextual Targeting This approach places ads on websites that are likely to be vis-
ited by the same people whom the advertiser is targeting. So a luggage advertiser 
would buy impressions on travel-oriented websites and on sites appealing to busi-
nesspersons who are likely to be the heaviest travelers. Contextual targeting relies 
on judgment and insight into the lifestyle of the product users. Geographic target-
ing is a form of contextual targeting—advertisers wanting to reach customers in 
Chicago might place ads on the website of Chicago newspapers, TV and radio sta-
tions, and Chicago weather or traffic reports.
Behavioral Targeting (BT) This approach takes conceptual targeting a step further 
and physically places a cookie on the computer of people who have visited, say in 
this example, travel-related websites, and in turn, other sites these people have vis-
ited that may not be as obvious (international weather, international vaccination 
recommendations, exchange rate sites, etc.). This data is used by the publishers or 
is sold to online networks that will serve, for example, a luggage ad to computers 
that have this cookie. Behavioral targeting is much more precise, but it also raises 
privacy issues that may limit its usefulness. It is further limited by the widespread 
practice of cookie deletion (computer owners who routinely delete all the cook-
ies). Finally, the cookie identifies a computer, but not the person using it. The fam-
ily member who browsed the travel website, so earning the cookie, may not be the 

 
Evaluating and Selecting Media Vehicles 
329
same person who is served the ad on that computer at another time. Nevertheless, 
BT is an important tool for online advertisers.
Demographic Targeting This approach helps the user select websites based on the 
demographics of their visitors. Many sites ask visitors to register before allowing 
entry to their advanced services, recording key demographics such as age, gender, 
family size, and other characteristics. These registered sites can then assure adver-
tisers that all the impressions are going to the desired demographics. Unregistered 
sites serve ads to any browser that visits.
 
Two syndicated research services, Nielsen Online (www.nielsennetratings.com) 
and comScore (www.comscore.com), provide the demographics of visitors to all 
sites whether registered or not. Their software allows comparison and ranking of 
sites by coverage and composition, and is used by online planners in the same way 
as magazine planners use MRI. These services provide detailed demographics and 
product usage of website visitors, using survey research similar to MRI. The Nielsen 
service is called NetView; the comScore service is called Media Metrics. Each has 
recruited a panel of Internet users who agree to put tracking software on their com-
puter. When recruited, panel members report their basic demographics followed 
by a long questionnaire on their usage of various products and services—the same 
kind of questions asked by MRI and Simmons. When panel members sit down at 
the computer, they log in and identify themselves. Then the software records every 
keystroke, allowing the researchers to know when the visits occurred, what sites 
were visited, how long the person stayed at the site, what pages within the site were 
explored, how long the person stayed on each page (“stickiness”), and other data, 
including campaign reach/frequency, that are useful to planners. Because the ser-
vices gather data automatically, they are able to report on thousands of websites.
 
Exhibit 11-11 shows the top websites for adults ages 18–34 as reported by 
Nielsen’s NetView.
 
Exhibit 11-12 shows comScore’s list of websites that have the highest composi-
tion of adults ages 18–34 who are heavy users of quick-serve restaurants (QSR).
 
Note that the site’s audience is expressed with the same coverage and composi-
tion concepts that were used for magazines. And as with magazines, the ideal plan 
uses a mixture of both high-coverage and high-composition sites.
 
Exhibit 11-13 shows comScore’s reach/frequency analysis of an online campaign 
in various sports websites directed to adults 18–34.
 
While the narrower A18–34 heavy QSR user target was available, the sample 
size was too small to accurately report the reach/frequency of individual sports 
websites. So we broadened the target to total adults 18–34. This need to expand the 

330 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Top Websites for Adults 18–34 According to 
Nielsen NetView, Ranked by Composition
Source: The Nielsen Company, Nielsen Online, NetView, July 2009. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 11-11

 
Evaluating and Selecting Media Vehicles 
331
Top Websites for Adults 18–34 Who Are Heavy Quick-Serve Restaurant 
Users According to comScore, Ranked by Composition
Source: comScore, Inc. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 11-12

332 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Reach/Frequency Analysis of an Online Sports Campaign 
Directed to Adults 18–34 According to comScore
Source: comScore, Inc. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 11-13

 
Evaluating and Selecting Media Vehicles 
333
target audience definition to obtain an adequate sample size happens frequently in 
media planning. While perhaps not as precisely targeted as we would like, it is close 
enough for marketing purposes.
 
Note also that delivery is expressed in GRPs, reach, and frequency, the same 
concepts we used for traditional media. It is also important to note the base for the 
GRPs. For online GRPs to be comparable with traditional media, the base should 
be total U.S. population. Online suppliers, and even this research source, use the 
smaller “Web population” as the base, inflating the GRPs (impressions divided by 
the smaller Web population base).
 
As noted, both Nielsen NetView and comScore require a subscription for a 
person to access the data. Google’s Ad Planner (www.google.com/adplanner) is a 
free service that offers the same basic demographic information, but lacks reach/
frequency analysis and many of the more detailed metrics such as product usage, 
time spent on a website, number of pages visited, and so on. Nevertheless, it can go 
a long way to helping create an online media plan for students and advertisers with 
a limited research budget.
 
Ad Planner is based on Google’s vast search engine technology. It allows users 
to select websites defined by geography (state and metro area), language spoken, 
demographics, sites visited, keywords searched, or a range of almost 50 lifestyle 
interests. For the selected sites, it displays coverage, composition, unique users, 
page views, advertising specifications, and other data. If the scope is limited to the 
United States, Ad Planner also shows the demographic composition of websites 
in terms of age, gender, household income, education, and presence of children. 
Ad Planner provides basic website metrics for almost 60 countries. Information 
includes unique visitors (estimated cookies), reach, page views, total visits, average 
visits per visitor, and average time on site.
 
Exhibit 11-14 shows the top websites visited by adults ages 18–34, according to 
Ad Planner. The sites can be sorted by coverage, composition, or any of the other 
reported metrics. As we have seen before, the most demographically selective sites 
have the least coverage, while the larger sites, such as www.yahoo.com, give much 
greater coverage but also have much more waste. A good media plan will place ads 
on both types of sites.
 
Quantcast (www.quantcast.com) is another free resource that provides informa-
tion on virtually every website (up to one million), but like Google’s Ad Planner, the 
information is only at the top domain level. Quantcast offers detail by age, sex, pres-
ence of children, household income, and education. It shows the trend of impres-
sions over user-selected time periods, other websites visited by people who visited 
the target site, and traffic frequency by “site addicts,” “regulars,” and “passers-by.” 
It also provides impressions by designated market area (DMA), a capability not 

334 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Top Websites for Adults 18–34 According to Google Ad Planner, Ranked by Coverage
Source: Google. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 11-14

 
Evaluating and Selecting Media Vehicles 
335
available in Ad Planner. Additional information is available for websites that place 
a beacon on every page served, allowing them to be “Quantified.”
 
Taken together, Ad Planner and Quantcast are free services that give planners a 
wealth of data about Internet websites that might be used for a campaign. However, 
as free services, they lack the depth of information available from the subscription 
comScore and Nielsen online services.
 
Planners can also use competitive reporting services such as Nielsen’s 
AdRelevance service (www.nielsennetratings.com) and Kantar Media (www.kantar
mediana.com) to show which sites are used by an advertiser’s competitors. It is 
important to note that due to their sampling methodology, reported competitive 
data for the Internet is not as accurate as it is for traditional media, where every ad 
is counted.
Ad Networks While most online campaigns focus on a select group of websites, the 
extreme fragmentation makes it difficult to achieve adequate reach going one site at 
a time. To help resolve this, ad networks were created to distribute an advertiser’s 
message over hundreds or even thousands of websites that have agreed to receive 
these ads, often at a significantly reduced price. Ad networks can be selected that 
focus on specific interests such as food, kids, entertaining, social commentary 
blogs, and so on. While the advertiser gives up a measure of control over where its 
ads appear, it gains from the greatly increased reach and lower CPM offered by ad 
networks.
 
Another tool for buying online media is the ad exchange, an impression-by-
impression auction marketplace that connects website publishers and buyers in 
real time. It gives buyers immediate access to inventory that meets campaign goals 
through behavioral targeting, defined bids, and frequency caps on inventory pur-
chases. These systems, operating as an auction, sell inventory to the buyer that 
pays the highest price. As of this writing, ad exchanges are a relatively new business 
model that may or may not succeed as more advertisers and publishers get involved. 
We can expect other models to emerge as the industry evolves.
 
Finally, online measurement is a moving target. Nielsen, comScore, and 
Google are constantly updating their software and adding to their capabilities. 
New services such as Quantcast, Hitwise, BlueKai, and others not even on the 
radar today can further inform the planning process. To stay informed about the 
latest developments, planners are encouraged to attend the Internet Advertising 
Bureau (www.iab.net) webcasts and other activities. Finally, talk to the respective 
sales representatives to get the most up-to-date understanding of the services that 
are available.

336 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Buying Internet Display Advertising
After selecting a number of appropriate sites, the planner sends each a request for 
proposal. This request identifies the advertiser; campaign objectives and strate-
gies; the planner’s name, address, phone number, and e-mail address; the dates of 
the campaign; ad unit size; target audience; and the expected budget. The website’s 
advertising department confirms the site’s ability to accept the advertising and gives 
the number of impressions that can be bought for this budget. From this the plan-
ner can calculate the site’s CPM and compare it with other submissions. For sites 
that compute CPM from total persons 2 impressions, like magazines, it can be 
useful to use composition data from Nielsen or comScore to help understand the 
target audience CPM. This step is not necessary for sites that can guarantee the 
target audience CPM from registered visitors.
 
The computer that serves the ad (“third-party ad server”) makes a record each 
time a banner or other ad unit is sent to a visitor’s browser. This documented 
exposure is the natural unit of value that allows digital advertising to be priced in 
terms of CPM impressions. After negotiation, a planner might say, “I agree to buy 
2,000,000 impressions on ESPN.com at $20.00 CPM, for a total cost of $40,000.” 
The insertion order is sent or the contract is signed, and creative materials and rota-
tion instructions are provided to the third-party ad server, which begins sending 
the advertiser’s banners, pop-up ads, or other creative messages to the designated 
target visitors whenever they visit the ordered (ESPN.com) website. Each impres-
sion is counted. When the ordered two million impressions have been delivered, 
the campaign ends, and the advertiser is billed.
 
The decision to order, in this case two million impressions, is a critical differ-
ence between the Internet and traditional media. When an advertiser places an ad 
on a television program that is watched by two million people, two million impres-
sions have been delivered at that moment—that is, two million people have seen the 
commercial. On the Internet, an advertiser must wait until two million people have 
browsed to that website and been served an ad. Since many advertisers are using a 
website, those impressions don’t go to the first two million people to come along. 
On smaller sites, it may take several days or even weeks to accumulate that many 
impressions.
 
While the website’s promotional material may claim hundreds of millions of vis-
its, the only thing that matters from an advertiser’s standpoint is the two million 
impressions that are purchased. Exhibit 11-13 shows FOXSports.com received 568.1 
million impressions (also called “page views”) in July, but the advertiser bought 
only four million impressions. Also, for some sites the impressions reflect deliv-
ery to browsers, without any indication who is viewing them. Others ask visitors 
to register and provide basic demographic information, allowing these sites to sell 

 
Evaluating and Selecting Media Vehicles 
337
demographically targeted impressions. So it is important for the buyer to know if a 
website is selling persons 2 impressions or registered (A18–34) impressions.
 
In addition to CPM impressions, advertisers may agree to pay only for site visi-
tors who click through the banner and are then redirected to the advertiser’s site. 
Because the click-through rate is typically less than 1 percent of the people exposed, 
the CPM click-throughs will be much higher than CPM banner impressions. On 
the other hand, these people are far more valuable because they have demonstrated 
interest in the advertiser’s product. In addition to CPM impressions, advertisers 
may agree to pay only for site visitors who click through the banner and are then 
redirected to the advertiser’s site or those who view the ad and go to the site later 
(view-throughs or postimpressions).
 
Advertisers can also buy site sponsorships, ad placement only in selected cit-
ies or zip codes, or placement on selected pages of a larger website (similar to 
placing an ad in a particular section of a newspaper). Some sites allow planners 
to deliver impressions only when the local temperature, pollen count, or rainfall 
meets some criterion. For example, a soft-drink company might want to deliver 
impressions only when the local temperature exceeds 90 degrees. Advertising can 
be delivered only at certain times of day (daypart scheduling). The possibilities 
for customized pricing models and modes of advertising exposure are virtually 
unlimited.
 
Many websites keep track of visitors by placing a small record called a cookie on 
the hard disk of the visitor’s computer. This enables the site to identify repeat visits. 
One creative execution will be served at the first visit; then on subsequent visits, 
the existence of a cookie will alert the server to send a different ad. This keeps the 
creative fresh and improves the chances that the visitor will click through to the 
advertiser’s website. This also allows the site to keep track of the number of impres-
sions served a given visitor (browsing computer), enabling the advertiser to place 
a frequency cap on exposures, which is the maximum number of times a given ad 
will be served to a visitor. This method also enables “retargeting,” which allows 
advertisers to deliver additional messages to people who have shown an interest in 
the product.
 
Some companies use cookies to develop a profile of the visitor’s browsing behav-
ior. Through arrangements with hundreds of websites, a record is made whenever 
a given computer, identified by the cookie on the hard disk, appears at any one of 
them. This allows the profiling company to identify a person who, for instance, vis-
its a sports website, a financial site, a golf pro site, an auto racing site, and a business 
news site. When that person (cookie) shows up again, the profiler knows to serve a 
banner for a financial service advertiser, for instance. Another user, whose cookie 
indicates an interest in child-oriented sites, would be served a banner for products 

338 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
targeting parents. This “behavioral targeting” is a widely used way of targeting digi-
tal advertising.
Buying Internet Search Advertising
In September 2009, according to Nielsen Online, 30 percent of all Internet advertis-
ing impressions were from sponsored search, making it the fastest-growing form of 
online advertising. Planning and buying search advertising is totally different from 
that of traditional media or even online display banners. Accordingly, the follow-
ing section was written by David L. Smith, CEO and founder of Mediasmith, San 
Francisco, and Bob Heyman, managing director of The Digital Engagement Group.
 
Search is typically viewed as a lead-generating medium that, as of this writing, is 
largely dominated by Google. It has been called the most efficient lead-generating 
medium ever, and it probably is. Search can also be used for branding and 
research.
 
The two dominant types of search are paid keywords, also referred to as pay-
per-click (PPC) and search engine marketing (SEM), and search engine optimiza-
tion (SEO), also referred to as natural or organic search. SEM, or paid keywords, is 
much like a direct-response media buy. SEO is more like PR, and there is an art to 
getting on the front page and at the top of the listings.
 
SEM has to do with buying keywords and phrases that trigger a sponsored link. 
Payment is on a per-click basis: if nobody clicks, there is no payment. Google and 
other search engines have many tools to assist you in the search buy. SEM is typi-
cally purchased online, directly from the Google website. Keep in mind that the 
80/20 rule applies here: 20 percent of the keywords generate 80 percent of the traf-
fic. Thus it is important to expand the list of top-performing words. You should 
know the keywords your competitors are using. And you must also carefully plan 
what words to put into the meta tags, which are lines in the HTML code of a web-
site that describe and classify its contents for search engines.
 
To maximize value for paid and primarily organic search, the keyword buyer 
must work closely with the website developer to ensure that the same words that 
are being bought are programmed into the content of the site and the meta tags. 
For instance, if a pharmaceutical advertiser buys the words “high cholesterol,” those 
same words must appear in the meta tag line of code as:
	meta name“keywords” content“high cholesterol”\
 
Keywords and phrases are bought through an auction on a competitive basis. 
The higher-traffic keywords have a significant amount of competition that bids 
up the price. So the keywords “high cholesterol” would be more expensive than 

 
Evaluating and Selecting Media Vehicles 
339
“toenail fungus.” The highest bidder generally gets the top listing, but variables such 
as the click-through rate and the appropriateness of the search to the content on 
the site also come into play. It is best to be in the top position, or at least in the top 
three positions. Click rates decline quickly after the first listing. Google sends the 
top three to other sites, giving them broader reach and distribution.
 
In Google the paid listings are generally on the right-hand column and identified 
as “sponsored links.” The free listings are the main or left-hand listings. Some paid 
listings can be at the top of the free listings. These are usually obvious, as they are 
shaded a different color.
 
Some best practices for paid search include:
Consider whether to use just Google or to include other
• 
 first- and second-tier 
search engines such as Yahoo! and Microsoft’s Bing (which as of fall 2009 are 
potentially combining their efforts).
Since you are paying for each click, keep a close—even daily—watch over your 
• 
campaign to ensure staying within budget. If costly clicks are coming in faster 
than expected, an SEM buy can be adjusted hour-by-hour as needed. Most 
advertisers have an “allowable” that they can afford to spend on an acquisition 
to make it profitable.
Optimize your bid management to ensure the best balance between buying 
• 
so many keywords that you are unable to handle the rush of business and so 
few that there is no effect. A number of tools can help you, including Marin 
Software (www.marinsoftware.com), DoubleClick (www.doubleclick.com), 
Eyeblaster (www.eyeblaster.com), Clickable (www.clickable.com), and Kenshoo 
(www.kenshoo.com). These applications include controls for managing entire 
SEM campaigns, in addition to the bid management tools. However, these 
costly tools of the trade must be accounted for when setting up a search buy-
ing unit.
Be on the lookout for click fraud, the criminal use of automated systems that 
• 
generate a flurry of robotic clicks to increase revenue to the website’s publisher 
and the middlemen. The search engines can help detect click fraud, but out-
side tools such as Click Facts (www.clickfacts.com) and Click Forensics (www
.clickforensics.com) can also be useful.
Discovering the best keywords is an ongoing process. Tools such as 
• 
WordTracker (www.wordtracker.com), KeywordSpy (www.keywordspy.com), 
and Keyword Tracker (www.keywordtracker.com) can help.
Unlike traditional media or even conventional online display advertising, SEM 
• 
optimization is a 24/7 proposition. Be prepared to watch the campaign care-
fully to ensure it is meeting your marketing objectives.

340 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Brand protection is important. Watch for competitors bidding on your brand 
• 
name or strategic keywords such as your advertising campaign tagline. You 
can fight this by insisting on your trademark rights (if the rival user is violat-
ing search engine rules) and by preemptively buying top placement for your 
most important brand-associated keywords.
 
While SEM is a paid auction, SEO represents the free listings. Like public rela-
tions, SEO is an art unto itself and there are many specialists, often outside of the 
media department.
 
SEO is defined as the process of editing and organizing the content on a Web 
page or website in such a way that it is more likely to be given a high position when 
specific keywords are entered. At the same time, it is important that external 
links to the site are correctly titled and in abundance. This is done with the aim of 
achieving a higher organic search listing and thus increasing the volume of traffic 
from search engines. Although it is technically free, there is a cost associated with 
paying the IT department or the content developers who build websites to be SEO 
compliant. Because this is extremely important to be successful in search, SEO is 
not free and can be a costly and time-consuming process.
 
It is a good idea for the media planner who is doing paid search to work in con-
junction with the SEO specialist to coordinate best practices. These include the 
following:
Organize aspects of a site’s construction to raise its ranking according to a 
• 
search engine’s algorithm. This changes often, and SEO must be an ongoing 
process, not just one time.
Recognize that SEO is a long-term proposition that can take months to show 
• 
positive results.
On-page factors still count: site structure, meta tags, and so on.
• 
Off-page factors are huge: number and quality of inbound links, paid link 
• 
strategies, generating inbound links with press releases and blogs.
Take advantage of Universal Search, a Google system that blends listings from 
• 
its news, video, images, local, and book search engines with those it gathers 
from crawling Web pages. Make sure all video and audio assets are optimized 
for search.
 
It is important for SEO and SEM to work together. Many studies show that they 
both improve when there is a coordinated effort.
 
As mentioned earlier, search can work from a branding standpoint. After all, if 
you find a term that is beneficial to you, has high traffic, and has few competitive 

 
Evaluating and Selecting Media Vehicles 
341
bidders, you can deliver a lot of impressions that are virtually free, since you 
pay for only the ones that are clicked. A number of companies have done this 
successfully.
 
Video search (included in Universal Search, which can handle many formats 
in addition to keywords) is a rapidly growing practice. Other fast-growing areas of 
search at the time of this writing include mobile search, real-time search (Twitter 
and other microblogs), and social search using Facebook and other social networks 
that can reveal what people like and dislike.
 
A final note: the capabilities and techniques of SEM and SEO change so quickly 
that the particulars of planning and buying are likely to be very different over the 
life of this text. They have a permanent place in marketing communications, but 
it is important for planners to stay current with the latest ways of using these new 
and rapidly evolving media forms.
The Continuously Evolving Online World
Updated in the spring of 2010, this book cannot possibly cover all the many tech-
nologies and business practices in use even today. Any attempt to do so would be 
useless, given the complexity of the Internet and the rapid pace of change. No doubt 
many of the media opportunities presented here will be out-of-date even when the 
book is published. As technology advances, a constant stream of improvements and 
new services will make digital advertising even more effective, but at the same time 
will require greater understanding of how to get the most out of the medium.
 
For all the changes, there is truth in the old saw, “There is nothing new under 
the sun.” Regardless what form the new creative units take—banner, rich media, 
pre-roll advertising before streaming video, SEM and SEO search, online capability 
merged with HDTV, 3-D television, social media, mobile, Twitter, and others not 
yet in existence today—whatever comes must still be primarily evaluated in terms 
of the fundamental concepts of cost efficiency, coverage, and composition of the 
vehicles, and response to the advertiser’s message, however that is measured. It is 
incumbent on the planner to keep informed as the medium changes and as new 
opportunities and challenges present themselves.

This page intentionally left blank 

 
343
CHAPTER TWELVE
Media Costs and Buying Problems
E
very media alternative considered for the media strategy has a different 
cost. The final media plan emerging from the marketing strategy should 
effectively maximize the delivery of the designated marketing target in the 
most cost-efficient manner. Therefore, the media planner must be famil-
iar with market definition and be fully versed in how people use various media. In 
some instances, as is the case with television time, the cost of media varies with 
supply and demand. Other media, such as magazines and newspapers, remain fairly 
constant in cost, thereby providing more predictability as planners develop costs 
for the media plan. But even for these media, the cost per insertion for advertis-
ers running a heavy schedule is highly negotiable. The cost of search varies greatly 
depending on the many factors that affect an auction.
 
The costs that go into the final media plan are always in a state of flux. 
Estimating such costs is as much an art as a science; it depends heavily on the 
experience and professionalism of the media planner and the media buyer. If a 
plan is based on costs that are out of line with marketplace realities, it can result in 
delivery of a faulty media plan. For example, if a planner estimates that 100 gross 
rating points (GRPs) of prime-time television can be purchased for $200,000, and 
the actual cost of that time is $300,000, the deliverability of the plan is seriously 
impaired. The client can then justifiably question the value of that media plan, as 
well as the competence of the planner.
 
Estimating media costs is a complex task. In addition, different media have dif-
ferent problems connected with the buying process. This chapter will identify the 
importance of the planner’s involvement in the media-buying process and explain 
why this involvement requires familiarity with both the cost of media and the prob-
lems associated with purchasing different media types.

344 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Some Considerations in Planning and Buying Media
The value of a media plan is related to how well it delivers the designated market-
ing targets at the lowest cost with the least amount of waste. The criteria for deter-
mining how well the plan accomplishes its mission are related to such concepts as 
reach, frequency, and target market impressions delivered. The gross number of 
target market impressions, coupled with the reach and frequency associated with 
those impressions within the designated budget, form the nucleus of an effective 
media plan. The media planner must go through a calculated process of matching 
the cost of various media alternatives with the delivery of the plan to arrive at the 
optimal relationship between cost and delivery.
 
For example, in June 2009, Nielsen tells us the cost per rating point (CPP) for 
women 18 years of age and older for daytime network television is $5,434 (:30 basis), 
and the CPP for the same audience segment in nighttime network is $28,884. A set 
budget placing all dollars in daytime network will deliver five times more GRPs to 
women 18 than will nighttime network based on these costs. For a $15 million 
budget over a one-year period allocated to 30-second commercials, the planning 
computer estimates that the average four-week reach and frequency for nighttime 
would be lower (25 percent) than the same budget in daytime (43 percent), as illus-
trated in Exhibit 12-1. However, the reach of nighttime will be higher than the day-
time reach over the total 52-week period. Conversely, the frequency in daytime will 
be higher than the frequency in nighttime over the total year. This is for illustration 
only since a planner would rarely recommend placing the entire budget in a single 
television daypart.
 
From this discussion, it is clear that a key part of the broadcast planner’s work 
is determining the best daypart mixture—that is, deciding how many rating points 
should be placed in each daypart. In the past, this was only possible as a trial-and-
error process with a computerized reach/frequency analysis system that analyzed 
one schedule at a time.
 
For at least the past 20 years, sophisticated broadcast optimizers have become 
available that will estimate the reach of thousands of combinations and then report 
the plan that offers the most reach for a given budget. Although the daypart opti-
mizer caused great excitement in the industry when first released, it has since taken 
its place as one of many tools used routinely by planners and buyers.
 
Planners have also become aware of the optimizer’s limitations. First, the results 
are largely determined by the CPP given for each daypart. But since these are only 
estimates of future prices, the resulting “optimal” plan may not reflect market con-
ditions when the buy is made. Second, and equally important, optimizers can work 

 
Media Costs and Buying Problems 
345
only with past audience data, but their results must apply to the next season’s pro-
grams, which may not even exist at the time of the analysis. Finally, many plans 
have virtually identical reach. 74.3 percent is not statistically different from 74.2 
percent, yet it may result from very different GRP levels (and hence, different total 
plan cost per thousand [CPM]). The best optimizers show the top 10 plans, allowing 
planners to select the one that best meets the advertiser’s marketing needs. These 
factors limit the usefulness of optimizers and reinforce the need for judgment in 
developing a broadcast plan.
 
Although broadcast is planned with CPP, comparisons among media are usually 
based on costs per thousand gross impressions or on net reach. Whichever method 
is used, the cost-efficiency of media delivery is important. The medium with the 
largest reach may not necessarily be the best buy, because it might provide less cost-
efficiency. Exhibit 12-2 shows a rough comparison of alternative media deliveries 
and cost-efficiencies.
Women 18 TV Delivery by Daypart for $15 Million Budget
NIGHT 
NETWORK
DAY 
NETWORK
Commercial unit
:30
:30
Population women 18 (000)
116,090
116,090
W18 average audience (000)
2,891
2,156
Cost/30-second commercial
$71,930
$10,091
Average rating
2.5%
1.9%
CPM
$24.88
$4.68
CPP
$28,884
$5,434
Total affordable GRPs ($15 MM divided by CPP)
519
2,760
Average four-week GRPs (total GRPs/52  4)
40
212
Average four-week reach/frequency
25%/1.6
43%/5.0
Total 52-week reach/frequency
73%/7.1
67%/41.1
Source: The Nielsen Company, “Household and Persons Cost Per Thousand,” June 2009; DRAFTFCB 
Reach, 2007. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 12-1

346 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Alternative Media: Cost and Delivery
ADVERTISING 
UNIT
NATIONAL 
EQUIVALENT 
COST ($000)
WOMEN 18 
(000)
WOMEN 18 
CPM
MEN 18 
(000)
MEN 18 CPM
Network TV—prime time 
(7 net—reg.)
:30
$108.8
3,296
$33.02
2,259
$48.19
Network TV—daytime 
(5 net)
:30
27.1
1,577
17.17
899
30.11
Cable TV—avg. net-
work—prime time
:30
2.8
236
11.78
216
12.85
Network TV—early news 
(M–F 3 nets)
:30
74.2
1,804
41.13
2,175
34.11
Syndication (avg.)
:30
16.6
1,303
12.71
816
20.32
General magazine 
(5-mag. avg.)
Pg 4/C Bl
171.8
13,695
12.55
9,951
17.27
Women’s magazines 
(5-mag. avg.)
Pg 4/C Bl
257.5
17,672
14.57
3,254
79.14
Network radio (:30) 
:30
$2.29
1,161
1.97
1,084
2.11
Outdoor (top 50 
markets, 4-week)
50 showing 5,080
2,662
1.91
2,447
2.08
Source: The Nielsen Company, Monitor-Plus, Average June 2008–June 2009. Used with permission. 
Mediaweek, Marketer’s Guide to Media, 2009.
 
An examination of the table shows that different coverage levels are achieved 
by different media vehicles, with certain implications for CPP. The media planner’s 
task is to combine familiarity with media costs and delivery dynamics with the 
goals of the marketing plan to reach designated audiences. The planner must be 
careful to employ correct media cost assumptions in the development of the plan.
 
Tables like these should be used with caution because the definition of an 
impression is different for each medium. For national broadcast, it is the number 
of people exposed to the average minute of the program or the average commercial 
minute at the time it airs. For magazines, it is the total number of people who have 
read or looked into the average issue over the many months when it is available. 
Newspaper impressions are also readership of the average issue. Outdoor is based 
on vehicles passing the boards over a 30-day period. Note that neither online dis-
play nor search media are shown here, because of the totally different way they are 
bought and priced. In short, while it is a common practice, planners who compare 
the efficiency and even the combined reach and frequency of multiple media should 
EXHIBIT 12-2

 
Media Costs and Buying Problems 
347
recognize they are comparing apples and oranges—or perhaps more accurately, 
apples and sushi.
 
To ensure they are using the most accurate and up-to-date costs, planners 
must maintain close contact with cost mechanisms in the media marketplace. 
Costs reflect not only the supply-and-demand conditions of each medium, but 
also the strong influence of the nation’s economy. Exhibit 12-3 shows the year-to-
year changes in media unit costs over the past 10 years as estimated in September 
of the preceding year. It projects 2010 network TV costs down 11 percent versus 
2009, while spot TV costs will be up 4 percent as the economy improves after the 
recession.
 
We cannot overstate the need to include media buyers in the development of 
media cost estimates. Media agencies employ buying specialists whose sole respon-
sibility is the purchase of media. Such media buyers are in regular contact with the 
media suppliers with whom they do business on behalf of the agency and client. 
During the course of the numerous media buyer–seller transactions, the buyer 
acquires a familiarity with what is occurring in the marketplace. Such familiarity 
can assist the media planner in forecasting media price changes. Media buyers are 
expected to maintain good relations with media suppliers to facilitate this flow of 
information. Media planners should make it a point to maintain close communica-
tions with the media buyers so as to tap this source of media cost information.
 
Media agencies develop expertise in estimating media costs based on the agen-
cy’s total experience. Over a period of time, the agency can compile media cost 
information in various markets or nationally by generalizing from various specific 
buying experiences. To develop this information, it is not necessary to breach secu-
rity within an agency, although they rarely buy for competitive advertisers in the 
same product category. Generalized experience is one reason why many agencies 
organized their buyers as market specialists who purchase media in their assigned 
market for every brand that the agency handles. The specialists become intimately 
acquainted with their markets and can usually negotiate more favorable rates than 
buyers who are active in a market only from time to time.
 
In addition to input from the buyers, planners can use the subscription-based 
service SQAD (www.sqad.com), which provides up-to-date cost estimates for spot 
TV and radio and network television. This is useful for planning markets where 
there is little current buyer experience, but even there, actual costs may vary 
depending on the stations selected, the amount of lead time before the schedule 
goes on air, and the buyer’s negotiating skill.
 
Once the media plan has been implemented and the schedules completed, the 
media planner should examine how closely the media cost estimates match actual 
costs. This is called a postbuy analysis. By conducting a postbuy analysis, the 

348 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Media Cost per Thousand Percent Increase/Decrease Over Prior Year
2000 
(OVER 1999)
2001 
(OVER 2000)
2002 
(OVER 2001)
2003 
(OVER 2002)
2004 
(OVER 2003)
2005 
(OVER 2004)
2006 
(OVER 2005)
2007 
(OVER 2006)
2008 
(OVER 2007)
2009 
(OVER 2008)
EST 2010 
(OVER 2009)
Consumer 
 
Price Index
3.4
2.8
1.6
2.3
2.7
3.4
3.2
2.8
3.8
–0.4
na
Network TV
11.0
–6.5
2.1
2.6
5.0
–1.5
0.0
–3.0
2.0
–2.0
–11.0
Spot TV
10.0
–8.5
7.0
–2.0
10.0
–8.0
5.0
–10
6.0
–12.0
4.0
Cable TV
9.5
–1.0
–1.5
7.5
12
7.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.0
0.0
Network Radio
14.0
–6.0
2.5
3.0
3.0
2.5
0.5
1.0
2.0
1.0
2.0
Spot Radio
12.0
–9.0
1.5
2.5
0.0
3.0
–1.0
–3.0
1.0
–10.0
3.0
Magazines
3.0
2.0
4.6
4.0
3.6
3.5
2.0
4.0
3.0
–2.0
1.0
Newspapers
3.5
–3.5
3.0
2.0
2.5
3.5
3.5
2.0
1.0
–2.0
–2.0
Out-of-Home
na
na
na
na
na
na
na
na
5.0
4.8
3.9
Internet
na
na
na
na
na
na
na
na
na
–1.9
0.0
Total media
8.0%
–4.5%
3.6%
2.1%
5.5%
–0.4%
1.9%
–1.9%
1.0%
–2.2%
–2.0%
Source: Consumer Price Index, annual average, all items; American Association of Advertising Agencies (4As), Media Matters, October 5, 2009.
EXHIBIT 12-3

 
Media Costs and Buying Problems 
349
planner can sharpen the capability to forecast costs by reviewing what went into 
the original estimates. Such trial-and-error devices assist the media professional 
in developing the personal art of media cost forecasting. Major variations between 
cost estimates and actual plan delivery cost might reflect flaws in understanding 
or thinking or might be the consequence of significant cost changes in the media 
marketplace that could not have been anticipated. In any event, the media plan-
ner, in checking back over the implemented plan, should consider the exercise an 
important learning experience.
Media Costs
As shown in Exhibit 12-4, national advertisers spent almost $70 billion in national 
television, radio, and magazines in 2009.
 
Within these broad media types are numerous alternatives with which the 
media planner must be acquainted. In addition to understanding general media 
cost relationships between television and magazines, for example, the professional 
planner must be familiar with costs of network versus spot and the different avail-
abilities within the general broadcast medium, as well as the changes over time. 
This assignment is complex and difficult, but necessary.
Television
Combined television expenditures, the first four categories in Exhibit 12-4, 
accounted for 58 percent of total advertising dollars spent in 2009. Note that spend-
ing in national cable is now on a par with national broadcast television. Most of the 
television investment was for consumer goods and services. However, there has 
been a growing use of the medium by industrial and business-related advertisers. 
In view of the magnitude of the investment in television, a media-planning profes-
sional must be fully conversant with all phases of the medium.
 
The major characteristic of television, insofar as media costs are concerned, 
relates to the “perishability” of the inventory. Generally speaking, there is a fixed 
amount of television time available for sale (called inventory). Unlike a magazine or 
newspaper, which can expand or contract the number of advertising pages available 
for sale in any given issue, a commercial minute that is unsold can never be recov-
ered. The sellers of television time must contend with this perishability concept in 
selling the medium.
 
Although marketplace pricing conditions prevail at any given time, these prices 
are subject to change as advertisers’ demand for that time increases or decreases. 
The stronger the demand and the earlier the sale in relationship to the program air 

350 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
date, the more likely that pricing will be higher. Less advertising demand close to 
air date can create lower pricing, assuming inventory availability. These interrelated 
conditions of perishability, demand, and inventory create a dynamic marketplace.
 
Because these market conditions are constantly changing, broadcast planners 
must ensure that they have the most recent costs before they begin the planning 
process. These costs are expressed in terms of CPP and are obtained either from the 
buyer who is responsible for executing the plan or (with the buyer’s approval) from 
published sources such as SQAD. This contact with the buyer is critical because the 
planner is, in essence, saying, “I want you to buy this many GRPs, and I’m giving 
you that much money to do it.” If planners give the buyers more money than they 
need, the returned excess becomes an embarrassment because it could have been 
National Advertising Media Expenditures (Jan.–Dec. 2009)
DOLLARS SPENT
MEDIA
MILLIONS
PERCENT
Network TV
$24,138
18.6%
Cable TV
24,404
18.8
Syndicated TV
2,198
1.7
Spot TV (All 210 DMAs)
24,235
18.6
Spanish-Language Network TV
6,824
5.3
Spanish-Language Cable TV
652
0.5
National Magazine
15,505
11.9
Local Magazine
436
0.3
National Sunday Supplement
1,068
0.8
Local Sunday Supplement
54
0.0
National Newspaper
1,357
1.0
Local Newspaper
10,762
8.3
Network Radio
991
0.8
Spot Radio
5,063
3.9
Outdoor
3,241
2.5
FSI Coupon
446
0.3
Internet
8,574
6.6
Grand Total
$129,948
100.0%
Source: The Nielsen Company, Monitor-Plus, 2009. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 12-4

 
Media Costs and Buying Problems 
351
spent in other places. Conversely, if the buyers are given too little money, then they 
will be unable to buy as many GRPs as the plan calls for—an equally embarrassing 
situation. Buyers typically have 5–10 percent leeway, but anything more than that 
will require a letter to the client explaining what happened.
 
Buyers need all of the following information to provide planning costs:
Geographic area (total United States or list of markets)
• 
Buying target audience (women 25–54)
• 
Commercial length (30-second)
• 
Dayparts to be used in the plan (daytime, prime, news, late fringe, kid)
• 
Schedule dates (typically there is a different CPP for each quarter)
• 
Special buying instructions, such as the need to purchase high-rated (high-
• 
cost) programs, sports sponsorships, promotional requirements, program con-
tent restrictions, and so on
 
Based on this information, buyers will estimate the planning CPPs to be used. 
These costs are based on the buyers’ recent experience in the market, contacts with 
station sales representatives, and their sense of future market demand. Typically, 
one group of people is responsible for buying national broadcast (network, cable, 
and syndication), while another group buys local market spot TV and radio.
 
Large companies that employ the services of several advertising agencies maxi-
mize their buying clout by giving all buying responsibility to a single organization 
(ad agency, buying service, or media specialty company). This agency of record is 
responsible for providing cost-per-point estimates to all planners who work on the 
business.
 
Planning costs are highly confidential because they are the basis for price nego-
tiation. Obviously, if a station finds out that the buyer expects to spend $500 per 
point, there is little incentive to offer a package that comes in at $450.
 
Under the broad heading of television, there are basically four subcategories: 
national network, local spot, syndication, and cable. Let’s start this section with a 
short discussion of a television-wide concept: dayparts.
Dayparts For both planning and buying purposes, the day is broken into a series 
of time periods that reflect different program types and audiences, called dayparts. 
Typical dayparts and time periods are listed in Exhibit 12-5.
 
These dayparts are the basis for planning television campaigns. The plan-
ner’s task is to determine how many GRPs should be purchased in each daypart to 
achieve the plan’s media objectives. Dayparts will be discussed in more detail in 
the following section.

352 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Network TV Certain parts of the broadcast day are programmed by the national 
networks: the American Broadcasting Company (ABC), the Columbia Broadcasting 
System (CBS), the National Broadcasting Company (NBC), the Fox network (FOX), 
the CW, and ION. In addition, Nielsen reports the audience to the Hispanic televi-
sion networks, Univision, Telemundo, and Telefutura. Exhibit 12-6 illustrates the 
dayparts when network programming is usually made available to affiliates (the 
individual stations that constitute a network lineup).
 
The number of stations serviced by a given network can vary from 150 to 210, 
depending on the strength of the network programming available. The networks 
sell time to advertisers, who run commercials within specific programs. These pro-
grams can appear throughout the entire country in various parts of the day (e.g., 
daytime network, prime-time network, or late night).
 
Prime time (Monday-Saturday from 8:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. and Sunday from 
7:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. eastern standard time [EST]) generally provides the highest 
ratings because of the large number of homes using television (HUT). This time 
period tends to deliver a family audience with high reach levels of most viewing seg-
ments. Prime time also reaches the most light viewers, although this group makes 
up only a small proportion of the audience at any one time. Media costs for prime 
time are generally the highest of all network time segments available for sale. The 
Television Dayparts
DAYPART
DAY/TIME
KEY DEMOGRAPHICS
Early morning (EM)
M–Su/7–9 A.M.
Business/professional
Morning kids (EM)
M–Su/7–9 A.M.
Kids
Daytime (DAY)
M–F/10 A.M.–4 P.M.
Women; adults 50
Early fringe (spot only) (EF)
M–F/4–6 P.M.
Women; kids
Early news (EN)
M–Sa/6–7:30 P.M.
Adults 50
Prime access (spot only) (PA)
M–Sa/7:30–8 P.M.
Total persons
Prime time (PR)
M–Sa/8–11 P.M., Su/7–11 P.M. Total persons
Late news (spot only) (LN)
M–Su/11–11:30 P.M.
Adults 25–54
Late fringe (LF)
M–F/11:30 P.M.–1 A.M.
Adults 25–54
Weekend sports (WS)
Sa–Su/10 A.M.–6 P.M.
Men 18; professional
Saturday late fringe (LF)
Sa/11:30 P.M.–1 A.M.
Teens; adults 18–34
EXHIBIT 12-5

 
Media Costs and Buying Problems 
353
cost for 30 seconds in prime time, as indicated in Exhibit 12-2, averages $108,800. 
Individual program costs will vary, depending on rating level (substantially more 
for the higher-rated shows) and the amount of inventory available for sale. As dis-
cussed earlier, the less inventory, generally, the higher the cost.
 
Daytime network (10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. EST) is normally the least costly of the 
network dayparts. This results in an extremely efficient cost-per-thousand delivery 
of homes and homemakers, although the audience composition tends to skew to 
older adults. Typically, daytime network is supplemented with cable and syndica-
tion programs such as “The Oprah Winfrey Show.”
 
Late-night network programming (11:30 p.m. to conclusion EST) varies from 
network to network and over time. This time period is generally programmed with 
talk or news programs such as the “The Tonight Show with Jay Leno,” “The Late 
Show with David Letterman,” and “ABC Nightline” during the week, and variety 
entertainment shows such as “Saturday Night Live” on the weekend. Because fewer 
sets are in use than during prime time, pricing for the late night shows tends to be 
about $21,600 for 30 seconds, with an average household rating of 1.5.1 Although 
the rating levels for late night are comparable to daytime, late night includes a dual 
audience (both men and women), which is not generally the case in daytime. Thus 
pricing for that dual audience tends to be somewhat higher than daytime.
 
Most network programming on weekends is in the sports and children’s areas. 
Sports programming, for the most part, is the domain of the male-oriented adver-
tiser. Such products as beer, male grooming aids, investment counseling, and 
1. The Nielsen Company, Household and Persons Cost Per Thousand Report, June 2009. 
Daypart Programming Available for Network Use
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1
2
A.M.
P.M.
A.M.
L
O
C
A
L
Network
L
O
C
A
L
Network
daytime
programs
L
O
C
A
L
L
O
C
A
L
N
E
W
S
Network
late-night
programs
L
O
C
A
L
N
E
T
W
O
R
K
L
O
C
A
L
L
O
C
A
L
A
C
C
E
S
S
Network
prime-time
programs
EXHIBIT 12-6

354 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
automobiles are heavily represented on weekend sports programming. In general, 
there is a limited amount of broad-scale sports programming compared with other 
network program time. Therefore, pricing tends to be comparable to prime time on 
a CPP basis. However, many advertisers believe the value of identifying with a major 
high-interest sports event rubs off on brands associated with such programming.
 
Children’s programs, often referred to as “kid TV,” are the primary fare on 
Saturday mornings. Nearly all of this programming is cartoons, but there are some 
live-action shows, especially in the action/adventure and sports areas. The predom-
inant audience is children, and the advertising, therefore, is highly child oriented. 
Advertisers of cereal, toys and games, fast food, and candy concentrate a significant 
portion of their advertising budget in kid TV. The growth of cable networks such 
as Nickelodeon and the Cartoon Network have made kid programming available 
throughout the day and have reduced advertisers’ dependence on Saturday morning 
as the sole national kids’ daypart.
 
The diversity of programming provided by the networks ranges from the all-
family interest generated in prime time to highly selective shows of interest to rela-
tively few households. Such diversity provides the media planner with rich oppor-
tunities for reaching broad national markets with programming aimed specifically 
to the interests of target markets. Costs for such programming will change as mar-
ketplace demand changes, so the media planner must be ever alert to the buying 
implications of the programming selected for inclusion in the media plan.
Local Stations Announcements can be purchased on local television stations in 
each DMA, which are either affiliated with a network or are independent. Affiliated 
stations carry network programming at certain times of the day. Independent sta-
tions do not have any network affiliation and so must program the entire day on 
their own. They can choose to produce programs in their own studios (such as local 
news), or they can purchase syndicated programs.
 
Costs for local announcements vary from market to market based on the size, 
the audience delivered, and advertiser demand for the available commercial time. 
Generally, the costs for scheduling announcements in markets like New York, Los 
Angeles, and Chicago are higher than those for smaller markets because of the large 
number of people reached by the big-city stations. Although the out-of-pocket cost 
is higher, the proportionally larger audience tends to lower the CPM.
 
Costs are highly negotiable and depend on the expected size of the audience. 
For the dayparts where there is not enough advertiser demand, or in soft economic 
times, stations will sell units at a negotiated cost per inquiry (PI). These commer-
cials are characterized by requests for direct response to an 800 number and the 
cry, “Operators are standing by.” This is the least desirable way for a station to sell 

 
Media Costs and Buying Problems 
355
time, because their revenue is controlled by the quality and appeal of the PI adver-
tiser. Unusually large amounts of PI advertising, especially in prime time, is an indi-
cation of a slow economy.
 
Time is made available for sale, whether the station is network-affiliated or 
independent, across almost the entire day. Even within dayparts programmed by 
the networks, such as in prime time, certain segments of time are set aside for local 
sale. This means that it is possible for a local advertiser to purchase a 30-second 
announcement (if available) in a network-originated program or between programs 
at the station break. There are also availabilities on cable networks from the local 
cable operators. With the growing audience to cable programs, this has become an 
important venue for local advertisers, although as of this writing, the competitive 
research services do not report spending on cable in local markets.
 
In addition to availabilities adjacent to, and on occasion, within network pro-
gramming, commercials can be placed in what is termed fringe time. In general, the 
fringe dayparts and the programming contained in them might look something 
like Exhibit 12-7.
Sample Fringe Schedule (New York)
STATION
LOCAL TIME (EST)
PROGRAM
WCBS (CBS affiliate)
6:00 P.M.–6:30 P.M.
Local news
6:30 P.M.–7:00 P.M.
Network news
7:00 P.M.–7:30 P.M.
“The Insider”
7:30 P.M.–8:00 P.M.
“Entertainment Tonight”
11:00 P.M.–11:30 P.M.
Local news
11:30 P.M.–12:30 A.M.
“Late Show with David Letterman”
WPIX (CW affiliate)
5:00 P.M.–5:30 P.M.
“My Wife and Kids”*
5:30 P.M.–6:00 P.M.
“George Lopez”*
6:00 P.M.–6:30 P.M.
“Family Guy”*
6:30 P.M.–7:00 P.M.
“Friends”*
7:00 P.M.–7:30 P.M.
“Two and a Half Men”*
7:30 P.M.–8:00 P.M.
“Family Guy”*
10:00 P.M.–11:00 P.M.
Local news
11:00 P.M.–11:30 P.M.
“Two and a Half Men”*
11:30 P.M.–12:00 midnight
“Friends”*
*Syndicated reruns of programs formerly on the networks.
EXHIBIT 12-7

356 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
Pricing for dayparts and specific programs within dayparts varies based on audi-
ence delivery and availability of commercial time. Costs are provided by the buy-
ers who will be purchasing the time. Their estimates are based on their experience 
with the market, but if this is a new market for them or one that has not had recent 
activity, both planners and buyers will use SQAD, the most commonly accepted 
source of spot television costs. This service offers low, average, and high planning 
CPP estimates for all 210 designated market areas (DMAs) and a variety of com-
monly used demographics. Exhibit 12-8 shows an example of the SQAD computer 
report of costs for four major markets. Note the difference in costs by daypart.
 
Costs are updated monthly and are accessed through SQAD’s proprietary com-
puter software. More general household data are available through the Marketer’s 
Guide to Media. For more information about SQAD, see their website at www.sqad
.com.
 
Estimating the cost of a television campaign is simply a matter of multiplying 
the cost per rating point (CPP) by the number of GRPs to be bought. In Exhibit 
12-8, the average cost to buy one women 25–54 rating point in the listed markets 
totaled $9,740 for prime time and $2,304 in early morning. So for example, it would 
cost $1,948,000 to buy 200 GRPs of prime time in each of the four markets (200  
SQAD DATAVue
Spot TV CPP
Target: Women 25–54
Quarter/Year: 3rd quarter
Level: Average
MARKET
RANK
POPULATION
EARLY 
MORNING
DAY
EARLY 
FRINGE
EARLY 
NEWS
PRIME 
ACCESS
PRIME
LATE 
NEWS
LATE 
FRINGE
New York
1
4,409,584
898
931 1,252 1,074 1,930 2,832 1,864 1,073
Los Angeles
2
3,734,035
827
992 1,558 1,102 2,312 4,497 1,537 1,330
Chicago
3
2,058,991
331
357
449
658 1,016 1,426
933
321
Philadelphia
4
1,623,366
248
267
354
385
547
985
519
268
Total
11,825,976
2,304 2,547 3,613 3,219 5,805 9,740 4,853 2,992
Source: SQAD Inc., July. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 12-8

 
Media Costs and Buying Problems 
357
$9,740). The same weight in early morning would cost $460,800 (200  $2,304). 
The same arithmetic applies to national television, only with the national CPP.
Syndication Syndication is the development or packaging of programming that is 
sold directly to the advertiser or cleared on a market-by-market basis by the com-
pany that produces the program, the syndicator. Clearances for a syndicated prop-
erty can range from a program run one time in a few markets to a weekly series 
clearing in 70–90 percent of the United States for extended periods. Each station 
makes its own decision about which syndicated programs to buy and when to put 
them on the air. The stations in a market compete intensely for the best programs. 
Although it happens rarely, stations have been known to buy a program and then 
not put it on the air, just to keep it away from a competitor. Syndicated properties 
include first-run talk shows, specials, sports events, entertainment, information, 
and game shows, as well as off-network reruns of sitcoms and serials. Exhibit 12-9 
lists the top 10 syndicated properties in second quarter 2009. Nationalized house-
hold ratings, impressions, and the syndication distributor are listed.
 
Syndicators and local TV stations make four types of deals: straight barter, part 
barter/part cash, all cash, and scatter. In straight-barter syndication the local sta-
tion receives the program and a percentage of the commercial time within the 
program for local sale in return for airing the show. Part-barter/part-cash syndica-
tion requires the local station to pay a license fee to broadcast the program. This 
arrangement gives the local station control of most of the commercial time, with 
the syndicator selling a smaller percentage of the commercial minutes to national 
advertisers. In an all-cash syndication deal, the local station pays cash for the syn-
dicated property and can sell all the commercial time to both local and national 
advertisers. Scatter syndication is a unique situation in which the stations are obli-
gated to run national commercial spots for a specific syndicator. The local station 
can drop or retain the syndicated show, but if the station elects to run the show, it 
must run the program in a predetermined time. The time period restriction gives 
the syndicator the means to guarantee national coverage by daypart for its national 
advertisers.
 
The costs and efficiencies of the top-rated syndicated properties are comparable to 
network program costs and efficiencies. However, overall syndicated cost-efficiencies 
generally run up to 25 percent better than network cost-efficiencies.
Cable TV
Cable TV can be purchased on either a national or spot basis. Although each cable 
network schedules programming differently, general dayparts mimic traditional 
network TV: early morning, daytime, prime time, and late night. However, many 

358 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
advertisers buy a “run-of-station” (ROS) schedule that rotates the commercials 
throughout the broadcast day. This ensures the advertiser will get the maximum 
possible reach of the network, as well as taking advantage of the lower CPM that 
networks will give ROS advertisers.
 
Until recently, cable was considered a new medium, one that played only a 
minor, if any, role in most media plans. Today, cable plus “alternate delivery ser-
vices” (ADS) such as direct broadcast satellite can reach 90 percent of U.S. TV 
households, with 89 measured cable networks currently on air.2 In May, when the 
broadcast networks still feature first-run programming, advertiser-supported cable 
accounts for 60 percent share of household prime-time viewing. In July, when the 
broadcast nets are in reruns, cable’s share goes up to 65 percent.3
 
With this large a share of viewing, cable is an essential part of any television 
buy. In addition, it allows better targeting of selective audience groups. For exam-
ple, Arts & Entertainment targets upscale, educated individuals; ESPN primarily 
reaches men; and Nickelodeon attracts children ages 2–17. This type of selectivity, 
2. The Nielsen Company, Nielsen Television Activity Report, July 2009. 
3. The Nielsen Company, Total Viewing Sources, May and July 2009. 
Top 10 Syndicated Programs—Second Quarter 2009
PROGRAM NAME
LIVE 
HOUSEHOLD 
RATING
AVERAGE 
AUDIENCE 
(000)
PROGRAM 
ORIGINATOR
“Wheel of Fortune”
6.19
7,085
CBS TV Distribution
“Jeopardy”
5.21
5,961
CBS TV Distribution
“The Oprah Winfrey Show”
4.38
5,017
CBS TV Distribution
“Two-Half Men”—Synd.
4.33
4,962
Warner Bros. TV
“Entertainment Tonight”
3.91
4,473
CBS TV Distribution
“Judge Judy”
3.88
4,440
CBS TV Distribution
“Family Guy”—M–F, Synd.
3.63
4,155
20th Television
“CSI New York”—Synd.
3.24
3,705
CBS TV Distribution
“Seinfeld”
3.17
3,628
Sony Pictures TV
“Law & Order: SVU”—Synd.
2.87
3,290
NBC Universal
Source: The Nielsen Company, Nielsen Television Index. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 12-9

 
Media Costs and Buying Problems 
359
referred to as narrowcasting, allows advertisers to be extremely focused in their 
targeting efforts, although planners must keep in mind the coverage/composition 
trade-off seen in other media. Advertisers with a broad target audience, such as 
women ages 25–54, typically buy more than 20 cable networks to ensure reaching 
a large percentage of the target audience.
 
Cable also tends to be more cost-efficient than other TV options. Exhibit 12-2 
shows cable’s CPM women 18 is roughly a third that of broadcast-network prime 
time. So by including cable in its plan, an advertiser can add reach to the broadcast 
schedule and at the same time lower the CPM exposures to a national network TV 
plan.
Magazines
The two major print advertising categories are magazines and newspapers. Pricing 
for print space tends to be slightly more stable than for broadcast media because 
magazines and newspapers can adjust up or down the number of pages they print 
on an issue-to-issue basis. Thus the cost of printing is somewhat variable, in con-
trast to the fixed commitment of television and its resultant perishability of com-
mercial time.
 
Newspapers and magazines generally issue rate cards that cover future costs, 
although published magazine rates are no longer reliable, due to negotiated rates 
and package deals. A media planner constructing a plan for a year in advance must 
be careful in projecting magazine rate increases during the course of the year, par-
ticularly if the magazines the buyer plans to use are among those negotiating their 
rates. In those cases, the buyer must make judgment calls about the rates to be used 
in the future media plan.
 
There is considerable diversity within the broad category of magazines. Some of 
the categories include general-interest, women’s service, and home magazines.
General-Interest (Dual-Audience) Magazines Publications such as Reader’s Digest, 
National Geographic, and to some degree People, Time, and Newsweek are viewed 
as general-interest magazines in view of the diverse audiences they reach. Their 
editorial content by nature does not exclude any potential reading group. Along 
with the large circulation delivered by these publications goes a commensurately 
high cost per page. Exhibit 12-10 shows sample costs and circulation numbers for 
these magazines.
Women’s Service Magazines More editorially selective publications, such as Ladies’ 
Home Journal, Good Housekeeping, Family Circle, Woman’s Day, and Redbook, 
gear their interest primarily to women. The editorial content of these publications 

360 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
is designed to be informative and entertaining. Male readership, as a percentage of 
total readership, is not very high compared with general-interest magazines. Exhibit 
12-11 shows the rate card costs for these selected magazines.
General-Interest Magazines: Sample Costs and Circulation
MAGAZINE
COST PG 4/C
CIRCULATION 
(000)
TOTAL ADULT 
READERS, 
AGED 18 
(000)
National Geographic
$204,495
4,699
32,069
New Yorker
131,974
1,004
4,611
Time
314,812
3,518
20,749
Newsweek
215,800
2,728
17,679
People
241,975
3,720
43,603
Source: Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC (www.mriplus.com), July 2009. Used with permission.
Women’s Service Magazines: Sample Costs and Circulation
MAGAZINE
COST PG 4/C
CIRCULATION 
(000)
TOTAL ADULT 
READERS, AGE 
18 (000)
Ladies’ Home Journal
$246,600
3,831
12,195
Good Housekeeping
344,475
4,630
23,936
Family Circle
247,200
3,835
19,792
Woman’s Day
252,390
3,894
20,481
Redbook
148,200
2,207
8,660
Source: Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC (www.mriplus.com), July 2009. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 12-10
EXHIBIT 12-11

 
Media Costs and Buying Problems 
361
Home (Shelter) Magazines Other magazines segment their editorial target in a dif-
ferent way, namely by environmental considerations such as sports, children, or the 
home. Magazines such as Better Homes & Gardens, for example, speak to the inter-
ests and concerns of homeowners. By their editorial nature, these magazines tend 
to be adult and dual-audience oriented. Here again, selectivity of editorial content 
as well as audience gives the advertiser an opportunity to position a commercial 
message in a highly compatible environment. The open rate costs for some of these 
magazines are listed in Exhibit 12-12.
 
Categorization of these magazines is somewhat arbitrary. One could argue, for 
example, that Better Homes & Gardens is really a general-interest publication based 
on the duality of the readership. In the final analysis, categorization is not nearly as 
important as the quantity and quality of the readership, compatibility of editorial 
with the sales message, and the cost of running the insertion—all of which must be 
taken into account by the media planner. A cost delivery relationship, however, is a 
good starting point in categorizing magazines from which to select those to qualify 
based on editorial content.
Other Magazine Editorial Categories The previous three categories are the larg-
est, but consumer magazines fall into dozens of other editorial categories. Some of 
these are listed in Exhibit 12-13, along with the number of magazines in each.
Home Magazines: Sample Costs and Circulation
MAGAZINE
COST PG 4/C
CIRCULATION 
(000)
TOTAL ADULT 
READERS, 
AGED 18 
(000)
Better Homes & Gardens
$454,600
7,658
39,018
Martha Stewart Living
154,600
1,954
11,172
House Beautiful
135,251
846
6,307
Traditional Home
172,040
977
4,624
Sunset
108,867
1,236
4,953
This Old House
85,250
976
5,685
Source: Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC (www.mriplus.com), July 2009. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 12-12

362 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Magazine Editorial Categories
EDITORIAL CATEGORY
NUMBER OF 
MAGAZINES
Adventure and Outdoor Recreation
2
Automotive
11
Babies
3
Boating and Yachting
3
Bridal
3
Business and Finance
9
Computers
3
Entertainment and Performing Arts
7
Epicurean
5
Fashion, Beauty, and Grooming
4
Fishing and Hunting
7
General Editorial
7
Health
5
Home Service and Home
20
Mature Market
2
Men’s
14
Motorcycle
3
Music
4
News—Weeklies
7
Parenthood
4
Photography
2
Science and Technology
2
Sports
10
Teen
2
Travel
4
Video and Computer Gaming
2
Women’s
19
Source: SRDS, June 2009.
EXHIBIT 12-13

 
Media Costs and Buying Problems 
363
Newspapers
In 2008, there were 1,408 dailies and 905 Sunday newspapers in the United States,4 
in addition to thousands more nondaily newspapers (weekly, biweekly, etc.). While 
this is down only slightly from 1,483 dailies and 905 Sunday papers 10 years ago, 
further losses are expected due to the loss of automobile, real estate, help wanted, 
and other advertising that has moved from newspaper’s highly profitable classified 
sections to the Internet. Readership has also declined with the advent of 24/7 news 
availability online and younger adults’ failure to get into the habit of reading news-
papers. Only 27 percent of 18–34 year olds read a daily newspaper compared to 56 
percent of adults 55.5
 
Although this trend is primarily affecting the big-city dailies, their Sunday 
editions continue to survive. And outside the big city, small-town papers remain 
profitable by meeting the need to cover high school sports, the police blotter, town 
council meetings, and all the other local activities that are below the radar of the 
big city papers.
 
While the medium is changing, newspapers continue to provide advertisers 
the distinct benefits of flexibility in adjusting efforts from market to market, quick 
closing dates, strong local market coverage, and individual market identification. 
As with other media, newspapers are also highly diverse in the ways they can be 
bought and the advertising units available for sale. The major categories include run 
of paper (ROP), supplements, and custom inserts.
Run of Paper ROP advertising can be purchased in virtually any size, from a full 
page down to just a few inches, in both black-and-white and color. If one color is 
added to black and white, the premium runs about 10–15 percent. Where available, 
four-color cost premiums run 20–40 percent. However, it is possible to package cer-
tain groups of newspapers to reduce the cost premium or to eliminate it entirely. 
ROP space is sold by the column inch for a set of standard advertising units (SAU) 
that ranges from a few inches to a full page. In recent years, specific dimensions 
have varied by paper.
Supplements Newspaper-distributed Sunday magazines offer the advantages of 
color reproduction, regional geographic flexibility, and in-home readership dur-
ing the more relaxed Sunday environment. These publications are preprinted and 
inserted into the Sunday newspapers. The largest, Parade and USA Weekend, are 
4. Newspaper Association of America, “Number of U.S. Daily Newspapers,” reprint of 
Editor & Publisher estimate, www.naa.org. 
5. Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC, Spring 2009. 

364 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
edited for a general national audience and offer the largest circulation of any publi-
cation in the United States. Their costs and circulation levels are shown in Exhibit 
12-14. Locally edited Sunday magazines, with the exception of the New York Times 
Magazine, have largely disappeared since the last edition of this book.
 
The large, general-interest publications are supplemented by more targeted 
Sunday magazines from the Publishing Group of America. American Profile is 
edited for rural communities. Relish is a Sunday food and recipe-oriented magazine. 
And Spry is a lifestyle Sunday magazine that targets women.
Custom Inserts In addition to ROP and magazine supplements, newspapers can 
carry advertising inserts that are printed by outside firms and stuffed into the 
paper along with the other sections. These inserts can be used in many different 
forms. They can be printed on fine-quality or inexpensive papers, in many differ-
ent sizes, used as single sheets or booklets, and printed in many different ways. 
All of these alternative production techniques allow advertisers to create unique 
advertising that will communicate whatever they want and can afford. Costs for 
custom-tailored inserts vary, depending on how elegant they are. Each newspaper 
charges a different price for stuffing and carrying the inserts. Note that inserts are 
normally bought by the advertiser as part of its consumer promotion plan, rather 
than by the ad agency’s media planner.
Major General-Interest Syndicated Supplements: 
Sample Costs and Circulation
MAGAZINE
COST PG 4/C
CIRCULATION 
(000)
TOTAL ADULT 
READERS, 
AGED 18 
(000)
Parade
$960,200
33,000
72,706
USA Weekend
619,445
23,400
48,231
Source: Mediamark Research & Intelligence, LLC (www.mriplus.com), July 2009.
Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 12-14

 
Media Costs and Buying Problems 
365
Radio
Radio is offered on a national network basis and on an individual local-market spot 
basis.
Network Radio Network radio programming available for advertiser sale includes 
primarily news, music, sports, and politically oriented talk shows. Costs for net-
work radio announcements are comparatively low, averaging about $2,500 for a 
30-second announcement, and deliver an average rating of 1.2 to men and 1.0 to 
women. Note that the standard commercial length for network radio is 30 seconds, 
while spot radio is based on 60-second units.
Spot Radio Formats of local radio stations vary widely from market to market. In 
major markets, such as New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago, numerous radio for-
mats appeal to a wide variety of listener interests. Programming ranges from talk 
shows to various kinds of music formats to total news. In smaller markets, stations 
concentrate on local news, country music, and music with more general appeal.
 
As is the case with spot television, the diversity of the medium makes it 
extremely difficult to generalize about costs. In overall terms, however, spot radio 
selectively purchased against designated target audiences can be an exceptionally 
cost-efficient medium for reaching these audiences. Spot radio costs are available 
from SQAD Radio, using the same computer system that delivers television costs.
Internet
Digital advertising prices are stated as the cost per thousand impressions delivered 
to the user’s browser. As with all media, the price varies substantially, depending 
on the size of the ad.
Banners By far the most commonly used and least expensive creative unit is the 
banner ad. Banners are measured in terms of pixels—the small, discrete elements 
that together constitute an image. Exhibit 12-15 shows the most commonly used 
ad sizes. Typical cost for banners is $20.00 per thousand impressions (persons 2); 
however, there is a wide range around this average.
 
For an additional charge, advertisers can take advantage of a variety of targeting 
options to deliver banners customized to the person visiting the site. For example, 
visitors in a given zip code could be shown ads for travel to featured vacation spots. 
Business travelers (more precisely, visitors whose cookie indicates that this com-
puter was used to book airline tickets for business) could be shown a banner with 
promotional rates to business centers.

366 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Rich Media With the maturing of the Internet, the effectiveness of banners has 
fallen off sharply. Typically, far less than 1 percent of people exposed to a banner 
will click through to the advertiser’s website. As indicated in the sample rate card, 
websites are offering larger and more creative units (wide banners, skyscrapers, 
wraparounds, and others) in hopes of improving response. But the most effective 
technique employs sound, motion, and intrusiveness to get the user’s attention. 
These so-called rich media employ a variety of visual elements:
Commonly Used Digital Advertising Units
Banners and Buttons
468  60—Full Banner
234  60—Half Banner
88  31—Micro Bar
120  90—Button 1
120  60—Button 2
120  240—Vertical Banner
125  125—Square Button
728  90—Leaderboard
Rectangles and Pop-Ups
300  250—Medium Rectangle
250  250—Square Pop-Up
240  400—Vertical Rectangle
336  280—Large Rectangle
180  150—Rectangle
300  100—3:1 Rectangle
720  300—Pop-Under
Skyscrapers
160  600—Wide Skyscraper
120  600—Skyscraper
300  600—Half-Page Ad
Source: Internet Advertising Board (www.iab.com).
EXHIBIT 12-15

 
Media Costs and Buying Problems 
367
Animated banners, moving cartoons, flashing words, alternating colors, and 
• 
other effects
Streaming banners that display a continuous stream of text such as a newswire 
• 
or video
Streaming audio banners that play a commercial or audio track when the ban-
• 
ner is presented
Pop-up ads that appear when a page is requested but before it has completely 
• 
loaded (sometimes called interstitial ads because they are delivered between 
the pages of requested content)
 
Rich media ads experience higher click-through rates than banners. However, 
they are considerably more expensive, and they are not accepted by all websites. 
Furthermore, as the use of rich media increases, there is the possibility of user 
backlash against interruptions to Internet browsing. Also, many browsers employ 
pop-up filters that prevent banners and rich media ads from appearing, increasing 
the time it takes to deliver the planned impressions.
Other Digital Advertising There are many other ways of using the Internet. These 
include site sponsorships and targeted e-mail. To address concerns about user back-
lash, some advertisers use “opt-in” advertising, delivered only if the user requests to 
see certain kinds of advertising. Another option is to use direct links to the adver-
tiser’s website from words in the site’s content or from a logo display.
Out-of-Home Media
Out-of-home media come in a wide range of availabilities that differ dramatically 
in size and location. Out-of-home media are the most local of all media forms, 
inasmuch as one advertising unit can be purchased in one very specific location 
geographically. The most popular varieties of out-of-home media are poster panels, 
painted bulletins, and transit advertising.
Poster Panels A poster panel is an outdoor advertising structure on which a pre-
printed advertisement is displayed. The most widely used poster sizes are standard, 
junior, and 3-sheet. The standard poster, or 30-sheet poster, measures approxi-
mately 12 feet high by 25 feet long. The junior panel, or 8-sheet poster, is about 
one-fourth the size of a standard poster. The 3-sheet poster is used extensively at 
transit or train stops. It is 60 inches by 46 inches.
 
Poster panels are generally sold in packages of daily GRPs, called showings. 
For example, a 50-GRP package, or “50 showing,” will deliver in one day exposure 
opportunities equal to 50 percent of the population of the market. The cost for 

368 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
posters varies tremendously from one market to another, and often from one loca-
tion to another in a given market. The cost to purchase a 50 showing for one month 
in standard 30-sheet posters in the top 10 markets of the United States is approxi-
mately $1.5 million. The same purchase encompassing the top 50 markets is about 
$3.8 million.6
 
As noted in Chapter 11, the outdoor industry is developing a new metric that 
will be used as the basis for outdoor sales using impressions and GRPs. The objec-
tive is to measure the medium with the same language as television. Given the long 
tradition of measuring outdoor media in terms of showings, it remains to be seen 
if the conversion to demographic GRPs will be successful.
Painted Bulletins A painted bulletin is an outdoor advertising structure that is 
painted with the advertising copy. “Paints” are generally larger than posters and 
measure, on average, 14 feet high by 48 feet wide. Paints are sold both individually 
and in packages. The cost for one painted bulletin can range from as low as $3,000 
in smaller markets to more than $20,000 in high-traffic areas of larger markets for 
an average month.
 
There are basically two types of paint availabilities: permanent and rotary. In the 
case of a permanent paint, the advertiser buys the specific location for one or more 
years, and the units vary in size. Permanent paints are usually in the most desirable 
locations, along the most heavily traveled highways, and are priced accordingly. 
Because existing advertisers have the right of first refusal when their contracts 
come up for renewal, the best locations are rarely available to new advertisers. The 
rotary bulletin is moved from location to location within a market on a set schedule 
(30-, 60-, or 90-day cycles, depending on the market). Rotary locations are typically 
in high-traffic areas along expressways and major arteries, giving advertisers broad 
exposure to the market over the purchased cycle. They are sold individually or in 
packages.
Transit Advertising Transit advertising is available on buses, taxi cabs, trains, and in 
carrier terminals (train stations, airline terminals, etc.) in selected cities. Numerous 
sizes and shapes can be purchased, including spectaculars that cover the entire bus. 
Advertising costs vary depending on the market, the medium, the size of the adver-
tisement, the length of the purchase, and the scope of the purchase.
Out-of-Home Video Display In the past few years a new form of outdoor advertis-
ing has been made possible by the size and flexibility of out-of-home video display 
6. BPI Communications, Marketer’s Guide to Media, 2009.    

 
Media Costs and Buying Problems 
369
units. These are placed in public spaces where constant traffic presents an oppor-
tunity to extend the reach of a conventional advertising campaign. These places 
include shopping malls, gas stations, grocery stores, movie theater lobbies, eleva-
tors in office buildings, restaurant restrooms, bookstores, cafeterias, and so on. The 
SeeSaw Networks (www.seesawnetworks.com) offers more than 30 different ven-
ues. The Digital Place-based Advertising Association (DPAA, www.ovab.org) was 
created to help marketers and their agency partners more easily evaluate, plan, and 
buy this media as part of their overall communications strategies. Their guidelines 
bring consistency to the measurement of this highly diversified new medium.
Media-Buying Problems
The television media planner works with dayparts, GRPs, reach, frequency, sched-
uling, and geographic weight to accomplish the brand’s marketing objectives. But 
the plan only says that this many GRPs will be purchased for that much money. It 
is the job of the professional buyer to decide which programs will carry the adver-
tising. The buyer is responsible for placing the commercials on programs that will 
deliver the desired GRPs within the allotted budget. Knowledge of how media 
sell their product is vital both for the development of the plan and for its ultimate 
implementation. This section discusses some of the timing and buying implica-
tions associated with various media. Here again, as in the case of cost estimating, 
the major distinction rests between broadcast and print.
Network TV
Network television is a negotiated medium; it is bought and sold somewhat like a 
commodity on the commodities exchange. The market for network television is a 
supply-and-demand market whose goods are highly perishable. A minute not sold 
is a minute wasted, resulting in lost revenue for the network. Consequently, the 
first problem the network television buyer must consider is timing. Other factors 
include packaging and costs.
Timing Incorrect timing and mistakes in assessing when to buy can lead to severe 
implementation problems. For example, if the network buyer waits too long before 
committing the designated budget, all of the availabilities could be exhausted, thus 
leaving nothing to buy. Generally, the earlier the network buy is initiated, the more 
likely the buyer will obtain desired programming in terms of audience delivery 
and stability. The longer the buyer waits before committing to a buy for a specified 
period, the less likely it is that the most desirable programming will be available. 

370 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Waiting does, however, increase the possibility of lower pricing for the inventory 
that remains if demand is low.
 
The ideal time to buy is when sellers are anxious to sell, just before others enter 
the market. In general, in a seller’s year, an advertiser should buy early, before prices 
rise and quality inventory is gone. In a buyer’s year, an advertiser should buy as late 
as inventory is available and prices are likely to be favorable.
Packaging Network television time can be purchased in packages of shows or by 
the individual program. Scatter packages—multiple programs with a few com-
mercials per program during the course of the advertising schedule—provide 
maximum programming dispersion. Therefore, they tend to generate broader 
reach for the available budget. In addition, scatter packages reduce the risk of 
not delivering the specified weight levels, because the outcome of the buy is not 
based on one or two programs achieving their audience levels. In preparing pack-
ages, networks typically include a mixture of high-rated prestige programs and 
new, unproven shows that reduce the overall CPM while still delivering the tar-
get audience.
 
Most network time is purchased as scatter packages, but networks also make 
individual programs available for sale on a continuity basis. Commercials regularly 
appearing on one or two shows can be highly effective when the planner can iden-
tify the specific audience values in those shows that achieve the objectives of the 
media plan.
Cost Considerations Determining network costs depends on three factors: (1) 
demand by advertisers, (2) estimates by both buyer and seller of audience deliv-
ery and CPM, and (3) network overhead and expenses in doing business. By far, 
advertiser demand is the most important determinant of network costs. Seasonal 
demand and the strength of the network and its programming best illustrate the 
effect of supply and demand on the network television marketplace. During the 
time of the year when an advertiser’s sales are expected to be greatest, advertising 
time is in great demand, so network prices are high.
 
For example, for toy makers, the pre-Christmas season, the fourth quarter of the 
year, is a time of great seasonal demand. In addition, advertisers generally prefer 
high-rated, popular programming in any given daypart. Such programming enables 
them to reach a large audience in a good commercial environment. This preference 
increases the price for that particular programming. In many cases, it increases 
pricing for an entire daypart on a network if that particular program dominates the 

 
Media Costs and Buying Problems 
371
daypart. To deliver the planned rating points within the budget, buyers will accept 
units in lower-rated, less desirable programs that lack the marquee value but deliver 
the target audience efficiently.
 
Another set of key determinants of network pricing consists of the buyer’s and 
seller’s estimates of audience delivery and the resulting CPM. In most major agen-
cies, network TV buyers estimate delivery for all network programming before 
negotiations begin. They base their estimates on consistent tracking of audience 
shares from week to week to determine audience trends. Network buyers are also 
aware of any network scheduling changes, new programs, and program cancella-
tions. In addition, the networks project audience delivery. Network projections are 
usually higher than agency projections.
 
For example, assume a buy in fall prime time when 45 percent of women are 
using television (PUT). The dialog between the network salesperson and the agency 
buyer might run something like this:
Network salesperson: This is a great new show by the same people who developed 
“Survivor.” It’s sure to do at least a 12 share and a 5.4 rating.
Agency buyer: Oh, give me a break. Everybody and his brother is doing a “Survivor” 
knockoff. It’ll be lucky to do a 9 share.
Keep in mind that the average woman age 18 cost per point of network prime 
time is about $33,585. When the network salesperson says the show will do a 12 
share, the rep is saying that a :30 spot will cost $181,359 (.12  45  $33,585). The 
buyer thinks it’s worth only $136,019.
 
When a substantial long-term network buy is made using mutually agreed-upon 
audience projections, the network normally guarantees delivery. If the network does 
not meet its guaranteed projections, it must offer compensatory units.
 
Finally, the network’s expenses also affect network pricing. The network will try 
to cover the cost of programming and business overhead. An expensive production 
is priced at a premium to offset its costs. In addition, there are mechanical charges 
for national and regional advertisers. In the past, networks charged an “integra-
tion” fee to splice the commercial into its proper place in the tape containing the 
program. Modern computerized traffic management systems have eliminated 
this manual operation, but networks continued to impose the charge until 2008, 
when advertiser pressure forced some networks to drop it. Additional fees are also 
charged to regional advertisers for the labor of setting up regional feeds, program 
cut-ins, and regional blackouts.

372 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Buying Network TV
Once the media plan has been approved, the action shifts to the professional media 
buyers, who must translate into specific programs the television activity that is pre-
sented on the flowchart in the general terms of target audience groups, dayparts, 
and campaign dates. Before a buyer starts to negotiate, planners prepare a set of 
deal points that have been reviewed by the client. These may include the budget, 
CPM within a certain price range, guaranteed audience delivery, positioning within 
a commercial pod or publication, added-value merchandising, limitations on objec-
tionable content, cancellation privileges, and anything else the buyer needs. These 
become part of the advertiser’s formal approval to begin the negotiations.
 
Advertisers purchase network television in three primary ways: up-front (or 
long-term), scatter (or short-term), and opportunistic (or last-minute) buys.
Up-Front (Long-Term) Buys An up-front, or long-term, buy is the purchase of inven-
tory for all four quarters of the coming broadcast year. Advertisers’ dollars are com-
mitted up front in the spring or summer for the following television season, which 
begins in September. Up-front buying usually involves a guaranteed audience deliv-
ery, expressed as a guaranteed cost-efficiency and consisting of premium inventory. 
If the purchased programs fail to deliver the expected rating points, the networks 
will honor the contract by offering additional “audience deficiency” commercial 
units at no charge. Committing dollars in the up-front market gives the advertiser 
insurance against sellouts but little flexibility with regard to possible cancellation. 
At best, networks will generally grant cancellation options on a portion of the last 
half of a long-term buy.
Scatter (Short-Term) Buys A scatter, or short-term, buy is the purchase of inven-
tory within a specific quarter, made before the start of that quarter. Scatter buys 
are negotiated on a quarterly basis and give the buyer a better fix on the market-
place. That is, the buyer knows pricing from the up-front market as well as pricing 
from the previous quarter. Scatter buys offer the advertiser more financial flexibil-
ity, with dollar commitment required only one to two months before the air date. 
Buying scatter does, however, involve inventory and efficiency risks, because the 
best inventory might already be sold. Also, scatter has historically tended to be less 
efficient (priced higher) than the up-front market. Finally, networks rarely guaran-
tee scatter buys.
Opportunistic Buys Opportunistic buys involve the purchase of inventory on a last-
minute basis if the networks have any remaining inventory to sell. Opportunistic 
buys depend on the availability of inventory. So they carry the risk of being shut 

 
Media Costs and Buying Problems 
373
out of the market when the exposure is needed. On the positive side, these buys 
can sometimes be very efficient, because the networks are trying to get rid of last-
minute inventory just prior to air date.
Other Types of Network Buys Occasionally, advertisers purchase network television 
programs on a full or partial sponsorship basis. A full sponsorship involves pur-
chase of all of the commercial time available in one or more telecasts of a program. 
Partial sponsorship requires purchase of at least three or four 30-second units of 
commercial time in one or more telecasts of a program.
 
In the early days of television, sponsorship was common. Today, although very 
few hours of network television are fully sponsored, partial sponsorship is common. 
Sponsorships have several advantages. Audiences identify the sponsor with the pro-
gram. The advertiser gains additional exposure in the form of opening and closing 
billboards. Sponsors may be able to use cast members in commercials. Sponsorship 
also can enable participation in high-quality programming. Sponsorship is espe-
cially valuable for advertisers with multiple divisions and product lines where 
brands with minimal advertising budgets can get high-visibility exposure.
 
However, sponsorships are generally expensive. Also, the advertiser takes a 
chance that the program will not do well. An additional drawback is that audience 
reach is limited with a single program, compared to spreading the buy over a vari-
ety of programs.
 
Special-event network programming can be purchased unit by unit or as pro-
gram sponsorship. Specials such as holiday parades, election night coverage, and 
award presentations provide a good environment for new-product introductions 
and for seasonal advertisers because they frequently have mass audience appeal and 
high visibility. In general, special-event programming carries a premium price.
 
Network regional time also is available. In a regional network buy, an advertiser 
buys only a portion of the country, and another advertiser or advertisers buy the 
rest. Regional network availabilities can benefit advertisers who seek certain types 
of programming identification, have products with less than national distribution, 
or are introducing new products to specific regions. Regional network time pur-
chases are generally difficult to execute and involve considerable planning and dis-
cussions with the network sales departments. An alternative for national advertis-
ers with multiple product lines is to purchase a unit that covers the entire country, 
then use regional feed patterns to deliver different commercial messages to differ-
ent parts of the country.
 
Finally, once the buyer and network salesperson come to an agreement on 
exactly what programs will be purchased, the expected rating of each telecast, the 
associated cost, and all the other details of the buy, the order is put “On Hold.” The 

374 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
network reserves this inventory for the advertiser with the expectation that a legally 
binding commitment will follow within 24–48 hours. This gives the advertiser a 
final opportunity to review the buy, ensure the money to pay for it is available, and 
that it meets the advertiser’s marketing needs. While it is technically possible for an 
advertiser to drop the hold, doing so is akin to not showing up for a wedding, with 
the resulting bad reputation for future orders.
Spot TV
The United States has 210 spot television markets (DMAs) with more than 1,200 
commercial television stations. The number of stations per market, which directly 
influences spot inventory, ranges from a high of 11 in Los Angeles to 3 or 4 stations 
in many small markets.
 
Major markets with multiple stations offer a considerable spot inventory from 
which to select. The multiplicity of spot commercial availabilities in such markets 
allows the buyer to be somewhat selective about programming and timing. Spot 
schedules are generally purchased two weeks to two months in advance of the start 
date of the schedule. Spot time can be bought for specified flight periods or on a 
continuing basis until canceled. Most station contracts call for cancellation notice 
to be given four weeks before the end of a schedule.
Syndicated TV
Syndication is bought much like network television: the advertiser makes one 
national buy. However, unlike buys for network television, syndication buys can 
include either packages of time on several shows or time purchased on one pro-
gram. Here again, the percentage of national coverage varies by syndicated prop-
erty, and pricing varies according to coverage, projected performance, and demand. 
Audience delivery guarantees are often available.
Cable TV
Cable TV is negotiated the same way as network TV—the buy is negotiated on a 
CPM efficiency basis with a guaranteed audience delivery. Like network TV, the 
cable networks are pitted against each other during negotiations to provide the best 
possible pricing. The cable marketplace is unique because each network has lim-
ited mass appeal. Except for the cable networks that program like network TV (e.g., 
USA), most target specific demographic groups. Nevertheless, it is possible to pit 
these niche networks against each other in negotiations, as long as the buyer is not 
particular about program environment. As noted earlier, most advertisers spread 
their cable buy across multiple networks—often more than 20 nets to ensure ade-
quate reach of the national buy.

 
Media Costs and Buying Problems 
375
 
Cable can also be purchased market by market in the same manner as spot TV, 
but the process is far more complicated. Orders must be placed, one at a time, on 
each cable system that serves an area. Although this allows very precise geographic 
targeting, managing the price negotiation, purchase, stewardship, and payment for 
potentially thousands of low-cost commercial units is highly inefficient. In addition, 
because the ratings are generally less than 1.0, and because of the small Nielsen 
sample in spot markets, no local ratings are available for most cable programs. This 
makes local cable a valuable medium for retail advertisers, which can measure its 
effectiveness by store traffic. Local cable is less useful for national advertisers that 
do not need spot cable’s geographic targeting capabilities.
Magazines
Although magazines publish a rate card in SRDS, the medium has become 
extremely negotiable, especially for high-volume advertisers. Most national publica-
tions accept space reservations guaranteeing that advertising space will be available 
in the desired issues. Space reservations can be made almost any time in advance 
of the issue. The final date for contracting to appear in a given issue is called the 
closing date. This date varies by publication. Closing dates for monthly magazines 
will generally be 45 to 60 days in advance of the issue date. Closing dates for weekly 
publications normally fall about three to seven weeks prior to issue.
 
National magazines provide regional and test-market circulation breakouts for 
achieving coverage in specified geographic areas. The regional availability can 
include multiple states or just a limited area, such as New York City. The rest of the 
circulation carries either another advertiser or editorial material. Magazines also 
make available test-market circulation breakouts that conform closely to television 
market coverage patterns, thus permitting test translations of national plans into 
local test areas. Normally, advertisers must secure costs and availabilities of such 
special breakouts from the magazines before placing an order, because the numbers 
are subject to change. Media Networks, Inc. (www.mni.com), allows advertisers to 
place an ad in the copies of national magazines that are distributed to individual 
DMAs.
 
Many magazines also make available what are called A and B copy splits. This 
means two different blocks of copy can appear in alternate copies of the magazine 
in the same issue. These copy splits provide opportunities to test alternative copy 
approaches, or different brands can use splits when national coverage is desired and 
half of the circulation is considered adequate for each brand. Some magazines also 
make available demographic breakouts. Such demographic editions allow advertis-
ers to place ads only in copies going to physicians, businesspeople, or some other 
breakout provided by the publication.

376 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
As media planners continue their education, they should keep abreast of the 
flexibilities provided by the ever-changing publishing industry.
Newspapers
Unlike magazines, newspapers are not generally considered a negotiable medium 
for national advertisers. The rate card sets the price, and that is what advertisers 
pay. Large local advertisers (supermarket chains, major retail stores, shopping cen-
ters, and others with a specific local street address) negotiate prices at the (unpub-
lished) local rate. Those prices are significantly lower than what is paid by national 
advertisers. This can lead to intricate negotiations when national advertisers such 
as fast-food chains buy newspaper space on behalf of their local franchisees.
 
Space closing for ROP space is only a few days before the actual issue. If a spe-
cial unit is desired, such as a two- or four-color half-page, then additional time in 
ordering such space is generally required. However, the advance notice to the news-
papers is still relatively short, compared with the longer closing dates of national 
magazines.
 
Newspapers have been very aggressive in developing special sections geared to 
various audiences and issues. For example, many food advertisers look for what 
is called the “Best Food Day.” Best Food Day in most markets is Wednesday or 
Thursday, the days that major food chains schedule their advertising. The adver-
tising is positioned adjacent to the special editorial sections that the consumer is 
likely to read before going to market. Positions within these sections are generally 
available at no extra cost.
 
Other sections that can be advantageous in reaching selected audiences include 
sports, business, and special features on fashion, grooming, and home care. In addi-
tion to such regular opportunities for positioning, newspapers offer availabilities for 
special preprints, such as card stock inserts. In most cases, the advertiser provides 
the particular preprint to the newspaper. Such advertising units have to be ordered 
well in advance to ensure space availability.
Radio
Network radio programming tends to offer relatively few format types, such as 
news and sports, some special events, and personality commentators. Network 
radio is purchased in the same way as network television: that is, with a contractual 
obligation for a specified number of commercials over a designated period.
 
Spot radio provides different buying opportunities in view of the tremendous 
selectivity and diversity of programming and stations in many major markets. 
Arbitron rating information is available in most markets but does not provide the 
total picture in buying radio. The number of men, women, and teenagers listening 

 
Media Costs and Buying Problems 
377
at various times to specific radio stations can be identified. However, the format—
whether contemporary music, country-western, stock market reports, weather, or 
sports—can be an important factor influencing station selection. The planner must 
rely heavily on the buyer’s experience in executing a local-market radio buy and 
ensuring a close match among the commercial copy, audience, and station format.
 
Arbitron is the primary source of local radio ratings; however, Eastlan measures 
the audience in more than 100 markets from the smallest to midsize markets such 
as Green Bay, WI. Additional information is available from their website, www.east
lan.com.
 
In a recent development, The Nielsen Company has begun measuring spot 
radio audiences in 51 small to midsize markets using a modified diary technique. 
The service has picked up large radio station groups, including Clear Channel and 
Cumulus. This service can be seen as expanding to challenge Arbitron.
Internet
An Internet ad campaign can involve dozens of websites and potentially millions 
of ad impressions rotated among numerous creative executions to multiple target 
audiences. This daunting task has led to the emergence of third-party ad servers 
such as DoubleClick Inc. (www.doubleclick.com) and Atlas Solutions (www.atlas
solutions.com). These services automate the execution of digital advertising pro-
grams. For an additional 40–50 cents per thousand, they assist in planning, budget-
ing, insertion order generation, creative trafficking, and post-buy analysis. Planners 
tell the ad server which sites they have bought, the number of impressions to be 
delivered on each, the creative executions and rotation instructions, and the target 
audience. Then when called on, the server delivers an ad to the user’s Web browser. 
When the contracted number of impressions have been delivered, the server bills 
the advertiser.
 
Although the medium has matured, there remain numerous issues and short-
comings to the audience measurement. One relates to the simple act of counting 
impressions. The ad server maintains a count of the ads that it delivers, and the 
website maintains its own count. The two invariably disagree because there is no 
standard way of counting exposures. For example, one may count ads when they 
are sent out (even if the user clicks away while it is still downloading), while the 
other counts an ad only when it has been successfully displayed. The magnitude of 
the discrepancy can range from just a few hundred impressions up to a significant 
proportion of the campaign.
 
The Internet is a continually evolving medium. It is beyond the scope of this 
book to go into greater detail regarding Internet buying and planning. The basic 
tools were covered in Chapter 11. The fundamentals of audience size, coverage, 

378 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
composition, reach, cost efficiency, and frequency are timeless. Beyond that, unlike 
traditional media, the capabilities of the Internet change so quickly and so often 
that a hardcover textbook, with a gap of almost a year between writing these words 
and their appearance in print, cannot hope to be an authoritative guide. Social net-
working, Twitter, mobile Internet, YouTube, Hulu, pre-roll video advertising, and a 
host of other services and tools have become available just in the past few years—
each have their own value and procedures for use as advertising vehicles. Others 
will surely emerge between this writing and when it is published, not to mention 
during the edition’s several years of life.
 
There is not even consensus in the industry about where the online planning 
function should reside. Some agencies see online as just another medium, to be 
planned along with radio, TV magazines, and the other traditional media. Others 
see it as an online group within a planning department—people responsible for the 
online portion of a media plan, but working side-by-side with the traditional plan-
ners. Still others see online as such a specialty that it can be handled only by a com-
pany whose sole expertise is planning and buying online media. Wherever Internet 
planning is handled, it is clear that anyone involved with online media should 
stay current with the industry, participate in seminars held by the Interactive 
Advertising Bureau (www.iab.net), and maintain contact with the representatives 
of the online publishers.

 
379
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Setting and Allocating the Budget
D
espite the time and thought that have been given to it, one of the most dif-
ficult tasks facing advertising and agency planners is that of determining 
the optimum amount of money to spend for advertising. The main dif-
ficulty in determining the budget size is that no one knows precisely how 
a given amount of money spent for advertising will affect sales or other marketing 
goals. In a timeless explanation, media expert Herbert D. Maneloveg summarized 
the problem as follows:
Our major problem, I believe, is that we really don’t know how much advertising 
is enough. And we haven’t done much about trying to find out. Not until lately. 
When someone asks about the amount of advertising pressure needed to make a 
potential consumer aware of the merits of a brand, we fumble and grope. When 
asked to justify an increase or decrease in advertising budget, we are lost because of 
an inability to articulate what would happen with the increase or decrease: if sales 
go up, we credit advertising; if sales go down, we blame pricing, distribution, and 
competition.1
 
In other words, there is no simple cause-and-effect relationship between the 
amount of money spent and the sales results that are supposed to occur because 
of the expenditure. Some manufacturers have learned from experience how much 
money they should spend to obtain a desired share or sales volume at a given time. 
But even these manufacturers do not assume the relationship will remain constant 
1. Herbert D. Maneloveg, “How Much Advertising Is Enough?” Advertising Age (June 6, 
1966): 30. 

380 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
at all times. At some time or other, they and most other advertisers are in the same 
quandary about how much to spend on advertising.
 
What further complicates the matter is that each brand usually has a number of 
competitors whose changing activities make it difficult to anticipate correctly what 
they will do. The dynamic marketplace situation makes the task of budget setting—
including having to estimate probable competitors’ activities and allow a portion of 
money for contingencies—difficult for most advertisers.
 
Finally, advertising is not the only factor that contributes to the sale of a product. 
Other elements of the marketing mix, such as pricing, sales promotion, personal 
selling, and packaging, also play a role. But who can separate the precise contribu-
tion of advertising from the effects of the other marketing mix elements?
 
Despite these problems, advertising budgets must be established, and the task is 
performed based on as much knowledge as is available at the moment. This chapter 
outlines some of the major methods and problems of setting budgets, along with 
their advantages and disadvantages.
Setting the Budget
Before they begin, planners must be absolutely clear about what the advertising 
budget is expected to cover. Many marketing executives consider promotional bro-
chures, sales meetings, coupon redemption, and even coffee cups or T-shirts to be 
part of advertising. This is in addition to the obvious advertising-related expenses of 
commercial production, talent charges, print production, and so on. Regardless of 
how the budget is determined, in the end planners need to know how much money 
is available for “working media,” that is, the cost of advertising time and space.
 
They must also know if this figure is “gross” or “net.” Gross means that the cost 
includes agency commission. The agency bills the advertiser the gross amount, but 
pays the media 85 percent, the net charge—this is a privilege granted to formally 
recognized advertising and media agencies. If the advertiser bought directly from 
the media, they would pay the gross price. Virtually all traditional media prices are 
gross.
 
Sometimes, especially for online media, the costs are expressed as net and do 
not build in a 15 percent commission for the ad agency. Planners might be asked to 
go the other way and calculate what the gross cost would have been. The formula 
is simple:
Gross cost  Net cost  1.1765

 
Setting and Allocating the Budget 
381
Planners also need to know the dates of the advertiser’s budget or “fiscal” year. For 
some, this is a standard calendar year beginning on January 1, but for others, the 
year may begin on July 1, or on September 1 with the start of the school year, or it 
may be tied to governmental years, which begin on October 1. Whatever the dates, 
the media plan and flowchart must reflect these budgeting realities. 
 
In most media flowcharts, weeks are expressed in terms of the broadcast calen-
dar. Weeks begin on Monday, and months end with the final Sunday, even if a few 
days after that fall in the next nomth. This decades-old convention greatly simpli-
fies media billing. In this section we will discuss the various methods of determin-
ing budget size—both traditional and nontraditional—as well as several of the fac-
tors that must be considered in the budgeting process.
Traditional Methods of Budget Setting
A number of methods are widely used to determine the budget: percent of sales, 
competitive spending, objective and task, expenditure per unit, and the subjective 
judgment of what is affordable. Those used most often tend to be simple to under-
stand and quick and easy to compute. In the ideal situation, these different methods 
will yield roughly similar budget levels.
 
Exhibit 13-1 reports on an international study of budgeting methods used by the 
top 100 advertisers in Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States. About 
half of these advertisers used several methods, but the most commonly used was 
“objective and task,” either on its own or in combination with other methods (most 
often the affordable and percent-of-sales methods). These will be discussed in detail 
in the following sections.
Percent of Sales To arrive at budget amounts, the percent-of-sales method mul-
tiplies projected sales revenue for the year by a given percentage to be spent on 
advertising. The amount of money available for advertising purposes, therefore, 
is based directly on the sales achievement of the brand. As sales increase, so does 
the advertising budget. If sales decline, the budget also declines. The heart of this 
method is the multiplier, the percentage by which the sales base is multiplied. In 
determining which percentage to use, one must consider the cost of goods and 
the pricing policy of each industry. If a brand costs 15 cents to manufacture and 
distribute and sells for $1.25, a considerable margin is available for advertising, 
promotion, and profit.
 
The first step in setting a budget based on percent of sales is to determine the 
expenses incurred in manufacturing and distribution. The difference between this 
cost and the selling price helps determine the margin available for advertising, 

382 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
promotion, and profit. (There are, of course, other costs to be factored in, such as 
overhead.) Smaller margins mean a smaller percentage available for advertising.
 
The key to this method of setting budgets is finding the best multiplier. This 
multiplier is often set arbitrarily. At other times, industry standards are used as a 
base. Advertising Age Data Center publishes advertising/sales ratios every year for 
data center subscribers at www.adage.com/datacenter.
 
The percent-of-sales method of budgeting might appear to be totally inflex-
ible. This is not true. Often the percent of sales is only the starting point. After the 
percentage is multiplied by gross sales, the total can be adjusted to compensate for 
special marketing situations. When there are special marketing needs, extra dol-
lars are added. Some companies, instead of adding to the total, will raise the mul-
tiplier when they are introducing a new product or when they are faced with very 
heavy competition. In some instances, however, the percentage multiplier remains 
constant year after year, no matter how much sales vary. When this happens, the 
multiplier tends to become a historical figure that is rarely questioned.
Methods Used by Top 100 Advertisers to Set Advertising Budgets
BUDGETING METHOD
NUMBER OF 
COMPANIES 
USING 
METHOD*
PERCENT OF 
TOTAL USAGE
Objective and task
61
32%
Affordable
41
21
Percent of anticipated sales
32
17
Percent of last year’s sales
10
5
Unit sales
9
5
Competitive relative
25
13
Competitive absolute
13
7
Total usage
191
100%
Sample base: 100 completed questionnaires (Canada, 36; United States, 36; United Kingdom, 28).
*Amounts add to more than 100 because 52 companies gave multiple responses.
Source: C. L. Hung and Douglas C. West, “Advertising Budgeting Methods in Canada, the UK, and the US,” 
International Journal of Advertising, vol. 10, no. 3 (1991).
EXHIBIT 13-1

 
Setting and Allocating the Budget 
383
 
The multiplier is also affected by product pricing. Sales of low-ticket products 
such as drugs or supermarket items depend heavily on advertising, while high-ticket 
items such as appliances, cars, and home furnishings are less dependent on adver-
tising. A guideline for determining whether the multiplier should be large or small 
is that the more advertising is used as a substitute for personal selling, the higher 
the multiplier (or the higher the margin to advertising).
 
The percent-of-sales budgeting method is easy to manage and understand. It 
is self-correcting as sales volume changes, and it can maintain a consistent profit 
margin. It also is suitable for both financial and marketing group needs.
 
However, there are many criticisms of the percent-of-sales method. For one, it 
seems illogical, because advertising is based on sales, rather than the other way 
around. When sales decline, the company will spend less for advertising, when per-
haps it should spend more. Also, unless the advertising-to-sales ratios are analyzed 
by area, better sales areas will tend to get better and weaker sales areas will get lit-
tle relief. This technique also assumes there is a direct linear relationship between 
advertising and sales, which is seldom true despite its intuitive appeal.
 
Another criticism of this method is that it does not encourage companies to pro-
vide the research money needed to find the relationship between advertising and 
sales. The advice offered by marketing expert Alfred A. Kuehn holds true:
Perhaps the best of these rules [methods of setting budgets] for an established brand 
is “budget a percentage of expected sales equal to the industry average.” This rule is 
of particular interest since it is self-adjusting over time, and appears to be a low-risk 
policy for a firm that does not have a better understanding of the effects of advertis-
ing than do its competitors.2
 
On the other hand, if all competitive brands used this method and employed 
about the same multiplier, advertising budget sizes would be approximately propor-
tional to market share, thus limiting investment spending for advertising warfare 
among competitors.
Competitive Spending The competitive spending method depends on setting the 
budget in relation to the amount of spending by competing brands. The amount to 
be spent need not be precisely the same as that of competitors, though at times it 
is. Sometimes, a brand that has a smaller market share than its competitor receives 
2. Alfred A. Kuehn, “A Model for Budgeting Advertising,” Mathematical Models and 
Methods in Marketing (Homewood, IL: Richard D. Irwin, 1961): 315–16. 

384 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
a budget that is equal to or greater than the competitor, as a means of improving 
its share position.
 
A major criticism of this approach is that it assumes competitors know what 
they are doing or competitors’ goals are the same as one’s own. It also assumes, 
incorrectly, that a simple increase in advertising expenditures will automatically 
increase sales, market share, or both. The products of competitors might be differ-
ent, or at least consumers might perceive them as different, so a company’s advertis-
ing must work much harder to make sales than competitors’ advertising. Certainly, 
the marketing goals of one company are not the same as another, and the ability of 
advertising to create sales also is not the same.
 
Another competitive approach relates a brand’s share of spending to its share 
of market. Because a given brand always loses some customers to competitors, this 
technique would suggest spending at a level that puts its share of spending a few 
points above its share of market. For new products or to meet a goal of aggressive 
growth, the target share of spending could be as much as double the expected share 
of market. This method hinges on the advertiser’s ability to predict the brand’s 
future market share and its competitors’ spending levels. It also depends, to some 
extent, on how the competitive set is defined.
 
The relationship between share of advertising and share of market is best 
expressed by James Peckham in his classic analysis of consumer package goods 
sales, The Wheel of Marketing:
Almost eight out of ten, or 78%, of the successful brand leaders maintained a fifteen 
year  share of advertising expenditures consistent with the brand’s share of consumer 
purchases, thus continually reminding consumers of the brand, its improvements 
and its usage.3
In this book, Peckham presents an easy-to-use process for graphing the relationship 
between share of voice and share of market. It is called the marketing advertising 
pattern (MAP). Assuming a stable relationship over the past five years, the MAP 
can estimate the spending needed to maintain or grow the share of market.
Objective and Task The objective-and-task method starts with someone setting 
specific marketing or advertising objectives. These are costed out, and the total 
cost represents the budget. Objectives can be sales, share volume levels, revenues 
expected, income, or profit.
3. James O. Peckham, The Wheel of Marketing, published by A. C. Nielsen, 1981. 

 
Setting and Allocating the Budget 
385
 
This method has two main criticisms. First, this method finesses the core prob-
lem: marketers usually do not know how much money it takes to attain any given 
objective. Second, the method does not consider the value of each objective and the 
relationship to the cost of obtaining it. Will the brand still be profitable after spend-
ing the money judged necessary to achieve any given objective?
Expenditure per Unit (Case Rate) The expenditure-per-unit (case rate) method is 
a variant of the percent-of-sales method. In this method, the budget is generated 
as a result of sales, but the base is units sold, not dollar sales. Many of the advan-
tages and disadvantages of the percent-of-sales method apply also to this method. 
However, there are two additional disadvantages, which follow.
 
First, unless the method is properly handled, the company might lose control 
of profits. This is particularly true if the product or brand has a wide range of sizes 
or prices. Shell Oil Company, for example, has four types of gasoline, ranging from 
super regular (premium price) to regular (lowest price). Profitability varies for each. 
Spending on a cents-per-gallon basis must take into consideration the mix of the 
line.
 
The second disadvantage is that working with units and fixed rates of expendi-
tures will not take inflation into account. To overcome this, the case rate must be 
adjusted from year to year.
Subjective Budgeting Subjective budgeting systems involve making decisions on the 
basis of experience and judgment. The person setting the budget will also consider 
some objective factors, such as the minimum job that advertising will be required 
to do or available profit margins. But after such consideration, the final figure is 
decided on rather subjectively.
 
One subjective budgeting method is known as “all we can afford.” Although at 
first glance this approach seems illogical or crude, it can be quite realistic if the 
subjective decision is accurate. This method generally starts by setting a profit per-
centage or dollar figure and then systematically analyzing the costs of doing busi-
ness. The remaining figure, after all other costs are accounted for, is spent in mar-
keting, a portion of which is advertising. A budget made on such a basis is difficult 
to defend, especially when there is reason to believe that if more money had been 
appropriated, the result would have been higher sales and higher profits.
 
A boss of mine once remarked that there were two kinds of marketers: those 
who consider advertising an expense, and those who think of it as an investment. If 
an expense, the goal is to spend as little as possible, with the same mind-set as one 
would approach buying gas and electric utilities, supplies, and office equipment. As 

386 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
an investment, however, the money spent on advertising is expected to return many 
times that amount in sales. The approach taken will color all thinking and can set 
the tone for the entire advertiser–media planner relationship.
Experimental Methods of Budget Setting
Some marketing and advertising professionals believe that the best way to deter-
mine the size of an advertising budget is by testing various levels of expenditures 
to see which will produce the most sales at the lowest total cost. The experimental 
designs for this purpose range from a simple before-and-after test in one market 
to elaborate designs in which many markets are tested and compared with control 
markets. Although the details of such experiments are usually kept secret, occa-
sionally some are publicized.4
 
Essentially, experimental tests involve trying different advertising expenditure 
levels in different markets. In some experimental situations, advertisers discover 
that they can reduce advertising expenditures without any effect on sales. In other 
situations, increases in advertising produce varying degrees of sales increases.
 
In one example, Anheuser-Busch used three sets of markets (each set consist-
ing of nine individual markets) to test alternative expenditure levels and measure 
the sales effects. In one set of markets, advertising expenditures were reduced from 
50 percent to 100 percent below the level that ordinarily would have been used in 
those markets. In another group of markets, the budget was increased at rates rang-
ing from 50 percent to as much as 300 percent. A third group was control markets, 
meaning there was no increase or decrease in normal advertising expenditures.
 
If the experimental method is indeed as effective as some individuals assume 
it to be, why is it not used more often to determine budget size? There are a num-
ber of reasons. George H. Brown, former director of the U.S. Census Bureau and a 
marketing expert, cited two problems involved with this method. The first is the 
relatively high cost of conducting the experiment, which involves finding and mea-
suring a fairly large sample. The second problem is the long time span required, 
perhaps a year or more. By the time the experiment is completed, the marketing sit-
uation might have changed, making the final figures irrelevant. Brown also pointed 
out that although the cost might not be considered too high if the payoff is accurate 
and valuable, the payoff might not be worth the cost.
4. Malcolm A. McNiven, “Choosing the Most Profitable Level of Advertising” (case 
study), in How Much to Spend for Advertising (New York: Association of National 
Advertisers Inc., 1969); Thomas M. Newell, “What Is the Right Amount to Spend for 
Advertising?” in Papers from the 1968 American Association of Advertising Agencies 
Regional Convention, Palm Springs, Calif., October 6–9, 1968.  

 
Setting and Allocating the Budget 
387
 
While this may be true for traditional media and products sold through tradi-
tional channels, different sales approaches can be readily tested for those sold on 
the Internet. Copy can be changed almost instantly to reflect the creative approach 
and online venues that deliver the greatest number of sales, leads, click-throughs, 
or whatever else is used as a success metric. Successful techniques can be used as 
long as they work and be replaced when their effectiveness inevitably declines.
 
Chapter 14 covers the subject of experiments and testing in detail.
Factors in Determining the Size of an Advertising Budget
Although it is not possible to determine a budget size scientifically, it is advisable 
to approach the task by weighting a number of factors that might affect the bud-
get size. Setting a budget in this manner can be called atomistic in that one could 
think about each factor separately and then assemble these factors into a final bud-
get figure.
 
In weighting each factor, planners will find some are more important than oth-
ers, suggesting that priorities for marketing the brand must be determined first. 
Furthermore, each factor must be judged on the basis of whether one should spend 
more than, the same as, or less than the previous year. Again, this is a subjective 
decision, but it might help the executive arrive at a final figure more easily. A brief 
discussion of these factors follows.
Assessing the Task of Advertising Before deciding on any figure, it is reasonable to 
determine what role advertising is to play. Must it do the selling job alone, or will it 
be added to other marketing mix elements such as reduced prices and sales promo-
tion? If advertising must do the selling job alone, the size of the budget will have to 
be substantial. If it works with other marketing mix elements, the size of the bud-
get will be less.
 
Important in this consideration is an understanding of the power of advertising 
to sell the brand. Some brands simply are not sensitive to advertising. They may be 
too much like other brands on the market or may lack a unique selling proposition. 
Or perhaps it is difficult to be creative in presenting the message through print or 
broadcast media.
Long- and Short-Term Goals To some extent, long- and short-term goals are set 
for advertising. However, when the objective is to build an image, then the budget 
should be treated as an investment rather than as an expense (as one would treat 
the budget for short-term goals). If both goals are required at the same time, then 
more money is required, because the advertising has a dual function. The advertis-

388 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
ing copy for immediate sales differs markedly from the copy whose goal is to build 
an image.
 
In a sense, however, the concept of dividing an advertising budget into an 
expense for immediate sales and an investment for long-term image building 
is invalid. Image-building advertising might not consist of special ads that are 
designed for that purpose. If the brand image is thought of as a “long-term invest-
ment in the reputation of a brand,” then every ad that is run, no matter whether it 
opts for immediate sales or future image, contributes to that long-range goal.
 
The goals of the company and advertising’s relationship with them affect to 
some degree the amount of money to be spent. Companies perceive this relation-
ship somewhat differently, so no general principle can be extracted.
Profit Margins People in the industry assume that where there are larger profit 
margins, there will be larger advertising budgets. The converse is also assumed to 
be true. Profit margins are a limiting factor in setting marketing and advertising 
goals: what one would like to do cannot be done, simply because there is not enough 
money available to do it. It is ironic that when profit margins must be increased, 
advertising expenditures also should be increased, but there is little or no money 
available to do the job.
Degree of Product Usage Products that are used nationally require more money for 
advertising than those whose usage is limited to a relatively small geographic area. 
However, some local and regional advertisers find it necessary to invest heavily in 
their marketing area to keep up with heavy competitive spending. This is often 
the case for fast-food firms and automobile dealers. Spending should be evaluated 
in terms of ad dollars per thousand population, not total dollars, to eliminate the 
effect of market size.
Difficulty in Reaching Target Markets Some markets are unique, so no single 
medium reaches them well. The market for yachts is a good example. Reaching 
these consumers requires a number of different media in addition to the obvious 
use of yachting-oriented magazines. Likewise, targets may be so spread out geo-
graphically that mass media must be purchased, resulting in enormous message 
waste. When this occurs, more money is needed to do a reasonable job. And once 
again we are faced with the coverage/composition trade off.
Frequency of Purchase Most planners assume that brands or products purchased 
frequently will require more money for advertising than those that are purchased 
infrequently. An exception occurs when the advertising goals of infrequently 

 
Setting and Allocating the Budget 
389
purchased brands call for spending more money for reasons other than frequency 
of purchase.
Effect of Increased Sales Volume on Production Costs If there is a danger of demand 
exceeding supply because of advertising’s power, the consequence could be that the 
advertiser will have to build a new plant. In that situation, the amount of money 
spent for advertising should be limited until the factory is built or another decision 
is made. The advertiser might want to reduce advertising expenditures until it is 
possible to supply the demand.
New-Product Introductions It is widely held that new-product introductions take a 
great deal of additional money to break into the market. How much more depends 
on the size of the market, the degree of competition, and the desirable qualities of 
the new brand. A guideline is that introducing a new brand takes at least one and 
a half times as much as is spent on established brands. Another guideline suggests 
that the share of spending behind a new product should be about twice the antici-
pated share of market.
Competitive Activity In markets where competitors are active in advertising 
and sales promotion, it is necessary to match or even exceed their expenditures, 
depending on the marketing goals of the brand in question. While the preceding 
factors do not indicate exactly how much to spend on advertising, they do serve as 
decision-making guidelines.
Allocating the Advertising Budget
Once the size of the advertising budget has been determined, then it must be 
allocated, or apportioned, in some reasonable way. When relating advertising to 
source of sales, advertising budgets are allocated to geographic areas. Many adver-
tisers, however, particularly on a national level, allocate their budgets on the basis 
of national media selection, with relatively little concern for geographic business 
skews.
Geographic Allocations
Perhaps the most often used budget allocation technique is to allot at least equal 
portions to the amount of sales produced by a geographic area. The reasoning 
behind this method is that one takes a minimal risk in allocating the most dollars 
to areas where sales are known to have been good. If previous budgets succeeded in 

390 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
producing or at least contributing to sales, why would not more money (or an equal 
amount relative to sales) be equally effective? The concept is used not only to keep 
the risk low, but also to optimize whatever monies are available.
 
If a geographic area contributed 15 percent of total sales, then this technique 
assumes that it would get 15 percent of the budget. Of course, there could be a 
problem here: it is possible that much more than 15 percent of the previous year’s 
allocation was necessary to produce 15 percent sales. In such a case, the budget 
could be based on a different method of allocation, one based on the amount of 
profit produced by the area in proportion to total profit nationwide. Allocating on 
the basis of profit is simply another method of distributing effort.
 
Other methods could be based on the market share contributed by each area or 
the anticipated sales produced by each area. The numbers could also be composites 
of a number of marketing variables, such as population, income, retail sales of the 
product class, and other related variables.
 
In practice, formula methods of allocating budgets tend to be only the starting 
point, rather than the endpoint, of the allocation procedure. The numbers usually 
must be adjusted to take into consideration special marketing problems. One such 
problem could be that the media in a particular area cost much more, proportion-
ally, than in any other part of the country. More money would have to be added 
to the initial allocation figure to compensate for this problem. Another problem 
could be that competitors have started to promote more heavily in areas that have 
been most profitable for the brand in question. This situation, too, requires special 
adjustments to the original allocation.
 
To illustrate how a computer formula can solve the problem of allocating an 
advertising media budget among 210 geographic markets, Exhibit 13-2 shows the 
geographic allocation model from Interactive Marketing Systems (IMS). It is called 
the PAL system. Although it has been used for more than 15 years, PAL remains 
the basic program for determining how much spot weight should go into a market 
after taking into account the local delivery of network, cable, and syndicated GRPs. 
The program also includes an estimate of consumer magazine delivery based on 
each market’s percent of national circulation.
 
In Exhibit 13-2, a national advertiser wants to allocate a budget of $650,000 to 
both network and spot television in 210 markets. (The author admits the example 
is old, as the dollar amounts in a more contemporary plan would be many times 
larger. However, the math and procedures are exactly the same as what is used 
today.) The total budget was determined by one of the alternatives discussed at the 
beginning of this chapter.
 
Is this the end of the allocation process? No. Adjustments now have to be made 
again, perhaps on a subjective basis such as whether each local market receives an 

 
Setting and Allocating the Budget 
391
adequate amount of dollars for spot advertising. (See Chapter 8 for a further discus-
sion of weighting techniques.)
Payout Planning
Another kind of budgeting operation that media planners use is called payout plan-
ning. A payout plan is a budget used in new-product introductions requiring more 
money than usual to launch a brand. The extra dollars come not only from sales of 
the brand, but also from allocating the brand’s profits to advertising for a limited 
time.
 
The following data provide background to the sample payout plan. A new brand 
could have the following costs and pricing:
 
Per Case
Selling price of brand by factory 
$12.00
Costs of manufacturing, overhead, and selling the brand 
7.00
Amount available for promotion and profit 
$5.00
Normal amount available for promotion 
$2.50
Normal amount available for profit 
2.50
Full amount available for introducing the new brand: promotion  profit 
$5.00
 
So in new-product introductions, the manufacturer might be willing to forgo 
profits for a limited time and invest them in advertising, in addition to the usual 
advertising investment. This practice of investing both promotion and profit funds 
is called full available. In the first months, the brand does not earn enough to pay 
for its heavy advertising. Therefore, the company in a sense invests in the brand 
during the early periods of selling. But as the brand begins to sell more, it begins 
to be in a position to start paying back the investment that the company made. 
Finally, if everything goes well, the brand will be selling enough of the product to 
pay back the entire investment and stand on its own as a profit center. When that 
happens, the full available is divided so that part goes for profits and a portion for 
advertising.
 
Following is an explanation of the payout plan shown in Exhibit 13-3. Each para-
graph is keyed to the number at the beginning of each row on the plan. Although 
payout plans are not generally calculated by media-planning personnel, the media 
planner should be aware of the mechanics insofar as they bear on the final adver-
tising budget.

392 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Television Allocation Analysis: The PAL System
Over four weeks
RANK
MARKET
(1) 
TV HOMES 
(%)
(2) 
BDI
(3) 
IDEAL 
DOLLARS 
(000)
(4) 
NETWORK 
DOLLARS 
(000)
(5) 
SPOT 
DOLLARS 
(UNADJ.)
(6) 
SPOT 
DOLLARS 
(000)
(7) 
TOTAL 
DOLLARS 
(NETWK.  
SPOT) (000)
   1
New York
8.44%
80
$ 43.9
$ 46.4
$2.5
$ 0.0
$ 46.4
   2
Los Angeles
5.34
107
37.2
29.4
7.8
5.9
35.3
   3
Chicago
3.76
105
25.7
20.7
5.0
3.8
24.5
   4
Philadelphia
3.17
126
25.9
17.4
8.5
6.5
23.9
   5
San Francisco
2.49
106
17.1
13.7
3.5
2.6
16.3
   6
Boston
2.38
118
18.3
13.1
5.2
3.9
17.0
   7
Detroit
2.11
103
14.1
11.6
2.5
1.9
13.5
   8
Washington, D.C.
1.84
113
13.5
10.1
3.4
2.6
12.7
   9
Cleveland
1.78
125
14.5
9.8
4.7
3.5
13.3
10
Dallas–Ft. Worth
1.55
100
10.1
8.5
1.6
1.2
9.7
10-
market 
total
32.87%
103
$220.3
$180.8
$ 39.5
$ 32.0
$212.7
210-
market 
total
100%
100
$650.0
$550.0
$100.0
$100.0
$650.0
Ranked on: Homes (000) 
Cost pro rata: TVHH
Column 1. The basis for allocating dollars is the number of households in the market. 
Presumably, the product being advertised has adult/family appeal. The number of 
TV households in each market is recorded in this column as a percentage of the total 
United States.
Column 2. The BDIs of each market come from the client’s own records.
Column 3. “Ideal dollars” represents the following formula:
EXHIBIT 13-2

 
Setting and Allocating the Budget 
393
Number of TV households  BDI  Total U.S. budget
0.0844  0.80  $650,000  $43,900 for the New York market
Column 4. The cost of network programs in each market is derived by adding the 
gross impressions of all TV programs that a client intends to buy for each market and 
converting the sum into a percentage. For the New York market, the network dollars 
would be $46,400. The sum for the top 10 markets is shown as $180,800; for the 
entire United States, it is $550,000.
Column 5. In the New York market, the amount of network dollars is greater than 
the ideal dollars, so the amount is shown as a negative number (2.5). But in Los 
Angeles, the differences between network and ideal dollars is positive and is the 
amount (unadjusted) to spend for spot TV in that market.
Column 6. Only the New York market has no dollars to spend for spot television among 
the top 10 (because of the negative dollars). (Data for the remaining 209 markets are 
not shown.) The sum of all negative numbers—like those of New York—is 31.3. (Other 
negative numbers in markets beyond the first 10 are not shown.) This represents 
overspending and must be deducted proportionately from all other markets. The for-
mula used to adjust for the 31.3 is the following:
Total spot dollars
Total spot overspending  100/131.3  76.2% 
Therefore, each unadjusted spot dollar is multiplied by 0.762 to arrive at the final 
amount of dollars to be allocated in each market. In Los Angeles, 7.8 unadjusted spot 
dollars  0.762  5.9 dollars. This multiplication is done for every market until the 
31.3 overspending is totally reduced. Some markets like New York received only net-
work advertising messages, while most others received both network and spot.
Source: Reprinted with permission of Interactive Marketing Systems (IMS).

394 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 1. Time Periods. Although the payout plan shows three periods, more or fewer 
could have been used. Furthermore, these periods could have varied from 
one to three years in length, or they could have been one to three six-month 
periods. The timing is a matter of judgment and experience on the part of the 
planner, who must estimate how long it will take to pay back the money nec-
essary to get the brand launched in the marketplace.
 2. Size of Total Market. A market can be described in any way suitable to the 
advertiser. Some advertisers prefer to use cases. Others use pounds of the 
product, packages, or dollars. The data for the number of cases that will be 
sold is an estimate, based on trend analysis, modified by the judgment and 
experience of the advertising executive. If these estimates are wrong, then the 
payout plan will have to be adjusted accordingly.
A Three-Period Payout Plan
1.
Time periods
PERIOD 1
PERIOD 2
PERIOD 3
TOTAL
2.
Size of total market in millions of cases
10
11
12
3.
Average share for the brand
12%
18%
25%
4.
Year-end total share for the brand
15%
25%
25%
5.
Cases (millions) purchased by pipeline
0.4
0.2
0.1 
6.
Cases (millions) purchased at consumer level
1.2
2.0
3.0 
7.
Total shipments from factory (millions of cases)
1.6
2.2
3.1
8.
Factory income @ $12 a case*
$19.2
$26.4
$37.2
9.
Less cost @ $7 a case
$11.2
$15.4
$21.7
10.
Budget (dollars available for promotion and profit)
$ 8.0
$11.0
$15.5
$34.5
11.
Reallocation of budget to place heavier weight in 
 
first period
$14.9
$11.7
$ 7.9
$34.5
12.
Percentage of reallocated budget
43%
34%
23%
100%
13.
Allocation of budget to advertising and sales 
 
promotion
To advertising (85%)
$12.7
$ 9.9
$ 6.7
$29.3
To sales promotion (15%)
$ 2.2
$ 1.8
$ 1.2
$ 5.2
Total
$14.9
$11.7
$ 7.9
$34.5
14.
Profit (or loss)
($ 6.9)
($ 0.7)
$ 7.6
—
15.
Cumulative investment
($ 6.9)
($ 7.6)
0.6
—
*All dollar figures are in millions. Thus 19.2  $19,200,000.
EXHIBIT 13-3

 
Setting and Allocating the Budget 
395
 3. Average Share for the Brand. As a new product is introduced and begins to 
be purchased by wholesalers, retailers, and consumers, the share of market 
could vary considerably from month to month. So this percentage represents 
the average for the year, rather than the total. Either could have been used, 
but the more modest percentage is probably safer. Again, this is a crucial esti-
mate. If it is incorrect, the plan has to be adjusted immediately.
 4. Year-End Total Share for the Brand. This figure is shown only as a guide 
to what the executive hopes to achieve at year-end. It is not used in the cal-
culations, though it could be substituted for average share, as previously 
mentioned.
 5. Cases Purchased by Pipeline. The first factory sales could be to pipeline 
companies such as wholesalers and distributors (depending on how the prod-
uct is distributed). This group of companies represents a portion of total 
sales. The amount in the pipeline at any time can be estimated from experi-
ence with similar types of products.
 6. Cases Purchased at Consumer Level. This figure is calculated as the prod-
uct of the average share expected times the number of cases expected to be 
sold in the total market: 10,000,000  12%  1,200,000 cases.
 7. Total Shipments from Factory. Pipeline and consumer purchases are added 
to find total shipments: 400,000  1,200,000  1,600,000 cases for period 1.
 8. Factory Income @ $12 a Case. The decision was to price a case at $12. To 
find factory income for each period, this figure is multiplied by the number 
of cases expected to be sold for the period: 1,600,000 cases  $12 per case  
$19,200,000.
 9. Less Cost @ $7 a Case. To find the total cost, the manufacturing cost per 
case (set at $7) was multiplied by the estimated number of cases that will be 
sold: 1,600,000  $7  $11,200,000.
 10. The Budget. Because the budget is composed of dollars allocated both for 
promotion and for profit (or full available), the amount of money available 
for promotion is simply the factory income minus the cost of cases sold per 
period: $19,200,000  $11,200,000  $8,000,000. The term promotion as 
used here does not mean sales promotion, but more broadly, advertising and 
sales promotion. As a result of the subtraction in each period, a given amount 
of money is available in each. These amounts, when added together, equal 
$34,500,000.
 11. Reallocation of Budget. Although $34,500,000 would be available for adver-
tising and sales promotion, the budget as it is shown in row 10 is allocated in 
a strict mathematical fashion, rather than with an understanding of advertis-
ing investment needs. The budget is largest in the third period, but most of 

396 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
the money is needed in the first period, where extra expenditures usually are 
needed to launch a brand.
 12. Percentage Budget. The executive has reallocated the budget total 
($34,500,000) in the manner believed necessary. As a result, the executive 
allocated 43 percent of the $34,500,000 to the first period instead of the 23.2 
percent that would have been available if the budget were accepted as shown 
in row 10: $8,000,000  $34,500,000  23.2%.
 13. Allocation of Budget to Advertising and Sales Promotion. The alloca-
tion is arbitrary, based on what the executive thinks is needed for each. Other 
executives with a different marketing situation and product might think the 
proportions should be different. Note that the $29,300,000 for advertising 
must be further split between commercial production and working media.
 14. Profit (or Loss). At this point, the company must make an investment in the 
brand. Since the amount of money available for promotion in period 1 is only 
$8,000,000 (row 10) and dollars needed for the same period are $14,900,000 
(row 11), the company will have to invest an additional $6,900,000. That 
amount represents a loss for the brand for period 1. The brand now owes the 
company $6,900,000 for period 1.
 
In period 2, the reallocated budget is again more than the brand would earn 
for that period, $11,700,000 versus $11,000,000. Again the brand loses money, 
but not as much. If this amount is added to the amount already owed to the 
company from period 1, the cumulative total for period 2 is now $7,600,000. 
This means that the company has to give the brand $7,600,000 for the extra 
amount needed above sales dollars up to the end of period 2.
 
However, in period 3, the brand earns enough money ($7,600,000) to pay 
back the amount the company has given to it. At this point, it has made a profit, 
paid back the money given to it by the company, and presumably will make a 
profit to keep it going in period 4. When the brand makes a profit, it pays out 
money to the company.
 
Not shown in this example, but what obviously should be included in real situ-
ations, is the inflation factor. Money “loaned” to a brand in year 1 is worth more 
than its face value will be in succeeding years.

 
397
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
Testing, Experimenting, 
and Media Planning
T
his final chapter addresses custom-designed research that can help a media 
planner find answers that are not in syndicated research volumes such 
as MRI, Simmons, or other services. Essentially, a media planner needs 
answers to questions such as these:
In which geographic markets should we place extra money to achieve our mar-
• 
keting objectives?
Will extra media weight generate enough additional sales to justify the cost?
• 
Which advertising timing schedule is best for this brand?
• 
How much money is optimum to achieve the brand’s goals?
• 
Tests and Experiments
Most of the research used to evaluate alternative media strategies falls under the 
general heading of tests and experiments. Briefly defined, a test is a simple field 
study of some advertising variable. An experiment is a carefully designed study in 
which the researcher controls and manipulates conditions to see how an experi-
mental variable affects audience behavior.
Why Test or Experiment?
Testing or experimenting is necessary for a number of reasons. The most important 
reason was stated earlier: to help the planner make decisions. Often the planner 

398 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
is faced with alternatives that are seemingly equal, but there might be differences 
of opinion between the planner and others (such as account executives or clients) 
about whether to use a given alternative. A way to resolve these differences is 
through custom-made research.
 
Another reason for testing or experimenting is to avoid making costly errors. 
The rising cost of media time and space and the proliferation of new media alter-
natives make this more necessary than ever. Furthermore, clients want more and 
better proof that they are getting their money’s worth in media and that optimum 
media strategies are being used.
 
Finally, although media planners use numerical data in making decisions, they 
often modify the data with their own judgment, based on personal experience. 
But often such personal experience is not broad enough, or the current situation 
is vastly different from what it was in the past. Planners need research to support 
their judgment and answer the question of which strategy will work best.
How They Differ
Because both tests and experiments usually involve field studies, they seem to be 
alike. But tests are quite different from experiments. In advertising or marketing, 
a test is a simple piece of research in which one measures a variable (or treatment) 
introduced into the market to see what effect it has. Although advertising can be 
tested in one market, most often it is tested in at least two; each market is given a 
different treatment. For example, in one market $500,000 could be spent for adver-
tising, while in the other $1 million could be spent, using the same medium in both 
markets. Results could be measured on the basis of which amount of advertising 
produced the greatest sales.
 
At the end of the test, the $1 million might have produced 10 percent more sales 
than did the smaller figure. Which treatment was better? The answer depends on 
the decision maker, who on the basis of experience, judgment, or a payout calcula-
tion says one expenditure is better than another. In this example, twice as much 
money yielded only 10 percent more sales, suggesting that the incremental spend-
ing was not justified.
 
The most important characteristic of the test is its simplicity and its minimal 
controls. Although some attempts are made to see that the two test markets are 
alike, the nature of testing is simplicity. Not too much trouble is exerted to control 
extraneous factors that could affect the test’s outcome. Testing provides guidelines 
for decision making, rather than yielding definitive and projectable results.
 
An experiment resembles a test in that similar markets are selected for treat-
ments, but great care is exerted to make sure that the markets are equivalent. 
Usually the same treatments are assigned to two or more test markets, and usually 

 
Testing, Experimenting, and Media Planning 
399
two or more treatments are used. Finally, the treatments must be assigned at ran-
dom by using a table of random numbers or, in simple cases, by tossing a coin. 
Furthermore, for measuring the results of the different treatments, a random sam-
ple must be drawn from each test-marketing unit, and two or more replications are 
made of each advertising treatment.
 
Using the random sample drawn from each of the test markets, the samples are 
measured through normal survey techniques to determine the effects of the vari-
ous treatments. Results from experiments are analyzed much differently from test 
results. In tests, the percentage of change from one market to the other is probably 
the most sophisticated analysis. In experiments, data are cast in the form of analy-
sis of variance or some other statistical technique that helps tell the experimenter 
whether there is a cause-and-effect relationship between the treatment and the 
result.
Which Is Better?
Testing and experimenting each have advantages and limitations. The experi-
ment provides the highest degree of objectivity. It is better controlled, it excludes 
the effects of extraneous variables, and it allows statistical inference that is usually 
more valid than personal judgment.
 
On the other hand, a test is less expensive than an experiment. Many compa-
nies that cannot afford the cost of an experiment still can find answers to their 
problems by conducting tests. Furthermore, tests usually take less time to conduct 
than experiments. Often there simply is not enough time for an experiment, but 
something needs to be learned. A test could provide this information. Then, too, 
although the test design promises less than an experiment, often what it promises 
is enough. For example, a planner might simply want some clues, rather than a 
complete rationale for a decision. Finally, a test is analyzed on the basis of relatively 
simple logic and reasoning that everyone can understand. Those who use experi-
ments often err by substituting the elegance of their statistics for good, common-
sense reasoning. The formulas of statistics are means to an end—not the end. For 
these reasons, advertisers use tests almost exclusively to obtain guidance and sup-
port for their marketing decisions.
Market Mix Modeling
In the late 1990s, with the advent of powerful desktop computers and the availabil-
ity of detailed grocery store scanner data, some large packaged-goods advertisers 
began using market mix modeling. This technique uses regression analysis to model 
the effect of a broad range of marketing variables on sales (the dependent variable). 
Manufacturers assemble vast amounts of information about their products, city by 

400 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
city, and give it to outside consultants such as Marketing Management Analytics 
(MMA, www.mma.com), which conduct the actual analysis. The data elements 
(independent variables) include, among others, the following measures:
Weekly gross rating points (GRPs) by daypart by commercial length
• 
Product distribution
• 
Number of grocery store facings
• 
Price of their own and competitors’ products
• 
Weekly GRPs of the primary competitors
• 
Dates and values of consumer promotions (coupons, contests, etc.)
• 
Weather (average weekly temperature) where relevant
• 
Seasonal influences
• 
With this information, the modeler can generalize from the past to predict what 
will happen to sales when media weight is increased or decreased. This analysis 
avoids the need to conduct lengthy and expensive test marketing.
 
J. P. Beauchamp, senior vice president of Consumer and Shopper Insights at 
SymphonyIRI (formerly Information Resources, Inc.), passes on the following points 
regarding market mix modeling and testing:
1. Mix modeling allows a marketer to evaluate each of the discrete market-
ing elements to scorecard return on investment (ROI) on the same play-
ing field (TV versus print versus trade versus consumer promotion and 
so on).
2. Test marketing, on the other hand, is very good at isolating the element you 
want to test (much better than mix), but cannot scorecard the tested element 
versus other marketing elements unless you add cells to do it.
3. We (our clients and us) will use mix results to help qualify other elements in 
a test or give additional context to other components of the marketing mix as 
well as to the element tested.
4. Some clients will use mix to examine small adjustments in spending. The rule 
of thumb is that you don’t want to project outside more than 20 percent of the 
observed data.
 
Market mix modeling is expensive, both in fees to the modeler and in the time 
necessary to assemble the required information. Furthermore, the results are 
affected by errors or misinterpretation of the input data. Nevertheless, because of 
the technique’s speed and ability to provide definitive answers to the age-old ques-

 
Testing, Experimenting, and Media Planning 
401
tions, market mix modeling has become an attractive alternative to test markets 
for some advertisers.
Test Marketing
Test marketing is the use of controlled tests or experiments (depending on how they 
are done) in one or more geographic areas to gather certain kinds of information or 
to gain experience in marketing a brand. Although any product or service can be 
test-marketed, marketers most often apply the process to consumer packaged goods 
(CPG)—products that consumers buy in grocery stores, discount warehouses, drug-
stores, and mass merchandisers.
 
In practice, test marketing means different things to different people. For some 
research-oriented people, test marketing means a precise method for gaining infor-
mation or experience. At the other extreme, to some entrepreneurs, test marketing 
means “trying something out in the marketplace.” Many other possibilities exist 
between these two extremes.
 
Test marketing is most common for new brands in existing product categories 
or for extensions of a product line. Even in new-product testing, the media portion 
of the test is usually not the first consideration, because the brand first has to be 
developed, packaged, and priced; selling strategies must be determined; and starting 
dates must be chosen. In a sense, then, media planning assumes the same relation-
ship in test marketing that it does in an existing brand strategy: marketing consid-
erations must be decided first.
 
It is important for a media planner to have a good basic understanding of test 
marketing, because the planner is often involved with it when translating national 
media plans to a local level. Although it is beyond the scope of this book to provide 
all the details of test marketing, the following discussion covers the essential facts 
for planners.
Purposes of Test Marketing
Test marketing has two major purposes: (1) to examine the viability and potential 
profitability of new products, and (2) to test alternative media, creative, and mar-
keting strategies for existing brands.
New Products Before a company spends any money on a new product, managers 
want to know the likelihood of success for the product’s concept and proposed mar-
keting plan. Most packaged-goods companies hire outside research firms to make 

402 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
this assessment. One of the most widely used is The Nielsen Company’s BASES, 
which estimates how many cases of a new product will be sold. The company uses 
three measures:
Product distribution as a percent of 
• 
all commodity volume (ACV)—the percent 
of grocery stores where the product is sold, weighted by store size (i.e., larger 
stores “count more”)
The estimated awareness of the new brand, based on the proposed media plan
• 
A survey of consumers’ intent to buy after seeing a description of the product’s 
• 
concept
From this volume estimate, marketers can predict whether the brand will have 
enough sales to be profitable. BASES claims that for 970 validations worldwide, its 
average estimates are within 9 percent of actual sales, with 9 out of 10 estimates 
falling within 20 percent of actual sales.1
 
Once a new product’s concept and proposed marketing plan appear promising, 
the next step is to determine whether real shoppers, in a real market situation, will 
try the product when it is introduced. More important, marketers need to know 
whether consumers will make the repeat purchases that are necessary for a brand’s 
long-term success. A wrong decision in introducing a new product is costly, and 
despite all these efforts, many new products fail each year. Essentially, test market-
ing is conducted to reduce the risk of failure by providing top management with 
knowledge gained from advertising in a limited geographic area. Management then 
can project test findings to a large geographic area. The major objectives of test 
marketing are to estimate the brand’s market share and volume that are likely once 
the brand is introduced nationally and to evaluate alternative marketing and adver-
tising strategies that also might be effective on a national basis.
 
Specifically, the purpose of new-product test marketing is to help planners work 
out the mechanics of a market introduction while learning the local market share 
and effects of various strategies. If problems exist, it is better to learn about them 
ahead of time and solve them before national introduction. Spending a relatively 
small amount of money in a local market is less risky than a national introduction. 
Once top management learns the local brand shares, it will try to project those 
findings to the national market. At that point, if there is not enough profit in the 
brand, management will decide not to go ahead. In such a case, the investment in 
1. The Nielsen Company, BASES website: http://en-us.nielsen.com/tab/product_families/
nielsen_bases), Global Validations, October 3, 2001. 

 
Testing, Experimenting, and Media Planning 
403
the failed product is considerably less than it would have been had the brand been 
introduced nationally without test marketing.
Existing Brands Although marketers can structure their own test markets for new 
products, most large packaged-goods companies use either The Nielsen Company 
or SymphonyIRI (formerly Information Resources, Inc.). Both services have exten-
sive experience in conducting tests and interpreting the results.
 
Nielsen’s Scantrack service provides detailed product movement and merchan-
dising information for food stores as well as food and drug combinations. The 
service obtains its information weekly from an international sample of more than 
350,000 stores across 30 countries.2 This product sales information is supplemented 
by Nielsen’s Homescan panel, which reports demographic and other information 
about the people who made the purchase. Panelists use a special “wand” device to 
scan the UPC (bar code) of all products that come into the home, so Nielsen can 
track sales in all types of stores. Nielsen specialists analyze the data and provide 
periodic reports to their clients. These reports provide the basis for evaluating the 
success of test-marketing efforts for new and existing products.
 
The other widely used service providing packaged-goods marketing data is 
SymphonyIRI. Its InfoScan service obtains checkout scanner data from a sample of 
more than 34,000 supermarkets, drugstores, and mass-merchandiser outlets.3 This 
service, supplemented by a wand-based household panel, provides data similar to 
Nielsen’s and, like the Nielsen service, helps marketers measure the success of new 
products, as well as sales of existing brands.
Behavior Scan Test Market Service Although Scantrack and InfoScan can be used 
to measure the effects of alternative marketing strategies for existing brands, many 
advertisers use the Behavior Scan service of IRI (popularly referred to as B-Scan). 
B-Scan provides marketers and their agencies with a measurable method for evalu-
ating the impact of different marketing strategies on consumer sales for both new 
and established brands. Currently, B-Scan operates four test markets, three with 
targetable TV capability. These three markets are Pittsfield, Massachusetts; Eau 
Claire, Wisconsin; and Cedar Rapids, Iowa. The market without TV testing is 
Grand Junction, Colorado. IRI selected these markets to ensure geographic disper-
sion throughout the United States, as well as typical consumer demographics and 
retail conditions.
2. http://en-us.nielsen.com/tab/product_families/nielsen_scantrack. 
3. http://symphonyiri.com/ProductsSolutions/AllProducts/AllProductsDetail/tabid/159/
productid/84/Default.aspx.

404 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
Television media influences are measured and controlled through local network 
affiliates, independent stations, and cable TV services. In addition, B-Scan tracks 
circulation and coupon redemption from local newspapers and women’s service 
magazines. The service measures competitive activity, providing a clear picture of 
pricing, displays, and features. Coupon redemptions are also collected from every 
panelist.
 
A panel of more than 3,000 households is maintained in each of the B-Scan 
markets. Panel members shop with an ID card presented at the checkout counter in 
scanner-equipped grocery stores and drugstores, allowing the tracking of specific 
consumer purchase behavior, item by item, over a continuous period of time.
 
B-Scan’s targetable TV capability exists through a special device attached to 
the panelist’s TV set that allows the marketer to broadcast alternative commercials 
to households in demographically balanced cells. In this way, the test can expose 
one group of homes to a test commercial or media plan while another group in the 
same market serves as a control.
 
B-Scan can test consumer promotions such as coupons, sampling, or refund 
offers through its balanced panel subsamples. This arrangement provides a labora-
tory environment for tests. Through direct mail or split newspaper-route targeting, 
a different treatment is delivered to each group. The sales and profits from each 
group can then be analyzed.
 
In addition to the household panel data, B-Scan continuously collects sales data 
from a pool of 45,000 grocery, drug, and mass-merchandise stores. Sales data from 
other outlets, such as convenience stores or hardware stores, can also be collected 
on a custom basis to ensure coverage of all appropriate outlets for testing.
 
Despite IRI’s expertise, biases of many kinds can creep into test-marketing opera-
tions. For example, test markets may experience higher distribution levels than could 
be expected on a national scale. Or the local markets may enjoy extra sales efforts that 
could not be expected nationally. Sometimes the expenditure of dollars for adver-
tising is excessive at the local level and could not be duplicated nationally. Because 
residents of the B-Scan markets have historically been exposed to so many market-
ing tests, they may not react in the same way as people in other parts of the United 
States. Finally, markets change, people’s attitudes change, and the economy changes. 
Therefore, by the end of a test-marketing operation, the national universe, as well as 
the local universe, might be far different from what they were during the initial test.
Advertiser-Run Market Tests
Although B-Scan and Nielsen tests are widely used, they are expensive compared 
to a test conducted by the advertiser using in-house resources. Following are some 

 
Testing, Experimenting, and Media Planning 
405
of the considerations and decisions that are necessary to ensure a successful test-
marketing program.
Number of Markets to Use No simple rules exist for deciding on a number of mar-
kets, but necessary considerations include cost and degree of accuracy. Using fewer 
than three markets could be considered inadequate for predicting national share, 
but some kinds of information can be learned from two markets or even one mar-
ket. Although most marketing experts would agree that test marketing should use 
three or more markets, many tests use fewer than that because the cost is prohibi-
tive. Even if managers think that using more markets will considerably enhance the 
results of an experiment, they still feel great reluctance to spend the extra money.
Kinds of Markets to Include A number of criteria are used in selecting test markets. 
The primary factor is that a market should be representative of the universe. The 
markets selected are really samples from the universe. Therefore, the more they are 
like the larger area, the better. This would mean that the markets selected should 
have the same demographic distribution of population as the country (if the uni-
verse is the entire country).
 
As shown in Exhibit 14-1, Peoria, Illinois, has a population distribution that 
closely matches the population distribution of the total United States. Because of 
this similarity, marketers often use Peoria as a single test market. At times, it is used 
in combination with others. Yet despite the demographic similarity, researchers 
should question whether the lifestyle of Peoria inhabitants is comparable to life-
styles in other areas of the country.
Market Sizes There is a difference of opinion about the optimum market size for 
test markets. One expert believes that the range should be a population of 100,000–
1,000,000. Another expert employs a rule that the size should be about 2–3 percent 
of the national population. Yet another believes that the total population involved 
in test marketing should not be less than 20 percent of the United States, because 
anything less would cause too much statistical sampling variance. Probably the 
size of each market is less important than the kinds or numbers of markets used. 
However, size is an important consideration for controlling the cost of the test. In 
large markets, marketers could expect to pay relatively higher media costs.
What to Test In addition to sales volume or share at a profitable level, a number 
of marketing variables can be tested. These include tests of advertising media 
weights, price levels, store promotion plans, trial and repeat buying rates, creative 

406 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
approaches, package sizes and assortments, brand names, brand awareness and/or 
attitude changes, and alternative media strategies. Although this list suggests that 
many marketing elements can be tested, an advertiser should test only one at a time 
to ensure that any effects, positive or negative, can be attributed to the changes in 
that one element.
When to Read the Test Before any test starts, there needs to be general agreement 
about when it is appropriate to examine the results and determine success or fail-
ure. Experienced marketers suggest running a test for at least six months, but there 
is often pressure to make the decision sooner, sometimes after only three months 
or even before that. Early results, however, can be highly misleading. Strong ini-
tial sales can indicate a successful launch with many people trying the product, 
but if these early buyers do not make repeat purchases, the brand cannot survive. 
Peoria Compared with the National Population (2009)
DEMOGRAPHIC
PEORIA DMA
      TOTAL U.S.
INDEX
Men 18
48.2%
48.7%
99
Persons 18–49/household
1.07
1.15
94
Persons 50/household
0.79
0.82
96
Children 2–11/household
0.33
0.36
92
Effective buying income/household
       $50,534        $48,800
104
Education (% DMA)
 
Non-high-school graduates
14.5%
19.3%
75
 
High school graduates
32.1
28.3
113
 
Attended college
29.6
27.7
107
 
College graduates
23.7
24.7
96
Total
100%
100%
100
Occupation (% DMA)
 
Professional and white collar
59.0%
60.2%
98
 
Blue collar
23.6
23.8
99
 
Service and farm
17.4
16.0
109
Total
100%
100%
100
Source: The Nielsen Company, DMA Test Market Profiles, 2009. Used with permission.
EXHIBIT 14-1

 
Testing, Experimenting, and Media Planning 
407
Conversely, brands with a long purchase cycle may need many months for con-
sumers to run out of their current product and be in the market for a replacement. 
Product seasonality also can influence the timing for reading a test.
Research Designs Used in Test Marketing
Research design refers to a plan of actions to be taken in the testing. This plan, or 
design, is carefully worked out to obtain certain kinds of information. Most often 
research design refers to experimental situations where the test data will be statis-
tically manipulated. Research design can be very simple—for example, observing a 
market, introducing an experimental variable, and then observing it again to learn 
what effects the variable had on the market. Or the design can be simple to the 
extent that two or more markets, presumably similar in demographic characteris-
tics, are tested at the same time, with each one getting a different treatment.
Control Markets Before conducting test marketing, the planner must design the 
test in such a way as to guarantee its validity. Validity means that the test measures 
what it is supposed to measure. For example, if advertising is introduced into a test 
market as an experimental treatment, the planner will want to know the extent to 
which advertising had any effect on the outcome.
 
One method of ensuring the internal validity of the test is to use a control mar-
ket along with a test market. A control market is one that does not receive any spe-
cial treatment. The control market, therefore, must be selected carefully so that it 
shares all the demographic and economic characteristics of the test market. If the 
research objective is to measure advertising’s effect on sales, then advertising will 
be used in the test market only. Sales then are measured in both kinds of markets. 
If sales rise higher in the test market than in the control market, one can conclude 
that advertising had a significant effect on sales. But if sales rise to about the same 
degree in both markets, then advertising had little or no effect.
 
The design of a test and control market for a new brand is shown in Exhibit 
14-2. This kind of test can involve more than a single variable. For example, differ-
ent spending levels can be tested in different test markets and compared with the 
control group. In addition, market shares of all groups can be tested simultaneously 
for the total of all test groups and compared with the control group.
Randomized Block Designs A randomized block design is one in which subjects to 
be measured are first grouped together into blocks. Each subject is carefully cho-
sen so that he or she will be much like every other subject in that block. The selec-
tion process, however, is done on a random basis so that every person with the 
same characteristic has an equal chance of being chosen. Randomized blocks are 

408 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
designed to prevent situations in which the outcome results from differences with 
the sample, rather than differences in the treatments.
 
The matching or grouping of subjects can be on the basis of age (e.g., people ages 
18–34), or income (annual income of $75,000 or more), or store volume (grocery 
stores with less than $500,000 income). Once subjects are placed into blocks, the 
experimenter can compare the results of treatments among the blocks. If subjects 
are not combined into blocks, then the experimenter might not be able to find sig-
nificant results, because the differences might be too small to be measured. The 
experiment can overcome this problem by using a very large number of subjects, 
but randomized blocks aid the experimenter in reducing the number of subjects to 
be used in an experiment.
Latin Square Designs A Latin square is a block divided into a number of cells con-
taining coded letters and so arranged that a letter appears only once in each row 
and column. This design technique is more precise than the randomized block 
because it helps control the problem of two rather than one source of variation 
within markets that could not be controlled by careful selection. Exhibit 14-3 shows 
an example of a Latin square used in a marketing experiment. This experiment con-
trols two variables (geographic variation and competitive expenditures) and applies 
three different treatments. This design assumes that each control or treatment is 
independent of the others and therefore will not affect the others in any way.
 
The problem illustrated in Exhibit 14-3 is this: if Brand X spends three vary-
ing amounts of money for advertising, which would produce the most sales, brand 
awareness, or other marketing variable? To make the experiment projectable to the 
entire country, the experiment tries different expenditure levels in different parts 
How Test and Control Markets Are Used
TIME PERIOD 1 →
TIME PERIOD 2 →
TIME PERIOD 3 →
TEST MARKET 
Sales of new brand 
measured (no 
advertising) 
Advertising 
introduced
Sales of new brand 
measured
Sales of 
markets 
compared 
on basis of 
percentage 
change
CONTROL MARKET
Sales of new brand 
measured (no 
advertising)
No advertising
Sales of new brand 
measured (no 
advertising)
EXHIBIT 14-2

 
Testing, Experimenting, and Media Planning 
409
of the country and also in areas where different competitive spending levels took 
place. By controlling for both variables, the experiment eliminated them as possible 
reasons for variations in sales that were found through the experiment.
 
The method of eliminating the effects of both variables is to add the rows and 
average out the effect of regions. By adding the columns, it is possible to average 
out the effects of competitive spending levels. By adding the expenditure levels for 
Brand X (or treatments), it is possible to average out the effects of both regions and 
competitive activity to determine which Brand X spending level was best.
Factorial Design With a factorial design, based on a factor as an independent vari-
able, it is possible to measure the effects of different kinds of treatments. An added 
advantage of this design is the ability to determine whether the factors interact or 
are independent. In conceptual terms, this design can create experiments to deter-
mine the influence of two or more independent variables on a dependent variable. 
Independent variables are those that the experimenter controls, manipulates, or 
varies. Dependent variables are the yield, or the effect variables; they vary depend-
ing on the independent variable.
 
An example of differing treatments in an experiment could be the effects of 
old versus new packaging, or an old package price versus a new price. The goal is 
to determine whether price and package changes are related to each other or are 
independent.
A Latin Square Design Applied to a Test-Marketing Situation
REGIONS OF THE UNITED STATES
DEGREE OF 
COMPETITIVE SPENDING
EAST
CENTRAL
WEST
Low spending levels
A
C
B
Medium spending levels
C
B
A
High spending levels
B
A
C
Treatments: A  high spending level for Brand X; B  medium spending level for Brand X; C  low spending 
level for Brand X.
Source: Benjamin Lipstein, “The Design of Test Market Experiments,” Journal of Advertising Research 
(December 1965): 6.
EXHIBIT 14-3

410 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
Other Designs Alvin Achenbaum suggested a checkerboard design as a valid means 
of obtaining data in test marketing. He described this design as requiring three 
basic elements:4
1. Divide a universe into groups of markets. These markets should be randomly 
selected and about equal in size (e.g., three television market groups from each 
of Nielsen’s 10 geographic areas).
2. Use alternative strategies in groups of three. Perhaps one group would receive 
80 percent of a current spending level, the second group 100 percent, and 
the third group 120 percent. Achenbaum would also use local media such as 
newspapers, spot television, and local magazines as the testing media. Three 
complete media plans at each spending level would then be produced.
3. Through syndicated retail auditing services, measure results over a year. The 
key to the success of this plan is representativeness, good control, and ease of 
measurement (because it uses Nielsen areas).
Media Testing
Media play an important role in most test-marketing operations. Although the 
objective of a market test is to learn whether certain marketing actions will result 
in a given level of sales or profits, usually other parts of a test are directly related to 
the selection and use of media. These other parts have different objectives, such as 
learning which spending levels or which media mixes to use.
Types of Media Testing
A media planner’s initial responsibility in test marketing is to create a national 
media plan, then reduce the size of this plan to fit the individual markets to be 
tested. (The reduction process is called media translation and will be explained 
in detail later.) The planner might have a number of different objectives to test, 
but any given test should be limited to a single objective, to avoid confounding the 
results. (If a test market is exposed to both additional media weight and different 
creative executions, there would be no way to know which produced the incremen-
tal sales.) The following paragraphs describe possible objectives to test.
4. Alvin A. Achenbaum, “Market Testing: Using the Marketplace as a Laboratory,” in 
Handbook of Marketing Research, ed. Robert Ferber (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1974): 4, 
47, 48. 

 
Testing, Experimenting, and Media Planning 
411
Complete Media Plan A national media plan might be developed for a new product 
that has not been marketed before. The typical objective of the marketing part of a 
test for such a product is to learn a brand’s sales or the market share that could be 
developed on a national scale. In addition, alternative forms of the national media 
plan can be tested to see which will best fulfill the brand’s media needs.
Alternative Spending Levels Testing can be used to help determine how much 
money should be spent on media. The following kinds of spending plans could be 
tested:
1. High spending versus current spending levels
2. Low spending versus current spending levels
3. High spending versus low spending levels
4. How much to allocate, either by dollars or GRPs, to various geographic mar-
kets or media
In testing allocation weights, the tester might use various kinds of weighted BDIs 
and CDIs to help arrive at spending levels.
 
Planners should ensure that the difference between the test and control cells is 
large enough that the effect of the incremental weight will be noticeable. Experts 
believe the high-spending test cell should receive at least 50 percent more weight 
than the control. Some may even advocate a spending level far above anything that 
could be sustained to find out, “How high is up?” What is the biggest increase that 
could be expected, regardless of cost?
Alternative Schedules It is important to know whether a media plan should use 
flighting, continuity, or pulsing. Although experience provides planners with some 
basis for judgment, a test can sometimes provide more objective information.
Alternative Media Mixes One could test the results obtained from any single 
medium or any combination—TV versus magazines, TV versus newspapers, 
national versus local media, etc. Testing of the media mix could also include com-
paring various dayparts in broadcast media—an exclusive daypart, such as prime 
time, or a combination of dayparts, such as daytime and early or late fringe. These 
are only a few of the possible combinations that could be tested.
Alternative Commercial Lengths or Ad Sizes The media plan can also use many 
different combinations of commercial lengths and ad sizes. Any of these could 
be varied in test markets. For example, the research could test 60-second versus 

412 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
30-second commercials, or 30-second versus 15-second (or 10-second) commer-
cials, or half-page versus full-page print ads.
Requirements for Selecting Media Test Markets
A number of criteria for selecting test markets apply specifically to media. For 
example, enough media options should be available in the test markets to repli-
cate the national media that will be used later. As a result, certain small markets 
are unsuitable for testing purposes. The following paragraphs address additional 
considerations.
Media Availability A test market must have a balance of media alternatives available. 
For example, if television is to be part of a national media plan, then there should be 
at least four TV stations in the test market, because there probably will be at least 
four TV stations in major markets when the plan is implemented nationally. In the 
same manner, if radio is to be used in the national plan, then one radio station in 
the test market should not dominate the market. In a national marketing effort, few 
if any markets will be dominated by a single radio station.
Spill-in and Spill-out One quality of a test-market medium is the degree to which it 
is isolated from other markets. Media from markets outside the test area often spill 
into the test market. That is, people in the test market are exposed to media origi-
nating from another market. Sometimes it works the other way; media from the test 
market spill out into adjacent markets.
 
The degree to which media in a test market spill out messages to markets outside 
the test area can be a serious problem. Spill-out is generally undesirable for a number 
of reasons. Consumers who live outside the test market might hear or see advertising 
for a product but be unable to buy it because it does not yet have national distribution. 
These consumers could become irritated at their inability to buy the advertised brand 
and might not respond to later advertising, due to their annoyance at being unable to 
find the brand on store shelves during the testing period.
 
A marketer can attempt to avoid the problem by distributing the brand in the 
broader spill-out area, but this in turn could cause another problem: will the supply 
of the brand be adequate? At times, only a limited amount of a brand is available for 
testing purposes, perhaps just enough for the test, but not for spill-out.
 
There is another way to get around the problem of poor distribution in spill-out 
areas: print and broadcast advertisements can specifically tell consumers where 
to purchase the brand. This approach averts the animosity that could occur when 
there is no distribution in a spill-out area.

 
Testing, Experimenting, and Media Planning 
413
 
The reverse problem of spill-out is spill-in, which occurs when media originating 
in another market spill into the test market. The more people in the test market are 
exposed to media from another market, the greater the variation in the reach and 
frequency pattern from the pattern ordinarily expected.
 
Although spill-in and spill-out should still be considered, the growth of cable TV 
and satellite penetration to 90 percent has reduced this problem. Viewers no longer 
need to tune to stations in adjacent markets to see popular programs that may not 
be available from local stations. Also, a test can minimize the effects of spill-in and 
spill-out by concentrating on local news programs that typically draw few viewers 
in neighboring markets. However, the need to minimize spill-out must be balanced 
against the need to faithfully duplicate a multi-daypart test. Spill-in and spill-out 
are reported in Nielsen’s annual “DMA Audience Allocation Report,” which shows 
how many GRPs are delivered in a neighboring DMA for every 100 GRPs in the 
home market.
 
Both IRI and Nielsen are able to smooth out behavioral differences since they 
have point-of-sale data that provides truth and allows them to identify those skews 
and in some cases adjust for them. Similarly, they are able to make adjustments that 
account for differences in distribution and quality of merchandising .
Media Costs When a market becomes known as a good test area, the local media 
sometimes raise their advertising rates to take advantage of their popularity. Some 
experts think that persons responsible for the media portion of testing should not 
worry about higher media costs in certain markets, because other considerations 
(spill-in, spill-out, quality, availability, etc.) are more important. In translating a 
national media plan to a test market, the objective should not be to translate costs 
downward from a national plan, but to translate the delivery (e.g., reach and fre-
quency) into the test market, regardless of the cost. If a test market cannot gener-
ate the necessary levels of reach and frequency, then some other market should be 
selected.
Test Area Coverage When test markets are being selected for media planning, 
enough DMAs should be used to cover at least 95 percent of the sales district, ter-
ritory, etc., that is being used for the test. This assumes that the test is being made 
to correspond to a specific company’s sales area. At times, this correspondence is 
not necessary, depending on what the client wants to learn from the test.
 
Planners must be careful in identifying the DMAs needed to cover Nielsen’s 
Scantrack or IRI’s InfoScan markets, since these areas do not clearly match DMA 
boundaries. Also, since DMAs are based on viewing patterns, they do not con-

414 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
form to political boundaries such as state lines. The St. Louis DMA, for example, 
straddles Illinois and Indiana.
Network Delivery Another consideration for test market selection, especially when 
the test is supposed to represent the entire United States, is that the daypart usage 
in the test market should closely match the planned national daypart usage of tele-
vision or radio.
Cable Penetration Penetration of cable and alternate delivery systems (e.g., satel-
lites) should be comparable to the total United States, that is, 90 percent.
Number of Markets As discussed previously, the number of markets used in testing 
should be more than two or three. Despite consensus that as many as five, six, or 
more are desirable, often only one is used. When testing uses a single market, that 
one is assumed to be a Little U.S.A. market (to be discussed in the next section). 
Dangers of projecting from one market are well recognized.
Types of Markets Some advertisers find it advantageous to test in large markets 
such as New York, Los Angeles, or Chicago. This preference assumes that these 
markets are more representative of the United States than smaller markets. A mar-
keter might also try a test in an entire geographic region, such as the West Coast, 
where a number of various-sized population centers exist. The regional approach 
could be much easier to use than a single isolated market, because the planner 
can more easily simulate the national media plan in the area. Regional editions of 
national magazines may be available, saving the cost of using Media Networks, Inc., 
local placement in every DMA. The regional test would be less likely to be affected 
by local strikes, bad weather, or high competitive reactions to the test. Sometimes 
network buys in a region such as the West Coast are relatively inexpensive and flex-
ible, but regional network buys are difficult to execute, if available at all, especially 
with the advent of satellite-delivered network programs to affiliates.
 
Another reason why regional test markets are preferred to individual and iso-
lated markets is that it is easier to obtain distribution in a region. It is also easier to 
compare market data with media coverage. Finally, in auditing sales, it is easier and 
less costly to audit sales in large regions than in isolated markets.
 
On the other hand, there are three good reasons for not using regional tests. 
First, the cost might be prohibitive. Second, there could be a large amount of wasted 
media impressions, because not everyone in the region is being tested. Finally, a 
regional test is not really a laboratory or sample test, but a small-scale introduc-

 
Testing, Experimenting, and Media Planning 
415
tion. The testing procedure does not eliminate the risks of large-scale failure if the 
product is not well accepted.
 
Sometimes media considerations are not an important part of test marketing. As 
one media planner noted, “Our client was interested only in finding out if he could 
sell the product to the trade. In this instance, the actual media schedules were not 
important.”5
Media Translations
As defined earlier, media translation is a process of simulating the effects of expen-
sive national media plans in relatively inexpensive local test markets. This is an 
adjustment technique, and there are several ways to make such adjustments. Each 
technique is based on a different philosophy of operations.
“Little U.S.A.” Versus “As It Falls” Philosophy
There are at least two philosophies regarding media translations in test marketing: 
the Little U.S.A. concept and the As It Falls concept. The most commonly used is 
the Little U.S.A. concept, which is based on the idea that some test markets are so 
much like the country as a whole that these markets can easily be projected to the 
national market. Suppose a media plan calls for one prime-time network :30 per 
week with a 4 national rating. The test-market translation would be a 4 rating on 
some local program or a number of spot commercials with 4 GRPs in that market, 
regardless of the local rating for that network vehicle in the test market. Another 
way to use the Little U.S.A. concept would be to translate it in direct proportion to 
the weight that would be delivered on a national basis. The measurement could be 
the average number of impressions to be delivered per household nationally, trans-
lated to a proportion the local market should have received.
 
In the As It Falls concept, the local market receives the exact media weight it 
would get from the national plan. Using the same example as before, with a prime-
time network program rated 4, the planner might find that this program delivers 
a higher or lower rating in the test market, because national media deliver vary-
ing levels of advertising weight from market to market. If the prime-time program 
happens to deliver a 3 rating in the chosen test market, then 3 GRPs should be pur-
chased in the test market.
5. B. G. Yavovich, “Quality of Local Markets Can Be a Determining Factor,” Advertising 
Age (February 4, 1980): S-2. 

416 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
 
The choice between Little U.S.A. and As It Falls generally depends on how rep-
resentative the test area is relative to the national plan. If the As It Falls transla-
tion method would result in delivering an abnormally high (or low) level of media 
weight, some adjustment toward the Little U.S.A. is desirable. IRI tends to use As 
It Falls for Behavior Scan tests and established products. They use Little America 
for new products in new categories. Little America is also used by most agencies 
for matched market tests, which indicates its popularity and the fact that it is easy 
to do. Exhibit 14-4 shows how a Little U.S.A. media translation would be made.
 
The example is based on a national media plan in which network and spot tele-
vision and national magazines would be the only media. The spot television plan 
covers markets that include 60 percent of U.S. households. To make a Little U.S.A. 
translation, average delivery is scheduled in local test markets as shown in Exhibit 
14-4. Using the same data, the As It Falls translation first requires the planner to 
determine how many GRPs would go into individual markets. Whereas the Little 
U.S.A. technique used the average delivery, this technique requires much more 
detailed planning and estimation of local delivery. In making this translation, it 
might not be possible to buy GRPs precisely as planned, so some media get more 
and others less than the national plan, as shown in Exhibit 14-5.
National Media Plan: Little U.S.A. Method
MEDIA USED
SPOT MARKETS 
(WOMEN GRPS)
TOTAL U.S. 
(WOMEN GRPS)
TEST-MARKET 
TRANSLATION 
(WOMEN GRPS)
Network TV
400
400
Magazines
100
100
Spot TV (60% of U.S. covered)
 
Average spot*
100
60†
60 
  (national average)
Total
560
560
*A markets received 150 GRPs, B markets 100 GRPs, and C markets 50 GRPs, but the average for all markets 
is 100.
†Average calculations are as follows: 100 GRPs in 60% of U.S.  60
 
0 GRPs in 40% of U.S.  0
 
Weighted average  60
EXHIBIT 14-4

 
Testing, Experimenting, and Media Planning 
417
National Media Plan: As It Falls Method
MEDIA USED
SPOT MARKETS 
(WOMEN GRPS)
TOTAL U.S. 
(WOMEN GRPS)
TEST-MARKET 
TRANSLATION 
(WOMEN GRPS)
Network TV
400
380
Magazines
100
120
Spot TV (60% of U.S. 
covered)
Average spot*
100
100
 
A markets
150
 
B markets
100
 
C markets*
50
50
Total
400
600
550
* The GRPs of C markets were used because test markets were C markets in character.
 
Under the As It Falls approach, only 380 GRPs were purchased in network TV 
while 120 GRPs were purchased in magazines in the test market. The reason is that 
this combination of national media delivers the desired levels of GRPs in the test 
market. Although the difference between the two translation techniques might 
seem insignificant, it is the difference between average and actual plan delivery in 
the test market.
Translations in Radio and Television
There are a number of ways to execute the translation of a national media plan into 
local radio and television. One way is the cut-in, in which the broadcaster inserts 
a local commercial in a network or syndicated program in place of some other 
commercial originally scheduled in a market for the same advertiser. This is pos-
sible when the client already has purchased a commercial on a network and simply 
replaces it with the test-market commercial by cutting in only in the test market. 
The rest of the country would see the national commercial. A cut-in is considered 
an excellent way to translate for broadcast media because it keeps the program 
environments the same as in the national plan, and it provides the exact national 
weight in a local market.
 
Cut-ins do have drawbacks, however. Local stations charge high fees for mechan-
ically inserting substitute commercials. Also, national advertising for some other 
EXHIBIT 14-5

418 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
product might suffer if it is replaced with the cut-in. Finally, cutting over cable 
telecasts is problematic because many systems serve a given market. Each system 
would have to execute the cut-in. With close to half of all viewing scattered among 
dozens of cable networks, the cut-in process today is seldom used outside of the IRI 
or Nielsen test markets.
 
If a cut-in is not feasible, then the planner will have to substitute local announce-
ments for the network commercials. This could be a problem, because the spot 
announcement times chosen must provide the same kind of target audience and 
the same audience sizes that the network program in that market would provide. 
With spot television, the only times available at a reasonable cost might be fringe 
times. Although fringe time spots produce lower ratings than prime-time network 
programs, planners might add GRPs to those of the theoretical plan level as a form 
of compensation. When a prime-time spot is used (instead of a prime-time net-
work program), the additional GRP compensation might be less than the amount 
of compensation used with fringe spot. Each advertiser relies on research experi-
ence to determine the degree of additional spot weight over the theoretical plan 
level. There is no single set of industry standards that applies to such translation 
methods. However, any decisions about compensation should consider two factors: 
compensation for loss of reach and compensation for loss of program environment. 
Presumably, any spots used will aim for a selected target audience.
 
Compensations will vary among markets, depending on the relationship of audi-
ence sizes between prime time and fringe times. In fact, daytime spots can be used 
in lieu of daytime network programs without any compensation, because they can 
be purchased either within or next to the kinds of network programs used in the 
national media plan.
 
When a national media plan calls for spot television, no compensation is neces-
sary. Spots are simply scheduled in the same number of GRPs, length, placement, 
reach, and frequency called for in the national plan.
 
In translating network radio, the method is identical to that used for translating 
daytime network television. For spot radio, the translation method would be iden-
tical to spot television.
Translations in Print
Translation of newspapers is direct and simple, because the national media plan 
spells out all details for local markets. There are a number of options for translating 
national print into the test markets, which in order of desirability are as follows:
1. Local (test market) editions of national magazines. There are often restric-
tions, including lack of availability in the desired test market or in the desired 

 
Testing, Experimenting, and Media Planning 
419
week, poor positioning within the magazine, and higher cost per thousand 
(CPM) necessitated by the additional labor.
2. Media Networks, Inc. (www.mni.com), which specializes in placing local 
advertising in national magazines. The service offers 10 lifestyle-defined 
advertising packages (Business, Family, Health & Beauty, Hispanic, etc.) avail-
able in more than 400 target markets. As with the local test-market editions, 
there are restrictions and limitations, but the service is able to accommodate 
most advertisers.
3. Parade and USA Weekend Sunday supplements. These can be purchased mar-
ket by market, again with a CPM premium over a full national run, but meet-
ing the needs of test-market advertisers.
4. Color insertion in the local newspaper.
What Successful Media Tests Have in Common
In 1991, IRI published a classic study that is still relevant today. It identified the 
common media and creative elements of 389 successful advertising and media 
weight tests conducted between 1982 and 1988. Successful was defined as an 
increase in sales that IRI was 80 percent sure did not occur by chance. The results 
of this and a follow-on study, referred to in the industry as AdWorks 1 and AdWorks 
2, respectively, have led to guidelines that can help media planners as they structure 
their tests. Here are the key findings from AdWorks 1:6
There is no simple relationship between the size of the weight increase and the 
• 
increase in sales.
Additional weight was more likely to increase sales when there was a change in 
• 
brand or copy strategy.
Successful media plans tended to expand the audience or shift the target 
• 
emphasis. Also, they used less daytime.
Growing and frequently purchased product categories were more likely to ben-
• 
efit from increased weight.
Successful tests continued to increase volume for up to two years after 
• 
resumption of traditional spending levels.
Advertising works by getting current users to buy more of a product, rather 
• 
than expanding penetration to new users.
Heavy trade promotion (price reductions) hinders the effect of advertising; 
• 
consumer promotion (coupons, sweepstakes, etc.) enhances it.
6. Information Resources, Inc., 1991; summary from FCB/Chicago Media Matters, 
February 1992.

420 
ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING
New brands and line extensions tend to be more responsive to media weight 
• 
tests than are established products.
For new products, the more prime time that was used, the greater the increase 
• 
in sales. Front-loaded heavy-up plans also were more likely to increase sales.
 
AdWorks 2, conducted from 1995 to 1996 by IRI and Media Marketing 
Assessment (MMA)/Carat, expanded on AdWorks 1 to study more than 800 
packaged-goods brands representing more than 200 product categories. Key find-
ings from AdWorks 2 are as follows:7
All the brands showed incremental sales over base equity in response to tele-
• 
vision advertising. In general, the more GRPs a brand received, the higher the 
percentage of total incremental sales volume due to television advertising.
Continuity counts. Television advertising effectiveness increased as the aver-
• 
age annual number of consecutive weeks on air increased.
Consistent with several recall studies that indicate that :30 spots are more 
• 
effective than :15s, as the percentage of :30 commercial units in a plan 
increased (compared to :15s), television advertising effectiveness also 
increased.
Plans using multiple network dayparts and other television venues are more 
• 
effective than those concentrated in one daypart or venue.
7. Media Marketing Assessment (MMA) at www.mma.com; link to “Products & Services”; 
“Publicly Released Highlights of AdWorks 2,” October 5, 1999. 

 
421
Media-Planning Resources 
on the Internet
T
he explosive growth of the Internet has made available a variety of media-
planning tools and information. Virtually every medium, research supplier, 
and advertising-related company is represented on the Internet. The following 
paragraphs describe the most commonly used websites for media planners. 
Although some sites limit information by password to only their customers, a great 
deal of information is available at little or no charge. The sites contain detailed infor-
mation about available services, research methodology, and top-line demographic and 
media data. In some cases, they offer fully functional media-planning tools that can be 
obtained at no charge in exchange for registering the user’s name and e-mail address. 
The following sites were verified as of February 2010.
General Media-Planning Sites
Advertising Media Internet Center (www.amic.com) The Advertising Media Internet 
Center website serves as an excellent starting point for media planners. It provides links 
to the major media research sources, media terminology, advice from a “media guru,” 
and other planning services.
MediaPost (www.mediapost.com) At MediaPost, media buyers and planners will find a 
broad range of resources, including a daily newsletter, research support, blogs, and the 
latest from all areas of the media world. Full access is provided in exchange for no-cost 
registration.
APPENDIX

422 
Appendix
Advertising Research Foundation (www.thearf.org) The Advertising Research Foundation 
(ARF) is a nonprofit organization whose mission is “to improve the practice of advertis-
ing, marketing, and media research in pursuit of more effective marketing and advertis-
ing communications.” It publishes the bimonthly Journal of Advertising Research and 
conducts numerous conferences and workshops devoted to the advertising profession. 
The ARF’s website has a link to the Journal of Advertising Research’s website (www.jar
.warc.com), which allows visitors to search past issues of the journal for topics of inter-
est. A synopsis is displayed, and article reprints and entire issues can be ordered online. 
Its annual Audience Measurement Conference features the latest developments in the 
area of media research. In addition, the ARF equips members with an array of self-ser-
vice tools for research, knowledge sharing, and learning. ARF PowerSearch provides 
searchable access to roughly 40,000 references on advertising, marketing, and media 
effectiveness drawn from its own library and third-party sources. Knowledge@Hand, 
a listing of frequently asked questions, authoritatively summarizes topics. Morning 
Coffee organizes hundreds of RSS feeds, blogs, websites, and videos that are relevant 
to practitioners. The ARF’s video library furnishes access to their conferences and 
forums. Last, the ARF offers assisted research and analytic services to members and 
nonmembers.
World Advertising Research Center (www.warc.com) The World Advertising Research 
Center (WARC) provides online information for the world’s advertisers, advertising 
agencies, media buyers, media corporations, and market research organizations. A 
search engine allows users to locate studies in virtually any field of advertising or mar-
keting communications that have been published anywhere in the world. Access to the 
complete study or article requires a full (but costly) subscription.
Kidon Media-Link (www.kidon.com/media-link) Kidon Media-Link provides Internet links 
to the websites of more than 2,000 U.S. and international media venues. The listing 
is organized by region of the world (Europe, United States, Americas, Asia, Africa/
Middle East, and Oceania) and shows the name, medium (TV, newspaper, magazine, 
radio, etc.), and language of the site. In addition to editorial content, most sites provide 
information on advertising and sales representatives.
AllNewspapers.com (www.allnewspapers.com) AllNewspapers.com is another site that 
provides links to international media services. This listing is organized by region, coun-
try, and media type (despite its name, the service includes all media in each country).
IMS and Telmar Computer Services (www.ims-usa.com and www.telmar.com) Although 
each research service has its own proprietary software, IMS and Telmar both provide 
access to research databases such as MRI, Experian Simmons, and others through a 
unified set of computer programs that offers the same look and feel for all applications. 

 
Media Planning Resources on the Internet 
423
Products of these “third-party software providers” include cross tabulations, cost per 
thousand (CPM) rankers, reach/frequency analysis, geographic allocation, media mix 
analysis, optimization, and a variety of other tools. Users must first subscribe to the 
basic research service and then pay an additional fee for the convenience of these third-
party tools.
Media Life (www.medialifemagazine.com) This no-cost online service provides daily 
information about the media industry, organized by medium and by market, as well 
as numerous links to Internet media services. The “Medialands” tab provides detailed 
demographic and media information about the top 50 markets.
Ephron on Media (www.ephrononmedia.com) Erwin Ephron is a widely known and 
respected consultant to the advertising industry. His Ephron on Media website is a 
compendium of the essays he has written over the years.
Single-Source Media/Marketing Research Sites
The following services provide demographics, media behavior, and product usage 
from a single research sample.
Mediamark Research and Intelligence, LLC (www.mediamark.com) MRI’s website describes 
the company’s service and provides top-line audience information for magazines, cable 
networks, and Internet usage. It also provides reports of consumer behavior for more 
than 6,000 products and services in 550 categories. The website has a link to the MRI 
(www.mriplus.com) service that provides extensive information about their 200 mea-
sured magazines as well as a wealth of other media information. Full access is provided 
in exchange for no-charge registration.
Experian Simmons (www.smrb.com) Formerly called the Simmons Market Research 
Bureau (SMRB), its primary service is the “National Consumer Survey” of product 
usage, demographics, and media behavior. It is similar to MRI. In addition to its cov-
erage of general market population, Simmons conducts studies that focus on a single 
demographic segment, including kids, teens, gay/lesbian, Hispanics, and business 
leaders.
Scarborough Research (www.scarborough.com) Scarborough surveys 81 markets to pro-
vide information similar to the national MRI and SMRB research. Categories include 
local-market consumer shopping patterns, demographics, media usage, and lifestyle 
activities. Scarborough uses a mail questionnaire, allowing it to provide detailed infor-
mation about each market surveyed.

424 
Appendix
The Media Audit (www.themediaaudit.com) The Media Audit is a multimedia audience 
survey that is similar to (and competitive with) Scarborough. The Media Audit covers 
86 local markets and more than 2,000 product categories. These qualitative and quan-
titative data include socioeconomic characteristics, lifestyles, retail shopping habits, 
and other selected consumer characteristics important to local media and advertisers. 
The Media Audit uses a telephone interview with a random sample of persons in the 
markets surveyed. Limited top-line information about each market is available from 
their website, www.weknowthelocals.com.
 
Both MRI and Simmons provide, at additional cost, estimates of DMA-level usage 
of nationally measured products based on regional and county size selectivity. So while 
they cannot give the demographics of local retail outlets or tell the demographic dif-
ferences between Chicago Cubs and White Sox fans, they can provide an estimate of 
usage and a selectivity index for all the measured product in each of the 210 DMAs.
Broadcast-Planning Sites
The Nielsen Company (www.nielsen.com) Although most Nielsen data are protected, the 
Nielsen website offers an overview of the TV rating service, a description of how tele-
vision audiences are measured, and occasional free reports on current topics. A mas-
sive amount of data is now available online in PDF file format to subscribers at www
.nielsenanswers.com. These reports were formerly released only in hard copy.
Arbitron (www.arbitron.com) Arbitron is the primary source of audience ratings for local 
radio stations and radio networks throughout the United States. The Arbitron website 
provides information about the company’s reports, market populations, and the latest 
information about its rating service. The free “Radio Today” report offers an overview 
of the radio industry and listening habits.
SQAD (www.sqad.com) SQAD is the primary source of planning cost per rating point 
(CPP) for national television, local market spot TV, and spot radio in all DMAs and 
radio metros. SQAD’s WebCosts service provides planning costs for image-based 
digital advertising. The SQAD website gives an overview of SQAD’s methodology, 
tips on how to use the data, and the current household CPP by daypart for each mar-
ket. Although almost all television buys are planned on demographic target GRPs, 
such as women ages 25–54, the household CPPs are available for a nominal charge 
from Mediaweek’s Marketer’s Guide to Media. See an example of a SQAD report in 
Chapter 12.
Cabletelevision Advertising Bureau (www.thecab.tv) The Cabletelevision Advertising 
Bureau (CAB) is a trade association that exists to promote cable television as an 

 
Media Planning Resources on the Internet 
425
advertising medium. Its website presents the strengths of cable TV in comparison to 
broadcast network and syndication. For a nominal cost, planners can order detailed 
audience information, program schedules, and other material about advertiser-sup-
ported cable television networks.
Television Bureau of Advertising (www.tvb.org) The Television Bureau of Advertising 
(TVB) is the not-for-profit trade association of America’s broadcast television industry. 
TVB provides a diverse variety of tools and resources, including this website, to sup-
port its members and help advertisers make the best use of local television. The website 
provides a broad range of information about the television industry, viewing trends, 
cable and satellite penetration by DMA, advertising expenditures in all media (not just 
TV), and useful facts about the television market. Some of the reports are available only 
to TVB members. Because the TVB is supported by local stations, there is only limited 
information about cable and network television.
Direct Marketing Association (www.the-dma.org) The Direct Marketing Association 
(DMA) is the oldest and largest trade association for users and suppliers in the direct, 
database, and interactive marketing fields. The website provides extensive informa-
tion on direct marketing advertising, including a library of white papers, research and 
statistics, demographics, and various free services that are available in exchange for 
online registration.
Radio Advertising Bureau (www.rab.com) The Radio Advertising Bureau (RAB) is a trade 
association that exists to promote radio as an advertising medium. The website has 
extensive information on radio-listening habits and the strength of the medium com-
pared to other broadcast and print alternatives. The Radio Marketing Guide and Fact 
Book for Advertisers, which is available through the link to “Radio Facts,” is especially 
valuable. Like the other media-specific websites, this one contrasts the strengths of 
radio to the weaknesses of other media. Some areas are limited to RAB members with 
no-cost registration.
National Association of Broadcasters (www.nab.org) The National Association of 
Broadcasters (NAB) is the principal trade association of the television industry. Its 
work focuses mostly on the business of broadcasting and governmental relations. The 
website contains reports on current events in the industry, regulatory issues, and tech-
nical advances. Although there is only limited information about advertising, the site 
provides useful background information at no cost for media planners.

426 
Appendix
Print-Planning Sites
MRI (www.mriplus.com) The website provides rates, circulation information, top-line 
MRI audience information, editorial calendars, and promotional media kits for more 
than 5,500 consumer magazines and business publications. This information is pro-
vided free on the Internet as a service to planners by MRI and the publications.
Audit Bureau of Circulations (www.accessabc.com) The Audit Bureau of Circulations 
(ABC) verifies the circulation statements made by major consumer magazines and 
newspapers. Although the audit data are password protected, the site contains informa-
tion about how to use the various reports. A “Hot Links” button offers links to numer-
ous media-related websites.
BPA Worldwide (www.bpaww.com) BPA provides a service that is similar to the ABC but 
deals primarily with controlled-circulation publications—magazines and newspapers 
that are subsidized entirely by advertising and offered at no cost to the reader. These 
tend to be trade or special-interest consumer publications whose readers request a 
subscription by filling out a questionnaire about their job titles, responsibilities, and 
product purchases. By using the BPA, advertisers can select the publications that most 
directly reach their particular marketing target. The website provides free access to all 
BPA reports and is a valuable resource for business-to-business advertisers.
Magazine Health Watch United States (http://www.ims.ca) A Canadian company, Inquiry 
Management Systems, makes available this free and exceptionally detailed overview of 
the U.S. magazine industry for the past three years up to the most recent month. For 95 
business-to-business and 24 consumer market segments, it shows the number of maga-
zines, issues, advertisers, insertions, and total revenue (calculated at rate card).
Magazine Publishers of America (www.magazine.org) The Magazine Publishers of 
America (MPA) exists to promote the value of magazines as an advertising medium. 
The MPA website provides a wealth of free information about the magazine industry 
and the way people read magazines. Because MPA is an industry group, however, the 
site has no data on individual titles that might be used to sell one versus another. The 
annual Magazine Handbook in the Research/Resources section provides especially use-
ful information about the medium.
Newspaper Association of America (www.naa.org) The Newspaper Association of America 
(NAA) is a nonprofit organization that represents more than 1,800 newspapers in the 
United States and Canada. The website’s Information Resource Center provides exten-
sive free information about newspapers, readership, and advertising expenditures in the 
medium. However, most of the reports are limited to NAA members.

 
Media Planning Resources on the Internet 
427
Verified Audit Circulation (www.verifiedaudit.com) Verified Audit Circulation (VAC) pro-
vides circulation audits for paid and free community newspapers; total market cover-
age flyers; shopping guides; alternative newsweeklies; ethnic, special interest, and niche 
publications; business, parenting, and senior periodicals; trade and consumer maga-
zines; and Yellow Pages directories.
Outdoor-Planning Sites
Outdoor Advertising Association of America (www.oaaa.org) The Outdoor Advertising 
Association of America (OAAA) is the lead trade association representing the outdoor 
advertising industry. With nearly 1,100 member companies, the OAAA represents 
more than 90 percent of industry revenues. The association’s website presents informa-
tion about the medium and various creative units available. Links to outdoor compa-
nies can be used for gathering information about pricing and local market planning.
Lamar Advertising Company (www.lamar.com) An out-of-home media agency that cov-
ers all 50 U.S. states, Lamar Advertising also runs a useful website. The site offers 
resources and information for media buyers and planners. It also contains rates and 
poster details for the areas served by Lamar.
Eller Media Company (www.ellermedia.com) Eller Media is one of the largest outdoor 
advertising companies in the United States. The company’s website provides links to 
outdoor companies, a glossary of outdoor terms, rates for various outdoor media in the 
major markets, and other information to help plan out-of-home media.
Internet-Planning Sites
Internet Advertising Bureau (www.iab.net) The Internet Advertising Bureau (IAB) pre-
sents itself as “the first global not-for-profit association devoted exclusively to maximiz-
ing the use and effectiveness of advertising on the Internet.” The IAB website provides 
general information about digital advertising, industry standard ad sizes, and an excep-
tionally complete listing (including hot links) to the many tools of the trade.
Forrester Research, Inc. (www.forrester.com) A leading Internet marketing research 
company, Forrester provides strategic analysis and insight about the commerce on the 
Internet. It tracks industry trends and forecasts future business activity. The Forrester 
website offers summaries of the company’s current presentations and top-line market-
ing information about the Internet in exchange for guest registration.
Glossary of Internet Terms (www.matisse.net/files/glossary.html) This extensive glossary 
of Internet terms is provided by Matisse Enzer, an Internet project manager who lives 
in San Francisco.

428 
Appendix
Advertising Publication Sites
Advertising Age (www.adage.com) Advertising Age is the oldest weekly trade publication 
of the advertising industry. Its website provides current information on all phases of 
advertising, media, creative, and Internet communication.
Adweek (www.adweek.com) Adweek is a weekly trade publication that covers the adver-
tising industry. Its website, Adweek Online, provides daily headlines and excerpts from 
the magazine. See other Adweek websites: www.mediaweek.com and www.brandweek
.com.
Advertising Industry Sites
American Association of Advertising Agencies (www.aaaa.org) The American Association 
of Advertising Agencies (AAAA or the 4As) is the national trade organization that 
represents the advertising industry. It offers its members information regarding the 
operation of ad agencies; management; media, print, and broadcast production; second-
ary research on advertising and marketing; and international advertising. The website 
lists current activities of the association and provides a catalog of available publica-
tions. It offers useful background for media planners but relatively little information 
for nonmembers.
American Marketing Association (www.marketingpower.com) The American Marketing 
Association (AMA) is the world’s largest and most comprehensive professional soci-
ety of marketers, consisting of more than 40,000 worldwide members in 82 countries 
and 400 chapters throughout North America. The AMA is the only organization that 
provides direct benefits to marketing professionals in both business and education and 
serves all levels of marketing practitioners, educators, and students. Its website con-
tains information about the organization and its members, but has no media-planning 
resources.
American Advertising Federation (www.aaf.org) The American Advertising Federation 
(AAF) describes itself as “The Unifying Voice for Advertising.” The AAF says, “We are 
the only professional advertising association that binds the mutual interests of corpo-
rate advertisers, agencies, media companies, suppliers and academia.” The federation’s 
website provides information about the organization and its publications, but there are 
no media-planning resources.

 
429
GLOSSARY
A Counties All counties belonging, as of June 30, 1999, to the largest metropolitan areas, which 
together account for 40 percent of U.S. households, according to the 2000 census.
ABC See Audit Bureau of Circulations.
Accumulation A method of counting audiences wherein each person exposed to a vehicle is 
counted once, either in a given time period such as four weeks for broadcast, or in one issue 
for print. (See also Reach.)
ADI (Area of Dominant Influence) Obsolete—a television market coverage area as defined by 
the Arbitron Company until 1992, when it stopped producing television ratings. Since then, 
Nielsen has been the only company producing local-market television ratings. Its comparable 
Nielsen area is the designated market area (DMA).
Adjacencies The specific time periods, usually two minutes long, that precede and follow reg-
ular television programming. These are commercial break positions available for local or 
spot advertisers. There is no such thing as a network adjacency; only spot adjacencies are 
available.
Adnorm A term used by Daniel Starch & Associates to indicate readership averages by publica-
tion, by space size and color, and by type of product for ads studied by Starch in a two-year 
period. It is used to provide a standard of comparison for individual ads against averages of 
similar types of ads.
Adstock The residual effect of advertising from the viewer’s memory in the weeks following its 
appearance on television, in print, or in another medium. This effect decays over time as the 
viewer forgets the ad. The growth and decay of adstock is one of the factors accounted for in 
market mix modeling.
Advertising Allowance Money paid under contract by a manufacturer or its representative to 
a wholesaler or a retailer for spending to advertise a specified product, brand, or line of the 
manufacturer. Usually used for consumer advertising.
Advertising Appropriation A company’s estimated dollar figure for an advertising effort of a 
short-term flight, seasonal campaign, and/or total marketing year. Usually refers to the com-
bined budget for working media, production, promotion, and reserve and is based on pro-
jected business volume.
Advertising Checking Bureau (ACB) A service organization that supplies advertisers and agen-
cies with tear sheets of advertisements run in publications and with other information used 
by clients to assess the impact of their advertising and competitors’ advertising.

430 
Glossary
Advertising Impression One person or home exposed to a single advertisement; on a gross 
basis, gross impressions report the sum of all impressions to the ads in a schedule. This 
includes duplication, for some of those who may have been exposed more than once. In some 
instances, advertising impression refers to persons or homes exposed to a media vehicle 
(magazine, television show, etc.), the result of multiplying the audience of each vehicle (on a 
household or person basis) by the number of advertisements or commercials carried by each 
vehicle and obtaining the total. In other cases, it refers to the number of persons or homes 
exposed to an advertisement or commercial within the carrier. In these cases, data on adver-
tising or commercial exposure are applied to the carrier audiences.
Advertising Weight A general term for the amount of advertising planned for or used by a brand. 
Although it is not limited to a particular measurement, it is most frequently stated in terms of 
the number of GRPs or gross impressions delivered or the number of broadcasts or insertions 
placed over a period of time.
Affidavit of Performance A notarized statement from a television or radio station that verifies 
that a media schedule ran as ordered.
Afternoon Drive Radio daypart between 3:00 P.M. and 7:00 P.M.
Agency Commission A commission that an advertising agency receives for media it has placed. 
Traditionally, this is in the form of a 15 percent discount on the cost of ad space or time that 
is offered by the media to recognized advertising agencies. The media grant this discount to 
compensate agencies for the effort of working with the advertiser to produce the ad, deliver-
ing it in the proper format, and ensuring the credit-worthiness of the advertiser. This form of 
agency compensation has been largely replaced by a negotiated fee that pays the agency 
for its work, regardless of fluctuations in the media budget. In recent years, agencies have 
experimented with payment based on performance that ties the agency’s compensation to an 
advertiser’s sales. Media costs that include this commission are called “gross” costs; those 
without are called “net” costs.
Agency of Record An agency that purchases media time or space for another agency or a group 
of agencies serving the same client.
Aided Recall A measurement technique in which an interviewer provides clues to help respon-
dents remember portions or all of ads. (See Unaided Recall.)
Alternate Week Sponsor An advertiser who purchases full or participating sponsorship every 
other week of a network program for a full 52-week broadcast year. Each sponsor purchas-
ing at least two minutes in a given program episode will receive billboard commercial time 
on its week of sponsorship. With the decline of program sponsorships, this form has largely 
disappeared.
Analytics The numerical data and the interpretation of that data in support of a point-of-view, 
recommendation, or other business application.

 
Glossary 
431
Announcement A commercial message between or within programs. Announcements may be 
live, recorded, or a combination of both. Common lengths in television are 60, 30, 20, 15, and 
10 seconds.
Annual Discount A discount given to an advertiser by a media carrier based on the number of 
advertising insertions or units run during an established contract year.
Arbitron A radio rating service that measures the listening audience to local radio stations and 
national networks. (See also RADAR.)
As It Falls Concept In test marketing, a translation method that executes a national media 
plan exactly as it would appear in the local test market. This method accurately reflects the 
market-to-market differences that would occur in an actual buy, but may complicate interpre-
tation of the results if network delivery in a given test market is abnormally above or below 
average.
Associated Business Publications A trade association of business (industrial, trade, and techni-
cal) publications.
Audience The number of people or households exposed to a medium. Exposure measurements 
indicate nothing about whether audiences saw, heard, or read either the advertisements or 
editorial contents of the medium.
Audience Composition The percent of a media vehicle’s audience that falls into various demo-
graphic groups such as age, sex, income, geographic region, and so on.
Audience Duplication In broadcast, a measurement of the number of listeners or viewers 
reached by one program or station that are also reached by another program or station. In 
print, the measurement of the overlap of potential exposure between different issues of the 
same magazine or among issues of different magazines. (See also Duplication.)
Audience Deficiency Units (ADU) Additional telecasts of a commercial in order to deliver the 
guaranteed gross rating points in the event that delivered GRPs were below the original pro-
jection. Sometimes called “makegood units.”
Audience Flow A measure of changes in audience between broadcast programs. May be reported 
on a minute-by-minute basis, by five-minute intervals, or from show to show.
Audience Holding Index A measurement of the retentive power or audience loyalty of a given 
program. Nielsen Media Research, for 30-minute programs, uses an index based on the per-
centage of homes tuned to the same program 25 minutes after the first measurement. It is a 
simple measure of the ratio of average audience rating to total audience rating of a given pro-
gram. Also called audience turnover.
Audience, Potential In broadcasting, the number of sets in use in the time period to be studied, 
or the number of set owners. In print, the total audience of an issue.
Audience, Primary In print, all readers who live in households where someone subscribes to or 
purchases the magazine. May be called primary readership.

432 
Glossary
Audience Profile The characteristics of the people who make up the audience of a magazine, 
TV show, newspaper, radio show, and so on in terms of age, family size, location, education, 
income, and other factors.
Audience, Secondary Pass-along readers who read a publication they did not purchase. This 
would include visitors who read a magazine in someone else’s home, readership in a barber 
shop or doctor’s office, readership of a friend’s copy of a magazine, and so on.
Audience Turnover See Audience Holding Index.
Audilog An old term for the diary that members of Nielsen’s local rating panels fill out to show 
what they are viewing on television. It is the basis for demographic information about local 
television viewing in all 210 DMAs. The current name is “TV Viewing Diary.”
Audimeter The old name for today’s Recordimeter, an electronic device, developed by The 
Nielsen Company, that records set usage and tuning on a minute-by-minute basis. This pas-
sive TV set information is integrated with demographic information from the TV Viewing 
Diary to provide local market ratings in the meter/diary integration markets. Nielsen plans to 
replace this meter/diary integration process with the Local People Meter by 2012.
Audit Bureau of Circulations (ABC) A tripartite, nonprofit, self-regulatory organization of adver-
tisers, agencies, and magazine and newspaper publishers that verifies the circulation figures 
of publishers and members and reports these data to advertiser and agency members.
Availability A specific period of broadcast commercial time offered for sale by a station or net-
work for sponsorship.
Average Audience (AA) In broadcasting, the number of homes/persons tuned in to a TV program 
for an average minute (a Nielsen network TV measurement). In print, the number of persons 
who read or looked into an average issue of a publication.
Average Frequency The number of times the average home (or person) reached by a media 
schedule is exposed to the advertising. This is measured over a specific period of time, for 
example, four weeks in broadcast media.
Average Net Paid Average circulation per issue. To calculate, divide the total paid circulation for 
all the issues of the audit period by the total number of issues.
B Counties All counties in the next largest set of metropolitan areas after the top 40 percent (A 
Counties), which together account for 30 percent of U.S. households.
Back of Book The section of a magazine following the main editorial section.
Back-to-Back Scheduling Two or more commercials run one immediately following the other.
Banner A form of online advertising, typically 468 pixels wide by 60 pixels high but available in 
many other sizes. Web publishers include a blank space on the page that is filled with adver-
tising delivered by third-party ad servers.
BAR (Broadcast Advertiser’s Reports) An organization that monitored network and spot TV com-
petitive activity through the 1980s. It has been replaced as one of the many media-tracking 
products of Kantar Media.

 
Glossary 
433
Barter Acquisition by an advertiser of sizable quantities of spot time or free mentions at rates 
lower than card rates from broadcast stations in exchange for operating capital or merchan-
dise. Although direct negotiation between the advertiser and station is possible, it is more 
common for barter to be arranged through a middleman, a barter agency, or a film producer or 
distributor, who may have procured the time through an exchange of film or taped shows.
Base A demographic group, such as total women or men ages 35–49.
Base Rate See Open Rate.
Behavior Scan A test market service of SymphonyIRI, for measuring product and brand pur-
chased through use of Universal Product Code (UPC) at checkout counters.
Billboard (a) An identifying announcement of sponsorship at the beginning, end, or breaks of 
radio and television sponsored programs. Billboards are not sold, but usually are a bonus, 
based on the advertiser’s volume or commitment with the program or the broadcaster. 
Usually 5 to 10 seconds in length. (b) An outdoor poster.
Billing (a) A charge made to an advertiser by an advertising agency, based on the listed or gross 
charges of the media from which space or time has been purchased, along with any other 
charges and fees incurred by the agency that are passed on to the advertiser. (b) Loosely, the 
money spent by an advertiser through an agency. (c) The actual charge made by a medium of 
communication to an advertising agency; the gross charge less the agency discount.
Blanket Coverage Total coverage by television and radio of a given geographic area.
Bleed An advertisement in which part or all of the illustration or copy runs past the usual mar-
gins out to the edge of a page. Bleed insertions are generally sold at a premium price, usually 
15 percent over the basic rate. Today, most full-page advertising is bleed.
Bonus Circulation Circulation delivered by a publication beyond the circulation on which an 
advertiser’s rate is based.
BPA Worldwide (www.bpaww.com) A company that verifies the circulation of free-circulation 
magazines and newspapers—primarily industrial trade publications—that are delivered at no 
cost to readers. The company was formerly known as Business Press Audit.
Brand Development Index (BDI) The ratio of a brand’s U.S. sales in a market divided by the mar-
ket’s percent of U.S. population  100.
Branded Entertainment See Product Placement.
Broadcast Calendar A calendar that is used for accounting purposes in the radio and TV indus-
try and that contains months of four or five whole weeks, ending on the last Sunday of each 
month. Each quarter in the broadcast calendar contains 13 weeks.
Bulk Circulation Sales in quantity lots of an issue of a magazine or newspaper. The purchases 
are made by individuals or concerns, and the copies are usually directed to lists of names 
supplied by the purchasers. In the Audit Bureau of Circulations report, bulk circulation is listed 
separately from single-copy sales.

434 
Glossary
Bulk Sales Sales of copies of a publication in quantity to one purchaser for the purchaser to give 
to others free. Many advertisers do not consider bulk sales to be a valuable part of a publica-
tion’s circulation.
Business Building Test A test run by a specific brand and designed to determine whether a 
change in a marketing or advertising plan will produce enough additional business for the 
brand to pay the required costs of the change.
Business Paper A publication directed to a particular industry, trade, profession, or vocation. A 
horizontal business paper is designed to reach all groups in a broad trade or industry, regard-
less of location or occupational title. A vertical publication is for a specific profession, trade, or 
occupational level within or across various industries.
Buyout A one-time payment to television or radio talent for all rights to performance.
C3 See Commercial Audience.
C Counties All counties after the top 70 percent (A Counties: 40 percent, B Counties: 30 percent) 
and including both metropolitan areas and nonmetropolitan counties, which account for 15 
percent of U.S. households.
Cable TV A system of broadcasting television whereby programs are first tuned in by a commu-
nity antenna and then distributed to individual homes by cables. Cable operators typically 
receive programs transmitted by satellites and then transmit by cable to their subscribers.
Cancellation Date The last date on which it is possible to cancel advertising. Such dates occur for 
print, outdoor, and broadcasting.
Card Rate The cost of time and space quoted on a rate card.
Case Allowance An allowance or discount a manufacturer or wholesaler gives to a retailer on 
each case of product purchased, in return for which the retailer is to use the money to adver-
tise the product.
Cash Discount A deduction allowed by print media (usually 2 percent of the net) for prompt pay-
ment (e.g., within 15 to 30 days), generally passed along by the agency to the advertiser to 
encourage collections.
Cash Refund Offer A type of mail-in offer, used by a brand or group of brands that offers cash to 
the consumer upon providing proof of purchase.
Category Development Index (CDI) The ratio of a market’s percent of U.S. sales of a product cate-
gory divided by the market’s percent of U.S. population  100. The category equivalent of the 
Brand Development Index (BDI).
Center Spread An advertisement appearing on the two facing pages in the center of a saddle-
stitched publication.
Chain Break (a) The time between network programs during which a station identifies itself. (b) A 
commercial appearing in a chain break.
Checking Copy A copy of a publication sent to an advertiser and agency as proof that the adver-
tisement appeared as ordered.

 
Glossary 
435
Circulation (a) In print, the number of copies of a vehicle distributed, based on an average of a 
number of issues. (b) In broadcast, the number of television or radio households that tune in 
to a station a minimum number of times within a specified time period (such as once a week 
or once a day). (c) In outdoor, the total number of people who have an opportunity to see a 
given showing of billboards within a specified time, such as a 24-hour period.
City Zone A geographic area that includes the corporate limits of the central city of the market 
plus any contiguous areas that have substantially the same built-up characteristics of the 
central city. This provides a method of reporting newspaper circulation according to the Audit 
Bureau of Circulations’ standards.
Class A, B, C Rates Rates for television time, categorized by desirability of the time period. Class 
A rates are charged for the most desirable and costly television time, usually between 6 P.M. 
and 11 P.M. The next most costly level of rates is Class B; Class C is still less costly (and desir-
able). Each station sets its own time classifications. This system is seldom used today.
Class Magazine A publication that reaches select high-income readers, in contrast to magazines 
with larger circulations, generally referred to as mass magazines.
Clearance Obtaining a time period for a program or commercial on a station or obtaining approval 
to use advertising from clients, legal or medical counsel, or network continuity departments.
Clear Time Process used by an advertiser to reserve a time period with a local station and by a 
network to check with its affiliates on the availability of a time period.
Click-Through (Click-Through Rate) The percent of exposures to an Internet ad that result in the 
viewer clicking the mouse and being transferred to the advertiser’s website. Click-through is 
used by many advertisers as the basis for payment to the site, because it can be a more use-
ful measure of an exposure’s value than ad impression.
Clipping Bureau An organization that examines newspapers and magazines and clips articles 
from them. It sends clients articles with references and allusions of interest to them.
Closing Date The final date to commit contractually for the purchase of advertising space, also 
called the space closing date. Generally, cancellations are not accepted after the closing date, 
although some publications have a separate cancellation date, which may fall earlier than this 
date. The materials closing date is the last date advertisers can supply production material to 
the publication.
Clutter Excessive amounts of advertising or nonprogram editorial material carried by media 
vehicles, both print and broadcast. The amount may be excessive both in terms of the total 
amount of advertising time and space and in terms of its scheduling—long strings of consec-
utive commercials for broadcasting and solid banks of advertisements in print.
Column Inch A measurement of newspaper space that is one column wide and one inch deep. The 
standard unit of measurement for newspaper pricing.
Combination Rate A discounted rate offered to encourage use of two or more stations, newspa-
pers, magazines, and so on having common ownership. Occasionally, an advertiser has no 
choice but to buy the combination, as space or time may not be sold separately.

436 
Glossary
Commercial Audience The number of viewers or percent of population tuned to the average com-
mercial minute of the program, viewed at normal speed. This can be reported as the live com-
mercial audience or live plus DVR playback, typically over three days (the C3 audience). The 
commercial audience is distinguished from the “program” audience, which is the number of 
viewers to the average of all the minutes including entertainment.
Commercial Break In broadcasting, an interruption of programming during which commercials 
are broadcast.
Commercial Delivery The part of the audience that is actually exposed to a particular 
commercial.
Commercial Pool The selection of television or radio commercials that an advertiser has avail-
able for airing at any one time. Typically, different executions of the same creative theme.
Commercial Protection The amount of time that a network or station provides between the 
scheduling of competitive commercials.
Commission Compensation to a salesperson, agency, or others as a percent of the person’s or 
agency’s sales.
Competitive Parity Method A method of establishing a marketing or media budget based on 
matching anticipated competitive expenditures.
Composition The percent of a media vehicle’s audience that is within an advertiser’s target. For 
example, if Magazine A is read by 5 million women who are ages 18–34, and if the magazine 
has 10 million total adult readers, then the women 18–34 composition is 50 percent. This 
contrasts with coverage, which is the percent of the target exposed to the vehicle. In this 
example, since there are 34 million women ages 18–34 living in the United States, Magazine 
A’s coverage of this target is 14.7 percent (5/34.0).
Concentration Campaign An advertising campaign that uses a small number of media vehicles to 
carry a relatively heavy amount of advertising.
Confirmation A broadcast media statement that a requested time slot is available to a prospec-
tive client.
Consecutive Weeks Discount A discount granted to an advertiser who uses a minimum number 
of weeks of advertising on a station or network without interruption.
Consumer Magazine A magazine whose editorial content appeals to the general public, or a spe-
cific segment or layer of the public. The term is used to differentiate these magazines from 
trade or business magazines.
Continuity A method of scheduling advertising at regular intervals over the year. Many patterns 
are possible, from advertising once each day of the year to once a month. Typically, a continu-
ity advertiser is on air every week.
Controlled-Circulation Publications Publications that are offered at no charge to individuals 
who qualify by virtue of their job title or other characteristic. Most trade publications are con-
trolled circulation. Some controlled circulation is solicited, although most is nonsolicited.

 
Glossary 
437
Cooperative Advertising Advertising run by a local advertiser in conjunction with a national 
advertiser. The national advertiser usually provides the copy and/or printing material and also 
shares the cost with the local retailer. In return, the national advertiser receives local promo-
tion for its product. The name of the local advertiser and its address appear in the ad.
Cosponsorship The participation of two or more sponsors in a single broadcast program where 
each advertiser pays a proportionate share of the cost.
Cost-Efficiency The effectiveness of media as measured by a comparison of audience, either 
potential or actual, with cost and expressed as a CPM.
Cost per Rating Point (CPP) In broadcast, the cost of one household or demographic rating point 
(1 percent) in a given market. Used in media planning and evaluation, it is calculated by divid-
ing the cost per spot by the rating. In the case of a number of spots, the CPP is their total cost 
divided by the total ratings or GRPs.
Cost per Thousand (CPM) The cost to deliver 1,000 people or homes. Used in comparing or evalu-
ating the cost-efficiency of media vehicles, it is calculated by dividing the cost by the audi-
ence delivery, then multiplying the quotient by 1,000.
Counterprogramming A technique used by networks to regulate audience flow by offering a pro-
gram of a different type from that broadcast by a strong competitor in the same time period.
Coverage A definition of a medium’s geographical potential. In newspapers, coverage is the num-
ber of copies of a paper divided by the number of households in a given area. In magazines, it 
is the percentage of a given demographic market reached by a magazine. In radio and televi-
sion, it is the percentage of television households that can tune in to a station (or stations) 
because they are in the signal area. In outdoor, coverage is the percentage of adults who pass 
a given showing and are exposed in a 30-day period. In previous years, coverage meant the 
same as reach. Today, the meaning depends on which medium is being discussed.
Cover Positions Premium-priced cover space for magazine or business publication advertise-
ments. Cover positions are numbered: first cover is the outside front cover; second cover is 
the inside front cover; third cover is the inside back cover; fourth cover is the outside back 
cover. The first cover of consumer publications is seldom used for advertising.
CPG Abbreviation for consumer package goods—the broad range of products typically sold at 
grocery stores, drug stores, and mass merchandisers.
Cume A broadcast term that is Nielsen’s shorthand for net cumulative audience of a program 
or of a spot schedule (radio or TV) in four weeks’ time. The figure is based on total number of 
unduplicated TV homes or people reached.
Cumulative Audience The net unduplicated audience of a campaign, either in one medium or in a 
combination of media. Sometimes called reach or cume.
Cut-In Different broadcast copy or format that is used to replace an originating commercial in a 
network program in a specific market or region. Frequently used in test markets.

438 
Glossary
Cyberspace A term coined by author William Gibson in his novel Neuromancer. It represents the 
conceptual “place” where all Internet websites, networks, and online content resides. It has 
become a slang term for the Internet and the information in it.
Cycle (a) An interval within a contract year at the end of which, upon proper notice, an advertiser 
may cancel network stations, facilities, or both. Weekly and multiweekly program cycles usu-
ally last 13 weeks, while cosponsored program cycles usually encompass 13 major broad-
casts. (b) A 13-week period used as a base for paying talent and use fees.
D Counties All remaining counties in the 15 percent of the United States that are not classified A, 
B, or C.
Daily Rate The rate a newspaper charges for space in its weekday editions, as opposed to the 
rate for the Sunday or weekend editions.
Data Fusion The process of combining the results of two surveys into a single database using 
common demographic “hooks.” Fusion is necessary because no single survey can effectively 
capture all consumer behavior. The MRI survey is designed to measure the usage of thou-
sands of products and services. The Nielsen Online survey captures all online activity across 
tens of thousands of websites. Each record in the fused database contains all the product 
usage information from a respondent in the MRI sample and all the online activity from a 
demographically similar respondent in Nielsen’s online panel. The fusion concept assumes 
that demographics, such as age, sex, education, race, and so on, can accurately reflect both 
product usage and online browsing behavior. The quality of a data fusion depends on the 
validity, respondent matching process, and accuracy of the demographic hooks.
Day-After Recall Probably the most common method used to test television commercials. Test 
commercials are shown on the air in the normal fashion. Approximately 24 hours later, inter-
viewers telephone people and ask about their previous day’s viewing. Only those who viewed 
the program carrying the test commercial are questioned further. The test score consists of 
the proportion of the commercial audience who are able to provide specific correct audio or 
video details from the test commercial.
Daypart A part of the broadcast day, so designated for analytical purposes. In TV, the dayparts 
are usually early morning, daytime, early fringe, prime time, and late fringe. In radio, they are 
morning drive, daytime, afternoon drive, and evening.
Demographic Characteristics Physical characteristics, such as sex, age, education, and occupa-
tion, used to describe a population. Standard definitions, established by the 4As (American 
Association of Advertising Agencies), are used by many research companies.
Demographic Edition An edition of a national publication circulated only to individuals with 
known demographic characteristics. Usually these editions have the same editorial content 
as the national edition and differ only in their advertisements.
Designated Market Area (DMA) Nonoverlapping TV market coverage of the United States as 
defined by The Nielsen Company. Generally speaking, a DMA consists of all the counties that 

 
Glossary 
439
spend the largest share of viewing hours tuned to the TV stations in a given market. County 
assignments are reevaluated each September, with most changes occurring in the fringe 
counties. Each county is assigned to a single DMA, except where geographic features such as 
a mountain range splits viewing. In California, Contra Costa East spends the bulk of its time 
viewing Sacramento stations, while Contra Costa West mostly views San Francisco. Because 
DMA’s are defined by television viewing, the counties are not necessarily adjacent. So 
Campbell County, Wyoming, is part of the Denver DMA even though it is widely separated from 
the cluster of counties that make up the bulk of the Denver DMA.
Diary Method A research technique in which a sample of respondents record in diaries specific 
behavior within a given period of time. This method is commonly used to measure the con-
sumption of both media and products.
Differential (Newspaper) The difference in newspaper rates charged to local and national adver-
tisers. Most newspapers charge higher rates to national advertisers than to retailers with a 
local street address.
Digital Video Recorder (DVR) An electronic attachment to a television set that records programs, 
either on command or at a set time or channel, to allow playback at a more convenient time. 
DVRs have the ability to fast-forward through the advertising, resulting in reduced exposure. 
The programs most likely to be recorded are the most popular scripted programs. News and 
sports programs are least likely to be recorded.
Discount A reduction from regular rates when an advertiser contracts to use quantities of adver-
tising. Discounts in print may consider amount of space bought and frequency of insertion. 
Discounts in network broadcasting may be based upon number of dayparts used, frequency 
or weight, and length of contract. In local broadcasting, discounts will consider number of 
spots per week, length of contract, or purchase of plans or packages. Broadcast discounts are 
included in the negotiated price and are seldom formally spelled out.
Drive Time The radio dayparts when most people drive to or from work (about 6 to 10 A.M. and 3 to 
7 P.M.). Drive time is the radio equivalent of television’s prime time.
Duplication (a) The number or percentage of people in one vehicle’s audience who are also 
exposed to another vehicle, best calculated as the percent of people exposed to either vehicle 
who are exposed to both. For example, if 80 people read either magazine A or magazine B, and 
if 40 people read only A, 30 people read only B, and 10 people read both magazines A and B, 
then the duplication would be 12.5% (10/80). (b) Audiences who are counted more than once 
in measurements, such as those who view the same TV program more than once a month 
(also called audience duplication).
Earned Rate The rate that an advertiser has earned, based on volume or frequency of space or 
time used to obtain a discount.
Effective Frequency The amount of frequency (or repetition) the planner judges to be necessary 
for advertisements to be effective in communicating the creative message.

440 
Glossary
Effective Reach The percent of the target audience exposed at the frequency level that is effec-
tive in the planner’s judgment.
Eight-Sheet Poster See Junior Panel.
E-Mail Marketing A form of direct marketing that uses e-mail to deliver advertising and other 
marketing communication to the target consumers.
Exclusivity Freedom from competing advertising that one advertiser enjoys within a given com-
munications medium; requires major purchases of space or time.
Expansion Plan An outline of the media to be used and timing thereof for a brand that plans to 
apply a theoretical national plan to portions of the country after testing and before actual 
national application. The expansion areas are the geographical units in which the product is to 
be sold.
Exposure Open eyes facing a medium. Practically, measurements are based on respondents 
who say with assurance that they have either read or looked into a given magazine during 
the most recent publication period (day, week, month, etc.). In broadcast, the measurement 
counts those who classify themselves as “watching” a television program or “listening” to a 
radio station, either by pushing a button on a people meter or by reporting exposure in a diary.
Exposure, Depth of The judgmentally determined additional value of an advertising exposure 
beyond the way it is defined in the standard methodology.
Exposure, Opportunity of The degree to which an audience may reasonably be expected to see 
or hear an advertising message.
Facebook One of the most popular social media websites as of summer 2010. Users create a pro-
file of themselves with photographs, interests, and other personal information. They link up 
others (“friends”) with similar interests to exchange informal messages about their daily life.
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) An independent United States government agency 
that was established by the Communications Act of 1934 and is charged with regulating inter-
state and international communications by radio, television, wire, satellite, and cable. The 
FCC’s jurisdiction covers the 50 states, the District of Columbia, and U.S. possessions.
Fifteen and Two The financial terms on which advertising media are ordered by advertising agen-
cies for their clients. Shorthand for saying a 15 percent commission is allowed by the media 
on the gross cost, with a 2 percent discount on the net amount for prompt payment.
Fifty-Fifty Plan In cooperative advertising, the equal sharing by a manufacturer and a dealer of 
the cost of a manufacturer’s advertisement appearing over a dealer’s name.
Fixed Position A specific period of station broadcasting time reserved for an advertiser and sold 
at a premium rate. Seldom used today.
Fixed Rate Station’s price for a time slot that guarantees the advertiser’s announcement will 
run in that position without preemption. Seldom used today—advertisers assume their 
announcements will run as ordered for the price they agreed to pay.
Flat Rate An advertisement rate that does not include any discounts.

 
Glossary 
441
Flighting A method of scheduling advertising for a period of time, followed by a hiatus period of 
no advertising, followed by a resumption of advertising.
Flowchart A system-analysis tool, either computerized or manual, that provides a graphical pre-
sentation of a procedure. In media plans, a flowchart is typically a one-year calendar, delin-
eated by weeks and months, which shows all planned media activity. This includes publica-
tion dates, ad sizes, TV dayparts, weekly GRP levels, reach/frequency, budget, and any other 
information that might be needed by an advertiser.
Food & Drug Index A service of The Nielsen Company that uses store audits to collect data on 
retail sales movement.
Forced Combination Morning and evening newspapers owned by the same publisher and sold to 
national advertisers only in combination. Some forced combinations are morning and evening 
editions of the same newspapers. With the decline of newspapers, relatively few markets 
today have morning and evening editions.
Four-Color Process A halftone printing process that uses the colors magenta (red), cyan (blue), 
yellow, and black. This is the standard process used for color magazine ads.
Fourth Cover The outside back cover of a magazine.
Fractional Showing In outdoor, a showing of less than 25, offered in certain areas.
Franchise Position A specified position in a publication (e.g., back cover, inside front cover) that 
an advertiser has the right of first refusal to continue using as long as needed. If the adver-
tiser does not use a given position one year, the right usually must be renegotiated for the 
advertiser to regain it.
Free Publication A publication sent without cost to a selected list of readers. Its circulation 
may or may not be audited by BPA and the publication cannot qualify for an Audit Bureau of 
Circulations audit unless at least 70 percent of circulation is paid.
Freestanding Insert (FSI) Printed material, typically a cents-off coupon, that is printed by the 
advertiser or a company such as Valassis Communications, Inc. (www.valassis.com) and 
inserted into a newspaper. The FSI is an important tool of package goods advertisers to stimu-
late trial and repeat purchase.
Frequency The average number of exposures to people who were reached by an ad campaign. 
Some people saw the ad only once; others saw it many times. Frequency (also average fre-
quency) is the number of times the average person saw it. Calculated as GRPs divided by 
reach.
Frequency Discount A discount given for running a certain number of insertions, irrespective of 
size of advertisement, within a contract year. In broadcasting, similar discounts may be of 
two types: frequency per week and total number of announcements in a contract year.
Frequency Distribution An array of reach according to the number of times people in each group 
saw the ad. In other words, the number of people or percent of the target exposed once, twice, 
three times, and so on. Also the number of people exposed at least once, twice, three times, 
and so on.

442 
Glossary
Frequency-of-Reading Technique The most commonly used method for determining the num-
ber of people who read a magazine. Respondents are asked to record the number of copies of 
each magazine they have read out of the last four issues—one out of four, two out of four, and 
so on. Average issue audience is calculated as 25 percent of the one out of fours, 50 percent 
of the people who read two out of four issues, 75 percent of the three out of fours, and all of 
the four out of fours.
Fringe Time Time periods preceding and following peak set-usage periods and adjacent network 
programming blocks. For television, usually classified as early fringe (4:00 to 7:30 P.M.) and 
late fringe (after 11 P.M. EST).
Full Position Preferred position for a newspaper advertisement, generally following and next to 
reading matter, or top of column next to reading matter. When specifically ordered, it costs 
more than an ROP position.
Full-Program Sponsorship A regular program sponsored by only one advertiser.
Full Showing In car card advertising, usually denotes one card in each car of a line in which space 
is bought. In New York subways, a full showing consists of two cards in each car; a half show-
ing is two cards in every other car. In outdoor poster advertising, a full or 100 showing indi-
cates use of a specified number of panels whose total daily traffic on the average day (num-
ber of people passing the boards) is equal to the market population.
Fusion See data fusion.
Gatefold A special space unit in magazines, usually consisting of one full page plus an additional 
page or part of page that is an extension of the outer edge of the original page and folds out-
ward from the center of the magazine as a gate.
General Editorial Magazine A consumer magazine not classified as to specific audience.
Geographic Market Weighting The practice of giving extra consideration to one or more markets 
that have more varying sales potential than other markets, because of location, demograph-
ics, or other reasons.
Geographic Split Run A way of buying a magazine ad where one creative execution is placed 
in the copies delivered to one geographic area and another ad is placed in other geographic 
areas or the balance of the country. Used by a national advertiser who sells different products 
in different geographic areas of the country.
Google An Internet website located at www.google.com that serves as a search engine that can 
locate desired content from anywhere in the world on the Internet. Google’s search capabil-
ity has been expanded to include search engine marketing, detailed satellite and terrestrial 
maps, and text translation. Offers news, video, images, shopping services, free e-mail, and 
other services.
Grade A and B Contours Areas in a television station’s coverage pattern in which the transmis-
sion signal should have specific levels of strength according to requirements. Grade A service 
is defined as providing a picture expected to be satisfactory to the median (average) observer 

 
Glossary 
443
at least 90 percent of the time in at least 70 percent of the receiving locations within the con-
tour, in the absence of interfering cochannel and adjacent-channel signals. Grade B service is 
satisfactory at least 90 percent of the time in at least 50 percent of the receiving locations. 
With 90 percent of American homes subscribing to cable or satellite, the contour is more 
important to station licensing than it is to advertisers.
Grid Card A rate card in which a broadcast station’s spots are priced individually, with charges 
related to the audience delivered. This is seldom used today.
Gross Audience The total number of impressions to a medium or a combination of media. For 
example, if Medium A and Medium B have audiences of 7 million and 6 million, respectively, 
their gross audience is 13 million. To go from gross audience to net audience, one must sub-
tract all duplicated audiences. The same as gross impressions.
Gross Impressions The duplicated sum of audiences of all vehicles used in a media plan. This 
number represents the message weight of a media plan. The number is sometimes called 
the tonnage of the plan, because it is so large. (See Gross Audience.) Expressed as a percent, 
gross impressions X 100 divided by the population universe is GRPs.
Gross Rate The published rate for space or time quoted by an advertising medium, including 
agency commission, cash discount, and any other discounts.
Gross Rating Point (GRP) GRPs are the simple addition of the ratings from all of the media in a 
campaign. Also calculated as gross impressions divided by the population base times 100. 
GRPs are duplicated ratings. Also, reach  frequency  GRPs.
Guaranteed Circulation The circulation level of a print vehicle; the basis for the advertising space 
rate. Similar to rate base circulation, except that an advertiser is assured of an adjustment if 
the circulation level is not achieved.
Half-Page Spread An advertisement composed of two half-pages facing each other in a 
publication.
Half Run (a) In transportation advertising, a car card placed in every other car of the transit sys-
tem used; also called a half service. (b) For certain publications, advertising in half of the pub-
lication’s circulation.
Half Showing One half of a full showing of cards; a 50-intensity showing of outdoor posters or 
panels.
Hall’s Magazine Reports (www.hallsreports.com) A study of the number of editorial pages a 
magazine devotes to various categories of product interest over a period of time (e.g., the 
number of pages a magazine devotes to articles on food, home furnishings, fiction, news). 
This information is frequently used in analyzing the editorial content of a magazine before 
advertising is placed in it.
Hiatus A period of time during which there is no advertising activity.

444 
Glossary
Holding Power The degree to which a program retains its audience throughout a broadcast. This 
percentage equals the average audience divided by the total audience. (See Audience Holding 
Index; Audience Turnover.)
Holdover Audience The audience a program acquires from listeners or viewers who tuned to the 
preceding program on the station and remained with the station.
Home Service Magazine A publication with editorial content keyed to the home and home living. 
Examples are Better Homes & Gardens and House Beautiful.
Horizontal Cume The cumulative audience rating for two programs in the same time period on 
different days.
Horizontal Half Page A half-page advertisement running horizontally across the page. (See 
Vertical Half Page.)
Horizontal Trade Publications A business publication editorially designed to be of interest to a 
variety of businesses or business functions.
Households Using TV (HUT) Also called Homes Using Television. A term used by The Nielsen 
Company that refers to the total number of TV households using their television sets during 
a given time period. Can be used for the total United States or a local market. The comparable 
term for persons is PUT, Persons Using Television.
Hyping Intense activity on the part of a broadcaster to increase rating during a rating survey.
ID Any short-length “identification” commercial on radio or TV (e.g., a 10-second ID).
Impressions See Gross Impressions.
Imprint In cooperative poster advertising programs, the local dealer’s name placed on the bot-
tom portion of the poster design (about 20 percent of the total copy area) to identify that 
store as the place to buy the product advertised. Sometimes the local dealer pays a portion of 
the cost of the poster space, and the parent company pays the remaining portion.
Index The ratio of two percentages times 100. The numerator represents the marketing infor-
mation the planner is interested in; that is, a market’s percent of U.S. sales. The denominator 
is usually the population base. If the market’s percent of U.S. sales equals its percent of U.S. 
population, the index is 100 and the market is said to be an average market. If the numerator 
is greater, the index is over 100, and the market would be viewed as above average. The con-
verse is true for markets with an index below 100. In calculating an index, the selection of the 
denominator base is important. The index for women’s products should be calculated against 
a base of all women, not total adults.
Industrial Advertising Advertising of capital goods, supplies, and services directed mainly to 
industrial or professional firms that require them in the course of manufacturing.
Inherited Audience On a radio or television station, the carryover of a portion of one program’s 
audience to the next program. (See Holdover Audience.)
In-Home Audience The portion of media exposure (reading, listening, or viewing) that occurs in 
the home.

 
Glossary 
445
Insertion Order Authorization from an advertiser or agency to a publisher to print an advertise-
ment of specified size on a given date or dates at a definite rate. Copy instructions and print-
ing materials may accompany the order or be sent later.
In-Store Media (In-Store Marketing) Print or broadcast ads that appear in stores. Print options 
include shopping carts, billboards, shelf talkers, and aisle posters. TV options include end-of-
aisle monitors and shopping cart and checkout monitors.
Integrated Commercial A commercial that features more than one product or service in the form 
of a single commercial message.
Integration (or Origination or Networking) Charge A moderate extra charge to an advertiser for 
each commercial occurrence by a TV network for the integration of a commercial into a pro-
gram. This anachronistic charge began in the early days of television when the commercials 
and entertainment were “integrated” by hand into a single reel of videotape. Technology and 
electronic switching have eliminated this process, but the charge continues as a bone of con-
tention between media buyers and the networks.
Intensity In outdoor advertising, the strength of combinations of poster locations throughout a 
city in terms of coverage or repetition opportunities. A 100 showing has a 100 intensity. The 
number of posters that comprise a 100 showing (therefore, a 100 intensity) varies from city 
to city.
Interim Statement Sworn circulation statement of a publisher made quarterly to the Audit 
Bureau of Circulations at the publisher’s option and issued unaudited but subject to audit. A 
situation that might call for an interim statement would occur when a community served by 
more than one newspaper loses one of them through consolidation or discontinuance and its 
circulation is absorbed by the other newspaper. (See Publisher’s Statement.)
Intermedia Comparison In the planning process, a comparison among different media—such as 
among TV, radio, and magazines.
Internet A network of computer networks derived from the U.S. Department of Defense system 
for scientific communication and considered by many to be the freest and most flexible form 
of communication that exists today. A complete glossary of Internet terms can be found at 
www.matisse.net/files/glossary.html. This site is operated by Matisse Enzer, an Internet con-
sultant in San Francisco.
Intramedia Comparison In the planning process, comparisons among media vehicles in the 
same class, such as among three magazines.
Island Position A newspaper or magazine advertisement entirely surrounded by editorial matter 
or margin.
Isolated 30 A 30-second commercial surrounded only by programming—virtually unheard of in 
today’s broadcast environment.
Issue Life The time during which a publication accrues its total readership. For a weekly, this is 
generally five weeks; for a monthly, three months.

446 
Glossary
Junior Page In print, a page size that permits an advertiser to use the same printing materials for 
small- and large-page publications. The advertisement is prepared as a full-page unit in the 
smaller publication, and in the larger publication as a junior page with editorial around it.
Junior Panel A small-scale version of the 30-sheet poster. Also called an eight-sheet poster.
Junior Spread A print advertisement that appears on two facing pages and occupies only part of 
each page.
Keying an Advertisement Identification within an advertisement or coupon that permits inqui-
ries or requests to be traced to a specific advertisement.
Keyline An assembly of all elements of a print ad pasted on a board. This camera-ready art 
is photographed to make the negative that in turn is used to make the printing plate. Also 
called a mechanical. This physical process has been largely replaced by computerized digital 
composition.
Lead-In (a) Words spoken by an announcer or narrator at the beginning of some shows to per-
form a scene-setting or recapitulation function. (b) A broadcast program positioned before 
another program.
Lead-Out In relation to audience flow, the program following an advertiser’s program on the 
same station.
Lifestyle Targeting A target-audience classification system that categorizes people based on 
their activities, interests, and opinions.
Linage (a) A newspaper term denoting the number of (agate) lines in an ad or an ad schedule. (b) 
The amount of total space run by a publication in certain categories (e.g., retail grocery lin-
age). Newspaper line rates have been replaced by column inch rates.
List Broker In direct-mail advertising, an agent who rents prospect lists from the advertiser that 
compiled the data, and sells those lists to another advertiser. The agent receives a commis-
sion for these services.
Listener Diary Method of TV or radio research whereby the audience keeps a continuing record 
of viewing or listening in a diary.
Listening Area The geographic area covered by a station’s signal, usually divided into primary 
and secondary areas.
Little U.S.A. Concept In test marketing, a media plan translation method that executes a national 
media plan in a small market that has the same demographics and product usage habits as 
the entire country. Contrast with As It Falls Concept.
Live Time The time that the actual performance of a program is transmitted by interconnected 
facilities directly to the receiving stations at the moment of performance.
Live-Time Delay A delay that coincides with the local live time. Usually occurs when the station is 
noninterconnected and thus unable to take a live feed.

 
Glossary 
447
Local Advertising Advertising by local retailers (as opposed to national companies advertising in 
local markets), usually at a lower rate than that charged national advertisers.
Local-Channel Station A radio station that is allowed just enough power to be heard near its point 
of transmission and is assigned a radio channel set aside for low-power local-channel sta-
tions (usually 250 watts).
Locally Edited Supplement Sunday magazine supplement similar in character to syndicated 
magazine supplements but owned and edited by the newspaper distributing it. In the past, 
such supplements were available in most of the largest cities throughout the United States. 
These have been largely eliminated in recent years due to the financial challenges facing 
newspapers. A few major newspapers, such as the New York Times, have continued their 
locally edited supplement.
Local Media Media whose coverage and circulation are confined to or concentrated in their mar-
ket of origin. Usually, they offer different sets of rates to the national advertiser and the local 
advertiser.
Local Rate Rate charged by a medium to the local retail trade.
Local Time Availabilities or times of broadcasting quoted in terms of local time rather than east-
ern standard time.
Loyalty Index Frequency of listenership to a particular station.
Magazine Supplement A magazine section of a Sunday or daily newspaper distributed either 
locally or nationally.
Mail-In Premium A premium offered at the point of sale in a retail store to be obtained by the con-
sumer by mailing a box top, coin, or label to the manufacturer.
Mail Survey Map A broadcast coverage map prepared by tabulating cumulative, unsolicited mail 
received during a certain period or by tabulating listener response to a special order or con-
test run during a certain period. A throwback to the early days of radio, before the advent of 
syndicated research.
Makegood An announcement or advertisement run as a replacement for one that was scheduled 
but did not run, or that ran incorrectly. Also, no-charge units given to honor audience delivery 
guarantees (called audience deficiency units or ADUs).
Market The geographic area that can receive the program; can range from the entire United 
States down to a local market.
Market-by-Market Allocation (MBM) A system of media/marketing planning that allocates a 
brand’s total available advertising dollars against current or potential business on the basis 
of each individual TV market. MBM spends all advertising dollars (national and local) available 
in each market in proportion to current or anticipated business in the market. The result of 
MBM planning is spending more accurately against anticipated sales and thereby generating 
greater business for a brand.
Market Development Index See Category Development Index; Market Index.

448 
Glossary
Market Index The factor chosen to measure relative sales opportunities in different geographic 
or territorial units. Any quantitative information that makes estimation of such opportunities 
possible might be used as a market index. A general market index is a factor that influences 
the purchase of a specific product or groups of related products. Sometimes called a market 
development index or category development index.
Marketing Mix A group of elements used to sell a product or service: product, place (or distribu-
tion), price, and promotion.
Market Outline The measurement of the share of market based on total purchases of a particular 
brand or groups of similar brands with a product category during a specific time period.
Market Pattern The pattern of a product’s sales in terms of the relation between the volume and 
concentration either by total market or by individual market. A thick market pattern is one in 
which a high portion of all people are prospects for a product. A thin market pattern is one in 
which a low portion of all people are prospects for a product.
Market Potential The portion of a market that a company can hope to capture for its own 
product.
Market Profile A demographic description of the people or the households in a product’s market. 
The description may also include economic and retailing information about a territory.
Market Segmentation A strategy of implementing different kinds of marketing programs 
to various segments of the total consumer market based on demographic or lifestyle 
characteristics.
Market Share A product’s share of an industry’s sales volume.
“Marriage” Split Ad placement that occurs when more than one advertiser buys the total circula-
tion of a magazine and each of the advertisers runs its ad in only a portion of that circulation. 
For example, an advertiser with distribution in the western United States and one with dis-
tribution in the eastern United States may split an ad in a magazine that permits this. In this 
case, the advertiser with distribution in the West would use only the part of the magazine’s 
circulation that reaches the West, and the other advertiser would use the remainder.
Masked-Recognition Test A method of assessing an ad’s effectiveness by finding the percent-
age of respondents who can identify the advertiser or brand when all identifying marks are 
concealed.
Mass Magazine A magazine of a general nature that appeals to all types of people in all localities.
Mechanical See Keyline.
Mechanical Requirements The physical specifications of a publication that advertising mate-
rial must meet to be reproduced in the publication. Such requirements are brought about 
by the physical requirements of the vehicle and the characteristics of its printing process. 
Broadcast media have similar requirements governing the physical characteristics of mate-
rial acceptable for broadcast.
Media Consortia A group of advertisers or advertising agencies that pool their media budgets to 
obtain maximum buying discounts through their greater combined negotiating leverage.

 
Glossary 
449
Media Objectives The goals a media plan is expected to accomplish.
Media Plan The blueprint for how the advertising message will be delivered to the target audi-
ence. The plan also serves as a persuasive document that communicates the rationale behind 
a recommendation to spend significant amounts of money. Generally includes the media 
objectives, competitive analysis, target audience analysis and media habits, media strategy, 
time line, flowchart, and budget.
Media Records A detailed report of advertising volume by selected brands in selected daily and 
Sunday newspapers in selected cities. Today this has been replaced by Kantar Media’s news-
paper expenditure reports.
Media Strategy Statement A document prepared by an agency and outlining the specific media 
that the agency believes will best accomplish the brand’s marketing objectives (as outlined in 
the market strategy statement) with the funds available.
Media Translation (a) The process of reducing a national advertising media plan to local level to 
test a product or campaign inexpensively. (b) The expansion of a local advertising campaign 
to a national level.
Media Value The judgment that a given medium has been found, through experience, to be 
more effective for a brand and its creative message, thus justifying more frequency in that 
medium.
Media Weight The total size of an advertising campaign in terms of number of commercials, 
impressions, GRPs, insertions, reach and frequency, advertising dollars, and so on.
Medium Any media class used to convey an advertising message to the public; includes newspa-
pers, magazines, direct mail, radio, television, the Internet, and billboards.
Message Dispersion A measure indicating how widely a message is received in a target universe. 
Reach is a measure of message dispersion.
Message Weight The gross number of advertising messages or impressions delivered by a vehi-
cle or a group of vehicles in a schedule.
Metro Area A county or group of counties comprising the central core of a geographical market 
(usually based on governmental lines).
Metropolitan and Micropolitan Statistical Areas Geographic entities defined by the U.S. Office of 
Management and Budget for use in publishing federal statistics. According to the U.S. Census 
Bureau, “A metro area contains a core urban area of 50,000 or more population, and a micro 
area contains an urban core of at least 10,000 (but less than 50,000) population. Each metro 
or micro area consists of one or more counties and includes the counties containing the core 
urban area, as well as any adjacent counties that have a high degree of social and economic 
integration (as measured by commuting to work) with the urban core.” The metro area is the 
geographic base for radio ratings.
Middle Break Station identification at about the halfway point of a show.
Milline Rate A means of comparing rates of newspapers; the cost of one agate line per million cir-
culation. The milline rate is computed by multiplying the line rate by 1 million, then dividing by 

450 
Glossary
the circulation. The factor of 1 million is used merely to provide an answer in convenient terms 
of dollars and cents, rather than in fractions of a cent. Today the line rate has been replaced 
by the inch rate in standard advertising units (SAU).
Minimum Depth At most newspapers, a requirement for the minimum size of advertisements—
generally that an ad must be at least one inch high for every column it is wide. For example, 
if an advertiser wants to run an ad that is eight columns wide, the ad must be at least eight 
inches high.
Minute-by-Minute Profile Nielsen data reporting the minute-by-minute program audience. Used 
to study audience gains and losses during specific minutes of the program and to aid in plac-
ing commercials at times when they receive maximum audiences.
Mobile The access and delivery of Internet content on cellular telephones that have been 
equipped with a keyboard, a browser, and the ability contact the Internet. See Smart Phone.
Morning Drive Radio daypart from 6:00 to 10:00 A.M.
Multistation Lineup Purchase of commercial time on more than one station in a market.
NAB Codes Radio and television codes promulgated by the National Association of Broadcasters 
(NAB) to help its members meet their obligation to serve the American public. The codes 
include both program and advertising standards. Included in the advertising standards 
are sections dealing with presentation techniques, contests, premiums and offers, and 
time standards. These codes are extended by other documents providing interpretations 
and guidelines (e.g., Children’s Television Advertising Guidelines and Alcoholic Beverage 
Advertising Guidelines). Discontinued in 1982.
Narrowcasting Service by a cable system to a small community; the delivery of programming 
that addresses a specific need or audience.
National Advertising Rates Rates for newspaper space charged to a national advertiser, as dis-
tinguished from local rates applying to local retailers. National advertising rates are generally 
higher than local rates.
National Media Media that are national in scope.
National Plan A media plan that is national in scope, as opposed to a local plan covering less than 
the entire United States.
National Rating A rating of all households or individuals tuned in to a program on a national base. 
Sometimes the base is all television or radio households in the country. Other times, the base 
is only those households that can tune in to the program because they are served by a cable 
system carrying the program.
Net Controlled Circulation The number of purchased and unpurchased copies of a controlled-
circulation publication that are actually distributed to its intended readership.
Net Plus The net cost of a print ad, commercial, or program with an earned discount added on.
Net Unduplicated Audience The combined cumulative audience for a single issue of a group of 
magazines or broadcasts.

 
Glossary 
451
Net Weekly Audience In broadcast research, the number of families tuned in at least once to a 
program aired more than once a week.
Network Two or more stations contractually united to deliver broadcast programs (e.g., network 
programs).
Network Affiliate A broadcast station that is part of a network and therefore offers network 
programs.
Network Franchise A brand’s right to retain the sponsorship of a program at the sponsoring 
brand’s discretion. Advertisers acquire this right by agreeing to sponsor a program on a con-
tinuing basis.
Network Identification Acknowledgment of a network affiliation at the end of a network 
broadcast.
Network Option Time Time on network affiliates for which the network has selling priority.
Newspaper-Distributed Magazine A supplement inserted into a Sunday newspaper.
Newspaper Syndicate A business concern that sells special material (columns, photographs, 
comic strips) for simultaneous publication in a number of newspapers.
Newsstand Circulation Copies of publications purchased at outlets selling copies. These out-
lets may include hotels, vending machines, street vendors, drugstores, and supermarkets, in 
addition to the traditional newsstand or kiosk.
Nielsen Shorthand for The Nielsen Company, an international research giant with services cov-
ering virtually every aspect of consumer product marketing. Although formerly divided into 
separate units that had little contact with each other, in recent years the company has made 
it a corporate mission to integrate and cross-pollinate its many divisions.
Nielsen Rating See Rating.
Nielsen Station Index (NSI) The local television rating service of The Nielsen Company.
Ninety-Day Cancellation For all poster advertising, a policy that the advertising may be can-
celled on 90 days’ notice to the plant. This means that the advertiser or agency must notify 
the poster plant owner of cancellation 90 days before the contract posting date.
Noted The basic measure in the Starch method for testing print ads. This score represents the 
percentage of respondents (claimed readers of the issue) who say they saw the ad when 
they first read or looked into the magazine issue. In other words, they claimed recognition of 
the ad.
Obtained Score A Gallup & Robinson term for the actual percentage of respondents who prove 
recall of a print ad before the score is adjusted for color and size or converted to an index 
score. It is the basis for the final score.
Off Card Using a special rate not covered by a rate card.
Offensive Spending Advertising activity intended to secure new business.

452 
Glossary
On-Air Test A test of a commercial that uses a real broadcast response before the advertiser 
uses that commercial on a larger scale. An on-air test measures audience response to the cre-
ative executions, such as recall, attitude, or purchase interest for that product.
One-Time Rate The highest rate charged by a medium not subject to discounts. Sometimes 
called open rate.
Open End A broadcast that leaves the commercial spots blank to be filled in locally.
Open-End Transcription A recorded program usually sold on a syndicated basis in various cit-
ies and produced so that local commercial announcements may be inserted at various points 
throughout the show.
Open Rate In print, the highest rate charged to an advertiser, on which all discounts are based. 
Also called base rate or one-time rate.
Opportunities Marketing facts that exist and, without much money or effort, sell the product 
naturally.
Option Time (a) Time reserved by the networks in contract with their affiliates and for which the 
network has prior call under certain conditions for sponsored network programs; called net-
work option time. (b) Time reserved by the local stations for local and national spot shows; 
called station option time.
Orbit A scheduling method in which stations rotate an advertiser’s commercial among different 
programs, time periods, or both—typically in prime time. Seldom used today.
Organic Search See Search.
OTO One time only, describing a spot that runs only once. An OTO spot may be bought outright or 
provided as a makegood.
Outdoor Advertising Display advertising (billboards, posters, signs, etc.) placed out-of-doors, 
along highways and railroads, or on walls and roofs of buildings.
Out-of-Home Audience (a) Listeners to auto and battery-operated radios outside their homes. 
(b) The audience of a publication derived from exposure that occurred outside the reader’s 
own home. (See In-Home Audience.)
Overlapping Circulation Duplication of circulation when advertising is placed in two or more 
media reaching the same prospects. Overlapping circulation is sometimes desirable to give 
additional impact to advertising.
Overnights Nielsen household ratings and shares provided to clients the morning following the 
day or evening of telecast.
Package (a) A combination of programs or commercials offered by a network for sponsorship 
at one price. Spot TV is sometimes sold as a package. (b) A program property in which all ele-
ments from script to finished production are owned and controlled by an individual or organi-
zation, commonly known as a packager.
Packaged Goods Mostly food, soap, and household products that are marketed in the manufac-
turer’s package, wrapper, or container. Also known as Consumer Packaged Goods (CPG).

 
Glossary 
453
Package Insert Separate advertising material included in packaged goods.
Package Plan A plan by which an advertiser purchases a certain number of TV or radio announce-
ments per week, in return for which the station gives the advertiser a lower rate per 
announcement. The advertiser agrees to run the specific number of announcements each 
week and cannot split them up over a period of time.
Package Plan Discount In spot television, a price discount based upon frequency within a week, 
for example, “5-plan,” “10-plan.”
Packager An individual or company producing a broadcast program or series of programs that 
are sold as complete units.
Painted Bulletin A billboard that is approximately 48 feet long by 14 feet high, with the copy 
message painted on the face of this structure, as contrasted to the poster panel that is com-
posed of preprinted sheets that are pasted up like wallpaper.
Painted Display See Painted Bulletin.
Painted Wall An outdoor advertising unit, purchased individually, usually situated on a 
high-traffic artery or in a neighborhood shopping area.
Panel (a) A fixed sample of respondents or stores selected to participate in a research project 
in which they report periodically on their knowledge, attitudes, and activities. This sampling 
technique is in contrast to the technique of using fresh samples each time. (b) A master TV or 
radio control board, usually in a master control room.
Panels Regular and illuminated units of outdoor advertising. A regular panel is a billboard that is 
not lighted at night. An illuminated panel is a billboard that is lighted from dusk until midnight.
Pantry Audit A consumer survey to tabulate brands, items, and varieties of grocery store prod-
ucts in the home.
Parallel Location An outdoor advertising location in which the poster panel is parallel to the road.
Participation An announcement inside the context of a program, as opposed to sponsorship 
or to chain or station breaks placed between programs. A station or network may program a 
segment of time to carry participation announcements, which it sells to various advertisers 
for commercial use. The announcements are usually 10, 30, or 60 seconds long, but may be 
longer.
Participation Program (a) A commercial program cosponsored by a number of advertisers. (b) A 
program in which the audience participates (e.g., a quiz show).
Pass-Along Reader A person who reads a publication not purchased by the person or a member 
of his or her family. These readers are included in determining the total numbers of readers of 
a particular issue or a particular publication. (See Audience, Secondary.)
Pay Cable Any of a number of program services for which cable subscribers pay a monthly 
charge in addition to the basic cable subscription fee.
Penalty Costs In a test market and expansion operation, the premium paid for local replacement 
media, compared with the national media that the brand uses for its national plan.

454 
Glossary
Penetration The percentage of total homes or people in a specified area who are physically able 
to be exposed to a medium or who purchase a given product or service.
People Meter An electronic device that measures viewership of TV programs. Present meters 
require members of a sample household to push their designated button when they con-
sider themselves to be “watching” television. This information is sent via telephone lines to 
the computers of The Nielsen Company, which tally the number of viewers watching each 
program.
Percent Composition See Composition.
Percent Coverage See Coverage.
Per Inquiry Advertising (PI Advertising) An agreement between a media owner and an advertiser 
in which the owner agrees to accept payment for advertising on the basis of the number of 
inquiries or completed sales resulting from advertising, soliciting inquiries, or direct sales. It 
is the least desirable way for a station to sell inventory.
Persons Using Radio (PUR) The percentage of an area’s population (older than age 12) listening 
to a radio at any given time.
P4C Abbreviation for “page/four-color,” meaning a full-page ad printed in the four-color process. 
Other abbreviations include P2C (page/two-color), PB&W (page/black and white), 3/5P4C (3/5 
page/four-color), 2C (second cover), and BC (back cover).
Piggyback The back-to-back scheduling of two or more brand commercials of one advertiser in 
network or spot positions.
Plan Rate The rate paid by an advertiser who purchased a TV or radio package plan. The rates are 
lower than if the spots were purchased individually, since the advertiser agreed to run a spe-
cific number of spots each week.
Pod A bank of consecutive commercials within a television program.
Position An advertisement’s place on a page and the location of the page in the publication. A 
preferred position is an especially desirable position obtained by paying an extra charge or 
granted to an advertiser that has placed a heavy schedule in a publication. Publications occa-
sionally rotate preferred positions among advertisers that have contracted for space above a 
specified minimum.
Poster A product sign intended to be displayed on a store window or on an inside wall, large 
enough to be legible at a reasonable distance.
Poster Panel A standard surface on which outdoor advertisements are mounted. The poster 
panel is the most widely used form of outdoor advertising. The standard panel measures 12 
feet by 25 feet and is usually made of steel with a wood, fiberglass, or metal molding around 
the outer edges. The 24-sheet poster is posted on this structure.
Poster Showing Poster advertising is sold in packages called showings. It is possible to buy #25, 
#50, #75, #100, and #200 showings. A showing equals the percent of the market’s popula-
tion passing one or more of the boards each day and is sometimes referred to as daily GRPs. 
This is based on the Traffic Audit Bureau’s count of cars passing each site multiplied by an 

 
Glossary 
455
estimated number of persons per car. So a #50 showing equals 50 GRPs per day or 1,500 
GRPs per month. The #100 showing is designed to provide more intense coverage of practi-
cally all major streets in the market. The #200 showing is one designed for maximum impact. 
Each poster plant owner decides how many panels will constitute a #50 showing or a #100 
showing in his or her city. The outdoor industry has plans to replace the showing metric with 
measured GRPs.
Post Test Study of the response to finished advertising after it has been published and tele-
cast in media. Post tests rely on normal patterns of behavior to expose respondents to 
advertising.
Potential Audience See Audience, Potential.
Preemptible Spot A spot announcement sold at a reduced rate because the station has the 
option to sell that same spot to another advertiser willing to pay full rate. No longer used.
Preemption Recapture by the station network of an advertiser’s time to substitute a special pro-
gram of universal value. For example, when the president speaks, the show regularly sched-
uled at that time is preempted.
Preferred Position A position in a magazine or newspaper that is regarded as excellent in terms 
of its ability to generate a large readership. Preferred position is usually located next to edito-
rial material that has a high interest among the publication’s readers.
Preprint A reproduction of an advertisement before it appears in a publication.
Pretest Study of advertisements or commercials prior to distribution via regular media chan-
nels. Advertising may be studied in rough or finished form. Pretesting relies on some special 
means of exposing respondents to the advertisement other than the regular media planned—
portfolios, dummy magazines, and so on.
Primary Audience See Audience, Primary.
Primary Households Households into which a publication has been introduced by purchase, 
either at the newsstand or by subscription, rather than by pass-along.
Primary Readers The readers of a publication who reside in primary households.
Primary Research Original research conducted for one client or to meet a specific agency need. 
Contrasts with syndicated research.
Primary Service Area In AM or standard broadcasting, the area in which a station signal is stron-
gest and steadiest. Defined by FCC rules as the area in which the ground wave (the primary 
wave for broadcast transmission) is not subject to objectionable interference or objection-
able fading. No similar term is officially used in TV broadcasting, although television engineer-
ing standards recognize three zones of signal service existing in concentric rings from the 
transmitting tower: City Grade Service, A Contour, B Contour. An irrelevant metric for media 
planners.
Prime Time The period of peak television set usage—between 8:00 and 11 P.M. in the eastern and 
Pacific time zones and between 7:00 and 10 P.M. in the central and mountain time zones. On 
Sundays, prime time begins an hour earlier.

456 
Glossary
Prime Time Access Rule (PTAR) An FCC rule that allows television stations to put on a specified 
amount of their own local programming during prime time. Under this rule, regular network 
programming starts at 8 P.M. eastern standard time Monday through Saturday and 7 P.M. on 
Sunday. The period from 7:30 to 8:00 P.M. is generally referred to as prime access time.
Product Placement A form of advertising where the physical product or service is incorporated 
into the script or is used as a prop in a movie, television entertainment, or news program. 
Sometimes called branded entertainment.
Product Protection Protection that an advertiser wants and sometimes gets against being posi-
tioned adjacent to a competitive product. A concept honored more in the breech than in the 
practice.
Program Coverage The number (or percentage) of television households that can receive a pro-
gram over one or more stations because they are in the signal area of some station carrying 
the program.
Program Lineup A listing of stations carrying a program on either a live or delayed basis. The 
information on the list may be supplied by the network or received directly from their 
affiliates.
Program Station Rating A rating that is based on the television homes located in the area in 
which a program was telecast. This type of rating permits an unbiased comparison of dif-
ferent programs regardless of variation in the number of homes capable of receiving the 
programs.
Promotion Allowance Money received by a wholesaler or a retailer from a manufacturer or its 
representative for sales promotion other than advertising. (See Advertising Allowance.)
Psychographic A term that describes consumers or audience members on the basis of some 
psychological trait, characteristic of behavior, or lifestyle.
Public Access FCC rule that requires any cable system with 3,500 or more subscribers to have 
at least one noncommercial channel available to the public on a first-come nondiscriminatory 
basis.
Public Service Announcement (PSA) Promotional material for a nonprofit cause, usually pre-
pared at no cost to the service advertised and carried by vehicles at no cost.
Publishers Information Bureau (PIB) PIB is a membership organization that tracks the amount 
and type of advertising carried by consumer magazines. It accounts for about 85 percent of 
consumer magazine ad volume. Data is reported quarterly and is designed to give convenient 
summaries of national magazine expenditures by advertiser and by publication.
Publisher’s Statement A notarized statement made by a publisher regarding total circulation, 
geographic distribution, methods of securing subscriptions, and so on. These statements are 
issued twice a year by the Audit Bureau of Circulations, for the six months ending June 30 and 
December 31. They contain detailed information about a magazine’s circulation, copy distri-
bution, price, and other information used by media planners.

 
Glossary 
457
Pulsing A media scheduling technique in which periods of heavy activity alternate with lower-
activity periods.
Pure Program Ratings A measurement of audience size in which estimates exclude program pre-
emptions that occurred during the survey period.
Qualified Issue Reader A respondent who qualifies to be interviewed about advertisements in a 
magazine on the basis of having read the study issue of a magazine. Requirements for such 
qualification vary. For Daniel Starch & Associates interviews, readers merely have to claim 
they looked into the issue when shown the cover. For Gallup & Robinson studies, respondents 
must prove reading by correctly describing some article when shown the issue’s cover and 
table of contents.
Qualified Viewer A respondent who has demonstrated viewing of a TV program (on the basis of 
recall of at least one part of the episode), thus becoming eligible or qualified for interview 
about commercials aired on that show.
Quantity Discount (a) A graduated discount on quantity purchases scaled to the number of 
cases in a single order. (b) A periodic refund based upon the value of purchases over a period 
of time.
Quintile The division of any sample of respondents into five equal-sized groups ranging from the 
heaviest to the lightest amount of exposure to the medium. Samples may also be divided into 
tertiles (thirds), quartiles (fourths), deciles (tenths), and so on.
Quota A predetermined media goal in a market. Goals can be established in terms of dollars 
spent, number of spots to be purchased, or GRPs to be achieved. The agency’s time buyer 
uses quotas in implementing a media plan. In research a quota sample establishes the tar-
get number of respondents in each age or gender group to match the U.S. Census. Although 
the final sample may match the census, panelists in difficult-to-recruit populations, such as 
young men, may not be representative of all the members of that group.
RADAR (Radio’s All Dimension Audience Research) The network radio rating service provided by 
the National Radio Services division of Arbitron Company. It is set up to service national cus-
tomers such as radio networks, syndicators, representative firms, public radio, and satellite 
radio companies.
Rate Base The circulation level of a print vehicle, used in setting rates for advertising space.
Rate Card A medium’s listing of advertising costs, mechanical requirements, issue dates, closing 
dates, cancellation dates, and circulation data. Rate cards are issued magazines and newspa-
pers. Broadcast stations no longer issue rate cards for their negotiated time.
Rate Differential Among newspapers, the difference between the national and the local rates.
Rate Holder (a) A minimum-sized advertisement placed in a publication during a contract period 
to hold a time or quantity discount rate. (b) An ID spot bought by the advertiser for the same 
reason.

458 
Glossary
Rate Protection A guarantee that an advertiser’s rate under the old rate card will be protected for 
a period, usually from three to six months, should a new rate be introduced.
Rating In television or radio, the percent of the target audience in a market that is tuned in to a 
program or a daypart. In national television, ratings refer to the average minute. In local TV 
and radio, ratings refer to the average quarter hour.
Reach The number of different persons or homes exposed to a specific media vehicle or sched-
ule at least once. Usually measured over a specific period of time (e.g., four weeks). Also 
known as cume, cumulative, unduplicated, or net audience.
Reader Interest (a) Expression of interest by readers in advertisements they have read. 
Sometimes evaluated by unsolicited mail. Sometimes evaluated by the numbers of people 
who can remember having read material with interest. (b) An evaluation of the relative level of 
general interest in different types of products.
Readers People who are exposed to a print vehicle.
Readers per Copy The average number of readers of a magazine per copy of circulation. When 
multiplied by a magazine’s circulation, the result equals its audience.
Readership or Magazine Audience The average number of persons who are exposed to a publica-
tion as distinguished from the circulation or number of copies distributed.
Reader Traffic The movement from page to page by readers of a publication.
Read Most As defined by Daniel Starch & Associates for measurement of ad readership, 
magazine or newspaper readers who read 50 percent or more of the copy of a specific 
advertisement.
Rebate A refund that reduces the contract price for merchandise. The term is frequently used for 
advertising allowances. Also given to advertisers by a certain media vehicle as a result of an 
advertiser’s exceeding the contract minimum and earning a greater discount.
Recent-Reading Technique In measurement of magazine readership, a technique in which sur-
vey respondents read a list of magazines and check the names of magazines they are sure 
they have read in the most recent publication period (week, month, quarter, etc.).
Recognition A technique used to determine whether a person saw or heard a given print adver-
tisement or broadcast commercial; the researcher shows (or plays) the ad or commercial and 
inquires whether the person saw or heard it at a previous date in a specific medium. This tech-
nique was pioneered and is still being used by Daniel Starch & Associates.
Regional Edition A geographical section of a national magazine’s circulation that an advertiser 
can purchase without having to purchase the rest of the magazine’s circulation (as is required 
in a split run). The magazine usually charges a higher premium for regional editions and demo-
graphic editions.
Regional Network A network of stations serving a limited geographic area.
Regular Panel See Panels.
Remnant Space Magazine space sold at reduced price to help fill out regional editions.

 
Glossary 
459
Renewals (a) In print, magazine or newspaper subscriptions that people extend past their expi-
ration dates. (b) In outdoor advertising, extra posters over and above the quantity actually 
needed to post the exact number of panels in a showing. They are shipped to the plant opera-
tor, and if one of the posters on display is damaged, the plant operator has a complete poster 
design on hand to replace the damaged poster immediately.
Repetition A measure indicating to what extent audience members were exposed to the same 
vehicle or group of vehicles. Frequency is a measure of repetition.
Replacement Media Local media that are being used to offset deficiencies in national media 
delivery in a test market or expansion area (e.g., local rotogravure supplements, comic sec-
tions, black-and-white daily newspapers). In television, additional spot TV weight to compen-
sate for network underdelivery.
Representative (or Rep) A general term used to describe sales representatives for media vehi-
cles. A representative firm usually handles several vehicles, serving as their sales agent and 
taking commissions on the sales they make; salespersons may also be directly employed by 
stations or publications.
Response Function A table that quantifies differences in a target’s response to advertising after 
varying numbers of exposures.
Retail Trading Zone The area beyond the city zone whose residents regularly trade to an impor-
tant degree with retail merchants in the city zone. These are defined by the Audit Bureau of 
Circulations.
Returns per Thousand Circulation A gauge of the effectiveness of media used in support of pro-
motions; computed by dividing the total number of returns by the circulation of the publica-
tion to which the returns are attributable. (See Keying an Advertisement.)
Rollout A marketing strategy technique in which a brand is introduced in a limited geographical 
area. If the brand succeeds in that area, it is then introduced in adjacent areas and, if suc-
cessful, in other adjacent areas until the entire country is covered.
Roster Recall Method of research in which a list of radio or TV programs is submitted to respon-
dents for recall.
Rotating Painted Bulletins Moving the advertiser’s copy from one painted bulletin location to 
another, usually every 60 days. This service, available in most major cities, offers advertisers 
an opportunity to cover a large area or a given market (over a long period of time) with a lim-
ited number of painted bulletins.
Rotation (a) The process of continuing a series of advertisements over and over again in a reg-
ular order. (b) The practice in store management of moving the older stock forward when 
restocking shelves or cases. (c) The practice, in retail advertising, of scheduling a branded 
product or group of products to be featured at intervals throughout the year to maintain a 
desired stock balance.
Run of Press (ROP) (a) A newspaper advertisement for which a definite position is not speci-
fied, but which usually appears in the general news sections. Also called run of book. (b) In 

460 
Glossary
connection with color newspaper advertising, color advertising in the main portion of the 
paper, as distinguished from that placed in the magazine section (Sunday supplement).
Run of Schedule (ROS) A broadcast commercial for which a definite time is not specified. For 
example, a nighttime commercial during prime time may be run at any time during this period. 
The time at which an announcement runs may also vary from week to week, depending upon 
other requirements.
Runs In television film syndication, the number of times a film has been telecast in a given area. 
The number of times a film may be run according to an advertiser’s lease. A rerun among tele-
vision film syndicators is an available program previously telecast in an area.
Russell Hall See Hall’s Magazine Reports.
Sales Promotion Sales activities that supplement personal selling and advertising, coordinate 
the two, and help make them effective; for example, sales incentives.
Saturation A level of advertising weight several times above normal reach and frequency levels 
standard for the market or product involved. Saturation implies simultaneous achievement of 
high reach and frequency designed to achieve maximum impact.
Saturation Showing In outdoor advertising, a showing of maximum intensity, designed to sur-
pass complete coverage (the 100 showing) with repeat impressions. Often a 200 showing.
Scatter Market The purchase of network or cable TV time on a quarterly basis, after the “up-
front” selling season.
Scatter Plan The placing of announcements in a number of different network TV programs.
Schedule (a) A list of media to be used during an advertising campaign. (b) A list of a product’s 
advertising to be included in a media vehicle during a specific time. (c) A chronological list of 
programs broadcast by a station. Also called a flowchart.
Search The use of a search engine such as Google to locate information on the Internet. After 
the user enters a keyword that describes what he or she is looking for, the software retrieves 
related content as organic search based on complex rules that reflect the popularity of the 
site and many other factors. Also on the screen are paid listings from advertisers who want to 
send a message and link to people with a demonstrated interest in the product. This is called 
paid or sponsored search.
Search Engine The websites and underlying statistical processes that organize content from 
all over the Internet, locate content that has been requested by the user, and deliver it to the 
user’s screen. Examples are Google, Bing, Yahoo, and others.
Search Engine Marketing (SEM) Also called paid search, the process of buying keywords and 
phrases at auction that trigger a short message and a link to the advertiser’s website. These 
appear on the screen next to related content that has been requested from a search engine 
such as Google. The goal of SEM is to have the advertiser’s link near the top of the paid search 
listing. This contrasts with SEO, which attempts to have the advertiser’s link near the top of 
the free (natural, organic) listing.

 
Glossary 
461
Search Engine Optimization (SEO) The process of organizing and writing a website to maximize 
the likelihood that Google’s organic or natural search will present the site near the top of the 
list, resulting in more traffic to the advertiser’s website. This contrasts with SEM, the effort to 
influence the ranking of the advertiser’s link in paid search.
Secondary Audience See Audience, Secondary.
Secondary Research Research information gathered from a published study conducted by 
another person or group. (See Syndicated Research.)
Secondary Service Area The distant area in which a broadcast station’s signal is subject to inter-
ference or fading but can still be received. This applies mostly to radio. With the conversion to 
all-digital television, there is no fringe area—the station is either received or not.
Sectional Magazine A magazine that is distributed only sectionally and not nationally (such as 
Sunset, which is confined to the western states). Also called a regional magazine.
Selective Magazine A magazine that because of its nature and editorial content appeals only to a 
certain type of audience.
Sets in Use The total number of sets tuned in to some program at a given time of day and day 
of week. At one time, “sets in use” was equivalent to HUT, but today its meaning is limited to 
sets, not households. (See Households Using TV.)
Share, or Share of Audience The audience for a program as a percentage of all households or per-
sons using television (HUT/PUT) at the time of the program’s broadcast.
Share of Market The percentage of the total sales of a specified class of products that is held by 
or attributed to a particular brand at a given time.
Share of Mind The percentage of relevant population (or sample of that population) who indicate 
awareness of or preference for the various brands within a product group. The specific mean-
ing varies considerably with the method of measurement. It may be a test of salience or a test 
of total recall, aided or unaided. The term usually refers to consumer awareness of brands 
relative to like measures of awareness for competing brands. For food products, it is “share of 
stomach.”
Share of Voice A brand’s share of the total advertising dollars or impressions for a product or 
commodity classification.
Shelter Magazines Magazines dealing editorially with the home, covering topics such as decorat-
ing, maintenance, and gardening. Additionally, these magazines carry a considerable amount 
of food editorial. An example is Better Homes & Gardens.
Shopper A newspaper that is published in a local community and contains mainly local news, 
shopping hints and suggestions, and advertisements. Sometimes called a shopping 
newspaper.
Shopper Marketing The use of marketing and merchandising materials such as freestanding 
inserts, co-op advertising, digital coupon centers, product reviews, shelf talkers, end aisle 
displays, and other promotional material designed to enhance the shopping experience and 
boost sales.

462 
Glossary
Short Rate The additional charge incurred when an advertiser fails to use enough media time or 
space to earn the contract discount envisaged at the time of the original order.
Showing (a) In outdoor advertising, the number of posters offered as a unit in terms of 100 GRPs 
per day and variations thereof. (b) In transit advertising, the number of cards included in a 
unit of sale. (See Poster Showing.) The outdoor industry plans to replace showing with an 
“eyes on” metric that is expressed in GRPs.
Significantly Viewed As defined by the FCC, describing a station in a given county if (a) it is a 
network affiliate and achieves among noncable households a share of total viewing hours 
of at least 3 percent and a net weekly circulation of at least 25 percent; or (b) it is an inde-
pendent station and achieves among noncable households a share of total viewing hours of 
at least 2 percent and a net weekly circulation of at least 5 percent. A station that is signifi-
cantly viewed becomes “local” for regulatory purposes. It therefore can demand carriage on 
cable systems, and the systems need not delete the duplicate programming of a significantly 
viewed station at the request of a higher-priority (local) station.
Simmons Data Data on print and broadcast media audience exposure and product usage 
reported by Experian Simmons.
Simmons (Experian Simmons or its earlier name, Simmons Market Research Bureau [SMRB]) A 
media and marketing research firm that uses a single sample to measure product usage, 
media audience, and consumer behavior. Separate studies cover adults, teens, children, 
Hispanics, consumer online users, and computer professionals.
Single-Source Data Data on product usage and media behavior gathered from a single sample. 
This technique makes the results more reliable and avoids the need to match samples that 
have different characteristics.
Situation Analysis Research prepared in document format to provide background for a media 
planner. The analysis includes history of the market, distribution channels, consumer analy-
sis, product analysis, and advertising and media analysis.
Sliding Rate A space or time rate in a medium that is reduced as the volume purchased increases 
over a period of time.
Smart Phone A portable, cellular telephone that has been augmented with a physical or graphic 
keyboard, allowing it to access the Internet, play games, download music or custom ring 
tones, serve as a global positioning device, or provide other online services.
Social Media (also called social networks) Internet websites that allow people to form semipub-
lic groups of family members, friends, business associates, and others who share a common 
interest for the purpose of frequent informal communication.
Space Position Value In outdoor advertising, an estimate of the effectiveness of a particular 
poster location. The factors considered are the length of approach, the speed of travel, the 
angle of the panel to its circulation, and the relation of the panel to adjacent panels.
Space Schedule A schedule that the agency sends to the advertiser, showing the media to be 
used, dates on which advertising is to appear, size of advertisements, and cost of space.

 
Glossary 
463
Special A one-time TV show generally employing known talent and usually running an hour or lon-
ger. Also called a spectacular.
Spill-In (or Spill-Out) The degree to which programming is viewed in adjacent television markets. 
Depending on the perspective, this is either spill-in or spill-out. Milwaukee television program-
ming spills out of the Milwaukee DMA and spills into the Madison, Wisconsin, area, and vice 
versa. The primary source of this information is Nielsen’s DMA Audience Allocation report that 
shows the number of GRPs delivered in a neighboring market for every 100 GRPs in the home 
market.
Spinoff A line extension of a magazine on a short-term basis. Also called a “one-shot” annual 
edition.
Split Run The running of two or more versions of an advertisement in every other copy of the 
same magazine or newspaper. In a variation of split runs, one version of the ad appears 
in newsstand copies and another in mail subscription copies. Splits may also occur 
geographically.
Split-Run Test Research designed to test the effectiveness of various copy elements, prices, 
or types of offers by placing them in alternative copies of an issue. The researchers evalu-
ate various forms of the advertisements by means of coupon or inquiry returns, or by orders 
placed for trial offers.
Sponsored Search See Search.
Sponsor Identification (SI) The extent to which a program’s sponsor is identified or its product 
or service remembered. The percentage of listeners or viewers who correctly associate a pro-
gram with the sponsor or his product is the Sponsor Identification Index (SII). Single-sponsor 
programs are rare these days.
Sponsor Relief The process whereby an advertiser who has contracted for broadcast time that is 
no longer needed is granted relief by having another advertiser purchase the unneeded time.
Sponsorship The purchase of more than one announcement in a program (usually a majority of 
commercials) by one advertiser. Partial sponsorships are common and give the advertisers 
sponsorship billboards.
Spot (a) A time period filled entirely by a commercial or public service message and sold sepa-
rately from the adjacent time periods. Such announcements may be placed between network 
programs or within local programs. (b) To buy time (for programs or announcements) on a 
market-by-market basis from stations through their representatives.
Spot Announcement A commercial placed on individual radio and TV stations.
Spot Programming The process by which an advertiser secures the rights to a television pro-
gram and places the program on stations in selected markets without regard to network affili-
ation. The advertiser may own the television program outright, have rights to the program for 
a specific length of time, or have rights to the program in only a certain part of the country.
Spot Radio The use of stations in selected markets without regard to network affiliation. May 
involve spot announcements or complete programs.

464 
Glossary
Spot Schedule A local spot announcement buy or a standard form that agencies submit showing 
specific times, adjacencies, and so on of a brand’s current spot announcements in a market.
Spot Television The use of stations in selected markets without regard to network affiliation. 
May involve spot announcements or complete local programs.
Spread An advertisement appearing on any two facing pages of a publication.
SRDS (formerly Standard Rate & Data Service) A service that publishes the rates and discount 
structures of all major media. It also publishes marketing research studies, often on media or 
market areas. See www.srds.com.
Staggered Schedule Several advertisements scheduled in two or more publications, arranged so 
as to alternate or rotate the dates of insertion.
Standard Advertising Unit (SAU) The 56 advertising units in broadsheet and 33 units in tabloid 
newspapers that are fixed sizes in depth and width and are measured in standard column 
inches.
Standby Space An order accepted by some magazines to run an advertisement whenever and 
wherever they wish, at an extra discount. The advertiser forwards print production materials 
with the order. This practice helps magazines fill odd pages or spaces.
Starch Method The recognition method used by Daniel Starch & Associates in the company’s 
studies of advertising readership. For each measured ad, Starch reports the percent of a pub-
lication’s readers who “noted” the ad, “associated” the ad with the advertiser, and “read most” 
of the body copy. This system has been in use in the same format for more than 50 years, giv-
ing the company a valuable database of average (normative) scores by ad size, publication, 
and other characteristics.
Station Break A time period between two programs when a station announces its call letters and 
channel number, and also broadcasts commercials.
Station Log The official, chronological listing of a radio or television station’s programming and 
commercial announcements throughout the day.
Station Rep A sales organization or person representing individual stations to national advertis-
ers. Short for station representative.
Store-Distributed Magazine Any one of several magazines (e.g., Family Circle, Woman’s Day) 
whose primary channel of distribution was retail grocery stores. In recent years these “store 
books” have shifted to more than 60 percent of subscription sales.
Store Panel A selected sample of stores used repeatedly for marketing research to collect data 
on retail sales movement (e.g., The Nielsen Company’s food store panel). (See Panel.)
Strip Programming (a) Running of a television or radio series at the same hour on each week-
day. (b) Similar but different programs telecast at the same time throughout the week. (c) The 
same program, but different episodes, broadcast several times weekly at the same time.
Sunday Newspaper Supplement Any printed matter that is inserted in a Sunday edition of a 
newspaper on a continuing basis and is not part of the newspaper itself. Two main publica-
tions fitting into this category are magazine supplements and comic sections. A supplement 

 
Glossary 
465
may be either syndicated nationally or edited locally. (See Syndicated Sunday Magazine 
Supplement.)
Sweeps Periods during which Nielsen surveys all 210 local television markets. Sweeps are con-
ducted four times yearly (November, February, May, and July), so these months are called 
sweep months.
Syndicated Program A method of selling a TV or radio program on a market-by-market (station-
by-station) basis, as opposed to a network of affiliated stations.
Syndicated Research Research that is available for general purchase, as contrasted with cus-
tom research for a single advertiser or user. Examples include MRI, The Nielsen Company, 
Arbitron, Experian Simmons, Kantar Media, and so on.
Syndicated Sunday Magazine Supplement A magazine supplement that is distributed through 
a group of newspapers and is owned by a single publisher. The distributing newspapers pay 
the publisher for the privilege of distributing the supplement, which in turn helps build circula-
tion for the distributing newspapers. There are general-interest nationally syndicated supple-
ments: Parade and USA Weekend. American Profile is a Sunday supplement distributed to mid-
size and smaller markets.
Tabloid A smaller than standard-sized newspaper, with five columns and about 1,000 lines per 
page.
Tagline A final line of a dramatic scene or act that is treated to give point or impact to the preced-
ing dialogue.
Target Audience The desired or intended audience for advertising, as described or determined by 
the advertiser. Usually defined in terms of specific demographic (age, sex, income, etc.), pur-
chase, or ownership characteristics.
Targetcasting Another term for narrowcasting, where cable programming is created to meet the 
interests of a special demographic audience.
Tear Sheets Actual pages of advertising as they appear in an issue of any publication, used to 
serve as proofs of insertion.
Telecast A broadcast, program, or show on television.
Telemarketing The sale of goods and services through the use of a telephone. There are two 
classes of telemarketing: inbound telemarketing—consumers initiate the call to ask ques-
tions or order a product; and outbound telemarketing—calls are initiated by a telemarketing 
firm to consumers’ homes.
Telephone Coincidental Survey In research, the interview method in which telephone calls are 
made while a particular activity, usually a broadcast program, is in progress.
Test Market A given marketing area, usually a metropolitan census region, in which a market test 
is conducted. Sometimes used as a verb to refer to introducing a new product.
Test-Market Translation The use of local media that are available in a specific market to repre-
sent the national media included in a brand’s national plan. The theoretical national plan must 

466 
Glossary
be reproduced as carefully and as accurately as possible in the test market, since company 
management will use sales results to determine whether the product should be expanded to 
national distribution. (See Little U.S.A. Concept and As It Falls Concept.)
Thirty-Sheet Poster An outdoor poster that is about 12 feet by 25 feet. In the early days of 
advertising, the poster consisted of 24 individual panels pasted together to form an ad. Today 
about 10 to 12 panels are used, depending on the type of artwork and copy.
Through-the-Book A technique of determining a print medium’s audience size by having respon-
dents go through a stripped-down issue with an interviewer to learn which articles are most 
interesting. After this preliminary examination, respondents are asked whether they are sure 
they looked into the magazine. Only those who answer positively are counted as readers. No 
longer used because of the limited number of magazines that can be carried by interviewers.
Tie-In A retail outlet’s newspaper advertisement referring to or associating with another ad in the 
same newspaper. Tie-ins are paid for by the retail outlets that run them.
Time Shifting The practice of recording a program off the air and playing it back at a different 
time using a DVR.
Total Audience The total number of unduplicated readers of a magazine.
Total Audience Rating The percent of households tuning to all or to any portion of a program for 
at least five minutes.
Total Net Paid The total of all classes of a publication’s circulation for which the ultimate purchas-
ers have paid in accordance with the standards set by the Audit Bureau of Circulations’ rules. 
Includes single-copy sales, mail subscriptions, and specials.
TPT (Total Prime Time) A television research project of Gallup & Robinson (G & R) evaluating all 
paid commercials aired during the evening period when national network programming is 
shown, that is, both program commercials and station breaks. Offers data on percentage of 
commercial audience able to recall the commercial, plus an estimate of actual audience in 
station coverage. TPT has been replaced by other G & R services. See www.gallup-robinson
.com.
Traceable Expenditures Published reports on advertising expenditures by media for different 
advertisers. Currently, traceable expenditures are available for 18 media including national 
consumer magazines, local magazines, national Sunday supplements, local Sunday supple-
ments, local newspapers, national newspapers, spot TV, network TV, cable TV, syndication 
TV, outdoor, network radio, and spot radio, Hispanic network TV, Hispanic cable TV, Internet, 
business-to-business trade publications, and freestanding insert coupons.
Trade Advertising Advertisements of consumer items directed to wholesalers and retailers in 
the distribution channel.
Trade Magazine See Business Paper.
Trade Paper Publication covering the commercial activities of wholesale and retail outlets, but 
many reach the sales departments of manufacturers. Trade papers include all publications 

 
Glossary 
467
that offer a manufacturer the opportunity to reach those who will sell the product for the com-
pany, at either the retail or wholesale level.
Trading Area The area surrounding a city, as defined by the Audit Bureau of Circulations, whose 
residents would normally be expected to use the city as their trading center.
Traffic Audit Bureau (TAB) An organization sponsored by outdoor advertising plants, advertising 
companies, and national advertisers for the purpose of authenticating circulation as related 
to outdoor advertising. See www.tabonline.com.
Traffic Count The evaluation of outdoor poster circulation by an actual count of traffic passing 
the poster.
Traffic Flow Map (Outdoor) An outline map of a market’s streets scaled to indicate the relative 
densities of traffic.
Traffic Pattern Comparisons of customer count to establish averages; behavior of customers in 
terms of shopping time, hour of day, day of week, frequency.
Transit Advertising Advertising that uses poster-type ads on transportation vehicles such as 
buses, subways, and streetcars.
Turnover The ratio of a single telecast rating to a four-week reach. This ratio serves as an indica-
tion of the relative degree to which a program’s audience changes. The greater the turnover 
in the audience, the higher the ratio. Also the ratio of total viewers of a telecast divided by the 
average minute rating.
Twitter A free social networking site that enables its users to send and receive text messages, 
known as “tweets,” that are up to 140 characters. These are displayed on the author’s profile 
page and are delivered to the author’s subscribers, known as “followers,” who can be select 
friends or can be open to anyone who wishes.
Two-Sheet Posters Outdoor posters placed at transit or train stops, which measure 60 inches by 
46 inches.
Unaided Recall The process of determining whether a person saw or heard a given ad or commer-
cial sometime after exposure with only minimal cueing such as mention of product class (not 
brand).
Universe The estimated number of actual households or people from which the sample will be 
taken and to which data from the sample will be projected; also called Universe Estimate.
Up-Front The purchase of national television time (network, cable, or syndication) in the spring 
or summer for the coming broadcast year that begins in September. Up-front buying usually 
includes a guaranteed audience delivery and a full commitment without options after the first 
quarter. Advertisers expect lower prices and a better selection of programs in the up-front 
than in the scatter market later in the year.
Upscale A general description of a medium’s audience indicating membership in an upper socio-
economic class.

468 
Glossary
URL (Uniform Resource Locator) The address of a page on the Internet. The first part consists 
of a string of letters that identify the protocol. For typical websites, this is http:// or hypertext 
transfer protocol, the computer language in which websites are written. The second part is 
the file and domain name that serve as the website’s location or domain. An example of a com-
plete URL, http://www.draftfcb.com.
Vehicle A particular component of a media class, such as a particular magazine or broadcast 
program.
Vertical Cume In broadcast research, a cumulative rating for two or more programs broadcast on 
the same day.
Vertical Half Page A half-page ad where the long dimension of the ad is vertical. (See Horizontal 
Half Page.)
Vertical Publication A business publication that serves a specific trade, industry, business, or 
profession.
Viewers per Set (VPS) The average number of persons watching or listening to a program in each 
home.
Viewers per Viewing Household (VPVH) “Estimated number of viewers, usually classified by age 
and sex, comprising the audience within those households viewing a given station or program 
or using television during a particular time period.” Also called Viewers per Tuning Household 
(VPTH). (Source: The Nielsen Company.)
Volume Discount A discount that a publisher gives an advertiser in exchange for running ads in a 
certain volume of space in the publication. An advertiser might use many small insertions to 
make up the required number of pages.
Waste Circulation (a) The audience members of a magazine or newspaper who are not prospects 
for a particular advertised product. (b) Circulation in an area where an advertiser does not 
have distribution of its product.
Website An interconnected set of text, graphics, and other content that constitutes an organiza-
tion, person, or other entity’s place on the Internet. Websites are displayed on a computer or 
mobile device using browser software such as Microsoft’s Internet Explorer. A website’s loca-
tion is identified by its URL, which is put into the browser to obtain access.
WOM (Word of Mouth) Person-to-person communication of news, gossip, or other content in the 
course of daily human interaction.
Women’s Service Magazine Magazine appealing to women (homemakers specifically), and 
whose editorial contents are designed to further their knowledge as homemakers.
Working Media Budget The portion of the budget set aside for the purchase of advertising space 
and time, as distinguished from other advertising-related expenses such as commercial pro-
duction, talent payments, tapes, shipping, and so on.

 
Glossary 
469
WWW (World Wide Web) The organized storehouse of billions of pages of alphanumeric and multi-
media content that is made available to worldwide users who have access to the Internet.
Yahoo! An Internet portal at www.yahoo.com that includes news, search capability, shopping, 
e-mail, video, graphics, and other capabilities.
Yesterday-Reading Technique Research technique that asks respondents in a selected sample 
which newspapers they read yesterday; similar to recent-reading magazine technique.
Zapping Using a remote-control device to change television channels from across the room, 
especially to avoid viewing commercials.
Zipping Using a remote-control device to skip ahead of any portion of a television or VCR pro-
gram, especially to skip over commercials.

This page intentionally left blank 

 
471
A and B copy splits, 375
AA audience. See Average minute 
audience
AAAA (American Association of 
Advertising Agencies), 428
AAF (American Advertising Fed-
eration), 428
ABC. See Audit Bureau of 
Circulations
Accumulation, audience, 81–84, 
110–11
Achenbaum, Alvin, 410
Active media, 256
Active/Passive (A/P) Meter, 70, 71
Actual audience size, 79–80
ACV (all commodity volume), 402
Ad networks, 335
Ad Planner, 333–35
Ad servers, third-party, 377
Addressability, in strategy plans, 
199
AdMeasures, 56–57, 80
AdRelevance, 158, 161, 335
ADS (alternate delivery services), 
358
Advertiser-run market tests, 404–7
Advertising. See also related topics, 
e.g.: Marketing strategy
and ad size, 411–12
assessing task of, 387
budgets for, 387–89
eﬀ ective frequency and quality 
of, 134
eﬀ ectiveness of, 25
and geographic markets, 
190–205
media planners’ knowledge of, 
281–82
positioning of. See Positioning
resources on, 428
return on investment for, 25
timing factors in, 205–8
trade publications, 173
Advertising Age, 428
Advertising analysis, 141
Advertising communication, 55
Advertising exposure, 55
Advertising Media Internet Center, 
421
Advertising page exposure, 82
Advertising perception, 55
Advertising rates, of newspapers, 
244
Advertising Research Foundation 
(ARF), 22, 422
Ad*Views, 158, 159, 161, 164
Adweek, 428
AdWorks studies, 419–20
Agency of record, 351
All commodity volume (ACV), 
402
All-cash syndication, 357
AllNewspapers.com, 422
Alternate delivery services (ADS), 
358
Alternative evaluation (in buying 
process), 53
AMA (American Marketing 
Association), 428
Amazon.com, 5
American Advertising Federation 
(AAF), 428
American Association of Advertis-
ing Agencies (AAAA, or the 
4As), 428
American Marketing Association 
(AMA), 428
American Proﬁ le, 364
Anderson, Chris, 5
Anheuser-Busch, 386
A/P Meter. See Active/Passive 
Meter
Appel, Valentine, 135
AQH audience. See Average 
quarter-hour audience
Arbitron Company, 73, 377, 424
ARF. See Advertising Research 
Foundation
As It Falls approach to test market-
ing, 415–17
Atomistic budget setting, 387
Attention, of audience, 249, 255, 
266
Auction-based pricing, 259
Audience(s). See also Target 
audience(s)
advertisers’ knowledge of, 259
average minute, 69, 70
average quarter-hour, 70, 96
for cable television, 250–52
composition of, 35
cumulative, 113
exposure of, 55–57
fragmentation of, 4, 5, 252, 
254–55
information processing by, 
51–53
for magazines, 245, 246, 311–12
measurements of. See 
Measurement(s)
for media plans, 27
of media vehicles, 59–63
net unduplicated, 113, 116
for newspaper supplements, 
247
for newspapers, 242–44
for outdoor advertising, 77
program, 96
for radio, 253, 254
selection of media by, 45–50
share of, 98
size of, 13, 79–80
total, 116
Audience accumulation, 81–84, 
110–11
Audit Bureau of Circulations 
(ABC), 80, 81, 195, 426
Availability, of media classes, 265, 
266
INDEX

472 
Index
Average audience rating, 96
Average minute (AA) audience, 
69, 70
Average quarter-hour (AQH) audi-
ence, 70, 96
Banks, Seymour, 127
Banner ads (Internet), 22, 365, 366
Baron, Roger, 321, 323
Base (demographics), 79
BASES, 402
BDI. See Brand development index
Beauchamp, J. P., 400
Behavioral targeting (BT), 328–29
BehaviorScan (B-Scan), 403–4
Best Buy, 51
Best Food Days, 376
Billboards, 12. See also Outdoor 
advertising
Block coding, 314
Boxcar ﬁ gure, 108
BPA Worldwide, 426
Brand awareness, 224, 264
Brand development index (BDI), 
200–203, 215, 220
Brands
exposure of, 258, 266
goals of, 207–8
perceived value of, 226
test marketing of existing, 403
Broadcast impressions, 94
Broadcast media, 2, 11. See also 
speciﬁ c types
audience accumulation in, 
82–84
CPM for, 60
GRPs in, 106–7
Internet resources for, 424–25
Broadcast ratings, 94–102
Broadcast times, 23
Brown, George H., 386
B-Scan (BehaviorScan), 403–4
BT (behavioral targeting), 328–29
Budget(s), 41, 379–96. See also 
Costs, media
for advertising, 387–89
constraints on, 207
for eﬀ ective campaigns, 63–64
as element of competitive analy-
sis, 30–31
experimental approaches to, 
386–87
geographic allocations, 389–93
and marketing strategy, 149–50
and media strategy, 286
and payout plans, 391, 394–96
and reach, 224–25
traditional approaches to, 
381–85
Bursting, 234
Buying media, 343–78
cable television, 357–59, 374–75
Engel/Kollat model of, 53
Internet, 336–41, 365–67, 
377–78
magazines, 359–62, 375–76
and media costs, 349–69
and media plans, 344–49
newspapers, 363–64, 376
out-of-home media, 367–69
problems related to, 369–78
radio, 365, 376–77
software for, 167–68
television, 349–57, 369–74
Buying power, 171–72, 200–204
Buying target, 284
Buzzmetrics, 162
C3 (three-day commercial) ratings, 
11, 52, 96–100
CAB (Cabletelevision Advertising 
Bureau), 424–25
Cable television, 5, 239, 250–52
buying time on, 374–75
costs of, 357–59
coverage for, 85, 90–91
interactive, 48
measuring audiences for, 72
penetration of, 414
Cabletelevision Advertising Bureau 
(CAB), 424–25
Callaway Golf Company, 32, 33
Canoe Ventures, 199
Case rate budget method, 385
Catalog value, 244, 250, 255
Catalogs, 14
Category development index (CDI), 
200–203, 215, 220
CBSA (core-based statistical area), 
194
CDI. See Category development 
index
CDs, marketing with, 151
Cellular service providers, 
260–61
Chambers of Commerce, 173
Charter Communications, 49
Chasin, Josh, 23
Checkerboard designs, 410
Children’s television, 354
Circulation, 55, 80–81, 316
City zones, 195
Click-through rates, 22, 25
Closing dates, of magazines, 246
Clutter, 250, 263, 316
CMSA (Consolidated Metropolitan 
Statistical Area), 194
Color ﬁ delity, 245, 247
Color inserts, preprinted, 243
Commercial wearout, 65–66, 135
Commercials, 250, 251, 411–12
Communication value, of product 
placement, 253
Comparatives, media, 314–15
Competition
analyzing, 30–33
frequency level of, 227
scheduling around, 207
selecting media based on, 251, 
259, 266
setting budget based on, 
383–84, 389
Competitive media expenditure 
analysis, 154–67
applications of, 165–66
custom, 161–62
data analysis in, 164–65
data gathering in, 162–64
data sources for, 156–58
international, 166–67
Monitor-Plus reports for, 
158–61
online buzz in, 162
Competitive spending budget 
method, 383–84
Competitrack, 162
Complete media plans, 411
Compose system, 300–302
Composition (comp), 35–36, 306
ComScore, 76, 329, 333
ComScore Media Matrix, 75, 76
Consolidated Metropolitan Statis-
tical Area (CMSA), 194
Consumer Innovators. See Lei-
sure Styles and Consumer 
Innovators
Consumer packaged goods (CPG), 
401
Consumer Reports, 174
Consumers, 17. See also 
Audience(s)
and digital advertising, 51

 
Index 
473
and direct mail, 263
selection of media by, 45–50
Consumer’s Digest, 174
Contextual targeting, 328
Continuity, 65, 234, 236, 285–86
Control, product placement and, 
253
Control markets, 407
Controlled circulation, 246
Convex response curves, 131
Cookies, 337
Coors Light, 4, 6–7
Copy checking, 316–17
Core readers, 322
Core-based statistical area (CBSA), 
194
Corporate legitimacy, 256
Cost eﬃ  ciency, 59, 249, 265, 266
Cost per inquiry (PI) advertising, 
354–55
Cost per rating point (CPP), 61–62, 
129, 344–46, 351
Cost per thousand (CPM), 38
calculating, 60–63
comparing media based on, 
345, 348
and geographic weighting, 210, 
211
for Internet advertising, 336, 
337, 365
for magazines, 306
Costs, media, 349–68, 413. See also 
Budget(s)
cable television, 251, 252, 357–59
direct mail, 262
Internet, 257, 365–67
magazines, 309–10, 359–62
and media testing, 413
newspaper supplements, 248
newspapers, 244, 363–64
outdoor advertising, 264
out-of-home media, 367–69
product placement, 252
radio, 365
sponsored search, 258, 259
television, 249, 349–57, 370–71
Coupons, 260, 317
Coverage, 84–92, 176, 306
cable television, 85, 90–91
composition vs., 88
Internet, 85, 91
local television and radio, 88–89
magazine, 84–88
network television, 85, 90
newspaper, 84–86
newspaper supplements, 247
outdoor advertising, 85
out-of-home media, 91–92
radio, 85, 88–89, 254
and reach, 113–15
spot television, 85, 89
of test area, 413
transit, 85, 265
CPG (consumer packaged goods), 
401
CPM. See Cost per thousand
CPP. See Cost per rating point
Creative marketing strategy, 15, 16, 
150–51
Creative media strategy, 286–93
balancing elements of, 289, 291, 
292
examples of, 288
guidelines for, 286–87
predicting outcomes of, 288–90
priorities in, 293
Creative strategy, 16, 278–79, 
284–85
Cross-channel communication, 
148–49
Cross-media, 270–71
Custom inserts (newspapers), 364
Cut-ins, 417–18
Cutoﬀ  points, 204–5
Daily eﬀ ective circulation (DEC), 
91–92
Daily showing, 91. See also Gross 
rating points (GRPs)
Data
for competitive media expen-
diture analysis, 156–58, 
162–65
fusion of, 76–77
insuﬃ  cient media, 21–23
interpreting, from measure-
ments, 77–78
sources of marketing, 168–74
Database media planning (data 
mining), 268
Dayparts, 351
Dealers, 152
DEC (daily eﬀ ective circulation), 
91–92
Degree of product usage, 388
Delivery, 20, 33
Delivery dates, for direct mail, 263
Delivery systems, 2, 414
Demographic targeting, 329–35
Demographics, 4–5, 79
Demographics USA, 203, 204
Designated Market Area (DMA), 
62, 69, 70, 194, 196, 198, 413
Digital advertising. See Internet 
advertising
Digital Place-based Advertising 
Association (DPAA), 13, 77, 
267, 268, 369
Digital video recorders (DVRs), 11, 
48, 52, 56, 96–98, 250, 251
Direct mail, 241, 261–63
Direct Marketing Association 
(DMA), 425
Direct response, 261
Discounts, 317
Dispersion, message, 121
Distribution, in marketing strategy, 
152
Distribution channels, 140–41
DMA. See Designated Market 
Area; Direct Marketing 
Association
“DMA Audience Allocation Re-
port,” 413
DMA rating, 62
Dollar allocation technique, 211–14
Donovan Data Systems, 168
Dow Chemical Company, 179–80
DPAA. See Digital Place-based 
Advertising Association
Dual-audience magazines, 12, 359
Duplication of reach, 118–21
DVRs. See Digital video recorders
Dynamic selling, 249
Eastlan, 377
Edge, Justin, 323
Editorial categories, magazine, 
359–62
Eﬀ ective frequency, 129–37
concerns about, 133–37
factors aﬀ ecting, 229–32
history of, 132–37
and reach, 227–32
and response curves, 130–31
setting levels of, 228–29
Eﬀ ective Frequency (Michael J. 
Naples), 132
Eﬀ ective reach, 132
Eller Media Company, 427
E-mail, 23
Endorsements, 252

474 
Index
Engagement, 21–22
Engel/Kollat model, 53
Entertainment content, of product 
placement, 252
Enzer, Matisse, 427
Ephron, Erwin, 65, 135–36, 423
Ephron on Media, 423
Ethnic appeal, of newspapers, 244
Evaliant, 158
Even continuity, 295
Excel, 9, 167, 168
Existing brands, test marketing 
of, 403
Expenditure-per-unit (case rate) 
budget method, 385
Experian Simmons, 168, 170, 423
audience measurements by, 75
target selection by, 177, 181, 186
Experimenting, testing vs., 398–99
Exposure, 55–57
advertising, 55
advertising page, 82
of media classes, 253, 264, 266
of outdoor advertising, 264
of radio, 254
and response function, 58
vehicle, 55, 79
Eyes On system, 77, 92
Factorial designs, 409
Feedback (in buying process), 53
Feelings (about particular media), 
46
Fiscal year, 381
Fixed quintiles, 123
Flexibility
of direct mail, 261–62
geographic, 318
of Internet display, 256
of newspaper supplements, 
247–48
of newspapers, 243
of outdoor advertising, 263
of out-of-home video, 266
of radio, 254
of television, 249
of transit media, 265
Flighting, 65, 234–36, 295
Flowchart, media plan, 41, 42
Focus groups, 188–90
Forrester Research, Inc., 427
Four Ps, of marketing mix, 54–55
4As (American Association of 
Advertising Agencies), 428
Fragmentation of audience, 4, 5, 
252, 254–55
Free-standing inserts (FSIs), 14, 150
Frequency, 81
average, 113
for cable television, 251
eﬀ ective. See Eﬀ ective frequency
as element of media strategy, 
285
emphasizing, in media plan, 
225–27
measurement of, 121–29
for outdoor advertising, 263
of purchase, 388–89
of radio, 253
and reach, 127–29
of transit media, 265
Frequency distributions, 123–26
Frequency-of-reading technique, 75
Fringe time, 355
FSIs. See Free-standing inserts
Full available (term), 391
Full sponsorships, 373
Fusion, data, 76–77
General-interest (dual-audience) 
magazines, 12, 359
Geographic budget allocations, 
389–93
Geographic ﬂ exibility, 318
Geographic market weighting, 297
Geographic markets, 190–205
and buying power indices, 
200–204
classiﬁ cation of, 192–96
and cutoﬀ  points, 204–5
and heavy-user data, 199
sales analysis of, 196–99
Geographic weighting, 209–22
dollar allocation technique for, 
211–14
gross impression technique for, 
211–14
guidelines for, 215–16
and minimum BDIs and CDIs, 
220
and quantitative vs. qualitative 
values, 221–22
share of voice technique for, 
214–15
spot TV market case study of, 
217–19
Geographical targeting, 328
Glossary of Internet Terms, 427
Goals
brand, 207–8
and budgets, 387–88
marketing, 145, 148
Good Housekeeping, 55, 317
Google, 5, 333, 338
Government Printing Oﬃ  ce, 173
Graphics, sponsored search and, 
259
Gross costs, 380
Gross impressions, 107–10, 
211–14
Gross rating points (GRPs), 106–7, 
333
Guide to Test Market Selection and 
Planning, 423
Hall’s Reports, 312–13
Heavy-up scheduling, 278, 296
Heavy-user data, 199
Heyman, Bob, 338
Home (shelter) magazines, 361
Homescan, 137
Horizontal (term), 176
Household ratings, 77
Households using television 
(HUT), 92–93, 98, 101, 352
IAB. See Internet Advertising 
Bureau
Illustrations, 151
Image, product, 252
IMC (integrated marketing com-
munications), 148
Immediacy, 242–43, 246
Impressions, 94
and buying Internet advertising, 
336–37
gross, 107–10, 211–14
media-based diﬀ erences in, 
346–47
IMS. See Interactive Marketing 
Systems
Inbound advertising, 261
Index number analysis, 181–85
Indexes, 181
Information Resources, Inc. (IRI), 
168, 169, 203, 413
InfoScan, 403, 413
InfoScan Census, 169
Innovation, 287
Inserts, 243, 364
Inspections, of transit media, 266
Institutional inﬂ uences, 23–24

 
Index 
475
Integrated marketing communica-
tions (IMC), 148
Interactive Marketing Systems 
(IMS), 390, 422–23
Interactive television, 47, 49
Intermedia comparisons, 237
International competitive analysis, 
166–167
Internet, 4–7, 9
audiences of, 75–77
media resources on, 421–28
and Nielsen television ratings, 
70
radio on, 73
surveys of media vehicles on, 68
Internet advertising, 21, 255–58
banners, 22, 365, 366
buying, 336–41, 377–78
costs of, 365, 366
creative strategy for, 151
eﬀ ectiveness of, 25
exposure to, 56
measurements for, 138
and media selection, 327–35
Monitor-Plus for, 161
perception of, by consumers, 51
rich media, 66–67
vehicles for, 327–38
Internet Advertising Bureau (IAB), 
335, 427
Internet coverage, 85, 91
Internet display, 240, 255–58
Interstitial ads, 367
Intramedia comparisons, 237
Inventory (television advertising), 
349
Investment spending strategy, 283
Invidi, 199
IPSOS/Mendelsohn, 177
IRI. See Information Resources, 
Inc.
Issue Speciﬁ c Readership Study, 
318
Jacobovits, L., 135
Jacobs, Lori, 321
Johnston, Helen, 136–37
Jones, John Philip, 135
Journal of Advertising Research, 
422
Kantar Media Intelligence, 156–58, 
335
Keywords, 338–40
Kidon Media-Link, 422
Klein, Caryn, 321
Kodak, 288
Krugman, Herbert, 130
Kuehn, Alfred A., 383
Lamar Advertising Company, 427
Latin squares, 408–9
Leisure Styles and Consumer Inno-
vators codes, 186, 188, 189
Lifespan, of media classes, 245–46, 
250, 262
Lifestyle analysis, 185–90
Little U.S.A. approach to test mar-
keting, 414–16
Local advertising, 88–89, 354–57
Local People Meter (LPM), 56, 
69, 70
Long Tail, 4, 5
Long-term buys, 372
Loyalty, 46
LPM. See Local People Meter
Magazine comparatives, 314–15
Magazine coverage, 84–88
Magazine Handbook, 426
Magazine Publishers of America 
(MPA), 426
Magazines, 12, 239
audiences of, 22–23, 74–75, 82
beneﬁ ts of, 245–46
buying advertising in, 359–62, 
375–76
duplication of reach for, 119–21
evaluation and selection of, 
304–10
exposure for, 56
general-interest, 12, 359
GRPs for, 107
home, 361
limitations of, 246
and media usage, 46–47
Monitor-Plus for, 160–61
special-interest, 14
women’s, 248, 329–30, 359–60
Mailing lists, 262–63
Maneloveg, Herbert D., 379
MAP (marketing advertising pat-
tern), 384
Market(s), 62, 193
geographic, 190–205
of magazines, 313–14
and media testing factors, 
414–15
newspaper designated, 195–96
in selection of media classes, 
243, 247, 249, 263
and test marketing factors, 405
Market coverage. See Coverage
Market history, 140
Market mix modeling, 399–401
Market penetration, of media 
classes, 247, 252, 258
Marketer’s Guide to Media, 22, 
172, 356
Marketing
as concept, 8
research for, 15, 16, 257, 423
test. See Test marketing
Marketing advertising pattern 
(MAP), 384
Marketing mix, 54–55, 148
Marketing objectives, 145, 148, 149
Marketing strategy, 15–17, 139–74. 
See also Strategy planning
and budget, 149–50
and competitive media expendi-
ture analysis, 154–67
and creative strategy, 150–51
data sources for, 168–74
dealers and distribution in, 152
and marketing mix, 148–49
and marketing objectives, 145, 
148
marketing strategy plan, 141–54
media planners’ knowledge of, 
139–40
and media planning and buying, 
167–68
outline of, 146–47
and overall sales strategy, 
152–53
situation analysis for, 140–41
and test marketing, 153–54
Marketing strategy plan, 16, 
141–54
Marketing strategy statement, 
146–47
Marketing-mix modeling compa-
nies, 150
Marshak, Seymour, 311–12
Mass media, traditional, 4, 5, 
10–12, 274. See also speciﬁ c 
types
Measurement(s), 55–63, 67–103, 
105–38
of advertising eﬀ ectiveness, 25
of audience accumulation, 81–84

476 
Index
of audience size, 79–80
of broadcast impressions and 
ratings, 94–103
of coverage, 84–92
of eﬀ ective frequency, 129–37
of exposure, 55–57
of frequency, 121–37
gross impressions, 107–10
gross rating points, 106–7
of households using television, 
92–93
of Internet audience, 75–77
and interpretation of data, 77–78
of magazine and newspaper 
audiences, 74–75
of media vehicles, 67–68
of out-of-home audience, 77
of print circulation, 79–80
of radio audience, 73–74
of reach, 110–21, 127–29
of television audience, 68–72
uses of, 78–79
Media, 45–66. See also related top-
ics, e.g.: Buying media
and audiences, 48–51
audiences’ processing of, 51–53
availability of, 412
combining, 297–98
costs of. See Costs, media
cross-, 270–71
deﬁ ned, 2–3
eﬀ ectiveness of, 64–65
insuﬃ  cient data about, 21–23
interactive television, 48
and marketing mix, 54–55
measuring audiences of, 55–63
and media research, 63–66
as message delivery system, 2
new, 267–71
nonmeasured, 271–72
nontraditional, 12–13
place-based, 268, 269
selection of, by consumers, 
45–47
specialized, 14
and subsequent behavior, 46–47
traditional, 4, 5, 10–12, 274
Media analysis, 141
Media Audits (Th e Media Audit), 
198, 424
Media classes, 39–40, 237–75
cable television, 239, 250–52
comparing, 237–38
and consumer media classes, 
238–66
cross-media, 270–71
database media planning, 268
direct mail, 241, 261–63
Internet display, 240, 255–58
magazines, 239, 245–46
media mix, 272–75
mobile advertising, 241, 259–61
new media, 267–71
newspaper supplements, 239, 
247–48
newspapers, 238, 242–45
nonmeasured media, 271–72
outdoor advertising, 241, 
263–65
out-of-home video, 242, 
266–67
place-based media, 268, 269
product placement, 239–40, 
252–53
radio, 240, 253–55
rationale for, 39–40
sponsored search, 240, 258–59
television, 239, 248–50
transit media, 241, 265–66
Media comparatives, 314–15
Media habits (of target audience), 
35–39
Media Life, 423
Media Metrics, 329–33
Media mix, 272–75, 411
Media Networks, Inc., 375, 419
Media objectives, 17, 18, 29–30
Media plan presentation (example), 
27–43
background for, 28–29
competitive analysis for, 30–33
ﬂ owchart and budget for, 41–42
and media habits, 35–39
media objectives for, 29–30
media selection in, 39–40
media strategy in, 40–41
post-buy evaluation for, 43
target audience analysis for, 
34, 35
Media planners, 17
changing role of, 8–9
and information processing by 
audiences, 51–53
and marketing strategy, 139–40
media strategy and role of, 
279–83
Media planning, 1–25. See also 
Budget(s); Media strategy
changes in, 4–7
and classes of media, 10–14
general procedures in, 15–19
Internet resources for, 421–28
and marketing mix, 54–55
and media, 2–3
and media planners, 8–9
and media vehicles, 19–21
problems in, 21–25
shelf-space model of, 135–37
software for, 167–68
time factor in, 23
and vehicle selection, 19–21
Media plans, 3, 27, 28, 411. See also 
Media strategy
Media Rating Council, 103
Media strategy, 40–41, 277–302. 
See also Media planning; 
Strategy planning
alternative within a ﬁ xed budget, 
292
and channel planning software, 
300–302
choosing a, 294–300
concepts, 277–79
creative, 286–93
and creative strategy, 284–85
deﬁ nition of, 17
elements of, 283–86
and media objectives, 18
and media planners, 279–83
selecting best, 19
Media testing, 410–15
Media translation, 410, 415–20
Media values, 227
Media vehicles, 2, 19–21, 303–41
and ad positions, 324–27
audiences of advertising in, 
59–63
combining, 297–98
evaluating and selecting, 19–21
Internet, 327–41
loyalty to, 46
measurements of, 55–63, 
78–79
and media values, 304
qualitative values for, 319–24
quantitative values for, 304–19
reach, composition, and cost-
eﬃ  ciency of, 304–10
MediaBank, 168

 
Index 
477
Mediamark Research and Intelli-
gence, LLC (MRI), 56, 168–70
audience measuring by, 74–77
estimates of product usage by, 
198, 423
media comparatives by, 314–15
qualitative values by, 321
target selection by, 176, 181, 
186–88
Mediapost, 421
Medium (term), 2–3. See also 
Media
Memory, short-term, 51–52
Merchandising, 309–10
Message
size limitations of, 260, 263, 265
uniqueness of, 226
Message dispersion, 121
Message weight, 106, 214–15
Metropolitan statistical areas 
(MSAs), 80, 194–96
Micropolitan statistical areas 
(μSAs), 194
“Mind, Mood and Moment” pro-
cess, 189–90
Mobile advertising, 241, 259–61
Mobile audiences, 254
Mobile Internet usage, measur-
ing, 76
Monitor-Plus, 156–64
Monthly sales patterns, 206–7
Mosaic USA, 170–71
MPA (Magazine Publishers of 
America), 426
MPlanner, 421
MRI. See Mediamark Research and 
Intelligence, LLC
MRI+ (website), 426
MSAs. See Metropolitan statistical 
areas
Multimedia integration, 270
Multiplier, 381
μSAs (micropolitan statistical 
areas), 194
NAA (Newspaper Association of 
America), 426
NAB (National Association of 
Broadcasters), 425
Naples, Michael J., 132
Narrowcasting, 359
National Association of Broadcast-
ers (NAB), 425
National Consumer Survey (NCS), 
75, 170, 423
NCS. See National Consumer 
Survey
Net costs, 380
Net reach, 120
Net unduplicated audience, 116
NetView, 329, 330, 333
Network delivery (for 
test-marketing), 414
Network radio, 365
Network regional time, 373
Network television
buying time on, 369–73
costs of, 352–54
coverage for, 85, 90
problems with, 369–73
Networks, cellular, 260–61
New media, 267–71
New products
introduction of, 224, 295–96, 
389
test marketing of, 401–2
Newspaper Association of America 
(NAA), 426
Newspaper designated markets, 
195–96
Newspaper supplements, 160–61, 
239, 247–48, 363–64
Newspapers, 11
and audience reading habits, 
22–23
beneﬁ ts of using, 238, 242–44
buying advertising in, 363–64, 
376
coverage for, 84–86
CPM for, 60
custom inserts in, 364
GRPs for, 107
limitations of, 244–45
measuring audiences of, 74–75
Monitor-Plus for, 161
positioning in, 326
and run of paper, 363
Niche media, 14
Nielsen Company, 10, 168–69, 413, 
424
geographic divisions made by, 
192–94
radio surveys, 73, 377
retail sales surveys, 203
television ratings, 21–22, 24–25, 
68–72, 94, 96, 159
Nielsen Mobile, 161
Nielsen Online, 75–77, 329
Nielsen People Meter (NPM), 
68–70, 83
Nielsen Television Index, 101, 102
Noise levels, 226
Nonmeasured media, 271–72
Nontraditional media, 12–13
NPM. See Nielsen People Meter
OAAA. See Outdoor Advertising 
Association of America
Objective-and-task budget method, 
384–85
Objectivity, 24–25
Obsolescence, 253
Oﬃ  ce of Management and Budget 
(OMB), 194
OMB (Oﬃ  ce of Management and 
Budget), 194
Online media, 13–14. See also 
Internet advertising
Opportunistic buys, 372–73
Opportunities (in market strategy), 
141, 143
Opt-in advertising, 260, 367
Ostrow, Joseph, 228
Outbound advertising, 261
Outdoor advertising, 241, 263–65
audiences for, 77, 427
coverage for, 85
GRPs for, 107
Monitor-Plus for, 161
Outdoor Advertising Association 
of America (OAAA), 107, 427
Out-of-Home Advertising Source, 
40
Out-of-home media
buying, 367–69
coverage with, 91–92
measurement of, 77, 138
Out-of-home video, 242, 266–67, 
368–69
Packaging, of network television, 
370
Paid keywords, 338–40
Painted bulletins, 368
PAL system, 390, 392–93
Parade, 22n.6, 363–64, 419
Part-barter/part-cash syndication, 
357
Partial sponsorships, 373

478 
Index
Pass-along readers, 82. See also 
Secondary readers
Payout plans, 391, 394–96
Pay-per-click (PPC), 338–40
Peckham, James, 384
Penetration, of media classes, 247, 
252, 258
Perceived value (of brand), 226
Percent of sales budget method, 
381–83
Personal quality, of media classes, 
259, 261
PI (cost per inquiry) advertising, 
354–55
Pink Sheet, 81
Pixels, 365
Place-based media, 268, 269
Planning, media. See Media 
planning
Planning target, 283–84
Plummer, Joe, 22
PMSA (Principal Metropolitan 
Statistical Area), 194
Point of purchase, 260, 265
Pointlogic, 300
Poltrack, David, 61
Pop-up ads, 367
Portable People Meter (PPM), 56, 
73, 83
Positioning, 309–10, 315–16, 
324–27
Post-buy analysis, 43, 53, 347–48
Posters, 367–68
Potential audience size, 79–80
PowerPoint, 9
PPC (pay-per-click), 338–40
PPM. See Portable People Meter
Preprinted color inserts, 243
Priemer, Gus, 134, 282
Primary readers, 82
Principal Metropolitan Statistical 
Area (PMSA), 194
Print media, 2. See also speciﬁ c 
types
circulation of, 55, 79–80
CPM for, 60
Internet resources for, 426
reach in, 115–16
translations in, 418–20
Privacy, 261
PRIZM, 170
Problem recognition (in buying 
process), 53
Product, place, price, and promo-
tion (four Ps), 54–55
Product placement, 239–40, 
252–53
Production costs, 389
Products
availability of, 208
diﬀ erentiation among catego-
ries, 133–34
history of, 141
image of, 253
for Internet display, 257–58
introduction of, 224, 295–96, 
389
protection of, 316
restrictions on, 317
test marketing of, 401–2
usage of, 388
Proﬁ t margins, 388
Program audience, 96
Project Apollo, 137
Projections, 96
Pro-rata budgeting, 297
Protection, product, 316
Psychographics, 141, 186, 188
Pulsing patterns, 235
Purchase
frequency of, 388–89
point of, 260, 265
as step in buying process, 53
Qualitative values (media vehicles), 
221–22, 319–24
Quantcast, 333, 335
Quantitative values (media 
vehicles), 221–22, 304–19
Quick*Views, 158, 163
Quintiles, ﬁ xed, 123
RAB (Radio Advertising Bureau), 
425
Radio, 240
audience accumulation in, 
82–83
beneﬁ ts of, 253–54
buying time on, 376–77
coverage with, 85, 88–89
exposure to, 56
limitations of, 254–55
measuring audiences of, 73–74
media translations in, 417–18
network, 365
spot, 160, 365
Radio Advertising Bureau (RAB), 
425
Radio Marketing Guide and Fact 
Book for Advertisers, 425
Radio Metro Area (RMA), 95
“Radio Today” report, 424
Randomized block designs, 407–8
Rate cards, 359
Ratings
average audience, 96
broadcast, 94–102
C3, 11, 52, 96–100
deﬁ nition of, 61–62
DMA, 62
household, 77
Nielsen, 21–22, 24–25, 68–72, 
94, 96, 159
Reach, 81, 110–21, 125–29
of cable television, 251
combined, 117–18
and coverage, 113–15
duplication of, 118–21
eﬀ ective, 132
and eﬀ ective frequency, 227–32
as element of media strategy, 
285
and frequency, 127–29
growth of, over time, 114–16
in media plan, 223–27
of out-of-home video, 266
previous levels of, 209
of print media, 115–16, 246, 306
of sponsored search, 258
types of, 112–13
Readers
core, 322
pass-along (secondary), 82, 245, 
246, 248, 311–12
primary, 82
Reading days, 320–21
Recall, for outdoor advertising, 
264
Recency theory, 65, 135–37, 260
Recent-reading technique, 74–75
Recipes, 317
Recordimeter, 70
Relationship building, 259
Relish, 364
Rentrack, 72
Repetition, 121
Request-For-Information (RFI) 
platform, 48
Requests for proposal, 167

 
Index 
479
Response function
deﬁ nition of, 55, 58–59
and eﬀ ective frequency, 130–31
of media classes, 258, 260, 266
veriﬁ cation of, 261
Restrictions, product, 317
Retail trading zones, 195
RFI (Request-For-Information) 
platform, 48
Rich media, 366–67
ROP. See Run of paper advertising
ROS (run of station) schedules, 358
Run of paper (ROP) advertising, 
245, 363
Run of station (ROS) schedules, 358
S. C. Johnson, 298–99
Sagan, Carl, 109
Sainsbury model, 118
Sales & Marketing Management, 
171–72
Sales analysis, 196–99
Sales channels, conﬂ ict between, 
257
Sales patterns, monthly, 206–7
Sales promotions, 208
Sales strategy, overall, 152–53
Sales volume, 389
Samples, product, 243
Satellite radio, 73
Scantrack, 403, 413
Scarborough Research, 86, 198, 423
Scatter buys, 372
Scatter syndication, 357
Scheduling, 233–36, 295, 307–10, 
411
“Seal of Approval” (Good House-
keeping), 55
Search engine marketing (SEM), 
258–59, 338–40. See also 
Sponsored search
Search engine optimization (SEO), 
338, 340–41
Seasonal advertising, 260
Secondary readers, 82, 245, 246, 
248, 311–12
SeeSaw Networks, 369
Selectivity, of media channels, 244, 
245, 248, 249, 251
SEM. See Search engine marketing
Semantic satiation, 47
SEO. See Search engine 
optimization
Servers, third-party ad, 377
Service providers, cellular, 260–61
Service Quality Analytics Data 
(SQAD), 347, 350, 356, 424
Set-top boxes (STBs), 67, 72
Share of audience, 98
Share of voice (SOV), 214–15, 300
Shelf-space model of media plan-
ning, 135–37
Shelter magazines, 361
Short-term buys, 372
Short-term memory, 51–52
Showings, 367
SimmonsLOCAL, 170
Simplicity, of outdoor advertising, 
264
Single source media, 423–24
Sirius XM Satellite Radio, 73
Situation analysis, 16, 140–41
Skew, 123
Smith, David L., 14, 338
SOV. See Share of voice
Special markets, 173
Special-event network program-
ming, 373
Specialized media, 14
Spending levels, 411
Spill-in, 412–13
Spill-out, 412–13
Sponsored links, 339
Sponsored search, 32, 240, 258–59
buying time on, 338–41
in creative strategy, 151
Sponsorships, 373
Spot radio, 160, 365
Spot television
buying time on, 374
case study, 217–19
coverage for, 85, 89
Monitor-Plus for, 160
Spry, 364
SQAD. See Service Quality Analyt-
ics Data
SQAD Radio, 365
SRDS, 172
SRDS Direct Marketing List Source, 
Th e, 261
SRDS Out-of-Home Advertising 
Source, 268
S-shaped response curves, 131
Standards, mobile advertising, 260
Starch studies, 316
STBs. See Set-top boxes
Storyﬁ nder, 186–87
Straight-barter syndication, 357
Straight-through advertising, 234
Strategy planning, 175–236. See 
also Marketing strategy
budget in, 149–50
components of marketing strat-
egy, 141–54
and creative strategy, 150–51
dealers and distribution in, 152
eﬀ ective frequency and reach in, 
227–32
and geographic market, 190–205
and geographic weighting, 
209–22
marketing mix in, 148–49
marketing objectives in, 145, 148
outline of, 146–47
and overall sales strategy, 
152–53
reach and frequency in, 223–32
and scheduling, 233–36
and target audience, 176–90
and test marketing, 153–54
and timing factors, 205–8
Subjective budgeting systems, 385
Super Bowl, 47
Supplemental information, 256–57
Supplements, newspaper, 239, 
247–48, 363–64
Suppliers, of out-of-home video, 
266
Supporting medium, radio as, 254
Survey of Buying Power, 171–72
Survey of the American Consumer, 
169
SymphonyIRI, 400. See also Infor-
mation Resources, Inc. (IRI)
Syndicated television, 136, 357, 374
TAB (Traﬃ  c Audit Bureau), 12, 77
Taco Bell, 52–53, 142
Tags (interactive television), 48
Target audience(s), 176–90
analysis of, 34, 35
for cable television, 251
creating, 55
diﬃ  culty in reaching, 388
index number analysis of, 
181–85
lifestyle analysis of, 186–90
media habits of, 35–39
in media strategy, 283–84

480 
Index
for out-of-home video, 266
psychographics of, 186, 188
for radio, 253
Target rating points (TRPs), 106
Tatham, Arthur, 143
Taylor Nelson Sofres (TNS), 72
TaylorMade, 32
Technology, 5, 68
Teenage Research Unlimited, 177
Telephone books, 14
Telescoping, 74
Television, 239. See also speciﬁ c 
types
audience accumulation in, 
82–83
buying time on, 372–73
C3 ratings for, 11, 52, 96–100
changes in, 5
costs of advertising on, 349–57
coverage for, 88–89
exposure to, 56
limitations of, 249–50
and magazines, 245
market case study, 217–19
measuring audiences for, 68–72
media translations in, 417–18
and media usage, 47
Monitor-Plus for, 159–60
Nielsen ratings for, 21–22, 
24–25, 68–72, 94, 96, 159
positioning in, 326–27
reasons for using, 249
in traditional mass media, 10
Television Bureau of Advertising 
(TVB), 425
Television comparatives, 314–15
Telmar Computer Services, 422–23
Test marketing, 153–54, 401–10
Testing, 397–420
and experimenting, 397–401
and market mix modeling, 
399–401
media, 410–15
and test marketing, 401–10
Th ird-party ad servers, 377
“Th ree hit” theory, 130
“Th ree Screens” of video, 10
Th ree-day commercial ratings. See 
C3 ratings
Th resholds, 134
Time pressures, 23
Time spent reading, 321
Timing (of advertising), 33, 205–8, 
369–70
TiVo, 48, 72
TNS (Taylor Nelson Sofres), 72
Total audience, 116
Trade associations, 173
Trade publications, 173
Traditional mass media, 4, 5, 
10–12, 274
Traﬃ  c Audit Bureau. See TAB
Transit coverage, 85, 265
Transit media, 241, 265–66, 368
Translation, media. See Media 
translation
Travel Channel, 5
Travel Michigan, 8, 9
TRPs (target rating points), 106
TV Dimensions, 172
TVB (Television Bureau of Adver-
tising), 425
Unbalanced frequency distribu-
tions, 123
Uniqueness of message, 226
Universal Search, 341
Universe, 84
Up-front (long-term) buys, 372
U.S. Census Bureau, 173, 192
USA Weekend, 22n.6, 363–64, 419
VAC (Veriﬁ ed Audit Circulation), 
426
Validity, 407
Value added (term), 270
Vehicle distribution, 79
Vehicle exposure, 55, 79
Vehicles, media. See Media vehicles
Veriﬁ ed Audit Circulation (VAC), 
426
Vertical (term), 176
Video
out-of-home, 242, 266–67, 
368–69
in traditional mass media, 10
Video Consumer Mapping study, 
50–51
Video search, 341
Video signatures, 159
VISTA service, 80, 323
Volatility Score, of magazines, 
318–19, 321, 322
Wall Street Journal Magazine, 
247
WARC (World Advertising Re-
search Center), 422
Ware, Britta, 323
Web radio, 73
Websites, 21, 258. See also Internet 
advertising
Week of Workshops, 422
Weight
gross, of media, 107
message, 106, 214–15
Weighting, geographic. See Geo-
graphic weighting
Wheel of Marketing, Th e (James 
Peckham), 384
Women’s magazines, 248, 329–30, 
359–60
World Advertising Research Center 
(WARC), 422
Xerox, 288
Yellow Pages, 14
Yesterday-reading technique, 75
Zeltner, Herbert, 144–45
Zip code marketing, 170–71, 314

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Jack Z. Sissors spent more than 40 years teaching and working in media at 
Northwestern University before retiring with the rank of professor emeritus. He 
created and edited The Journal of Media Planning and directed various media 
symposia for media planners. He worked on the Advertising Research Foundation’s 
committees on single-source data, effective frequency, and media model building. 
Before working in academia, he held positions with Leo Burnett and other adver-
tising agencies.
Roger B. Baron is senior vice president, director of media research at DRAFTFCB. 
He received a BA in communications and public policy from the University of 
California, Berkeley, and an MA in telecommunications from the University of 
Southern California. Following graduate school he spent three years on active duty 
as a Supply Officer in the U.S. Navy, retiring with the rank of captain in the U.S. 
Naval Reserve.
 
His professional experience includes five years at Leo Burnett in media research 
and as a media planner and supervisor on the Kellogg cereal account. He then spent 
12 years at D’Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles in San Francisco—the last four as VP/
media director. In 1987, he returned to Chicago and assumed the post of media 
research director at Foote, Cone & Belding, now DRAFTFCB.
 
Mr. Baron is active in the Advertising Research Foundation, the American 
Association of Advertising Agencies, the Media Rating Council, and the Market 
Research Council. He is also a past president of the Media Research Club of 
Chicago. Baron is an accomplished computer programmer and has developed sev-
eral computer models for media planning.  He is married and has two adult sons. 
Outside the office he spends time reading, working around the house, and driving 
his midlife-crisis Audi convertible.

