
Real-World Skills for the
Aspiring Motion Graphics Artist
AFTER EFFECTS
TRISH & CHRIS MEYER
4th Edition
Version CC

DEDICATED to the After Effects team, past and present: from those hearty 
pioneers at the Company of Science and Art (CoSA) who revolutionized our 
industry, to the current innovators at Adobe who keep this vital program fresh.
Fourth edition published 2016
by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
and by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2016 Trish and Chris Meyer
The right of Trish and Chris Meyer to be identified as authors of this work has been asserted by 
them in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
Third edition published by Focal Press 2013
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilized in any form 
or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including 
photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without 
permission in writing from the publishers.
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and 
experience broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices,  
or medical treatment may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in 
evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein.  
In using such information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety 
of others, including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility. 
Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for 
identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
An application has been submitted for this material.
ISBN: 978-1-138-64307-9 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-138-64308-6 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-62954-4 (ebk)
Publisher’s Note: This book has been prepared from camera-ready copy provided by the authors.
Additional materials are
 
 available on the companion website at www.routledge.com/cw/meyer

iii
Table of Contents
 d Pre-Roll   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  
1
Exploring the After Effects landscape.
 
1 project structure
 
2 main Application window
 
3 Tools panel; Project panel
 
4 importing footage
 
5 Footage panel
 
6 transparency and alpha channels
 
8 Composition panel
 
9 Timeline panel
 
x Introduction
 
xi Getting Started
 d Lesson 1 – Basic Animation   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 20
Building your first animation while you learn a typical After Effects workflow.
 20 composition basics
 22 starting a project; creating folders
 23 importing footage; alpha channels
 24 creating a new composition
 25 adding layers to the Comp panel
 26 changing property values (scrubbing)
 27 animating Position; the motion path
 28 previewing the animation
 28 navigating between keyframes
 28 managing the comp view; zooming
 29 applying Easy Ease In
 29 adding the foreground layers
 30 duplicating and replacing layers
 31 more precise placement; snapping  
and grids
  32 adding solid layers
 32 applying, copying, and pasting effects
 34 dragging footage to the Timeline panel
 36 editing motion paths; spatial keyframe types
 38 animating Scale
 39 animating Rotation; animating Opacity
 40 rendering
 42 importing layered Photoshop and  
Illustrator files
 10 Layer panel
 11 Info, Preview, Audio panels
 12 Effects & Presets; Effect Controls;  
other panels
 13 workspaces; stacked panels
 16 previewing
 17 work area
 18 preview behaviors

TABLE OF CONTENTS
iv
 d Lesson 2 – Advanced Animation   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 44
Manipulating keyframes to create more refined animations.
 44 keyframe basics 
 46 Anchor Point overview
 47 Anchor Point tool
 48 motion control moves
 50 Graph Editor
 51 speed versus value graphs
 52 panning and zooming time
 53 editing graph curves
 54 easing animations
 55 improving the timing;  
Graph Editor Sets
 56 Separate Dimensions
 60 Motion Sketch
 61 smoothing keyframes
 62 Auto-Orient
 63 Motion Blur
 64 Roving keyframes
 65 Time-Reverse Keyframes
 66 Hold keyframes
 68 time display and timecode 
 d Lesson 3 – Editing Layers and Effects   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 70
Learning how to trim layers and enhance them using blending modes and effects.
 70 layers and stacking order
 71 moving layers in time
 72 trimming layers
 73 trimming in the Layer and Footage panels
 74 slip editing
 75 Sequence Layers keyframe assistant
 77 looping footage
 78 image sequences
 79 changing the frame rate; Time Stretch
 80 applying effects
 82 blending modes
 84 effects and solids
 85 effect motion path
 87 Effects & Presets panel; searching  
for effects
 89 animation presets
 91 Behavior presets
 92 layer styles
 94 adjustment layers
 95 filmic glow trick
 96 property links with effects
 97 third-party effects
 98 higher-quality scaling

TABLE OF CONTENTS
v
 102 masking tools; creating mask shapes 
 104 Free Transform Points
 104 masking in the Layer panel; Ellipse tool
 105 Mask Feather
 106 animating a mask path
 107 creating a vignette; Mask Expansion
 108 masking with the Pen tool (Bezier masks)
 110 effecting a masked area
 111 mask path interpolation; First Vertex
 112 Mask Interpolation keyframe assistant
 113 effects that can use the mask path; 
Scribble effect
 114 Mask Modes and multiple masks
 115 Mask Opacity
 116 creating and editing RotoBezier masks
 117 Audio Spectrum effect
 118 Rigid Mask Tracker
 120 Face Tracking
 122 variable mask feathering
 126 Alpha Track Matte
 128 nesting a track matte composite
 130 Luma Track Matte
 131 animating matte layers
 132 Stencil Luma and Stencil Alpha
 134 Color Keying; Keylight; greenscreen
 136 Key Cleaner and Advanced Spill 
Suppressor
 139 effects with track mattes and stencils
 d Lesson 4 – Creating Transparency   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 100
Using masks, mattes, stencils, and keying to cut out portions of a layer.
 d Lesson 5 – Type and Music   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 140
Animating text and working with music are essential to motion graphics design.
 161 adding the Wiggly Selector
 162 rendering with an alpha channel
 164 multiple selectors and animators
 166 using text animation presets
 168 saving text animations as presets
 169 editing Photoshop text layers
 170 adding audio to a comp
 171 spotting audio; using layer and  
comp markers
 172 mixing and enhancing audio
 141 creating basic text
 145 creating text Animators;  
Range Selectors
 147 animating text Position
 148 animating text Rotation and Opacity
 149 randomizing the order of characters
 149 creating cascading text; working with 
selection Shapes
 151 setting the text Anchor Point
 152 animating by words
 153 title safe areas
 154 animating text Blur and Tracking
 155 text on a path
 156 Per-character 3D animators
 159 Ease Low and Ease High

TABLE OF CONTENTS
vi
 d Lesson 7 – Expressions and Time Games   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 206
Using expressions and playing with time.
 208 using the pick whip to create expressions
 209 altering expressions
 210 stabilizing shadows
 212 matching value ranges (the linear expression)
 214 looping keyframes
 215 expression tips
 216 the wiggle expression
 217 expression controls
 217 keyframing the wiggle expression
 218 creating a master controller
 219 converting sound to keyframes
 220 frame blending 
 221 Pixel Motion
 222 Pixel Motion Blur
 223 stop-motion tricks; Preserve  
Frame Rate
 224 Preserve Frame Rate with effects
 225 adding handle with freeze frames
 226 time remapping (varispeeding)
 228 using the graph editor to smooth 
time
 d Lesson 6 – Parenting and Nesting   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 174
Grouping layers to make them easier to coordinate.
 174 parenting, nesting, and expressions defined
 176 assigning a parent
 177 parenting, opacity, and effects
 178 parenting with null objects
 180 nesting to group layers; using guides
 182 editing precomps
 184 nesting a common source
 185 navigating composition hierarchies
 187 sizing precomps
 190 precomposing a group of layers
 192 precomposing a single layer
 194 render order explained
 195 splitting work between comps
 196 precompose options compared
 196 using precomposing to reorder
 198 edit this, look at that (ETLAT)
 200 continuous rasterization
 202 collapsing transformations
 204 compound effects
Comp1
Composite All Layers
FLATTEN
Masks
Effects
Transform

TABLE OF CONTENTS
vii
 d Lesson 8 – 3D Space   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 230
Adding a new dimension to your animations.
 232 moving and rotating layers in 3D space
 234 multiplaning effects
 236 3D motion paths
 237 multiple views
 238 adding a camera; camera settings
 239 using the camera tools; 3D views
 240 moving and animating cameras
 242 building a camera rig
 244 layer and camera auto-orientation
 246 camera depth of field blur
 248 3D lights
 250 Material Options
 252 casting shadows
 254 Light Transmission
 256 Light Falloff
 276 Warp Stabilizer
 279 Reversible Stabilization
 281 point-based tracking and stabilization
 282 creating track points
 284 applying stabilization
 285 when tracks go wrong
 286 2D motion tracking
 287 applying a motion track
 288 tracking interlaced footage
 288 Radio Waves effect
 289 applying tracks to effect points
 291 planar tracking with mocha AE CC
 294 pasting the mocha track into After Effects
 295 mocha Shape
 298 3D Camera Tracker
 299 defining the plane; moving the target
 300 creating a Track Null; parenting
 302 adding 3D text
 302 creating a shadow catcher
 304 Rolling Shutter Repair
 d Lesson 9 – Track and Stabilize   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 274
A key to visual effects work is removing or re-creating camera movement.
 258 adjustment lights
 259 Ray-traced 3D renderer
 260 extrusion and beveling
 262 Fast Previews
 263 bending footage layers
 264 transparency; index of refraction
 266 reflections
 268 environment layers
 269 ray-tracer image quality
 270 CINEMA 4D renderer 
preview

TABLE OF CONTENTS
viii
 d Lesson 10 – Paint, Roto, and Puppet  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 306
Exploring Paint, Roto Brush, and the Puppet tools.
 307 basic painting
 309 erasing strokes
 309 Paint Channels
 310 Paint blending modes
 310 brush duration bar
 311 animating strokes
 312 revealing a layer
 313 creating organic textures
 314 tablet settings
 315 cloning
 316 transforming strokes
 317 basic Roto Brush
 320 Roto Brush workflow; the base frame
 322 propagating strokes
 324 corrective strokes
 326 refining the matte
 328 Refine Edge
 330 Puppet Pin tool
 331 animating puppet pins
 332 Puppet Overlap tool
 333 recording puppet animation
 333 Puppet Starch tool
 334 multiple shapes
 d Lesson 11 – Shape Layers   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 336
Creating, animating, and extruding vector-based shapes.
 336 creating a shape layer
 337 Fill and Stroke settings; editing shapes
 338 multiple shapes
 339 Even-Odd Fill
 340 shape effects
 342 Bezier Shapes; Pen tool
 344 Convert to Bezier Path
 345 Create Shapes from Text
 346 Repeater
 348 compound shapes; Merge Paths
 350 gradients
 352 Wiggle Transform
 354 advanced strokes; dashes and gaps
 356 animating a stroke
 357 Create Shapes from Vector Layers
 358 extruding shape layers

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ix
 362 
CINEMA 4D user interface
 363 Project and Render Settings
 364 frame rate issues
 366 navigating the Viewport
 367 Extrude object
 368 Light Setups
 369 Materials
 370 texture selection and projection
 371 Ambient Occlusion
 372 cameras
 373 keyframing
 374 
CINEWARE Render Settings
 375 extract camera and lights
 376 creating text
 378 importing Illustrator files
 379 Fracture object
 380 Plain effector
 383 render quality; 
Interactive 
Render Region
 384 Target Light
 408 Resources, Production Credits
 d Appendix   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 396
Perfecting your renders, as well as dealing with other video issues.
 396 rendering: under the hood
 397 render templates
 398 Adobe Media Encoder
 400 rendering movies; rendering 
sequences
 401 issues that affect image quality
 403 flickering
 403 subpixel positioning
 404 resampling in action
 405 non-square pixels
 406 fields and interlacing
 407 3:2 Pulldown
 d Lesson 12 – CINEMA 4D Lite   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 360
Integrating a 3D application into the After Effects timeline using CINEWARE.
 409 Index
 386 using the After Effects camera
 387 Object Buffers
 390 importing model
 392 shadows
 393 using layers
 394 Multi-Pass

x
It’s simple: We’re attracted to interesting imagery that 
moves. Adobe After Effects excels at creating that imagery, 
be it an opening title for a television program, special 
effects for a commercial or film, an animated banner in  
a sports stadium or at a trade show, entertaining content  
on websites or mobile devices, or informational displays  
in shopping malls, at airports, or even in elevators or cars.
In contrast to editing software that specializes in creat-
ing a linear story, the power of After Effects is in layering 
multiple images to quickly convey visually rich or complex 
ideas. After Effects is a deep, mature tool that allows you 
to combine video, film, photographs, scans, illustrations, 
PDFs, 3D objects, text, and music in myriad ways, plus 
create elements of your own. You can arrange, animate, 
and treat these components, and render the result to a wide 
variety of formats for print, the web, video, film, and more. 
In short, master After Effects, and you will be able to craft 
compelling imagery for a wide variety of clients and tasks. 
Our goal in After Effects Apprentice is to teach you the 
most important core features through a series of practical, 
hands-on exercises. Every lesson is grounded in our own 
real-world experiences, showing you the right way to use 
the right feature for a given task. We start out with simple 
animations to help you over that first step in learning the 
program, eventually working up to animating text, motion 
tracking and stabilization, and creating 3D worlds. 
This book has been designed for a variety of users. Our 
primary target is a beginner or student new to motion 
graphics or visual effects. Or, perhaps you are a video editor 
or web designer who wants to learn “just enough” After 
Effects to help raise the quality of your productions. 
On the other hand, you might also be a longtime or 
former user looking for a refresher course – especially as  
you upgrade from an older permanent license version to  
a Creative Cloud subscription. In this edition we’ve made 
a point of also adding in some more advanced material, 
from motion tracking tricks and refined text animation 
techniques, to integrating MAXON CINEMA 4D Lite which 
is now bundled with After Effects. 
We realize different people learn differently: Some prefer 
to read; some prefer to watch. That’s why in addition to 
this book, we’ve created a companion After Effects Apprentice 
video series. We’ve tried to make this book as concise as 
possible while still conveying the information we think you 
need; the videos allow us to expound a bit more and explain 
what we’re thinking when we make certain design or tech-
nical decisions. The videos are available through multiple 
outlets, listed on onlinetraining.crishdesign.com. Whether 
you choose one or use both, we hope After Effects Apprentice  
helps you on your path to a 
 fulfilling career.
Trish & Chris Meyer
Crish Design
Introduction
Learning After Effects is key to creating a wide range of moving imagery.

xi
 Learning any new piece of software can be as frustrating as 
it is rewarding – especially if you are unfamiliar with how it 
works or what a book is trying to tell you to do. Although 
we know you’re probably anxious to jump right in, please 
take a few moments to read these introductions – we 
promise they will help reduce your stress level later on:
• This Getting Started section explains how to use this book 
and its associated files.
• The following Pre-Roll section will help familiarize you 
with the “lay of the land” inside After Effects including  
the user interface, plus explain how projects are structured.
In a program as broad as After Effects, there are features 
you will use almost every day, and those you may use only 
once a year or less. The exercises in this book are designed 
to familiarize you with the core tools and features in After 
Effects (plus a few important “gotchas”), preparing you for 
many of the real-world tasks you will encounter.
Software Versions
To use this book, you need to install Adobe After Effects 
CC 2014, CC 2015, or later on either your Macintosh or 
Windows computer. If you do not have a licensed copy, 
Adobe makes fully functional time-limited trial versions 
available on its website at www.adobe.com/downloads/.
This book, including all of the screen shots, was created 
using After Effects CC 2015.1 (also known as version 13.6). 
However, most of the lessons can be executed using After 
Effects CC 2014, as the project file format is the same. The 
main difference is the preview mechanism has changed; 
we’ll discuss that in more detail in the Pre-Roll section.  
And, we’ll mention when a feature is not supported in CC 
2014. You can also load these project files in later versions 
of After Effects, as the core features often remain the same.
Preferences
We assume you are starting out using the default After 
Effects preferences. If you have modified your current pref-
erences, created custom templates, and so on, and want 
to save those preferences, launch After Effects and open 
Preferences > General. At the bottom of that dialog, click 
Reveal Preferences in Finder/Explorer. Copy that file to a 
safe place. Then, to restore the default preference settings, 
quit After Effects, and hold down Command+Option+Shift 
on Mac (Ctrl+Alt+Shift on Windows) while re-launching 
the program. You can always later copy your saved prefer-
ences file back to where you found it to restore your custom 
settings. (Note that if you have only added Render Settings and 
Output Module templates, and have not changed the program’s 
Preferences, you will be okay using your current Preferences file.)
Project Files
The project files and source media that go along with this 
book are online at www.routledge.com/cw/meyer. You will 
need to create an account on that site, including answering 
a question about the content of the book.  
Getting Started
How to use this book including project files, version numbers, and terminology.

In the Project panel, twirl open one of the subfolders inside 
the Sources folder; missing items will be displayed in italics. 
Double-click a missing item: This will bring up a standard 
file navigation dialog where you can locate that item. Select 
the missing file from its corresponding Sources subfolder 
on your drive and click OK. Provided the folder relation-
ship between the project and the source files it uses has 
not changed, After Effects will search for the other missing 
items and link them in as well. 
Virtually all of the material inside this book and in the 
downloaded exercise files are copyright protected and are 
included only for your own learning and experimenta-
tion. (The United States map in Lesson 6 and the Indian 
Territories map in Lesson 9 are in the public domain.) 
Respect copyrights: Some day, it could be you who made 
that cool graphic…
After you’ve registered, return to that page and click on the 
Project Files menu. Then click on the link for the Lesson 
you’re on, and a .zip archive should download automat-
ically. Decompress that .zip archive, and you will have a 
self-contained folder with everything you need for that 
lesson. Copy that folder to a convenient place on your 
computer’s drive and double-click the .aep project file 
inside it. After opening any lesson’s project for the first 
time, you should use Edit > Save As and give it a new name. 
This will ensure you keep the original version intact for 
future reference. 
If After Effects is unable to find a project’s source files, 
you will see a warning dialog when the project opens.  
xii
By the way: Just because we provide you with all of the 
materials you need, this does not mean you can’t use your 
own images and video instead! Indeed, we encourage you 
to use your own sources and to try your own variations on 
our ideas instead of just typing in the numbers we give you. 
There are gazillions of motion graphics styles out there. 
Although we can demonstrate only a few of them here,  
you will learn what you need to re-create a lot of what  
you see on TV – or in your own imagination.
Fonts
With Creative Cloud, Adobe changed to a system where 
fonts are not necessarily installed with a new piece of soft-
ware. Instead, you can use Adobe Typekit – included with 
your Creative Cloud subscription – to add fonts you may 
not have currently installed. 
If you open a project 
file and get a message 
that a font is missing, 
open the Adobe Creative 
Cloud application and 
look under Assets > 
Fonts. If needed, enable 
Typekit, then click Add 
Fonts from Typekit. 
Search for the missing 
fonts, click Use Fonts, 
then Sync Selected 
Fonts. After a pause 
for them to download, 
reload your project.
System Requirements
Adobe lists the system requirements for After Effects on the 
associated web page: www.adobe.com/products/aftereffects/
systemreqs. That page lists the minimum requirements; the 
bigger display you have, the more pixels you can see, while 
more RAM allows you to create longer previews to check 
your results as you work. 
If you plan to take advantage of the Ray-traced 3D 
renderer (introduced in the last third of Lesson 8 and 
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
g If sources are missing, After Effects 
will display a warning dialog . 
f Missing sources appear in italics 
in the Project panel . Double-click a 
missing item to relink the source . 

HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
xiii
Shortcuts and Phrases
After Effects runs on both Mac OS X and Windows and  
is nearly identical on both platforms. That said, there are 
numerous elements in an After Effects project to keep 
straight, such as files, compositions, effects, and expres-
sions. To help indicate what we’re talking about, we have  
a handful of particular type conventions and shorthand 
phrases that we will be using throughout this book:
• Words in bold refer to the names of files, folders, layers, 
or compositions you are using. These words refer both to 
files on disk and to items inside your project file.
• “Words in bold and in quotes” are text you should 
enter – such as the name for a new composition or solid. 
(Obviously, you should not enter the quotes themselves.)
• Words in this typewriter font indicate code 
inside an expression.
• Menu items, effects, and parameter names do not get  
a special font.
• When there is a chain of submenus or subfolders you 
have to navigate, we separate links in the chain with a > 
symbol: For example, Effect > Color Correction > Levels.
• To help make you a faster user, we mention keyboard 
shortcuts throughout this book. They are indicated by a 
special keyboard font. The Macintosh shortcut – such as 
Cs to save a project – is presented first and is colored 
red (followed by the Windows shortcut – such as Ls – 
in parentheses, colored blue). Keyboard shortcuts that are 
the same on both platforms are in gray, such as typing  
s to reveal a layer’s Scale parameter. 
The modifier key icons we use mean:
 
C 
Command (Mac)
 
O 
Option (Mac)
 
L Control (Windows)
 
A 
Alt (Windows)
• After Effects makes extensive use of “context-clicking”  
on items to reveal additional menus or options. To context-
optionally used in portions of Lessons 9 and 11), you really 
want to have a compatible NVIDIA CUDA-enabled GPU 
(Graphics Processing Unit) in your video card or on the 
motherboard of your laptop. This greatly accelerates ray-
traced rendering. You can still use the ray tracer without 
it, but performance may be so poor that you could become 
discouraged. Compatible GPUs are listed on the System 
Requirements web page mentioned above.
In addition to Adobe’s processor and operating system 
restrictions, we personally suggest that you use an extended 
keyboard (or that you learn how to access the function 
and numeric keypad equivalent keys on your laptop), and 
a three-button mouse; one with a scroll wheel is a nice 
bonus. We also recommend installing an SSD (Solid State 
Drive) to use for your applications and/or the After Effects 
cache. The disk used for this cache is set in Preferences > 
Media & Disk Cache. 
Retina and HiDPI Displays
An increasing number of laptops and even desktop com-
puters now feature “Retina” (Apple) or “HiDPI” (Microsoft) 
displays. After Effects supports these by rendering its user 
interface elements at higher resolution. 
However, there is a gotcha with how content is  
displayed: A magnification or “zoom” level of 100% on 
a normal display corresponds to a zoom level of 200% 
on a Retina display, or either 150% or 200% on a HiDPI 
display. If you have one of these displays, whenever we 
say something like “set the Magnification level to 100%,” 
translate that number to what is supported by your 
display. For example, all of the screen shots in this book 
were taken on a Retina iMac or MacBook Pro, so you will 
see 200% in the bottom left corner of panels where you 
might expect to see 100%.

click, use the right mouse button; we will 
say “right-click” in the instructions. If you 
are using a Macintosh single-button mouse, 
hold down the L key while clicking. On 
a Macintosh laptop’s trackpad, you can also 
click with two fingers to “right-click.”
• After Effects makes a distinction between 
the normal section of the keyboard and the 
numeric keypad, especially when it comes 
to the E or R key. When you see 
R, we mean the carriage return key that 
is part of the normal keyboard; when you 
see E, we mean the key on the numeric 
keypad. If you are using a keyboard without 
a numeric keypad, in place of E press 
CR (LR).
• The Preferences are located under the 
After Effects menu on the Mac (and under 
the Edit menu on Windows). We’ll just say 
“Preferences” and assume you can find them.
Finally: Relax! Have fun! It’s only software; 
you can’t break it. And remember there is 
often more than one solution to any problem 
– especially when artistic expression is 
involved. Rather than give you a set of rigid 
recipes that must be followed exactly, our 
hope instead is to give you a set of skills that 
you can draw on to realize your own ideas 
while using this wonderful program.
Website Tech Support
If you have trouble accessing the supporting 
web materials for this title, please contact 
our publisher’s customer service department 
using the Feedback form on the companion 
website at www.routledge.com/cw/meyer
or by using the contact form at  
www.routledge.com/info/contact.
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
xiv
For Instructors
Each lesson in After Effects Apprentice demonstrates essential features 
through a series of hands-on exercises. They are supplemented with sidebars 
and numerous tips that cover technical issues and other features of inter-
est. Additionally, many of the lessons end with a series of challenges you 
can give your students to have them build on what they’ve learned. We’ve 
also included a lot of real-world tips, including how to work with clients and 
potential delivery requirements. We hope that you will find this format useful 
and can adapt it to your specific needs.
This book was created using After Effects CC 2015. After Effects CC 2014 
will load the same project files without modification, and it contains most 
of the features covered in this book (the big difference being how previews 
function, as discussed in the following Pre-Roll section). If necessary, you 
can load the project files into CC 2014 or CC 2015 and use File > Save As > 
Save a Copy As CC to run them on the first Creative Cloud version, but again 
some of the more recent features may not be supported. 
We have created a companion After Effects Apprentice video training 
series which you may find useful to watch. In addition to getting to see  
and hear us actually walk through the steps, we share a lot of our thought 
process as we make design and technical decisions. This background may 
aid your own understanding, as well as provide additional ideas for how to 
explain individual concepts to your students. For distributors of these video 
courses, check our web page onlinetraining.crishdesign.com.
The contents of this book and its accompanying files online are copy-
righted. Each student must own his or her own copy of this book. You may 
not duplicate this book’s text, project files, and associated materials for your 
students if they do not own a copy of this book. As long as they do, you  
may download the project files and media from the companion website  
www.routledge.com/cw/meyer and copy them to their individual computers, 
or you may place the files on a classroom server for them to access. Provided 
each student owns the book, you are free to then modify the tutorials and 
adapt them to your specific teaching situation without infringing copyright. 
Thank you for helping protect our copyrights, as well as those who  
contributed sources – your cooperation enables us to write new books and 
obtain great source materials for your students to learn from. We hope you 
and your students enjoy the results.
Qualified teaching professionals can request evaluation copies of our 
books directly from Routledge. Please search for the book title on  
www.routledge.com and follow the Comp Exam Copy link.

I
n this section, we want to give you the “lay of 
the land” inside After Effects and show you how 
to move around inside it. You will learn what 
each of the major sections of the user interface  
are called and what they are for, as well as how to 
rearrange the interface to best suit the task at hand. 
The After Effects Project
Before we explain the pieces of the puzzle, we should first 
explain the puzzle they are part of: namely, an After Effects 
project. A project file points at the footage – sources or 
pieces of media – you want to use to build one or more  
compositions. After Effects does not store a copy of the 
footage inside the project file; just a pointer to it. When 
you move a project to a different folder or computer, 
you need to move the footage it uses as well. You can use 
movies, still images, sequences of stills, or audio files – all  
in a variety of formats – as footage items. 
When you add a piece of footage to a composition  
(or “comp” for short), it becomes a layer inside that comp. 
Once a footage item is a layer in a comp, you can arrange  
it in relation to other layers, animate it, and add effects  
to it. Another way of thinking of a comp is as the place 
where your sources get composited together into the  
final image.
You can create virtually unlimited compositions in a 
project, as well as virtually unlimited layers in each comp. 
The same footage item can be used in more than one  
comp, as well as more than once in the same comp.  
You can even use comps as layers inside of other comps 
(this is called nesting, which we’ll cover in Lesson 6).
1
 d In This Lesson
 
1 
project structure
 
2 
main Application window
 
3 
Tools panel
 
3 
Project panel
 
4 
importing footage
 
5 
Footage panel
 
6 
transparency and alpha channels
 
8 
Composition panel
 
9 
Timeline panel
 
10 
Layer panel
 
11 
Info, Preview, Audio panels
 
12 
Effects & Presets; Effect Controls; other panels
 
13 
workspaces; stacked panels
 
16 
previewing
 
17 
work area
 
18 
preview behaviors; customizing previews
Pre-Roll
Exploring the After Effects landscape.
d tip
Help!
Pressing ! opens the After Effects Help in your web browser. 
This landing page contains a number of helpful links to specific 
topics. It also includes a Search box to find specific information.
 d Getting Started
Optional: If you’d like to follow along, download the file 
archive for Pre-Roll (as discussed in How to Use This Book) 
and decompress it. It contains the project file and sources  
that we used to create the figures in this chapter.

The Application Window
The box all of these puzzle pieces fit into is the After Effects 
Application window. By default, this window is designed to 
fill your entire display, although you are able to resize it  
by dragging on its edges or lower right corner, and reposi­
tion it by grabbing it along its top. 
This window is split into several different sections  
known as frames. Each frame can hold one or more tabbed 
panels; a full list of available panels is included under the 
After Effects Window menu. 
Each panel type holds a different kind of information,  
such as what footage items you have already imported 
into your project or which effects you have applied to a 
PRE-ROLL
2
layer. Different types of panels – or in some cases, multiple 
copies of the same type of panel – can share the same frame, 
appearing as tabs along the top of the frame. A blue outline 
around a panel indicates it is currently “forward” or selected.
An arrangement of panels and frames is called a work-
space. After Effects comes with a number of prearranged 
workspace layouts; you can also save your own custom 
arrangements. You will learn how to do this later in this 
Pre-Roll. But first, let’s become familiar with the panels  
you will encounter most often, what information they 
hold, and how you will use them while working on a 
project in After Effects. You won’t be putting them to use 
quite yet; that will be your task in the following lessons!
Tools panel
Project panel
Composition panel
Timeline panel
Effects & 
Presets
Libraries
Preview
Info / Audio

The Tools Panel
The After Effects main window 
 features a toolbar along its top.  
This provides an easy way to switch 
between different tools until you learn 
the keyboard shortcuts. The keyboard 
shortcuts are worth learning; they’ll 
make you a much faster After Effects 
user. If a tool you want is grayed out, 
make sure you select a comp or a  
layer – it should then become active. 
Selecting some tools (such as Type or 
Paint) may also open related panels 
that go along with it.
PRE-ROLL
3
The Project Panel
The Project panel is the central hub  
of an After Effects project. Whenever 
you import a footage item or create  
a new composition, it appears in the 
Project panel. 
The Project panel displays infor­
mation such as file type, size, and 
location in a series of columns. You 
can drag the horizontal scroll bar at 
the bottom of this panel to view the 
different columns. Selecting a column 
header causes After Effects to sort the 
Project panel based on this column’s 
information; look for the arrow along 
its top to tell which one’s selected. To 
add or subtract a column, right­click 
on any column header and select or 
deselect it from the list that appears.
When you select a footage item in 
the Project panel, a thumbnail of it 
will appear at the top of this panel, 
along with its vital statistics. If you  
are already using it in a composition, 
Options Menu
Interpret 
Footage
New 
Comp
Delete Selected 
Project Items
Project Flowchart 
View
New 
Folder
Project  
Settings
g The Project panel. Use File > Close Project to close 
the project without quitting After Effects. (Closing the 
Application panel will quit After Effects.)
Columns (click to sort by;  
drag heads left/right to reorder; 
right-click to show/hide)
QuickSearch
g The Tools panel. A small triangle beside 
the tool means that this tool has options, 
in which case its shortcut key will cycle 
between some or all of them. The Tools 
panel is the only one that cannot be docked 
into a different frame. 
Selection 
Tool (v)
Zoom 
Tool (z)
Camera 
Tools (c)
Shape 
Tools (q)
Type Tools 
(Ct/ 
Lt)
Brush Tool 
(Cb/
Lb)
Clone 
Stamp Tool 
(Cb/ 
Lb)
Roto Brush Tool  
(Ow/ 
Aw)
Eraser Tool 
(Cb/ 
Lb)
Puppet Pin 
Tools  
(Cp/ 
Lp)
Hand 
Tool (h)
Rotate 
Tool (w)
Pan Behind 
(Anchor Point) 
Tool (y)
Pen Tool 
(g)
Local/World/View 
Axis Modes
Snapping Modes

D Importing Footage
The most common way to “import” 
sources (known as footage) into an 
After Effects project is to choose File > 
Import. This will open a dialog where 
you can browse to the file you want  
(see figure to the right). 
Two other options include opening 
Window > Media Browser or choosing 
File > Browse in Bridge, which opens a 
handy file-browsing utility standardized 
across multiple Adobe applications. 
Bridge needs to be installed separately 
with Creative Cloud. 
After Effects itself cannot capture or 
digitize its own footage; you will have to 
do that in a video editor such as Adobe 
Premiere Pro.
To change parameters for your 
imported footage, select it in the 
Project panel and click on the Interpret 
Footage button at the bottom of the 
panel. These settings will be discussed 
in the Transparency and Alpha Channels 
section starting on page 6 .
the name of the comp it appears in will be added to a popup menu 
to the right of its name. 
If you need to change some  settings for a footage item – such as 
its frame rate or alpha channel type (more on that later) – select it 
in the Project panel, then click the Interpret Footage button at the 
bottom of this panel.
As projects become more complex, the Project panel can quickly 
become messy. Fortunately, you can create folders inside this 
panel to keep things  organized. To do this, click on the Create a 
New Folder icon along the bottom of this panel or use the menu 
command File > New > New Folder. You can double­click a folder 
or use the arrow to its left to open and close it; to rename a folder, 
select its name, press R, type in the new name, and press 
R again. (You’ll be creating folders in Lesson 1.)
PRE-ROLL
4
The File Import dialog contains important options such as whether you want to import 
the file as a single footage item or as a composition (handy for layered Photoshop and 
Illustrator files), whether you want to import a sequence of stills as a movie, and whether 
to import an entire folder in one go. (You’ll learn about importing footage in Lesson 1.)

PRE-ROLL
5
The Footage Panel
The Footage Panel is where you can inspect your footage 
in isolation before it is added to a composition. You can 
double­click any footage item in the Project panel to open 
it in the Footage panel. By default, this panel opens in the 
same frame as the Comp and Layer panels. If you open 
more than one footage item, you can switch between them 
by clicking on the name of the currently open footage item 
along the top of the panel, which will reveal a list of other 
previously opened items.
The buttons along the bottom of the Layer panel affect 
how you view this source, such as its magnification, res­
olution, and color channels. If your source has an alpha 
channel, clicking Toggle Transparency Grid will display 
h The Footage panel.
Close 
Panel
 
Options Menu
Toggle 
Viewer Lock
Viewer 
Dropdown Menu
Grid & 
Guide 
Options
Take 
Snapshot
Show Last 
Snapshot
Preview Time
Toggle  
Transparency 
Grid
Ripple Insert 
Edit
Overlay Edit
Primary Viewer 
Toggle
(for External 
Video Preview)
Always 
Preview 
This View
Region of 
Interest
Toggle Pixel Aspect  
Ratio Correction
Show Channel & Color 
Management Settings
Time Marker 
(relative to the  
start of the source)
Time Ruler
(trimmed portion 
shown in color)
Set Out Point  
to Current Time
Set In Point  
to Current Time
Magnification
Reset 
Exposure
Adjust 
Exposure
your cutout source against a checkerboard. This is partic­
ularly useful for troubleshooting problem alpha channels 
(discussed in the next couple of pages). If you are viewing a 
video source and you are separating its fields, you can step 
through its individual fields in the Footage panel, instead 
of just viewing whole interlaced frames. The arcane subjects 
of fields, interlacing, and pulldown are explained in the 
Appendix at the end of this book.
You may pretrim your sources in the Footage panel and 
then add just this trimmed portion to the currently open 
composition (the “Edit Target” displayed along the bottom 
of the panel). This procedure is discussed in the sidebar 
Trimming in Other Panels in Lesson 3.

PRE-ROLL
6
Transparency is a crucial concept in After 
Effects. Video footage is typically opaque 
from edge to edge, as are photographs. 
However, some sources have partially or  
fully transparent areas: for example, text or  
a logo in an Illustrator footage item is trans-
parent beyond the outlines of its characters 
or shapes. Transparency makes it more  
interesting to composite layers on top of 
each other, as an upper layer can reveal  
portions of the layers underneath without 
having to resort to tricks such as crossfading.
The transparent areas of a layer are 
defined by its alpha channel. When you 
import a footage item into After Effects 
and use it in a composition, each pixel of 
that source is defined by four channels of 
information: the red, green, and blue color 
channels (which are added together in 
varying strengths to create different colors, 
including black and white), and the alpha 
channel, which defines the transparency of 
that pixel. You can modify the alpha channel 
of a layer by changing its Opacity parameter 
(which scales the alpha channel values of 
every pixel in the layer by the same amount) 
and by other more targeted techniques such 
as masks and mattes (described in Lesson 4).
Viewing the Alpha Channel
There are two main ways to view the trans-
parency of a layer or composite of layers in 
the Footage, Composition, and Layer panels:
Toggle Transparency Grid: Enabling the 
Transparency Grid in any of the viewer panels 
displays a gray and white checkerboard 
pattern where the layer or composite of 
layers is transparent. This will be familiar to 
those used to working in Photoshop. If you 
enable the Transparency Grid and don’t see 
a checkerboard pattern, the entire viewer is 
covered by an opaque source. 
When the Transparency Grid is toggled 
off, these transparent areas are filled in with a 
color: black in the case of the Footage panel, 
or the composition’s background color in the 
case of the Composition and Layer panels. 
The Background Color is set at the bottom 
of the Composition > Composition Settings 
dialog under the Basic tab. 
The Background Color should be thought 
of as a temporary color used primarily for 
display purposes. If you “render” (output 
or export; discussed in the Appendix) a 
composition to a format that supports an 
alpha channel, this color will disappear and 
be replaced by transparency. If you want a 
solid color to indeed fill your background, 
you should use a solid or shape layer. Solid 
layers are demonstrated in Lesson 1. Shape 
layers – the subject of Lesson 11 – can also 
be created using gradients instead of just a 
solid color.
Show Alpha Channel: Clicking on the Show 
Channel button along the bottom of a viewer 
panel and choosing Alpha converts the view 
to a grayscale image, where white represents 
fully opaque, black represents fully trans-
parent, and shades of gray represent partial 
transparency. This makes subtle details such 
as semitransparent shadows much easier to 
see, without getting distracted by a layer or 
background’s color.
D Transparency and Alpha Channels
g The Transparency Grid is a checkerboard displayed in the 
areas where the layer (or composite of layers) is transparent.
g Choosing Show Channel > Alpha displays just the alpha channel 
as a grayscale image, with white = opaque and black = transparent.

PRE-ROLL
7
Straight versus  
Premultiplied Alpha
There are two different types of images with 
alpha channels: straight and premultiplied. 
These terms refer to how the color channels 
are handled in the areas where the image is  
partially transparent:
Premultiplied means the layer’s background 
color is mixed (“multiplied”) with the original 
color of the image, depending on how trans-
parent it is in that area. Although the color 
channels may appear normal in isolation, the 
result is minutely less color fidelity when you 
composite it on top of another layer.
Straight means the color is full strength in the 
partially transparent areas; it is not diluted 
by the background color. Although the color 
channels may look strange in isolation, this 
approach results in higher quality and it is 
what is expected by editing software receiv-
ing a footage item with an alpha channel.
If the alpha channel is “interpreted”  
incorrectly, you may see a colored fringe 
around the partially transparent edges of 
an object. Changing the alpha type in the 
Interpret Footage dialog – discussed next – 
often fixes this.
Interpreting the Alpha Type
The alpha channel type, as well as other 
parameters used to process source footage 
such as its Frame Rate, Pixel Aspect Ratio, 
whether or not it is “interlaced,” and more, is 
set in the Interpret Footage dialog. Select a 
footage item in the Project panel and choose 
File > Interpret Footage > Main to open 
this dialog; you may also click the Interpret 
Footage button along the bottom of the 
Project panel. The Footage panel displays 
the source with these interpretations applied.
When determining the alpha channel for a 
footage item, clicking the Guess button often 
g Viewing the color channels of a footage 
item or composite with a straight alpha 
channel may look odd. For example, the 
partially transparent shadow around the  
text in this example appears solid black;  
the translucent bar across the top appears 
solid yellow. Don’t worry: Once the alpha 
channel is factored in, it will look fine.
(but not always!) works. If you see a colored 
fringe, either change the alpha type or try a 
different color for the Premultiplied option. 
Black is the most common color that is multi-
plied into the semitransparent areas; choose 
white when an object was shot against a 
white background and cut out in a program 
such as Photoshop. If the footage was  
previously “color keyed” 
(Lesson 4) and has a pre-
multiplied alpha, choose 
the color the object was 
shot in front of, such as 
green or blue.
e The Interpret Footage 
dialog can be opened at 
any time if you feel you 
interpreted the alpha 
channel incorrectly during 
the import process.

PRE-ROLL
8
The Composition Panel
The Composition panel – “comp” for short – is where you 
see your creations. It displays the current frame of your 
composition. You can also directly click on and drag the 
objects (layers) that make up your comp. After Effects 
renders only the pixels that fall inside the comp’s image area 
(which we’ll refer to sometimes as the Comp viewer), but 
you also have a pasteboard beyond this area to work with. 
The buttons along the bottom of the Comp panel affect 
how you view the composite of your layers, such as mag­
nification, resolution, color channels, and mask and shape 
path outlines. The tab along the top includes a popup 
menu that allows you to select which open comp to view.
Whenever you set Magnification to something other 
than 100% (200% on an Apple Retina display; 150% or 
200% on a Windows HiDPI display depending on your 
hardware), by default After Effects interpolates the pixels  
in the composite image as needed to fill the display. A good 
choice for the Footage, Comp, and Layer panels is Fit Up 
to 100% (or 150 or 200, depending on your monitor), as 
this will resize the viewer to take advantage of the available 
space on monitors with fewer pixels such as small laptops.
Note that Magnification is the zoom level, while 
Resolution decides how many pixels After Effects is going  
to process (Full means every pixel, Half is every second 
pixel in the width and height, and so on). Setting the 
Resolution popup to Auto will keep these two in sync – 
such as Full Resolution when at 100% Magnification, or 
Half Resolution when at 50% Magnification. This gives  
the fastest playback speeds and avoids the common mistake 
of processing at Full Resolution when viewing at less than 
50% magnification – why spend time rendering more pixels 
than your monitor is set to display?
Always 
Preview 
This View
Grid & 
Guide 
Options
Toggle Mask 
& Shape Path 
Visibility
Take 
Snapshot
Show 
Last 
Snapshot
Preview 
Time
Show Channel & 
Color Management 
Settings
Resolution
Viewer  
Dropdown Menu
Toggle  
Viewer Lock
Magnification
Options 
Menu 
Region of 
Interest
Toggle 
Transparency 
Grid
3D 
View 
popup
Select 
View 
Layout
Comp Flowchart
Bring Timeline Forward
Fast Previews Menu
Toggle Pixel Aspect Ratio Correction
h The Composition panel.
Reset 
Exposure
Adjust 
Exposure
Primary Viewer Toggle
(for External Video Preview)

PRE-ROLL
9
The Timeline Panel
The Timeline panel gives you details on how the current 
composition is built: what layers it includes, what order 
they are stacked in, where they start and end, how they  
are animating, and what effects have been applied to them. 
It is the left brain to the Comp panel’s right brain.
The Timeline panel is broken down into two sections:  
the timeline section to the right, which shows how the 
layers have been trimmed and any keyframes applied  
to them, and a series of columns to the left that display 
 different switches, information, and options. The timeline 
section is also where the Graph Editor (introduced in 
Lesson 2) is displayed.
g The Timeline panel. Click on a tab to bring that particular Composition and Timeline pair forward. Note that we have moved the A/V 
Features column (the column with the eyeball) to the right, so that the keyframe navigator arrows in this column are closer to the keyframes.
Like in the Project panel, you may select which columns 
to view by right­clicking on any column header and select­
ing or deselecting it from the list that appears. These columns 
may also be dragged left and right to reorder them – for 
example, we prefer placing the A/V Features column to  
the right near the timeline, rather than its default position 
of far left. Once you reorder these columns, all new  
compositions you create will have the same arrangement.
The Timeline panel  features a tab for each currently open 
comp, which makes it easy to see which ones are open 
and to quickly jump between them. Note that the Render 
Queue docks into the same frame as the Timeline panel.
Expand or Collapse the Layer Switches Pane
Expand or Collapse the Transfer Controls Pane
Expand or Collapse the In/Out/Duration/Stretch Panes
Zoom Out 
(in time)
Comp 
Marker Bin
Time 
Display
Close
Tab
QuickSearch
Hide Shy 
Layers
Draft 
3D
Composition 
Mini-Flowchart
Enable 
Frame 
Blending
Enable  
Motion Blur
Graph 
Editor
Zoom In 
(in time)
Bring Comp 
Panel Forward
Zoom In to 
Frame Level, 
or Out to 
Entire Comp
Click to toggle  
Source Name/Layer Name
Animation 
Stopwatch
Current Time 
Indicator (CTI)
Column Headers
(drag left/right to reorder; 
right-click to hide/show)
Switches
Comp 
Tab
Options 
Menu
A/V Features
“Twirly”

PRE-ROLL
10
The Layer Panel
When you add a footage item to a comp, it becomes a layer 
in that comp, where it is combined with the other layers 
you’ve added. But there are times when it is hard to view 
what is going on with a particular layer in the Comp panel 
because it’s fading out, has been effected or scaled down 
really small, has been dragged out of the visible area of the 
comp, or the view is otherwise obscured by other layers. 
This is where the Layer panel comes in.
Double­click a layer in either the Comp or Timeline 
panels to open it in its own Layer panel. By default, it  
docks into the same frame as the Comp panel. The most 
interesting feature here is the View popup along the bottom 
right side. This gives you the option of viewing a layer 
before or after a mask (cutout shape) has been applied,  
as well as after it has been processed by any effects you 
have added to the layer. If you have added more than  
one effect, you can view it at any point in the effect chain. 
The Render checkbox to the right of the View popup is a 
quick and easy way to view the layer with or without the 
modifications selected in the View menu.
A layer may be slid in time in a comp’s overall timeline. 
That means the local time in a layer – how far you are  
from its start – often will not match the master time in  
the comp. A second timeline and time marker in the  
Layer panel shows you where you are in the layer.
If the layer is a precomp (Lesson 6), double­clicking will 
open that comp. To open the Layer panel for a precomp, 
press O on Mac (A on Windows) when you double­click.
h The Layer panel.  
Some functions can be performed 
only in the Layer panel.
Close 
Tab
Options 
Menu
Toggle 
Viewer Lock
Viewer 
Dropdown Menu
Grid & 
Guide 
Options
Take 
Snapshot
Show 
Channel
Show Last 
Snapshot
Preview Time
Magnification
View 
Menu
Show Rendered Result 
for Current View
Always 
Preview 
This View
Region 
of 
Interest
Time Marker  
(relative to start of layer)
Time Ruler  
(relative to layer)
View 
Modes
Set Out Point  
to Current Time
Set In Point  
to Current Time
Primary 
Viewer 
Toggle
(for 
External 
Video 
Preview)
Reset 
Exposure
Adjust 
Exposure
Bring Comp Forward
Toggle Transparency Grid
Toggle Pixel Aspect Ratio Correction

PRE-ROLL
11
Other Panels
There are numerous other types of panels that we will be putting to work 
throughout this book; we will explain them in more detail as we need them. 
However, so they won’t seem so foreign when you first encounter them, here’s  
a quick overview of some you will use most often:
g The Audio panel.
g The Info panel displays information 
such as the color currently under the cursor 
(above). Click on the three lines to the right 
of the panel’s name to open its Options 
menu (right). Here you can change the color 
display to Percent, Web, and more.
Preview
The Preview panel is where you’ll find 
the transport controls in After Effects. 
It also contains options that control 
previewing, which we’ll discuss in 
detail at the end of the Pre-Roll.  
Once you learn the shortcuts such  
as ß for Play and • or 
ª to move by a single frame, 
you will rarely use the top section of 
this panel.
Audio
The Audio panel features volume  
controls for the selected layer, plus  
a level meter that is active while  
previewing a comp or layer. 
When working with audio, you  
can also view the audio waveform  
in the Timeline panel; this is covered 
in Lesson 5.
g The Preview panel.
First 
Frame
Previous 
Frame
Next 
Frame
Play/ 
Pause
Last 
Frame
Mute 
Audio
Loop
Options
g Hide the Preview Options to 
allow more room for other panels. 
Move your cursor over the area 
below Preview until the icon 
changes, then drag up.
Info
The top portion of this panel gives 
a numeric readout of the color 
value underneath the cursor in a 
Comp, Layer, or Footage panel, 
as well as the cursor’s current 
X/Y coordinates in those panels. 
Additional useful information – 
such as the in and out points of 
a selected layer – are displayed in 
the lower portion of this panel.

PRE-ROLL
12
Effects & Presets
This very handy panel provides a quick and 
easy way to select and apply effects and  
animation presets. The QuickSearch box along 
the top provides a search function for your 
effects and presets, which is usually faster  
than searching through a menu or file dialog. 
This panel is demonstrated in Lesson 3.
Effect Controls
When you add an effect to a layer, the effect’s 
settings and user interface appear in this panel, 
docked into the same frame as Project. The 
shortcut is to select a layer and press #. If 
you need to get back to the Project panel and 
can’t see it, click on the Overflow menu in the 
upper right corner and select Project.
You can also reveal effects applied to a layer 
by selecting it and typing e, which will twirl 
them open in the Timeline panel. From there, 
you can click on the “twirly” arrow next to  
the effect’s name to reveal its parameters.
f The Effects & Presets 
panel. We will explain  
the different options 
available for searching  
and organizing effects  
and animation presets  
in Lesson 3. 
Character and Paragraph Panels
Covered in detail in Lesson 5, these are the  controls you need  
to help typeset text. Selecting Workspace > Text will open  
both panels. 
Paint and Brush Panels
After Effects contains a pretty nifty paint and clone engine, which 
will get a workout in Lesson 10. Selecting Workspace > Paint  
will open both panels. 
More Panels
Additional miscellaneous panels (such as Smoother, Align, 
Tracker, and more) will be covered as they are needed in various 
lessons. (Check the Index for specific references.)
d tip
Maximize Frame
To temporarily view a 
panel full screen, select 
it and press the tilde (~) 
key. Press ~ again to 
switch back to the normal 
multiframe view.
g The Effect Controls panel. 
Options 
Menu
Options Menu
Viewer 
Dropdown 
Menu
Toggle 
Viewer 
Lock
Overflow 
Menu
Close 
Tab
Toggle 
On/Off 
Effect
Reset 
Effect

Managing Workspaces
After Effects comes with a number of preset workspaces. 
These open defined sets of panels that come in handy for 
doing specific tasks. You select them by using the menu 
item Window > Workspace or by choosing one from the 
Workspace Bar along the top right of the Application 
window. Three workspaces – Essentials, Standard, and Small 
Screen – are shown in the bar by default, with an Overflow 
menu to the right that reveals more choices. You can also 
make the Workspace Bar larger or smaller.
The currently active workspace will either appear in blue 
in the Workspace Bar, or have a check mark next to it in 
the Overflow menu. Try a few different workspaces and 
notice how the panels and frames change. Some panels will 
display just their name tabs; this behavior is referred to as 
stacked panels – clicking on their tabs will toggle the entire 
panel open and closed. 
When you’re finished exploring, return to the Standard 
workspace. If the layout is a mess thanks to earlier 
experimentation, choose Window > Workspace > Reset 
“Standard” to Saved Layout.
Customizing a Workspace
You may toggle any panel open or closed by choosing it 
under the Window menu. All panels have an Options menu 
indicated by the three horizontal lines to the right of the 
panel’s name. The options near the top – including Close 
Panel, Close Other Panels in Group (those docked into the 
same frame), and Panel Group Settings > Close Panel Group 
– are universal to all panels. The options near the bottom 
are specific to that panel. Some panels also have a small “×” 
in their upper left corner that you can click on to close that 
panel (circled in the middle figure to the right).
If you want to give a frame more or less room, move  
your cursor over the area between frames until it changes  
to an icon of two arrows connected to two parallel lines 
(see figure to the right). When you see this icon, click and 
drag to balance the size of adjacent frames, such as those 
that hold the Project and Composition panels. This works 
when resizing a frame horizontally or vertically.
PRE-ROLL
13
The Workspace Bar, by default, displays three workspace choices, 
plus an Overflow menu with more choices. Drag the bar to  
the left of Essentials (circled) to make more or less room for 
workspace presets in the bar itself. 
Overflow 
Menu
Current 
Workspace
Workspace 
Options
Presets
g Every panel has an Options menu, indicated by the 
three bars to the right of its name. The options near the 
top, including the Panel Group Settings, are universal 
to all panels; the remainder are specific to that panel. 
h When the cursor is placed between frames, its 
icon will change to indicate you can click and drag to 
change the boundary between adjacent frames.

With the Standard workspace still selected, turn your 
attention to the column of frames along the right side of the 
Application window. The top frame has two panels docked 
into it: Info and Audio. The default in the Standard work­
space is for Info to be forward; click on the tab for Audio.
The Audio panel could benefit from being in a taller 
frame. Rather than extend its height, you can instead 
change where it is docked: Click on the Audio tab, then 
drag it until you are hovering over the center of the Effects 
& Presets panel (see figure far left). The center of the Effects 
& Presets panel will turn blue, indicating that if you were to 
release your mouse now, Audio would be docked into this 
frame instead. Keep the mouse depressed for now.
In addition to this central “drop zone” you will see four 
smaller zones around it. Drag to these and watch them 
highlight. If you release the mouse over one of these, you 
will create a brand­new frame for the Audio panel on that 
side of Effects & Presets. Finally, drag your cursor over the 
tab along the top of Effects & Presets until it highlights in 
blue: This option also means “add me to the same frame as 
this panel.” Release your mouse, and Audio will be tabbed 
into the same frame as Effects & Presets and Libraries.
Now click on the Window menu and select Smoother. 
It defaults into opening a new frame to the right of the 
Timeline panel and frame. Because this layout reduces the 
width of the timeline, feel free to move this panel as well: 
Drag Smoother’s tab and dock it into the same frame as 
Effects & Presets and Audio.
When multiple panels are docked into the same frame 
(known as a panel group), you may not be able to see all  
of their names. In this event, a double arrow icon will 
appear for the Overflow menu (circled in red below).  
Click on it and choose the name of the panel you desire 
from the menu that appears.
PRE-ROLL
14
d tip
Floating Windows
To convert a panel into a floating window, 
click on its Options menu and choose 
Undock Panel. To re-dock it into a frame, 
click on the panel’s name and drag it on 
top of another panel’s name.
Click on the Audio panel tab and drag it to the center of the 
Effects & Presets panel (left). Once you release the mouse, 
the Audio panel will be docked into the same frame (right).

Stacked and Soloed Panels
The user interface in After Effects CC has been constantly evolving. A recent 
addition is Stacked Panel Groups, which helps you optimize space in the list  
of panels that appear along the right side of the Application window.
Choose Essentials from the Workspace Bar or Window > Workspace. The 
most recently used panel will open fully and you see just the name tabs for the 
other panels. In this workspace, all of the panels along the right are stacked, 
plus they have an additional feature known as “solo mode” enabled. 
Click on the name tab for Info: The previously open panel will minimize to 
just its name tab, and the Info panel will be revealed. Click on the names for 
the different panels in this workspace to become familiar with the behavior. 
If some panels have been scrolled off the bottom of the frame, a scroll bar will 
appear along their right edge; click and drag it to access the other panels.
If you wish to keep multiple panels open, click the Options menu and select 
Solo Panel in Group to toggle it off. Now click on a currently collapsed panel’s 
name: the previous panel will remain open and the panel you clicked will open 
as well. Click on an open panel’s name to collapse it.
To disable stacking, open the Options menu and toggle Panel Group Settings 
> Stacked Panel Group off. It is possible to create multiple stacked groups inside 
a workspace, plus have other panels not stacked.
Open the Options menu for the Essentials workspace and choose Reset to 
Saved Layout. Then select the Standard workspace and do the same for it. 
Unless otherwise instructed, this is the workspace we assume you’ll be using  
for the remainder of this book.
PRE-ROLL
15
d tip
Small Tabs
Disabling Panel Group Settings > Small Tabs 
creates more space around a panel’s name at 
the top of the panel. This makes it easier to 
select on a touch-enabled device or a small 
screen that’s more challenging to navigate. 
Small Tabs has been disabled for all of the 
panels in the Small Screen workspace.
When both Stacked Panel Group and Solo 
Panel in Group are enabled, clicking on a 
panel’s name tab will expand that panel and 
collapse the previously expanded panel.
The Panel Group Settings inside a panel’s 
Options menu is where you turn the stacking 
and solo behaviors on or off.

Previewing
You will often want to preview your animation inside After Effects playing at 
normal speed (displayed as “realtime” in the Info panel) to check your work 
before you render. Previewing was overhauled extensively in After Effects CC 
2015, offering more interactivity as well as user customization.
Caching
In general, most of the preview behaviors will attempt to play back your com­
position in real time. However, After Effects may not be able to do so during the 
first playback pass – especially if After Effects has not had the opportunity to 
cache the frames in the composition.
Whenever you move the current time indicator to a new frame, After Effects 
must calculate the result of combining your various layers and any effects 
applied to them. The result is displayed in the Composition panel and saved 
to your computer’s RAM (Random Access Memory). A green line segment will 
appear below the Work Area Bar to indicate this frame has been cached. The 
next time you locate to this point in time, rather than recalculate the frame 
from scratch, it will be retrieved from RAM, which is much faster.
If your RAM fills up with cached frames, the ones that took a long time 
to render will be saved to a disk cache. This is indicated by a blue cache bar 
segment. When you close a project, all of the render­intensive cached frames  
are stored in this disk cache. Its location and size is set in Preferences > Disk  
and Media Cache; assigning it to your fastest drive will reduce the time needed 
to retrieve previously cached frames, making After Effects more responsive.  
You can also empty the disk cache from this same dialog.
PRE-ROLL
16
The first time you attempt to preview a 
composition, chances are it will play slower 
than real time (top) as it renders and caches 
all the frames. The next time those frames 
are previewed, they are more likely to play  
in real time (above).
A blue cache bar indicates a frame has been 
saved to disk; a green bar indicates it has 
been loaded into RAM. A blank bar indicates 
those frames have not been cached, perhaps 
because an edit was made during that 
segment of time (such as the last keyframe 
at the end of this timeline).
Whenever you change the contents of a composition, this “invalidates” the 
cache and you will see your blue or green cache bars disappear. 
If you ever return your composition to a previously cached state (for example, 
when you undo after a change you did not like), After Effects will search through 
your disk cache to see if those frames are still available to be retrieved.

Work Area
PRE-ROLL
17
As your compositions grow to be longer than 
a few seconds, you may want to focus on 
individual chunks of time within them rather 
than always previewing the entire length of 
the comp. That user-defined chunk of time  
is known as the work area.
The Work Area Bar appears between  
the stack of individual layers and the time 
markings in the Timeline panel. You can 
adjust its length by dragging its blue end 
caps or by placing the current time indicator 
at the desired frame and pressing b to 
define the beginning of the work area and 
n to define its end. The preview modes 
interact with this work area, as well as other 
functions such as rendering.
Click and drag the middle of the Work 
Area Bar to move it along the timeline while 
keepings duration intact. If you move the 
current time indicator later than the end 
of the work area, pressing b will slide the 
entire Work Area Bar to begin at the current 
time; otherwise, b and n will trim it. 
Double-clicking the middle of the Work Area 
Bar resets the work area to equal the entire 
length of the comp.
Work Area Options
Right-clicking the middle of the Work Area 
Bar presents additional options: 
Lift Work Area creates a blank area in the 
middle of your comp. This function splits and 
trims any layer bars inside the work area so 
they stop playing at the work area’s begin-
ning and resume at the work area’s end. The 
duration of the comp is not changed and the 
layers are not moved in time.
Extract Work Area is similar to Lift Work 
Area, but instead of leaving a blank area 
in the middle of your comp, this function 
deletes that segment of time from the com-
position. Any layers or remaining fragments 
of layers after the work area’s end are slid 
earlier in time by the duration of the work 
area, and the composition itself is shortened 
by the same amount.
Trim Comp to Work Area is the opposite 
of Extract Work Area: Any layer segments 
before the work area’s beginning and after 
its end are deleted and the comp is short-
ened to the work area’s duration. The time
of the work area’s beginning also becomes 
the time assigned to the first frame of your 
trimmed composition (this is known as  
the Start Timecode; it can be changed  
in Composition > Composition Settings).  
One way of working is to initially create  
a composition that is longer than needed,  
build your animation, and then trim the  
comp to just the segment you decide to 
keep, using Trim Comp to Work Area.
Right-click on the middle of the Work Area Bar to view additional options. Trim Comp 
to Work Area is particularly useful as it can remove space from the beginning of the 
composition; changing the Duration in Composition Settings only affects the ending frames.
The Work Area Bar is displayed just below the time markings in the Timeline panel.  
You can scrub its ends to trim it or use the shortcut keys b and n to set the beginning 
and end of the work area to the current time, respectively. Double-clicking the bar returns 
the work area to the full length of the composition.
Start
End
Work Area Bar

PRE-ROLL
18
d tip
Escape Key to Stop Previewing
´ is the “emergency stop” key to 
press to immediately stop a preview. 
It ignores the state of the cache and 
returns the current time indicator to 
its original position.
During preview, you will see two time 
indicators: the blue current time indicator 
(where edits take place) and the red preview 
time indicator (the frame currently displayed 
in the Comp panel). Pressing ß 
to stop a preview causes the blue current 
time indicator to jump to the blue preview 
indicator’s current position; pressing 
º leaves it at its original position.
Common Preview Behaviors
After Effects reserves several different key combinations to start and stop  
previews and allows you to customize the behavior of each one. We’re going  
to focus on the “Play From” and “Range” behavior of the two most common 
shortcut keys used to start a preview. Throughout this book, when we instruct 
you to preview your work, press one of these keys: 
ß Playback will start from the current time indicator and will loop 
(repeat) the segment of time defined by the work area (plus some extra if the 
current time indicator was initially outside of the work area).
º When pressing 0 on the numeric keypad on an extended keyboard, 
playback will start from the beginning of the work area and will loop the 
segment of time defined by the work area. (Mac users: If you don’t have an 
extended keyboard, you may press L0.)
During preview, a second red preview time indicator will appear in addition  
to the blue current time indicator. The red indicator shows which frame is  
currently being played.
These two keys also have different behaviors to stop a preview:
ß Playback will stop and the current time indicator will move to the 
time of the preview indicator when you stopped playback.
º If all of the frames inside the work area have been cached, playback 
will stop. If the frames have not all been cached yet, then just the already cached 
frames will loop; you will need to press º again to stop playback. In 
either case, the current time indicator keeps its original time.
As of After Effects CC 2015, you can edit your composition while a preview is 
still playing. If you need to move the current time indicator without stopping play­
back, press and hold the S key while dragging its head – otherwise, playback 
will stop. Of course, if you change the contents of your comp, you will invalidate 
your cache, and playback will most likely slow down while it is recalculated.
Customizing Preview
There are a total of six different preview start and stop keys, each with their 
own programmable behavior. To expose these options, drag open the Preview 
panel to its full height. The Shortcut menu near the top sets which key’s options 
are currently being displayed. Here are some of the more interesting functions 
beyond Range and Play From:
Include is a set of three switches that indicate whether video, audio, and graphic 
overlaps such as mask and motion paths will be included in the preview. You’ll 
notice that the preview shortcuts that use π (decimal point) disable the 
Current Time 
Indicator (blue)
Preview 
Time 
Indicator 
(red)

Previewing Audio
If your composition has audio, it will play smoothly only if your preview is 
running at normal speed (displayed as “realtime” in the Info panel). If the 
preview is playing slower than real time – even by a slight amount – the  
audio will either stutter or go silent (mute). This choice is set in 
Preferences > Previews > Audio. You may also temporarily mute 
the audio by clicking on the Mute Audio During Preview button 
at the top right of the Preview panel.
There will be occasions when you want to listen to the audio 
without worrying about video playback – for example, when  
locating specific words or musical events that you would like  
to synchronize an edit or keyframe to. In this situation, press 
π (decimal point) to start an audio­only preview (Mac  
users with a numeric keypad may press L.). After Effects 
quickly caches the audio internally and playback will begin almost 
immediately. The audio preview duration is not controlled by the 
normal preview range. “Spotting” audio using this technique is 
demonstrated in Lesson 5.
video switch, playing just audio. We suggest you enable the third one (Show 
Overlays) for the Sß preview.
Cache Before Playback allows you to calculate the RAM cache for the entire 
preview area before playback starts, avoiding the annoyance of a preview that’s 
not playing in real time. Some users enable this for their º preview to  
replicate the previous preview behavior in After Effects.
Skip provides the option of calculating and playing fewer frames during a 
preview to reduce time spent waiting for the cache to fill. The preview shortcut 
Sº sets Skip to 1, meaning every other frame is calculated and played.
Full Screen automatically maximizes the viewer to 100% (or larger, on high­
resolution displays) and surrounds it with gray to reduce distractions – great for 
when the client is watching over your shoulder.
If Caching, Play Cached Frames underneath Stop was described earlier:  
If enabled, this means the first time you try to stop a preview may result in  
After Effects playing a shortened version of the requested Range instead.
During the life of After Effects CC 2015, Adobe has regularly tweaked these 
defaults as well as the options available in the Preview panel; we would not be 
surprised if they changed again after this book is published. But after reading this 
section, you should have a good idea of the general behaviors; just study the con­
tents of the Preview panel to better understand exactly what After Effects is doing.
PRE-ROLL
19
If you do not like the default “stuttering” behavior of audio 
during a slow preview, you may temporarily mute the audio 
by clicking the Mute Audio During Preview button in the 
Preview panel (above), or enable the Preference > Previews > 
Audio: Mute Audio When Preview Is Not Real-time (below).
Drag the bottom of the Preview panel to 
reveal the extensive options you can set for 
each of six different preview start/stop keys. 
Hover your cursor over each choice to open 
a tooltip with a useful description.

Basic  Animation
I
n this lesson, you will learn how to build a typical 
After Effects project. Although the design itself 
is simple, you will learn principles you can use 
over and over again in the future. For example, you 
will see how to import sources while keeping your 
project file organized. As you add layers to a com-
position, you will learn how to manipulate their 
transform properties, as well as how to keyframe 
them to create animations. Along the way, you’ll 
learn important tricks and keyboard shortcuts. 
We’ll also discuss how to handle alpha channels  
as well as layered Photoshop and Illustrator files.
Composition Basics
In the Pre-Roll chapter, we discussed the basic hierarchy of an 
After Effects project: Sources are called footage items; when 
you add a footage item to a composition (“comp” for short), 
it is then known as a layer. Potential sources can include  
captured video, 3D animations, photographs or scans, 
images created in programs such as Photoshop or 
Illustrator, music, dialog…even film footage that has  
been scanned into the computer.
Layers are flat objects that can be arranged in a comp’s 
space and animated around that space. We’ll work in  
2D space (the X and Y axis) at first, adding the Z axis in  
Lesson 8, 3D Space. The order they are stacked in the 
Timeline panel determine the order in which they are 
drawn (unless they are in 3D space) – meaning that layer 1 
will appear in front of layer 2 in the Composition panel. 
Layers can also start and end at different points in time 
(more on moving and trimming layers in Lesson 3).
Lesson 1
20
Building your first animation while you learn a typical After Effects workflow.
 d Getting Started
Make sure you have downloaded the file archive for  
Lesson 1 (as discussed in How to Use This Book) and 
decompressed it. It contains the project file and sources  
you need to execute this lesson. Our versions of these 
exercises are in the project file Lesson_01_Finished.aep.
 d In This Lesson
  22 
starting a project; creating folders
 
23 
importing footage; alpha channels
 
24 
creating a new composition
 
25 
adding layers to the Comp panel
 
26 
changing property values (scrubbing)
 
27 
animating Position; the motion path
 
28 
previewing the animation
 
28 
navigating between keyframes
 
28 
managing the comp view; zooming
 
29 
applying Easy Ease In
 
29 
adding the foreground layers
 
30 
duplicating and replacing layers
 
31 
more precise placement; snapping and grids
  32 
adding solid layers
 
32 
applying, copying, and pasting effects
 
34 
dragging footage to the Timeline panel
 
36 
editing motion paths; spatial keyframe types
 
38 
animating Scale
 
39 
animating Rotation; animating Opacity
 
40 
rendering
 
42 
importing layered Photoshop and Illustrator files

Some properties (or attributes) – such as Position, Scale, and Rotation – are 
common to all image layers. Masks and effects can also be applied. Individual 
effect controls – such as Blur Amount – are referred to as parameters.
All properties in After Effects start out constant: You set them, and this is  
the value they have for the entire comp. However, it is very easy to enable  
keyframing for virtually any property, which means you can set what their values 
will be at different points in time. After Effects will then automatically interpolate 
or “tween” between these values over time. Once you enable keyframing,  
changing a property’s value automatically creates a new keyframe – you don’t 
have to explicitly say “make new keyframe.”
You have considerable control over how After Effects moves between keyframes. 
In this lesson, we’ll demonstrate editing the motion path for Position keyframes, 
and in the next lesson we’ll dive into further refining the speed at which After 
Effects interpolates between values.
A layer can be smaller or larger than the composition, and its “resolution” 
(pixels per inch) is ignored by After Effects. In addition to fading a layer in and 
out using its opacity, a footage item may also have an alpha channel that deter-
mines where the image is transparent and where it is opaque.
But before you start arranging and animating, you need to know how to make 
a new project and comp, as well as how to import sources – so let’s get started!
Frames from the animation you’ll be creating 
in this lesson. Movies courtesy Artbeats.com 
(clips VPK-FH100-15, AGG-FH109-04, A005-C003, 
and CC-FH101-74); bumblebee illustration 
courtesy Pond5 (clip #17961109).
Individual layer properties may be keyframed 
in the Timeline panel to create an animation. 
BASIC ANIMATION — Lesson 1
21
d factoid
File Format Support
The list of file formats that may be 
imported in After Effects is subject to 
change. For a current list, open the 
program, press ! to open the After 
Effects Help, select the “importing 
footage” option, then “Importing and 
interpreting footage items”, and finally 
“Supported import formats”. 

Starting a Project
In this first lesson, you’ll create a simple but fun animation. To see where you’ll 
end up, locate the movie First Animation_final.mov in this lesson’s folder and 
play it a few times in QuickTime Player. Bring After Effects forward when you’re 
done and we’ll guide you through building this animation from scratch.
1 When After Effects is first launched, the Start screen will open. Click the 
New Project button to create a new, blank project. At the top of the application 
window is a list of Workspaces; the default is Essentials. Select the Standard 
workspace instead. To make sure you are using the original arrangement of this 
workspace, select Reset to Saved Layout from Standard’s options menu.
2 The Project panel can quickly become a confusing mess of sources and 
comps. To avoid this, let’s create a couple of folders to help keep it organized:
• Click on the New Folder icon along the bottom of the Project panel. A folder 
called Untitled 1 will be created. It defaults to its name being highlighted; to 
rename it, type “Sources” and press R (on a Windows keyboard, this is  
the main E key – not the one on the extended keypad). You can rename it  
at any time; just select the folder and press R to highlight the name.
• Click in a blank area of the Project panel to deselect your Sources folder.  
Now create a second folder; rename it “Comps” and press R. 
(If the Sources folder was selected when you created the Comps folder, 
Comps will be nested inside Sources. Place it on the same level by dragging  
the Comps folder outside of the Sources folder.)
Saving a Project
3 Select File > Save to save your project. The shortcut is Cs on Mac  
(Ls on Windows). A file browser window will open; save your project file  
in this lesson’s folder (Lesson 01-Basic Animation) and give it a name that 
makes sense, such as “Basic Animation v1”. 
It is a good idea to give projects a version number so you can keep track of  
revisions; it also allows you to take advantage of the nifty File > Increment and 
Save function. Instead of just saving your project, Increment and Save will save 
your project under a new version number, leaving a trail of previous versions  
in case you ever need to go back. After Effects also has an Auto Save function;  
it’s under Preferences > Auto-Save.
2 To create a new folder, click on the 
folder icon along the bottom of the 
Project panel. Name the first folder 
“Sources”, and press R. Then create 
a second folder called “Comps” (below).
Lesson 1 — BASIC ANIMATION
22
1 When you create a new project, the 
default workspace is Essentials. Select the 
Standard workspace instead (above). Then 
click the trio of blue lines (below) and select 
Reset to Saved Layout to make sure you are 
starting with the same arrangement.

Importing Footage
It’s time to import some sources into your project: 
4 Select the Sources folder you created in Step 2. Then use the menu 
item File > Import > File. Navigate to the Lesson 01-Basic Animation 
folder you downloaded (as discussed in How to Use This Book) and open 
the folder 01_Sources. Select Bumblebee.tif and click Open.
The Import dialog will be replaced with an Interpret Footage dialog 
because this file has an “unlabeled” alpha channel. As we discussed in  
Pre-Roll, an alpha channel is a grayscale channel that sets the trans-
parency of the RGB color channels. There are two main types of alpha 
channels: Straight, which means the color in the RGB channels has been 
“painted beyond” the edges of the alpha channel, and Premultiplied, which means 
the color is mixed (“matted”) with the background color around the edges.
If you knew what type of alpha your file has, you could select it here. Since 
you don’t, click the Guess button. In this file’s case, After Effects will choose the 
Premultiplied – Matted With Color Black option, which is correct. Click OK, and 
it will appear in your Sources folder. At the top of the Project panel you’ll see a 
small thumbnail, along with its width, height, and aspect ratio. Its alpha channel 
is indicated by the + symbol in Millions of Colors+ (see figure to the right).
5 To keep things simple, we created a title in Photoshop for you and rasterized 
the text layer (you’ll learn about creating text in After Effects in Lesson 5).  
Make sure the Sources folder (or a file inside it) is still selected, and use the 
shortcut Ci (Li) to open the Import dialog. Select Flight-Title.psd 
and click Open. An options dialog will open next: Set the Import Kind popup 
to Footage, select Merged Layers, and click OK. Photoshop saves layers with a 
“labeled” alpha channel, so After Effects knows how to interpret them correctly. 
(We’ll cover importing a layered Photoshop file at the end of this lesson.)
6 Finally, double-click on an empty area of the Project panel – this will also 
open the Import dialog. Select the folder named Movies and click the Open 
button. This will import all the contents of the folder with a single click; it will 
also create a folder with the same name in the Project panel. Drag the Movies 
folder inside the Sources folder, then double-click it to reveal the items inside.
Feel free to double-click any source in the Project panel to view it in the 
Footage panel. If it’s a movie, tap ß to play it; tap again to stop playback. 
Note that you can also drag and drop from the Finder or Windows Explorer to 
import items, but that can be awkward as the After Effects application window 
tends to take up the entire screen. You can also import using Adobe Bridge by 
selecting File > Browse in Bridge. Once you navigate to the footage, right-click 
on it, and select Open with > Adobe After Effects from the menu that pops up.
BASIC ANIMATION — Lesson 1
23
4 continued  Select a source to see its 
thumbnail and details. You can expand the 
Project panel wider to see more details.
4 If a source has an unlabeled alpha 
channel, you’ll want to select the correct 
alpha channel type. After Effects has a Guess 
function to help.
5 Import Flight-Title.psd as a Footage 
item and merge layers.

Creating a New Composition
7 Select the Comps folder you created in Step 3. That way, 
the new comp you are about to create will automatically be 
sorted into it. Then either select the menu item Composition 
> New Composition, or use the keyboard shortcut Cn 
(Ln). A Composition Settings dialog will open in which 
you can determine the size, duration, and frame rate of your 
new comp. A good habit to get into with After Effects is 
naming your compositions as you create them. Enter  
“First Animation” in the Composition Name dialog. 
At the top of this dialog is the Preset popup menu, which 
includes a number of common comp sizes and frame rates. 
You can also enter your own settings. For this starting  
composition, uncheck the Lock Aspect Ratio box, then type 
in a Width of 960 and Height of 540. Click on the menu 
next to Pixel Aspect Ratio and select Square Pixels (we’ll 
discuss pixels that are not square in the Appendix). 
Highlight the value currently in the Duration field, and 
enter “4.00” for 4 seconds. Frame rate should be 29.97. 
Click on the Drop Frame popup and select Non-Drop Frame 
(this is covered in Tech Corner near the end of Lesson 2).
Check that the remaining settings are at their defaults: 
Resolution of Full and Start Timecode of 0:00:00:00. 
Background Color defaults to black (the background color 
was discussed in Pre-Roll). Click OK, and your new comp 
will open into the Comp and Timeline panels. This would 
be a good time to Save your project using Cs (Ls).
Your comp will appear in the Project panel, inside your 
Comps folder (if it’s not in there, drag it in). If you cannot 
read the entire name in the Project panel, place your cursor 
along the right edge of the Name 
column (a double-sided arrow will 
appear) and drag the column wider. 
If you extend the Project panel wide 
enough, you’ll see the very useful 
Comment column. We like to move 
this column to the left side so its easier 
to see; to do this, click on the word 
Comment and drag and drop it just  
to the right of the Name column.
Lesson 1 — BASIC ANIMATION
24
After you click OK, the Project panel will have two folders and one 
composition (below). Drag the Name column wider if the comp’s 
name is bring truncated. We like to drag the Comment box to the 
left so we can add notes. Feel free to twirl down the Movies folder 
and double-click the movies to play them in the Footage panel. 
7 These are the settings we will use for our first composition: 
Be sure to give your new comp a name! Uncheck the Lock Aspect 
Ratio box (circled) before typing in new dimensions of 960×540, 
Square Pixels. Frame rate is 29.97, Non-Drop Frame. Duration 
04:00. If necessary, set the Background Color to black.  
(You won’t need to change any settings in the Advanced tab.)

BASIC ANIMATION — Lesson 1
25
Building a Comp
Now that you have your sources, you can add 
them to your comp and have some fun animat-
ing them. First, make sure the Timeline and 
Composition panels have the name of your 
comp (First Animation) in a tab along their 
tops. If not, double-click this comp in the 
Project panel to open it. (You can close the 
Footage panel by clicking on the small ×.)
Adding the Background
8 In the Project panel, from the Sources > 
Movies folder, select Meadow.mov and drag 
it to the center of the Composition panel so 
it fills the image area. The movie will fill the 
Composition panel as it is the same size. 
Before you release the mouse, you will notice After Effects 
tries to snap the source to the center and edges of the 
comp. In the More Precise Placement sidebar on page 31, 
we’ll cover different methods for making layers “snappy.”
Click the Lock switch for the Meadow.mov layer so 
you don’t accidentally move it as you add more layers.
8 Add Meadow.mov to the composition to act as a background 
layer. This movie is a composite of two movies: Clouds.mov and 
Poppies.mov. (The composite work file is in our finished project.) 
Adding the Title
9  Select the footage item Flight-Title.psd in your 
Sources folder in the Project panel. A handy way to add 
selected footage items to a composition and ensure they 
are centered is to choose File > Add Footage to Comp.  
The shortcut is C/ (L/). 
Once you’ve added the Flight-Title.psd, it will appear  
as a layer in the Timeline panel as well, on top of the 
background movie (which is now layer 2). 
Press ß to preview the comp (previewing was 
also covered in Pre-Roll). 
9 Add Flight-Title.psd to the comp (above). Lock the background 
movie in the timeline so you don’t accidentally move it (below). By 
the way, we have dragged the Timeline panel’s A/V Features column 
from its default position over to the right. You can do the same by 
dragging the column header to the right until it drops into place. 

Lesson 1 — BASIC ANIMATION
26
11 Use the Selection tool to interactively 
scale the title layer by dragging its corners  
in the Comp panel (above). Add S while 
dragging to constrain a layer’s proportions. 
Use the Rotation tool to rotate a layer (below).
Add S to rotate in 45° increments. 
Changing Property Values
Before you create an animation for the title layer, you’ll need to learn how to 
change property values. You can do so either numerically in the Timeline panel 
or interactively in the Composition panel. Don’t worry about the results right 
now, just play! You’ll reset the values at the end of the exercise.
10 In the Timeline panel, click on the arrow to the left of Flight-Title.psd: This 
will reveal the word Transform. Click on the arrow to the left of Transform; this 
will reveal all of the Transform properties for this layer. In the future, we will refer 
to clicking these arrows as twirl down (and twirl up when closing a section). 
Notice the numeric values next to each property: Place your cursor over one 
(a finger with a left-right arrow will appear), then click and drag while watching 
the Comp panel to see the effect of editing a property. This technique is referred 
to as scrubbing a value, and is a skill you’ll use over and over in After Effects. Note 
that adding the C (L) key allows you to scrub in finer increments. 
You can also type an exact value by clicking a value, which makes that field 
active. Press T to advance to the next value, and press R when done. 
Some properties – such as Scale and Position – have separate X (horizontal,  
or left-right) and Y (vertical, or up-down) dimensions to their values. By default, 
Scale’s X and Y dimensions are locked together to prevent distorting the layer; 
you can unlock them by clicking on the chain link icon next to their value.
11 After you’ve experimented with chang-
ing values numerically, click on the word 
Reset to the right of the Transform header 
to return these values to their defaults. Next you’re going to play with directly 
manipulating the title layer in the Comp panel to edit its Transform properties. 
While doing so, the property values will update in the Timeline panel; keep an 
eye on these values to get a better feel for what’s going on.
• Make sure the Selection tool (V) is active. To edit Position, select and drag  
a layer in the Composition panel. To constrain movement to one dimension, 
start to drag the layer, then hold down the S key and drag some more.
• With the layer still selected, edit Scale by clicking and dragging one of the 
eight square dots (“handles”) around the outline of the layer in the Comp panel. 
To avoid  distorting the layer and keep its original aspect ratio, start to drag the 
layer, then hold down the S key and drag some more. 
• To edit Rotation, select the Rotation tool (shortcut = w for “Wotate”) then 
drag the layer around in a circle; the further you move the cursor away from the 
layer, the more control you have. Add the S key to constrain movement to 
45° increments. When you’re done, press v to return to the Selection tool (V).
As before, click on Reset (next to Transform) to return to the default values.
10 To “scrub” a value in the Timeline panel, 
place the cursor over the value until a two-
headed arrow appears, then click and drag 
(above). Scale has its X and Y dimensions 
locked together, so scrubbing one value also 
changes the other. You can also enter an 
exact value by clicking on it (below). 

12 Enable Snapping in the Tools panel (top), then drag the top of the 
title layer below the comp’s image area; the centers will snap together.  
Then enable the animation stopwatch for the Position property (below). 
13 Move to time 01:10, then drag the title up into position (Y = 430). 
A motion path will appear and a second keyframe will be created. 
Animating Position
Now you know how to transform a layer manually; next comes making After 
Effects transform a layer over time. This involves a process known as keyframing. 
12 Make sure the current time indicator is at the start of the timeline (the 
numeric time display in the Timeline panel should read 0:00:00:00). If it isn’t, 
click on the blue head of the current time indicator and drag it there, or press 
H to quickly make it jump to the start of the comp. 
• There are keyboard shortcuts to reveal select Transform properties. 
With Flight-Title.psd selected, type p to reveal just its Position property.
BASIC ANIMATION — Lesson 1
27
To hide the Parent column in the Timeline 
panel, right-click on its header and select 
Hide This from the menu that pops up.
• You’re going to make the title layer move onto the 
screen from below and settle into place. In the Comp 
panel, enable Snapping in the Tools panel (see figure). 
Select the title by clicking near the center top edge of the 
layer then drag it below the image area; when your 
cursor gets close to the bottom of the comp, the top of 
the layer will “snap” to the center of the bottom edge. 
If you prefer, you could instead scrub the Position Y 
value to move the layer down. The value we used is  
X = 480 (centered) and Y = 590.
• To the left of the word Position is a small stopwatch 
icon (see figure to the right). Click on it, and it will be 
highlighted in blue; you have now enabled Position 
for keyframing and animation. Enabling keyframing 
also places a keyframe –  indicated by a diamond to the 
right in the timeline portion of the display – at the 
current time, using Position’s current value.
13 Drag the current time indicator to 01:10. Move 
the Flight-Title.psd layer where you want it to end up; 
add the S key after you start dragging to constrain 
the motion to up/down only. A new keyframe will 
automatically be created for you with this value, at the 
current time. (Our new keyframe is X = 480, Y = 430.)
You may have noticed that a line appeared in the 
Comp panel, tracing the path from where your layer 
started to where it is ending up. This is known as the 
motion path. It is made up of a series of dots. Each dot 
indicates where that layer will be at each frame. The 
motion path is visible only when the layer is selected. 

Drag the current time indicator back and forth along the 
top of the timeline and notice how your layer moves along 
its motion path. To see what it would look like playing 
back in real time, press ß or º to initiate 
a preview, or press the Play button in the center of the 
Preview panel. After Effects will work its way through the 
frames once as fast as it can, then play back the animation 
in real time. Press the same key again to stop the preview.  
A green bar appears in the time ruler as frames are cached.
• It is easy to change the timing of keyframes: In the 
Timeline panel, drag the second diamond keyframe to the 
left or right to make it occur earlier or later in time. Preview 
to see the new timing, then return the keyframe to 01:10.
• You can also easily edit the value of a keyframe after 
you’ve created it. In the A/V Features column of the 
Timeline panel are a pair of gray arrows surrounding a 
small diamond. These are known as the keyframe naviga-
tion arrows (see figure on next page). Clicking on them 
will jump to the next keyframe in line for that property, 
confirmed by the diamond changing from hollow to blue. 
Once you’re “parked” on a keyframe, to edit that keyframe 
either scrub the layer’s Position values or drag the layer 
around in the Comp panel. 
Lesson 1 — BASIC ANIMATION
28
D Managing the Comp View
You learned in Pre-Roll how to resize the user interface’s 
frames. You can resize the frame that holds the Comp panel 
to decide how much screen real estate you can devote to it. 
There are several ways to control how this space is used to 
display the comp’s image area:
• In the lower left corner of the Comp panel is a Magnification 
popup. A popular setting for this is Fit up to 100%, which 
uses as much of the Comp panel’s frame as it can up to full 
size (on a high-resolution display, this will say Fit up to 150% 
or 200%; see below). A downside of the Fit option is that the 
image quality may be reduced if the result is an unusual size, 
such as 78%. Therefore, in some situations you might prefer 
to set a size such as 100% or 50% that gets close to using the 
space available, then resizing the frame again as needed.
• When the Comp panel is selected (surrounded by a blue 
outline), you can hold down C (L) and press the + key 
to zoom in larger or the - key to zoom out smaller.
• If you have a mouse with a scroll wheel, hover its cursor 
over the Comp panel, and use the wheel to zoom in and out.
• For more targeted zooming, select the Zoom tool  
(shortcut: z) and click to zoom in and center around where 
you click, or O+click (A+click) to zoom out. Don’t forget 
to press v when done to return to the Selection tool!
• Even better, press and hold down the z key to temporarily 
switch to the Zoom tool; add O (A) to zoom out. When 
you release the z key, the Selection tool will still be active. 
• To pan around your composition, hold down ß  
to temporarily bring up the Hand tool, then click and drag 
in the Comp panel to reposition it. (Remember that tapping 
ß  previews the timeline.)
13 When a layer’s Position 
is animating and the layer is 
selected, you’ll see a motion path 
in the Comp panel illustrating its 
travels. A square icon will appear 
at each keyframe’s location – you 
can drag this icon directly in the 
Comp panel to change the value 
of that keyframe without moving 
to that point in time; as you do so, 
the new value will update live in 
the Info panel. Undo when done!

Important concept coming up: If you are not parked on the exact frame of a pre-
viously existing keyframe when you try to edit a property, you will instead create 
a new keyframe. If you create one by accident, undo or delete it by selecting it 
in the timeline and pressing D. Or, use the keyframe navigation arrows to 
jump to it, then click on the blue diamond between the arrows to remove it.
Applying Easy Ease In
14 As you preview the title’s animation, you 
may have noticed that it stops abruptly at the 
second keyframe. To make it land “softly,” 
select the keyframe at 1:10 and choose 
Animation > Keyframe Assistant > Easy Ease  
(or Easy Ease In). Preview, and now the title 
slows down before it stops. (We’ll cover  
velocity changes in depth in Lesson 2.) 
Save your project. Indeed, now would be a good time to use the  
File > Increment and Save option, so your work to date will be saved 
under a new version number.
Adding the Foreground Layers
In the next few steps, you will learn a few strategies for working with 
multiple layers in a composition. Move the time indicator to a point 
after 1:10 so you can use the placement of the title for reference.
15 From the Project panel, select Tulips.mov from the Sources > 
Movies folder and drag it into the Composition panel to a position 
between the title and the top of the comp, offset to the left (you will 
eventually be placing another video to the right). Release the mouse, 
and this layer will be added to your timeline starting at 00:00. (When 
you add a new source to the Comp panel, it always starts from the 
beginning of the comp and in front of all other layers.) 
• Press s to reveal the layer’s Scale parameter and reduce it in size 
until it acts as a nice inset above the title (we used 40%). Feel free to 
tweak its placement, but leave some space along the top of the comp 
for another graphical element you will be adding later.
BASIC ANIMATION — Lesson 1
29
Under the A/V Features column are a pair of 
keyframe navigation arrows, which make it 
easy to jump to the previous or next keyframe 
for a given property. If the diamond between 
the two arrows is blue, the current time 
indicator is parked on top of a keyframe.
15 Drag the tulips movie to the top left 
side of the comp and scale it so that it 
makes a nice inset movie.
14 After applying the Easy Ease 
Keyframe Assistant (left), the 
keyframe icon changes from a 
diamond to a chevron to indicate 
that interpolation over time is no 
longer linear (below). Note also 
that the green line is removed 
between keyframes, indicating 
that changes have been made. 

Duplicating and Replacing Layers
16 With Tulips.mov selected, choose Edit > Duplicate. 
This will create a copy of the original layer with the exact 
same transform parameter values (including Position and 
Scale) on top of the original. The duplicate layer will be 
selected. Move the duplicated layer to the right to create  
a second video inset:
• You can drag it in the Composition panel, adding S 
after you start to drag to constrain your movements to a 
straight line. 
• Or, press p to reveal the Position property in the 
Timeline panel, and scrub its X Position value to constrain 
movement to a straight line left and right. 
• You can also use the left and right cursor keys (˚ and 
∆) to nudge its position 1 pixel at a time (add the S 
key to nudge in 10-pixel increments).
17 It is easy to replace a layer with a new footage source 
while maintaining any changes you’ve made to its attributes 
(position, scale, opacity, effects, and so on). So let’s replace 
the duplicate layer with a new source:
• Make sure the target layer is selected in the comp (in this 
case, the rightmost movie), return to the Project panel, and 
select Sources > Movies > Daisies.mov. 
• Hold down O (A) and drag this new movie over 
either the Comp or Timeline panel; the exact placement does 
not matter! Release the mouse, and the target layer’s source 
will be replaced with this new source. Feel free to preview. 
18 Once both movies are side by side, you might decide 
that they are too big or too small. With Daisies.mov 
selected, S+click on Tulips.mov to select it as well. 
Scrub the already exposed Scale value for Tulips.mov, and 
Daisies.mov will be rescaled in tandem. Add the C (L) 
key to scrub in finer increments. Feel free to also tweak the 
position of both layers to get a nice arrangement, but keep 
them aligned vertically (see sidebar opposite for tips).
Lesson 1 — BASIC ANIMATION
30
16 Duplicate the Tulips.mov layer, then move the copy to the 
right to create a balanced arrangement.
17–18 Swap in a new footage source for the duplicated layer, 
and scale them together in the Timeline panel. We settled on a 
size of 40% for both movies. 

D More Precise Placement
BASIC ANIMATION — Lesson 1
31
If you want to move beyond “eyeballing it” to arrange your layers, 
After Effects has a few tools you might find useful:
When you add footage to the Comp panel, before you release 
the mouse you will notice After Effects tries to snap the outline of the 
source to the center and edges of the comp. To get this snapping 
behavior when you try to drag an already added layer in the future, 
press the CS (LS) keys after you start dragging a layer.
Snapping
The Snapping option gives you the ability to easily align an edge, 
corner, or center point from one layer with a similar (or dissimilar) 
feature of another layer. Snapping even works with mask vertices 
(Lesson 4), shape layers (Lesson 11), and in 3D space (Lesson 8). 
The Align Panel
Select the layer(s) you 
wish to align, then open 
Window > Align. You can 
align selected layers to 
each other or distribute 
layers evenly across the 
composition.
Using Grid and Guide Options
To use this feature, enable the Snapping checkbox in the Tools 
panel. Decide which vertex (or center) you wish to have snap to some-
thing of interest and click near this edge or point; as you drag the 
layer, a box will appear around the closest vertex to your cursor and 
this point will behave like a “magnet,” meaning it will snap to layer 
edges, vertices, and more. When this happens you’ll see a double box 
around the vertex, at which point you can release the mouse. 
When Snapping is enabled, press C (L) to disable it. With 
Snapping disabled, press C (L) to enable the behavior. Two 
additional options appear to the right of the Snapping checkbox for 
enhanced snapping; their tooltips explain their use. More information 
on snapping behavior can be found in Adobe’s online Help file. 
Editing by Percentage of Source or Composition
Right-click on the Position value for a layer and select Edit Value.  
In the Position dialog 
that opens, you can set 
the Units popup to % 
of Composition. This 
simplifies the math when 
insetting layers a certain 
distance. (Similar dialogs 
exist for all properties;  
try it with Scale as well.) 
Click on the Choose Grid and 
Guide Options button along 
the bottom of the Comp 
panel (above) and enable 
the Grid option (right). Also 
enable View > Snap to Grid 
to have a layer’s Anchor 
Point snap to the grid. (Note 
that the Snapping feature 
mentioned earlier does not 
interact with this grid.)
Another grid – the 
Proportional Grid – is a handy 
visual reference for simple 
divisions, but layers do not 
snap to the Proportional Grid.
The color, style, and 
spacing of grids may be modified in Preferences > Grids & Guides.
Using Guides
There are also rulers and user-definable guides. Rulers display the  
X and Y coordinates of a comp in pixels. They can be toggled on by 
selecting Rulers from the Choose Grid menu (shown above) or by 
selecting View > Show Rulers. To create a guide, click in the ruler area 
and drag into the Comp panel. The Info panel will tell you its exact 
coordinates. Layers will snap to guides if View > Snap to Guides is on. 
Hide or show guides using View > Show Guides. Drag guides back to 
the ruler to delete them.

Adding a Solid Layer
Footage items are not the only objects that can be layers in a comp.  
For example, After Effects can create solids, which are simple graphical  
elements of a solid color. Let’s use a solid to add a colored bar across the 
top of our composition:
19 Choose the menu item Layer > New > Solid. To create a full-width bar, 
click on the Make Comp Size button; this will create a solid that fills the 
entire comp. Then enter a smaller value for Height, such as “60”.
Next, click on the eyedropper next to the color swatch along the bottom 
of the dialog, then click on a golden yellow color from the tulip petals 
to visually relate the bar to the video. Give this solid a name that makes 
sense, such as “Solid Bar”, and click OK.
20 In the Comp panel, enable Snapping in the toolbar, if it isn’t already. 
Then click near the center of the top edge of the bar and drag the bar 
upward; when it gets close to the top of the composition, it will “snap” to 
the top edge of the comp. After placing Solid Bar, you may want to tweak 
the position of the inset videos to get a better overall balance. To further 
edit the solid’s color or size, select it and go to Layer > Solid Settings. 
21 With Solid Bar still selected, press t to reveal its Opacity value. 
Reduce it until it provides a nice tint across the top of the comp, allowing 
part of the background video to peek through. We used a value of 75%. 
Quick Effects
Time for a little instant gratification: Add some polish to your composition 
using effects. We’ll focus on some quick improvements to the look of the 
video inset layers (effects will be covered in more detail in Lesson 3):
Lesson 1 — BASIC ANIMATION
32
19 Create a solid bar that is the width of the 
comp and 60 px high, and choose a golden yellow 
color (you can eyedropper the color from a tulip).
20–21 After dragging Solid Bar to the top 
of the comp, reduce its Opacity to create a 
tinted bar across the top of your comp.
22 Apply the Hue/Saturation effect, target the Green channel, and tweak to taste. 
22 The green color in the daisies layer is 
rather bright. To make it better match the 
blue sky, select the Daisies.mov and apply 
Effect > Color Correction > Hue/Saturation. 
When you apply an effect, the Effect 
Controls panel immediately opens so 
you can edit the effect’s parameters. To 
only change the background color, set 
the Channel Control popup to Greens. 
We changed the Green Hue to +100° and 
reduced Saturation by –35 for a pleasing 
blue color, but feel free to set to taste.

23 With Daisies.mov still selected, add 
dimension by applying Effect > Perspective 
> Bevel Alpha. In the Effect Controls panel, 
scrub Edge Thickness for Bevel Alpha until 
you get a nice frame around the video.
24 Apply Effect > Perspective > Drop 
Shadow. In the Effect Controls panel, 
increase Distance and Softness for the 
effect to achieve a pleasing result.
25 Now that you have a treatment you 
like for one video inset, it is easy to apply 
the same treatment to the other video. In 
the Effect Controls panel, select the Bevel Alpha effect,  
then S+click Drop Shadow, followed by Edit > Copy. 
Then select Tulips.mov and choose Edit > Paste. This 
second video will now have the same bevel and shadow 
effects settings as you applied to the first. 
(Note: After you have copied and pasted effects, you 
can continue to tweak them individually, but then both 
layers will look different. In Lesson 3, you’ll learn how to 
keep effects in sync across layers using Edit > Copy with 
Property Links.)
Preview your composition: The animation so far has the 
title animating into position, a solid adding some color 
across the top, and two inset videos in the foreground.  
In the next section, you’ll add our hero bumblebee to  
the scene! But first, click the Lock switches for all your 
existing layers so you don’t accidentally move them.
BASIC ANIMATION — Lesson 1
33
23–25 Add Bevel Alpha and  
Drop Shadow effects to Daisies.mov, 
and tweak to taste. Then select them 
in the Effect Controls panel, copy 
them, and paste both effects to the 
Tulips.mov layer. 
25 The project so far, with effects duplicated for the two inset videos. Lock your layers at this stage to avoid accidentally selecting them. 

Dragging Footage to the Timeline Panel
The final layer you’ll add is the Bumblebee.tif that you imported 
earlier with an alpha channel. First, let’s cover a few more tricks for 
adding footage to a comp:
26 In the Project panel’s Sources folder, select the footage item 
Bumblebee.tif. Drag Bumblebee.tif to the left side of the Timeline 
panel and, without releasing it, move your cursor up and down in 
the stack of layers. You will see a dark horizontal line, which indi-
cates where you are about to place this layer. Drag it downward until 
this line appears above the Flight-Title.psd layer but below the two 
foreground movies, and release the mouse. The bumblebee will appear behind the 
foreground movies. This technique is handy for placing elements in a busy com-
position with dozens of layers. If you make a mistake, it’s easy to reorder layers in 
the Timeline panel by dragging layers up and down. Try it! Note that no matter 
where the current time indicator was parked, the new layer starts at time 00:00. 
27 With the Bumblebee.tif layer selected, press D to undo this addition, 
and try another method. This time, drag Bumblebee.tif to the right side of the 
Timeline panel (below the time ruler). You 
should see a second blue time indicator 
head appear. This indicates where it would 
start in time if you were to release your 
mouse now, and provides an interactive 
way to decide your initial starting time. 
You can also move the layer up and down 
in the layer stack with this method. When 
you release the mouse, the new layer will 
be added at the time you’ve chosen. 
Drag the current time indicator back 
and forth, and notice how the bumblebee 
does not appear in the Comp viewer until 
after the current time indicator crosses 
the start of the layer in the timeline. You 
can click and drag the middle of the layer bar to make it start sooner or later in 
time; for now, avoid dragging the ends of the layer bar, which trims the layer. 
(Moving and trimming layers is covered in detail in Lesson 3.)
• With Bumblebee.tif still selected, press OH (AH) to make it start 
at the beginning of the comp. (If you don’t have a H key, just drag it there.)
• You’ll want the bumblebee in front of all the layers, so also drag it to the top 
of the layer stack (so it’s layer 1) and let’s add some animation.
Lesson 1 — BASIC ANIMATION
34
26 When you drag a new source from the 
Project panel to the left side of the Timeline 
panel, a dark line indicates where you are 
about to place the layer in the layer stack. 
The layer will start at time 00:00.
27 When you drag a source from the Project 
panel to the right side of the Timeline panel, 
you can also decide when the layer starts in 
time. Notice the ghosted outline and second 
current time indicator before we let go of 
the mouse (top), and how the layer start 
time updates on the left side of the Timeline 
panel as you drag left and right. Once you 
release the mouse, the layer will start at the 
indicated location (above). 

Crafting a Motion Path
The plan is to have the bumblebee fly across the screen and land on a flower that 
appears in Daisies.mov. You’ll animate the bumblebee’s position (moving it 
from left to right), as well as reduce its size as it flies along its path. You’ll also 
set an option so it automatically rotates along its path, then rotate it some more 
after it lands on the daisy. (Whew, busy bee!) Let’s start by animating Position: 
28  Right now, the bumblebee image is dominating the center of your comp. 
With the Bumblebee.tif layer selected, press s to reveal its Scale property and 
set the Scale value to around 20%, or to taste. 
• We’ll animate Scale later on; for now just move the bumblebee into its final 
resting place: Drag the current time indicator while watching the daisies movie, 
and stop at 2:15 where a large flower fades up. Turn off Snapping in the toolbar 
so you can move layers freely, then move the bumblebee so that it sits on top of 
this daisy. You can use the cursor keys to nudge it into place.
29 When you animated the title, you started at time 00:00 and created key-
frames as they appeared in time. While that’s logical, this time we’ll work 
backward by creating the first keyframe at the bumblebee’s final resting place: 
• At time 2:15 and with Bumblebee.tif still selected,  
press Sp to also reveal the Position property in the 
timeline, then click on the animation stopwatch to the 
left of the word Position to enable keyframing. This will 
create a Position keyframe at 02:15 with the current value. 
• Move the current time indicator to the start of the 
 composition (00:00 in time); the shortcut is to press 
H. Drag the bumblebee to the pasteboard on the left 
side of the comp. A new Position keyframe will be created 
at 00:00 and you will see a straight motion path join the 
two keyframes in the Comp panel. Again, the dots along 
this line indicate the layer’s position at each frame in 
time; the spacing between these dots indicates how fast 
it is moving. Preview to get a feel for the straight motion 
path animation (now that’s one robotic bee!). 
BASIC ANIMATION — Lesson 1
35
28 At 100%, the Bumblebee.tif layer 
dominates the scene (above). At 2:15, scale 
it down and position it over the large flower 
that appears in the daisies movie (below).
29 Animate the bumblebee’s Position property so that it moves from 
offscreen at time 00:00 to the daisy’s center at 2:15 (above and below). 
Make a note of the two handles (circled in red above) for the next step.

Lesson 1 — BASIC ANIMATION
36
30 Move the current time indicator to around 1:10, where the bumblebee is 
halfway along its path. If you look closely, you should see two small squares 
along the straight motion path line, close to each keyframe icon. Motion path 
keyframes default to an interpolation type known as Auto Bezier, which auto-
matically tries to smooth the path. These squares are the interpolation handles 
for those keyframes; note that the lines connecting the handle to the keyframe 
are not visible until you move the handle. Pull the handle on the left up to 
create a curved motion path; the connecting line will then appear. 
If you cannot see the handles you’re supposed to pull, don’t panic! Here’s a 
little trick: With the Selection tool still active, press CO (LA) and hover 
your cursor over the keyframe icon itself; the cursor should change to an upside-
down V, indicating the Convert Vertex tool is active (see figure, left). Click on 
the keyframe icon and drag in the direction of the motion path – as you drag 
away from the keyframe you will create a Bezier handle! Manipulate the handles 
for both keyframes, creating a simple arc, and preview the animation so far. 
31 To make the flight path more interesting, move the current time indicator 
to 01:10 (between both keyframes), and drag the bumblebee to a new position. 
A new Position keyframe will be created automatically and the motion path will 
bend to connect your three spatial keyframes. Tug on the Bezier handles for each 
keyframe to create a smooth motion path (the middle keyframe has two handles 
in a continuous line). Preview and tweak until you have a motion you like.
If the Auto Bezier handle is hard to find on 
a busy background (see red arrow), don’t 
worry about it! Hold down CO (LA) 
and hover your cursor over the keyframe 
icon itself (above), then click and drag 
outward to pull out a visible handle (below).
30 After creating two Position 
keyframes, tug on the Auto 
Bezier handle (left) to create a 
motion path that arcs across the 
comp (right). 
31 Add a middle keyframe 
and play with the motion 
path’s Bezier handles to create 
a more involved flight path. 
Study the spacing of the dots 
along the motion path; each 
dot represents the position of 
the layer’s Anchor Point at each 
frame (you’ll learn about the 
Anchor Point in Lesson 2).

32 To make the bumblebee land softly on the 
daisy, select the last (third) Position keyframe, 
and choose Animation > Keyframe Assistant > 
Easy Ease In. When you preview, if you notice 
that the speed is uneven, it could be because 
the bee is traveling farther between one pair of 
keyframes than between the other pair. Slide the 
middle Position keyframe in the timeline until 
the dot spacing is more balanced. (Don’t sweat 
the tempo though – in the next lesson you’ll 
learn how to precisely edit a layer’s speed.)
33 In Lesson 2, you’ll also learn various 
options for making complex animation easy. 
One technique is forcing a layer to automati-
cally rotate as it follows a motion path, which 
would be ideal for a flying insect! Try it now:
• Select the Bumblebee.tif layer and choose 
Layer > Transform > Auto-Orient. In the dialog 
that opens, select Orient along Path and click 
OK. Preview, and the bumblebee will automati-
cally rotate along its path! Don’t forget to save.
BASIC ANIMATION — Lesson 1
37
A
Auto Bezier
B
Continuous Bezier
C
Bezier
D
Linear
D Spatial Keyframe Types
The Position keyframes in the Comp viewer are referred to as spatial 
keyframes, as they define where the layer is supposed to be in space at a 
given time. How the motion path flows into and out of a spatial keyframe 
is also important, and can be deciphered both by looking at the path itself 
and by looking at a selected spatial keyframe:
• The default spatial keyframe type is Auto Bezier. It is indicated by two 
dots in a straight line on either side of the keyframe (A). This means After 
Effects will automatically create a smooth bend through this keyframe.
• Dragging one of these dots results in the keyframe being converted 
into a Continuous Bezier type, indicated by a straight line (“handle”) con-
necting the dots (B). Drag these handles to explicitly control the motion 
path while maintaining a smooth entry and exit through the keyframe.
• If you want to create a sudden change in direction at the keyframe, 
hold down g (to temporarily toggle to the Pen tool) and drag one of the 
handles to “break” their continuous nature. You can then drag the handles 
of this Bezier keyframe independently (C).
• To create a hard corner without a curve or handles, hold down g and 
click the keyframe’s vertex itself to convert it to a Linear keyframe (D). 
• To return a Linear keyframe to an Auto Bezier key frame, hold down 
g and click on the keyframe’s vertex again.
Press v if you need to return to the Selection tool. Note that the size 
of the path points and handles can be set in Preferences > General.
33 By default, our bumblebee moves along the path 
without rotating (A). Enabling Auto-Orientation (below) 
will automatically rotate the bee along its path (B).
A
B

Animating Scale
Having a layer “fly into position” rarely involves just Position keyframes; you 
can also animate Scale to make it appear to fly toward or away from you.
34 You have already created a good ending size for the bee when it lands on 
the daisy, so it makes sense to first create a keyframe to remember this pose:
• Move the current time indicator to 02:15 to align with the final Position key-
frame for Bumblebee.tif. You can press the S key as you drag to “snap” to 
existing keyframes, or use the keyframe navigator arrows to jump to the next or 
previous keyframes. 
• Select Bumblebee.tif. 
Its Scale parameter should 
already be revealed (if not 
press Ss to also reveal 
Scale). Click on the animation 
stopwatch for Scale to enable 
keyframing. This creates an initial keyframe with the current Scale value.
Lesson 1 — BASIC ANIMATION
38
34 With the Scale property animating from 
50% to 20%, the bumblebee gets smaller as 
it flies across the screen (top). With a larger 
size at time 00:00, you may need to adjust 
the Position value in the Timeline panel to 
avoid the larger bee peeking into the comp.
D Transform Shortcuts
The following shortcut keys reveal 
specific Transform properties for the 
selected layer(s):
a 
Anchor Point
p 
Position
s 
Scale
r 
Rotation
t 
Opacity
To reveal effects that are applied, 
select a layer and press e. 
To add (and subtract) a property, 
hold down S when you press 
any of these shortcuts.
• Move the current time indicator to 00:00 (shortcut: H). Scrub the Scale 
parameter in the timeline while watching the result in the Comp panel and pick 
a larger starting size; we used 50%, although it can be larger or smaller than its 
final Scale value, depending on the visual effect you want. (One thing to keep in 
mind is that with most layers, it is a bad idea to increase Scale past 100%, as this 
may result in softening of the image plus other visual artifacts.) You may need to 
move the bee to the left if you don’t want its head to peek into the scene! 
• Preview. You will probably want to apply Easy Ease In to the second Scale 
keyframe. Another method to apply a keyframe assistant is to right-click on the 
keyframe and select it from the context-sensitive menu that pops up.

BASIC ANIMATION — Lesson 1
39
d factoid
Anchor Point
Notice how the bumblebee scaled and 
rotated around its center? That’s because 
we centered it in Illustrator first (before 
creating the TIF file). You won’t be so 
lucky with other sources; they may appear 
to wobble when they rotate. The cure for 
this is setting the Anchor Point, which 
you’ll learn in Lesson 2.
d tip
Slow Scrubbing
To scrub a value by smaller increments for 
precise control, hold down the C (L) 
key while scrubbing. To jump by larger 
increments, hold down S while scrubbing.
35–36 Two Rotation keyframes rotate the 
bumblebee clockwise, while two Opacity 
keyframes fade off the layer.
Animating Rotation
35 To finish off the animation, have the bumblebee rotate after it lands on  
the flower (as if it is very excited by the pollen it’s collecting!): 
• Place the current time indicator at 2:15. To work faster, hold O (A) and 
press r: This will reveal the Rotation parameter, plus enable keyframing.
• Press N to move the time indicator to the end of the comp, at time 03:29.
• Rotation is displayed with two fields, for Revolution and Degrees. Scrub the 
second number (degrees); positive numbers will animate clockwise. Note that as 
you scrub past 359°, the values will change to 1 rotation + degrees. You can also 
click in either field and enter precise values; press R when done. 
• Preview, and decide if you want the first keyframe to Easy Ease Out. (Motion 
blur would also be a great addition; you’ll learn about this option in Lesson 2.)
Animating Opacity
36 To have the bumblebee fade off as it rotates at the end of the comp, you 
need to animate its Opacity values. Move the time indicator to 3:00:
• Press St to reveal Opacity (shortcut: t for Transparency, or OpaciTee!).
• Enable its animation stopwatch to create the first keyframe at 100%.
• Press N to jump to the end of the comp, and reduce Opacity’s value; 0% 
means fully transparent. You can also directly enter a number such as 0. 
Preview to test your new animation, and tweak to taste. 

Lesson 1 — BASIC ANIMATION
40
Rendering
Time for the final payoff: rendering your animation to a 
movie file. Save your project first (File > Increment and 
Save); it’s always a good idea to save your file before you 
render, just in case the render crashes or your computer 
loses power.
37 Make sure the First Animation Composition or 
Timeline panel is selected (not the Project panel). Select 
Composition > Add to Render Queue. This will open the 
Render Queue panel. By default, it will appear in the same 
frame as the Timeline panel. 
d tip
Solid Tips
When you create a solid, After Effects 
automatically creates a Solids folder in 
the Project panel. Solids may be reused 
in a project, just like other footage items. 
When you duplicate a solid in a comp, it 
will use the same source. If you edit one 
of these layers, a switch at the bottom 
of the Solid Settings dialog will ask if you 
want to update all solids that use this 
source or create a new solid.
d tip
Drag to Render Queue
You can also select Window > Render 
Queue and then drag your composition  
from the Project panel to the Render Queue.
37 In the Render Queue, to choose where 
to save and what to name your render, click 
on the name to the right of Output To.
• Click on the name to the right of Output To. This will open up a standard 
file dialog. Pick a place on your drive where it will be easy to retrieve the movie 
later. The default movie name is the same as the comp’s name; you can change 
it at this stage if you like. Click Save to close the dialog.
• Click on the Render button or press R. Your comp will start to render. 
The Render Queue panel will tell you what frame it is currently working on and 
when it thinks it will finish (see figure opposite). If the Comp panel is visible, 
you will get visual feedback of what each frame looks like after it is rendered.
• When the render is done, twirl down the Output Module section in the 
Render Queue and click on the file path to reveal the movie on your hard 
drive. Double-click it to open it in QuickTime Player and play back your work. 
Nice job! If you’d like to compare your results, our After Effects project file 
(Lesson_01_Finished.aep) is included inside this lesson’s folder.
• To rerender using the same settings, duplicate the render item in the queue.
You may think you’re done at this point…but in reality, once you (or your 
client, or your boss) see the first render, that’s when a bunch of new ideas will 
usually present themselves!
D Nudging Position, Rotation, and Scale
Sometimes it’s easier to use the keyboard to nudge the  
transform values for a layer. Here are the magic keys:
Position: 
cursor keys ˆ∆˚µ
Rotation: 
˜+ and -
Scale: 
O (L) plus ˜+ and -
If you hold down the S key while doing any of these, the 
transform values will jump in increments of 10 rather than 1.
The default Render Settings and Output Module are fine for our first effort 
(we’ll demonstrate how to modify them in the Appendix). 

Idea Corner
In addition to teaching you After Effects, the goal of this book is also to teach 
you the art of motion graphics – which includes creative thinking and being able 
to craft variations on a theme. The workflow after the first render is to analyze 
your work, decide how to improve it, make changes, and render another version. 
Below are some ideas to try for this lesson: 
• Animate the solid bar onto the screen.
• Fade up the title as it moves up into position.
• Animate the video insets to transition on in a more interesting fashion, such 
as by fading or scaling up. Stagger their timing by sliding their layer bars in time 
(more on moving and trimming layers in Lesson 3).
You’ve learned quite a bit in this lesson – skills you will use in virtually every 
After Effects project you tackle. In the next lesson, we’ll show you several ways 
to fine-tune your animations.
BASIC ANIMATION — Lesson 1
41
d tip
Stopping the Render
If you see a problem while rendering, hold 
down O (A) when clicking the Stop 
button. This will requeue the item and set the 
duration to the original length. Pressing Stop 
queues up only the unrendered frames to 
render; not very useful if you make changes.
37 continued After you press the Render 
button (circled), the Render Queue keeps 
you apprised of what frame it is working on 
and how much longer it thinks the render 
will take. If the comp being rendered is 
open, you can watch the frames while 
they’re rendering.

Lesson 1 — BASIC ANIMATION
42
In this lesson, you learned how to build a 
composition from scratch in After Effects by 
importing sources, dragging them into a comp, 
arranging them to taste, and animating them. 
Indeed, this is our preferred way of working.
However, some of you may be more famil-
iar working in Photoshop or Illustrator, and 
may want to start your project there. Perhaps 
you work for a company with a separate print 
department where they want to hand you 
their Photoshop or Illustrator files to animate. 
After Effects also accommodates this type  
of workflow.
After Effects can import Photoshop and 
Illustrator files several different ways: flat-
tened into a single image, selecting just a 
single layer to bring in, or as a composition 
where all of the layers exist as their own 
footage items that you can then animate. 
Let’s try all three options in that order; you 
can use our demo file or one of your own 
layered Photoshop files:
1 In After Effects, create a File > New 
> New Project. Double-click the Project 
panel or type Ci (Li) to import a 
file. Navigate to the Lesson 01 folder you 
downloaded earlier, open it, then open the 
Photoshop Layers folder inside that. Locate 
the file named Fantasy.psd and select it.
Turn your attention to the bottom of this 
dialog and click on the Import As popup. 
Here you see options for whether to treat 
this file as a single source or as a composi-
tion. These options are presented again with 
more detail, so the best choice here is to just 
accept the default (Footage) and click Open.
A second import dialog will open. The top 
popup – Import Kind – is similar to the Import 
As dialog; for this first exercise, make sure it 
says Footage as well. Then look under Layer 
D Importing Layered Photoshop and Illustrator Files
Options: You have a choice of whether to 
bring in the entire layered file merged into a 
final image or to choose just a single layer. For 
now, choose Merged Layers, and click OK.
A single footage item will be added to 
your project. Select it and choose File > New 
Comp From Selection (you can also drag it to 
the Create a New Composition button at the 
bottom of the Project panel, see figure above). 
After Effects will create and open a comp 
that is the same size as your file, and the 
Photoshop file will be a full-frame single layer 
without access to the individual elements.
2 Repeat Step 1, but this time in the second 
dialog select Choose Layer under the Layer 
Options. Pick a layer from this popup, such 
as fantasy or rusty car. Underneath it, the 
Footage Dimensions popup will become 
active. If you select Document Size, After 
Effects will create a footage item the size of 
the Photoshop canvas. We prefer the option 
Layer Size, which honors the size of the layer. 
If the layer is smaller than the canvas (as it is 
with the fantasy text layer), it auto-trims the 
layer to just the pixels needed. If the layer is 
larger than the canvas (as it is with the rusty 
car layer), it imports the entire layer. 
Try both options for Footage Dimensions 
on different layers; each will result in a single 
footage item in the Project panel.
1 You can import a layered file as a single 
footage item (and either merge all the layers, 
or select a single layer), or a composition 
(includes all layers). If you choose to import 
as Footage (left), you will get a single layer 
in After Effects (above), with all the layers 
flattened into one image.

BASIC ANIMATION — Lesson 1
43
If you import a layered file as a 
composition, all of the layers in 
the original Photoshop file (above) 
will appear in After Effects as 
individual items in the Project 
panel and as layers arranged in a 
composition (right). Double-click 
the comp to open it. A number of 
Photoshop features are translated 
into equivalent features in After 
Effects, such as Blending Modes 
(Lesson 3) and Layer Styles (Lesson 
3). However, Vector Shapes import 
only as masks, not Shape layers. 
3 In the Project panel, delete 
everything you’ve done so far in 
this exercise. Repeat Step 1 again, 
but this time select Composition – 
Retain Layer Sizes from the Import 
Kind popup. To extract the most 
from a layered Photoshop file, 
select Editable Layer Styles under 
Layer Options. Click OK. (We will 
explore Layer Styles in Lesson 3.) 
You will now have two new 
items in the Project panel: a comp 
and a folder, both named Fantasy. Double-
click the comp to open it; you will see a stack 
of layers representing the individual layers in 
the Photoshop file. Back in the Project panel, 
twirl down the Fantasy folder to reveal each 
layer as a footage item.
If your Photoshop file includes text layers, 
you can make them editable in After Effects 
via Layer > Convert to Editable Text (more 
on this in Lesson 5). Note that Illustrator text 
layers are not editable in the same manner.
3 For maximum flexibility, set Import 
Kind to Composition – Retain Layer Sizes. 
For Photoshop files, enable the options 
for Editable Layer Styles. (Note that 
Illustrator files have similar choices with 
the exception of Layer Styles.) 
Smart Layers are imported rasterized to 
match their size in Photoshop. To edit any 
layer back in Photoshop (or Illustrator), select 
a layer in the comp, then select Edit > Edit 
Original. The file will open in Photoshop. 
Make the necessary changes and be sure to 
save the file before returning to After Effects. 
The layer will be updated. 
While importing layered files is handy, we 
advise you to build composites directly in 
After Effects so that properties and effects 
are fully editable. Remember that layers in 
After Effects are always “smart” and you can 
always recover your original pixels at all times! 
Convert to Layered Comp
If you import a file as footage and later wish 
you’d imported it as a layered comp, right-
click on it in the Project panel and select 
Replace Footage > With Layered Comp.  
A folder of layers will appear in the Project 
panel and a new comp will be created that 
replaces the footage wherever it was used.

I
n this lesson, you will work through a number  
of easy exercises to help build your animation 
skills. Along the way, you will become familiar 
with managing a layer’s Anchor Point for “motion 
control” and other style movements, taking  
advantage of Keyframe Assistants, and using the 
Graph Editor for the utmost in animation control. 
We’ll also show you advanced tricks such as using 
Motion Sketch to hand-draw your animation path, 
using roving keyframes to maintain smooth speed 
changes over complex paths, and the crucial com-
ponent needed to create “slam down” animations.
Keyframe Basics
When animating in After Effects, the center of your 
universe is the keyframe. Keyframes provide two main func-
tions: They define what a parameter’s value is at a specific 
point in time and they contain information about how 
those values behave before and after that point in time. 
This behavior is referred to as a keyframe’s interpolation.  
It consists of two components: the velocity, or how fast a 
value is changing over time, and the keyframe’s influence, 
which defines how abruptly speed changes occur around 
the keyframe. A keyframe may have both incoming and 
outgoing velocity and influence. For example, if you are 
animating position, and a keyframe has an incoming  
velocity of zero (which means it will come to a stop) with  
a very high influence, the object would seem to slowly 
glide into its new position. If its velocity was zero but the 
influence was very low, the object would instead seem to 
abruptly stop when it reached that keyframe.
Lesson 2
44
Advanced Animation
Manipulating keyframes to create more refined animations.
 d Getting Started
Make sure you have downloaded the file archive for  
Lesson 2 (as discussed in How to Use This Book) and 
decompressed it. It contains the project file and sources  
you need to execute this lesson. 
 d In This Lesson
 
44 
keyframe basics 
 
46 
Anchor Point overview
 
47 
Anchor Point tool
 
48 
motion control moves
 
50 
Graph Editor
 
51 
speed versus value graphs
 
52 
panning and zooming time
 
53 
editing graph curves
 
54 
easing animations
 
55 
improving the timing; Graph Editor Sets
 
56 
Separate Dimensions
 
60 
Motion Sketch
 
61 
smoothing keyframes
 
62 
Auto-Orient
 
63 
Motion Blur
 
64 
Roving keyframes
 
65 
Time-Reverse Keyframes
 
66 
Hold keyframes
 
68 
time display and timecode

Spatial keyframes define where a layer is  
in the composition’s space at a given time 
(right). Temporal keyframes (left) numerically 
define a parameter’s value at a given time 
(the red and green curves), and also show 
how fast that value changes (the white line 
plus the text). Butterfly courtesy Dover. 
Background image #6002397 courtesy 
iStockphoto/Goldmund.
ADVANCED ANIMATION — Lesson 2
45
d tip
Reset Property Value
Clicking Reset in the Transform section  
of the Timeline panel will reset all of the 
Transform properties for a layer to their 
default values. To reset an individual 
property, right-click on the name of the 
property and select Reset.
Most keyframes are temporal, meaning they describe how values change over 
time, and these changes can be viewed and edited in the normal Timeline panel  
or in the Graph Editor (pictured above). However, keyframes that describe 
changes in position also have a spatial component. Remember the motion paths 
with Bezier handles that you played with in the previous lesson? Those were 
spatial keyframes. The length and direction of their Bezier handles define the 
path the layer travels along in space. 
After Effects is unusual in that it gives you separate temporal and spatial 
control over keyframes by default. This is good, because you can split your work 
into first deciding how an object moves through space, then concentrating on 
how quickly it moves. Many other programs change the path as you change the 
speed, which can be more difficult to control (although you can re-create this 
behavior inside After Effects by using the Separate Dimensions command).
We’re going to start this lesson by focusing on the pivot around which all  
of this animation takes place: the Anchor Point. Most beginning users ignore  
the Anchor Point, but it’s an important piece of the animation puzzle. For 
example, there are occasions where it is better to animate the Anchor Point  
than the more familiar Position parameter.
We will then move on to the Graph Editor, where you have very precise 
control over keyframe interpolation. The Graph Editor may seem daunting  
initially, but you will come to find it’s the best way to visualize what is  
happening with an animation. The skills you learned while editing spatial  
paths will also come in handy in editing temporal keyframes, as the Graph 
Editor gives you Bezier handles to edit velocity and influence.
After bending your brain around the Graph Editor, you can relax a bit as  
you get the chance to play with a pair of fun Keyframe Assistants, including  
the ability to hand-sketch a motion path. You’ll also learn how to have a layer  
auto-orient itself to point along its motion path, enable Motion Blur to create 
smoother movement, and apply Hold keyframes to create abrupt animations. 
Later lessons also touch on the subject of advanced animation, including 
Behaviors in Lesson 3, text animation in Lesson 5, and Expressions in Lesson 7.
d tip
Do U See What I See?
An excellent keyboard shortcut is u: 
It reveals all of the animated properties 
for the selected layer(s). If you type u 
twice quickly (uu), you will see all of 
the edited properties whether they are 
animating or not. This is a great way to 
quickly get an idea of who’s doing what.

Lesson 2 — ADVANCED ANIMATION
46
3 In the Layer panel, set the View popup to 
Anchor Point Path. (If View is set to Masks, 
you can move the Anchor Point but you 
won’t see its motion path if it is animated.)
Anchor Point 101
The Anchor Point is the center of a layer’s universe around which it scales, 
rotates, and moves. Although it defaults to the center of a layer, it may be 
moved anywhere, including outside the layer’s boundaries.
1 Open Lesson_02.aep. In the Project panel, make sure 
the Comps folder is open. Then locate and double-click 
on the empty comp 01-Anchor Point*starter. 
Back in the Project panel, open the folder Sources 
and select Flower.ai. Use the handy keyboard shortcut 
C/ on Mac (L/ on Windows), which adds it to 
the center of the current comp. In the Timeline panel, 
twirl open all of its parameters by pressing C (L)  
and clicking on the arrow to the left of the layer’s name.
2 Scrub the layer’s Rotation parameter: Notice the 
flower symbol rotates from its center, not its base.  
Scrub its Scale; again, that’s not the behavior we would 
want, say, to simulate the flower growing. Click Reset in the Timeline panel.
Whenever you add a layer to a comp, think: What should this layer logically 
rotate or scale around? Here, the answer would be the base of the flower stem.
Double-click Flower.ai: It will open in a viewer known as the Layer panel.  
This allows you to see a layer without distraction from the rest of the layers in 
your comp. (If you have trouble keeping these two panels straight, look at the 
top of the panel for the word “Composition:” or “Layer:” before its name.  
The Layer panel also has its own timeline and a different set of switches.)
Click on the word “Layer” at the top of its panel and drag the panel to the 
center of the Project panel to dock it into the same frame. This will place the 
Layer and Comp panels side by side. Resize the panels so that you can see them 
both clearly, as well as the Transform properties in the Timeline panel. 
3 In the Layer panel, click on the View menu and select Anchor Point Path.  
The small crosshair in the middle of the panel is the layer’s Anchor Point.
• Drag the Anchor Point in the Layer panel while carefully watching the Comp 
and Timeline panels. You will notice that as you drag down, the flower moves 
up in the Comp panel. As you drag left, the flower moves right. Does this mean 
you’re editing the layer’s Position value? No! 
• Drag the Anchor Point again in the Layer panel, but this time watch what 
happens to the Anchor Point in the Comp panel. The position of the Anchor 
Point in the Comp panel stays the same, as does the Position value in the 
Timeline panel. So why does the layer appear to change position? Because  
Layer panel 
Comp panel
2 Double-click Flower.ai to open its Layer 
panel. Dock the Layer panel with the Project 
panel so that you can see it, the Comp 
panel, and the Transform properties in the 
Timeline panel all at the same time.

you are changing where the Anchor Point is 
in relation to the layer. This in turn changes 
where the layer’s pixels are drawn in rela-
tion to this position coordinate – a subtle 
but important difference. 
• When you’re done playing, drag the 
Anchor Point in the Layer panel to the base 
of the flower’s stem. Any rotation or scale 
will now occur around this point. 
4 In the Comp panel, drag the flower 
down so that its stem rests on the bottom  
of the comp’s image area. 
Scrub the values for Rotation and Scale: 
The flower animates more naturally now. 
Anchor Point Tool
This is a great tool for moving the Anchor 
Point without using the Layer panel:
5 In the Timeline panel, click Transform > 
Reset to reset the layer to how it was when 
you first added it to the center of the comp.
• Type y to select the Pan Behind  
(Anchor Point) tool. In the Comp panel 
only, drag the Anchor Point while care-
fully watching the Layer panel and the 
Transform values: The Position and 
Anchor Point values change in opposite 
directions, resulting in the layer remain-
ing stationary! 
Close the Layer panel, and press v to 
return to the Selection tool. 
6 Here’s how to move the layer to the 
bottom of the comp more precisely: 
Right-click on the Position value and 
select Edit Value. In the Position dialog 
that opens, set the Units menu to % of 
Composition, then set X = 50, Y = 100. 
Click OK and the layer’s position will be 
centered at the bottom of the comp.
ADVANCED ANIMATION — Lesson 2
47
4 When the Anchor Point is relocated to the bottom of the flower, animating Scale 
and Rotation will look more natural. (See Comps_Finished > 01-Anchor Point_final.)
5 Select the Anchor Point tool (top), and in the Comp panel 
move the Anchor Point to the bottom of the stem (above). 
The Anchor Point will also move in the Layer panel.
6 The Position dialog allows 
you to place a layer based on a 
percentage of the composition.
Layer Panel
Comp Panel
3–4 In the Layer panel, move the Anchor Point to the base of the stem of the flower. 
Then in the Comp panel, move the flower so its stem touches the bottom of the comp.

Faux Motion Control
You can add a layer larger than your comp size to a composition, then pan and 
zoom around that image. However, if you animate using Position and Scale, it 
can quickly become an exercise in frustration, because scaling happens around 
the anchor. The secret is to animate the Anchor Point instead of Position.  
To compare both approaches, try these exercises:
1 If necessary, close the Layer panel from the previous exercise. In the Project 
panel, locate and double-click on the comp 02a-Motion Control*starter1.
This comp already has a layer in it – AutoRace.jpg – that is considerably larger 
than the comp’s size. Drag it around in the Comp panel to get a feel for how it 
looks (you can view the entire image in the Footage panel by double-clicking 
AutoRace.jpg in the Sources folder in the Project panel).
2 With the Selection tool active (shortcut: v), select this layer in the Timeline 
panel and type p to reveal its Position, followed by Ss to also reveal its 
Scale. Press H and enable keyframing for Position and Scale at 00;00.
3 Drag the layer to focus on some cars you like. Then reduce the Scale to get 
more of them in the picture. Notice that as you alter Scale, the image is no 
longer framed the same. This happens because the layer is scaling around its 
Anchor Point – not the portion of it you were viewing in the comp. Drag the 
layer back to where you like it.
4 Press N and drag the layer to focus on a different set of cars, then set a  
different “zoom” level (Scale value). Again, you’ll have to re-tweak the position  
as the Scale edit made them move. Hmm…there’s got to be an easier way…
5 Click on the name of the comp at the top of its frame and choose Close All. 
• Back in the Project panel, double-click 02b-Motion Control*starter 2.  
This is a blank composition. In the Sources folder in the Project panel, select 
AutoRace.jpg and press C/ (L/) to add this to the center of your comp, 
starting at 00;00. Resist the urge to reposition the layer; you want the Anchor 
Point’s location (the Position value) to stay  centered in the comp. 
• Type s to reveal Scale, but this time type Sa to also reveal the Anchor 
Point. Press H and enable keyframing for these two properties. Throughout 
the remainder of this exercise, do not reposition the layer in the Comp panel.
6 Now double-click Auto Race.jpg to open its Layer panel. This panel should 
open to the left of the Comp panel from an earlier exercise (if it does not, dock  
it with the Project panel). With the Layer and Comp panels side by side, arrange 
your workspace so that you can see the entire image in both panels, as well as 
the Timeline panel. Setting Magnification > Fit can be useful here.
3 The problem with Position: After you’ve 
moved the layer into place (A), when you edit 
its Scale, it will appear to slide out of place 
(or even out of frame!) (B), requiring you to 
reposition it (C). This is because layers scale 
around their Anchor Point, not the center of 
the comp. Photo courtesy Crish Design.
5 Click on the name of the first starter 
comp and select Close All.
Lesson 2 — ADVANCED ANIMATION
48
A
B
C

ADVANCED ANIMATION — Lesson 2
49
8 You can tweak the Bezier curve for the Anchor Point path in the Layer panel (above) 
to create a “motion control” move that sweeps around your photo (below).
In the Layer panel, set the View 
menu to Anchor Point Path. Drag  
the crosshairs in the Layer panel to the 
center of the car or cars you want to 
see. Then edit the layer’s Scale to get 
the zoom amount you want. Notice 
how you smoothly zoom in and out  
of the center of your framed image –  
it doesn’t slide off the screen.
7 Press N. In the Layer panel, drag 
the Anchor Point to a different car 
or cars to focus on. Again, resist the 
temptation to drag the layer in the Comp 
panel! Then edit Scale to change your 
zoom amount. Notice how the layer 
stays “centered” as you scale – that’s 
because Position (where the Anchor 
Point is in relation to the comp) is 
always in the center of the comp. 
8 If you remembered to enable key-
framing in Step 5, you will now  
see a motion path in the Layer panel 
(not the Comp panel). It has Bezier 
handles, just like a position motion 
path. Tug on those handles and create 
a nice arc for your motion control 
camera move. If you can’t see the 
handles clearly, press C (L) and 
drag out a handle from the keyframe 
icon in the Layer panel (similar to the 
technique covered on page 36).
To preview, bring the Comp panel 
forward (otherwise, you’ll preview  
the Layer panel) and start a preview by 
pressing either º or ß. 
In a real job you would enable 
Motion Blur and add ease controls to 
taste (both covered later). 
To compare, our version is Comps_
Finished > 02-Motion Control_final. 
d tip
Nudging Scale
To edit the Scale value 
in 1% increments, 
press O (L) and 
use the + and - 
keys on the numeric 
keypad. To nudge  
in 10% increments,  
add S. 
6 By moving the Anchor Point in the Layer panel (top left), you can easily set the center 
of what your virtual camera is looking at in the Comp panel (top right).
Layer Panel
Comp Panel
Layer Panel

The Graph Editor
The next step in mastering animation is refining your keyframes and the way 
values interpolate between them by using the Graph Editor. You can switch 
between the Graph Editor and normal layer bar view at any time; the Graph 
Editor merely provides a more precise tool for manipulating keyframes.
1 Close the Layer panel if its still open, then click on the Composition 
Viewer menu and choose Close All. In the Project panel, double-click Comps > 
03-Graph Editor*starter to open it. This is similar to the animation you created 
in Lesson 1, except we went back a couple of steps to where all of the keyframes 
had linear interpolation. This is the default in After Effects and a telltale sign of 
less experienced animators. The Graph Editor is a great place to refine them.
2 Type Ca (La) to select all the layers in your composition. Then type 
u: This reveals the animating properties of the selected layers. The diamond 
shapes for the keyframes indicate linear interpolation. 
Slowly drag the current time indicator back and forth in the timeline to get  
an idea of how the Flight-Title.psd and Bumblebee.tif layers are animating. 
Then start a preview by pressing ß or º to check the animation 
at normal speed. All of the movements have sudden speed changes, which  
correspond to the default linear keyframe interpolation each keyframe has.
3 Press º to stop the preview 
and return the current time indicator to 
where it started. With all of the layers 
still selected, click on the Graph Editor 
icon along the top of the Timeline 
panel. The layer bars and keyframes will 
be replaced with a graph, and a new set 
of icons will appear along the bottom of 
the Timeline panel. 
Click on the eyeball icon along the 
bottom of the timeline and select Show 
Animated Properties from the popup menu. You will now see a series of colored 
lines, which correspond to how each animated property in this project is chang-
ing over time. The color of these lines corresponds to the colored boxes around 
their values to the left of the Timeline panel. (As the Scale’s X and Y dimensions 
are currently locked together, the red X Scale value and green Y Scale are drawn on 
top of each other, resulting in just a red line in the Graph Editor.) 
4 Press @ to deselect all of the layers, and select Bumblebee.tif: just its  
animating properties will be visible. Open the Choose Graph Type and Options 
Lesson 2 — ADVANCED ANIMATION
50
In this exercise, you will be using the  
Graph Editor to refine a version of the 
animation you created in Lesson 1.  
Clips VPK-FH100-15, CC-FH101-74, A005-C003 
and AGG-FH109-04 courtesy Artbeats.com; 
graphic #17961109 courtesy Pond5. 
d tip
Show Reference Graph
When Show Reference Graph is enabled 
under Choose Graph Type and Options, 
both the value and speed graphs are 
displayed at the same time. Choose Edit 
Value Graph or Edit Speed Graph to 
determine which type of curve you wish to 
edit; the other type will be displayed with 
reduced brightness. Having all of these 
lines on screen at once can be confusing, 
so we usually disable this option unless  
we explicitly want to see the impact on  
one graph type while we edit the other.

menu (the button to the right of the eyeball); it is currently set to Auto-Select 
Graph Type. While in this mode, After Effects is choosing to show you the value 
graph for Scale, Rotation, and Opacity (the red, cyan, and blue lines) and the 
speed graph for Position (the pink line). 
5 In the Choose Graph Type and Options menu, choose Edit Value Graph.  
The pink Position speed graph will be replaced with separate red and green 
graphs showing how those individual dimensions are varying over time as  
the bumblebee animates across the screen (see figures on next page). 
Scrub the time indicator, watching how the numeric values along the left cor-
respond to the lines and curves to the right. You can also press the j and k 
keys to jump back and forth between visible keyframes. Hover the cursor over 
ADVANCED ANIMATION — Lesson 2
51
2–3 The normal keyframe view displays keyframes for each property underneath each layer’s 
bar in the timeline (top). The Graph Editor allows you to see multiple layers and properties 
overlaid in a single display (middle). The Graph Editor icons explained (above and right).
Legend Key
A Choose which Properties are shown in  
Graph Editor
B Choose Graph Type and Options
C Show Transform Box when Multiple Keys  
Are Selected
D Toggle Snap On/Off
E 
Auto-zoom Graph Height
F 
Fit Selection to View
G Fit All Graphs to View
H Separate Dimensions
I 
Edit Selected Keyframes
J 
Convert Selected Keyframes to Hold
K Convert Selected Keyframes to Linear
L 
Convert Selected Keyframes to Auto Bezier
M Easy Ease
N Easy Ease In
O Easy Ease Out
 
 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H 
I 
J 
K 
L 
M 
N O

If you have zoomed in on a graph and want to quickly get  
back to viewing your entire curves, click the Fit All Graphs to  
View button along the bottom of the Graph Editor. To zoom in  
on selected keyframes, first select the keyframes you want to 
focus on, then click on the adjacent Fit Selection to View button.
Remember that the eyeball icon offers a Show Animated 
Properties option. When enabled, simply selecting a layer will 
show a graph for every animated property. To view just one  
property at a time, disable this option and select individual  
properties, or S+click to view multiple properties.
Lesson 2 — ADVANCED ANIMATION
52
the graph lines, and a popup will appear that provides the name of the layer, the 
name of the property, and that property’s value at that given moment in time.
6 Now open the Graph Type and Options menu and choose Edit Speed Graph 
(its original setting). When viewing speed graphs, the height of the lines indicate 
their rate of change in units per second. Note that all of the lines are perfectly 
flat. This indicates that all of the displayed properties are maintaining a constant 
speed between keyframes – a natural result of the linear keyframe interpolation 
type. Flat speed graphs often imply less-sophisticated motion.
7 Click the Choose Graph Type and Options button again and reset it to  
Auto-Select Graph Type. 
5 When Choose Graph 
Type and Options is 
set to Edit Value Graph 
(below), the lines in the 
Graph Editor show the 
values of each parameter 
as they change from 
frame to frame. Hover the 
cursor over one of these 
graphs to see its specific 
value at this particular 
point in time (right).
Zoom Slider
Fit Selection to View
Auto-Zoom 
Graph Height
Fit All Graphs 
to View
D Panning and Zooming Time
You can zoom in and out in the Graph Editor and the normal  
timeline keyframe display in a variety of ways:
• Drag the end handles of the Time Navigator bar that runs 
along the top of the timeline area.
• Drag the Zoom slider along the bottom of the timeline area.
• Use the normal magnification shortcut keys - and +.
• You can also use the normal Zoom tool: Press z to engage,  
then drag a region to auto-fit it to the Graph Editor display. 
Once zoomed in, you can slide the Time Navigator bar or  
hold down ß and drag to pan earlier or later in time.
The Graph Editor has an Auto-zoom Graph Height button; this 
defaults to On and is handy for making sure you see the full value 
range of your graphs. When the Auto-zoom button is disabled (not 
highlighted), you can use a mouse scroll wheel: The normal wheel 
movement is up and down; S+scroll moves horizontally. 

Editing Graphs
In the following steps, you will be using the 
Graph Editor to refine your animation. Preview 
during or after each change to verify the results.
8 Make sure Bumblebee.tif is still selected. 
The cyan-colored line along the bottom of the 
Graph Editor represents its Rotation, animat-
ing from 0° to 720°. To decrease the amount of 
rotation, click on its second keyframe and drag 
it downward. As you do so, a tooltip will appear, displaying the keyframe’s new 
value. This information will also be echoed in the Info panel. In comparison, on 
the left side of the timeline, the Rotation value shown is the value at the current 
point in time – not necessarily the keyframe’s value.
If you accidentally wander left or right as you drag this keyframe upward,  
add the S key as you drag; this will help constrain your movements. If you 
cannot get the exact value you desire, double-click the keyframe to numerically 
edit its value. You will also notice that the keyframe attempts to snap to the 
values of other keyframes as you drag; this is because Snap (the magnet button 
at the bottom of the Graph Editor) is enabled.
9 To have the bumblebee finish its rotation earlier in time, drag its second 
keyframe to the left. If you want it to rotate for the entire duration of the comp, 
drag it back to the right until it snaps along the right edge of the Timeline panel.
10 Rather than have the bumblebee spin at a constant speed, it may be more 
interesting to have it “ease” out of its at-rest pose and into its ending spin.  
A quick way to do this is to employ the Easy Ease Keyframe Assistant. Select  
the first Rotation keyframe and do any one of the following:
• Select Animation > Keyframe Assistant > Easy Ease or > Easy Ease Out.
• Click on one of the Easy Ease buttons along the 
bottom of the Graph Editor.
• Press ( for Easy Ease or S( for Easy Ease In.
11 After you apply Easy Ease, the cyan-colored line 
will gently bend upward from the first keyframe and 
a yellow Bezier handle will appear. Easy Ease applies 
a default interpolation to a keyframe so that its value 
changes more slowly as it approaches the keyframe. 
This is reflected in the changing slope of the value’s line 
in the Graph Editor. To make this slowdown more or 
less gradual, drag the yellow handle to the left or right.
ADVANCED ANIMATION — Lesson 2
53
d tip
Easier Shortcut
It’s simpler to use Easy Ease on the first or 
last keyframes; these keyframes have only 
outgoing or incoming handles anyway! 
8–9 To decrease the amount of rotation, 
drag the keyframe downward; to make the 
animation end earlier in time, drag it to the 
left. Add S as you drag to constrain 
your movements.
10 To have the bee slowly speed up from 
its first Rotation keyframe, select it and then 
press the Easy Ease or the Easy Ease Out 
button at the bottom of the Graph Editor.
11 Pressing S as you drag the Bezier handles 
will constrain the movement to the horizontal axis.

12 Now let’s smooth out the bumblebee’s flight. There are some jerks in its 
movement, particularly when it “lands” on the flower; we’d prefer a smoother 
flight. Select the last keyframe for Position (the pink line), then S+click the 
last keyframe for Scale (the red line). Then click the Easy Ease In button along 
the bottom of the Graph Editor.
Remember that the pink line was showing us the speed graph for Position. 
After applying Easy Ease In, this line will be lowered to a value of 0 speed at its 
final keyframe. The arc in this line shows its speed easing to a halt.
13 There is a discontinuity in the middle of Position’s speed graph. This  
indicates that its speed is changing suddenly at the middle keyframe, caused by 
an imbalance between how far the bumblebee has to travel between keyframes 
versus the amount of time between them. The linear keyframe interpolation 
does nothing to help smooth the transition. Let’s fix these problems:
• Place the cursor over one of the keyframe boxes for Position at 01:10 in time. 
Hold down the O (A) key to change the cursor to a Convert Vertex tool. 
Click on one of the keyframe boxes, and the keyframe interpolation will change 
to Auto Bezier, which joins the discontinuous keyframe handles and helps 
smooth the motion through this keyframe. (Click again to return to Linear.)
Lesson 2 — ADVANCED ANIMATION
54
13 Kinks in the speed graph for Position 
(A) indicates that there will be a “hitch”  
in the motion through that keyframe.  
Hold down O (A) then click on the 
keyframe to convert to Auto Bezier  
(B), and then reposition it to smooth out the 
graph (C). You can also use the buttons at 
the bottom of the Graph Editor to toggle 
selected keyframes from Linear to Auto 
Bezier (refer to figure on page 51 or hover 
your cursor over the icons to view tooltips).
d gotcha
Not So Fast
You might think of using the Easy Ease 
Keyframe Assistant to smooth out a kink 
in the middle of the graph. But this will 
just reduce the speed at that keyframe  
to zero! The Easy Ease shortcuts are best 
used on the first or last keyframes.
• There is still a slight kink in Position’s speed graph. To cure it, drag the middle 
keyframe up or down (changing its velocity at this point) as well as left or 
right (changing its timing) until you have a smooth graph. You can tug on its 
Bezier handles to further shape its curve; this converts it to Continuous Bezier 
 interpolation. (Later in this lesson you’ll learn about roving keyframes, which 
would be another good solution for smoothing out this particular graph.)
Preview again: You should notice that your animation is now a lot smoother 
and more refined than when you started. (If you can’t remember, compare your 
animation to the comp 03-Graph Editor2_reference.)
d tip
Diamonds and Circles
You don’t need to be in the Graph Editor 
to toggle between Linear (diamond icon) 
and Auto Bezier (circle icon) keyframes. 
In the regular keyframe display, simply 
O+click (A+click) on a keyframe  
to toggle between the two. 
A
B
C

ADVANCED ANIMATION — Lesson 2
55
Improving the Timing and “Feel”
An additional feature of the Graph Editor is that it allows you to see keyframes 
from several different layers overlaid in the same view. This makes it easier to 
coordinate the values and timing of multiple layers and properties. For this to 
happen, you need to add properties to a Graph Editor Set so that they will be 
displayed regardless of which layer is selected.
In this composition, we’ve initially animated the title to arrive at 
its final position before the bumblebee does. What if you (or more 
important, your client) want them to arrive at the same time?
14 Select the layer Flight-Title.psd. The graphs for Bumblebee.
tif will disappear, replaced by the single graph for Flight-Title.psd’s 
Position. To see them all at once, create a Graph Editor Set:
• Between the word Position and the animation stopwatch to its left 
is a Graph Editor Set button. Enable it for Flight-Title.psd’s Position.
• Enable this switch for Bumblebee.tif’s Position, Scale, Rotation, 
and Opacity properties. You can click on one switch and drag the 
mouse across the others to enable them all in one movement.
• Click on the eyeball icon along the bottom of the Graph Editor to 
open its properties menu. Make sure Show Graph Editor Set is enabled.
• Click anywhere in the Timeline panel, deselecting your layers. The graphs  
for your Graph Editor Set properties remain visible in the Graph Editor.
15 Double-click on the word Position to select both of the keyframes  
for Flight-Title.psd. A white box in the Graph Editor will enclose them.  
Place your cursor over the box until you see an arrow with 
no tail, indicating you are about to move all of its selected  
contents. Drag to the right until its last keyframe aligns 
with the final Position keyframe for Bumblebee.tif. Press 
S while dragging to constrain its movement and to 
snap to available keyframes. (Another approach is to slide 
the timing of the entire layer; that’s in the next lesson.)
Have fun further refining this composition. For example, 
the bee’s rotation “feels” late because it is easing into its 
spin after the bee has eased into its final position. Rather 
than worrying about aligning keyframes, drag its first 
Rotation keyframe earlier to make the transition from 
moving to spinning feel more seamless. Perhaps animate 
the yellow bar on screen as well. You have the tools; now 
it’s just a matter of taste.
14 To view selected graphs regardless  
of whether or not a layer is selected,  
enable the Graph Editor Set button for  
the desired property. Also verify that 
Show Graph Editor Set is enabled in  
the Graph Editor properties menu.
d tip
Quick Keyframe Assistance
You can right-click on any keyframe to get 
quick access to the Keyframe Assistants, 
as well as several other handy keyframe 
interpolation and selection options.
15 To edit multiple keyframes at once, select them and then move 
or resize the bounding box that surrounds them. (Note that as you 
drag, keyframes may move out of view until you release the mouse; 
if they don’t reappear, check that Auto-zoom is enabled.)

Separate Dimensions
After Effects bundles X and Y position data (and when employing 3D space,  
Z position) into one “temporal” keyframe to manipulate in the Timeline panel, 
as well as one “spatial” keyframe in the Composition panel. This is a good 
system for many jobs and makes it easier to manipulate position data. However, 
some movements require separate control over each dimension. Next we’ll work 
through an exercise where this comes in handy: animating a bouncing ball, 
where the object’s speed as it moves from left to right (the X dimension) is  
different from its speed as it bounces up and down (the Y dimension). As this is 
an advanced technique, feel free to skip ahead to the next exercise on page 60.
Lesson 2 — ADVANCED ANIMATION
56
2–3 Enter two Position keyframes for the volleyball so it 
starts in the upper left and comes to rest in the lower right. 
Ball image #5752295 courtesy iStockphoto/boris64.
1 Close your previous comps to clean up the 
display. Return to the Project panel and double-
click the comp 04-Separate Dimensions*starter to 
open it. It contains a yellow volleyball in the upper 
left corner. The plan is to have you animate it to 
bounce off the “floor” of the comp while moving 
from left to right at a steady speed.
2 Select the layer volleyball.ai and press Op 
(Ap) to toggle on the animation stopwatch for 
Position and also reveal it in the Timeline panel. 
(Alternatively, press p to twirl down Position and 
then toggle on the stopwatch.)
3 Move the current time indicator to the end of 
the composition (the shortcut is to press N).  
Drag the volleyball to the lower right corner of the 
comp, as if it were resting on the floor. You will 
notice a straight motion path in the Comp panel 
connecting these two Position keyframes.
4 When you enabled keyframing for Position, 
a second switch appeared to its right of the ani-
mation stopwatch in the Timeline panel. Click 
on this Graph Editor Set button to enable it: This 
will ensure that Position will always appear in the 
Graph Editor. Then reveal the Graph Editor in the 
Timeline panel by clicking its button along the top 
of the panel. You will see a single horizontal white 
line, representing the constant speed of the ball as 
it travels between these two keyframes.
4 Enable the Graph Editor Set button for Position.  
This will ensure Position will appear in the Graph Editor. 
Then click on the Graph Editor button (circled in red). 

ADVANCED ANIMATION — Lesson 2
57
5 Make sure the Position parameter is selected in the Timeline panel. Then click 
on the Separate Dimensions button underneath the Graph Editor. Along the left, 
the former unified Position value will now be replaced by separate X Position 
and Y Position parameters, color-coded red for X and green for Y. In the Graph 
Editor, the single white velocity graph will be replaced with separate sloping red 
and green X and Y Position value graphs. (If you see flat horizontal lines instead, 
make sure the Choose Graph Type and Options popup has been set to Auto-
Select Graph Type.)
6 We’re happy with the left-to-right movement, so we can leave X Position 
alone for now. Let’s work on the bounces, which means editing the Y Position 
(up and down) graph. First we’re going to set the 
keyframes for where the ball hits the floor, then 
in the next step edit the Y Position graph to 
create the flight path between those hits:
• Move the current time indicator to 00:15.
• In the Timeline panel, scrub the Y Position 
value until the ball just touches the bottom of 
the comp. (You don’t want to drag the ball in 
the Comp panel, because that would add both  
X and Y keyframes!)
• Make sure just the new Y Position keyframe 
is selected; it will have a solid yellow box in the 
Graph Editor, rather than a hollow yellow box. 
Edit > Copy this keyframe.
• Move the current time indicator to 01:15.
• With Y Position still highlighted along the left 
of the Timeline panel, Edit > Paste to create a keyframe at  
this new time with the same value as the previous keyframe.
6 After pasting the second keyframe for 
Y Position at 01:15, the ball lurches more 
than bounces across the floor.
5 After enabling Separate Dimensions, 
separate X and Y Position values will appear. 
You will also see color-coded lines for the  
X and Y values and velocities.

Lesson 2 — ADVANCED ANIMATION
58
7 start The red line in the Graph Editor 
indicates the ball is moving left to right 
at a fairly constant speed. The green line 
is the Y Position, and looks similar to the 
motion path on the previous page. You 
will tweak this curve to fix the path.
7 Preview: At this point, the volleyball just hits the ground and slowly lurches 
across it. Time to add a bigger bounce to its step:
• A bouncing motion is not continuous; the ball reverses direction when it hits 
the floor. This means you need to create discontinuous motion at the keyframes. 
Currently, Bezier handles appear in the Graph Editor around each keyframe  
indicating Auto Bezier keyframes (the default). Press the O (A) key and drag 
one of the Bezier handles for the keyframe at 00:15 to “break” them.
• Now that the handles are broken for that keyframe, release the O (A) key 
and drag both handles down until you get a nice arc coming into and leaving 
this keyframe – you will see this arc in both the Graph Editor and in the  
resulting motion path in the Comp panel.
• Repeat to also break the handles and create a steep arc at the keyframe at 01:15. 
7 end The final X and Y Position value graphs.

• Also edit the curves for the first and last keyframes to help trace out a nice 
bounce motion path. 
• Start a preview and continue to tweak the handles in the Graph Editor until 
you like your motion. You can also move the Y Position keyframes in time by 
dragging them left and right in the Graph Editor. For example, move the third 
keyframe later to shorten the “flight time” during the last bounce. Note that  
this does not alter the ball’s speed in the X dimension, just when it bounces in 
the Y dimension.
8 Remember that the X Position 
graph is separate! You can O+click 
(A+click) on the Auto Bezier key-
frames in the Graph Editor to revert 
them to Linear. 
Experiment some more:
• Select the second (last) X Position 
keyframe and add Easy Ease (() to it. 
Preview, and notice how the ball slows 
toward the end of the animation while 
the bounces remain the same. 
• Press N and decrease the X 
Position value. Preview, and note how 
the ball doesn’t travel as far across the 
comp, but the up and down bounce 
motion remains the same. Our version 
is in the Comps_Finished folder.
This animation would have been very difficult to pull off with normal, 
joined-together Position values – you would be fighting to keep a constant speed 
in X while you created your bounces in Y. However, using Separate Dimensions 
does come at a price: You can no longer directly edit the motion path in the 
Comp panel (note that the Bezier handles disappeared); you have to craft your 
path in the Graph Editor. The good news is that you can select Position and 
disable Separate Dimensions by clicking the same switch along the bottom of 
the Graph Editor – After Effects will then approximate your final animation 
using traditional joined Position keyframes.
Quick Quizzler
How would you make the ball “squash” each time it hits the floor?  
Remember: Layers scale around their Anchor Point… The answer is in the 
Quizzler Solutions folder.
ADVANCED ANIMATION — Lesson 2
59
d tip
Motion Blur
Enabling Motion Blur for the ball really 
helps this animation. The faster the ball 
moves or changes direction, the more it  
will be blurred – automatically! (Motion 
blur is covered on page 63.)
8 The final motion path. Remember that 
the dots along the motion path indicate 
the distance the ball travels between 
frames in time. Note the lack of Bezier 
handles on the motion path; this is a side 
effect of using Separate Dimensions in the 
Graph Editor.

Float like a Butterfly
In this next exercise, we’re going to take an object with an alpha channel – a  
butterfly – and fly it around a composition by literally drawing its flight path. 
Then we’ll employ some keyframe assistants and a few other tricks to refine  
its animation, as well as working in the Graph Editor.
1 Close all previous comps. Return to the Project panel and open Comps > 
05a-Butterfly Flight*starter. 
2 The butterfly is a bit large. Select Butterfly 2.tif, type s to reveal its Scale 
parameter, and reduce it to around 65%.
3 Open Window > Motion Sketch, then Window > Smoother. Where they 
open will depend on your current workspace; they will most likely appear 
tabbed together in a frame in the lower right corner of the application 
window. To give each its own space, click and drag the tab for Smoother 
downward to the bottom of its frame until a blue region illuminates; release 
your mouse.
4 Turn your attention to the Motion Sketch panel. This captures your mouse 
movements in the comp’s image area and converts them into Position key-
frames. The Start and Duration are determined by the work area (page 17). 
To see a box indicating the size of your layer while you’re sketching, keep  
the Wireframe checkbox enabled; to see the other layers (which we want to  
do here to determine the butterfly’s path), enable the Background checkbox.
5 The plan is to draw a path of the butterfly starting on the largest flower 
head, have it fly about the screen, then settle back on the same flower, all 
during the duration of this comp (5 seconds). Practice this by dragging the 
butterfly around while counting to 5 to get a feel for what you would like  
to do, as well as how fast.
Lesson 2 — ADVANCED ANIMATION
60
4 In the Motion Sketch panel, enable 
the Background checkbox so you can 
see the other layers while you sketch.
5 Select the butterfly, click Start Capture in Motion Sketch, and 
trace a flight path for the butterfly by moving your mouse. After 
you are done, you will see the motion path in the Comp panel.
1 Our starter comp: You’ll use the Motion 
Sketch keyframe assistant to animate the 
butterfly around the garden.
• Verify that Background is checked, then click the 
Start Capture button in the Motion Sketch panel.  
After Effects will wait until you click and start dragging 
the mouse in the Comp panel. Click on the flower head 
to start, then draw your path, keeping the mouse key 
pressed. It’s okay if you finish early; just release the 
mouse. Your new motion path will be drawn in the 
Comp panel. 

ADVANCED ANIMATION — Lesson 2
61
• Press p to reveal your new Position keyframes in the timeline.
• Preview your movement. If you’re not happy with it, or if time ran out before 
you were finished, type Cz (Lz) to undo until your new path and key-
frames disappear, then try again! You can also toggle off the stopwatch for 
Position to delete all keyframes. When you’re happy, save your project.
Smoothing Keyframes
After you use Motion Sketch, you’ll probably have a large number of Position 
keyframes. This makes it really difficult to edit your path. So let’s simplify things.
6 Click on the word Position for Butterfly 2.tif to select all of its keyframes; 
they will turn yellow. Then turn your attention to the Smoother panel (if its  
text and buttons are grayed out, deselect then reselect your keyframes).
This assistant plots an ideal smoothed curve for the selected keyframes, then 
looks at the actual keyframes to see how far they deviate from the ideal case. 
How much deviation you allow is set by the Tolerance parameter. You can scrub 
the Tolerance value or click it and type an absolute value. Try a value of, say, 10 
for Tolerance and click Apply (its Apply To menu is set automatically depending 
on the keyframes selected). 
Press @ to Deselect All. Notice how you have fewer keyframes and your path 
has been simplified. Preview; the movement should be an idealized version of 
your original sketch. You can always undo and try another 
Tolerance value. The goal is to avoid leftover clusters of 
keyframes that are too close to one another. Feel free to  
also remove keyframes manually if they are unnecessary.  
It should be relatively easy to tweak your motion path  
now that you have fewer keyframes. 
Motion Sketch includes its own Smoothing parameter 
which it applies after you draw a path. We prefer to keep 
this value low and use the Smoother afterward to get our 
desired result as it’s easier to try different smoothing values 
without having to redo the entire motion sketch.
5 continued Press p to reveal the Position 
keyframes in the Timeline panel.
6 After applying the Smoother (above), you 
will have considerably fewer keyframes to 
deal with in the Comp and Timeline panels 
(below), even though the path is very similar 
to your original sketch.

• At this point, your butterfly will automatically rotate to follow its path…but 
it’s skidding sideways! No problem: Type Sr to reveal its Rotation param-
eter in addition to Position, and scrub the Degrees value (the rightmost value 
with the ° symbol) to point it the right way.
When using Auto-Orientation, pay close attention to the handles for the 
beginning and ending spatial keyframes in the Comp panel. Zoom in, and you’ll 
often find that the default dots (the Auto Bezier handles) are pointing a little off 
to the side, causing the layer to do a little twist as it exits the first keyframe and 
enters the last keyframe. To fix this, drag the dots to create Bezier handles and 
edit them so that they are exactly in line with the motion path.
8 In the sidebar on the following page, we discuss Motion Blur. Let’s enable it 
for our butterfly:
• In the switches panel for Butterfly 2.tif, toggle on the Motion Blur switch  
(the hollow box underneath the switch that looks like a circle with an echo). 
• To see the effect in the Comp panel, also toggle on the large Enable Motion 
Blur button along the top of the Timeline panel. Preview and enjoy the result. 
• To render more or less blur, open Composition > Composition Settings, click 
on the Advanced tab, and change the Shutter Angle. Try various values between 
90° and 720° and compare the effect; edit Shutter Phase to be negative half the 
Shutter Angle to blur equally before and after each frame.
7 Normally, layers keep the same 
orientation as they move around a comp 
(A–B). By setting Layer > Transform >  
Auto-Orient to Orient Along Path (top) 
and adjusting its initial rotation, it will 
now appear to automatically rotate to 
follow its path (C–D).
Lesson 2 — ADVANCED ANIMATION
62
Auto-Orient and Motion Blur
Let’s clean up a few details before further refining our motion.
7 Currently, the butterfly stays pointed toward the top of the frame, regardless 
of how it’s flying. To fix that, select Butterfly 2.tif and choose Layer > Transform 
> Auto-Orient to open the Auto-Orientation dialog (the shortcut is COo, 
LAo). Select Orient Along Path and click OK.
A
B
C
D
8 When you enable the Motion Blur 
switch for the butterfly layer and the comp 
(below), you will notice the butterfly’s wings 
get blurry as it moves – especially as it 
turns a corner (above).

(64 and 256 respectively) and then reduce them only if we notice  
the composition seems to be taking too long to render. 
If Motion Blur is taking too long to preview, turn off the 
master Enable Motion Blur switch in the Timeline panel; don’t 
turn off the Enable Motion Blur switch for the layers themselves!
D Motion Blur
When moving objects are captured by a normal camera, they 
might appear blurry, depending on how far they have moved 
while the camera’s shutter was open while capturing a frame. 
After Effects can mimic this through the use of Motion Blur.
To add this to a layer, the layer’s Motion Blur switch must be 
enabled (see figure on previous page). To preview what the blur 
looks like in the Comp panel, you also need to turn on the master 
Enable Motion Blur switch along the top of the Timeline panel. 
There is a separate Motion Blur popup in the Render Settings  
to determine whether this blur is rendered for “checked layers” 
(layers with their Motion Blur switch on). 
When enabled, After Effects will automatically add blur to 
layers where the Transform properties are animating; some  
effects also can calculate motion blur. To add motion blur to 
already shot or rendered footage, you need to use the Pixel 
Motion Blur effect (demonstrated in Lesson 7).
To control the amount of blur, open Composition > 
Composition Settings and click on the Advanced tab. The  
Shutter Angle controls how much blur is calculated. A full frame 
of blur is 360°. Film cameras typically have 180° of blur; the 
maximum in After Effects is 720°. The length of the blur is also 
affected by the frame rate: The slower the rate, the longer the 
shutter is open, and therefore the longer the blur streaks. It is  
preferred to set the Shutter Phase to negative half of the value  
of the Shutter Angle – this way, an equal amount of blur is  
happening before and after the current frame in time.
Motion blur helps prevent fast-moving objects from appearing 
to strobe or stutter across the frame. If you notice strobing or  
stuttering, increase the Samples Per Frame and Adaptive Sample 
Limit values. We typically increase these to their upper limit  
ADVANCED ANIMATION — Lesson 2
63
When you’ve settled on a shutter angle you like, Preview again. Notice how 
the outside of the wings are more blurred whenever the butterfly turns a corner 
quickly because the pixels are traveling faster than the butterfly’s body.
Also note how the blur amount automatically ramps up and down as the 
speed of the layer changes between keyframes. In the next exercise, you will 
learn how to smooth out the butterfly’s speed across this complex motion path 
and add eases onto the ends of the path. Save your project before moving on. 
Our version so far is in Comps_Finished > 05a-Butterfly Flight_final.
d try it
Keyframe Strrrreettcchh
To stretch or compress the amount  
of time that a group of keyframes is 
spread across, select them, hold down 
O (A), and then drag the first or  
last keyframe (not the middle ones). 
g The amount of motion blur is adjusted under the Advanced 
tab in the Composition Settings dialog. Shutter Angle controls 
how long the blur streaks are, Shutter Phase controls the timing 
of the streaks, and Samples Per Frame plus the Adaptive 
Sample Limit control how smooth the blur is. 

9 The butterfly’s initial speed graph.  
The flat lines between keyframes reflect 
the constant speeds that result from 
the default linear temporal keyframes.  
(Enable the Graph Editor Set button 
for Position – circled above – to ensure 
you always see this property.)
Lesson 2 — ADVANCED ANIMATION
64
d tip
Right-Click to Rove
You can right-click a keyframe in the 
Graph Editor or timeline view to toggle 
on and off Rove Across Time. If this 
option is grayed out, make sure the first 
or last keyframe is not also selected. 
Roving Keyframes
Next, we want to show you how to create smooth speed changes over time even 
when you have a bunch of Position keyframes in space. Our alternate starting 
point can be found in Comps > 05b-Butterfly Flight*starter. 
9 Click on the Graph Editor button along the top of the Timeline panel to  
open this display. Make sure Position is exposed for Butterfly 2.tif (press p if  
it isn’t), then enable the Graph Editor Set button to the left of the word Position.
You should see a squared-off white graph. If not, click on the Choose Graph 
Type popup underneath the Graph Editor and select Edit Speed Graph. In this 
graph, higher values mean faster motion. You can “read” this graph to tell that 
speed changes at keyframes are sudden, not smooth, because the butterfly enters 
the keyframes at one speed and exits at a different speed. It is also cruising at 
a speed higher than 0 at the start and end, which makes for sudden starts and 
stops. Remember that the dots in the motion path also indicate speed; 
the closer the dots are together, the slower the butterfly is traveling. 
10 The sudden changes in speed are the result of using linear inter-
polation. Take a stab at trying to smooth out this speed graph by hand: 
• Drag the first keyframe all the way down to the horizontal line at 
zero, or select it and press the Easy Ease Out button. 
• Do the same for the last keyframe, or press the Easy Ease In button. 
• Click and drag a marquee selection around all the keyframes in the 
middle (excluding the first and last); the selected keyframes will have a bound-
ing box around them. Change these linear keyframes to smooth keyframes by 
pressing O (A) to temporarily switch to the Convert Vertex tool, then click 
on any one of the selected key frames: All the keyframes will convert to Auto 
Bezier (smooth) keyframes with short Bezier influence handles. Click outside  
the selection box to deselect the keyframes. 
10 Before trying to smooth out the speed 
graph by hand, apply Easy Ease to the 
first and last keyframes and then O+click 
(A+click) on the keyframes in-between 
to convert them to Auto Bezier. You can 
also click the Auto Bezier button (circled in 
red). Even though your overall speed is still 
inconsistent, the changes will be smoother.

• Now try dragging individual keyframes up and down and left and right to 
smooth out bumps in the curve; dragging the handles longer will also help. 
Preview your work. Even though the butterfly’s flight should have smoother 
speed changes, it’s time to tell you that there is an easier way to achieve this  
goal using one of the best-kept secrets in After Effects: roving keyframes. This  
trick leaves your motion path alone (in other words, it doesn’t touch the  
spatial keyframes in the Comp panel), but simplifies your temporal keyframes 
(where they are in time in the Timeline panel) so that you have to edit only 
the starting and ending keyframes. After Effects will then automatically move 
(“rove”) all of the keyframes in-between to work out the required timing.
11 Still in the Graph Editor, double-click Position to make sure all of the 
Position keyframes are selected. Then open Animation > Keyframe Interpolation. 
Click on the Roving menu, and select Rove Across Time. Click OK. All of 
the keyframes between the first and last automatically adjust to maintain  
a smooth speed curve between these two keyframes; Preview to verify this.
The first and last keyframes cannot Rove Across Time. Select them indi-
vidually and drag their handles to alter their influence; namely, how the 
butterfly speeds up out of the first keyframe and slows down to the last. 
Notice how the ease controls now apply across the entire animation as if 
the keyframes in the middle didn’t exist in the timeline.
12 Last trick, and then you can break for tea: 
• Double-click Position again to make sure all keyframes are selected, then 
select the menu item Animation > Keyframe Assistant. This offers a series 
of utilities that automatically edit keyframe values for you. 
• Select Time-Reverse Keyframes. It does just what it says: It reverses all of  
your keyframes in time. Preview, and now you’ll see your butterfly travel  
in the opposite direction along your path. For comparison, our version is  
in Comps_Finished > 05b-Butterfly Flight_final.
ADVANCED ANIMATION — Lesson 2
65
11 Select all the Position keyframes, then 
select Animation > Keyframe Interpolation 
and set Roving to Rove Across Time (left). 
Afterwards, you only need to adjust the 
interpolation of the first and last keyframes 
(right), and the ones in the middle will slide 
(“rove”) in time to ensure smooth speed 
changes in-between.
d tip
Rove in Either View
The Keyframe Interpolation dialog may be 
opened while in either the Graph Editor or 
the normal keyframe view.
12 Select all of the keyframes, and choose 
Animation > Keyframe Assistant. You can 
also right-click on one of the keyframes to 
bring up a version of the Animation menu. 
(Note that you can also apply Rove Across 
Time to selected keyframes from this menu.)

Hold Keyframes
Sometimes an animation requires sudden, jerky movements. The perfect tool  
for this job is the Hold keyframe. Hold is another type of interpolation – like 
linear – except this one says “hold my value until you encounter another  
keyframe.” Let’s put it to work on a common animation style known as the 
“slam down.” If you’d like to see where you’re going with this exercise, take  
a peek at our finished version in comp 06-Slam Down_final and Preview it. 
1 In the Project panel, locate and double-click the comp 06-Slam Down*starter. 
This comp already has two layers in it: REJECT, which is the word in the middle 
of the comp, and frame, which is the rounded rectangle bordering it. The goal 
here is to have the word stagger and slam into position by 02;00 in the timeline, 
then to slowly drift as the frame around it blinks.
2 Click on a time display in the Timeline or Comp panels, type “1.” (don’t 
forget the period), and press R to jump to 1;00. Select the REJECT layer, type 
p to reveal Position, Ss to reveal Scale, and Sr to reveal Rotation. 
Click the stopwatch for Position and drag down across the stopwatches for Scale 
and Rotation to enable keyframing for all three parameters in one smooth move; 
After Effects will remember the current values at this point in time.
3 Move the current time indicator  
10 frames earlier in time to 00;20. The 
shortcut is S•. Choose a new 
pose for your word: Try something 
larger (increase Scale), offset a bit  
(edit Position), and perhaps rotated 
(Rotation). After Effects will automati-
cally create the new keyframes for you.
• Press S• again and create a 
new pose at 00;10 in the same fashion. 
Then press H to jump to 00;00 and create your beginning pose. 
• Finally, press N and set up a final pose that’s slightly smaller and perhaps 
slightly rotated from the main pose you set up at 01;00.
4 Preview your animation: The word REJECT slides around between keyframes 
then drifts away as After Effects interpolates between your keyframes. Hmm… 
we had something harder-edged in mind.
Click on the word Position in the Timeline panel, then S+click on Scale 
and Rotation – this will select all of their keyframes. Now, select the menu item 
Animation > Toggle Hold Keyframe. Notice how the shapes of the keyframes 
changed to have squares on the outgoing side. Also, in the Comp panel, all  
Lesson 2 — ADVANCED ANIMATION
66
dtip
Toggle Hold Shortcut
To change a selected keyframe to Hold, 
type COh (LAh) or press 
CO (LA) and click on the 
keyframe you wish to change. 
d insider knowledge
Supersize Me
Normally, it’s a bad idea to increase 
Scale beyond 100%, because you will lose 
image quality. However, if the layer is 
created using vectors – such as Illustrator 
artwork – you can enable its Continuously 
Rasterize switch so that it remains sharp. 
We’ve done that for you in this comp.  
We’ll explain this more in Lesson 6.
3 Keyframe the REJECT layer to strike a 
few poses as it falls into position, then to 
drift away.

the handles retracted so that the motion path moves only in straight lines.  
Preview again: Now we have sudden movements…but we lost our drift at the 
end! That’s because we also converted the keyframes at 01;00 to Hold, which 
means they can’t change their value until the next keyframe. 
5 Select just the three keyframes at 01;00 by dragging a marquee selection 
around them. Press the C (L) key and click on one of them: All selected  
keyframes will change back to linear keyframes (diamond shape). Preview  
again; now you have your desired animation. 
6 If you know you want a parameter to use Hold keyframes, you just have to  
set up the first one; subsequent keyframes will then get the same interpolation. 
Let’s say we want the border around the title to blink on and off, starting 
when the word lands: 
• First, move to 01;00, select frame (layer 2), and press [ (left square bracket)  
to make it start at this point in time. 
• Press Ot (At) to enable keyframing for Opacity; it defaults to 100% 
and a linear keyframe. Toggle it to a Hold keyframe using this shortcut: Press 
CO (LA) and click on it. 
• Press Sª to jump 10 frames to 01;10 in the timeline, and set 
frame’s Opacity to 0%. It automatically gets the squared-off keyframe shape  
on the right side, indicating it also will “hold” its value and not interpolate.
Finish off this animation using copy and paste to save time. Select the Opacity 
keyframes at 01;00 and 01;10 and copy. Press Sª to move to 01;20 
and paste: Both keyframes, with the copied values and spacing, will be created 
for you. Move to 02;10 and Paste again. Preview again; the frame layer will  
blink on and off. Our finished version is shown in comp 06-Slam Down_final.
ADVANCED ANIMATION — Lesson 2
67
5 Select just the keyframes at 01;00, and 
C+click (L+click) on them to convert 
them to normal linear keyframes. You need 
this interpolation to get the drifting motion 
at the end.
6 Our final timeline, including Hold 
keyframes for frame’s Opacity so that it 
blinks on and off. (If the keyframes are 
not visible, select both layers and press 
u to reveal animated properties.)
4 Select all of the keyframes and either 
right-click on them or use the Animation 
menu to select Toggle Hold Keyframes. 
The square shape on the right (outgoing) 
sides of the keyframes indicates “hold.”

Lesson 2 — ADVANCED ANIMATION
There are several standard frame rates:  
23.976 or 24 frames per second (fps) for 
filmic situations, 25 fps for PAL video, and 
29.97 or 30 fps for NTSC video. 
It’s harder to count to 29.97 instead of a 
simple number like 30. Therefore, SMPTE  
has two different ways of counting this rate: 
Drop Frame and Non-Drop Frame. Non-Drop 
assumes the frame rate is 30 fps, just for the 
sake of counting. It counts neatly from 00 
to 29, then rolls over to 01:00. Most people 
working on shorter programs (say, under a 
half hour) use Non-Drop. After this lesson, 
we will use Non-Drop Frame counting as our 
project default for the rest of this book.
If the actual frame rate is 29.97 fps (the 
legacy standard) instead of 30, the Non-Drop 
frame number displayed will eventually drift 
compared with real time. Therefore, Drop 
Frame counting was created. To even things 
back up, Drop Frame skips the frame 
numbers 00 and 01 (just the numbers, not the 
actual frames) every minute, except for 10s of 
minutes. You can tell Drop Frame counting is 
After Effects features three different ways to 
count time: SMPTE Timecode, Frames, and 
Feet + Frames. The counting method used  
can be changed in File > Project Settings. 
You can also C+click (L+click) on the 
frame number in the top left of the Timeline 
panel to toggle between the choices. 
Regardless of the counting system chosen, 
the starting number can be set for each 
comp inside its Composition > Composition 
Settings dialog. Additionally, the starting 
number for each movie source can be set  
in its File > Interpret Footage dialog.
SMPTE
This is the most common frame counting 
format – and the most confusing. SMPTE  
displays the number of hours (HR), minutes 
(MN), seconds (SC), and frames (FR) in the 
format HR:MN:SC:FR. 
D Tech Corner: Time Display and Timecode
g The File > Interpret Footage dialog for each source movie allows you to set its frame 
rate, start timecode, and whether to use the Non-Drop or Drop Frame counting method.
being used by the semicolons between  
the numbers. 
After Effects attempts to determine 
if a 29.97 fps source uses Non-Drop or 
Drop Frame. This may be overridden in 
the Interpret Footage dialog. Preferences 
> Import sets the default to use if a source 
movie is not tagged. Non-Drop or Drop 
Frame counting may also be set per comp.
Frames
This simple format just displays the frame 
number, starting from the beginning of the 
timeline. It is preferred by some animators 
and visual effects artists.
Feet + Frames
This is the way film editors used to count 
time – they actually measured the amount  
of film that had gone past. Different film  
sizes have different numbers of frames per 
foot; 35mm film has 16 frames per foot. 
Therefore, time in this format is displayed  
as FEET + FR.
After Effects supports three different ways to 
represent time: SMPTE Timecode, Frames, 
and Feet + Frames. 
g SMPTE Timecode
g Frames
g Feet + Frames
68

ADVANCED ANIMATION — Lesson 2
69
d solutions
No Peeking!
Don’t peek at the Quizzler Solution comps 
until you’ve tried them yourself first! There 
is no “right” answer to the Idea Corner 
challenges, so feel free to take a different 
path and use your own sources instead.
Idea Corner
The following will help you 
build on the animation skills 
learned in this lesson:
• Create an animation in 
02b-Motion Control that explores multiple areas of the image. You could pause 
at some areas by using Hold keyframes or “whip pan” quickly from one area 
to another, using Motion Blur for added effect. Our version is Idea1 – Motion 
Control. Also feel free to use your own image!
Use Hold keyframes whenever you “pause” Position or Anchor Point paths  
to ensure that Bezier handles are retracted (this avoids odd behavior in the 
motion path). If you have trouble moving the Anchor Point when keyframes  
are stacked on top of each other, scrub the Anchor Point value in the timeline  
to move them apart, and drag from there.
In Idea1 – Motion Control, we used 
a combination of different keyframe 
types and motion blur.
Idea2: By giving each character its own 
layer, you can create even more interesting 
slam-down effects, with drop shadows falling 
from one character to another.
• At the end of Lesson 1, we showed you how to import a layered Photoshop or 
Illustrator file as a composition. Import the file Reject_split.ai from this lesson’s 
02_Sources folder as a comp – it contains each character on a separate layer. 
Animate a slam down (as you did in 06-Slam Down) for each character, this time 
using more steps and animating faster. Our version is Idea2 – REJECT on 3s, 
where we animated the slam down every 3 frames (known as “animating on 3s”).
Quizzler
A large part of becoming a motion graphics artist is looking at another anima-
tion and “reverse-engineering” it. Play the movies inside the Quizzler Movies 
folder and try to figure out how they were done:
• The animation in Quiz_Butterfly Orbit.mov can be done a couple of different 
ways. Try it using Position keyframes; it’s hard to get that perfectly circular path. 
What other two Transform properties could you combine to get a perfect rota-
tion like this? (Hint: Which one sets the center for Rotation?)
• Overshooting animations are a staple of character-style animation. You can  
do it using three keyframes, including one for the peak of the overshoot, or  
with just two keyframes: start and end. Play Quiz_Overshoot.mov and see if  
you can re-create this. (Hint: This will require a trip into the Graph Editor…)

I
n the first two lessons, we focused on animating 
the properties of layers. However, your sources 
may have built-in “animation” of their own – 
namely, the frame-to-frame movement inside a 
video clip. Therefore, we’re going to spend a good 
portion of this lesson showing how to move a 
clip in time, edit its in and out points, and work 
with its frame rate and ability to loop. From there, 
we’ll move onto applying and taking advantage 
of effects, including using animation presets, and 
adjustment layers. We’ll also combine layers and 
effects using blending modes – the secret sauce that 
creates rich, deeply layered looks. 
Working with Layers
Before we get into trimming and editing, first let’s take 
a refresher course on the significance of how layers are 
stacked in the Timeline panel.
1 Open this lesson’s project file Lesson_03.aep – you will 
be using it for the exercises in this lesson. In the Project 
panel, twirl open the Comps folder if it isn’t already, then 
double-click the comp 01-Layer Practice*starter to open it. 
2 In a typical two-dimensional comp such as this one, 
layers closer to the top in the timeline stack also appear 
closer to the top in the comp viewer. This is particularly  
an issue with full-frame footage, as a layer can completely 
obscure the layer behind it.
Note that this timeline has three short layers, all of 
which have been trimmed – their colored layer bars are 
“ghosted” where material has been trimmed off. 
Lesson 3
70
Editing Layers and Effects
Learning how to trim layers and enhance them using blending modes and effects.
 d Getting Started
Make sure you have downloaded the file archive for  
Lesson 3 (as discussed in How to Use This Book) and 
decompressed it. It contains the project file and sources  
you need to execute this lesson.
 d In This Lesson
  70 
layers and stacking order
  71 
moving layers in time
  72 
trimming layers
  73 
trimming in the Layer and Footage panels
  74 
slip editing
  75 
Sequence Layers keyframe assistant
  77 
looping footage
  78 
image sequences
  79 
changing the frame rate; Time Stretch
  80 
applying effects
  82 
blending modes
  84 
effects and solids
  85 
effect motion path
  87 
Effects & Presets panel; searching for effects
  89 
animation presets
  91 
Behavior presets
  92 
layer styles
  94 
adjustment layers
  95 
filmic glow trick
  96 
property links with effects
  97 
third-party effects
 
98 
higher-quality scaling

EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS — Lesson 3
71
3 Dragging MetroTokyo below the 
JetLanding layer in the timeline (above) 
results in the jet being drawn on top in the 
Comp panel (below). Clip RC-FH167-042 
courtesy Artbeats.com.
With an eye on the Comp panel, scrub the current time indicator between  
00:00 and 10:00, and notice how the image switches as the first layer bar ends.
3 In the Timeline panel, grab the first layer (MetroTokyo.mov) and drag it  
just below the second layer (JetLanding.mov). Now scrub the current time  
indicator, and note the change: JetLanding.mov starts playback earlier in time, 
as it is now above MetroTokyo.mov where they overlap.
Practice swapping layers while previewing or scrubbing the current time 
indicator until you have a solid grasp on the interaction between layer stacking 
order and when they start and stop in the comp.
Moving Layers in Time
With layers, there are two sets of times we are interested in: the layer’s internal 
in and out points which determine what portion of the clip we use, and its 
external in and out points which determine when a trimmed layer starts and 
stops in the comp. You can edit these separately or together. We’ll continue 
working in 01-Layer Practice to demonstrate this; JetLanding.mov should  
be the top layer at this point.
4 Along the bottom left of the Timeline panel is an icon of a pair of brackets. 
Click on this icon to expose the In, Out, Duration, and Stretch columns in the 
Timeline panel. Then right-click on the top of the Stretch column and select 
Hide This: You won’t need it for this exercise, and we could use the space.
4 Click on the Expand or Collapse In/
Out/Stretch/Duration button in the lower 
left corner of the Timeline panel to reveal 
these parameters. Then right-click on the 
Stretch column header to hide it.
2 Studying the timeline (above) allows you to “read” which layer 
will play when. Higher layers are drawn on top of layers they overlap 
underneath, such as here where the Tokyo clip overlaps the jet. 
Selected layers are drawn brighter and with a texture. “Ghosted” 
areas of layer bars indicate there are additional frames of footage 
that are currently trimmed away. The triangle (circled) indicates a 
layer has been trimmed to the very first or last frame of its source. 

Lesson 3 — EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS
72
5 Place the current time indicator where it overlaps the first layer. In the time-
line, click in the middle (not the ends) of the layer bar and drag it left and right  
along the timeline while watching the Comp panel; note that the frame being  
displayed changes. As a result, the layer will play earlier or later in the comp.  
Notice how the in and out times in the Timeline panel change, but the duration 
doesn’t – this is confirmation that you’re not trimming the layer, just sliding it.
• A good shortcut to slide a layer is to place the time indicator where you want 
a layer to start, make sure the layer is selected, and press [ (the left square 
bracket) – the layer will move so that its in point matches the current time.
• To move a selected layer so that it ends at the current time indicator, press  
] (the right square bracket). Note that these shortcuts also work when multiple 
layers are selected. When you’re done experimenting, drag layer 1 so that you 
can see both its in and out points in the timeline.
Trimming Layers
Oftentimes you don’t want to use all the frames in a movie clip. There are 
several ways to nondestructively trim a layer: 
d tip
Ins and Outs
To quickly locate the current time indicator 
to a layer’s in point, select it and type i.  
To locate to its out point, type o.
d tip
Shortcuts for Laptop Users
If you don’t have an extended keyboard, 
you can use these alternative shortcuts for 
H and N: To go to the beginning of 
the timeline in the Comp, Layer or Footage 
panels, press CO˚ (LA˚). 
To jump to the end, press CO∆ 
(LA∆). 
d tip
Splitting Layers
To split (divide) a layer into two at the current time, choose  
Edit > Split Layer. This will duplicate the layer and auto matically  
trim both copies so that they meet up at the split. Any keyframes  
and effects will appear on both layers after splitting. 
6 Place the current time indicator where it overlaps the 
first layer. Click and drag the start of the layer bar: Its In 
and Duration times change, but the frame being displayed 
in the comp does not change (unless you trim it so much 
that you reveal the layer underneath). You can do the 
same to its out point. This is referred to as trimming a 
layer “in place” because you are not sliding which frame 
of the footage will play at a given point in time. Note the 
“ghosted” area of the layer bar that shows how much you 
have trimmed off the front.
7 Time for more shortcuts, this time for trimming layers: 
• Place your current time indicator where you want the 
layer to start, such as when the plane’s tires first touch the 
runway. Select this layer, and type O[ on Mac (A[  
on Windows) – the layer will be trimmed in place to start  
at this time. The out point stays the same and the  
duration changes.
• To trim the out point to the current time without moving 
the layer, select it and type O] (A]). The in point 
stays the same and the duration changes. Note that these 
shortcuts also work when multiple layers are selected. 
6 Hover the cursor over the in point and the cursor will change 
to a double-headed arrow; click and drag to change the in point 
and trim the layer. 

EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS — Lesson 3
73
To add the trimmed clip to your comp, 
make sure the comp you want it to appear in 
is the forward comp; the Footage panel will 
verify this with its “Edit Target” in its lower 
right corner. Click on the Overlay Edit button 
to add this clip into a new top track in the 
comp beginning at the current time without 
disturbing the other layers. The Ripple Edit 
button to its left has the added function of 
splitting any underlying clips at the insertion 
point and moving all of the later clips after 
the new clip is done.
Those with an editing background might 
be used to trimming sources in a separate 
clip window. You can work like this in After 
Effects as well:
• In the timeline, double-click any layer 
to open its Layer panel. To see the original 
layer before any masks or effects are applied, 
set the View popup to None or turn off the 
Render button. Trim the clip’s in and out 
points by dragging the ends of the layer bar 
in this panel’s timeline, or press the In button 
(the { icon below the ruler) to set the in point 
to the current frame. Either way, when you 
change the in point in the Layer panel, the 
layer will slide in time to maintain the same 
start point in the composition. Trimming in 
the Timeline panel doesn’t offer this feature. 
• You can trim a clip before you even add  
it to your comp. In the Project panel, select 
one of the movies in the Sources folder and 
double-click it to open its Footage panel.  
The trimming controls are identical to the 
Layer panel. 
g Double-click a layer to open 
it in its Layer panel, where you 
can focus on its internal in and 
out points – how it has been 
trimmed, regardless of how it 
is being used in a comp.
D Trimming in Other Panels
g Trimming in the Layer panel affects the in and out points relative to the source clip, but does not 
change its in point in the comp’s timeline (notice the two “in” times are different here). You can also click 
the { button in the Layer panel (where the cursor is pointing) to set the in point to the current frame.
g Opening a source from the Project panel into its own Footage panel allows you to trim 
the source before overlaying or ripple-inserting it into the currently forward composition. 
Clip AGG-FH122-06 courtesy Artbeats.com.

Slip Edit
We’ll finish our editing tour with the Slip Edit tool. This is a great way to change 
the portion of a clip that plays without disturbing its overall timing in a comp.
8 Trim the in and out points of the layer you’ve been working with so that you 
see some “ghost” layer bar at its head and tail. Place the current time indicator 
around the middle of the layer and hover the cursor over the ghost areas until 
you see a two-headed arrow bracketed by two lines: This is the Slip Edit tool. 
Click and drag while this tool is visible; note that the In, Out, and Duration 
values do not change, but the frame visible in the Comp panel does. How far 
you can slip a layer is determined by how much trimmed space exists at its head 
or tail. This is a lot faster than sliding a layer, then retrimming its ends!
9 Sometimes, you will not be able to see the ghosted portions of the layer  
bar – maybe you are zoomed into the middle of the clip in the timeline, or  
it extends beyond the end of the comp. You can still use the Slip Edit tool. 
Type y to switch to the Pan Behind (Anchor Point) tool we introduced in  
the previous lesson. Now you will get the Slip Edit tool when you hover over  
the layer bar itself; drag the layer and try it out! Don’t forget to type v to  
return to the normal Selection tool when you’re done.
10 Life gets more interesting when the layers you are sliding or trimming have 
keyframes as well. For example, open comp 02-Layers & Keyframes*starter. 
Type Ca (La) to Select All, then t to reveal their Opacity keyframes. 
These perform crossfades between the layers. Press @ to Deselect all layers.
Note that because we were working with full-frame sources, we animated 
Opacity only for the topmost layer; if we also animated the lower layer, both 
layers would be semitransparent and the background color would show through. 
• Keyframes are attached to the layer and therefore to frames in the source, not 
a specific time in a composition. As a result, moving a layer in time also slides its 
keyframes by default. Move layer 2 by dragging its layer bar, and notice that its 
keyframes go along for the ride. Undo to return layer 2 to its original location. 
• Place the current time indicator at around 10:00 so it’s over layer 2, and use 
the Slip Edit tool to slide the layer. Because the keyframes were not selected, they 
remain in the same place in the comp. This is useful for occasions when the key-
frames need to keep the same timing relationship to the rest of the composition. 
• Now select the Opacity keyframes near the out point of layer 2, and perform  
a slip edit. As you drag, selected keyframes should remain selected and move 
along with the movie; keyframes that are not selected won’t move. If keyframes 
are timed to the overall composition – such as fades – deselect them to leave 
them in place. If keyframes are timed to a clip – such as an animated mask – 
select them to have them move with the clip. 
9 By selecting the Pan Behind tool (above), 
you can slip edit a layer by dragging its layer 
bar (below). This is especially handy if you 
can’t see the start or end of the layer in the 
Timeline panel. When you’re done, type  
v to return to the Selection tool.
Lesson 3 — EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS
74
10 If you slip edit with keyframes 
deselected, the keyframes will not move 
relative to the comp, meaning they keep 
their same relationship to other layers.
If keyframes are related to specific frames  
in the layer (as is the case with animated 
masks; see Lesson 4) then they should be 
preselected before you slip edit so that they 
keep the same relationship to the layer.
8 Place the cursor over the ghosted 
area of a layer bar, and the Slip Edit tool 
will appear. This allows you to edit the 
frames of the source that will be played 
back without moving its in and out points 
in the comp’s overall timeline.

Sequence Layers
After Effects can automate some common editing 
tasks. Let’s start with a group of layers that are 
supposed to play back end to end:
1 Open the comp 03a-Sequence – Full Frame*start. It contains four already 
trimmed layers that are placed at the start of the comp. 
2 Type Ca (La) to Select All, then choose the menu item Animation > 
Keyframe Assistant > Sequence Layers. For now, turn the Overlap option off,  
and click OK. The layers are automatically placed end to end. 
3 Undo to get back to your initial timing. With the layers still selected, type  
t to reveal their Opacity property, and let’s talk about that Overlap option.
• Right-click on one of the layer 
bars and select Keyframe Assistant 
> Sequence Layers again. When the 
dialog opens, enable the Overlap 
button. This automatically creates 
crossfades determined by the 
Duration value. For now, use the 
default Duration of 01:00, and set 
Transition to Dissolve Front Layer. 
• Click OK, and preview. The layers have been arranged to have 1 second of 
overlap, and the layer on top fades out to reveal the layer underneath.
4 When you have layers that cover the entire frame – or otherwise perfectly 
line up and cover each other – you want to use the Dissolve Front Layer option. 
To verify why, undo and try Step 3 again using the Cross Dissolve option instead, 
then scrub the time indicator around where layers overlap: There will be a dip  
in opacity as the layer on top fades out while the layer underneath is fading up. 
5 The Cross Dissolve option comes in handy if you have layers of different sizes 
or layers with interesting alpha channels: 
• Open the comp 03b-Sequence – Alpha*starter, which contains a number of  
3D wireframe renders.
• Select All, and press t to reveal Opacity. 
• Apply Sequence Layers using the Dissolve Front Layer option. Notice how the 
layer underneath “pops” on through the transparent areas of the layer on top?
• Undo, and try again using the Cross Dissolve Front and Back Layers option. 
Opacity keyframes are created for both the outgoing and incoming layer.  
Much nicer, yes?
EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS — Lesson 3
75
2 Selecting layers and applying Sequence 
Layers with Overlap disabled (above) results 
in the layers being placed end to end (top).
3 Enabling the Overlap option in Sequence 
Layers (above) both overlaps the layers by 
the specified duration and creates Opacity 
keyframes so that they will crossfade (top).
d tip
Sequence and Slip
After performing Sequence Layers, you 
can then slip edit moving footage to adjust 
the frames you see without disrupting the 
overall timing.

Lesson 3 — EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS
76
6 To quickly trim layers to have the same 
duration, line them up to start together, and 
trim their ends as a group (above). Then use 
Sequence Layers to automatically spread them 
across time, with crossfades (right).
6 Time to put a few tricks together. Open the comp 03c-Sequence – 
trim*starter. Say you want to crossfade between its photographs at a nice, 
orderly pace:
• Select layer 4, then S+click to select layer 1. This will select all layers, 
but from the bottom up (layer 4 will then be sequenced first in time). 
• Type OH (AH) to make them all begin at the start of the comp.
• If you want a layer to play for 4 seconds and then crossfade for 1, each 
layer needs to have a total duration of 5 seconds. Because After Effects starts 
counting at 0, move the time indicator to 04:29 for a 5-second  
duration and type O] (A]) to trim each of their out points.
• Right-click on one of the layer bars and select Keyframe Assistant > 
Sequence Layers. Set the Overlap > Duration to 01:00 crossfade time.  
(Which Transition option should you use for full-frame sources?) Click OK. 
• Press t to show the Opacity keyframes, and Preview. Our version  
is in the Comps_Finished folder. Save your project at this point.
D Solo Switches
When layers are stacked on top of each 
other, it can be difficult to see what each 
one looks like. Use the Solo switches (the 
hollow circle to the 
left of the padlock) 
to preview them  
individually: 
• For instance, 
turn on the Solo 
switch for layer 4 to 
see it in isolation; 
layers 1–3 will temporarily be disabled 
and their eyeballs will be grayed out. 
• Then turn on the Solo switch for  
layer 3 to preview it; notice that layer 4 
remains soloed. 
• O+click (A+click) on the Solo 
switch for layer 2. Only layer 2 will be 
soloed. All other layers are disabled.
When you’re done, and you want to 
see all the layers again, turn off the Solo 
switch for all layers. If you turn them all 
on, any layers you add to the comp in the 
future won’t be displayed unless you solo 
them also!

Looping Footage
You now know how to shorten footage by trimming; how can you make it 
longer? You could increase the Time Stretch value, but that also slows down  
the playback speed. Fortunately, some clips have been designed to be seamlessly 
“looped” or repeated. After Effects can make them look like one long clip:
1 Click on the Composition Viewer menu at the top of the Comp panel and 
choose Close All to clean up the display. In this lesson’s Project panel, locate  
and open Comps > 04-Looping Footage*starter. It should be empty.
2 Back in the Project panel, select the folder My Sources so that the file you’re 
about to import will automatically sort into it. Type Ci (Li) to open the 
Import File dialog.
Navigate to where you copied this lesson’s files onto your computer and open 
the Lesson 03 > 03_Sources > Movies folder. Select 
the file Clock+Skyline.mov, and click Open. 
Double-click this movie in the Project panel to 
open it in the Footage panel. Play it, and watch what 
happens when the movie reaches the end: It looks the 
same as it did at its beginning, indicating this footage 
file is a candidate for looping.
EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS — Lesson 3
77
3 The movie is initially not long enough to play for the entire comp 
(above). However, it was designed to be looped. 
3 continued Select the movie  
in the Project panel, open the 
Interpret Footage dialog (left),  
and Loop it 3 times (above). 
4 After you loop the movie, you will see that the ghosted (trimmed) 
duration of its layer bar now reaches to the end of the comp (above).  
Retrim its out point (below) by dragging or by using keyboard shortcuts.
1 Play the Clock+Skyline.mov in the 
QuickTime Player and it will seamlessly loop. 
However, it won’t automatically loop when 
After Effects uses it as footage. Clip DB109 
courtesy Artbeats.com.
3 Select the Project panel, and type C/ (L/) 
to add this footage item to the already open comp 
04_Looping Footage. The clip is 10 seconds long, but 
the comp is 30 seconds long, so it doesn’t reach the end.
Select Clock+Skyline.mov in the Project panel (not 
the Timeline panel) and click the Interpret Footage 
button at the bottom of the Project panel to open its 
Interpret Footage dialog. Near the bottom is a param-
eter called Loop. Enter 3 (3 × 10 = 30), and click OK.
4 Back in the comp, you will now see the “ghost” 
layer bar after the layer’s out point, indicating it can 
be longer. Press N to jump to the end of the comp, 
select Clock+Skyline.mov, and type O] (A])  
to retrim its out point to this time.
Practice importing, looping, and extending the 
other files you find in the Lesson 03 > 03_Sources  
> Movies or > Wireframes folders on your drive. 
Most real-world footage does not loop cleanly, but 
other items – such as these 3D renders – do. 

2 After importing, a footage item 
named Muybridge_[1-10].tif will 
be selected in the My Sources 
folder in the Project panel. Along 
the top it says it is 10 frames long 
at 29.97 fps (or whatever preference you entered). 
Ten frames is rather short for a movie; fortunately, this 
sequence was designed as a seamless loop – so let’s loop it. 
With this file selected, click the Interpret Footage button at 
the bottom of the Project panel. Enter a large number such 
as 100 for its Loop Times value, and click OK. The duration 
should now read 33:10 at the top of the Project panel.
3 Back in the Project 
panel, drag the image 
sequence (Muybridge_
[1-10].tif) to the Create a 
New Composition icon at 
the bottom of the Project 
panel. A new comp will be created with the same width and 
height, frame rate, and duration as the footage. Press Ck 
(Lk) to open Composition Settings, and change the 
duration to something shorter, such as 05:00.
Image Sequences
Sometimes, you will receive a set of still image files that are intended to be played 
back as if they were a continuous movie. You don’t need to use the Sequence 
Layers assistant to make this happen; you can do it during import, setting the 
spacing between frames by “conforming” the resulting file’s frame rate.
1 Open Preferences > Import. Because sequences of images have no inherent 
frame rate, After Effects defaults to setting them to 30 fps. In the Sequence 
Footage field, enter the common frame rate of 29.97 (some prefer 23.976 or 25).  
Click OK. This preference will be retained for future projects on this computer.
• In the Project panel, select the folder My Sources so that the file you’re about 
to import will automatically sort into it. Type Ci (Li) to open the 
Import File dialog.
• Navigate to this lesson’s files on your computer and open the Lesson 03 > 
03_Sources > Muybridge Sequence folder. It contains 10 similarly named TIFF 
format files. Select the first one. Along the bottom of the Import File dialog will 
be a checkbox for TIFF Sequence; make sure it is checked, then click Open.
Lesson 3 — EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS
78
1 Set Preferences > Import > Sequence 
Footage to the frame rate you expect to be 
working at, such as 29.97 fps for NTSC video. 
1 continued Navigate to the folder that holds your file sequence, 
select the first frame, and make sure the Sequence option is 
checked before clicking Open. Footage courtesy Dover.

The new comp – Muybridge 2 – will be created in the 
same folder as the footage; move it to the My Comps folder. 
Preview and check out the speed this sequence plays at; 
wait until the Info panel says it has reached “realtime”. 
Does it seem a bit too fast to be realistic? If so, let’s conform 
just this layer’s frame rate without affecting the global 
Import Preference. You can leave Preview playing for now.
4 In the Project panel, select Muybridge_[1-10].tif in your 
My Sources folder, and open its Interpret Footage dialog 
again. Look for the section named Frame Rate; enter a new 
number for Assume This Frame Rate (such as 10), and click 
OK. The footage will play back at this rate in your comp, 
independent of the comp’s frame rate, skipping or repeating frames as needed. 
Try out different rates until you find one you like the feel of, and stop preview-
ing when you’re done.
Frame Rate versus Time Stretch
There is another way to change the playback speed of a source: Time Stretch.  
But it has an important difference compared with “conforming” the frame rate…
5  Add a 1-second fade-up to your Muybridge sequence: Move to 01:00, select 
the layer, type Ot (At) to enable keyframing for Opacity at its current 
value of 100%, return to 00:00, and set Opacity to 0%. Test your fade-up. 
• Change Interpret Footage > Assume This Frame Rate again as you did in Step 
4; the timing of the keyframes stays the same. This is because settings in the 
Interpret Footage dialog affect source files before they are processed in a comp.
• Reveal the Stretch column in the timeline by right-clicking on any column 
head and selecting Columns > Stretch. Enter a value of 200%, which means the 
layer will take twice as long 
to play back. Preview, and 
note that not only does 
the layer slow down, the 
timing of its Opacity key-
frames is stretched as well: 
Your second keyframe now 
appears at 02:00. Scrub the 
value for Stretch and watch 
this keyframe move. Time 
stretching affects the speed 
of a layer after the keyframes 
are applied.
EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS — Lesson 3
79
d insider knowledge
Stretching Keyframes
Time Stretch is a good way to give multiple 
copies of the same footage item different 
playback speeds. However, unlike adjusting  
a source’s Frame Rate, Time Stretch also 
changes the spacing of any keyframes 
already applied to the layer.
4 You can conform your sequence to an 
alternate frame rate in the Interpret Footage 
dialog to slow it down (or speed it up!).
5 If you place keyframes (top), and then use Stretch to retime your footage (above), the timing of the 
keyframes will change as well.

3 Effects can have a variety of user interface elements, including 
their own menus of options.
2 Effects are sorted into categories to make them easier to find. 
Clip AGG-FH122-06 courtesy Artbeats.com.
Lesson 3 — EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS
80
Applying Effects
After Effects artists are often expected to spin straw into gold. One of the main 
tools to improve the appearance of your sources is plug-in effects; After Effects 
comes with nearly 200 of them. In the next exercise, you’ll learn the basics of 
applying, editing, and rearranging them. Throughout the rest of this chapter  
and book, you’ll learn how to use them in increasingly sophisticated ways.
1 Get a fresh start by clicking on the Composition Viewer 
menu along the top of the Comp panel, and choose 
Close All. In the Project panel, double-click Comps > 
FX-Applying Effects*starter to open it.
2 Effects need to be applied to a layer in order for them to 
operate on its pixels, so select layer 1 (SumidaRiver.mov). 
Click on the Effect menu to reveal a list of categories. Move 
down to Blur & Sharpen; a list of effects in that category 
will appear to its right. Select Box Blur from this list. Blurs 
are some of the most common effects you will be using, 
and Box Blur is one of the most versatile of the blurs.
The Effect Controls panel will open, usually docked into 
the same frame as the Project panel. Your layer should also 
automatically twirl open in the Timeline panel to reveal 
the new effect. You can edit its parameters in either panel; 
the Effect Controls panel is more convenient as it has more 
room to work and allows you to reorder the effects applied 
to a layer.
3 Scrub the Blur Radius value. The quality is initially a 
bit coarse; slowly increase Iterations to make it smoother. 
There is a big jump when you increment from 1 to 2,  
with diminishing returns after that. When you have a 
parameter where a small change makes a big difference, 
hold C (L) and scrub; this will slow down your mouse 
movements. On the other hand, if you encounter a param-
eter that requires a big change to make a difference, hold 
S while scrubbing to accelerate your movement.
Effects often have a variety of user interface elements. 
Blur Dimensions has a dropdown menu associated with  
it; click on the menu to the right of the parameter name 
(not the name itself) and choose Vertical, then Horizontal. 
The Repeat Edge Pixels parameter is a simple checkbox 
switch; click inside the box to enable it, and notice that  

5 The order of effects can make a difference in the final image.  
On the left (A), the horizontal blur is applied first, followed by a warp. 
On the right (B), the warp is applied first, followed by a horizontal blur. 
4 You can apply 
multiple effects to a 
layer, and they will be 
processed in order from 
the top down.
EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS — Lesson 3
81
the edges of your layer no longer reveal the transparency 
grid (or the comp’s background color if the grid is disabled).
4 You can apply multiple effects to a layer. With layer 1 
still selected, choose Effect > Distort > Warp. Click on the 
menu to the right of Warp Style and try out the different 
choices. Set it to Fish when you’re done playing.
5 Effects process the frame in order from the top down. 
Rearranging the order of effects can result in anywhere 
from a large difference to no change in the final result. 
Currently, you are blurring the layer horizontally, then 
bending the blurred lines. Click on the effect name Box 
Blur, drag it downward until you see a thin black bar  
appear underneath the Warp effect, and then release  
the mouse. Now the layer is warped, then blurred in a  
horizontal line.
6 You can disable effects individually (circled here), or for the entire 
layer (where the cursor is pointing).
6 Each effect may be individually enabled or disabled. 
Click on the stylized “fx” to the left of the effect name in 
either the Effect Controls or Timeline panel to toggle it 
off and on. The layer also has a master “fx” switch in the 
Timeline panel; this is on the same line as the layer’s name. 
(If you don’t see that switch, the Switches column may 
be hidden in the timeline; press $ or click on the Toggle 
Switches/Modes button along the bottom of the timeline  
to reveal it.)
The next step up from making one layer look cool is 
combining layers in interesting ways, which is what we’ll 
tackle next.
A
B

Blending Modes
We’re going to move on from seeing one layer at a time, to mixing together 
multiple layers at the same time. The secret to this is blending modes.
When you place one layer on top of another, its pixels normally replace the 
pixels of any image underneath. As you fade the top layer, its pixels are mixed 
with those underneath. Blending modes provide alternate ways to mix (blend) 
these pixels together, such as adding together their color values. Let’s try out a 
few to get a feel for them.
1 Open comp 06_Blending Modes*starter. Select layer 1, Muybridge_[1-10].tif, 
and type t to reveal Opacity. Scrub its Opacity value and note the result  
of fading it in and out over the layer behind it. Set it back to 100% for now.
2 Open the Mode column. You can press $ to toggle between it and the 
normal Switches column. If you have a fairly wide monitor, right-click on any 
column header in the Timeline panel and select Columns > Modes from the 
popup: Now you can see both Switches and Modes at the 
same time (reorder them to taste by dragging the column 
heads left and right). 
In the Modes column, note that each layer has a Mode 
dropdown menu, which decides how it blends with the 
layer below. It defaults to Normal. Different types of modes 
are roughly grouped in this popup – for example, the 
second group tends to make the results darker; the third 
group tends to make the results brighter; and the fourth 
group creates interesting, colorful blends of layers.
3 Click on the Mode popup for the Muybridge layer, and 
pick Multiply. This says “take my brightness and multiply it 
by the brightness of the pixels underneath.” You can think 
of black pixels as having a value of 0, meaning the result 
will be 0 (black); think of white pixels having a value of 1 
or 100%, which means the result will keep the color of the 
underlying pixel. 
Try other modes in this first group, and notice they have 
similar but different results. 
4 Now select Add mode: This adds the color values of 
pixels together. If the pixel on top is black (0), it will have 
no effect on the pixel underneath. If it is white, it will cause 
the result to be white. Try other modes in this group such 
as Screen, which is a less intense version of Add.
Lesson 3 — EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS
82
e 2 continued The Mode popup  
has a long list of choices. They tend  
to be grouped: Modes that brighten  
the result, for example, are in the 
same section.
To move up and down the Mode 
menu without using the popup,  
select a layer and press S+  
(the plus key on the regular keyboard) 
to move down, and S-  
(the minus key) to move up. 
1 At 100% opacity with its blending mode 
set to Normal (the default), the Muybridge 
sequence completely blocks out the 
background behind it.
2 Press $ to toggle the Switches/Modes 
columns. If you forget the shortcut, two 
buttons in the bottom left corner of the 
Timeline panel (above) open and close the 
Modes (also known as Transfer Controls)  
and Layer Switches columns. You can also 
open and close columns by right-clicking 
on any column header and selecting them; 
reorder them by dragging the column  
heads left and right.

5 Staying with the Muybridge layer, select Overlay from the third group. 
This is a more complex mode, providing colorful, richly saturated results. 
Black pixels on top darken underlying pixels, but do not cause them to go 
completely black; white pixels lighten and tint rather than go to white. 
Again, try other modes in this group.
The next level is applying effects to the layer that is being “moded” onto 
the layers underneath:
A
B
C
D
EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS — Lesson 3
83
3–5 Choosing different modes for 
Muybridge_[1-10].tif creates different 
“looks” in the way it blends with the 
underlying layer. Here we compare Multiply 
(A), Add (B), Overlay (C), and Difference (D).
6 You can use effects to further alter the blend. Here we’re using Levels to 
adjust the image’s Gamma (right) to alter the midpoint values in the composite 
using Overlay mode (left).
7 We disabled Levels, added Tritone, and used its Midtones eyedropper to 
select a color from the background to tint the Muybridge image. The result 
(with Overlay mode) is an even richer composite compared with using the 
original grayscale source.
6 Select the Muybridge layer, and apply Effect 
> Color Correction > Levels; it will appear in the 
Effect Controls panel. The Levels effect is the pre-
ferred way to alter the brightness and contrast of  
a layer. Take a look at the Histogram in the Effect 
Controls: This gives you a visual representation  
of the darks and brights that exist in the image. 
Try scrubbing the Gamma value, which sets  
the gray midpoint of a layer; you can also drag its 
pointer under the middle of the Histogram. Note  
how it changes the contrast of the image sequence.  
Try this with the different modes. Remember  
that you can temporarily solo the layer to see the 
results of the effect without the blending mode.
7 Turn off Levels by clicking on the stylized “fx” 
switch next to its name in the Effect Controls 
panel. Then, with the Muybridge layer still 
selected, apply Effect > Color Correction > Tritone. 
Click on the Midtones color swatch, and pick a 
color such as yellow. Or to more closely match the 
Muybridge layer to the background, use the eye-
dropper to pick a color from the background layer. 
Notice how the result is richer again and more  
colorful. Try different colors and modes, and 
reduce Opacity to tone down intensity.
Save your project, and close all comps by select-
ing Close All from the Comp Viewer’s menu.

Effects, Solids, and Modes
Now let’s take the combination of modes and effects to the next level. While 
we’re here, we’ll also show you how to edit the motion path for an effect point – 
it doesn’t reside where you might think.
1 Click on the Project panel tab to bring it forward; if you can’t see it, click 
on the Overflow menu to the right of the Effect Controls tab and select Project. 
Double-click the comp Comps > 07_Effects Solids Modes*starter to open it.
2 This comp has a single layer in it: SumidaRiver.mov. Select this layer and 
apply Effect > Generate > Lens Flare.
While Lens Flare is selected in the Effect Controls panel, you will see a crosshair 
at the center of the flare’s brightest point in the Comp panel – this is its effect 
point. Drag it around the comp and note how the flare changes.
Let’s say you generally like this flare, but want to tweak it a bit. You can 
explore its parameters in the Effect Controls panel, but unfortunately this effect 
has no way to directly change its color. You could try applying Effect > Color 
Correction > Hue/Saturation, but this will change the color of the underlying 
footage as well as the flare. So let’s explore a better approach:
3 To gain more control over this effect, we need to give it its own layer.
• Start by removing the effect from the movie, but rather than deleting it, select 
it in the Effect Controls panel and Edit > Cut.
• Select Layer > New > Solid; the shortcut is Cy (Ly). Click on the  
Make Comp Size button. Then click on the Color swatch and set it to pure black. 
Click OK in the Solid Color dialog, then OK in the Solid Settings.
• With your new Black Solid layer selected, select Edit > Paste. The Lens Flare 
will now be applied to the solid layer (type e to see it), with exactly the same 
settings applied as when you cut it.
4 If the Mode column is not visible, type $ to reveal it. Set the Mode for Black 
Solid 1 to Add – the black solid will disappear, leaving just the bright flare. 
Lesson 3 — EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS
84
4 Apply the Lens Flare to the solid, and place it above the layer to be treated (left).  
Try different modes such as Screen or Add (A) and Color Dodge (B) to get different looks.
A
B
2 If the Lens Flare effect is selected 
(top), you can see and drag around its 
Flare Center in the Comp panel (above) 
to interactively place the flare.
3 Many effects – such as flares – work best 
if applied to a black comp-size solid.

5 Apply other effects such as Hue/Saturation to the solid layer to 
alter the lens flare without affecting the underlying footage.
EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS — Lesson 3
85
6 Effect Point paths are not visible in the Comp panel (A).  
Double-click the layer to open its Layer panel (B) where you can 
edit the effect point path. (If the motion path is not visible, select 
Lens Flare from the View dropdown menu.)
Now press S+ (the plus symbol on the regular key-
board) to move down the Modes list without using the 
popup. Screen will give you the same look as when you 
applied it directly to your footage layer. Linear Dodge looks 
identical to Add in this mix, while Color Dodge creates a 
tight single flare. Use whichever mode you like best. 
Note that pressing S- (the minus key) moves back 
up the modes list. 
5 Apply Effect > Color Correction > Hue/Saturation to your 
Black Solid 1 layer; it will be added to the Effect Controls 
panel below Lens Flare. Scrub the Master Hue value to 
change the color of the flare; notice that your underlying 
footage remains unaffected – this is why you used a solid! 
Effect Motion Path
Remember in Step 2 where you played with the location 
of the flare’s center? This is a good time to learn another 
important skill: animating the motion path for an effect 
point path. 
6 Make sure the current time indicator is at 00:00. In the 
Effect Controls panel, click on the stopwatch to the left  
of the Flare Center parameter to enable keyframing. This 
should also select the Lens Flare effect, which will cause  
its Flare Center crosshair to be visible in the Comp panel. 
• Drag it to a good starting location, such as near the upper 
left corner. (If you can’t see its crosshair, click on the cross-
hair in the Effect Controls panel, then click where you want 
it to be in the Comp viewer.)
• Press N, then drag the Flare Center to a good ending 
location. Preview, and your flare will trek in a straight line 
across the sky.
The effect point creates spatial keyframes (they have an  
X and Y value), but these values are in relation to the layer, 
not the comp. That’s why you won’t see its motion path in 
the Comp viewer. But all is not lost…
• Double-click the Black Solid layer to open its Layer 
panel. In the bottom right corner, check that the View 
popup is set to Lens Flare and that the Render button is on. 
You should now see the Flare Center’s motion path.
A
B

7 We are assuming that you are using the default 
After Effects preferences. If this is the case, you will 
see only the keyframe icons for 15:00 worth of time 
(07:15 seconds on each side of the current time  
indicator). So at the end of the comp (09:29) you 
won’t see the first keyframe’s icon. To fix this, open 
Preferences > Display, set the Motion Path option  
to All Keyframes, and click OK. This preference will 
be retained for future projects on this computer. 
Go ahead and edit the Flare Center’s motion path, 
perhaps making a nice arc going across the frame.  
If you have trouble spotting the two dots that you 
pull to create Bezier handles (they are in line with 
the motion path), hold down g and drag handles 
out from the keyframes. Preview the comp to try  
out your new path, and close the Layer panel when 
you’re done. Our version in the Comps_Finished 
folder is 07-Effects Solids Modes_final1, where we 
also animated Flare Brightness and the color.
Lesson 3 — EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS
86
7 We suggest you set Preferences > 
Display > Motion Path to All Keyframes 
so that you see the entire motion path. 
(This preference will be retained for all 
future projects on this computer.)
7 continued To edit the motion 
path, press g to temporarily switch 
to the Pen tool, then pull out a Bezier 
handle from the keyframe itself. 
Big Solids
You may have noticed that a lens flare always pivots around the center 
of the layer it is applied to. Another reason to apply effects to a solid is 
that you can increase the size of the solid, then reposition or otherwise 
transform the solid in the comp to change how the effect appears. 
In this exercise, select Black Solid 1, type CSy (LSy) 
to open its Solid Settings, enter a larger number such as 1500 for its 
Width and Height, and click OK. The flare is no longer required to 
pivot around the center of the comp, giving you more flexibility in 
deciding its path. Have fun scaling, rotating, and moving this layer. 
We provide one alternative idea in Comps_Finished > 07-Effects 
Solids Modes_final2. Save your project when you’re done playing.
Lens Flare pivots around the center of the layer it is 
applied to. By applying it to a solid larger than the 
comp (as we did in 07-Effects Solids Modes_final2), 
you can reposition it as desired.

Deeper into Effects
Next we’re going to show you a few more ways to work with 
effects, including finding them in a hurry, and alternate ways 
to animate them. Then we’ll reveal how to save and use anima-
tion presets, which can recall not only what effects you have 
applied to a layer but any keyframes you have applied as well.
Finding and Animating Effects
It can be a challenge to remember which Effect submenu a 
particular effect resides in (for example, is Invert in Color 
Correction or Channel?). Fortunately, After Effects has a panel 
that makes it much easier to find effects: Effects & Presets.
Effects & Presets is one of the default panels that appear in 
the Standard work space, docked with Libraries. Click the Effects 
& Presets tab to bring it forward; if you can’t see it, you can close 
the Libraries panel (we won’t be using it in this book) or choose 
Window > Effects & Presets. (If you’d like to give it more room, 
dock it on the right side of the Comp panel in a new frame.) 
1 If the Comp or Timeline panel is forward, close all of the 
previous comps as you have before. Next, click on the Project 
panel tab to bring it forward; if you can’t see it, close the  
Effect Controls panel for now or click on the overflow menu 
to its right and choose Project. Then double-click Comps 
> 08_Save Preset*starter to open it. It has one layer in it 
(MetroTokyo.mov); select it.
2 Turn your attention to the Effects & Presets panel. Click on 
its options menu in its upper right corner: This is where you 
determine what this panel will show you and how it will show 
it. For now, disable the option Show Animation Presets so that 
you see only the names of actual effects.
Along the top of the Effects & Presets panel is a QuickSearch 
box, akin to the ones that appear along the tops of the Project 
and Timeline panels. Type “radial” into this box. As you type, 
the area underneath will sort through all of the effects that 
contain the characters you are typing. Double-click the effect 
named Radial Blur, and it will be applied to the layer you had 
selected. If you forgot to select a layer, you can also drag and 
drop it onto the desired layer.
EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS — Lesson 3
87
2 Click on the Options arrow in the upper right corner of 
the Effects & Presets panel, and temporarily disable Show 
Animation Presets so only actual effects are searched (above). 
Then type “radial” into the QuickSearch box to search for 
these characters in any effect name (below).

3 The Effect Controls panel will open, showing the effect you applied. In addi-
tion to some of the normal user interface elements you have seen so far, Radial 
Blur contains a custom element in the form of the blur graphic. To change the 
center of the blur, either drag around inside the graph in the Effect Controls,  
or drag the effect point directly in the Comp panel. The slider directly below  
the graphic changes the Amount of blur. Optionally change the Type menu 
from Spin to Zoom for a different effect; we’re going to stick with Spin. 
• Come up with a look you like, and at 00:00 enable keyframing for the 
Amount property by clicking on the stopwatch to the left of its name in the 
Effect Controls panel. Type u, and this animated property will be revealed  
in the Timeline panel as well.
• Move the current time indicator a few seconds later to around 03:00, and  
set the Amount to 0. Type n to end the work area here, and preview. Your blur 
effect will animate from your initial setting to unprocessed video over this time.
4 Let’s apply another effect to help create a sort of flashback look. In the Effects 
& Presets panel, delete “radial” and instead type “tint” in the QuickSearch box 
to reveal the Tint effect. (Note that recent and saved searches appear above 
where you are typing.) Double-click Tint, and it too will be applied to your layer.
5 Press H to return to the start of the comp (and where you placed your 
first Radial Blur keyframe). 
• In the Effect Controls panel, enable keyframing for the Amount to Tint param-
eter at its default value of 100%, which creates a nice black and white treatment. 
Press u twice slowly so both this and 
the Radial Blur keyframes are revealed 
in the timeline.
• Press SN to jump to the end 
of the work area around 03:00. In the 
Effect Controls panel, set the Amount 
to Tint value to 0%, restoring the  
original color in the image. 
Save your project, and Preview. If you’d like to compare results, we saved our 
version as Comps_Finished > 08-Save Preset_final.
3 The Radial Blur effect has a custom user 
interface to adjust the center and amount 
of blur. Drag inside the graph to change 
the center of the blur.
Lesson 3 — EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS
88
3–5 Animate Radial Blur and Tint (above)  
to resolve from a blurry black-and-white  
image to a sharp, full-color one (below).  
Clip TKY102 courtesy Artbeats.com.

Saving Animation Presets
Let’s say you like that treatment and decide you’d  
like to apply it to other layers. You could copy and  
paste the effects and their keyframes, but that’s  
cumbersome – especially if that layer was in a new 
project, started sometime in the future!
You should know by now that whenever we present 
you with a problem, it means we’re about to show you  
a better way:
6 In your 08-Save Preset*starter comp, select the 
MetroTokyo layer and press # to bring the Effect 
Controls panel forward (if it isn’t already). Click on the 
effect name Radial Blur to select it, then S+click on 
Tint to select it as well.
There are various ways to save your effects as an animation preset:
• Choose the menu item Animation > Save Animation Preset.
• Click on the Create New Animation Preset icon at the bottom right of  
the Effects & Presets panel.
A file browser dialog will open. It should default to the folder After Effects 
CC > User Presets for your current version inside your operating system’s 
Applications folder. Save your presets in either this or the User Presets > 
(Adobe) folder, and it will automatically appear in the Effects & Presets panel 
later. It’s a good idea to create your own subfolders to keep track of the presets 
you save. So create a New Folder, give it your name, then give your new preset  
a name you’ll remember it by – say, “radial flashback.ffx” (keep the .ffx suffix). 
Then click Save. After a slight pause, the Effects & Presets panel will refresh. 
7 To see how easy it is to apply your new preset 
to a different layer, bring the Project panel 
forward and open a different comp: 09_Apply 
Preset*starter. Preview; it currently has an 
untreated video layer in it called CrowdNYC.mov. 
Select that layer (if you don’t select a layer first, 
After Effects will create a solid and apply the preset to that).
EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS — Lesson 3
89
7 There are several 
ways to search for saved 
animation presets; if you’ve 
just saved it or used it, it 
will appear in the Animation 
> Recent Animation Presets 
menu (above). You can 
then apply the preset to 
any other layer (left). Clip 
CR209 from Artbeats.com.
6 Select both effects (above left), then 
use either the Animation menu item or the 
button in the lower right corner of the Effects 
& Presets panel (above right) to Save Preset.
d gotcha
No Selection = Solid
If you don’t have a layer selected when you 
apply an animation preset, After Effects 
may create a dummy layer (such as a solid, 
or generic text) and apply the preset to 
that instead.

Animation presets apply their keyframes starting at the current time. If you 
want to make sure that your keyframes start when the layer starts, select the 
layer and type i to jump to its in point before applying a preset.
Just like you have options on how to save a preset, you have options for 
applying presets. With the layer selected, do one of the following:
• Open the Animation menu. If you hover over the Recent Animation Presets 
submenu, your new preset will appear there. 
• You could use the handy Effects & Presets panel and its search function! For 
this to work though, you will need to include presets in the search. Click on the 
Effects & Presets options menu and enable the choice Show Animation Presets. 
Then start typing “flashback”, or whatever name you gave your preset, until it 
appears. Double-click it or drag it onto your layer. 
• If it exists outside your After Effects application folder, you can use Animation 
> Apply Animation Preset and navigate to the preset on your drive.
Whichever method you use, the Effect Controls panel will come forward to 
show which effects are part of the preset. Press u to reveal the keyframes, and 
preview the result. There is nothing special about the effects at this point; you 
can edit them as needed to work with the new source. 
Adobe’s Animation Presets
In addition to creating and saving your own animation presets, After Effects 
ships with hundreds of presets that Adobe has developed for you to use.  
Let’s take a quick trip through applying them. While we’re at it, we’ll explore  
a few of our favorite categories: 
1 Save your project, and open the comp 10_Adobe’s Presets*starter. It has two 
layers in it; currently, the first layer (Kite.ai) has its Video switch turned off. 
Select the second layer: CloudFlythrough.mov.
2 Delete any text left over in the search box of the Effects & Presets panel.  
Twirl open the top folder * Animation Presets. (If you can’t see it, enable  
Show Animation Presets from Effects & Presets Options menu.) This contains 
Adobe’s presets, and if you saved your own presets in the User or (Adobe) folder, 
they will show up here as well.
3 Twirl open the Image – Creative 
subfolder (resize the panel wider if 
the names are truncated). It contains 
a number of interesting image treat-
ments. For example, double-click 
Colorize – infrared; the footage will 
take on surrealistic red and cyan tones.
Lesson 3 — EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS
90
3 The Image – Creative presets include 
treatments ranging from Vignette Lighting 
(below left) to Mood Lighting – digital 
(below right). Clip CF321 from Artbeats.com.
2 Twirl open the * Animation Presets 
folder. It contains hundreds of presets 
supplied by Adobe, broken down by 
category into folders; it also contains any 
folders you created (such as the one you 
made in the previous exercise).
Remember that you won’t see animation 
presets unless the Show Animation Presets 
option is selected from the Effects & Presets 
options menu (the icon circled above).

Undo to remove this preset, then try something more 
subtle, such as Colorize – sunset gradient. This gives the 
clouds a pink glow using two effects: Ramp creates the 
color gradient then Calculations composites the gradient 
on top of the original layer using a blending mode.
4 In the Timeline panel, turn on the Video switch  
(the eyeball icon) for the layer Kite.ai and select it.
Twirl up the Image – Creative folder, and instead 
twirl down the subfolder Behaviors. These use a  
combination of effects and “expressions” (a user pro-
gramming language for After Effects that we’ll discuss 
in Lesson 7) that creates animation moves without the 
need for keyframes.
For example, double-click the preset Rotate Over 
Time to apply it, then preview: The kite will slowly 
rotate clockwise over the course of the comp. Look  
at the Effect Controls panel and scrub the Rotation  
parameter in the top effect – this controls how fast  
the layer rotates, and in what direction.
Undo until the Rotate Over Time preset is removed, 
and apply the Wiggle – position preset. Preview; the  
kite will now wander about the comp – without you 
having to keyframe a motion path! Edit the two values  
in the Wiggle parameters at the top of the Effect 
Controls panel to change how turbulent the wind is. 
Note that there are separate Behavior presets for  
wiggling position, rotation, scale, and skew, but the 
most fun to play with has to be Wigglerama, which 
throws them all into one mondo preset! Try it on some 
of your own footage items, or a text or logo layer. 
EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS — Lesson 3
91
4 continued: The Behaviors presets create automated animation, such as Wigglerama’s random movement. 
Kite image #229044 courtesy iStockphoto/ggodby.
4 Some presets – such as Wigglerama – add a specialized “controller” 
effect, followed by one or more effects that it actually controls. 

Layer Styles
In addition to plug-in effects, After Effects also features layer styles, which  
originated in Adobe Photoshop. They offer a different way to add bevels, 
shadows, gradients, and other treatments to layers. Layer styles usually offer 
more sophisticated options than their counterparts such as Effect > Perspective >  
Drop Shadow or > Bevel Alpha.
You can import a Photoshop file that has layer styles embedded in it, or  
apply them to virtually any layer inside After Effects. They are applied from  
the Layer menu (rather than the Effect menu), and their parameters are edited 
directly in the Timeline panel rather than in the Effect Controls panel.
Importing a Photoshop File with Layer Styles
There are two ways to treat a Photoshop file that has layer styles embedded:  
You can “flatten” the file on import, which will render layer styles into the 
resulting image, or you can import the file as a composition with edit able  
layer styles. We’ll take the latter path, as it provides maximum flexibility:
1 Bring the Project panel forward by clicking on its tab; if you can’t see this 
panel or tab, click the overflow menu to the right of the Effect Controls panel 
and select Project. Then select the My Comps folder so you can import a 
Photoshop file and its accompanying composition into it.
2 Type Ci (Li) to open the import dialog. Navigate to Lesson 03-Layer 
Control > 03_Sources and select Reality_drop.psd. Click Open.
In the dialog that opens, set the Import Kind popup to Composition – Retain 
Layer Sizes. Under Layer Options, enable Editable Layer Styles. Then click OK.  
A composition and folder  – both named Reality_drop 
– will be created in the My Comps folder in the Project 
panel. If you like, drag the Reality_drop Layers folder into 
your My Sources folder.
3 Double-click the comp Reality_drop to open it. Two 
layers will appear: drop inset and drop frame. Toggle their 
Video switches (the eyeball icons) on and off to confirm 
which piece is which in the final image.
In the Timeline panel, twirl down drop inset, then  
twirl down Layer Styles. You will see a list of all possible 
layer styles. In the A/V Features column, you will see a 
Video switch for each of the styles. Toggle them on and  
off to get a feel for what each style is contributing to the 
final render.
Lesson 3 — EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS
92
2 When importing a layered Photoshop  
file (format = PSD), set Import Kind to 
Composition – Retain Layer Sizes and 
enable Editable Layer Styles. This will give 
you maximum flexibility in using the file.
3 This stylized 
waterdrop-like badge 
(above) was created by 
Andrew Heimbold of 
Reality Check using layer 
styles in Photoshop. 
Unlike normal effects, 
Layer Styles may be 
edited only in the 
Timeline panel (right).  
You can toggle each style 
on and off individually, as 
well as twirl them down  
to edit their parameters.

4 Sometimes, a Layer Style has a visual contribution that is different from its 
name. For example, when you toggle Outer Glow on and off, a dark shadow 
around the raised inset appears and disappears. Twirl down Outer Glow and 
scrub its Opacity value: This affects how dark the “shadow” is. Look a little 
farther down the list and you will notice that Outer Glow’s Color is black;  
this is what is creating the shadow effect. Click on the Color swatch to change 
its color, and now you will see its true effect.
Have fun experimenting with the other parameters for Outer Glow, then 
move onto the other layer styles. Note that each parameter also has an  
animation stopwatch next to it, meaning it can be animated! 
Applying Layer Styles
As mentioned on the previous page, you can also apply layer styles to other 
layers inside After Effects. They work best on layers that have interesting alpha 
channels, such as icons or text.
1 In the Project panel, double-click Comps > 11-Layer Styles*starter to open 
it. This composition features the beginnings of an interactive menu. Your goal is 
to make the buttons look more interesting.
2 Select layer 2 – Button 1 – and apply Layer > Layer Styles > Bevel and Emboss. 
The buttons will suddenly have more dimension, appearing to be raised off the 
surface of the background.
3 In the Timeline panel, twirl down 
Button 1 > Layer Styles > Bevel and 
Emboss. Change the Technique popup 
from Smooth to Chisel Hard, noting  
the change in the bevel profile. Set 
Technique back to Smooth, and 
increase the Size parameter to get  
a larger rounding.
4 Change the Style popup to Outer 
Bevel or Emboss; now the buttons 
appear to be pushing up from the background surface. Change Style to Pillow 
Emboss, and now the buttons appear to be cut into the background image.
5 Change the Style popup back to Inner Bevel. Now add Layer > Layer Styles > 
Outer Glow or > Drop Shadow to Button 1. Experiment with the parameters of 
these layer styles to create different looks – for example, increase the Size to get 
more dimension. For practice, select Layer Styles in the timeline and save your 
styles as an animation preset, then apply the preset to the other button layers.
4 Layer Styles > Bevel and Emboss can 
convert flat buttons (above) to ones with 
dimension (left). Experiment with the  
Bevel and Emboss parameters (below).
EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS — Lesson 3
93
d tip
Working with Presets
Animation presets can add effects, masks, 
layer styles, and keyframes to a layer – 
which makes them a bit harder to remove 
later if you decide to go a different direction. 
Therefore, it’s best to save your project 
before trying out presets. If you don’t like 
a preset, undo back to where you started 
rather than try to delete all the elements  
the preset added. If all else fails, because  
you saved your project, you can always  
File > Revert back to your saved state.

Adjustment Layers
Another great tool to use with effects is adjustment layers. These allow you to 
apply effects to just one layer, and have them affect all of the layers underneath. 
Then we’ll wrap this lesson by showing you one of our favorite tricks.
1 Close your previous comps, and bring the Project panel forward by clicking 
on its tab. Then open Comps > 12_Adjustment Layers*starter. How would you 
go about blurring all three layers in it? Happily, you don’t have to apply a blur 
effect three times!
2 Choose Layer > New > Adjustment Layer. This creates a solid that is the 
same size as the comp and places it at the top of the layer stack, with one differ-
ence: Its Adjustment Layer switch (the half-moon icon in the Timeline panel’s 
Switches column; if necessary, press $ to toggle from Modes). You can’t “see” 
adjustment layers; you need to apply effects to them and observe their results.
3 With your Adjustment Layer selected, add Effect > Blur & Sharpen > Fast 
Blur. The Effect Controls panel will come forward. Enable Repeat Edge Pixels, 
then increase the Blurriness value; the entire composite image gets blurrier.
4 Adjustment layers treat only those layers underneath them in the layer stack. 
In the Timeline panel, grab Adjustment Layer and drag it down a level, just 
above the Muybridge_[1-10].tif layer: The title is no longer blurred, but the 
layers underneath still are.
Drag Adjustment Layer down one more level, to just above the layer 
Clock+Skyline.mov. Now just the background image of the clock and skyline 
are blurred, and the other two layers above it are sharp. Move it back up a layer.
5 If adjustment layers don’t cover the entire comp image area, then only the 
area underneath them will get treated.
Select Adjustment Layer, and type s to reveal its Scale. Reduce the Scale  
to around 80% while keeping an eye on the comp: You will see that only the 
areas below the adjustment layer are blurred. Drag it to reside just below  
Why We Work.ai layer so the text remains sharp, while part of the 
background is blurred.
6 Try out some other effects: Add Effect > Color Correction > Hue/
Saturation, and scrub its Master Hue and Saturation values to colorize 
the underlying layers.
7 With Adjustment Layer still selected, type St to reveal its 
Opacity. Scrub this value and note how much of the adjustment 
layer’s effect is blended into the final composite. 
Lesson 3 — EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS
94
d future vision
Adjustment Ideas
Anything you do to effect the shape or 
opacity of an adjustment layer is fair 
game; see Idea Corner at the end of 
this lesson for one suggestion. In later 
lessons you’ll learn about masks and 
track mattes; you can also apply these 
techniques to adjustment layers to create 
interesting shapes for the effected area.
5–6 Scaling down the adjustment layer 
(below) results in just an inset portion of 
the composite being affected by the effects 
applied to the adjustment layer (above).
2 The half-moon icon indicates that a layer 
is an adjustment layer. (Note that you can 
enable this switch for any layer.)

1 Reopen one of the comps from this lesson’s earlier exercises where you were 
playing with editing layers, such as 13_Filmic Glow*starter. 
2 Add a Layer > New > Adjustment Layer to this comp – a new layer will appear 
above your edit. 
3 Apply Effect > Blur & Sharpen > Fast Blur to your new adjustment layer, 
increase its Blurriness parameter, and toggle on the Repeat Edge Pixels option. 
Drag the current time indicator through the timeline, and note how all of your 
layers – including any crossfades between them – get the same amount of blur.
4 The Modes panel should be visible in the timeline (if not, press $ to reveal 
it). Select a blending mode such as Screen or Overlay for the adjustment layer. 
The result will be that a blurred  composite of your layers will 
be blended back on top, creating an intense, dreamy, sort 
of filmic look that is very popular. You can alter this layer’s 
Opacity or add Color Correction > Levels and alter the  
Gamma of the adjustment layer to balance the grayscale 
values in the final composite. You can even duplicate your 
adjustment layer and use a different mode for each. 
This general technique is often referred to as “Instant Sex.” 
One version of it is saved in Comps_Finished > 13_Filmic 
Glow_final. In our version, we duplicated the adjustment layer, then set one  
to Overlay and the other to Screen. You don’t have to blur both layers, but  
you must apply an effect for the mode to actually work.
Applying a Filmic Glow
Adjustment layers are handy for adding effects to a number of layers that have 
been stacked to create a composite image. They are equally useful for quickly treat-
ing a number of layers that have been arranged in time, such as a video montage.
EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS — Lesson 3
95
1–4 The original image is sharp and literal 
(A). Adding an adjustment layer with some 
blur results in the entire image becoming 
blurry (B). Choosing a mode such as  
Overlay (left) results in a much more 
interesting treatment (C).
A
B
C
d tip
Universal Tint
A great way to help unify a group of 
disparate clips is to give them all the same 
color treatment. For example, apply Tritone 
to an adjustment layer above an edited 
group of clips, and tweak its Opacity to  
get the amount of tint you want.
We often apply two adjustment layers to 
create the Instant Sex look. See example: 
Comps_Finished > 13_Filmic Glow_final.

Property Links with Effects
In contrast to adjustment layers, it is common to use the same effects with  
the same settings for different individual layers in a project; for example, when 
you’ve established a color scheme and style to use for all your text overlays. 
Fortunately, there’s a way to set up property links between layers so they can 
follow a single master. This greatly simplifies client changes or just playing 
“what if?” as you create your design.
1 Open Comps > PL-Property Links*starter. It contains several lines of text, 
plus a shape layer (creating these types of layers will be covered in Lessons 5 and 
11). We initially made them white. However, the client has requested something 
more colorful, with a drop shadow. Rather than change the color and shadow 
for each layer individually – every time the client changes his or her mind – let’s 
create one set of effects that will control all of the others. 
2 A universal way to change the color for a solid, shape, or text is to use the 
Fill effect. Select the first layer (REASONS TO UPGRADE) and apply Effect > 
Generate > Fill. Then apply Effect > Perspective > Drop Shadow.
3 Using the Copy with Property Links option copies not just the selected parameters 
and effects, but also creates expressions to link to them.
2 Apply the master Fill and Drop Shadow 
effects just to one layer to start. Clip DB107 
courtesy Artbeats.com.
Lesson 3 — EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS
96
3 Select the names of the Fill and 
Drop Shadow effects in either the 
Effect Controls or Timeline panel, 
and choose Edit > Copy with Property 
Links. By selecting the entire effect, 
After Effects will build links using 
expressions (see Lesson 7) to every 
parameter of the effect. You can also 
individually select any combination 
of parameters that can be keyframed, 
including Transforms and Layer Styles 
(but not Blending Modes, as they can’t 
be keyframed).
4 Select layer 2 (dividing line), then 
hold S and select layer 5 (24/7 
e-commerce) to also select the layers 
between. Choose Edit > Paste. The 
Fill and Drop Shadow effects, as well 
as links to their parameters, will be 
pasted to all of those layers. The red 
parameter values indicate these are 
being controlled by another source.

5 Select layer 1 again, as this is the master you want to 
edit to control the other layers. Edit the color for Fill and 
the parameters for Drop Shadow; all of the other text and 
shape layers will automatically follow.
Because you used the normal Copy with Property Links 
option, After Effects will remember the name of the compo-
sition with the master controls, so you can paste these links 
onto layers in other comps and they will still follow the 
leader. If you used Copy with Relative Property Links, the 
leader must be in the same composition as the followers, 
which can be useful if you’re trying to keep comps in a 
project separated.
5 With Property 
Links, any changes 
to the effects 
applied to the 
master layer are also 
applied to the other 
layers the effects 
were pasted to.
EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS — Lesson 3
97
Boris FX Continuum Complete
www.borisfx.com/products/continuum-complete
A wide-ranging, full-featured plug-in set with more than 230 
effects as well as over 2500 presets for them.
GenArts Sapphire Effects
www.genarts.com/sapphire/after-effects 
A high-quality library of more than 250 image-processing effects.
Trapcode Suite
www.trapcode.com/products 
A well-loved set of particle systems plus other visual effects, as 
well as Sound Keys™ for tying animations to sound.
D Third-Party Effects
In addition to the effects installed by After Effects, there are numerous compatible plug-in effects offered by other “third party”  
manufacturers that you might considering adding to your toolkit. Some of the most popular ones include:
Red Giant Magic Bullet Suite
www.redgiant.com/products/magic-bullet-suite 
A set of color correction, finishing, and film looks especially 
popular among editors. Distributed by Red Giant, which also 
carries the popular Effects Suite (including Knoll Light Factory  
and Composite Wizard) and Keying Suite (including the Primatte 
Keyer and Key Correct).
Zaxwerks 3D Software
www.zaxwerks.com 
Maker of powerful yet fast, production-oriented 3D tools  
including 3D ProAnimator, 3D Invigorator Pro, and 3D Flag.
RE:Vision Effects
www.revisionfx.com/products
Purveyors of specialized production tools such as Twixtor for 
smooth, super-slow-mo effects and RE:Flex for morphs and warps.
Digital Anarchy
www.digitalanarchy.com/products/main.html 
A boutique plug-in house known for its Beauty Box skin  
retouching effect as well as a Flicker Free tool for cleaning up 
timelapse video.
Trapcode Suite

Lesson 3 — EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS
98
When you scale a pixel-based layer larger than 100% (known 
as “upscaling” or “upsampling”) you’re going to lose some 
image quality, as After Effects has to create new pixels where 
there were none before. However, there are ways to improve 
your results.
Open the composition US-Upscaling*starter. It contains 
a typical example where we have a piece of 720×486 pixel, 
standard-definition footage and need to scale it up to fill a 
1280×720 pixel, high-definition composition. Make sure you 
are viewing the composition at 100% magnification (150% or 
200% on a HiDPI display such as a Surface Pro or Mac Retina).
Select the first layer and press s if the Scale value is not 
already visible. Right-click on the layer, and from the menu 
that appears, choose Transform > Fit to Comp Width, which 
scales the layer by nearly 200%. Click on the Take Snapshot 
camera icon along the bottom of the Comp panel to store a 
copy of this result.
Make sure the Switches panel is visible ($ toggles its 
appearance). Click once on the backslash in the Quality and 
Sampling column for your layer. The backslash will change 
to a curved line, indicating this layer is now using Bicubic 
sampling instead of the default Bilinear. The text should look 
sharper; click the Show Snapshot button along the bottom 
of the Comp panel to compare the new display with your 
previous snapshot. Repeated clicking on a layer’s Quality 
and Sampling switch will toggle between Nearest Neighbor 
(the lowest quality), Bilinear (the default), and Bicubic (the 
highest). The Transform effect – which we’ll use in Lesson 6 – 
also has a choice between Bilinear and Bicubic sampling. 
Turn off the Video switch (the eyeball) for layer 1, and 
select layer 2. Leave its native Scale transform property at 
100%, and apply Effect > Distort > Detail-preserving Upscale. 
In the Effect Controls panel, click on Fit to Comp Width, and 
the layer will again scale up to fill the comp. Toggle layer 1’s 
Video switch on and off to compare the results. Notice that 
this effect also has user-adjustable parameters for Reduce 
Noise (an issue when sharpening most video footage) and 
Detail; balance these to taste for a given clip. You can also 
choose which scaling algorithm to separately use for the  
alpha channel. The trade-off is that higher-quality settings 
take longer to render.
D Higher-Quality Scaling
A
B
C
g Each layer has a Quality and Sampling switch in the Timeline panel 
that may be changed between Bicubic (layer 1) and Bilinear (layer 2).
g Normal bilinear sampling (A), bicubic sampling (B), and the  
Detail-preserving Upscale effect (C). Clip CP222 courtesy Artbeats.com.

EDITING LAYERS & EFFECTS — Lesson 3
99
Idea Corner
• Do you have access to a still-image camera and a tripod? If so, use them to 
create a time lapse or stop-motion “video” of a scene. Import the stills as an image 
sequence, or import them individually and use Sequence Layers to add crossfades.
• In the Idea Corner folder in the Project panel, open the Idea-Adjustment 
Layer Alpha comp. Layer 1 is an animated butterfly created with Motion Sketch 
(Lesson 2). It has the Hue/Saturation effect applied. Turn on the Adjustment 
Layer switch (the black/white split circle) for this layer. The butterfly becomes  
an adjustment layer, and any effects are now applied to the layer below using 
the butterfly’s alpha channel! Try this with your own sources; text or logo layers 
work well, too.
• Also in the Idea Corner folder, open the Idea-Animated Bars comp. Layer 1 
(bar 1) is a full-frame adjustment layer. Select it and open Layer > Solid Settings, 
and change the width to 150 pixels. Press # to open the Effect Controls, and 
edit the effects to taste. Animate this bar moving left or right across the frame 
(extra points for using Behaviors > Drift Over Time). Create additional bars for  
a more complex look. (We used the Transform effect to scale the layers below,  
as the regular Scale property scales only the size of the adjustment layer solid.)
• The Muybridge frames in our image sequence were originally part of a “film-
strip” that contained five images in a row – see the Idea Corner > Muybridge 
> Sources folder. We used Hold keyframes to line up and pose these individual 
images inside the barbell walk sequence comp and then rendered them out as a 
sequence that we could then import and loop. If you have one of the Muybridge 
books* (from Dover Publications), scan a different example and create another 
sequence using the same technique. 
Quizzler
• Inside this lesson’s Quizzler folder is a movie called Quiz_pyro.mov; play it.  
The explosion was originally shot against black, with no alpha channel. Open  
Quiz-Pyro*starter – how would you composite it on top of the drumming shot?
• In the Quizzler folder, play the movie Quiz-Build on Layers.mov; four 
objects build on over time, 2 seconds apart, each one fading up for 1 second. 
We used Sequence Layers to help create this effect. Open the Quiz-Build*starter 
comp and see if you can re-create this look. It’s a brain teaser! (The answer is  
in the Quizzler Solutions folder.)
Our versions of some of the Idea Corner and Quizzler animations are con-
tained in a folder of the same name inside this project file. Don’t peek!
* Muybridge was a photographer who in the 1870–’80s devised ways of taking time lapse 
photographs of humans and animals in motion. Muybridge released two books of his plates – 
Animals in Motion and The Human Figure in Motion – which Dover publishes to this day.
Idea-Animated Bars: Animated adjustment 
layers can create interesting looks.
Idea-Adjustment Layer Alpha: We used the 
butterfly layer as an adjustment layer and 
animated it with Motion Sketch. Butterfly 
courtesy Dover. 
Quiz-Pyro: Composite of an explosion shot  
on black on top of the CymbalCrash.mov 
footage. Cymbal clip 46340011 courtesy 
Pond5; pyro clip RE323 courtesy Artbeats.com.

I
n this lesson, we will be focusing on different ways 
to create transparency. One of the keys to creating 
an interesting composite of multiple images is to 
make portions of those images transparent, so that 
you can see other images behind or through them. 
This is one of the main techniques that sets motion 
graphic design and visual effects compositing apart 
from video editing.
Masks, Mattes, and Stencils
In previous lessons, we introduced two basic forms of  
managing transparency: altering the Opacity property  
of a layer, and taking advantage of a layer’s built-in alpha 
channel, which defines which parts of it are supposed to 
be transparent. In this lesson, you will go beyond these 
by adding your own transparent areas to an image using 
masks, track mattes, stencils, and keying.
Masking is a way to cut out sections of a specific layer.  
At its default, a mask path says “I want to see only the area 
inside this shape; make the area outside transparent.” You 
can draw your own shapes and paths directly on the layer or 
copy paths from the Adobe companion programs Photoshop 
and Illustrator and paste them onto an After Effects layer  
to create a mask path. You may have multiple masks per 
layer and combine them in a variety of ways, such as 
adding together their shapes or using only the area where 
they overlap. You can also control the opacity of a mask 
(making its cutout semitransparent), define its feather (how 
soft its edges are), and invert it so areas inside of its shape – 
rather than outside – are transparent. You can even create a 
mask path that is just a line or path rather than an enclosed 
Lesson 4
100
Creating Transparency
Using masks, mattes, stencils, and keying to cut out portions of a layer.
 d In This Lesson
  102 
masking tools; creating mask shapes 
  104 
Free Transform Points
  104 
masking in the Layer panel; Ellipse tool
  105 
Mask Feather
  106 
animating a mask path
  107 
creating a vignette; Mask Expansion
  108 
masking with the Pen tool (Bezier masks)
  110 
effecting a masked area
  111 
mask path interpolation; First Vertex
  112 
Mask Interpolation keyframe assistant
  113 
effects that can use the mask path; Scribble effect
  114 
Mask Modes and multiple masks
  115 
Mask Opacity
  116 
creating and editing RotoBezier masks
  117 
Audio Spectrum effect
  118 
Rigid Mask Tracker
  120 
Face Tracking
  122 
variable mask feathering
  126 
Alpha Track Matte
  128 
nesting a track matte composite
  130 
Luma Track Matte
  131 
animating matte layers
  132 
Stencil Luma and Stencil Alpha
  134 
Color Keying; Keylight; greenscreen
  136 
Key Cleaner and Advanced Spill Suppressor
  139 
effects with track mattes and stencils
 d Getting Started
Make sure you have downloaded the file archive for Lesson 4 
and decompressed it. It contains the project file and sources 
you need to execute this lesson.

d tip
Mask Colors
By default, the colors used for new mask 
paths are automatically selected from 
the Label colors. To have the path color 
automatically contrast with what it is being 
drawn on, enable Preferences > Appearance 
> Use Contrasting Color for Mask and 
disable Cycle Mask Colors. Disabling both 
makes all new mask paths yellow. 
area; these are particularly handy when used in conjunction with effects or text. 
Note that the same shape tools are used to create mask paths and shape layers 
(Lesson 11). For this lesson, be sure to select a layer first so you only create masks.
Track mattes, by contrast, involve the combination of two layers. One layer – 
the matte – is used just to define transparency; you don’t directly see the image 
it contains. This matte is then used to decide what portions of the layer imme-
diately below it are visible. There are two types of mattes: alpha mattes, which 
use the matte’s alpha channel to define the transparency of the second layer, 
and luminance (or luma) mattes, which use the luminance – grayscale values, or 
brightness – of the matte layer to define the transparency of the second layer.
Stencils take the concept of track mattes further: Rather than define the trans-
parency of the next layer below, a stencil layer defines the transparency of all  
the layers below, cutting a hole through the entire layer stack. Just like mattes, 
stencils can also be based around alpha channels or luminance.
In short: Masks involve one layer, mattes involve two layers (the fill and the 
matte), and stencils are basically mattes that can affect multiple layers below 
them. In this lesson, you’ll learn how to put all three to work.
Finally, we’ll discuss keying, which is a way to remove a solid color from a 
background and replace it with transparency. This is commonly used in visual 
effects compositing to place actors into another scene.
Masks take a layer (A), and allow you to 
cut out portions to make them transparent 
or opaque (B). Mattes use either the alpha 
channel or luminance of one layer (C) to 
define the transparency of a second layer  
(D) to create a final composite image (E). 
Video fill clip CDS101 courtesy Artbeats.com.
CREATING TRANSPARENCY — Lesson 4
101
A
B
C
D
E
d tip
Help with Shortcuts
For a full list of Pen tool and mask editing 
shortcuts, see Help > Keyboard Shortcuts, 
click Show All, and then select Masks from 
the bottom of the list.

Masking
There are several ways to create masks, and several ways to use them. Before we 
get started, spend a few minutes getting used to how the masking tools work. 
1 We assume you’ve already opened the project Lesson_04.aep. In the Project 
panel, open the Comps folder and double-click the comp 00-Masking*practice.
• Select the layer Wildflowers.mov. If no layer is selected, you will create a 
Shape Layer instead of a mask path (just undo if that happens in this lesson). 
• Select the basic Rectangle tool from the Tools panel. Click and drag in the 
Comp panel to create a rectangular shape. As you draw this mask shape, the 
areas beyond the mask will disappear, revealing the background color. That  
was easy, so try out a few more shapes for size! 
• Undo to remove your first mask. Click on the Shape tools popup menu. It 
contains five choices: the Rectangle and Ellipse tools are fairly straightforward; 
note you can add the S key to draw perfect squares and circles. 
• To start over, either Undo or select Layer > Mask > Remove All Masks. 
• To create a full-frame mask, select the layer and double-click the shape tool. 
• The Rounded Rectangle, Polygon, and Star shapes have additional parameters: 
how rounded the corners are, how many sides there are to the polygon, and how 
many points there are on the star. You can interactively change these shapes 
if you add the following keys after you start drawing the shape but before you 
release the mouse:
Lesson 4 — CREATING TRANSPARENCY
102
Shape tools (q)
Pen tool (g)
The Shape tools menu includes five basic 
shapes (press q to select this tool and 
toggle between the choices, shown below). 
Both this and the Pen tool are used to draw 
both mask paths and shape layers. You’ll  
be creating mask paths only in this lesson  
so be sure to preselect the layer first before 
drawing a path (when no layer is selected 
you may inadvertently draw a Shape Layer!)
Shape Type 
Up/Down Cursor Keys (or scroll wheel) 
Left/Right Cursor
Rounded Rectangle 
corner roundness 
toggle rectangle/ellipse
Polygon 
number of sides 
corner roundness
Star 
number of points 
point roundness
You can use modifier keys (see table) to alter 
shapes as you drag them, as we did here 
with the Star shape. Note that you can add 
ß while dragging to reposition the 
mask shape before you release the mouse. 
Clip TL218 courtesy Artbeats.com.
In addition, pressing C on Mac (L on Windows) while dragging out a Star 
shape alters just the outer radius, while pressing • and ª alters the 
inner roundness. Press ß and drag to move a mask before it is created.
The Rectangle, Rounded Rectangle, and Ellipse are drawn from corner to 
corner as you drag; add C (L) while dragging to draw them from their 
centers. The Polygon and Star are always drawn from their centers outward;  
add the S key to stop them from rotating. 
Once you are done dragging out the mask, it will immediately be converted 
into a Bezier path. Unlike with Shape Layers (Lesson 11), there is no easy way  
to edit the roundness or number of points in a mask after the fact. 

2 Now that you have some idea of how masking works, in this first exercise,  
we will focus on using the basic mask shapes to create windows on footage, to 
reveal a title, and to create a vignette. (Subsequent lessons will cover using the 
Pen tool to create more intricate mask paths, using Mask Modes, and more.)
If you’d like to preview what you’ll be creating in this exercise, open the 
Comps_Finished folder and preview the comp 01-Masking_final. 
• Return to the Project panel, and double-click Comps > 01-Masking*starter  
to open it. 
• Select the foreground layer SumidaRiver.mov. Then select the Rounded 
Rectangle tool from the Shape tools menu in the Tools panel. Click and drag  
in the Comp panel to surround a few of the major buildings on the right plus 
some of the water. As you draw this outline, the areas of SumidaRiver.mov 
beyond the outline will disappear, revealing the background. 
• After you release the mouse, Mask 1 will be revealed in the Timeline panel. 
With SumidaRiver.mov selected, press m to reveal 
its Mask Path parameter as well. m is the shortcut 
to reveal Mask and Mask Path for any selected layer.
CREATING TRANSPARENCY — Lesson 4
103
2 Select the layer to mask, then select the Rounded 
Rectangle tool (right top). Click and drag in the Comp 
panel to define the mask path you want (right). Press m 
to view the Mask Path in the Timeline panel (above).  
Foreground clip AGG-FH109-04 courtesy Artbeats.com; 
background clip U02-B26 courtesy 12 Inch Design.
d tip
Shapes by Numbers 
Clicking the word Shape in the switches 
column of the Timeline panel opens the 
Mask Shape dialog, where you can enter 
values numerically. 
d gotcha
Reset Shape Tools
If you use a modifier key while drawing a 
shape, this will become the new default for 
that tool from then on, even if you quit  
After Effects. To reset the tool to its basic 
shape again, double-click the Shape tool 
(then immediately Undo to remove the  
mask or shape created if you don’t need it).
D Masks versus Shapes
Both Masks Paths (this lesson) and Shape Layers (Lesson 11) are created using the 
same Shape and Pen tools. So, how do you know which you are creating?
• If no layer is selected, you will create a new Shape Layer.
• If any layer other than a Shape Layer is selected, you will draw a Mask.
• If a Shape Layer is selected, a pair of buttons to the right in the Tools panel deter-
mine whether you are creating a new Shape Path or a Mask for the Shape Layer.

Lesson 4 — CREATING TRANSPARENCY
104
3 Press v for the Selection tool. Then double-click the colored mask outline; 
this will enable its Free Transform Points, which means you can edit its shape. 
Note the eight small boxes (“handles”) around its shape: As you hover your 
cursor over these, the cursor will change to icons that indicate you can click and 
drag to resize or rotate the shape. Dragging anywhere else moves the entire shape. 
Tweak the size and position of the mask to taste, then press E to accept 
your edits and turn Free Transform off.
4 Next, you want to reveal a different section of SumidaRiver.mov – but you 
can’t see the rest of the image as it’s already been masked out. No problem: You 
can also create masks in the Layer panel where you can view the entire image.
In the Comp panel, you should see a colored 
outline around the mask shape. If you don’t, 
click the Toggle Visibility button along the 
bottom of the Comp panel to turn it on.
3 Double-click the mask outline to enable 
its Free Transform Points; the shortcut to 
enable Free Transform is Ct on Mac 
(Lt on Windows). Here we are about  
to grab the top point to change the height 
of the shape.
4 Double-click a layer to open its Layer panel. Set the View popup to Masks 
and turn off the Render switch. You can then draw and edit masks undistracted 
by other layers or the results of previous mask paths.
• Double-click SumidaRiver.mov to open 
its Layer panel. It opens docked into the 
same frame as the Comp panel, but feel 
free to rearrange your workspace so the 
Comp and Layer panels are side by side.
• Along the bottom of the Layer panel 
is a View popup; check that it is set 
to Masks. Uncheck the Render button 
(to the right of View): This will reveal 
the entire layer without the effect of 
masking.
• Select the Ellipse mask shape tool.  
If you like, hold down the S key 
while dragging out a new mask shape  
in the left half of the layer; this will  
constrain it to draw a circle. Release  
the mouse before releasing S.  
When you’re done, Mask 2 will appear  
in the Timeline panel below Mask 1.

5 Press v to return to the Selection tool. After you are 
done drawing a mask shape in the Layer panel, you will  
see the individual mask points or “vertices” that define 
it; by default, all vertices are selected. While all points are 
selected, you can drag any one point to move the entire 
mask, or use the arrow keys to nudge it by 1 screen pixel. 
You can S+click or drag a marquee around individual 
vertices to select or deselect them, and edit the position of 
these directly. You can also double-click the mask to use  
the Free Transform Points as you did in the Comp panel.
Tweak your second mask shape to taste, and bring the 
Comp panel forward again when you’re done. Note that 
in the Timeline panel, selecting a mask’s name selects the 
entire mask shape, making it easier to move as a unit.  
Click on Mask 1 in the Timeline panel to select it, then  
try using the arrow keys to reposition it by 1 screen pixel; 
add the S key to nudge by 10 pixels. 
6 By default, masks have sharp, crisp edges. However, it 
is possible to soften these. With SumidaRiver.mov still 
selected, type Sf to reveal the Mask Feather parameter 
in addition to Mask Path. Turn the Toggle Visibility button  
(at the bottom of the Comp panel) off to more clearly see 
the outlines, and scrub Mask Feather to soften the masks. 
Set Feather for both masks to taste. (After Effects also has 
the ability to vary the amount of feather around a mask 
shape; we’ll explore that trick later on page 122.)
7 After Effects calculates effects for a layer after masks 
have been taken into account. Apply Effect > Perspective > 
Drop Shadow to SumidaRiver.mov; notice that both masks 
get the same shadow. Slightly increase the Distance and 
Softness of the shadow to taste, and save your project.
CREATING TRANSPARENCY — Lesson 4
105
7 Effects are applied after masks 
have been calculated. That means 
the single Drop Shadow effect 
(right) applied to this layer affects 
both masks (far right). (Return Mask 
Feather back to 0 if the shadow is 
not obvious.) Remember that you can 
toggle off the colored outline around 
masks to better see the effect. 
6 We increased the Mask Feather value (below) to soften the edges 
of Mask 2 (above). 

Animating a Mask Path
Masks do not need to be fixed windows onto a layer – their 
shapes can also animate. This is particularly useful for 
revealing the content of layers.
8 Press H to make sure you are at the start of the  
composition. Bring the Project panel forward, and open  
the Sources > Stills folder. Select Bring on the Night.ai  
and type C/ (L/) to add it to your comp.
9 This black title is hard to read against your video. With 
it selected, add Effect > Generate > Fill. Click on its Color 
swatch and change it to white.
That’s better, but it still looks a bit flat on top of your 
composite. Add Effect > Perspective > Drop Shadow and 
adjust the Distance and Softness to taste.
10 As we mentioned in a previous lesson, sometimes 
it’s easier to start where you want to end up and work 
backward. With Bring on the Night.ai selected, select the 
Rectangle mask tool, then double-click it. This will add  
a mask to it that is the same size as the layer – a perfect 
ending point for a reveal. Enable the Toggle Visibility 
switch to see its outline in the Comp panel.
11 Type m to reveal the Mask Path parameter in the 
Timeline panel. Move the current time indicator to 01:00, 
and click on the stopwatch next to Mask Path to enable 
keyframing and create the first keyframe.
Press H to return to 00:00. Then double-click on  
the mask outline in the Comp panel to bring up the Free 
Transform Points; the shortcut is Ct (Lt). Drag the 
handle on the right edge all the way to the left until the 
title is completely hidden. A new Mask Path keyframe  
will be created automatically at 00:00.
To soften the leading edge of your wipe, increase the 
Mask Feather for the title’s mask. You need to increase only 
the first value, which is in the X (horizontal) direction.
12 Preview your animation. Add a dramatic pause by 
moving Bring on the Night.ai’s layer bar to start later in 
the timeline, such as at 01:00 – its keyframes will move 
with it. Save your project!
Lesson 4 — CREATING TRANSPARENCY
106
9–10 Add a title, 
use the Fill effect to 
color it white, and 
add the Drop Shadow 
effect. Then double-
click the Rectangle 
mask tool to apply  
a full-frame mask.
11 To wipe on the title (above), animate the mask to reveal it by 
setting two keyframes for Mask Path. To soften the leading edge, 
press Sf to also show Mask Feather, toggle off the Mask 
Feather lock, and increase the horizontal feather amount (below).

Creating a Vignette
Masks can also be used to create a “vignette” where 
the edges of an image are darkened, focusing the 
viewer more toward the center of the screen.
13 Press H to return to 00:00. Create a Layer 
> New > Solid; the shortcut is Cy (Ly). In 
the Solid Settings dialog that opens, click the Make 
Comp Size button, and set the Color to be something complemen-
tary to your scene such as a dark purple or blue. Give it a name that 
makes sense such as “vignette” and click OK.
14 Click and hold on the Mask tool; a popup will appear. You want a rounded 
mask for this task, so select the Ellipse tool option, and release the mouse. (You can 
also cycle through the options by pressing q.) Then, with the vignette layer 
selected, double-click this tool in the Tools panel to create a full-size oval mask.
15 Now you have a big dark oval obscuring the center of your image – probably 
not what you had in mind. But that’s easy to change. With vignette still 
selected, type m once to hide the mask, then type mm (two ms in quick  
succession) to reveal all of the mask’s properties. Make the following edits:
• Click on the checkbox next to Inverted: Now the mask solid will be transparent 
inside and opaque outside.
• Scrub the Mask Feather until you get a nice, soft falloff around the edges.
• Scrub the Mask Expansion property: This offsets a mask to draw inside 
or outside of the original mask path. (To better see its effect, temporarily 
turn Mask Feather down to zero.) Increase Mask Expansion to push the 
vignette off into the corners.
• If the corners are too dark, reduce the Mask Opacity value (or use the 
regular Opacity property). Then feel free to balance the Mask Feather, 
Opacity, and Expansion values off of each other to get the look you want.
14 Select the Ellipse tool (inset), then 
double-click it in the Tools panel to create a 
full-size oval mask on your new solid (above).
CREATING TRANSPARENCY — Lesson 4
107
A
B
C
D
Congratulations – you’ve created a tasteful little animation, plus now have a 
handle on creating simple masks. Go ahead and tweak your animation to taste. 
If you like, compare your results with ours – see comp 01-Masking_final in the 
Project panel’s Comps_Finished folder. 
15 To finish off the vignette, invert the 
mask (A), increase its feather (B), increase its 
expansion (C), and reduce its opacity (D). 
d tip
Vignette Effect
After Effects CC 2015 includes a new  
CC Vignette effect under the Stylize menu; 
it includes an option to preserve highlights 
in the darkened areas. Apply it to an 
adjustment layer to effect all layers below.

Masking with the Pen Tool
Next up is practicing using the Pen tool to create more detailed mask paths.  
It has two basic modes: One that creates common Bezier curves with handles 
(which we’ll do first), and a RotoBezier mode, which automatically determines 
the curve of the path. As with the Mask tool, you can create shapes in either  
the Comp or Layer panels, plus keyframe their shapes.
Drawing a Path
1 Return to the Project panel; if necessary open the Overflow menu to the right 
of the Effect Controls tab and select Project. Locate 02-Bezier*starter in the 
Comps folder and double-click it to open it. Select PinkTulips.jpg. 
2 Select the Pen tool (the shortcut is g). When you do, a RotoBezier option  
will appear on the right end of the Tools panel; turn it off for now.
3 Drawing with the Pen tool is similar to drawing paths in programs such as 
Photoshop and Illustrator, although the shortcuts can differ. To practice, start by 
just making a random shape:
• To create straight line segments, click with the mouse to create a series of points.
• To create curved segments, click and drag to pull out Bezier handles for the 
point you are creating. 
While drawing with the Pen tool, you can edit the points you’ve just placed:
• To reposition any point or handle before you’re finished drawing a mask, click 
and drag that point.
• To toggle between a sharp corner point and a smooth point, press O (A) 
and click on a point. The cursor will automatically change to the Convert Vertex 
Point cursor, which looks like an upside-down V. 
2 Select the Pen tool and turn off the 
RotoBezier option for now.
Lesson 4 — CREATING TRANSPARENCY
108
d tip
Select All Points
To select all the points on a mask, with the 
Selection tool active hold down O (A) 
and select any one of the mask’s points.
3 The Convert Vertex Point tool is used to 
toggle between smooth and hard corners 
(left), and to break or unbreak the continuity 
of the Bezier handles (right). 
d tip
Selecting a Single Vertex
If you try to move a single vertex and 
the entire mask shape moves instead, 
all of the points are probably selected. 
S+click once on a point to deselect 
it from the rest, then click it again to 
select just that point. In many cases you 
can also drag a selection marquee around 
one or more vertices, but you might 
deselect the entire mask by accident.
• To break the continuous handles of a smooth point, press O (A) and then 
click and drag one handle. To switch back to a smooth point, hold O (A), 
click on the vertex, and then drag to make them continuous again.

Editing the Path
You can switch back to the Selection tool for editing a mask. 
However, some of the shortcuts will then change. Because 
closing the mask creates transparency, if you need to see the  
entire image, we suggest you edit the mask path in the Layer  
panel with the Render switch off. Feel free to zoom in as well.
4 Press v to change to the Selection tool, and practice the following:
• To move a point, click and drag it. 
• To add a point, hold down g (to temporarily switch to the  
Pen tool) and click between vertices. To delete a point, select it  
and press D.
• To toggle a point between a smooth and sharp corner point, 
press CO (LA) and click on the point. 
• To break Bezier handles, press C (L) and drag on one of the 
handles. To rejoin the handles, start dragging one of them, then 
press O (A) and continue dragging to re-create a smooth point.
5 After you’ve had some fun, delete your experimental mask, 
and practice drawing a mask around the foreground tulip. It will 
require a combination of smooth shapes and sudden direction 
changes where some of the petals overlap or meet the stem.  
It’s fairly challenging, but a good example of a task you will  
often need to perform in the real world. Our version is in the  
Comps_Finished folder (02-Bezier_final), pictured to the right.
CREATING TRANSPARENCY — Lesson 4
109
• To delete a point, press C (L) to get the Delete Vertex 
tool and click on it (previously, you did not need to press a 
special key). To delete the most recent point, Undo.
• To add a new point between points you’ve already drawn, 
click on the line joining them – the cursor will automatically 
change to the Add Vertex tool while doing so.
• To pick up drawing a mask path where you left off, make 
sure only the last point is selected, then continue creating 
points with the Pen tool. 
• To close a mask path, click back on the first point. (You 
can also select Layer > Mask and Shape Path > Closed.)  
Only closed masks create transparency. If you want to  
create an open path, simply change to the Selection tool 
(shortcut: v) when you’re done creating the path. 
3 continued To delete a vertex, place the 
cursor over a point and press C (L);  
it will change to the Delete Vertex tool (A). 
To add a vertex, place the cursor between 
points (B).
A
B

Effecting a Masked Area
Masks can be used to define which areas of a layer receive an effect, akin to  
creating a selection in Photoshop before applying an effect. The trick involves  
an effect’s Compositing Options, which appear in the Timeline panel rather 
than the Effect Controls panel.
1 Close your previous comps and open CO-Masked Effects*starter. It contains 
the tulip from the last exercise, already masked.
2 Select PinkTulips.jpg and apply Effect > Color Correction > Tint. At its 
default settings, it converts the tulip to a grayscale image.
3–4 Enabling Compositing 
Options reveals the rest of 
the layer beyond the mask, 
effecting just the portion inside 
the mask (A). Inverting the 
mask (right) applies the effect 
to the previously transparent 
area, and leaves the area inside 
the mask unaltered (B).
5 Effects can be stacked onto 
a layer, each with their own 
Compositing Options. Below 
is the result of adding the Blur 
and Sharpen > Radial Blur effect. 
Lesson 4 — CREATING TRANSPARENCY
110
2 By default, the area inside a mask 
receives the effect, and the area outside 
is transparent.
3 In the Timeline panel, twirl 
open PinkTulips.jpg > Effects 
> Tint > Compositing Options. 
Click the + symbol to the 
right of Compositing Options; 
this will add a menu for select-
ing which mask you want to 
use. By default, it will use the 
first mask it finds. A stylized 
“fx” will appear next to the 
mask’s name in the timeline, 
and a mask icon will appear 
next to the effect’s Visibility 
switch. The previously 
masked-out portions of the 
image will reappear, as its 
Mask Mode will now be 
ignored. The mask parameters 
Feather and Expansion still 
affect the mask boundary.
4 Twirl open Masks > Mask 1 if you can’t see it already. Enable the Inverted 
switch on the same line as Mask 1. Now the masked tulip will appear in its orig-
inal color, and the background behind the mask will be tinted to gray. Scrub 
Compositing Options > Effect Opacity to mix how strongly the effect is applied.
5 Apply another effect such as Blur and Sharpen > Radial Blur. Initially, the 
entire layer is blurred, as Compositing Options are assigned on a per-effect basis. 
Click on the + next to Radial Blur > Compositing Options to have it also obey 
the inverted mask.
A
B

CREATING TRANSPARENCY — Lesson 4
111
How Mask Paths Interpolate
In the first exercise, you animated a simple mask shape to wipe on a layer. You 
can also animate more complex shapes made with the Pen tool. However, the 
more complex the mask, the harder it is to get smooth interpolation from one 
shape to another. Here are some ways to make it smoother.
1 Open the comp 03-Interpolation*starter. It contains a solid that has an  
animated mask. If the Mask Path property and its keyframes are not visible, 
select the layer leaf shapes and press u. 
2 Preview; the maple leaf shape interpolates to an 
oak leaf shape. Unfortunately, it twists inside-out  
on its way.
When you see mask interpolation problems such 
as this, the most likely culprit is the little-known First 
Vertex Point (FVP). The FVP of one mask path always 
interpolates to the FVP of the next mask path, and 
the rest of the points do what’s necessary to follow.
Click on the words Mask 1 in the Timeline panel 
to select the mask path, and make sure Toggle Mask 
Path Visibility is on. Move the current time indicator 
to the first keyframe at 00:00 and carefully look around the shape until you see 
one mask point that is larger than the others (hint: it is at the bottom left of the 
maple leaf stem). This larger point is its FVP. Type k to jump to the second 
keyframe, and look for the FVP; it is at the top of the oak leaf. 
Changing the First Vertex
Interpolation works best if all of the FVPs are at the same relative point of a 
shape, such as the top or bottom. 
3 Type j (or press H) to jump to the earlier maple leaf shape keyframe. 
Drag a marquee around the top mask point so just this one keyframe is selected. 
Then select Layer > Mask and Shape Path > Set First Vertex; you can also right-
click on the point and choose the same option. (If it’s grayed out, you have 
more than one point selected.) Preview, and note how the interpolation is much 
smoother – not perfect, but a lot better!
Another reason mask paths don’t interpolate smoothly is if there are different 
numbers of points in each shape. Watch the mask points move as you scrub the 
time indicator; they will “crawl” around the leaf stems, causing the shape to 
twist. You can often fix this by adding extra points to one side of one shape to 
balance them out. We added extra points to the bottom left of the maple leaf; 
our results are in Comps_Finished > 03-Interpolation_final.
d insider knowledge
Which Point Is First?
The First Vertex Point (FVP) is the point 
where you started drawing a shape with  
the Pen tool; it is the top right if you used 
the Rectangle mask tool, and it is the top 
point if you used the other mask tools. It 
appears slightly larger than the other points.
2 continued The maple leaf’s First Vertex 
Point (FVP) is at its bottom (left); the oak’s 
FVP it at its top (right). This misalignment 
is what causes the funky interpolation.
2 The maple leaf (left) and oak leaf (right) mask paths unfortunately do not 
interpolate smoothly (center).

Lesson 4 — CREATING TRANSPARENCY
112
Sometimes the mask path does not inter-
polate nicely between keyframes with 
different shapes, even after you’ve aligned 
the First Vertex between the two. The Mask 
Interpolation panel attempts to force better 
interpolation by creating extra keyframes 
that contain a flood of extra vertex points.
Open the composition MI-Mask 
Interpolation*starter1 and preview. It 
contains three solids with mask paths that 
animate from the outline of a champagne 
bottle to a martini glass. These two paths 
have their First Vertex aligned, but otherwise 
are very different in the number and location 
of the remaining vertices. 
Select layer 2 (the green one), press m 
to reveal its Mask Path keyframes, and click 
the Mask Path property to select both of 
them. Open Window > Mask Interpolation 
and click the Apply button. Preview, and 
you will see the overall animation is greatly 
improved, even with the default settings. 
If you want to further tweak the results, 
here is a summary of Mask Interpolation’s 
parameters that you can adjust before click-
ing Apply:
Keyframe Rate: Change if you want fewer 
keyframes created, although more keyframes 
equals more control.
Keyframe Fields: Enable if you will be field 
rendering this composition.
Use Linear Vertex Points: If there is rotation 
in the shape between your Mask Path  
keyframes, then disable this; otherwise,  
you might get unexpected results such  
as the shape growing between your original 
keyframes.
Bending Resistance: Higher values = stiffer 
shapes during the animation; lower values = 
looser animations. Warning: There is a huge 
difference between 99% and 100%.
Quality: Higher values usually result in nicer 
animations, so set it to 100%.
Add Mask Vertices: This is how the magic 
happens, so leave it enabled. The number 
and popup below Add Mask Vertices alter 
the algorithm on how extra vertices are 
created during the animation. Setting the 
value to 1 and leaving the popup at Pixels 
Between Vertices will often yield the brute-
force best results; the cost is a slight pause  
as it calculates.
Matching Method: Curve is best for organic 
shapes; Polyline is best for shapes constructed 
of straight-line segments. Leave it at Auto, and 
After Effects will usually guess the right one.
Use 1:1 Vertex Matches: Leave off unless 
you purposely want odd results.
First Vertices Match: Set the First Vertex 
correctly as you learned on the previous 
page, and you can leave this off. 
Try out different settings for these  
parameters on layer 3 (the blue shape). 
Note, however, that Mask Interpolation 
doesn’t always improve your results. Try it  
in MI-Problem Shapes*starter and you’ll  
be disappointed with the results.
g The red shape is the default mask 
animation; the green shape uses Mask 
Interpolation at its default settings; the blue 
shape is with Quality = 100% and Pixels 
Between Vertices set to 1.
g The masks for the wine bottle and martini 
glass both have their First Vertex at the base. 
Before you try Mask Interpolation, be sure to 
check the location of the First Vertex points 
on each path, and match them up well. 
g In MI-Mask Interpolation*final2, 
compare using regular interpolation to 
the results of Mask Interpolation with the 
butterfly shapes. The results are subtle, but 
there is an improvement in how the body 
morphs, plus the wings rotate less as well. 
Paths from 34591570 courtesy Pond5.
D Mask Interpolation Keyframe Assistant

Mask Paths and Effects
You now know how to create and animate interesting mask shapes. You can 
make them even more interesting by employing effects that can use their paths.
1 Open the comp 04-Effects*starter. It contains the leaf shape animation from 
an earlier exercise, this time cutting out a more interesting source image. 
2 Select the Sunprints_A layer, and apply Effect > Generate > Scribble. The leaf’s 
outline will be filled with a scribbled white line. Preview, and note how the scrib-
ble automatically animates while staying inside the changing outline of the leaf.
In the Effect Controls panel, you will see that Scribble has a Mask menu. This 
allows you to select the mask it uses, in the event you have multiple masks on 
the same layer. It defaults to the first mask path it finds. If there are no masks, 
the scribble will not be drawn.
3 Scrub the Start and End values; they 
control how much of the leaf is filled. 
Set Angle to 90° so that the scribble will 
fill in from top to bottom.
• Press H, and set both Start and 
End to 0%; the scribble will disappear. 
Click on the stopwatch to enable 
keyframing for End, which will set a 
keyframe at this value.
• Move the current time indicator to 
02:00, and set End to 100%, which  
fills the mask shape. A keyframe will 
be created for you. Preview, and enjoy 
the scribble animation.
4 The whole point of this lesson is to create transparency – so let’s place  
something behind this masked-out solid.
Bring the Project panel forward and open the Sources > Movies folder. 
Select ForestPath.mov and drag it to the left side of the Timeline panel below 
Sunprints_A. It will appear where the leaf shape is transparent, starting at 00:00. 
What if you want to see both the masked shape and the effect? Select leaf 
shapes and press # to bring the Effect Controls panel forward. Change the 
Composite popup from On Transparent to Reveal Original Image. Now the 
Scribble effect will act as a matte for the original image (more on mattes later).
Feel free to play with the other Scribble parameters, including Fill Type 
and the parameters inside Stroke Options. Our version (with some additional 
enhancements) is in Comps_Finished > 04-Effects_Final.
CREATING TRANSPARENCY — Lesson 4
113
2 Scribble fills the area defined by a mask.
3 By animating Scribble’s End value from 0% to 100%, it will fill in the outline over time.
Our final 04-Effects_Final comp, which 
includes rendering just the Stroke effect 
as well as adding a Drop Shadow. Clip 
RC-FH181-076 courtesy Artbeats.com.

Multiple Mask Madness
You’ve probably noticed that in the Timeline panel every mask has a popup  
next to it that defaults to Add. This is the Mask Mode, which determines how 
multiple masks on the same layer interact. By default, they add together – but 
great fun can be had with the other possible combinations.
1 Open Comps > 05-Mask Modes*starter and select ForestPath.mov. Type q 
until you see the Ellipse mask tool appear in the Tools panel. Then double-click 
this tool to add a full-frame oval mask. The trees and path will appear inside an 
oval; the color around the outside is the comp’s background color.
Type m to reveal Mask 1; its Mask Modes popup is set to Add. Rename Mask 1 
by selecting it, pressing R, typing “oval mask”, and pressing R again.
2 Open Comps_Finished > 03-Interpolation_final. It contains the finished 
version of the earlier leaf shape animation. Select the layer, reveal Mask 1, click 
on the words Mask Path to select its keyframes, and type Cc (Lc) to copy.
3 Bring the comp 05-Mask Modes*starter forward again by clicking on its  
tab along the top of the Timeline panel. Make sure ForestPath.mov is still 
selected, then type S@ to deselect your first mask path but leave the layer 
selected – otherwise you may paste over the first mask by accident!
Press H to position the current time indicator at 00:00 and type Cv 
(Lv) to paste the leaf mask and its keyframes. It will default to Add mode, 
which was its setting in its original comp. Make sure Toggle Mask Path Visibility 
is enabled; you should now see the leaf mask inset inside the oval mask. Rename 
this new mask “leaf shapes” to help remember which mask is which.
4 Change the Mask Mode popup for leaf shapes to Subtract: You will now  
see the forest path inside the oval, but not inside the leaf shapes. Continue to  
experiment with the Mask Modes to get a better feel for them – for example,  
set the oval mask to Subtract and leaf shapes to Add. Your result should then 
look the same as our version in Comps_Finished > 05-Mask Modes_final.
Lesson 4 — CREATING TRANSPARENCY
114
d factoid
Advanced Modes
The Lighten and Darken modes are useful 
when Mask Opacity is set to less than 100%: 
Lighten affects how the alpha channel value 
is calculated when Add mode is used for 
overlapping mask paths; Darken affects  
the alpha value when Intersect is used. 
4 You can get different results from the same masks by changing their Mask Mode settings.
1 For your first mask path, add a full-frame 
elliptical mask to ForestPath.mov.
3 For your second mask path, paste in  
the animated mask from an earlier exercise. 
Rename the masks to keep track of them.

CREATING TRANSPARENCY — Lesson 4
115
You can create some interesting looks by 
combining multiple masks, placing the 
masked layer on top of an unmasked copy, 
and giving each different effects such as  
drop shadows and blurs.
There’s no need to stop with just two! Experiment with drawing a 
third mask path that overlaps both existing masks (we drew a simple 
rectangular mask along the bottom), then playing with the Intersect and 
Difference modes. Keep in mind that masks are rendered from the top 
down (similar to how effects are rendered), so the third mask would be 
combined with the result of the first two.
To make a mask inactive while experimenting without having to 
delete it, set its mode to None. We also suggest you avoid Inverting a 
mask unless you cannot achieve the result you are looking for with the 
Mask Modes popup – inverting masks makes the logic doubly confusing!
Our “going further” comp is Comps_Finished > 05-Mask Modes_final2, 
where we resized the first leaf shape, added a third mask, and applied a Drop 
Shadow effect with Distance set to 0. Just for fun, we also placed an effected 
version of the original movie in the background, offset in time.
The combination of multiple masks and 
animating their Mask Opacity creates 
interesting transitions.
D Mask Opacity
Another fun way to work with multiple masks is to use  
their Mask Opacity to fade individual shapes on and off. 
Open Comps_Finished > 06-Transition_final, select 
SumidaRiver.mov, and make sure Toggle Mask Path 
Visibility is enabled to see the mask paths. If the Mask 
Opacity keyframes are not visible, type u to reveal them.
Scrub the current time indicator through the timeline 
and note how the mask shapes inside the Comp panel  
are filled in as you go between Mask Opacity keyframes. 
This is a very useful transition as it gives precise control 
over what part of the image comes on in what order.
Once you feel you understand how we created this 
look, try it yourself! Open Comps > 06-Transition*starter 
and follow these general steps to create your own version:
• To view the unmasked video while creating your mask 
paths, double-click SumidaRiver.mov to open its Layer 
panel. Set the View menu to Masks and uncheck Render.
• Draw a series of masks, focusing on different parts of 
the video. If your shapes do not add together to cover the 
entire video, draw one more mask shape that includes the 
entire video image.
• Close the Layer panel and type tt (two ts in quick succession) to reveal the 
Mask Opacity properties for your masks. Keyframe them fading up from 0 to 100% to 
bring on the masks. Offset the timing of the keyframes to create a staggered fade.

RotoBezier Mask Paths
The final step in your path to mask enlightenment is working with RotoBezier 
mask paths. You just click where you feel mask points should be, and After 
Effects will automatically create a curve to smoothly join them. You can tweak 
the “tension” at each point to influence this curve. RotoBezier is great for 
organic shapes; they also generally animate more smoothly.
To get an idea of where you are headed with this exercise, close all previously 
opened comps and open Comps_Finished > 07-RotoBezier_final2. Preview,  
and notice how the audio spectrum line along the top bops along with the 
music – that’s what you’re going to create.
1 Open Comps > 07-RotoBezier*starter. Select PurpleFlow.mov; that’s the 
layer you’re going to draw on.
2 Select the Pen tool; the shortcut is g (verify the Pen is selected). A checkbox 
for RotoBezier will appear along the right side of the Tools panel. Check it.
Get a feel for RotoBezier masks by clicking around in the Comp 
panel. You don’t need to drag any handles to create a Bezier curve; 
After Effects will create curves automatically.
To form a hard corner at a RotoBezier point, with the Pen tool still 
active hold down the O (A) key and click on an existing point. To 
change its tension, hold down O (A) and click-and-drag left and 
right to select from a range between a sharp corner and a generous curve.
Once you feel you’ve got the hang of this behavior, select Layer > 
Mask > Remove All Masks.
Trace the Flow
3 Press H, and using the same technique, create an open path that runs just 
above the flowing purple shape. This will be your first mask path. Press m to 
reveal its Mask Path in the Timeline panel, and enable keyframing by clicking on 
its stopwatch. 
The colored mask path can be hard to see against the white background, so 
click on the color swatch for Mask 1 and choose a more visible color, such as red.
4 Next, you will edit this starting mask path to animate along with the undula-
tions of the flowing purple ribbon. 
Move the current time indicator forward 15 frames and press v to return to 
the Selection tool. By default, all of the mask points are selected. Drag a marquee 
around just one mask point to select that point, and move it into a new position 
that better follows the purple shape. Tweak the rest of the points to follow the 
purple shape as needed, remembering these tips: 
2 Select the Pen tool, and enable the 
RotoBezier option (top). Practice clicking 
around the comp; RotoBezier automatically 
creates curves between your points, with  
no visible Bezier handles (above).
Lesson 4 — CREATING TRANSPARENCY
116
d tip
To Mask or Not to Mask
To create a closed mask but not have it 
create transparency, or to temporarily turn 
off a mask, change its Mask Mode popup 
to None. You can still apply effects to it.
In this exercise, you will animate a path 
above the purple ribbons and add an Audio 
Spectrum effect that will draw along it.

• If you want to add a point, hold g and click along the mask shape; to delete 
a point, hold Cg (Lg) and click on it. Note that adding or deleting a 
point will affect existing and future keyframes as well. 
• If you want to tweak tension of a point when the Selection tool is active, press 
CO (LA), click on a point, and drag left and right through that point. 
Continue this for the duration of the comp. You can scrub the current time 
indicator back and forth to check your progress. Press j or k to jump between 
existing keyframes. If you lack patience, open our comp 07-RotoBezier_final 
where we’ve animated the mask path and changed the temporal keyframes to 
Auto Bezier. Continue with the rest of this exercise using our comp.
Audio Spectrum Effect
Audio Waveform and Audio Spectrum are two examples of effects that draw 
along a mask path. Although they must be driven by an audio layer in the comp, 
you don’t apply them to the audio layer – you apply them to a layer with pixels!
5 Select PurpleFlow.mov and apply 
Effect > Generate > Audio Spectrum. 
The Effect Controls panel will open. 
Make the following changes to the 
default settings:
• Set the Audio Layer popup to 
CoolGroove.mov (the audio track  
in this comp).
• Set the Path popup to Mask 1;  
otherwise, Audio Spectrum will draw 
along a straight line defined by its 
Start and End Point.
• Enable the Composite On Original 
option at the bottom of its settings.
Preview and feel the groove.  
Disable the Toggle Mask Path Visibility 
option to see the effect more clearly 
in the Comp panel. You can tweak 
the other Audio Spectrum settings to 
taste. For our version, we eyedroppered colors from the PurpleFlow.mov for 
Audio Spectrum’s Inside and Outside Colors. We also increased the Thickness, 
reduced the Softness, and set Hue Interpolation to 90°. Play with increasing 
the Maximum Height and check out the different styles in the Display Options 
popup. Save your project when you’re done.
CREATING TRANSPARENCY — Lesson 4
117
d try it
Smoother Interpolation
All temporal keyframes – Mask Path  
included – default to Linear interpolation, 
which can result in a jerky animation. For  
a quick improvement, click Mask Path in  
the Timeline panel to select all of your key-
frames, and C+click (L+click) on any 
one to change them all to Auto Bezier. We’ve 
already done this with our final versions. 
d tip
Effects and Masks
Examples of effects that can use mask paths 
include Audio Spectrum, Audio Waveform, 
Fill, Scribble, Stroke, and Vegas.
5 By default, Audio Spectrum just draws  
a straight line. You need to edit a few of  
its Effect Controls (left) to get it to render  
your audio along your mask path (above). 
Tweak the effect controls to taste (below).

2–3 Mask out the poster on the side 
of this bus, and then alter its color 
using the effect’s Compositing Options. 
Clip 46092682 courtesy Pond5.
d tip
mocha AE Shapes
A more sophisticated approach to masking 
or matting a moving area is to use a full-
blown motion tracker such as mocha AE, 
which we’ll demonstrate in Lesson 9.
Lesson 4 — CREATING TRANSPARENCY
118
Rigid Mask Tracker
As you saw in the previous exercise, animating the mask path to follow a moving 
object takes time. After Effects has a pair of motion tracking tools for masks 
that attempts to do some of this work for you: the Rigid Mask Tracker and Face 
Tracking. As its name suggests, the Rigid Mask Tracker is optimized for following 
an object that may change in perspective as it moves by the camera, but which 
otherwise does not change its underlying shape. Take this example, where a 
client wants to quickly see if changing the color of the bus poster would make  
its message stand out better:
1 If you have previous compositions open, click on the Composition Viewer 
menu and choose Close All. Bring the Project panel forward; if necessary, click 
on the double arrow to the right of the Effect Controls header and select Project. 
Then double-click Comps > RMT-Rigid Mask Tracker*starter to open it. 
2 Move the current time indicator to the start of the composition. Select the 
Pen tool and disable RotoBezier as you want to draw a mask path with straight 
rather than curved lines. Select layer 1, Bus.mov, and draw a mask around the 
poster on the side of the bus. Initially, you will see just the contents of your mask.
3 Apply Effect > Color Correction > Hue/Saturation. In the timeline, twirl open 
Effects > Hue/Saturation, and click the + symbol next to its Compositing Options. 

4 With your mask selected, open the 
Tracker panel and use its Method popup 
to choose an algorithm for the Rigid Mask 
Tracker (the first five choices).
5 The automatically tracked mask will 
exhibit some drift. Hopefully the manual 
corrections will take less time than masking 
the entire duration of the clip by hand.
CREATING TRANSPARENCY — Lesson 4
119
Now you will see the whole bus again. In the Effect Controls panel, adjust the Master 
Hue control to quickly change the color of the poster you masked. Great – but 
now the client wants to see what it would look like if the bus were moving.
4 Open Window > Tracker. Initially, it has a large number of choices and 
parameters. Select Mask 1 in the Timeline panel; the Tracker panel will simplify 
to show just a Method popup menu. The first five choices are different algo-
rithms for the Rigid Mask Tracker; the last two are for the Face Tracker (which  
is covered in the next exercise). You need to figure out which algorithm works 
best with the movement in this clip.
Choose Method > Perspective, which tries to take three-dimensional move-
ments into account. Click Track Selected Masks Forward (the “play” button). 
After Effects will attempt to modify your Mask Path to follow your initial target, 
and set a keyframe for each frame of the composition. Verify your results by 
pressing ß to preview. For us, most of the points tracked fairly well,  
with the upper right point most noticeably drifting out of location.
5 To see if After Effects can do better, press H to return to your initial Mask 
Path keyframe at 00:00. With Mask 1 still selected, change the Method popup 
to Position, Scale, Rotation & Skew, which takes a slightly less sophisticated 
approach to transforming your Mask Path. Click Track Selected Masks Forward 
again, and After Effects will overwrite the previous Mask Path keyframes with 
new ones. Preview to see if the mask looks any better or worse overall.
Unless you managed to get a perfect track, repeat this step with the next 
Method choice for the Rigid Mask Tracker, working your way up the list. As 
the choices higher up the Method popup are less sophisticated, chances are 
they will look progressively worse; you can stop going through the algorithms 
once you’re not seeing any improvement. Choose the Method that gave the 
best results, and perform the track one last time.
The Rigid Mask Tracker’s results are seldom perfect. It’s usually best for a 
mask you can softly feather to cover a general area or just for quick proof-of-
concept such as changing this poster’s color. The hope is that by using it, you 
only need to tweak one or two mask vertices on every frame, rather than the 
entire Mask Path.

4 Draw a loose mask around her face (A), 
select one of the Face Tracking options 
in the Tracker panel (top), and click Track 
Selected Mask Backward (circled). The mask 
should snap to the outlines of her face (B). 
Clip PAD102 courtesy Artbeats.com.
Lesson 4 — CREATING TRANSPARENCY
120
Face Tracking
Adobe recently created a new application called Character Animator that can 
automatically detect and follow the features in a face, as long as it was somewhat 
facing the camera. A piece of this tracking technology migrated into After Effects 
CC 2015. Let’s put it to work:
1 Bring the Project panel forward and double-click Comps > FT-Face 
Tracking*starter to open it. Preview the footage in this comp: It contains a 
woman initially looking off to the side, then facing a moving camera. It’s a 
nice clip, but say the client wants her face to “glow” as if a light was aimed at it 
during the original shoot. Stop the preview and select layer 1, Facetrack.mov.
2 To see if After Effects can detect the partially sideways face, press H to 
return to 00:00 and use the Pen tool (RotoBezier is optional) to enclose her face 
and forehead while staying beyond its edges. You don’t need to be precise, but 
the closer you are, the higher the odds After Effects will detect the face.
3 With Mask 1 selected, open Window > Tracker and set the Method to Face 
Tracking (Outline Only). Click the Track Selected Masks Forward button. 
Chances are, After Effects will not snap your loose mask tightly around her face 
until around 01:15 when she starts to turn toward the camera. Okay – that’s not 
going to work, so delete the mask.
4 Press N to move to 15:07, and with the layer selected, loosely mask around 
her face again. This time, click Track Selected Mask Backward in the Tracker 
panel. The mask should immediately snap tightly around her face and follow her 
up through the start of the clip. (If it doesn’t, Undo and redraw the mask closer 
to her face.) When you’re done, press v to return to the Selection tool.
A
B
d tip
Blurring facial features
A common use for face tracking is 
to blur facial features for privacy 
reasons. We’ve provided an alternate 
finished version of this exercise for you 
to check out, which uses the Mosaic 
effect applied inside Mask 1.

5–6 When the mask 
around her forehead gets 
pulled down during a blink 
(A), select those keyframes 
in the Timeline panel (left), 
disable RotoBezier for them, 
and delete them (B). 
7–8 Use Shadow/Highlight to brighten 
her face, feathering the mask as necessary 
to blend the treated area with the original 
footage.
CREATING TRANSPARENCY — Lesson 4
121
You’ll notice there are times when the mask 
moves unexpectedly, such as when she blinks. 
You’ll need to fix these problems by hand:
5 Starting at the end of the comp, scrub the 
current time indicator to the left until you see 
the mask outline around her forehead get pulled 
down while she blinks. One example occurs from 
around 13:15 – 13:20.
Press u to reveal the Mask Path keyframes, 
and press = to zoom in until you can easily see 
the individual keyframe icons. Select or otherwise 
remember the time of that keyframe.
6 Move earlier in time until the first frame 
where the mask is disturbed by this blink (around 
13:15). Drag a selection marquee around all of 
the bad keyframes in that span of time.
Choose Layer > Mask and Shape Path > 
RotoBezier to disable it; this will prevent the 
interpolated mask path from drawing as linear 
segments. Then press D to remove the offending keyframes. After 
Effects will interpolate the mask path between the good keyframes. 
Repeat as necessary to clean up the entire length of the clip. (Or if 
you’re impatient, go ahead and move onto the next step anyway.)
7 Add Effect > Color Correction > Shadow/Highlight, which brightens 
her face and adds contrast. Increase its Temporal Smoothing to about 
1.50 seconds so its response is less jittery in Auto mode. Then, in the 
Timeline panel, twirl open Effects > Shadow/Highlight and click the + 
symbol to the right of Compositing Options. Mask 1 will automatically 
be assigned to this effect.
Click the Toggle Mask and Shape Path Visibility switch along the 
bottom left of the Composition panel to disable the drawing of the 
mask outline. See that hard edge around the area that is brightened? 
That won’t do.
8 Press mm to reveal all of the mask parameters. Increase Mask 
Feather to soften the transition between the brightened area and the 
rest of her head, tweaking Mask Expansion as necessary to make sure it 
doesn’t spill onto her neck. Remember that as of After Effects CC 2015, 
you can make these adjustments while a preview is playing. You can 
also toggle the fx switch for Shadow/Highlight to see before and after.
A
B

Variable Mask Feathering
So far we’ve used the Mask Feather parameter when we’ve wanted to soften the 
edges of a mask. This creates an even amount of feathering all around the result-
ing shape. However, there are some applications for which you would prefer to 
vary the amount of feather around the mask path – either to create a more bal-
anced composite or to match where the edge of an object is sharp and in focus 
or blurred and out of focus. After Effects has the ability to create a second mask 
path around a shape, softening the edge between these two paths. Let’s look at  
a pair of examples where this is useful. 
Soft Composite
1 Click on the Comp Viewer menu (along the top of the Comp panel) 
and select Close All to close any compositions left open from the previous 
exercises. Bring the Project panel forward and open Comps > VMF_1-Soft 
Composite*starter. 
2 This composition contains a graphical rendering of a clock over a city skyline. 
Say you’re working for a client who says she likes the clock but wishes it was 
over a real skyline rather than a synthetic one. To keep her happy, go into the 
Sources > Movies folder and drag SumidaRiver.mov into the Timeline panel 
below the layer Clock+Skyline.mov.
3 You need to mask out the clock face so that the new skyline will be visible 
behind the clock. Select Clock+Skyline.mov, then choose the Pen tool. (It is 
your call whether to use RotoBezier masks; we disabled this option.) Create a 
mask path around the clock face. Feel free to change the mask color to make it 
more visible against the yellow and orange face.
4 First, let’s try to solve this the old way: Press mm (two ms in quick succes-
sion) to reveal all of the mask parameters. Increase Mask Feather to create a soft 
edge around the clock face. Because ordinary feather softens both inside and 
outside of the mask shape, increase Mask Expansion until the entire face  
is opaque again.
It’s not a bad look, but pretty soon you’ll find  
yourself having to compromise. We personally like the 
look of a broad feather along the left edge of the clock 
to blend it more softly into the underlying buildings, 
but we also prefer a tighter feather along the bottom 
and lower right so the lights in the freeway are not 
obscured. It also gets fiddly to constantly balance 
Mask Feather and Mask Expansion off each other  
to keep the entire clock face opaque.
Lesson 4 — CREATING TRANSPARENCY
122
A
B
C
2–4 The client likes the graphical clock 
(A) but wishes to have a real instead of 
synthetic cityscape behind it. Mask out the 
clock face (B), and for your first attempt 
softly blend it into your new background (C) 
using a combination of Mask Feather and 
Mask Expansion (below). Clock clip DB109 
courtesy Artbeats.com.

5 Reset Mask Feather and 
Mask Expansion to 0 and click 
on the Pen tool until its drop-
down menu appears. Choose 
the Mask Feather tool from 
the bottom of the list. Make 
sure Mask 1 is still selected.
• Hover the cursor over the 
mask path in the Comp panel: The Feather cursor 
will gain a + symbol at its base. Click and drag 
outward from the mask; you will create a feathered 
edge that starts at the original mask path and ends 
at the feather path (as opposed to straddling the 
mask path).
• With the Feather tool still active, click and drag 
another section of either the mask or feather path. 
The amount of feather will interpolate between 
these two feather points.
6 There are two different algorithms for the way  
the feather “falls off” between the mask and feather 
paths. The default Smooth algorithm follows an  
S-curve where the opacity tapers slowly away from 
the mask path, changes somewhat quickly between 
the two paths, then tapers very gradually to fully 
transparent at the feather path. Aesthetically this 
looks very nice, but it can require you to drag the 
feather path out farther than you may expect. 
With Mask 1 still selected, choose Layer > Mask > 
Feather Falloff > Linear. The result is a more math-
ematically even transition between the mask and 
feather path, at the expense of creating the illusion 
of a harder transition away from the mask path.
CREATING TRANSPARENCY — Lesson 4
123
A
Smooth
B
Linear
5 Select the Mask Feather tool (top left), click on the mask path in the 
Comp panel, and drag out a feather path (above). After creating this first 
point, click on either the mask or feather path and drag out additional 
feather points (below).
6 The default Mask Feather Falloff  
of Smooth creates a visually pleasing 
transition (A). The alternative Linear is 
more mathematically even, but can create 
a noticeable transition away from the mask 
path (B). For clarity, we soloed layer 1  
and used the Show Channel popup at  
the bottom of the Comp panel to view  
just the alpha channel.

7 Before we wrap this up for the client, let’s play 
a bit more with the options available with variable 
mask feathering. Save your project so you can use File 
> Revert to retrieve it later (often easier than hitting 
Undo a bunch of times) and try out these tricks:
• Hold the S key and hover the cursor between 
two vertices along the mask (not feather) path: The 
cursor will change to show two + symbols joined by a 
bar. This means you can feather just a specific span of 
the original path. Click and drag while this cursor is 
visible; you will see sudden feather transitions before 
and after these mask vertices. These transitions are 
referred to as “hold” points around the feather path; 
you can manually insert a hold point by right-clicking 
on a feather point.
• Hold O (A) and hover over a feather point: You 
will see the familiar “change direction” cursor with a 
two-headed arrow at its base, which indicates it can be 
scrubbed. Doing so will change the “tension” through 
a feather point, just as with a RotoBezier mask point. 
(This effect is more obvious when the angle at the 
point is more pronounced.)
• With the Feather tool still selected, right-click on  
a feather point; a popup menu will appear with addi-
tional parameters that can be edited on a per-point 
basis. Picking an “edit” choice will open a dialog 
where you can enter a numeric value.
Lesson 4 — CREATING TRANSPARENCY
124
Our final composite, using variable mask feathering, effects, 
and blending modes.
7 continued Hold O (A) and scrub to change the tension of a 
feather point (circled above); right-click a feather point to get more 
options (inset). 
7 Hold the S key while hovering the cursor over the mask path to 
feather a segment between two vertices (inset). The result creates hold 
feather points (circled above), identified by their teardrop pointer shape.

CREATING TRANSPARENCY — Lesson 4
125
4 Add one or two feather points near the center top of the mask 
path where the clock face is in focus. You can either drag these 
points close to the original mask path to create a slender feath-
ered edge or drag them directly against the mask path and later 
use the Mask Feather parameter to antialias this edge. Tweak the 
mask and feather points to create a visually appealing, realistic 
composite. When you’re done, the left and right edges should 
appear to “melt” into the blurry background. For reference, our 
version is in Comps_Finished > VMF2_2-Depth of Field_final.
• You can feather to both the inside and outside of the 
original mask path: Just click on the mask path and drag 
inward to create a second set of Variable Mask Feather points. 
Undo or File > Revert to clear the results of your playing. 
Now create a nicely feathered mask to blend these two clips 
together. You can also apply a color correction effect such 
as Hue/Saturation to match their colors and optionally  
vuse blending modes (Lesson 3) to create a final composite 
that really looks like one image. Our version is saved in 
Comps_Finished > VMF_1-Soft Composite_final.
Feathering to Match Focus
1 For a challenge that relates to a real-world issue you 
might encounter on a visual effects project, open Comps  
> VMF_2-Depth of Field*starter. The foreground clip 
Clock.mov was shot with a very shallow depth of field.  
As a result, only a small portion of the clock face is in  
focus, while sections that are closer or farther away fall  
progressively out of focus.
2 Select the Pen tool and create a curved mask path that 
follows the edge of the light color along the top of the dial. 
Create the remainder of the mask path outside of the image 
frame, leaving extra room to feather inward. You may use 
RotoBezier or normal Bezier masks; we used the latter.
3 Press g to switch to the Mask Feather tool. Click in  
the upper left corner of the mask path and drag inward 
(down) a short distance, corresponding to the width of the 
blur along that edge (observe how much wider the edge 
trim appears compared with the center of the shot). Do the 
same for the corner on the right side.
This clock was originally 
shot on 35mm film 
with a shallow depth 
of field (A). A mask 
with variable feathering 
that matches the 
focus across the edge 
of the clock face 
(B) creates a more 
realistic composite (C). 
Clip TM102 courtesy 
Artbeats.com.
d tip
The g Key
The g key selects the Pen tool 
group and toggles between the 
Pen and Mask Feather tools. If 
you prefer the old After Effects 
behavior where g toggled through all of the Pen tool 
options (including Add, Delete, and Convert Vertex), 
open Preferences > General and turn off Pen Tool 
Shortcut Toggles Between Pen and Mask Feather Tools.
A
B
C

Lesson 4 — CREATING TRANSPARENCY
126
3 Start with the matte layer – the text – on top of the fill layer (A). Set the Track Matte 
popup for the fill layer to Alpha Matte (above). When you release the mouse, the fill will 
be seen only inside the matte (B). Clip 12483201 courtesy Pond5.
A
B
Using Track Mattes
Masks create transparency directly on the layer they are applied to. But what if 
you want to borrow transparency from another layer? That’s where Track Mattes 
come in. 
The most common use of Track Mattes is to play video from one layer inside  
a window defined by either the transparency (alpha) or grayscale values  
(luminance) of a second layer. In this exercise, you will learn how to set up  
an Alpha Track Matte.
1 Still in Lesson_04.aep, click on the Comp Viewer menu (along the top of  
the Comp panel) and select Close All to close your previous open comps. 
Bring the Project panel forward and open Comps > 08a-Alpha Matte*starter. 
It is currently empty, with its Background Color set to white.
2 Track mattes require two layers, and the stacking order of these layers in the 
Timeline panel is important: The matte layer must be on top of the “fill” layer. 
• Open the Sources > Movies folder and select VerticalBars.mov – this will be 
the fill. Type C/ (L/) to add it to your comp.
• Then select Sources > Stills > Night Vision.ai, and either drag it into the 
Comp panel and position it, or type C/ (L/) to add it centered in your 
comp. This text will be your matte. Remember that the matte must be on top of 
the image that will fill the matte, so reorder the layers if that’s not the case. 
3 The Modes column should be visible (press $ to Toggle Switches/Modes,  
or right-click on any column head to add Modes alongside Switches).
For the VerticalBars.mov layer, click on the popup menu under the “TrkMat” 
heading: It will give you four choices for the type of matte, all of which should 
mention Night Vision.ai (the name of the layer above). Select Alpha Matte, 
which says use the alpha channel of the layer above for the matte.
D Masks and Mattes
You can combine masks and mattes. 
For example, you can use masks to 
define the transparency of a layer 
and use the result as a matte for the 
layer underneath. 
Masks, mattes, and stencils work 
in addition to a layer’s alpha channel; 
they don’t replace it. If you add a 
mask to a layer that already has its 
own alpha, the mask will only further 
reduce the area visible through its 
alpha channel.

Once you release the mouse, the movie will now appear 
only inside the text, and you will see the white background 
color outside the text. 
If you want to verify that these areas are transparent, 
click on the Toggle Transparency Grid button along the 
bottom of the Comp panel (it’s the one with the checker-
board pattern); the checkerboard indicates transparency.
You will also notice a few changes in the Timeline panel. 
For one, the Video switch (eyeball icon) for Night Vision.ai 
will be turned off. This is because you no longer want to 
directly see the content of the matte layer; you just want  
to borrow its alpha channel. You will also notice that some 
additional icons appear to the left of the layer names,  
representing the matte (top layer) and fill (bottom layer). 
If your results don’t match the figures, compare your 
comp with our version: Comps_Finished > 08a-Alpha 
Matte_final.
CREATING TRANSPARENCY — Lesson 4
127
3 continued After setting the Track Matte popup, the matte layer on top will have its Video 
switch (the eyeball) turned off, and new icons will appear to the left of the layer names indicating 
that one is being used as a matte for the other. Notice there is no track matte popup for layer 1 
because there is no layer above it. If there were additional layers above Night Vision.ai, the track 
matte popup would appear for the matte layer as well, which can be a source of confusion. 
3 continued Toggle the Transparency Grid on 
to verify the resulting alpha channel. 
4 To understand the difference 
between Alpha and Alpha Inverted, 
go ahead and set the Track Matte 
(TrkMat) menu to Alpha Inverted 
Matte: Now the area inside the 
text will be transparent, and the 
area outside will be filled with the 
VerticalBars.mov layer. 
Set the popup back to Alpha Matte 
before performing the next step.
4 The result of using Alpha Inverted Matte. 
The white areas are the background color, 
showing through where the result is transparent.

Nesting with Track Mattes
The two-layer combination required to create a track matte gives you a lot of 
flexibility in combining layers, plus the freedom to animate them independently 
from each other. However, there are a couple of downsides to this combination:
• You can’t directly add an effect to the composite (the result of the track matte). 
This can be a problem when adding normal drop shadow or glow effects; layer 
styles help work around this (see the sidebar on page 139).
• It is trickier to move the pair as a group and keep them in sync. 
The best way to work around this is to leave the track matte layers in their 
own composition, then “nest” this comp into a second comp where it will 
appear as a single layer. We’ll discuss nesting in greater detail in Lesson 6, but for 
now all you need to know is that you can treat a nested comp just like a normal 
layer (with the added perk that you can go back and edit the contents of the  
first comp and have the results automatically show up in the second comp). 
5 Open Comps > 08b-NightVision*starter. This is a background we’ve built  
for you, using elements you’ve already worked with in the earlier exercises. 
6 To nest your track matte pair into this new comp, locate 08a-Alpha 
Matte*starter in the Project panel and either drag it on top of 08b-Night-
Vision*starter in the Project panel or press C/ (L/) to add it to 
08b-NightVision*starter. Using either of these techniques will ensure it is the 
top layer in the Timeline panel and centered 
in the comp. 
After you’ve “nested” the comp, you will  
see the name of your first composition  
08a-Alpha Matte*starter appear as a layer  
in the second comp, with a special “comp” 
icon to reinforce this.
7 Preview your composite: Fun, but a bit too much may be happening all at 
once. In the timeline, slide the 08a-AlphaMatte*starter layer bar to the right 
to start around 00:28, which happens to line up with a good beat in the music. 
(Hold down S after you start dragging to snap it to the layer marker on the 
audio layer.) This allows the masks in SumidaRiver.mov to build on and be the 
hero before the title comes up. Preview and see if you like that better.
8 The fill movie in 08a-AlphaMatte*starter contains flashy red, yellow, and 
orange colors that go well with the yellow and red lights in SumidaRiver.mov. 
However, we might want to tie the text in more with the purple background  
to give more contrast against the river-at-night footage as well as the illusion 
that the text has been punched through that clip to the background.
Lesson 4 — CREATING TRANSPARENCY
128
6 Nest the comp with your track matte 
pair into a new comp that already includes 
two video layers and one audio layer.  
Note the icon for 08a-Alpha Matte*starter 
layer: It looks like the comp icons you  
see in the Project panel, which helps  
you identify it as a nested comp.

9 The masked river footage has drop shadows to set it off from the purple  
background; you can do the same to your title here. Experiment with different 
layer styles: Layer > Layer Styles > Drop Shadow will make the title appear to 
float above the river footage; Layer Styles > Inner Shadow will make the title 
appear to be cut out from the river footage. If you chose Drop Shadow, add  
Layer Styles > Bevel and Emboss to add more dimension; if you chose Inner 
Shadow, add Layer Styles > Inner Glow to add contrast to the cutout title.  
In any case, experiment with their parameters to go beyond the default look. 
10 As we mentioned, an advantage of nesting a compo-
sition is that you can treat its results as one layer, making 
animation easier. Go ahead and animate the 08a-Alpha 
Matte*starter layer to come on in an interesting fashion. 
If the layer is moving quickly, turning on the Motion Blur 
switch for the layer plus the Timeline panel’s Enable Motion 
Blur switch will give a nice look.
If you’re curious, our version is in Comps_Finished >  
08b-Night Vision_final. Compare it to make sure you  
followed the steps correctly, but feel free to deviate from  
its precise settings to create your own look.
If you agree, select 08a-AlphaMatte*starter and apply Effect > Color 
Correction > Hue/Saturation, and try rotating the Master Hue dial to shift the 
range of colors inside the text. You can also play with Master Saturation to better 
match the tones of the colors. Test your settings at different points in time, as 
the colors inside the text change throughout its life.
CREATING TRANSPARENCY — Lesson 4
129
9 Experiment with different layer styles  
to create different looks, such as the title 
floating above (below left) or being cut  
into (below right) the city footage behind. 
8–9 The text initially blends into the foreground clip (A). To add contrast and make it better match 
the background, use Hue/Saturation to alter its color (B) and add Layer Styles to help it stand out (C).
A
B
C
10 The final animation. 
Because the track matte 
is created in a precomp, 
you needed to animate 
only one layer. 

3 Make sure the Modes column is visible in the timeline. Set the TrkMat  
popup for Firestorm.mov (remember – always the bottom layer of the two!)  
to Luma Matte. The matte layer will turn off, track matte icons will appear in  
the Timeline panel next to the layer names, and the fire will now play inside  
the cloudy stream. If you like, click on the Toggle Transparency Grid button  
to confirm that the black area outside the clouds is transparent.
As we noted earlier, you can edit the two components of a track matte  
independently from each other. For example, press H: You won’t see the  
fire because the luma matte layer is all black at its first frame. Slide the luma 
matte layer CloudMatte.mov to start earlier in time (before 00:00), and you  
will see some of the fire from the first frame of your comp. This is what we did  
in our version Comps_Finished > 09-Luma Matte_final.
4 To help confirm what the different matte 
modes do, select Luma Inverted Matte; now  
the fire plays outside the clouds. 
Then select Alpha Matte: The fire plays full 
frame, ignoring the clouds. This is because 
Firestorm.mov is using the alpha channel  
of the full-frame movie CloudMatte.mov 
above it, and its alpha channel is all white. 
Luma Track Matte
In the previous exercise, you used an Illustrator layer – which inherently has an 
alpha channel around its shapes – as an Alpha Track Matte. This time, you will 
use a high-contrast grayscale layer as a Luma Track Matte. 
1 Bring the Project panel forward and open Comps > 09-Luma Matte*starter. 
It is currently empty, with its Background Color set to black.
2 As you learned in the previous exercise, track mattes require two layers, with 
the matte on top and the “fill” underneath:
• In the Project panel’s Sources > Movies folder, select Firestorm.mov and add 
this to your comp. This will be your fill layer.
• In the same folder is CloudMatte.mov; this will be your matte. Add it to your 
comp on top of Firestorm.mov. Scrub the current time indicator to the end of 
the comp; you will see the CloudMatte.mov spew out over a black background.
3 When you set Firestorm.mov to Luma 
Matte (above), it plays through the bright 
areas of CloudMatte.mov (below). 
Lesson 4 — CREATING TRANSPARENCY
130
d factoid
Hicon
Layers that have high contrast between 
white and black levels make good luma 
mattes. Indeed, you will often hear them 
referred to as “hicons” or as a hicon matte.
4 Using Luma Inverted Matte.
2 The fire (top) will be your fill; the clouds 
(above) will be your matte. Clips RF207 and 
CC123M courtesy Artbeats.com. 

Animated Track Matte
You’re not stuck with the original content of a still image or movie to use as a 
track matte. You can also animate and add effects to it to create more interesting 
matte shapes.
1 Open Comps > 10-Animated Matte*starter. It is currently empty, with its 
Background Color set to black. In the Project panel’s Sources > Stills folder, 
locate the image InkblotMatte.psd and add it to the comp. (To create this, 
we dropped some India ink on a piece of paper, squished another one on top, 
pulled them apart, scanned it once it had dried, and inverted it. Very high tech.)
2 We created InkblotMatte.psd larger than the comp so you would have some 
room to animate it:
• Type p to reveal Position, and click on its stopwatch to enable keyframing.
• Slide it downward until the top of InkblotMatte.psd just reaches the top 
of the comp. Remember you can hold S while dragging to constrain your 
movement in the comp view, or scrub just the Y Position value (the second one) 
in the Timeline panel.
• Press N, and slide the blot upward until its bottom just touches the bottom 
of the comp view.
Preview. Hmm…not all that exciting. But all is not lost; we know of an effect 
that can add some interesting movement…
3 With InkblotMatte.psd selected, apply Effect > Distort > Turbulent Displace. 
In the Effect Controls panel that opens, scrub its value for Evolution: The blot 
will now undulate in an organic manner. 
This effect does not self-animate, but it’s easy enough to keyframe:
• Press H to return to 00:00. Reset Evolution to 0x +0.0° and click on the 
stopwatch for Evolution to enable keyframing.
• Press N, and set Evolution to a different value, such as 2x + 0.0° (two full  
revolutions). Feel free to experiment with the other parameters too, if you like.
Preview again. Now that’s more interesting!
4 Bring the Project panel back forward, locate Firestorm.mov (your fill layer)  
in the Sources folder, and add it to the Timeline panel below InkblotMatte.psd.  
Check that Firestorm.mov starts at the beginning of your comp; if not, press 
OH (AH).
5 Make sure the Modes column is visible and set the TrkMat popup for 
Firestorm.mov to Luma Matte. The fire will now play inside the animated  
track matte. Note that just the shape of the matte – not the fire footage – is 
 distorted by Turbulent Displace, which reminds us of the flexibility of mattes.
CREATING TRANSPARENCY — Lesson 4
131
2 The file InkblotMatte.psd is larger than 
the comp, so you have room to animate it 
moving up over time.
3 Effect > Distort > Turbulent Displace is 
handy for adding organic movement to layers. 
You need to animate the Evolution parameter 
to have the distortion change over time.
5 The displaced ink blot is used as a matte 
for Firestorm.mov. The black areas are 
where the image is transparent; you could 
put another image behind this if you wished.

Lesson 4 — CREATING TRANSPARENCY
132
Just for fun, also try the Silhouette Luma 
option; the area outside the cloud stream  
will now be visible. Continuing the matte 
 analogies, you can think of Silhouette as 
being “stencil inverted.”
4 Remember that stencils affect only 
the layers below them; not above. Drag 
CloudMatte.mov down one space in 
the layer stack so that it sits between 
CodeStorm.mov and SumidaRiver.mov.  
The layer below – SumidaRiver.mov – will  
 be cut out by the cloud stream, but the  
layer above – CodeStorm.mov – will now 
play full frame.
D Stencils
3 Placing CloudMatte.mov on top of the 
other two layers and setting its Mode to 
Stencil Luma causes it to cut out both layers 
below (above). Silhouette Luma gives the 
inverted result (below).
The third method of creating transparency 
that we’ll explore in this lesson is stencils. 
Stencils can be thought of as overeager 
mattes: Rather than define transparency for 
just one layer, they define the transparency 
of the composite of all the layers under-
neath (remember that After Effects generally 
renders from the bottom up). In other words, 
stencils cut all the way through to the bottom 
of the layer stack in the Timeline panel, but 
they don’t affect layers that sit above them. 
Like mattes, they come in two flavors – alpha 
and luma.
Stencil Luma
1 Bring the Project panel forward, and  
open Comps > 11-Stencil Luma*starter. It 
contains a pair of movies we’ve used earlier 
in this lesson, with a twist: SumidaRiver.mov  
has been inverted to make it look more 
graphical, and CodeStorm.mov has been 
applied on top of it in Overlay mode (you 
learned about blending modes in the  
previous lesson).
2 In the Project panel’s Sources > Movies 
folder, select CloudMatte.mov and add it to 
the top of the layer stack. Move the current 
time indicator a bit later to where the cloud 
stream emerges, or drag CloudMatte.mov to 
start a second or two earlier so you see some 
action at the beginning of the comp.
3 In the Modes column in the timeline, set 
the Mode popup for CloudMatte.mov to 
Stencil Luma – it’s near the bottom of the list. 
Just as in a previous exercise, the image will 
appear only inside the clouds. (If your version 
doesn’t look like our figures here, compare 
it with Comps_Finished > 11-Stencil Luma_
final.) Note that unlike mattes, the Video 
switch for the stencil layer must stay on. 

CREATING TRANSPARENCY — Lesson 4
133
Stencil Alpha
As with track mattes, stencils can also be 
based on a layer’s alpha channel. Effects  
can be used on the stencil layer, just as we 
treated the matte layer earlier in this lesson.
1 Open Comps > 12-Stencil Alpha*starter. 
The background layers are the same as in 
the previous exercise. The top layer – Night 
Lites.ai – is an Illustrator layer that you will 
use as a stencil. Because it is black, it won’t 
work as a Stencil Luma (black pixels = zero 
opacity), but it will work as a Stencil Alpha.
2 Set the Mode popup for Night Lites.ai  
to Stencil Alpha. The composite image of all 
layers below will now be contained inside the 
stencil’s alpha channel. (Silhouette Alpha is 
akin to “inverted stencil alpha” and will yield 
the opposite result; stick with Stencil Alpha.)
3 Make sure Night Lites.ai is selected, and 
apply Effect > Distort > Turbulent Displace. 
Animate the Evolution property from 0 at 
time 00:00 to a value of 1 revolution at the 
end of the comp, and preview. (If the title 
isn’t “oozing,” verify that you animated one 
whole revolution and not just one degree!)
Just to make life more interesting, make 
the amount of ooze change over time: 
Animate Turbulent Displace’s Amount to 
increase from 0 to, say, 25. While you’re at 
it, have fun experimenting with the options 
under the Displacement popup too.
4 Finish off your animation by animating  
the stencil to make it come on in a more 
interesting fashion. 
When you’re done, check out our version 
in Comps_Finished > 12-Stencil Alpha_final. 
You applied Turbulent Displace to the stencil 
layer, but we applied it to an adjustment 
layer (Lesson 3) so it would affect layers 
below. Move it below the stencil layer and 
it will distort the movies only, and not the 
stencil. Choices, choices! 
1–2 The comp 12-Stencil Alpha*starter initially has black 
type on top of a composite of two background layers (inset). 
Setting the type to Stencil Alpha results in it cutting out the 
underlying layers (above).
4 Add and animate Turbulent Displace to the type to make it ooze over time.  
You can also animate the scale and rotation of the type to create additional movement.  
The disadvantage of using stencils is that you can’t put a background layer in the same 
comp, as the stencil will cut through that as well. To add a background, nest the stencil  
comp into a second comp (as you did earlier with the Alpha Matte exercise).

Lesson 4 — CREATING TRANSPARENCY
134
2–4 
Create a garbage matte, apply the Keylight preset (top), then dock the Layer panel alongside the Composition panel so you 
can see the before-and-after results of your work (above). Disable Render in the Layer panel (circled here) for the “before” view. 
Clip 5165161 courtesy Pond5.
Color Keying
Another common way to create transparency is to shoot action against a solid 
green or blue background. Plug-ins are then used to remove (“key”) that color, 
leaving just the desired foreground surrounded by a transparent alpha channel. 
This exercise will outline a typical keying workflow, keeping in mind that every 
clip is different and will require its own set of adjustments:
1 Close any previous comps by clicking on the Composition Viewer menu and 
choosing Close All. Bring the Project panel forward (if necessary, click on the 
double arrow to the right of the Effect Controls tab and select Project). Double-
click Comps > KEY-Greenscreen*starter to open it. It contains a woman in 
front of a greenscreen, with a lot of hair – often a challenge when keying.
2 The more even the background, the easier it is to key. Therefore, it is desirable 
to create a “garbage matte” that cuts out areas of the background that the actor 
is not in front of. 
Keyframe a mask that loosely encloses the actor. Be careful not to accidentally 
crop off any body parts or hair, especially later in the clip. When done, click on 
the Toggle Mask and Shape Path Visibility switch along the lower left edge of the 
Comp panel to hide the mask outline. Our example using a RotoBezier mask is 
in KEY-Greenscreen+mask*starter.

CREATING TRANSPARENCY — Lesson 4
135
5 The Combined Matte view (left) looks 
initially promising, but switching View to 
Status reveals lots of partially transparent 
gray areas that we thought would be white 
or black (right). 
3 In the Effects & Presets panel, make sure Animation Presets are enabled, and 
search for “Keylight”. Select the preset Keylight + Key Cleaner + Advanced 
Spill Suppressor and drag it onto your clip. This is the chain of three effects 
you’ll use most often for keying. Advanced Spill Suppressor defaults to being 
disabled; also turn off the fx switch for Key Cleaner so we can see its results in 
isolation later.
4 It’s easier to tweak Keylight when you can see both the processed and  
unprocessed footage. Double-click the layer Greenscreen.mov to open its Layer 
panel, and uncheck the Render option along its lower right edge. Click on the 
word Layer in the panel’s tab and drag it to the left of the panel until you see a 
vertical blue overlay appear. Release the mouse, and the Comp and Layer panels 
should now be side by side. Zoom and pan the two displays as needed. 
5 Set Keylight’s View popup to Combined Matte. This will show the resulting 
alpha channel as grayscale values. Then select the eyedropper next to Keylight’s 
Screen Colour swatch, and click in the Layer panel on the green background 
near the actress. Not all colors are created equal; try a few different points until 
the Combined Matte display in the Comp panel is solid black beyond her silhou-
ette (not mottled dark gray). We found that colors on her left side worked best.
The resulting alpha channel looks pretty good, but it’s not perfect. Switch the 
View popup to Status: black is perfectly transparent, white is perfectly opaque, 
and gray is a blend of the foreground and background (ignore the red areas).
You want partial transparency in the wispy parts of her hair, but not in  
areas such as the middle of her face. The goal is to strike a balance between 
removing the gray where it doesn’t belong versus eroding too much of it away 
where it does belong.
d tip
Keylight Manual
You’ll find useful documentation for the 
Keylight effect in your Applications folder 
for After Effects: Look inside Plug-ins/
Effects/Keylight/docs and open the PDF 
that’s there. It includes suggested workflows 
and descriptions of each of the parameters.

Lesson 4 — CREATING TRANSPARENCY
136
8 Change Keylight’s Status popup to Screen Matte. This will show you the 
actual, unexaggerated alpha channel values in the Comp panel. Compare it to 
the original footage in the Layer panel. If you see any areas (such as the top of 
her head) that should be partially transparent but that are appearing as solid 
white (opaque) in the Comp panel, slightly increase Keylight’s Clip Rollback 
parameter to reintroduce more of a transition from white to black.
Key Cleaner and Advanced Spill Suppressor
9 Change Keylight’s Status popup to Intermediate Result. The key looks pretty 
good, but has some issues. In particular, the partially transparent areas around 
her hair are looking a bit soft, plus we can see some of the green background 
color wrapping around and “spilling” onto her hair and shirt.
There are parameters in Keylight that can help improve these issues. However, 
Adobe has created a pair of effects – Key Cleaner and Advanced Spill Suppressor 
– that also do a great job improving these areas, with fewer parameters to tweak.
10 Enable the Key Cleaner effect. Immediately you will see more definition 
in her hair. This is particularly obvious if you increase the Comp panel’s mag-
nification and toggle Key Cleaner on and off. (If the result looks terrible, make 
sure Keylight’s Status is set to Intermediate Result, not Final Result – otherwise 
Keylight will try to duplicate what Key Cleaner and Advanced Spill Suppressor 
are doing.)
6 Scrub Screen Balance to minimize the initial 
gray visible in the Status display. This alters how 
Keylight is looking at color values to separate the 
foreground and background. 
7 Twirl open Keylight’s Screen Matte section. 
Hold down C (L) and slowly scrub the Clip 
Black value higher, just to the point where it 
removes the gray speckles beyond her silhouette 
without cutting into the gray around the edges  
of her hair. Refer to the Layer panel display if  
you need a reminder of where her hair is indeed 
partially transparent.
Then, hold down C (L) and slowly scrub the 
Clip White value lower to remove the gray speckles 
inside her silhouette, being careful not to expand 
the white areas into where her hair should be semi-
transparent. Check your results at several different 
points in time, and strike a good balance.
6–7 With View set to Status, make minimal 
adjustments to Screen Balance, Clip Black, 
and Clip White to make the background 
solid black, the foreground solid white, 
and maintain a nice band of gray in the 
semitransparent areas.
d tip
Garbage In = Garbage Out
Keying relies on image quality to work its 
magic. Use the least-compressed, highest-
resolution source you can. Turn off Edge 
Sharpening in the camera, as this may 
introduce edge artifacts when keying.

CREATING TRANSPARENCY — Lesson 4
137
If you feel the result has been 
oversharpened where you’re seeing 
individual strands of hair at the cost of 
nice partial transparency, reduce Key 
Cleaner’s Strength parameter to find a 
happy balance. On the other hand, if 
you find her hair still looks too wispy, 
increase Key Cleaner’s Alpha Contrast 
to bring more definition to it.
11 Move the current time indicator 
to around 10:17 where she flips her hair. Are some of the wispier areas of her 
hair disappearing? If so, increase Key Cleaner’s Additional Edge Radius to get it 
back, but stop before her arm starts to become transparent as well.
12 Step through a few frames or otherwise preview earlier in the clip where 
she’s not moving as much. Does her outline seem to “sparkle” or fade in and 
out? If so, enable Key Cleaner’s Reduce Chatter option and see if that helps.
13 Time to get rid of that green color spill: Enable Advanced Spill Suppressor.  
It defaults to a Method of Standard. Press S% to take a snapshot of this 
result, and then set Method to Ultra. Press % to retrieve your snapshot and 
compare results. Better yet, in After Effects CC2015 or later, start a preview and 
toggle Method between Standard and Ultra. Ultra doesn’t always look better,  
but it does give you more control over tweaking the spill. For example, with  
this clip, increasing Ultra’s Tolerance resulted in a more natural skin tone.
Every keying job will be different, and only practice (and patience) will make 
you better. But now you know a good initial approach; study the Keylight 
manual to dig in deeper.
When you’re finished, save your project and re-dock the Layer panel into  
the same frame as the Comp panel.
10 Before (A) and after (B) enabling Key 
Cleaner, which brings a lot of definition 
back to the hair.
13 Before spill suppression (A), Method = 
Standard (B), and Method = Ultra with 
increased Tolerance to improve skin tones (C).
A
B
A
B
C
d tip
Roto Brush
If you need to cut out an actor not shot 
against green or blue, explore Roto Brush 
(Lesson 10).

Idea Corner
If you want to practice the techniques you’ve learned in this lesson, try out the 
following variations on the exercises you’ve already performed. Some of our 
 versions are included in the Project panel’s Idea Corner folder.
• Animating a mask shape is one way to wipe on a title; another approach is 
to use a transition-style effect. For example, in Masking+Transitions, instead 
of using a mask to wipe on the Bring on the Night title, we used Effect > 
Transition > Linear Wipe and animated the Transition Completion parameter. 
Experiment with the other effects in this category; the CC effects installed with 
the Cycore FX HD plug-in set can create a lot of interesting looks. (Cycore Effects 
HD effects are installed automatically with After Effects.)
• Effects applied to mattes or stencils treat only the shape of the matte or 
stencil, they don’t affect the image being cut out. For example, in the comps 
10-Animated Matte or 12-Stencil Alpha where we used Turbulent Displace to 
alter the matte and stencil, you might have noticed that the background cut  
out by the matte or stencil didn’t ooze as well. If you want to ooze the entire 
composite, delete the effect from the matte or stencil, and instead apply it to  
an adjustment layer (introduced in 
the previous lesson) sitting above all 
the other layers. Our version is shown 
in Idea Corner > Adjustment Layer. 
You could also nest your track matte  
or stencil comp into a second comp 
where you can apply effects to the 
nested layer. (Nesting is covered in 
detail in Lesson 6.)
• You can stack stencils on top of 
stencils! In Idea Corner > Stacking 
Stencils, we added the CloudMatte 
as a Stencil Luma layer to the top of 
what was Example 12.
• Create a series of high-contrast 
grayscale images using whatever 
means take your fancy (digital images, 
India ink, Photoshop). Number them 
sequentially and import the series as a 
sequence, then loop and set the frame 
rate in Interpret Footage. Use this 
sequence as a luma matte or stencil  
for another layer. 
The Transition effects provide an alternative 
to using masks to wipe layers on and off. 
The effects shown here include Venetian 
Blinds, CC Grid Wipe, and CC Twister.
We added the CloudMatte.mov as a Stencil Luma layer in Idea Corner > Stacking 
Stencils comp to animate on and erode the edges of the title (right). 
Lesson 4 — CREATING TRANSPARENCY
138
There is a big difference between applying an effect such as Turbulent Displace to a matte 
(left) and using an adjustment layer to apply the same effect to the result of a track matte 
(right). The latter is demonstrated in Idea Corner > Adjustment Layer.

CREATING TRANSPARENCY — Lesson 4
139
Track mattes involve the combination of two layers. Effects are 
applied to a single layer. So in the comp where you applied the 
track matte, you can apply effects to the fill layer or the matte 
layer, but this applies them to the layer before the track matte is 
composited together. Edge effects (such as drop shadow, glow, 
and bevel alpha) need to be applied to the track matte result.
If you need to see this problem for yourself, in the Project 
panel, select Comps_Finished > 08a-Alpha Matte_final, dupli-
cate it (Edit > Duplicate), and then open the duplicate comp. 
• Try adding Effect > Perspective > Drop Shadow to 
VerticalBars.mov: You won’t see any change. This is because 
the effect is being applied to the rectangular movie layer before 
the track matte is composited. 
• Now try adding Drop Shadow to the Night Vision.ai layer 
and increase the Distance parameter. You may think you’re 
seeing a normal shadow, but preview and you will realize that 
the fill movie is playing inside the shadow. This is because  
a black drop shadow at 50% opacity is being applied to the 
matte layer before the track matte is composited. Because the 
fill layer is using the alpha channel of the layer above as a matte,  
it plays at 50% opacity inside the shadow.
There are a few potential solutions to this problem:
• If all you need is a drop shadow applied to the result of a 
track matte, select the second layer in your track matte pair  
(the fill), and apply Layer > Layer Styles > Drop Shadow.  
Layer styles render after the matte has been calculated. 
If you add a drop shadow to individual layers of a track matte 
pair, you either won’t see the result, or the shadow will become 
part of the matte that the fill plays inside of (above). However, if 
you apply Layer > Layer Styles > Drop Shadow, the shadow will 
be calculated after the matte, giving the desired result (below).
• Composite the track matte or stencil in one comp, then nest 
this comp into another comp. The resulting layer will look like any 
other source with an alpha channel, meaning you can apply any 
effect or layer style you want, including Drop Shadow, Roughen 
Edges, and the like. (After you complete Lesson 6, you will also 
know how to use precomposing to achieve the same result.)
• Composite the track matte or stencil in its own comp, and 
then apply an adjustment layer on top of these layers. You can 
now apply any effect you like to the adjustment layer, and it will 
affect the result of the track matte or stencil composite below. 
The one catch is, if you apply layer styles to the adjustment layer, 
they will be ignored because they are not “effects.”
d tip
Take Any Matte
You can take almost any layer and use 
its luminance as a luma matte. To better 
“see” a layer’s luminance, apply the 
Color Correction > Tint effect to make 
it grayscale. Use other effects such as 
Levels to increase the contrast between 
the black and white values.
Quizzler
And finally, a few mask-related challenges to make you think:
• Inside the Project panel’s Quizzler folder, play back the movie Pop on by 
word.mov. Note that the title pops on a word at a time, rather than wipes on. 
How did we do that using an animated mask? To test your theory, try re-creating 
it yourself using Pop on*starter as a starting point.
• In Quizzler > Stroke play, we made a Stroke effect animate clockwise around 
the leaf shape mask. How would you make it animate in the opposite direction? 
Once you figure that out, how would you make it start at the top of the leaf 
shapes and go all the way around, instead of start at the bottom?
The solutions to all of these are in the Quizzler Solutions folder. No peeking!
D Effects with Track Mattes and Stencils

F
rom opening titles to closing credits, bullet 
points to lower thirds, and conveying infor-
mation to creating abstract backgrounds, one 
of the most common elements in motion graphics 
is the use of text. Fortunately, After Effects has  
a very powerful text engine – but it’s admittedly 
not the most intuitive tool in the world. In this 
lesson, we’ll show you how to professionally 
typeset text, then animate it in interesting ways.
Another important – but often overlooked – element 
in motion graphics is the use of sound. By tying your ani-
mations to music and dialog, you can greatly increase the 
impact of your designs. Later in this lesson, we will show you 
how to add audio layers to compositions, mix audio, view 
the audio waveform, and place layer markers that will help 
you time your animation to events in the audio. 
Type Tools
The Type tool in After Effects borrows heavily from other 
Adobe applications such as Photoshop and Illustrator. If  
you are familiar with creating text in those applications,  
you already have a good head start. You can still create  
type in these programs and import them into After Effects, 
but whenever we have the choice, we prefer to start from 
scratch in After Effects. (At the end of this lesson we’ll show 
you how to convert Photoshop Text layers to After Effects 
editable text, but be aware that this option still does not 
exist for text created in Illustrator.)
Beyond creating text is animating it. In After Effects, the 
most important concept is that of the selection. Typically, 
selected characters are treated or offset in some way (such 
as by position, scale, rotation, color, opacity, and so forth), 
Lesson 5
140
Type and Music
Animating text and working with music are essential to motion graphics design.
 d In This Lesson
 141 
creating basic text
 145 
creating text Animators; Range Selectors
 147 
animating text Position
 148 
animating text Rotation and Opacity
 149 
randomizing the order of characters
 149 
creating cascading text; working with  
selection Shapes
 151 
setting the text Anchor Point
 152 
animating by words
 153 
title safe areas
 154 
animating text Blur and Tracking
 155 
text on a path
 156 
Per-character 3D animators
 159 
Ease Low and Ease High
  161 
adding the Wiggly Selector
 162 
rendering with an alpha channel
 164 
multiple selectors and animators
 166 
using text animation presets
 168 
saving text animations as presets
 169 
editing Photoshop text layers
 170 
adding audio to a comp
 171 
spotting audio; using layer and comp markers
 172 
mixing and enhancing audio
 d Getting Started
Make sure you have downloaded the file archive for Lesson 5 
and decompressed it. It contains the project file and sources 
you need to execute this lesson.

while characters outside the selection retain their normal appearance. The 
selected characters can also display a transition from the ordinary appearance 
of the text to their treated appearance – for example, gradually growing in size. 
The fun comes in animating this selection zone so that characters will appear to 
fly in, zoom down, and do all sorts of other tricks as they move between their 
treated and ordinary states. And if that’s not enough, don’t forget that many 
effects and layer styles also enhance the look of text.
Text Basics
After Effects allows you to create individual characters, words, or lines of text 
(sometimes referred to as point text), or paragraphs that are auto-wrapped to fit 
inside a box that you define (referred to as paragraph text). Text can be created 
horizontally or  vertically as well as set along a curve. Paragraphs can be left jus-
tified, right  justified, or centered, with additional control over how the first and 
last lines are treated. You have a lot of control over tracking (the space between 
characters over an entire block of text), kerning (the space between individual 
pairs of  characters), leading (space between lines), and baseline shift (the upward 
or  downward offset of characters in superscripts and ordinals such as the “st” in 
1st). You can also freely mix and match fonts, styles (bold, italic, et cetera), sizes, 
and colors in each word, line, or sentence – not that you necessarily should! 
Quite often, less is more when it comes to elegant text design.
Working with text in After Effects requires becoming familiar with the 
Character and Paragraph panels, as well as the different selection and editing 
modes. Let’s start by getting some practice with these:
1 Open this lesson’s project file Lesson_05.aep. Choose Window > Workspace 
> Text, then Workspace > Reset “Text” to Saved Layout. This will expose the 
Character and Paragraph panels. You can also open those panels directly by 
choosing Window > Character and Window > Paragraph.
2 To start with a clean slate, click on the icon to the right of the word 
Character along the top of its panel to open its Options menu, and choose Reset 
Character from the bottom of the list. This resets the font parameters, but not 
the colors; click on the small white swatch underneath the eyedropper to set 
TYPE AND MUSIC — Lesson 5
141
After Effects can create animated text by 
manipulating properties such as position, 
scale, rotation, opacity, and more. Here, text 
is blurred per character and animates along 
a mask path. Clip 2964497 courtesy Pond5.
d factoid
Size Doesn’t Matter
Normally, increasing the scale of a layer 
above 100% will make the image appear soft. 
But no matter what size you make your text 
layer, it will always render with sharp edges 
because it is vector-based. This is technically 
known as continuous rasterization, meaning 
After Effects creates pixels for the text layer 
only after it knows what size they should be. 
Note that this does change the rendering 
order, as detailed in Lesson 6, page 202.
d tip
Adobe Typekit
You may receive project files (such as the 
one for this lesson) that use fonts you do not 
have currently installed in your system. The 
good news is that they may come with your 
Creative Cloud subscription. If you open a 
project and see a “missing dependencies” 
message that lists fonts, open the Adobe 
Creative Cloud application and look under 
Assets > Fonts. If needed, enable Typekit, 
then click Add Fonts from Typekit. Search 
for the missing fonts, click Use Fonts, then 
Sync Selected Fonts. After a pause for them 
to download, reload your project.

Lesson 5 — TYPE AND MUSIC
142
Alignment
Options Menu
Indent First Line
Indent 
Left Margin
Indent 
Right Margin
Add Space Before
Paragraph
Add Space After
Paragraph
the Fill Color to white. Then in the Paragraph panel, 
open its Options menu and choose Reset Paragraph. 
3 Click the Type tool in the Tools panel and select 
Horizontal Type – the shortcut is Ct on Mac 
(Lt on Windows). Click inside the Comp panel, 
and start typing. This is called point text, as you start 
from a single point and type as much as you want. 
The presence of the cursor indicates you are in editing 
mode. To start a new line, press R on the normal 
section of the keyboard. 
When you are done, press E on the numeric 
keypad. If you are using a keyboard without a 
numeric keypad, press CR (LR). 
Instead of a cursor, you will see layer handles  
surrounding your text, indicating you are now  
in layer mode. It is important to understand the  
distinctions between these two modes.
When the cursor is visible, you are in editing mode (left). After you press the E key, handles will appear around the text block (right); this 
is layer mode, where changes you make in the Character and Paragraph panels apply to the entire title. (Double-clicking an existing text layer 
in the timeline also selects all characters, but any text animator applied in this mode will count characters in Index mode, not Percentage.)
Font Family
Options Menu
Eyedropper
Fill Color
Stroke Color
(no fill/stroke color)
(black/white
swatches)
(swap colors)
Stroke Style
Stroke Width
Faux
Bold
Faux
Italic
All
Caps
Small
Caps Superscript
Subscript
Tsume 
(for setting
Asian type)
Vertical Scale
Horizontal Scale
Baseline Shift
Font Style
Font Size
Kerning
Leading
Tracking
g Character panel.
g Paragraph panel.
Select the Type tool from the Application window’s toolbar 
to create some text. To switch between the Horizontal and 
Vertical Type tools, click and press this icon. The shortcut 
to select the Type tool and toggle between Horizontal and 
Vertical modes is Ct on Mac (Lt on Windows).

TYPE AND MUSIC — Lesson 5
143
4 When you are in layer mode, any changes you make in the Character  
panel affect the entire text layer. For example, scrub the Font Size – all of the 
characters change.
5 With the Type tool still selected, now click at the end of a word you typed. 
When you see the cursor, you are back in editing mode. Changes in the 
Character panel only affect characters you have selected or what you type next. 
For example, change the Font Size again, and change the Fill Color to red. 
Nothing will have changed. Then type a new word – it will be in the new color 
and font size. Then click and drag to select the last word you typed, and change 
Font Size again to verify how you can target your changes in editing mode. Press 
E to accept your changes and switch back to layer mode.
5 While in editing mode, any changes in 
the Character panel affect the next letters 
you type (above). Press E to return to 
layer mode, and the mixed parameters are 
left blank in the Character panel (below).
d tip
Go Real, Not Faux
If your font family has a font style choice 
for bold or italics, use that – it will look 
much better than the Faux Bold or 
Faux Italic options at the bottom of the 
Character panel. 
7 Tracking affects all of the selected 
characters equally; here we increased 
the Tracking value to space them out. 
6 While in layer mode, let’s get some practice 
changing the font family and style. Click on 
the arrow to the right of the current font family 
name, and a menu will appear with its own 
scroll bar (see figure right). You can navigate 
this menu to select a new font. Once you select 
it, the entire text layer will change to this font 
– because you were in layer mode. You can also 
select individual characters and give them their 
own font.
If you know what font family you want, 
you don’t need to use the menu; just click on 
the name of the font family to select it and 
start typing the name of the desired font. On 
the other hand, if you don’t know what font 
you want, select the font family name and use 
the up and down cursors to step through your 
loaded fonts. The Font Style menu below works 
the same way.
7 Time to become familiar with 
the difference between tracking and 
kerning. In short, tracking affects 
the spacing between selected char-
acters the same way; kerning affects 
the spacing between individual 
pairs. While in layer mode, scrub the 
Tracking value in the Character panel 
and observe the results.

8 Different font families have different “kerning tables” that 
control the spaces between pairs of characters. Some fonts 
(especially free ones) may have an inadequate number of 
preprogrammed “kerning pairs.” To fix that, place the cursor 
between the offending characters to reenter editing mode,  
press O (A), and use the left and right cursor keys to change their spacing. 
If the Type tool is selected, you can temporarily change to the Move tool by 
pressing C (L) and then dragging your text layer. Do this now to get your 
first text layer out of the way, as you’re about to learn about paragraph text.
9 With the Type tool still active, click and drag a rectangle in the Comp panel. 
This will define a rectangle that the type will stay within. Start typing a few lines 
of text or paste in some text copied from a word processor. It will automatically 
wrap whenever it hits the right edge of the rectangle. You can click and drag the 
rectangle’s handles while in editing mode to resize it; the text will automatically 
reflow to fill it.
10 Press E to return to layer mode. Try out the different options along the 
top of the Paragraph panel for centering and justifying the text. All of your text 
will need to fit inside the paragraph rectangle for the last four options to make 
a difference, as they only change the last line of text. Paragraph text otherwise 
works just like point text in the ability to style individual characters in editing 
mode, or the entire block of text in layer mode.
The rest of the parameters in the Character and Paragraph panels are already 
familiar to you if you have typeset text in another Adobe application. Remember 
you can always hover your cursor over them to get a tooltip that reminds you 
what they are. And there’s nothing like 
taking some time out to play with them so 
you know what they do should you need 
them later.
While in layer mode, press v to return 
to the Selection tool. Now the text layer 
behaves like any other layer: You can 
animate its Transform properties or apply 
effects to it. You can also extrude it to create 
true 3D text; this is demonstrated in the last 
portion of Lesson 8 on 3D Space.
8 Kerning affects the spaces between 
individual character pairs; here we are 
tightening up the spacing between just 
two of the letters.
Lesson 5 — TYPE AND MUSIC
144
A
B
9 Click and drag a rectangle with the Type tool 
to define a region for paragraph text (A). Text will 
automatically wrap to stay inside the rectangle (B). 
You can resize the rectangle while in editing mode.
d tip
What’s My Line?
You can set strokes to use Miter, Round, 
or Bevel styles. This is set via the Line Join 
submenu of the Character panel.

TYPE AND MUSIC — Lesson 5
145
Text Animators
Many effective titles consist of just good typesetting and simple transform ani-
mations. However, the real fun begins when you add text animators. These enable 
you to animate individual characters, words, or lines, virtually telling the viewer a 
story (or at least grabbing their attention) in the way that you bring words on and 
off the screen! But before you get animating, we need to cover a few basic concepts:
• Nothing in the Character and Paragraph panels can be animated directly – 
there are no stopwatches to turn on for font size, color, tracking, and so on.  
All animation is created by applying text animators.
• When animating on a title, start by creating the title the way it should look 
normally. For example, if you want the title to “resolve” to a certain color or size, 
or be in a certain position when the animation is over, use the Character panel 
and Transform properties to create the text looking that way, then add a text 
 animator to transition the text on.
Setting the Text
In this exercise, you will create a title and use a text animator to make it drop 
down into position one character at a time while also fading up.
1 In the Project panel, locate and open Comp > 02-Dropping In*starter – it  
will also be blank to start with. Make sure the Character and Paragraph panels  
are visible; if they aren’t, you can choose Window > Workspace > Text to pick  
a preset arrangement that has them open.
2 To reset any doodlings you did in the first exercise, in the Paragraph panel 
click on the small icon of three lines to the right of the word Paragraph to open 
its Options menu, and choose Reset Paragraph from the bottom of the menu to 
clear previous settings. Then choose the Center text option. 
Likewise, in the Character panel open its Options menu and choose Reset 
Character. Assuming your Composition > Background Color is black or some 
other dark color, click on the small white swatch underneath the eyedropper to 
set the character Fill Color to white.
3 Bring the Composition panel forward, and double-click the Type tool. The 
cursor will be centered in the comp. Type your title – something that fits on  
one line, like “Just Dropping In” – and press E. The layer will be named 
automatically to match what you typed.
The default character style on Mac is Helvetica 36 px (“px” = pixels), but feel 
free to change the font style and color to taste – for example, we changed the 
font style to Bold and increased the size to 60 px. For this exercise, we suggest 
you stick with one style for the entire text layer to make things more clear. 
Typesetting Tips
In the Lesson 05 folder is a PDF file 
named Typesetting Tips.pdf that 
includes information on using smart 
quotes and dashes for  creating  
professional-looking titles.
2–3 Reset the Character and Paragraph 
panels using their Options menu, accessed 
via the lines to the right of the panel’s name 
(circled). Select the Center text option in  
the Paragraph panel, and set the Fill Color  
in the Character panel to white. We set the 
font style to Helvetica Bold at a size of 60 px 
(above) and created a single line of text to 
animate (below).

Range Selectors
To animate text, you need to apply a text animator:
4 In the Timeline panel, click on the arrow next to  
the text layer to twirl it down, revealing its Text and 
Transform sections. Then twirl down the Text section. 
To the right of the word Text will be the word 
Animate, followed by an arrow. Click on this arrow,  
and choose Position from the popup menu that appears. 
Animator 1 will be created; nested inside will be Range 
Selector 1, and inside that, a Position value.
5 Deselect All (@) and twirl down Range Selector 1. 
Select only Range Selector 1 and you will see vertical 
lines with triangles at the start and end of the title in  
the Comp panel. These indicate where the Start and End 
values of the Range Selector are: 0% means the begin-
ning, and 100% means the end. Scrub the Start and End 
values, and note how these indicators move along the 
text. (Note that you can also drag these triangles directly 
in the Comp panel.) 
• When you’re done, set Start to 25% and End to 77%.
6 Animator 1’s Position value indicates how much the 
selected text should be offset from its original position.  
It starts at 0,0, which means no offset. 
• Scrub the X Position value (the first of the pair); the 
selected characters will move left and right.
• Scrub the Y Position value, and the selected characters 
will move up and down.
Important concept: By default, only the selected char-
acters – those inside the Start and End bars – are affected 
by the text animator properties. Any characters outside 
the selection are unaffected and appear in their original 
style as created. You can toggle Animator 1’s eyeball off 
and on if you ever need to check what effect it is having.
To reinforce what is going on, leave Position at a 
value such as X = 0, Y = 100 and scrub the values for 
Start and End to change the characters that are included 
in the selection. This will result in characters switching 
between their original and offset position.
Lesson 5 — TYPE AND MUSIC
146
5–6 The characters “selected” by the Start and End values in Range 
Selector 1 are bracketed by the vertical lines with the arrows in their 
middle (above). As you scrub the values for Animator 1’s Position, 
the selected characters will be offset by this amount (below).
4 Clicking the Animate button to 
the right of the word Text reveals 
the properties you can animate 
on a per-character basis. Selecting 
Position creates Animator 1.

TYPE AND MUSIC — Lesson 5
d try it
Motion Blur
Animating text often looks great with motion 
blur (Lesson 2). Enable the Motion Blur 
switch for your text layer, then turn on the 
master Enable Motion Blur switch along the 
top of the Timeline panel. Remember that 
motion blur takes longer to calculate, so  
your previews may be slower.
147
Just Dropping In
By scrubbing the Start and End values, light bulbs should be going off about  
how you might create an animation: By keyframing the Start and End values  
to animate the characters that are selected, you can make the title, say, fall  
down from the top of the frame:
7 Start over with a clean slate: Select Animator 1, and press D. The text 
should return to being centered in the comp. 
Then choose Animate > Position again from the text layer’s popup menu  
to create a fresh text animator, just as you did in Step 4.
8 Press H to ensure you are at  
the start of the comp. 
Twirl down Range Selector 1, and 
click on the stopwatch icon next to 
Start to enable keyframing for it. The 
first keyframe will be created for you, 
using Start’s default value of 0%.
Then scrub the Y Position value 
to around –200 so that the text is 
hanging from the top of the comp 
(keep it visible for now). 
9 Go to time 01:00, and set the  
Start value to 100%. This will create  
a second keyframe at this value. 
Preview your 
animation and 
watch the text 
drop into place. 
Save your project 
at this point.
Adding More Properties
Once you have created this basic “dropping in” move, it is easy to add more 
properties to your animation.
10 Press H to return to the start of the comp where the text is at the top of 
your frame. In the Timeline panel, look along the line that Animator 1 sits on: 
You will see the word Add followed by an arrow. Like Animate, this will reveal 
a list of properties, but in this case a new animator will not be created – the 
selected property will just be added to the existing animator.
8–9 Set Animator 1’s Y Position to –200 and animate the Start value from 0% to 100% 
(above). The result will be the text dropping from its offset position to its original position,  
a character at a time (below).

Click the Add arrow, and choose Property > Rotation. The 
Rotation property will be added to the existing Animator 1. 
(If you created Animator 2 instead, you may have clicked 
on the Animate button by mistake! Undo and try again.)
11 Scrub the Rotation value to about 45°. Now all  
characters included in the Start/End selection will be 
affected by the rotation offset. 
Preview again. As the title drops into place, the characters 
will fall outside the selection and are no longer rotated. You 
did not need to animate the Rotation value itself; the ani-
mation happens automatically as characters are transferred 
from inside the selection (where they get the position and 
rotation offset) to outside the selection.
Lesson 5 — TYPE AND MUSIC
148
12 So far, so good. But at the start of the animation, you have a row of silly-
looking characters sitting along the top of your comp. How can you make them 
invisible before they drop in? You could offset their position further so they start 
above the frame, but there’s an even better way: Make them invisible!
Return to 00:00. Click the Add arrow again and choose Property > Opacity. 
Scrub the Opacity down to 0%; the selected text will disappear. Preview again: 
The characters return to their normal opacity value (set by the layer’s main 
Opacity property) as they fall outside the selection. 
If you want to make sure you followed the steps correctly, compare your  
result with our version: It’s in the Project panel’s Comps_Finished folder, 
named 02-Dropping In_final. And don’t forget to save your project.
Now that you have the basic idea, feel free to experiment by adding other 
properties to Animator 1. Try Scale (the characters will appear to zoom up or 
slam down), or Fill Color > RGB (their color will change as they fall into place). 
Obviously, thousands of variations are possible! Just remember that you don’t 
have to animate these properties individually; you need to animate only the 
Range Selector, then let these properties decide how different the characters  
will look when they’re inside the selection.
12 Adding Opacity (above) will cause the 
characters to also fade in as they fall into 
place (below). (And if you return Animator 
1’s Position and Rotation values to zero, your 
characters will appear to type on in place!)
11 By adding Rotation as a property included in Animator 1 and setting Rotation to 45°, 
the characters will drop in and rotate back to 0° while doing so.
10 Once you have created the initial 
animator, you can animate additional 
properties by clicking on its Add arrow. 
(You can also click on the Animate arrow 
provided Animator 1 is selected.)

Creating Cascading Text
In the previous exercise, you learned how to make text animate in, one character 
at a time. Sometimes it is nice to spread this movement across several adjacent 
 characters. This creates what we refer to as a “cascading” animation, and is the 
subject of this next exercise. To get a peek at where you are heading, preview 
Comps_Finished > 03-Cascade_final. 
1 Choose Close All from the Composition Viewer menu along the top of the 
Comp panel. In the Project panel, locate and open Comps > 03-Cascade*starter. 
We’ve already created a title for you to start with, but feel free to change the text 
or font style to taste.
2 In the Timeline panel, twirl down the text layer, and choose Animate > Scale. 
This will create Animator 1 and Range Selector 1, with a Scale property. Change 
Scale to 400% (for now, don’t worry about how the letters overlap). 
3 Click on the Add arrow on the same line as Animator 1, and choose Property 
> Fill Color > RGB. Fill Color will be added below Scale, using a default color of 
red. Set the Fill Color to taste by clicking on its swatch in the Timeline panel. 
4 Twirl down Range Selector, then twirl down the Advanced section inside 
Range Selector 1. Try the different Shape options by selecting them from its 
popup, while also experimenting with Range Selector’s Start and End values. 
Here’s a quick rundown of how they behave:
• The default Shape is Square, which means that characters inside the range 
selection are fully affected by the Scale and Fill Color properties. Scrub the  
Start value, and note how characters outside the selector are immediately 
returned to their original settings, with little to no transition to speak of.
TYPE AND MUSIC — Lesson 5
149
2 Select Animate > Scale, and set the Scale 
value to 400%.
3 Add Property > Fill Color > RGB; the 
color defaults to red (but is easily changed).
A “cascading” animation is when multiple 
characters slide into place, like a wave. This 
requires a slightly different technique, which 
you will learn in this exercise.
D Randomize Order
To have the characters fall down in a random order, twirl down the Advanced section  
of Range Selector 1, and set Randomize Order to On (click the Off value to toggle).  
The characters will now drop down in a random order rather than from left to right.  
The Random Seed value allows you to jiggle the order and find a more pleasing pattern. 
To see this result, check out our version in Comps_Finished > 02-Dropping In_final2.

• Try the Triangle, Round, and Smooth shapes. You will notice that they 
have a wider transition zone. Also note that the characters in the center 
of the selection are fully affected, but the effect of your Scale and Fill 
Color offsets fall off the closer the selected characters are to the Start and 
End points. Characters outside the range selection are not affected, just 
as is the case with the Square shape. 
• Next, choose Ramp Up, which behaves differently: It uses the Start  
and End values to create a transition from the original text (white color, 
normal size) at the Start of the selection, to the fully affected text (red, 
400% size) at the End of the selection. Any characters after End are also 
fully affected (red, 400%), as if they were inside the selection; any  
characters before the Start are not affected, as if they are outside the 
selection. Ramp Down does the same, but in reverse. 
In short, the Ramp Up and Ramp Down shapes transition between 
selected and not selected, and the size of this transition is determined  
by the number of characters between the Start and End points. These  
are the shapes that you need to create cascading text animations.
When you’re done experimenting, select Ramp Up from the Shape 
popup, and twirl up the Advanced section.
5 In Range Selector 1, set the Start to 0%, and scrub the End parameter 
to about 33%. All the characters after the End parameter will be fully 
affected (red, 400%).
Take note of the Offset value in Range Selector 1. Offset is added to  
the values for Start and End. As a result, Offset is a handy way to animate 
both Start and End at the same time, keeping the same relationship 
between them so that the width of the selection remains the same. 
Scrub the Offset parameter while watching the Comp viewer, and note 
how the transition area moves back and forth along the line of text. 
6 To create the cascading effect, make sure the current time indicator is  
at 00:00, and enable the stopwatch for Offset. Set its value to –33%. This 
will move the transition completely to the left of the title. Why did we 
pick this particular number? It’s simply the negative of the End value, 
which ensures the selection has been offset to just before the Start.
7 Move to 02:00, and set Offset to 100%. This adds 100% to both Start 
and End, resulting in Start and End both being 100% (the maximum); 
the transition will be pushed off to the right. Scrub the current time indi-
cator back and forth along the timeline to get a feel for this animation. 
Leave the current time indicator around 01:00 to better see what is 
about to happen in the next step.
Lesson 5 — TYPE AND MUSIC
150
6–7 Using the Ramp Up shape in combination with 
animating Offset from left to right (above) results in 
our characters transitioning from being large and 
red to their original appearance (below).
4 Twirl down Range Selector’s Advanced section 
and explore the different Shape options. Then  
select the Ramp Up shape.
4 continued The Ramp Up shape allows cascading 
animations by creating a smooth transition from  
the unselected (white, normal size) to the selected  
(red, 400% scale) states.

9 Add Anchor Point to your Animator 
and offset its Anchor Point Y value 
slightly negative to center the expanded 
text vertically.
f We created a pair of alternate versions 
in Comps_Finished > 03-Cascade_final2 
that include both X and Y Anchor Point 
offset (both lines), as well as Randomize 
Order plus motion blur (bottom line).
8 The finishing touch is to make the characters fade up as they 
cascade on. To do this, click on Animator 1’s Add arrow, and choose 
Property > Opacity. Then set Opacity to 0%. Because you’re using 
the Ramp Up shape, the characters will transition from 100% 
opacity at the Range Selector’s Start, to 0% opacity at its End. 
Characters after the End will be fully transparent. Preview to see 
this in motion – a nice cascading effect! You can compare your 
results with our version in Comps_Finished > 03-Cascade_final.
Again, remember: You didn’t need to animate Opacity!  
It is merely another property that is being used to treat the  
text as you transition from being inside the selection 
(in Ramp Up’s case, after the End point) to outside 
the selection (before the Start point).
Adjusting the Anchor Point
If you watch closely, you’ll notice that the scaling 
occurs around the baseline (bottom) of the text. What 
if you want the characters to scale from their centers?
9 Move to 01:00 to catch the animation mid- 
cascade, and temporarily increase Animator 1’s 
Opacity value to 50% to better see what’s about  
to happen:
• Click the Add (not Animate) arrow and choose 
Property > Anchor Point. This will add the Anchor 
Point property to Animator 1. 
• Scrub Anchor Point’s Y value slowly to the left 
while watching the Comp panel; add the C (L) 
key to scrub in finer increments. A small negative  
Y value should center the characters vertically. 
Experiment with different X and Y values of  
Anchor Point and preview to see the results.
• Change Opacity back to 0% when you  
are done.
Our experiments with Anchor Point 
are demonstrated in Comps_Finished > 
03-Cascade_final2. Layer 1’s Anchor Point 
is offset in X and Y. Layer 2 serves as a 
reminder: Randomize Order and motion blur 
are two enhancements that you can add too!
TYPE AND MUSIC — Lesson 5
151
8 Adding Opacity to Animator 1 and setting it to 0% 
will make characters fade from 100% to 0% within the 
transition zone.

4 By default, when you set Range Selector’s Opacity to 0% 
and animate its Start, the text will type on one character at  
a time. Clip DG101 courtesy Artbeats.com.
Lesson 5 — TYPE AND MUSIC
152
5 In Range Selector 1’s Advanced section, set Based On 
to Words to have entire words be selected or unselected. 
To cause the words to “pop” rather than fade on, set 
Smoothness to 0%.
2 Reveal the Text property for layer 1, click on the Animate 
button, and select Opacity. An Animator and Range Selector 
will be created. Set this Opacity value to 0%. 
One Word at a Time
So far, you’ve been animating text a character at a time. However, 
After Effects also makes it easy to animate entire words as units.
1 Close your previous comps and open the composition  
04-RockinText*starter. It includes some basic text that we’ve 
already created for you, with a drop shadow applied. We chose 
the font Adobe Birch Std, which can be enabled in Typekit.  
(If you don’t have access to this font, pick another condensed 
font and adjust it so that it fits nicely inside the comp.)
2 Twirl down the text layer (layer 1), and choose Animate > 
Opacity. Animator 1 and Range Selector 1 will be created, with 
the Opacity property already added. Set Animator 1’s Opacity 
value to 0%. Because all of the text is selected by default, the 
entire line will become transparent.
3 Twirl down Range Selector 1. At 00:00, turn on the animation 
stopwatch for Start. This will create a keyframe with a value of 0% 
at the beginning of the animation.
4 Move to 03:00, and set the Start value to 100%. Preview your 
animation. Because the text is using the default Square shape,  
it will type on from left to right, one character at a time.
5 Here’s the trick to make the text appear one word at a time: 
Twirl down Range Selector’s Advanced section, and set the  
Based On dropdown menu to Words. Preview again; the title  
now fades on one word at a time. 
Below the Shape popup is the Smoothness parameter. For now, 
set Smoothness to 0% so the letters pop on with no fade-up. 
6 Let’s add some rotation to the mix, while also learning an 
important gotcha. Click Animator 1’s Add button, and choose 
Property > Rotation. 
Set Animator 1’s Rotation value to –1 revolution (meaning  
it should read –1 × 0.0°). As the title types on, you might expect  
the characters to rotate into position. But nothing happens! 
Remember the Smoothness parameter? The combination of  
the Square shape and no Smoothness results in no transition 
time, meaning no chance to see the Rotation. Set Smoothness 
back to 100% and now you will see your Rotation animation  
(as well as the Opacity fade).

TYPE AND MUSIC — Lesson 5
153
7 Although Range Selector is set to animate word by word, 
the characters themselves are rotating around their own 
individual anchor points. To have them rotate word by 
word as well, twirl down the Text > More Options section 
and set the Anchor Point Grouping popup to Word also. 
Preview to see the difference this makes.
8 The text is rotating around its baseline. To have it spin 
from a different location, play with the More Options > 
Grouping Alignment parameter. For example, change the  
Y value to –200%, and the text will rotate in from above. 
8 More Options > 
Grouping Alignment 
allows text to travel 
in interesting ways. 
You can also animate 
this parameter.
7 To have each word rotate as a unit as well (above), set  
More Options > Anchor Point Grouping popup to Word (below).
D Safe Areas
If you are creating video to be played back on a television 
set, you need to know about safe areas. After Effects shows 
you the entire video frame, and this is what a viewer on the 
web sees. However, televisions often hide some of the image 
behind their bezels; there may also be some image distortion 
or falloff in brightness near the edges.
Keep any imagery you expect the viewer to see (such as 
subtitles and logos) inside the action safe area. Traditionally, 
this margin is 10%, cutting 5% off the top, bottom, left, and 
right to take into account the distortion in old CRT-based TVs; 
even in today’s LED and LCD flat-panel TVs, as much as 2%  
on each side can be hidden behind the bezel.
There is a title or graphic safe area to worry about. The 
margin used to be 20% of the total image; today it’s more 
like 10% total, or 5% on each side. Additionally, some are still 
creating standard definition versions of high-def content by 
cutting off the left and right edges – this is known as center 
cut. Yes, many break these rules by putting news, sports, and  
stock price tickers between the action and title safe areas. 
However, some broadcasters or disc duplicators will reject 
your content if you place text outside of these areas.
To check your work, you can toggle a Title/Action Safe grid 
on and off in After Effects. The shortcut is F (the apostrophe 
key); you can also select it from the Grid and Guide button 
along the bottom of the Comp, Layer, and Footage panels.
Our version is in Comps_Finished > 04-RockinText_ 
final. We had a bit of fun by also adding Scale to Animator 
1 and setting it to 200%, so that the text scales down as it 
rotates. And remember: Save your project.

Flowing Text
In this exercise, you’ll create some elegant, cool-looking type by animating  
character spacing and blur, plus flow text along a mask path.
Animating Blur
1 Close your previous comps and open 05-Path*starter. We’ve already created 
the basic title using the font Trajan Pro 3 (another font you may need to enable 
through Typekit; pick another if you like) and placed it over a cool background. 
Indeed, we’re going to use this background to inspire our animation…
Lesson 5 — TYPE AND MUSIC
154
2 In the Timeline panel, twirl down the text layer (layer 1) to reveal the 
Text properties and the Animate button. Choose Animate > Blur. This 
creates Animator 1 and Range Selector 1, with the Blur property added. 
3 We want our characters to start out as vertical rays. To do this, click 
on the Constrain Proportions button (it’s the chain link icon) next to 
Blur to disable this lock, and set the Blur Y value to around 80.
4 We would also like some variation in how blurry each character 
is. Variation usually means randomization, so we need to seek out a 
 parameter that lets us introduce this. 
• Twirl down Range Selector 1, then twirl down its Advanced section. 
Change the Shape popup from Square to Ramp Up. Note that now the 
characters transition from being sharp near the Start of the range to 
being blurry near the End.
• Then toggle Randomize Order to On. This will scramble which  
characters appear sharp and which appear blurry.
5 Now create a cascading-type animation:
• At 00:00, enable keyframing for Offset, and set its initial value to 
–100% (the negative of the End value). All the characters will be blurred.
• At 02:00, set Offset to 100%. Now all of the characters will be sharp,  
as Offset has moved through the entire range. Preview to see the effect.
Animated Tracking
Characters coming together is a popular look. This requires animating 
the tracking of the text:
6 Choose Add > Property > Tracking; this will add Tracking Type and 
Tracking Amount parameters to Animator 1. Return to 00:00 where  
the text is fully selected. Scrub the Tracking Amount, and observe how 
the blurred characters spread out. Set it to about 6. 
1 Open 05-Path*starter, which contains 
a basic title over a cool background.
3–4 Turn off the Constrain Proportions switch 
for Blur, and set the Blur Y value to around 80. 
This turns the characters into vertical rays of light. 
Then change the Shape to Ramp Up to get a 
transition from sharp to blurry characters. Toggling 
Randomize Order to On scrambles the order of 
which characters are sharp and which are blurry.

Text on a Curve
The text looks cool, but it’s a bit rigid 
compared with the flowing back-
ground – so let’s create a curved path 
for the text to follow, using the 
masking skills you learned in Lesson 4.
7 Make sure the text layer is selected, then choose the Pen 
tool, and enable the RotoBezier option in the Tools panel.
Create an open curved path by clicking a few points  
from left to right across the Comp panel, using the curves 
in the background layer for inspiration. When done, press 
v to return to the Selection tool.
8 In the Timeline panel twirl down the Text > Path 
Options section, and set the Path popup to Mask 1. (If you 
don’t see Mask 1, make sure the mask was applied to the 
text layer!) The text will now sit on top of your mask path.
Press H to return to 00:00 and study your text; you 
might want to increase the Tracking Amount value to 
spread your text out more along its path.
9 The Path options exist outside the Animator and Range 
Selector. To make the text slide along your path, keyframe 
one of its Margin parameters:
• Return to 00:00, and scrub Text > Path Options > First 
Margin until you are happy with where it starts. Enable  
the animation stopwatch for First Margin.
• Press N to jump to the end of the comp, and scrub  
First Margin to make the text travel. Preview; ease into  
the second Offset keyframe to create a smoother move. 
Our version is in Comps_Finished > 05-Path_final.  
We also added Effect > Blur & Sharpen > Radial Shadow, 
and animated the mask path over time.
Preview: The text will come together 
as the animation resolves (see right). 
This is because the amount of tracking 
applied is controlled by Range Selector 
1’s animating Offset.
TYPE AND MUSIC — Lesson 5
155
8–9 To have the text sit on your newly drawn mask path (above), 
set the Text > Path Options > Path popup to Mask 1 (below).  
Then animate the Path Options > First Margin parameter to slide  
the text along your path. Feel free to animate the mask path as well.
7 Select the Pen tool, and enable the RotoBezier option (above). 
Then create an open curved path in the Comp panel.

Per-Character 3D
Up to now you’ve been animating characters in two dimensions: X (left and 
right) and Y (up and down). Per-character 3D allows text animators to be  
manipulated in three dimensions: X, Y, and Z. With this third dimension,  
individual characters or words can be rendered at different distances from  
the viewer. In this lesson, we’ll focus on using the simpler, faster Classic 3D  
renderer, which treats each character as a flat postcard in space; in Lesson 8  
we’ll show you how to extrude and bevel these characters using the Ray-traced 
3D renderer, which is much slower but can be even more attractive. 
Anything you can do to a regular 2D text layer – such as text on a path,  
as well as adding the Wiggly Selector (page 161) – you can also apply to  
Per-character 3D text. To get the most out of Per-character 3D animation, you 
need to be working in a composition that also has a 3D camera (and optionally, 
lights). If you’ve been following these lessons in order, you haven’t encountered 
3D cameras and lights yet, as they are introduced in Lesson 8. In the meantime, 
for simplicity’s sake, the following exercises take advantage of Custom Views 
which already have dummy cameras set up for you. 
Lesson 5 — TYPE AND MUSIC
156
d future vision
Real 3D
After Effects CC has the ability to extrude 
and bevel type as well as shape layers.  
We’ll demonstrate native extruded type 
in Lesson 8. MAXON CINEMA 4D Lite – 
bundled with After Effects – also allows  
you to create extruded, animated type;  
that is demonstrated in Lesson 12.
Text Position in Z
To get started, close all previous comps using the Composition 
Viewer menu. In the Project panel, open Comps > 06-3D 
Position*starter; a few words have already been typeset for you 
(feel free to change the words or restyle them). 
1 In the Timeline panel, twirl down the text layer, click on the 
Animate button, and choose Position. This will create Animator 1 
with a Position property. Position will have two values: X and Y.
2 Here is the magic feature to enable 3D text: Click either the 
Animate or Add button and choose Property > Enable Per-character 
3D from the top of the list. In the Timeline panel, the text’s 3D 
Layer switch will sport two small cubes to show that Per-character 
3D is enabled. Study the Comp viewer: The text layer now has a set 
of red, green, and blue 3D axis arrows that indicate how the layer  
is oriented in X, Y, and Z respectively. Their origin is where the 
layer’s Anchor Point is located.
2 When you Add > Enable Per-character 3D 
for a text layer (top), you will see two small 
boxes appear in its 3D Layer switch (above). 
The text’s XYZ axis arrows will help show  
how it is oriented in the Comp view (right).

You will also notice that Position has three values: X, Y, and Z. Scrub the  
Z Position value (the third one) while watching the Comp viewer. Negative 
values bring the text forward in space (or closer to the front of an imaginary 
“stage”), while positive values send it farther back in space.
3 To better visualize what you are about to do, change the 3D View popup  
at the bottom of the Comp panel from Active Camera to Custom View 1.  
You should now see the text from above and at an angle. (If not, use the  
menu option View > Reset 3D View.)
4 You can animate these characters in a fashion similar 
to the methods you learned earlier. For example:
• Set Position to 0, –75, –350 to position the characters 
inside the Range Selector higher and forward in Z space 
compared with where the axis arrows are.
• Twirl down Range Selector 1. At 00:00, enable the 
stopwatch for Start with a value of 0%.
• Move to 02:00 and change the Start value to 100%. 
Preview and the characters will animate back to their 
original position.
• Return the 3D View popup to Active Camera and press 
H to return to 00:00. Notice how characters that are 
closer to the camera appear to be larger, even though 
you haven’t changed their Scale value. And no matter 
how close they get to the camera, they will always remain sharp because they  
are being continuously rasterized (explained near the end of Lesson 6). 
• Click the Add button and choose Property > Opacity. Set Opacity to 0% so  
that the characters will be invisible when they are outside the selector’s range. 
Our version is shown in Comps_finished > 06-3D Position_final.
Note that not all text properties are affected by Per-character 3D. For instance, 
Opacity, Skew, Fill Color, and Tracking appear the same whether or not it’s 
enabled. However, Anchor Point, Position, Scale, and Rotation all will gain a third 
parameter: Z. In the case of Rotation, its X, Y, and Z values appear as separately 
keyframeable parameters for even more control – which we’ll play with next.
3D Text Rotation
Open Comps > 07-3D Rotation*starter and preview it. To save time, we’ve 
already created a basic cascading type-on effect using the same technique you 
learned earlier in this lesson. Select layer 1 and press uu to see the relevant 
properties; namely, Opacity is set to 0%, the Shape is Ramp Up, and Range 
Selector 1’s Offset is animated.
TYPE AND MUSIC — Lesson 5
157
4 As Range Selector’s Start animates from 
0% to 100%, the characters will move from 
their offset position in 3D space back to  
their original plane.
As a starting point, the composition  
07-3D Rotation*starter has a basic 
cascading animation already set up.
Selecting Custom 
View 1 will give you 
a perspective view 
of your comp.

1 In the Timeline panel, click the Add button for Animator 1 and choose 
Property > Enable Per-character 3D. Set the 3D View popup in the Comp panel 
to Custom View 1. You should now see the text from above and at an angle.
2 Click on the Add button for Animator 1 and choose Property > Rotation. 
Parameters for X, Y, and Z Rotation should appear (if not, check that you  
correctly enabled Per-character 3D in Step 1). Let’s explore what happens  
when you rotate on each axis individually:
• Set X Rotation to 1 revolution and preview. The characters swing around their 
baseline as they fade up.
• Undo your X Rotation and set Y Rotation to 1 revolution. Now each character 
swivels around to face the viewer as it fades up. Try other values, such as 60°  
or –100° for a more subtle effect. Return Y Rotation to 0° when done.
• Set Z Rotation to 1 revolution: This parameter is equivalent to the rotation 
property when text is animating in 2D. 
Explore combinations of X, Y, and Z Rotation. It doesn’t take much before 
your characters are performing complex gymnastics – all with just two Range 
Selector keyframes! 
Lesson 5 — TYPE AND MUSIC
158
4 Add > Property > Anchor Point and 
edit the Z value to offset the pivot point.
X Rotation
Y Rotation
Z Rotation
Setting the Anchor Point in 3D
By default, characters rotate around their baseline. A lot of fun can be had rotat-
ing them around a different point. To do this, manipulate their Anchor Point:
3 Continue with comp 07-3D Rotation*starter. Set X Rotation to 1 revolution, 
and zero out Y and Z Rotation. Move to a time in the middle of the animation.
4 Click on the Add button and choose Property > Anchor Point. You will see 
three values, again corresponding to X, Y, and Z. These offset the pivot point for 
the characters. Scrub the third value (Z) and note how the characters move away 
from their baseline. Preview to observe how they spiral into place. 
5 For more fun, try offsetting the X or Y Anchor Point and preview the result. 
2 After enabling Per-character 3D, adding 
Rotation will yield three separate parameters 
(above). Below: X Rotation swings characters 
around their baseline; Y Rotation twirls 
characters around their vertical axis; and Z 
Rotation behaves the same as rotation in 2D.

Note that you don’t have to view the text animation from a perspective view: 
Change the 3D View popup back to Active Camera and you will still get a sense 
of dimension. 
Per-character 3D can give you interesting results even while working in 2D! 
Our version is shown in Comps_finished > 07-3D Rotation_final. 
Ease High and Ease Low
Now that you have some experience with text 
Animators, it’s time to learn a subtle trick that will give 
you finer control over how those animations proceed.
1 Close your previous comps and open Comps >  
EHL-Ease High/Low*starter. We’ve already created  
a text animation for you in it. Change the 3D View 
popup to Custom View 1 and preview, carefully  
observing how the characters arc up from the back  
to land in front of you. Both their take-off from the  
back line and landing at the front are a bit sudden.
Normally, a quick way to smooth out the start and  
end of an animation move is to change its keyframe  
interpolation. However, that approach doesn’t quite  
work how you’d expect with text animators:
2 Select the text layer ease high/ease low and press u to reveal its Offset  
keyframes. Click on Offset to select those keyframes, right-click on one of them, 
and choose Keyframe Assistant > Easy Ease (the shortcut is (). Preview, and 
observe: The overall animation starts slowly, speeds up in the middle, and  
slows down at the end, but the individual characters still start and stop their 
movements suddenly. This is because editing the keyframe interpolation only 
changes how quickly the range selection moves through the characters, not  
how the individual characters behave.
TYPE AND MUSIC — Lesson 5
159
4 continued Offsetting the Z Anchor Point 
causes the characters to spiral into place.
To bring more nuance to your text 
animations, you’re going to learn to control 
the speed with which each character starts 
and ends its individual movement. (Motion 
blur has already been enabled for the starter 
comp, to make the speed of motion visible 
even when not previewing.)

Lesson 5 — TYPE AND MUSIC
160
4 The Ease 
parameters are in 
the Range Selector 
> Advanced section 
(right). Increasing 
Ease Low causes each 
character to slow 
down just before it 
lands (below).
6 Increasing Ease High causes the characters to each pick up 
speed as they proceed through their movements.
3 Undo to return the Offset keyframes to Linear 
interpolation (the diamond icons). Twirl up the 
text layer, then twirl it down to reveal Text > 
Animator 1 > Range Selector 1 > Advanced. Below 
Shape, you will see the parameters Ease High 
and Ease Low. Ease High controls the movement 
of a character around the point where it is fully 
selected (usually its initial position); Ease Low 
controls the movement of a character as it settles 
into its final pose when it is no longer selected.
4 Set Ease Low to 100% and start a preview. 
Notice how each character gently settles into its 
final position, even though the overall animation 
is proceeding at a brisk pace. Edit the Ease Low 
value between 0 and 100% while the preview is 
still running to tweak how soft this landing is.
5 Negative ease values cause each movement to 
end faster than normal. Set Ease Low to around 
–30% and preview: Each character will slam into 
its final location. 
6 Return Ease Low to 0%, set Ease High to 75%, 
and preview: Each character will be slow to leave 
its initial position, then pop into its final posi-
tion. This sort of animation is more akin to the 
way gravity works, when objects move slowly 
when they start to fall, accelerating until they  
hit the ground.
7 To slightly soften the landing, slowly increase Ease Low while 
the preview is playing. Balancing Ease High and Ease Low is how 
you can create some sophisticated, highly nuanced animations. 
Increasing either Ease High or Ease Low slows down a portion 
of each character’s animation. However, each character still has 
to complete the animation in the same total amount of time.  
If you find the middle portion of the animation is now too fast, 
you may need to increase the time between the Range Selector’s 
keyframes to compensate. In this last example, moving the 
second Offset keyframe to around 5:00 helps re-create the overall 
impression of speed you felt (and length of motion blur trails 
you saw) with the initial animation.

The Wiggly Selector
Most of your text animations so far have included simple, two-keyframe, “from 
here to there” movements. For those times when you want to get a little wacky, 
such as having text jiggle and dance, just add the Wiggly Selector:
TYPE AND MUSIC — Lesson 5
161
4 Adding a Selector 
> Wiggly causes 
the property we are 
animating – Fill Hue –  
to automatically 
randomize per 
character over time.
D 3D Text Animation Presets
After Effects ships with many text animation presets that 
take advantage of Per-character 3D. They can be found in 
the Effects & Presets panel under Animation Presets > Text 
> 3D Text. You can apply these to any text layer (not just in 
compositions that have cameras and lights) and use them  
as is, or as a starting point for your own animation. 
For your convenience, we’ve created a sample comp  
in this Lesson’s project for many of these presets: They are 
inside the Comps_finished > Adobe Animation Presets 
folder. Open each one and preview, then select the layer 
and press uu to delve into understanding how they were 
done. Additional 3D text animation presets can be found on 
the Adobe Add-ons site: bit.ly/ShapeTextPresets.
To whet your appetite for what you’ll be able to create 
with Per-character 3D text layers, open 3D World in this 
folder and preview; it demonstrates the preset 3D Flutter In 
Random Order with lighting and shadows.
1 Close all comps and open comp 08-Wiggly*starter, 
where we’ve created some basic text using the font 
Adobe Poplar Std (again, available through Adobe 
Typekit, feel free to pick your own). We made the text 
a pale blue, with a 1-pixel Stroke, and added the Drop 
Shadow effect. To wiggle text, you need to add at least 
one parameter to wiggle. Let’s wiggle color, then add 
transform properties:
2 Twirl down the text layer, and choose Animate > 
Fill Color > Hue. Scrub the Fill Hue value to 300°,  
and the blue text will now appear green. 
3 Click Animator 1’s Add button and choose  
Selector > Wiggly. Preview: Each character now has  
a random color that varies over time automatically! 

4 Choose Add > Property > Position. Scrub the Y Position value to around 50  
or so. Preview again; the characters wiggle a maximum of 50 pixels up or down.
5 Choose Add > Property > Rotation, and set Rotation to around 15°. As with 
Position, the Wiggly Selector treats this value as a maximum offset; notice that 
characters rotate clockwise and counterclockwise (ranging from +15° to –15°).
6 The Wiggly Selector is below Range Selector; twirl it down and experiment:
• To make the title easier to read as it animates, increase the Correlation value 
to around 80%. Now adjacent characters behave more alike.
• Try setting Wiggly’s Based On popup to Words; now “Penguin” and 
“Playhouse” will jiggle as words instead of individual characters. Adjust 
Correlation to 0% to have them be as different as possible, or set to taste. 
• To randomize the color and location of the characters without having 
them animate, set Wiggles/Second to 0.
• To fade out the entire wiggle effect, animate both the Max Amount and 
Min Amount from their default value down to 0%. Or, fade up or down a 
single property (say, Position) by setting keyframes for that property only. 
Our version can be found in Comps_Finished > 08-Wiggly_final.  
We added a couple of touches, such as animating the Amount parameters 
in the Wiggly Selector. We also faded out the Position and Rotation offsets, 
leaving just the color variation at the end.
Rendering with an Alpha Channel
Say that after you’ve finished your penguin title animation in the previous exer-
cise, the editor says he might still change the video behind it – so can he have 
the title by itself? To do that, you need to render it with an alpha channel.
1 Open or select the 08_Wiggly comp you created in the previous exercise.  
If you didn’t finish it, open ours: Comps_Finished > 08-Wiggly_final.
2 Turn off the Video switch (the eyeball icon) for the background layer, 
Penguins.mov – the editor is planning on replacing that.
3 To confirm that you have nothing else behind your type, click the Toggle 
Transparency Grid button along the bottom of the Comp panel. You should  
see a checkerboard pattern everywhere the type isn’t.
4 Choose Composition > Add to Render Queue. The Render Queue panel  
will open, with an entry for your composition. Inside this entry are two lines:  
Render Settings and Output Module. To the far right of the Output Module 
header is a line of text that says Output To, followed by a file name (it may  
Lesson 5 — TYPE AND MUSIC
162
3 Turn off the background layer, and use 
Toggle Transparency Grid to verify that 
there are no other layers present (such as a 
black solid) that are not supposed to render.
6 In our final version, we animated the 
Wiggly Selector’s amount and faded down the 
Position and Rotation leaving just Fill Hue.
5 By default, the Wiggly Selector 
randomizes each character by a maximum  
of the animation properties you set, in  
either direction (positive or negative).  
Clip FNN-FH100-50 courtesy Artbeats.com.

TYPE AND MUSIC — Lesson 5
163
5 In the Render Queue, select the Lossless 
template from the Output Module popup, 
then click on the underlined “Lossless” to 
open the Output Module Settings.
say Not yet specified initially). Click that name, and a file dialog will open. Name 
your movie and choose a place to save it. Include the word “alpha” in the name 
to remind you that this movie will have an alpha channel in it.
5 To the immediate right of the Output Module header, it should say Lossless; 
this is the default template, and it uses the QuickTime Animation codec, which 
is well suited for this purpose. If it doesn’t, click on the arrow and choose Lossless 
from the menu that appears (or choose the Lossless with Alpha template).
Click on the underlined “Lossless” text to the right of this arrow to open the 
Output Module Settings dialog and change these settings:
• In the Video Output section, set the Channels popup to RGB+Alpha.  
The Depth popup should change to Millions of Colors+ 
(the “+” stands for alpha). 
• Click on the Color popup and change it to Straight 
(Unmatted): This is the preferred format for most editing 
systems to obtain the highest quality. (The Lossless with 
Alpha template outputs a Premultiplied alpha.)
• Set the Post-Render Action popup to Import. This will 
bring the finished movie back into After Effects. 
Click OK to close the Output Module Settings dialog. 
(You can also save this as a template; we cover using and 
creating templates in the Appendix.) 
6 Click the Render button. When After Effects is done, 
the file will appear in the Project panel.
Select your rendered movie and choose Edit > Edit Original  
to open it in QuickTime Player. See that coarse black fringe 
around your type? That’s the result of a Straight Alpha render, 
where After Effects “oversprays” the color pixels beyond the 
edges of an alpha, just as you would do when painting through 
a stencil. You actually want to see this; it verifies that you ren-
dered a Straight Alpha. If your editors panic when they see it, 
tell them it will look fine when it’s composited in their editing 
system, after the alpha channel does its job. 
To see what your render really looks like, close the QuickTime 
Player, return to After Effects, and double-click the movie to 
display it in its Footage panel. This After Effects viewer factors 
in the alpha channel. Turn on the Transparency Grid and you 
will see clean edges around your type, including any drop 
shadow effects. Likewise, it will look great if you add this movie 
to an After Effects composition. Save your project when done.
6 If you view your Straight Alpha render in a QuickTime 
viewer, you will see just the RGB color channels, which includes 
pixels that extend beyond the alpha (above). View it in the  
After Effects Footage panel, which factors in the alpha channel, 
and you will see that it is actually clean (below).
5 continued In the Output Module, set Channels to RGB+Alpha, 
Depth to Millions of Colors+, and Color to Straight (Unmatted). 

1 Close your previous comps 
and open MU1-Two Range 
Selectors*starter. It contains the 
phrase “Two heads are better than 
One.” We want to emphasize the 
first and last word with color.
2 With the Text tool active, 
select just the word “Two” in the 
Comp panel. Twirl down the text layer in the Timeline panel, and choose 
Animate > Fill Color > RGB. “Two” will turn red. 
Twirl down Range Selector 1, and you will see that Start and End have 
been set to 0 and 3. Twirl down Advanced, and Units will be set to Index 
instead of Percentage. When you select a range of characters before creating 
a text animator, After Effects will preset the Range Selector to include just 
the characters you selected. 
3 Select the word “One”. Click Add (not Animate) and choose Selector > 
Range. Range Selector 2 will be created, with Start and End encompassing 
the last word.
4 In the timeline, note you still have only one Fill Color – it applies to both 
ranges above it. Change its color to verify this (we used green).
Independently animate the End values for both range selectors to change 
their corresponding words from white to your chosen color. For bonus 
points, change Advanced > Based On for both range selectors to Words, and 
redo your animation to fade each word as a whole. Our example is saved as 
Comps_Finished > MU1-Two Range Selectors_final.
Lesson 5 — TYPE AND MUSIC
164
Multiple Selectors and Animators
As you’ve seen, you can do a lot with a single Animator and Range or Wiggly 
Selector, as each one can control multiple parameters. However, there are times 
when you need more than one. Let’s run through two quick examples; these just 
scratch the surface of what you can do once you understand the concept.
Two Range Selectors
First we’ll use multiple range selectors to target just specific parts of our text.
d tip
Renaming for Clarity
You can rename both Animators and 
Selectors in the timeline. To remind yourself 
later what you were doing, give them more 
descriptive names such as “Anim1-Color 
Change” and “Anim2-Wiggle”.
2 Selecting a range of characters (A) and 
creating a text animator will create a range 
for just those letters (B). The Range Selector 
in the Timeline panel will automatically 
have its Units set to Index, with Start 
and End preset to this range (above).
A
B
4 Both range selectors are affected by 
the same Fill Color (right).

3 The final timeline. Note that the only keyframes are 
set for Animator 2’s Range Selector > Start. Our result  
is in Comps_Finished > MU2-Two Animators_final.
1 Animator 1 wiggles the color on the second word.
2–3 Animator 2 types on the characters randomly. 
Grouping Alignment Y affects how the characters scale.
TYPE AND MUSIC — Lesson 5
165
Two Animators
Sometimes, you want two entirely different animations happening 
inside the same piece of text, as in our next example: 
1 Open MU2-Two Animators*starter. The second word 
“Complicated” already has an animator applied, with a Wiggly 
Selector. The only property added is Fill Color, and the Shape is  
set to Ramp Up, which transitions the text color between yellow  
(the color set in the Character panel) and red (the color set in the 
animator). Turn off and on the eyeball for Animator 1 – Wiggle 
Color to see the before/after view. 
Now you decide you’d like to have this text type on in a random 
order, with some scaling as well. Whenever an animator has a 
Wiggly Selector applied, it will affect every property, so you need  
two animators to achieve your goal:
2 Twirl up Animator 1, and make sure the text is in Layer mode 
(characters should not be preselected). Click Animate (not Add)  
and choose Opacity. This adds a second animator below the first. 
Select its name, press R, and name it Animator 2 – Type On. 
• Set Opacity value to 0%, fading out the entire line of text.
• Twirl down Animator 2 > Range Selector 1. With the current time 
indicator at 00:00, enable keyframing for Start.
• Move the current time indicator to 01:15 and change the Start 
value to 100%. Preview; the text should type on from left to right.
• Twirl down Animator 2 > Range Selector 1 > Advanced and  
change Randomize Order from Off to On. Preview again; the text  
will transition on randomly.
3 To add further interest, also Add > Property> Scale to Animator 2; 
increase the Scale value to 300%.
• The characters scale around the baseline. Twirl down More 
Options and scrub the Grouping Alignment Y value to –35%; as  
you scrub this value, small ×s will move up and down indicating the 
location of the characters’ anchor point. Preview; the text now scales 
around the vertical center. (Note that while More Options affects all 
animators, Grouping Alignment affects Scale and Rotation only.) 
• If you find the characters land too abruptly, set Range Selector > 
Advanced > Ease Low to 100%. 
If you like the result, stay tuned to learn how to save it as a preset.

Text Animation Presets
In Lesson 3, we introduced animation presets, which are a great way to save 
favorite arrangements of effects as well as keyframed animations. In addition  
to providing a way to save your own creations, Adobe ships After Effects with  
literally hundreds of prebuilt animation presets that you can explore and use. 
One of the richest areas to mine is Text Presets. 
Applying a Text Preset
1 Open Comps > 09-Apply Preset. It contains a text layer and an audio layer. 
With the current time set to 00:00, select the text layer Jazz It Up!.
2 Click on the Options menu to the right of the panel name Effects & Presets, 
and choose Browse Presets. (If this panel isn’t open, choose it from the Window 
menu.) Choosing Browse Presets will open Adobe Bridge and navigate to the 
Presets folder for you.
3 Double-click the folder Text. Inside it will be several 
subfolders that represent categories of presets such 
as Animate In, Blurs, and Rotation. Double-click the 
Animate In folder to open it. You will see a number  
of thumbnails, representing each preset. Select one by 
single-clicking it; an animation of it will start playing  
in the Preview panel. Go ahead and preview a few. If  
you like, click on the Go Back button (top left corner) 
and explore some of the other text preset categories.
4 Once you’ve found a preset you like, double-click 
it. Bridge will return you to After Effects and apply that 
preset to your text. (If your text layer was not selected 
when you applied a preset, you will get a new layer 
named Adobe After Effects instead. If you see this,  
undo, select Jazz It Up!, return to Bridge, and try again.) 
Press u to reveal the keyframed properties this preset is 
using to create its animation.
Preview the comp to see how the animation looks  
full-size with your text. If you’re less than thrilled,  
no problem; Undo to remove the preset, press H  
to jump back to 00:00, return to Bridge, and select 
another preset. After you’ve had some fun, undo  
and apply the preset Curves and Spins > Counter 
Rotate.ffx, as we’ll be using it in the next section.
Lesson 5 — TYPE AND MUSIC
166
3 Selecting Browse Presets from the Effects 
& Presets Options menu (above) opens 
Adobe Bridge (below), which makes it easy 
to preview the Adobe-supplied presets. 
Double-click one to apply it to a selected 
layer in After Effects. If you don’t need to see 
an animated preview, you can apply presets 
directly from the Effects & Presets panel.

Editing a Preset
Applying an animation preset is not the end of the road; you 
can freely edit the layer afterward. Let’s make a couple of cus-
tomizations to the Counter Rotate preset we applied in Step 4.
5 While watching the Comp viewer, drag the current time 
indicator until you observe several characters overlapping.
Twirl down the parameters for Jazz It Up! until you open 
the Text > More Options section. Inside there is a popup for 
Inter-Character Blending. This uses blending modes to affect 
how overlapping characters interact. Try a few, and pick one 
you like; we thought both Multiply and Add were interesting.
6 Now, tie the text’s animation more closely to the music. 
Select layer 2, CoolGroove.wav, and type ll to reveal its 
waveform. Preview this comp, noting how the spikes in the 
waveform relate to the drum hits, and when the saxophone 
wail starts and stops. We’ve already added layer markers for 
you noting where these events are; you’ll learn how to do that 
yourself later in this lesson.
7 Select Jazz It Up! again, and press u until you see just its 
keyframes. Slide them in time to line up with some event in 
the music. Since these keyframes have had Easy Ease applied 
to them, they will not seem to “hit” your beats as tightly as 
they slide out of and back into position again. Feel free to 
tweak their timing to compensate for this, or to change them 
to Linear keyframes by C+clicking (L+clicking) on them. 
Save your project when you’re done.
TYPE AND MUSIC — Lesson 5
167
5 Play with More Options > 
Inter-Character Blending (top) 
to create some different looks 
when characters overlap.  
Here, we show their normal 
interaction (A), using Multiply 
(B), and using Add (C).
7 In our version 09-Apply Preset_final, we keyframed the animation to follow the rise and fall of the saxophone’s wail.
A
B
C

Lesson 5 — TYPE AND MUSIC
168
Saving Text Animations
As we’ve mentioned, you can save your own animation presets, including 
presets you’ve modified. However, text layers can require a bit of additional 
thought. If you save everything about a text layer, you will save its Source Text 
as well – which means that every time you applied it, it would replace any text 
in the target layer with your old text! So let’s get some practice being selective  
in how we save properties in a preset:
1 Open Comps > 10-Save Preset. It contains the Mystery of Light animation 
you built earlier in this lesson.
2 A great way to remind yourself of what you’ve done to a layer is select it  
and type uu (two us in quick succession) to reveal all of its parameters that 
have been changed from their defaults. Do this to The Mystery of Light. You 
will see you’ve made changes to Source Text, parameters inside Path Options 
and Animator 1, and applied a mask as well as an effect.
• In this case, you don’t want to save your Source Text, so don’t click on that.
• Click on Path Options to remember its settings for Path and First Margin.
• C+click (L+click) on Animator 1; this will by default remember all of  
the settings indented inside of it, such as Range Selector 1 and the properties 
you added to the animator.
• C+click (L+click) Mask 1 (which includes Mask Path) to remember the 
path the text is supposed to follow.
• Finally, C+click (L+click) on Radial Shadow to select the entire effect.
3 Choose Animation > Save Animation Preset to save your preset. Remember,  
it is preferable to place it somewhere inside the Presets folder, which exists  
alongside the After Effects application on your computer’s drive. You can make 
your own subfolders inside here if you wish. (Saving and applying animation 
presets was covered in more detail in Lesson 3.)
d gotcha
Unaltered Effects
If you apply an effect to a layer, but don’t 
change any of its parameters, After Effects 
might not reveal this effect when you select 
a layer and type uu. Press Se to 
also reveal Effects in the timeline. 
saving an animation preset. If the essence of the preset is the  
animation, regardless of the actual text, then don’t select Source 
Text when saving the preset. 
On the other hand, if the styling of the text – its size, its color, 
and the like – are important, then you will need to include it.  
Just be prepared to replace the underlying text after you apply 
the preset to your new text layer.
D Source Text
2 Carefully select just the parameters  
and parameter groups that you want to 
remember in your animation preset. Any 
keyframes are included automatically for 
selected items. Note that we did not select 
Source Text.
The Source Text parameter bundles together a bunch of informa-
tion into one keyframe: your actual text, plus the settings in the 
Character and Paragraph panels for that text. If you wish, you can 
keyframe Source Text to change over time, although only Hold 
keyframes (covered in Lesson 2) are allowed.
Because you can’t save the actual text separately from its style, 
think carefully whether you want to include Source Text when 

TYPE AND MUSIC — Lesson 5
169
D Editing Photoshop Text Layers
Although we have focused on creating and 
animating text inside After Effects, you may 
receive a Photoshop file with text already 
in it. You can import the layered Photoshop 
file as a composition, then convert the 
Photoshop text to After Effects editable text.
For this final exercise, you’ll need the Myriad 
Pro Condensed and Bold Condensed fonts. If 
you don’t have these fonts currently installed, 
activate them using Adobe Typekit, or open 
this lesson’s RightWrongPoll.psd file in 
Photoshop and replace the fonts to taste.
1 In the Project panel, select the PSD 
Text_starter folder so that the PSD file will 
be imported into this folder. 
2 Use File > Import > File and select 
RightWrongPoll.psd from the 05_Sources > 
text folder on your drive. Click Open. 
In the dialog that appears, set the Import 
Kind popup to Composition – Retain Layer 
Sizes (so that layers are only as big as the 
content). Verify Editable Layer Styles is 
enabled and click OK. The folder will now 
contain a composition and a folder of the 
individual layers. 
3 Open the RightWrongPoll comp that 
appears inside the PSD Text_starter folder. 
Say that the network graphics department 
has set up this template with the name of the 
poll and created dummy text for the date 
and percentages. It’s your job to edit the text 
and animate the text and bars. Problem is, 
you can’t edit the Photoshop-created text 
the way it is. Time for a little magic:
To change the date, select <month/day> 
(layer 2), and choose the menu item Layer > 
Convert to Editable Text. The layer will now 
appear with a “T” icon to indicate it’s an 
After Effects text layer. Double-click and  
type today’s date; press E when done. 
To force edited text layers to have the 
same name as the new text you’ve typed, 
select the layer in the Timeline panel, press  
R, D, R.
From here on, think of this as an Idea 
Corner for you to explore your own design 
impulses. Convert any other layers you wish 
to edit or apply an animation preset to. For 
instance, convert the poll’s title (layer 3) to 
editable text, then try out some of the text 
presets you played with earlier in this lesson. 
4 The graphic designer created the dark 
title bar, right bar, and wrong bar in 
Photoshop using its Shape layers feature. 
When they were imported into After Effects, 
they were automatically converted into 
solid layers with masks. Select right bar 
and wrong bar, and type m to reveal their 
masks. Animate their mask paths to make the 
bars grow out to their final values. You could 
also use Effect > Transition > Linear Wipe  
to achieve the same result, as we did in our 
version PSD Text_finished > RightWrong-
Poll_finished. (Feel free to explore our final 
composition for some other ideas you can 
apply or modify for your own comp.)
2 Import the layered Photoshop file as a 
composition, using the Retain Layer Sizes 
option to automatically trim the layers.
3 Select any Photoshop Text layer inside 
After Effects, and under the Layer menu 
select Convert to Editable Text (above).  
The result will be an After Effects text layer, 
noted by the “T” icon next to it (below).
4 In our final version, we converted some text layers and changed the content to suit our 
needs, then animated some layers to build on the graphic. Background footage courtesy  
12 Inch Design.

Animating to Sound
One trick you can use to improve the “look” of your motion graphics is coordi-
nate them with audio, such as dialog and music. To do this, you need to “spot” 
where the important “hit points” are in your soundtrack and place layer markers 
at these times. These serve as signposts for placing keyframes and edit points.
Adding Audio to a Comp
1 Choose Window > Workspace > Standard, which contains the Audio panel, 
then choose Window > Workspace > Reset “Standard” to Saved Layout. Open 
your finished version of 08-Wiggly from earlier in this lesson, or our version 
Comps_Finished > 08-Wiggly_final. Press the H key to return to 00:00.  
If layer 1 (Penguin Playhouse) is still twirled open, close it to save space.
2 In the Project panel, twirl down Sources > Audio and select the file 
Playhouse.wav. Its sample rate and bit depth will appear at the top of the 
Project panel. Add this file to your comp just as you would any other footage 
layer: by dragging it to the Composition or Timeline panels or by pressing  
C/ (L/).
3 Preview your composition; after the comp has had a chance to cache, the 
audio will play back with the video. (If you can’t hear any sound, aside from 
the obvious checking of cables, open Preferences > Audio Hardware and > Audio 
Output Mapping to make sure After Effects is sending audio to the connections 
you expect.) To preview audio by itself, press π (the decimal point key  
on the numeric keypad); MacBook users can press L. (period).
4 In the Timeline panel, you will notice that Playhouse.wav has a speaker  
icon under the A/V Features column. You can toggle this on and off to mute  
or unmute an audio layer. Layers that have both audio and video will have  
both speaker and eyeball icons, which can be toggled independently. Audio 
must be turned on to see the audio waveform, which we’ll play with next.
Lesson 5 — TYPE AND MUSIC
170
2 Footage items that contain audio are 
identified with a generic waveform graphic 
at the top of the Project panel; their sample 
rate and bit depth are also displayed.
4 Layers with audio display a speaker icon 
in the A/V Features column of the Timeline 
panel (above). Click the speaker icon to 
mute the track. Audio for all layers may be 
muted in the Preview panel (right).
D Audio Basics
Audio is often embedded with the 
video in the same file. However, 
you can also import audio-only 
files just as you would a video-only 
movie. There are many valid formats 
for audio, such as AIFF, WAV, and 
MP3 files; you can also create a 
QuickTime or AVI file that contains 
just audio. 
Like pictures and video, audio’s 
resolution is defined by its bit depth, 
with higher being better. The most 
common format is 16 bits (the same 
as CDs); 24 bits is a high-end format; 
32 bits is used by programs such  
as Adobe Audition for audio pro-
cessing. Audio is also defined by  
its sample rate, which is akin to 
frame rate. Again, higher is better. 
Audio CDs have a rate of 44.1 kHz; 
professional video uses 48 kHz.

Spotting an Audio Waveform
The audio waveform illustrates how loud the audio is at 
any given instant. The taller the waveform, the louder 
the sound is at that particular time. Spikes in the wave-
form indicate percussive events such as drum hits or 
“plosive” consonants such as “P.” Those spikes are often 
great spots to place keyframes or to trim a layer to.
5 Twirl down Audio > Waveform for Playhouse.wav. 
The shortcut is to select the layer and press ll (two 
ls in quick succession). Feel free to change the height of the waveform (right). 
6 Press π to preview the audio (MacBook users can press L.),  
studying how the moving time indicator relates to spikes in the waveform.  
Tap your fingers along with the beats in the music to get a feel for its rhythm.
Using Markers
One of the more useful features in After Effects is the ability to place markers 
on each layer or in the overall composition. You can use these to note special 
events in the layer or comp, making it easy to synchronize keyframes and other 
layers to these times.
7 Select Playhouse.wav to make sure it is the layer that receives your markers. 
There are a few ways to add a marker:
• Start a preview and tap the X key on the numeric keypad at the instant you 
want a marker to be placed. 
• Move the current time indicator to a spike you think you might want to 
animate to later, and press the X key on the numeric keypad (MacBook users 
can press L8). You can also choose Layer > Add Marker.
To name a layer marker or give it a duration as you create it, press OX 
(AX) to open the Layer Marker dialog. You can also double-click an existing 
marker. To delete a marker, C+click (L+click) it. Right-click on a marker  
for additional options.
TYPE AND MUSIC — Lesson 5
171
7 Use markers to indicate important 
moments of time in a layer (below). Double-
click a marker to add a text comment  
and optionally give it a duration (above).  
The same dialog can be used for disc 
chapter markers and embedded web links.
5 Press ll to reveal a layer’s audio 
waveform. To make the waveform taller, 
position the cursor under the waveform 
until it changes to a two-headed arrow. 
Click and drag up or down to change the 
height of the waveform display.

Lesson 5 — TYPE AND MUSIC
172
Comp Marker bin
Comp Markers
Layer Markers
2 Keep the Audio panel visible to make 
sure you’re not distorting (indicated by 
the red segment on top of the “meters”) 
as well as to quickly adjust the Levels 
parameter for a selected layer.
d tip
Comp Markers
Layer markers are attached to their layer:  
As you slide the layer in time, its markers 
will move with it. When you need to mark a 
time in the composition that doesn’t move 
with the layers, add a comp marker. Move 
the current time indicator to the desired 
place, hold S and press a number from 
0–9 from along the top of the keyboard 
(not the numeric keypad). A numbered 
pointer will appear. To jump to that marker, 
just type its number. You can also drag out 
comp markers from the “bin” at the right 
side of the Timeline panel. Comp markers 
become layer markers when you nest the 
comp into another comp. 
8 After spotting and marking the musical events in Playhouse.wav, twirl up 
the waveform display. This saves space and speeds up redraws. 
9 Practice moving the keyframes for the Penguin Playhouse text layer to  
line up your markers; Preview and note how the music and visuals work 
together. You can also mark and slide the Penguins.mov video layer so the 
antics of the penguins better synchronize with what’s happening in the 
soundtrack. Our version is in Comps_Finished > 08-Wiggly_final2.
Mixing Audio
After Effects provides two ways to change the loudness of a layer with audio:  
the Levels parameter and the Stereo Mixer effect. Levels animates too abruptly, 
so we use it just to balance the relative loudness of the audio tracks, then  
keyframe Stereo Mixer to perform fade ins and outs.
1 Close your previous comps, and open Comps > 11_Audio Mixing*starter. It 
contains a music soundtrack plus a voiceover from the Apollo 15 moon mission. 
We’ve already spotted the waveforms for both of the layers, trimmed the voice-
over to include just a few select phrases, and slid it in time so the voice starts 
when the drums come in. Preview; the music drowns out some of the words.
2 Select Musical Messages.wav and press l to reveals its Levels parameter  
in the Timeline panel. Click the tab for the Audio panel to reveal a set of level 
meters and controls: The meters reflect the combined loudness of all audio layers 
in the comp; the Levels controller in this panel applies only to the selected layer. 
Preview the comp’s audio and decrease Levels for the music layer Musical 
Messages.wav to make it easier to hear the words over the music. (You can also 
increase Levels slightly for Lunar Rover audio.wav to +3 dB, but mind those  

red “peak” indicators in the Audio panel!) That helps, but what you really want 
is the music to be loud when there is no voice, and to be quieter when the  
astronaut is talking. So set the Musical Messages.wav layer back to 0 dB and  
let us show you a better way.
3 Start dragging the current time indicator toward the marker labeled “hit”  
for Musical Messages.wav. Add the S key as you get close; the indicator will 
snap to that marker. Select Musical Messages.wav and apply Effect > Audio > 
Stereo Mixer. In the Effect Controls panel, enable keyframing for Left Level and 
Right Level, then press u to reveal your keyframes in the timeline.
4 Locate to the “rhythm starts” marker and set both Left and Right Level to 50%. 
Preview the entire comp; the audio will “duck” down out of the way when the 
voiceover starts.
3–6 Keyframe the Stereo Mixer effect for 
the music layer to “duck” its loudness while 
the astronaut is talking. (You can use the 
expression pick whip – introduced in Lesson 
7 – to make the Right Level follow the Left 
Level, cutting down on keyframing.)
TYPE AND MUSIC — Lesson 5
173
d gotcha
Avoiding Distortion
Levels work akin to Scale, in that lower 
values reduce the volume and higher levels 
increase it. As with Scale, going over “100%” 
(0 dB in audio-speak) is generally a bad idea 
– especially if the red bars along the top of 
the Audio panel light up during previews, 
indicating the audio is being distorted.
5 Move the current time indicator to 11:09, where the voiceover ends for 
Lunar Rover audio.wav. Add a keyframe for both the Left and Right Level  
parameters (the values will be 50%, based on the previous keyframes). 
6 Locate to the “last bar” marker and set both Left and Right Level back to 
100%. Preview the entire comp; now each audio layer is loud when it should 
be, not fighting the other. Tweak their Levels to balance their relative loudness 
while maximizing the comp’s volume without distorting.
7 You can improve the tone quality of the scratchy Apollo 15 voiceover by 
applying frequency “equalization” to it. The simplest way to accomplish this  
is to select Lunar Rover audio.wav and apply Effect > Audio > Bass & Treble. 
• Increase the Bass parameter to fill in the low frequencies; this is a common 
technique to add gravitas to a voiceover. Conversely, reducing Bass makes audio 
sound cheaper or farther away; it can also reduce hum and rumble in a poorly 
recorded audio track.
• Decrease Treble to reduce the scratchy, crackly, hissy nature of the voiceover. 
Conversely, increasing Treble can improve the intelligibility of muffled audio.
Comps_Finished > 11_Audio Mixing_final contains our version, with video 
edited in time with the music. We also keyframed the Apollo soundtrack so the 
background noise fades in and out rather than cuts abruptly.
d tip
Guide Layers
Layers can be set to appear only in the 
current composition, but not in the final 
render nor in compositions further down 
a chain of nested comps (Lesson 6). This 
is great for scratch audio tracks you don’t 
want appearing in the render, as well as 
other notes and guides. To enable this 
feature, select a layer and choose Layer > 
Guide Layer. A blue grid icon will appear 
next to its name in the Timeline panel.

N
o layer or composition is an island – at least, 
not in complex animations. In this lesson, 
you will learn how to group layers and build 
composition hierarchies, making it easier to create 
and manage complex animations. First up will 
be parenting, where one layer’s animation can 
influence that of others. After that we’ll work with 
nesting and precomposing compositions: ways to 
bundle together layers, keyframes, and effects into 
one comp and treat the result as a single layer in 
another comp.
Approaches to Grouping
There are three general approaches to grouping inside After 
Effects: parenting layers together, nesting and precomposing 
compositions, and applying expressions to individual  
parameters. Here is an overview of their relative strengths, 
weaknesses, and uses:
Parenting: With this technique, you “parent” (attach) as 
many child layers as you want to a parent layer. The children 
remember their relationships to the parent at the time you 
attach them. Any changes in the parent’s position, scale, or 
rotation results in the children being dragged along for the 
ride. The children may have their own animation as well, but 
these are not passed back to the parent. To better visualize 
this, imagine a person walking several dogs. The dogs may be 
running around their minder, but as their minder walks down 
the street, all of the dogs move down the street as well.
The advantage of parenting is that all of the layers 
involved are in the same composition, which makes them 
easy to keep track of. A disadvantage is that changes in 
Lesson 6
174
Parenting and Nesting
 d In This Lesson
 174 
parenting, nesting, and expressions defined
 176 
assigning a parent
 177 
parenting, opacity, and effects
 178 
parenting with null objects
 180 
nesting to group layers; using guides
 182 
editing precomps
 184 
nesting a common source
 185 
navigating composition hierarchies
 187 
sizing precomps
 190 
precomposing a group of layers
 192 
precomposing a single layer
 194 
render order explained
 195 
splitting work between comps
 196 
precompose options compared
 196 
using precomposing to reorder
 198 
edit this, look at that (ETLAT)
 200 
continuous rasterization
 202 
collapsing transformations
 204 
compound effects
Grouping layers to make them easier to coordinate.
 d Getting Started
Make sure you have downloaded the file archive for Lesson 6 
and decompressed it. It contains the project files and sources 
you need to execute this lesson.
Rather than use a single project file, for this lesson we have 
provided several different project files to make it easier to keep 
track of all the compositions you will be creating and using.

opacity are not passed along from parent to child, so 
you can’t use parenting to fade out a group of layers 
together. Effects are also not passed from parent to child.
Nesting: The process of adding a composition to 
another composition is referred to as nesting comps.  
The nested comp (often referred to as a precomp) 
appears as just another layer in the second comp. You 
can animate, fade, and apply effects to the nested comp 
layer as if it were a normal movie file. The primary dif-
ference is that it is “live”: You can still go back to the 
first (nested) comp and change it, and those changes 
will appear immediately in the second (master, or main) 
comp without the need to first render the precomp.
Another use for nesting is that a single source comp  
can be nested into more than one master composition.  
The same source comp may also be nested several times into the same master 
comp. By doing this, you can easily change the original nested comp, and the 
change will ripple through to any comp it is nested into. This is ideal for creat-
ing (and updating) repetitive elements such as  animated logos that may be used 
multiple times throughout a project; some  animators may refer to this process  
as creating an “instance.”
Precomposing: When building a chain of nested compositions, ideally you’re 
thinking ahead: You use several layers to build an element in one comp, then 
use the result nested into a second comp. However, the creative process is rarely 
that orderly and logical. You might build a complex composition, only to later 
think, “You know, life would be easier if I could just group these layers into  
their own nested comp…”
Well, you can: The process is known as precomposing. You can select one or 
more layers in the current comp and “send them back” into their own comp – 
called a “precomp”– that automatically becomes a nested layer in the current 
comp. It’s almost as if you planned it that way ahead of time (you’re so smart…). 
Once you do this, as far as After Effects is concerned, there is no difference 
between the resulting precomp and a normal nested comp.
Expressions: After Effects also allows you to connect virtually any parameter  
to another parameter. This involves creating small pieces of JavaScript code 
referred to as expressions. We cover expressions in the next lesson, but in short, 
basic expressions could be considered a highly targeted form of parenting,  
where only individual parameters are connected rather than all transform  
properties at once. The big advantage is that you can connect any parameter  
you can keyframe – not just position, scale, and rotation.
PARENTING AND NESTING — Lesson 6
175
In this lesson, you will learn several ways to group together layers to 
make complex animations easier and to reuse elements multiple times 
in the same composition.
d factoid
Family Trees
You can create parenting chains where one 
layer is parented to a second, the second 
layer is parented to a third, and so on.  
This makes parenting an essential tool in 
character animation: For example, you can 
attach a hand to a forearm, a forearm to an 
upper arm, and the upper arm to a body.
d tip
Effects and Children
Effects applied to a parent are not passed 
along to its children. To apply the same 
effect to a group created by parenting,  
use an adjustment layer (Lesson 3), or 
precompose the parent and its children  
into a precomp and apply the effect to  
the resulting layer.

Parenting
In this first parenting exercise, you will be grouping together two layers to make 
it easier to animate them as a unit. In it, the “child” will keep its animation, 
which will also be affected by its parent.
1 For these first two exercises, open project Lesson 06 > 06a-Parenting.aep.  
In the Project panel, twirl open the Comps folder, then double-click the comp 
Parenting1*starter to open it.
Preview this comp. It consists of a movie of a globe rotating and a Photoshop 
still image of text on a circular path. For this animation, let’s make the text and 
planet scale up as a group, with the text rotating around the planet. We’ll then 
try to fade them out as a unit.
2 Select the first two layers, then press s to reveal their Scale followed by 
Sr to reveal Rotation and St to reveal Opacity. If you scrub these 
values for each layer, they will act independently of the other layer. Undo to  
get back to their original state.
3 To set up a parenting group, you need to reveal the Parent column in the 
Timeline panel. If it is not already visible, you can either right-click on any 
column header in the Timeline panel and choose Column > Parent, or use the 
keyboard shortcut S$. We tend to drag the Parent column to reside  
alongside the layer names, making it easier to read who is connected to whom.
The next step is deciding who the child should be and “parenting” it to the 
layer you want it to follow. In our case, we know we want to rotate the text  
independent of the planet. Therefore, it would be best if the text was the child, 
so that its rotation will not get passed onto the planet.
4 There are two ways to assign a parent:
• Click on the Parent popup for the prospective child Text on a circle.psd and 
pick its new parent – planet.mov – from the list that appears.
• Alternatively, click on the spiral icon (the pick whip tool) in the Parent column 
for the child and drag it to the name of the layer you wish to be the parent.
Lesson 6 — PARENTING AND NESTING
176
4 There are two 
ways to attach a 
child to a parent: 
use its Parent 
popup (left), or 
its pick whip tool 
to point to its 
parent (right).
Use parenting to make the text and planet 
scale up as a group, with the text rotating 
around the planet. Clip LNE119 courtesy 
Artbeats.com.
D Choosing a 
Responsible Parent
When grouping together layers using 
parenting, it is important to think 
about who should be the parent and 
who should be the child. 
A parent’s animation gets passed 
along to its children. Therefore, the 
layer that is going to be doing the 
least animating often (but not always) 
makes the best parent. That way, the 
children are free to run around the 
parent without their animation being 
passed onto the parent.
If you can’t find a suitable parent, 
use a null object (see page 178).

5 Scrub the Scale for Text on a 
circle.psd; only that layer scales. 
Return it to 100%, then scrub Scale 
for planet.mov: When you scale 
the parent, both layers scale as a 
group. Note that the Scale value  
for Text on a circle.psd does not 
change; its Scale value is now 
shown relative to its parent.
• Press H to make sure the current time indicator is at 00:00, then click on 
the stopwatch for planet.mov’s Scale to enable keyframing. Enter a value of 0%; 
both layers will disappear.
• Move the time indicator to 02:00 and set Scale back to 100%, returning both 
parent and child to full size. Press ( to make this an Easy Ease keyframe.
6 Now let’s rotate and colorize the child layer:
• Scrub Rotation for Text on a circle.psd; it rotates, but its parent does not.
• Press H again, and enable keyframing for Text on a circle.psd’s Rotation. 
Return its value to 0°. Then press N, and enter 2 for Revolutions (Rotation’s 
first value). The second keyframe should read 2x+0.0°.
• Apply Effect > Generate > Fill to the text, and pick a nice green for the text.
Preview again: The text rotates as both scale up together, then continues to 
rotate without affecting the parent. The planet’s color is also unchanged. 
7 Parenting passes scale, position, and rotation from parent to child, but 
nothing else:
• Move to 10:00, select planet.mov, and press Ot on Mac (At on 
Windows) to reveal Opacity and enable keyframing.
• Press N, and set planet.mov’s 
Opacity to 0%: The text will still be 
visible. You will have to fade out the 
text layer separately. 
In addition to opacity, effects are 
also not passed from parent to child. 
Go ahead and try adding an effect 
such as a blur to planet.mov; the  
text will not be affected. This can be  
a blessing or a curse, depending on  
what you are trying to accomplish.
PARENTING AND NESTING — Lesson 6
177
7 For better or worse, neither opacity (left) nor effects (right) are passed from the parent 
to the child. This means fading just the parent will not fade out both layers as a group.
6 Nothing applied to the child – for 
example, rotation or the color fill effect  
we applied to the text in this figure – are 
passed along to the parent. 
5 As the parent (the planet) scales up, 
the child (the text) scales up as well, by 
the same proportional amount.

Parenting with Nulls
Sometimes it is not clear which layer would make the best parent. The solution 
is to hire a nanny: a null object. Nulls are layers that do not render, but otherwise 
have normal transform properties such as position, scale, and rotation.
1 Bring the Project panel forward, open the Finished Movies folder, and play 
Parenting2.mov to see what you will be building. Close the movie when done.
2 Double-click Comps > Parenting2*starter to open it. If the Parent column is 
not already visible in the Timeline panel, press S$ to reveal it.
Parenting Chain
3 When you start parenting, first build any subgroups that make sense to 
handle as one element. In this case, the number 
9 and the planet form a logo. Click on the Parent 
popup for Nine and select planet.mov to be its 
parent. Now when you move the planet, the 
number will stay with it.
4 Let’s employ a null object to move the rest of the title layers as a group. Still 
at time 00:00, select Layer > New > Null Object; it will be added to the timeline. 
To rename the null, select it, choose Layer > Solid Settings, enter a name such 
as “Title Parent Null”, and click OK. In the Comp viewer, the null will appear as 
a square outline. The null may be hard to see, so temporarily turn off the Video 
switch for Muybridge_textless.mov; you can also change its Label color in the 
timeline. Note that a null’s anchor point defaults to its upper left corner.
5 Because scaling and rotation happen around the parent’s anchor point, it is 
important to first move the parent into the desired position before attaching  
the children to it. The center of the planet would make a good center for scaling 
this group, so let’s borrow its Position value:
• Select planet.mov, type p to reveal its Position, click on the word Position  
to select it, and use Edit > Copy. 
• Then select Title Parent Null and Edit > Paste. The top left corner of the null 
will now appear centered over the planet. 
Lesson 6 — PARENTING AND NESTING
178
3 The number 9 and the planet form a 
logo (left), so use parenting to parent the 
Nine layer to the planet.mov layer and 
make a subgroup (right).
5–6 Copy the planet’s 
position value to the null’s 
position (left). Then select 
and parent the remaining 
children to the null (right).
1 Play the finished movie. You will use 
parenting to animate the title layers and 
the Planet 9 logo together as a group.  
(You will build the background animation 
in the next exercise.)
4 Null objects appear in the Comp viewer 
as an outline of a square, with the Anchor 
Point in its upper left-hand corner. You can 
use the Solid Settings dialog to change the 
size of the null without affecting the children. 

6 Time to parent the other layers. Click planet.mov to select it. Then 
S+click on Season Finale to select layers 3 through 5. (Don’t select layer 2,  
as it is already parented to layer 3.) Then drag the pick whip tool for any of the 
selected layers to Title Parent Null, and they will all become attached to it.
Animating the Null
Now that we have everything set up, we can animate the group. The plan is to 
have them move forward to make the “9” logo and “Tomorrow” the heroes. 
7 Select Title Parent Null. Type p to reveal its Position, then Ss to also 
reveal Scale. Move to 02:00, then click on the stopwatches for Position and Scale 
to enable keyframing for these parameters, as well as set their first keyframes.
PARENTING AND NESTING — Lesson 6
179
In Parenting2_final, we animated each of 
the children independently and added a 
text animation preset to the Tomorrow title. 
Muybridge images courtesy Dover; video 
clips courtesy Pond5 and Artbeats.com.
8 Press F (apostrophe) to turn on the Action and Title Safe grids. 
These help you position the text in a legal area of the screen.
9 Move the time indicator to 02:15. Increase the scale of Title 
Parent Null to 150%; the entire group grows larger and a second 
Scale keyframe is created.
Then click inside the null’s outline and drag it to the left until the planet  
is positioned just inside the Title Safe lines. The group will move together,  
and a second Position keyframe will be created. (If only one layer moves, you  
accidentally grabbed a layer other than the parent null; undo and try again.)
10 To clean up the title, fade out the words to the left: Keyframe the opacity  
for Season Finale from 100% at 02:00 to 0% at 02:15.
Now that the major structural work is done, you can work with the children 
without worrying about affecting the parent and the overall move. Animate the 
planet, Tomorrow, and Season Finale child layers to your personal taste. Turn 
the Video switch for Muybridge_textless.mov back on to see the title in context.
Our version is in Comps_Finished > Parenting2_final. We scaled up the 
planet subgroup, slid in Season Finale, and applied a Text Animation Preset to 
Tomorrow, all with staggered timing so that each would get their turn at being 
the center of attention.
7–9 Keyframe the null object to grow from 
100% to 150% (left), and place the planet 
logo at the edge of the Title Safe area 
(below) at the second keyframe.
D Parenting and Scaling
Scaling a layer past 100% normally 
reduces its quality. However, the 
Scale values for a parent and its  
children are combined before After 
Effects calculates how to draw the 
pixels for each layer. Therefore, if a 
child has already been scaled down, 
you can get away with scaling up its 
null object parent without any loss  
of image quality for the child – as 
long as the combined Scale values 
amount to 100% or less.

Nesting a Group of Layers
One of the more powerful features in After Effects is the ability to treat a  
composition as a layer in another comp. This process is referred to as nesting, 
and is a great way to group layers together.
Creating the Wide Comp
1 Open the project Lesson 06 > 06-Nesting1.aep. Look inside the Project 
panel’s Finished Movie folder and play Human Figure in Motion.mov: This  
is what you are going to make. You’ll start by building a wide comp that holds 
multiple copies of the Muybridge human figure sequence. This wide comp will 
be nested into a second comp that includes all the other layers.
2 In the Sources folder, single-click the Muybridge_[00-09].tif 
sequence to select it. The top of the Project panel informs you  
that its size is 270×500, with a rate of 10 frames per second (fps).  
The sequence consists of only 10 unique images, so it was looped  
10 times in its Interpret Footage dialog. Your first task will be 
 creating a large composition to hold copies of this sequence. 
Select the Comps folder so that your new comp will auto matically 
sort into it, and type Cn (Ln) to create a new composition. 
Enter the following parameters in the Composition Settings dialog:
• Disable Lock Aspect Ratio. Set Width to 2300 pixels (more than 
eight times the width of the sequence) and Height to 500 pixels  
(the sequence’s height). 
• Set the Pixel Aspect Ratio popup to Square Pixels.
• Set the Frame Rate to 10, Start Timecode to 0, and the duration to 10:00.
• Enter a name of “Figures_group”, and click OK.
Resize your user interface frames to give the Comp panel as much room as  
you can, and set its Magnification popup to Fit up to 100%. 
3 Drag Muybridge_[00-09].tif from the Project panel to the left edge of the 
Comp viewer – it should snap into place. 
4 We want eight copies of the Muybridge animation spread across this comp. 
With Muybridge_[00-09].tif still selected, type Cd (Ld) seven times to 
duplicate it. Verify that you have eight layers in the Timeline panel; delete or 
duplicate layers as needed to achieve that goal. 
5 In the Comp panel, click and drag one of the duplicates to the right. As you 
get near the right edge of the Comp panel, add CS (LS) so it will 
snap to the right side of the comp. 
Lesson 6 — PARENTING AND NESTING
180
2 Create a large composition to hold 
several copies of the Muybridge sequence.
The final composite includes multiple copies 
of the Muybridge “walking man” animation 
in a nested composition.
d tip
Rulers and Guides
In addition to the Align panel, After Effects 
also offers Rulers and Guides. Press Cn 
(Ln) to toggle the rulers, then click 
and drag outward from a ruler to create a 
guide. Additional options – including the 
ability to Lock and Snap to Guides – reside 
under the View menu.

6 Type Ca (La) to select all the layers. Open Window > Align, and click 
the Horizontal Center Distribution button (bottom row, second from the right). 
The layers will now be spread out evenly across the composition. 
Nesting the Wide Comp
Next, let’s create a main comp to nest this group of Muybridge sequences into:
7 In the Project panel, select the Comps folder and click the New Comp 
button. Set the Width and Height to 960 and 540 respectively, and the Frame 
Rate to 29.97 frames per second (fps). Change the duration to 06:00, rename it 
“Figures Main”, and click OK. (You can close the Parent column if it appears.)
8 To nest a comp, you have two choices: You can drag your first comp into 
your new comp, same as adding any footage item to a comp. Alternatively, in 
the Project panel you can drag the comp Figures_group on top of the icon for 
the comp Figures Main and release the mouse to nest it. After either move, 
Figures_group will appear as a single layer in Figures Main.
9 The next step is animating the nested comp to slide from left to right:
• Select the Figures_group layer; press s to reveal Scale and Sp  
to reveal Position. Set the initial Scale value to 60%.
• Type Cr (Lr) to reveal the Rulers in the Comp panel, and 
make sure Window > Info is open for reference. Click along the top ruler 
and drag down a guide, placing it around Position Y = 40 (the Info 
panel will display the coordinates). Drag the layer upward until its top 
snaps to the guide. Then press Cr (Lr) to hide the rulers.
• Check that the Align panel’s Align Layers to popup is set to Composition, 
then click the Horizontal Right Alignment button. In the Timeline panel,  
enable the stopwatch for Position to create the first keyframe.
4–6 Create eight copies of the Muybridge 
layer, with the first and last ones justified  
to the edges of the comp (top left). With 
all layers selected, click on the Horizontal 
Center Distribution button in Align (above), 
and they will be evenly spaced (left).
8 To nest one comp into another, you 
can just drag it onto the target comp in 
the Project panel. It will then appear as a 
layer with a comp icon in the target comp.
PARENTING AND NESTING — Lesson 6
181
9 The Figures_group comp appears as 
a single layer when nested, so one set of 
Position keyframes can be used to move 
the eight layers as a group.

• Press N to go to the end of the comp (at 05:29). Then with Figures_group 
still selected and the Align panel’s popup still set to Composition, click its Hori-
zontal Alignment Left button. The second keyframe will be created automatically.
Preview: The figures should be marching to the right (if not, check you didn’t 
pan the layer in the other direction!). The problem is, they’re all marching in 
lock step, which is kind of boring…
Editing the Precomp
It is common to call a nested comp a precomp, as it renders first, with its result 
included in the master or main comp. Although the main comp actually gets a 
“flattened” layer to work with, the precomp is still live: Any changes you make to 
the precomp will ripple through into the main comp. 
10 Double-click on the layer Figures_group to open this nested comp, or select 
the Figures_group tab in the Timeline panel. If layers are selected, deselect all. 
11 Let’s stagger the timing of the Muybridge sequences so that the layers are 
not all in sync:
• In the Timeline panel, right-click on any column header, and select Columns > In.
• For layer 7, click on the In value, enter –1 in the Layer In Time dialog, and 
click OK. The In time will change to –0:00:00:01.
• Set the In time for layer 6 to –2. Continue to set each layer one frame earlier  
in time, ending at –7 for layer 1. (Remember that the precomp runs at 10 fps.)
Each copy of the sequence will now look different. After sliding the layers 
earlier, they run out before the end of the comp. In this instance, that’s okay 
because the main comp is much shorter than this precomp.
12 Bring the Figures Main comp forward, and preview. Your staggered timing 
for the sequence has been automatically rippled up to this main comp.
Lesson 6 — PARENTING AND NESTING
182
11–12 In the precomp, offset the In 
time of each layer (below) so that they 
will appear staggered in time (bottom). 
This edit will automatically show up in 
the main comp (below right).
9 continued Animate the nested comp 
to pan across its new comp. 
d tip
Opening Precomps
Double-clicking a precomp’s layer  
in the main comp opens the precomp. 
Pressing O (A) and double-clicking 
opens its Layer panel. This behavior can 
be reversed in Preferences > General. 

Finishing the Project
Congratulations – you’ve completed the major steps (save your project…).  
Here are some ideas for dressing up the final composite; please take artistic  
liberties and use your own sources to create your own design!
13 Locate Sources > Movies > VerticalBars and > CodeRage in the Project 
panel, and add them as background layers in Figures Main. Press $ to toggle  
to the Modes panel, and blend to taste, also using Opacity to temper the effect.
14 To better match the background, let’s warm up the gray Figures_group 
layer plus give it some dimension:
• Select Figures_group and apply Effect > Color Correction > Channel Mixer. 
Set to taste; we increased Red-Red to 140 and reduced Blue-Blue to 80. 
• Add Effect > Perspective > Drop Shadow and set to taste. Effects applied to 
nested comp layers affect all of the elements in that comp, with the benefit of 
having only one set of effects to edit.
15 Now let’s add a lighting treatment: In the Project 
panel, select Sources > Movies > CloudChamber.mov, 
and add it on top of the other layers in Figures Main. 
Slide it back in time until the emerging clouds fill the 
width of the frame, then set its mode to Overlay. This 
creates a richer look and adds more movement to the 
final composite. Feel free to try out different modes for 
each of the layers until you get a blend you like.
16 If you completed Lesson 5, here’s a chance to put 
your newfound skills to work! Add your own title to this 
composition. Choose whatever font you think works best 
(we used a condensed font so that it would fit on one line but still be fairly tall), 
and add Effect > Perspective > Drop Shadow to lift it off the background. Then 
apply a Text Animation Preset, or create your own design using text animators. 
Save your project when you’re done. If you’re curious, our alternate version is 
saved in Comps_Finished > Human Main_final. 
PARENTING AND NESTING — Lesson 6
183
13–15 Add a background to your main 
comp (A), then tint and add a shadow  
to the nested precomp (B). Add Cloud­
Chamber.mov on top using Overlay 
blending mode (C). We finished by setting 
Figures_group to Linear Burn mode (D). 
A
B
C
D
16 For a final touch, add a text animation 
to your composition.

Lesson 6 — PARENTING AND NESTING
184
2 The backing badge in the MyPlate comp 
will be reused in each of the City comps.
3 Nest MyPlate into a new composition 
with exactly the same vital statistics by 
dragging it to the New Comp icon (above). 
Lock this nested layer (right) so you don’t 
accidentally move it.
Nested comps are helpful when you have 
repeated elements, such as the “plate” 
behind the name of each new city. Map 
courtesy National Atlas of the United States 
(www.nationalatlas.gov).
Nesting a Common Source
In this exercise, you will build a more complex hierarchy of compositions.  
As part of it, you will see how a single change can update several elements in  
a project at once – a real time-saver!
The Common Element 
1 The idea in this exercise is that your client has three new locations opening 
in the United States, and they want to highlight this in a 5-second animation.
Open the project file Lesson 06 > 06c-Nesting2.aep. Twirl open the Finished 
Movie folder in its Project panel and play Locations.mov. Notice that the 
colored backplate and the words “New Location” are common to all three cities. 
When you have a repetitive element like this, plan your composition hierarchies 
so that this element can be isolated in a separate precomp, then nest it multiple 
times. Close the movie when done.
2 In the Comps folder, double-click the composition named MyPlate to  
open it. It’s only 300×100 pixels, and is twice as long as the client requested.  
In general, it’s a good idea to create precomps that are longer than necessary,  
as it’s a hassle to have to go back through multiple precomps and make each  
one longer at a later date. 
The MyPlate comp consists of two layers: the text layer New Location and  
the shape layer Rectangular Shape (shape layers are covered in Lesson 11). 
Because you will be nesting the MyPlate comp into three City comps, you  
will be able to edit the text or characteristics of the rectangular plate in this  
one precomp, and the changes will ripple through to all the City comps. 
Creating the First City Comp
Now let’s create the first of the three City comps and add the individual city 
names on top of this common plate:
3 In the Project panel, drag MyPlate to the New Comp icon at the bottom 
of the Project panel. A new comp will open with MyPlate nested into it. Type 
Ck (Lk) to open the Composition Settings, rename this new comp 
“City1” and click OK. Then in the timeline, click on the Lock switch for the 
nested MyPlate layer so you don’t accidentally move it while creating your text.

PARENTING AND NESTING — Lesson 6
185
4 Choose Window > Workspace > Text, then Workspace > Reset “Text” to 
Saved Layout and click OK. This will expose the Character and Paragraph panels. 
You can also open those panels directly by choosing Window > Character.
Set the Paragraph panel to the Center Text option. Double-click the Type tool 
to create a blank text layer centered in the comp. Type the name of the city 
you’d like to use. Press E when done, move the layer down as needed, and 
spend a few moments using what you learned in Lesson 5 to select a font, size, 
and color; the other cities will be based on this style.
As you build more complex hierarchies, your new challenge is to 
visualize how compositions flow into each other and how you’ll 
navigate between them. After Effects offers several tools to  
facilitate this.
Composition Navigator
Along the top of the Composition panel (above) is a series of 
buttons that represent the currently open composition plus the 
chain of any compositions linked to it, if any. (If these buttons 
are not visible, click on the Options menu to the right of the 
comp’s name along the top of the Comp panel and enable Show 
Composition Navigator.) Clicking on any of these buttons will 
open the corresponding comp. If more than one comp is linked 
to the current comp, only one is shown in the Navigator; After 
Effects automatically chooses which to display (usually the nested 
comp that you’ve opened most recently).
g The Mini-Flowchart shows three steps 
in a hierarchy of compositions.
D Navigating Composition Hierarchies
g The Mini-Flowchart may be opened several ways, 
including clicking its icon in the Timeline panel.
4 Type in the name of a city centered in 
the backing plate, and then style the text 
to taste.
Mini-Flowchart
The Mini-Flowchart (below left) is a floating window that 
provides more detail than the Composition Navigator – for 
example, it shows all of the nested comps that flow into a 
composition, rather than just one. There are several ways to 
open it, including:
• Click on the Composition Mini-Flowchart button along  
the top of the Timeline panel.
• Tap the T key when either the Comp or Timeline panels 
are forward.
• Click on the arrow to the right of a comp’s name in the 
Composition Navigator.
• Select Composition > Composition Mini-Flowchart.
In all cases, the Mini-Flowchart will open near where your 
cursor is. It shows three steps in the composition hierarchy; 
to move up and down longer hierarchies, click on the arrows 
between comps. Clicking on a comp’s name opens that comp. 
The Mini-Flowchart also has an Options menu in its upper right 
corner to change how it draws and sorts.

Lesson 6 — PARENTING AND NESTING
186
9 Create a new comp for the map graphic 
and nest the three city comps into it, 
positioning them over their respective states.
Duplicating Comps
5 Once you’re happy with how your text in the City1 comp looks, select City1 
in the Project panel and press Cd (Ld) to duplicate it. After Effects will 
automatically increment the number at the end of its name, labeling it City2. 
Duplicate again to create City3. 
6 Open the City2 comp. Double-click the 
text layer to select the text and type the name 
for your second city. Press E when done.
7 Open the City3 comp and edit the text 
layer to your third city. When you’re done, 
press v to return to the Selection tool, and 
save your project.
 If you like, rename the individual city 
comps so that you can better keep track of 
who is who. You can do this directly in the 
Project panel: Select a comp, press R  
(not E) to highlight its name, type in  
the city’s name, and press R again.
5 In the Project panel, duplicate the 
original City1 composition; the duplicates 
will be numbered automatically as City2 
and City3.
6–7 Enter your desired city names 
for the City2 and City3 comps.  
The text will be styled the same as 
in the original City1 composition.
Creating the USA Map Comp
Now it’s time to place your individual city comps 
around a map: 
8 In the Project panel, drag Sources > USA Map.jpg 
to the New Comp icon. A comp called USA Map is 
created that is the same size as the still image map  
(if needed, set the Comp panel’s Magnification to 
Fit up to 100%). It will be created inside the Sources 
folder; drag it up to the Comps folder. 
With USA Map selected, open the Composition 
Settings: Verify that its duration is 10 seconds and 
that the frame rate is 29.97 fps. Click OK when done.
9 Drag one of your city comps from the Project 
panel into the USA Map Comp panel, and position 
it over the state where it belongs (yes, this is a geog-
raphy test). Do the same with the other two cities. 
Don’t worry about animating them right now; let’s 
finish building the comp hierarchy first.

Let’s take a moment to contemplate the composition hierarchy you’ve created. 
Study the Composition Navigator along the top of the Comp panel (above) for 
Locations Main, and you will see that the nested comps flow from MyPlate to 
one of your city comps to USA Map to Locations Main. Click on any one of 
these navigation buttons, and After Effects will bring that comp forward. 
Select MyPlate, and tap the T key to open the 
Mini-Flowchart (right). This flowchart will show 
you that MyPlate flows into each of your city 
comps, meaning that changes made to MyPlate 
will affect all of those comps downstream. 
Switch to USA Map, and tap 
T again: The Mini-Flowchart 
(right) will show you that all of 
the city comps flow into USA 
Map, which then flows into 
Locations Main. Note that you can click on the arrows between comps in the 
Mini-Flowchart to navigate along the chain.
Click on Locations Main to bring it forward again. 
PARENTING AND NESTING — Lesson 6
187
Creating the Main Comp
Now that the cities are placed in position on the map, you can treat the USA 
Map comp as a group. So let’s nest it into the final composition and animate it 
as a group: 
10 Select the Comps folder, and type Cn (Ln) to make a new comp.  
In the Composition Settings dialog that opens, set the size to 960×540 pixels at 
29.97 fps. Enter a duration of 05:00 (shorter than your precomps), change the 
default name to “Locations Main”, and click OK.
11 Nest the USA Map comp into 
Locations Main by dragging it from 
the Project panel to the left side of 
Locations Main’s Timeline panel. 
This will center the map in the com-
position (see figure to the right). If 
needed, set the Magnification popup 
in the Comp panel to Fit up to 100%.
D What Size Should 
Precomps Be?
Precomps do not need to be the 
same size as the compositions they 
are nested into. But what size should 
they be? The answer is based more 
on experience, intuition, and com-
promise than a simple formula.
Rule number one is that you do 
not want to have to zoom a nested 
precomp to be larger than 100%,  
or you will likely lose image quality. 
Having some extra size will also give 
you freedom later to decide how 
much you want to zoom in or pan 
around a nested comp (as is the case 
with nesting USA Map into Locations 
Main in this exercise).
Rule number two is that you don’t 
want to make a precomp much larger 
than it has to be. Larger precomps 
take more RAM and time to render.  
If it’s just going to be a small button 
(such as the Plate comp in this  
exercise), there’s no need for it to  
be as large as the final comp.
In general, when you have a 
complex chain of comps, try to  
create a test of the comp hierarchy 
before you spend time finessing  
the animation in each potentially 
wrong-sized precomp.

13 This is about the point during a real project that the 
client calls and says “We changed our mind – it can’t say 
New Locations; it has to say New Cities!” Fortunately, those 
words are in a single precomp that feeds all of your city 
comps:
• Click on MyPlate in 
the Comp Navigator 
to bring it forward. 
Double-click the layer 
New Location, type 
“NEW CITIES”, and press E.
• Click on Locations Main in the Comp Navigator: all of 
the city precomps have been updated to say NEW CITIES. 
And that, my friends, is the power of nested comps and 
building intelligent hierarchies!
12 Now animate the big map inside 
this smaller comp:
• With USA Map layer selected, press 
a to reveal the Anchor Point, then 
Ss to add Scale. 
• Press Sª to jump to 
00:10, and enable the keyframing 
stopwatches for Position and Scale. 
• Change Scale to 45–55%, and scrub 
the Anchor Point values to create a 
nice initial framing of the map. 
• Move to 04:20, increase Scale to 
around 70%, and scrub the Anchor 
Point as needed to frame all three 
of your cities. If your cities are fairly 
tightly grouped, this simple “push in” 
animation will suffice. If your cities are 
more spread out, you might want to 
do a “pull out” instead (animate from zoomed in on one title to pulling back to 
include the entire map). In the real world, an animation like this may be driven 
by a voiceover (narration), in which case you might end up needing to do a 
more complex “motion control” move (as covered in Lesson 2).
Lesson 6 — PARENTING AND NESTING
188
13 Through the power of nesting, any changes to MyPlate (right) 
are automatically rippled through to the final comp (above).
12 Pan and zoom USA Map inside 
Locations Main to start with a zoomed-out 
overview (above), and end up zoomed in on 
your three cities (below).
d future vision
3D Polish
After you have completed Lesson 8 on  
3D Space, come back to this exercise  
and think about how you might use 3D  
to make it more interesting. For example, 
rather than animate the scale of the 
city plates to zoom them up, move them 
forward in Z space, perhaps with 3D 
shadows or transparency and refraction. 
Or rather than panning and scaling in  
the final comp, use a 3D camera to move 
around your world.
d tip
Position or Anchor Point?
As Scale acts around the Anchor Point 
instead of Position, animating the 
Anchor Point for “motion control” moves 
will yield more predictable behavior. 
This was demonstrated in Lesson 2. 

Final Polish
Preview your animation. Once you have the basic move down, bring the USA 
Map comp forward and experiment with animating the three city layers so they 
appear at different times. 
In Comps Finished > Locations_final we scaled each city layer up from 0% to 
100% over 20 frames, and staggered them to start at 01:00, 02:00, and 03:00 as 
we moved from west to east across the country. Of course, you could also have 
them spin in and slam down with a huge lens flare! (Just kidding…)
On a more serious note though, this project has revealed another common 
trick advanced motion graphics artists employ: Creating a complex world in one 
oversized composition that is full of detailed animations, and then nesting this 
world into a final comp that moves around their world. This is much easier than 
trying to animate all of the individual component layers in a single composition.
PARENTING AND NESTING — Lesson 6
189
In our final version, we zoomed up each 
city and staggered when they came on.
D Editing Nested Effects
Let’s say you need to alter the color of 
the backing rectangles in the MyPlate 
comp and observe what this color looks 
like against the map layer in Locations 
Main. How can you see both at once? 
Open MyPlate comp, select the 
Rectangular Shape layer, and press # 
to open its Effect Controls panel. Lock 
this panel by clicking the padlock icon 
at the top left. Then bring the Locations 
Main comp forward. The Effect Controls 
panel for Rectangular Shape in MyPlate 
should still be visible. Now you can edit 
the Hue/Saturation effect already applied 
to Rectangular Shape while viewing the 
results “in context” in Locations Main.
If you lock an Effect Controls panel for a layer in a precomp, it will stay forward 
even if you display a different comp in the Comp panel. This is known as  
“Edit This, Look At That” (ETLAT); we’ll discuss it in more detail on page 198. 
Unlock the Effect Controls panel when done.

Precomposing a Group
So far, we’ve demonstrated using nested comps when you can plan ahead and 
decide what your composition hierarchy should be. As if life always worked out 
so neatly… More often, you’ll be in the middle of a design and discover that you 
would be better off if some layers already in the main composition were actually 
in a nested comp of their own. That’s where precomposing comes in.
1 Open the project file Lesson 06 > 06d-Precompose-Move.aep. In the Comps 
folder is wiredfruit*starter; open it by double-clicking. If you like, return to the 
Standard workspace by clicking its button along the right of the Tools panel.
This comp contains five layers: three that make up the title and logo, plus  
two for the background. After building it, you have the sudden brainwave that  
it would be cool to warp the title and logo as a unit. However, if you applied a 
warp effect with an adjustment layer, or nested this comp into another and then 
applied a warp, everything – including the background – would get warped. 
The solution is simple: Go back in time. Or more practically, select the three 
layers to be warped and send them back into their own nested comp. Then you can 
warp the resulting single layer in the current comp. And it’s easier than it sounds:
After you’ve created a basic design (A), 
you decide it would be better if the text 
and logo – but not the background – had 
a crazy warp effect at the start (B). Blue 
clip LAB120 courtesy Artbeats.com.
2 Select the layers you want to be in their own nested comp (above 
left). Use Layer > Pre-compose (below), and they will be replaced 
with a single layer, which is a comp that contains those three layers 
(above right). Note that if the layers are trimmed, there is a new 
option to auto-trim the precomp to the selected layers.
Lesson 6 — PARENTING AND NESTING
190
2 In the Timeline panel, click on layer 1, then S+click 
on layer 3. The first three layers will be selected. Then 
choose the menu item Layer > Pre-compose.
The Pre-compose dialog will open. When you select mul-
tiple layers, the only option available is “Move all attributes 
into the new composition.” This means a new composition 
will be created (with the same size and duration as the 
current comp), and the selected layers – including their 
current transformation, effects, and any animation – will  
be moved intact into that new comp.
Disable the Open New Composition checkbox, enter a 
name that makes sense such as “apple group”, and click 
OK. Nothing will appear to change in the Comp panel,  
but in the Timeline panel those three layers will now be 
replaced by a single layer that points to the new nested 
comp – or precomp, as we like to call it. 
A
B

3 You can treat this new precomp layer just as you would any other layer:  
transform it, animate, or apply effects to it.
Select the single nested layer apple group, and apply Effect > Distort > Warp. 
The Effect Controls panel will open. Set the Warp Style popup to Squeeze, and 
Bend to –100 to get a squished distortion. To animate the effect, press H  
and click on the stopwatch for Bend to enable keyframing. Move a second or 
two later in the comp, then set Bend to 0 to “come out of” the effect. 
And that’s the basic technique for precomposing. Precomps are still live, like 
any other nested comp. Any changes you make in the precomp will ripple up to 
the top comp where it’s nested. To open the precomp (as you did not select Open 
New Composition when precomposing), double-click the nested layer apple 
group in the main comp. You can also open the precomp from the Project panel 
(precomps are created in the same folder as the comp they originated from). 
Twirl down the Comps_finished folder and take a moment to explore some 
enhancements we put into our version:
• We removed the Drop Shadow from the three individual layers in the 
precomp apple group_finished and applied it instead to the nested layer in  
the main comp wiredfruit_finished. Now we have only one effect to tweak  
(and render), rather than three.
• In the comp wiredfruit_finished, select the Bend value for the layer apple 
group_finished and click on the Graph Editor button along the top of the 
Timeline panel. You’ll see how we played with its value graph to overshoot the 
second keyframe’s final value, adding a little bounce when it lands. Preview to 
see this, then see if you can re-create a similar overshooting in your version. 
3 After precomposing, the Warp effect 
(below) is applied to the precomp group 
without affecting the background (above).
PARENTING AND NESTING — Lesson 6
191
d tip
Anchor Point and Precomps 
After you precompose a group of layers,  
the anchor point defaults to the center  
of the resulting layer. If you want to scale  
or rotate this precomp around a different 
location, use the Anchor Point (Pan Behind) 
tool (Lesson 2) to move the anchor point.
In our finished version (below), we added  
an overshoot to Bend’s value graph to add 
a little bounce to the end of its animation.

Precomposing a Single Layer
Precomposing is a great way to group together layers. However, it also comes  
in handy for individual layers. Sometimes, you need to perform a series of  
treatments on a layer that must happen in a specific order. Precomposing allows 
you to divide up the chores across more than one comp, making it easier for you 
to determine what happens when.
1 Open the project file Lesson 06 > 06e-Precompose-Leave.aep. In the Comps 
folder is Colored Apple*starter; open it by double-clicking, then preview it. 
Select all the layers and press u to see their keyframes.
In this comp, the apple is scaling up and gently bouncing around (thanks  
to Animation Presets > Presets > Behaviors > Wigglerama). The gray color in the 
apple is a little boring though, so the idea struck us to use the apple as an alpha 
matte (Lesson 4) and fill it with a colorful movie.
The problem with this brilliant idea is trying to match the fill layer to the 
apple’s animation. We would need to also scale up the fill, and possibly wobble  
it to match. Even if we could do that, we would have another problem with the 
Drop Shadow effect needing to render after the track matte has been composited.
What you really want is for the track matte effect to be composited in a separate 
precomp. This precomp would be used as a source in the current comp, where  
its existing attributes – effects and keyframes – would continue to be applied. 
Pre-compose to the rescue:
2 Select layer 1 (Apple_loop.mov), and choose Layer > Pre-compose. In the  
Pre-compose dialog, choose the option Leave All Attributes. This will move just 
the underlying source layer back into a new comp and keep all of the transforms 
and effects in the current comp. Give your new precomp a clear name such as 
“apple+matte”, enable Open New Composition (since you want to work in it), 
and click OK. The precomp will open in the Comp and Timeline panels.
Lesson 6 — PARENTING AND NESTING
192
2 Select the Apple_loop.mov layer (above) and precompose using the 
Leave All Attributes and Open New Composition options (right). 
The goal in this exercise is to take this 
near-finished composition and add a 
track matte to the apple that animates 
along with it without having to re-create 
any of the existing keyframes.

Open the Composition Settings for apple+matte, and note that the precomp 
is the same width, height, frame rate, and duration as the Apple_loop.mov 
layer’s source. Click OK when done. Also note that there are no effects applied  
to the apple movie, and the Transform properties are set to their default values.
3 Bring the Project panel forward and twirl down the Sources folder. Select 
the BlueSpiral.mov footage and drag it into the apple+matte comp below the 
Apple_loop.mov layer.
4 This colorful new layer is considerably larger than the comp. There’s nothing 
wrong with leaving it as is, but to create a more intricate pattern for the fill, let’s 
shrink it down to just fit this precomp. With BlueSpiral.mov selected, use the 
menu item Layer > Transform > Fit to Comp.
PARENTING AND NESTING — Lesson 6
193
2 continued After you precompose, the result is a new precomp (above left) the same size, 
duration, and frame rate as the apple movie layer (above right). 
5 Set the background to use the apple 
above as an Alpha matte (left), resulting 
in the apple’s wireframe being filled with 
the Light Illusions movie (above).
5 It’s time to fill the apple’s alpha channel with this colorful movie. Press $ 
to reveal the Modes column, then set the TrkMat popup for BlueSpiral.mov to 
Alpha. Rather than gray, the apple will be filled with the background image. 
6 Click on the tab for Red Apple*starter and preview: The colorful apple you 
created in the precomp appears in this main comp, with its zoom, fade, and 
wobble intact. Mission accomplished; save your project.
As usual, our version of this exercise is in the Project panel’s Comps_Finished 
folder. It includes a few extra touches: We applied Effect > Color Correction > 
Hue/Saturation to the apple, rotated its Hue 50° to make the apple more red 
than pink, and enabled motion blur for our animating layers.
6 Our final version includes a hue shift.
3–4 In the precomp, add a background 
movie behind the apple, and use  
Transform > Fit to Comp to shrink it down.  
Clip LIL103 courtesy Artbeats.com. 

Render Order
Sometimes, After Effects will appear to have a mind of its own: You try to treat 
an image a certain way, but you get an unexpected result. This occurs because 
After Effects has a very particular order in which it performs operations, which 
you need to know and understand. Gaining this understanding is the purpose 
behind the next few exercises in this lesson.
The Order Things Render
Frustration often precedes enlightenment. To help make it clear what’s really 
going on, let’s first work through an example in frustration:
1 Open the project file Lesson 06 > 06f-Render Order.aep. The Comps folder 
should be twirled down; focus first on the nested folder Render Example 1. 
Inside it is the comp Basic Order; double-click it to open it. It contains a single 
layer: Digidelic.mov.
2 Select Digidelic.mov and apply Effect > Distort > Wave Warp. The default  
settings are fine; preview, and notice that this effect even self-animates.
3 With Digidelic.mov still selected, choose the Rectangle mask tool. Click in 
the center of the Comp panel and hold C(L) as you drag outward to create 
a centered mask. Rather than cutting a clean rectangular mask, the mask’s edges 
are warped as well!
From the result, you can deduce that the Wave Warp (and for that matter,  
any effect you apply) is being rendered after the mask – even though you applied 
the effect before creating the mask. 
4 To see how Transform factors into the mix, press r to reveal Rotation and 
scrub its value. The movie, mask, and wavy pattern are all affected. This proves 
that transformations are calculated after masks and effects have already been  
calculated. If this is the look you wanted, fine. But perhaps you wanted a 
straight-edged mask and to have the image wave inside. Or you might want to 
rotate the underlying image and not have the mask rotate. Who will win this 
war of wills: the artist or the software? 
Lesson 6 — PARENTING AND NESTING
194
d insider knowledge
The Basic Render Order
When you twirl down a layer’s properties 
in the Timeline panel, After Effects 
informs you of its internal rendering 
order: Masks, followed by Effects, followed 
by Transform, followed by Layer Styles.
2–4 Take the original movie (A) and apply 
the Wave Warp effect (B). Then draw a 
rectangular mask: The mask gets waved (C) 
even though you applied it “after” the warp 
effect! Edit the layer’s Rotation value, and 
both the mask and effect are rotated (D). 
Clip DG101 courtesy Artbeats.com.
A
B
C
D

First, it is important to grasp that the order in which you apply transforma-
tions, masks, and effects doesn’t matter – After Effects will calculate them in the 
same, set order of Masks, Effects, and Transform. And there is very little you can 
do inside one composition to change this basic rendering order – for example, 
you can’t drag Effects before Masks, or move Masks after Transform. 
Two Comps Are Better Than One
There are hundreds of similar render order issues you might encounter, and 
there’s almost always more than one way to solve them. However, the simplest 
solution is often to use two comps. 
Take our Basic Order comp as an example. If you were to spread the Digidelic 
layer across two comps, you could then pick and choose the attributes that are 
rendered in the first comp and those that are rendered in the second. 
5 In the Project panel, drag the Basic Order comp down 
to the Create New Composition button at the bottom of 
this panel. This will nest Basic Order into a second comp 
called Basic Order 2. This new comp will open automati-
cally. The chain now goes as follows: The Digidelic.mov 
source is in Basic Order, and Basic Order is nested in Basic Order 2  
(you can see it in the timeline of the comp that just opened).
6 The tabs for both comps should be visible. Remember that the Basic Order 2 
comp renders second, so if you want the mask to render after Wave Warp and 
Rotation, you need to move the mask into the second comp:
• Click on the Basic Order tab in the Timeline panel to bring this comp 
forward, and if necessary twirl down Masks (the shortcut is m). Select Mask 1 
and Edit > Cut. The mask will be removed.
• Bring the Basic Order 2 comp forward, select the nested layer, and Edit > 
Paste. The mask will be applied, but will have straight edges because the effects 
and transformations rendered in the first comp and are not affecting it. 
PARENTING AND NESTING — Lesson 6
195
5 Drag Basic Order to the Project panel’s 
Create New Composition button (top), and 
Basic Order will be nested as a layer in the 
new comp Basic Order 2 (above).
A
First comp
B
C
Second comp
6 Select the first comp Basic Order (A) and cut the mask from Digidelic.mov (B). Then select the second comp Basic Order 2 
and paste the mask onto the nested layer (C). Now the source will be rotated and waved inside a clean rectangular mask.
d tip
Transform Cheat
The Effect > Distort > Transform effect  
has all of the features of the Transformation 
section and more. Because you can drag  
the Transform effect before other effects, 
you can use it to manipulate the render 
order or even have two sets of, say, Position 
or Rotation keyframes on one layer. 

Using Precomposing to Reorder
In our first example, you fixed the visual problem with the wavy mask by 
nesting the comp into a second comp, then moving the mask. If the comp 
you’re working in has only one layer, that method works fine.
In the real world, you’ll likely come across a rendering order problem in the 
middle of a project, when there are already multiple layers in the comp. If you 
were to nest this complex comp, you would be grouping all of its layers into the 
second comp – perhaps not what you had in mind. You need a scalpel not a 
hatchet, as it were – and this is where precomposing becomes your friend.
Lesson 6 — PARENTING AND NESTING
196
d factoid
Reordering Effects
Although you can’t make effects render 
before masks or after transformations,  
you can decide the order multiple effects 
are rendered by reordering them in the  
Effect Controls or Timeline panels.
The Pre-compose dialog offers two options, and the results differ 
depending on which one you choose. The term attributes refers 
to masks, effects, transformations, blending modes, in and out 
points, and so on. 
Leave All Attributes 
• This option is available for single layers only. 
• After you precompose, the precomp will have one layer in it, 
and the size and duration of the precomp will be the same as the 
original layer.
• Any attributes applied to the layer before you precompose  
will remain in the original comp.
• The precomp will have a fresh render order, and any attributes 
applied to the layer in the new precomp will render before the 
attributes in the original comp. 
Move All Attributes
• This option is available for single layers and multiple layers. 
• The precomp created will be the same size as the original 
comp. There is an option to trim or keep the original duration. 
• Any attributes applied to the layer(s) before precomposing 
will be moved to the precomp. 
• The nested layer in the original comp will have a fresh render 
order, and any attributes applied to this layer will render after  
the attributes in the precomp. 
Open New Composition
Selecting the Open New Composition option has no effect other 
than if it is selected, the precomp will come forward after you 
click OK so you can more easily edit it. If it’s not selected, the 
current comp will remain forward.
D Precompose Options Compared
Nice design – too bad the circular logo 
isn’t actually a circle. 
1 Still in 06f-Render Order.aep, click on the Comp Viewer menu 
(along the top of the Comp panel) and select Close All. Bring the Project 
panel forward, and open Comps > Render Example 2 > Circle. 
This comp has three layers: Digidelic.mov with a circular mask and 
effects applied, a title, and a background. The client likes the idea, but 
insists that the result be a clean circle, not a wavy circle.
2 Select layer 1. If the mask and effects aren’t visible in the Timeline 
panel, press m to reveal masks, then Se to reveal the effects.  
Now let’s sit for a second and think this through.

• Currently, Mask 1 renders first, followed by all the effects. But the Warp effect 
needs to be applied before the mask so that the mask doesn’t get warped. 
• The Bevel Alpha and Drop Shadow effects need to be applied after the mask  
is calculated (if beforehand, they will apply to the rectangular movie). 
• The three color correction effects treat the entire layer, so we don’t need to 
worry about whether they are applied before or after the mask.
So – how to accomplish this? If you precompose this layer, you will spread  
the layer across two comps and can then pick and choose which attributes 
should render in the first comp (the new precomp) and which should render  
in the second comp (the current main comp): 
3 Select layer 1, Digidelic.mov, then Layer > Pre-compose. Select the Leave All 
Attributes option (you want the attributes to remain in the main comp for now), 
and enable Open New Composition. Name your new precomp “Digi_precomp” 
and click OK. The precomp will be forward, displaying the source movie in its 
original form. 
4 Click on the tab for Circle comp in the Timeline panel to bring the main comp 
forward again. The movie in layer 1 has now been replaced with the output of 
the Digi_precomp. (Note that after you precompose, the layer always twirls up.)
• Select layer 1, press m, then Se again. Because you precomposed with 
the Leave All Attributes option, the mask and effects remained in the Circle 
comp. Let’s move the Warp effect back to the precomp, where it will render first:
• Select just the Warp effect and Edit > Cut. The distortion will be removed. 
• Click the Digi_precomp tab to bring the 
precomp forward. Select Digidelic.mov and 
Edit > Paste. The image should twist. Press 
e to twirl down effects and confirm that the 
Warp effect is now in this comp.
• Click the Circle tab again and look at the 
Comp viewer: The warped movie is now cut 
out by the mask as a perfect circle.
The precomp (which renders first) is used 
only to distort the movie; the original comp 
(which renders second) applies all other 
effects and the mask. 
Quick Quizzler: If you were to rotate this layer over time, would it matter 
which composition you applied the Rotation keyframes in? (Think…what would 
the consequences be to the light direction in the Bevel Alpha and Drop Shadow 
effects? Would using layer styles instead of effects allow for a different result?)
PARENTING AND NESTING — Lesson 6
197
4 continued  Back in the main comp,  
the mask will be applied to the precomp, 
followed by the other effects (above left), 
giving us the desired result (above).
4 Cut the Warp effect from the main comp 
and paste it into the precomp (left), causing 
the movie to become warped (above). 
2 The mask currently renders before all of 
the effects. What we need is for the mask  
to render after the Warp, but before the 
Bevel Alpha and Drop Shadow.

2 To make sure a panel doesn’t keep 
disappearing, enable its Toggle Viewer 
Lock switch. 
3 With the Composition panel locked, 
you can apply and edit an effect to the 
single layer in Wheel­1/rotates and see 
the results in the locked panel when 
you release the mouse. Background clip 
NAB116 courtesy Artbeats.com.
Lesson 6 — PARENTING AND NESTING
198
Edit This, Look At That
An issue when nesting compositions is the desire to edit a parameter in a 
precomp and see the results in a final comp. Fortunately, there’s a trick in  
After Effects known as “edit this, look at that” (ETLAT for short) that makes  
this much easier. We’ll work through a couple of variations here.
Locking the Final Comp
1 Open the project file Lesson 06 > 06f-ETLAT.aep. Three compositions should 
already be open; if not, open the trio inside the Comps folder. 
2 We want to see the results in the comp Wheel-3/final, so click its tab in the 
Timeline panel to bring that comp forward. To ensure the viewer for this comp 
stays forward, click on the lock icon in the upper left corner of the Composition 
panel. If you are using After Effects CC 2015 or later, start a preview.
3 Click the tab in the Timeline panel 
for the nested comp Wheel-1/rotates. 
Its timeline will come forward, but the 
Comp viewer for Wheel-3/final will still 
be displayed.
Select bikewheel.tif. This one layer is 
replicated numerous times in the comps 
downstream. Apply Effect > Distort > 
Twirl, and change the Angle value in 
the Effect Controls panel. If you started 
a preview for Wheel-3/final, the Comp 
viewer will show the result of your edits 
in their final context. (If you did not 
start a preview, or are using After Effects 
CC 2014, you will see the results when 
you release the mouse.) Tweak the Angle 
and Twirl Radius values to taste.
4 Click on the tab for Wheel-2/six up. In the Effects & Presets panel, twirl 
open * Animation Presets > Presets > Image – Utilities, and drag the preset Flip 
onto one of the layers in the precomp’s Timeline panel (see figure next page). 
The Composition panel will continue to display the result in Wheel-3/final. 
5 To return to normal behavior, toggle the lock icon in the Comp panel to 
unlock Wheel-3/final. The comp you were working in – Wheel-2/six up – will 
now be displayed in the Comp viewer, and the preview will stop. Switching 
comps in the Timeline panel will now update the Comp panel to match.

4 You can select the timeline for a different precomp and work on its layers while the 
locked final comp will continue to be displayed. (Be sure to use the tabs in the Timeline 
panel to select a comp, not the comp navigators.)
3 The Effect Controls panel may also be locked to keep a particular layer’s effect visible.
PARENTING AND NESTING — Lesson 6
199
Note that we first opened a series of 
nested comps, locked the master comp, 
and then used the tabs along the top of 
the Timeline panel to bring forward the 
timeline we wished to edit. If you use 
one of the comp navigators, a second 
unlocked Comp panel will open; this 
can quickly become crowded on a 
smaller monitor. 
Locking the Effect Controls
You might remember that effects are 
tied to a specific layer, and the Effect 
Controls panel switches to display the 
effects for the selected layer. This can 
be inconvenient when you’re switching 
between multiple comps and layers. 
Fortunately, a variation of ETLAT  
provides a solution:
1 Bring the comp Wheel-1/rotates 
forward and select layer 1. The Effect 
Controls panel should be visible (if not, 
press #) with the Twirl effect applied.
2 To see the effect in context, bring 
the comp Wheel-3/final forward again. 
Argh – the Effect Controls panel no 
longer shows the Twirl effect!
3 Return to Wheel-1/rotates. In the 
Effect Controls panel for layer 1, toggle 
on the lock icon (in the top left corner 
of its tab).
4 Now when you bring Wheel-3/
final forward, the Twirl effect controls 
remain visible for editing. Select other 
layers in Wheel-3/final for editing;  
you still have access to Twirl back in 
the nested precomp. Toggle the lock 
switch again to unlock the Effect 
Controls panel when you’re done.

Continuous Rasterization
In the last few exercises, we put a lot of emphasis on the order in which After 
Effects processes layers: Masks are calculated first, followed by Effects, followed 
by Transforms such as Rotation, and then Layer Styles. 
However, there are exceptions to every rule. The biggest exception is layers 
that are continuously rasterized: For these special layers, the pixels you see are cal-
culated on the fly by After Effects, rather than ahead of time when the footage 
item was created. Text and Shape layers fall into this category automatically; so 
do Illustrator, PDF, and SWF files, as well as Solids when an optional switch is set. 
If a layer is being continuously rasterized, the render order 
changes: Transforms are calculated first instead, followed 
by Masks and Effects. Unfortunately, these sections are not 
reordered in the Timeline panel to provide a clue as to what’s 
going on underneath the hood. To tell if a layer is being  
continuously rasterized, look for the sunburst icon under the 
Timeline panel’s Switches column (shown at left). This switch 
is always on for text and shape layers. It is permanently dis-
abled for movies and most other layers, as their pixels have 
already been calculated. For Illustrator and PDF layers as well 
as solids, you will see a hollow box, which means it defaults to off (layer renders 
normally) but can be switched on (layer behaves like text and shape layers). The 
status of this switch can have a large impact on how the final image appears:
1 Open project 06h-Rasterization.aep, then double-click Comps > 
Continuous Rasterization > Rasterization to open it.
2 The first layer in this comp was created in Adobe Illustrator. If it is twirled up, 
select it and press u to reveal its Scale and Rotation transform keyframes,  
followed by Se to reveal its effects. Its Continuously Rasterize switch 
defaults to off, which means After Effects will treat it as a normal pixel-based 
layer such as a photo or a movie. 
Scrub through the timeline and pay attention to the direction of the shadow: 
Unfortunately, it rotates with the text. This is because effects are normally  
calculated before transforms such as 
rotation. On the other hand, look  
at the size of the shadow and the  
beveled edges relative to the text:  
As the text scales up, so does the 
shadow and bevel, which is what you 
would expect. In this case, transforms 
occurring after effects is a good thing. 
Lesson 6 — PARENTING AND NESTING
200
2 With continuous rasterization 
disabled for the Illustrator layer, effects 
are calculated before transforms, so the 
bevel and shadow rotate.
The sunburst icon indicates if a layer’s 
Continuously Rasterize switch has been 
enabled. It defaults to off for Illustrator files 
(layer 1); it is unavailable for pixel-based 
layers such as movies (layer 2).

PARENTING AND NESTING — Lesson 6
201
4 With continuous 
rasterization enabled 
(above), the rotation and 
scale are calculated before 
the bevel and shadow (left).
3 Press N and look at the quality of the text: Here it is being scaled 200%, 
where it looks quite fuzzy and aliased as After Effects “blows up” its pixels.
4 Enable the Continuously Rasterize switch for Illustrator Vectors.ai. After 
Effects will now treat it as a vector-based layer, such as a text or shape layer. 
It will use the Transform values to scale, rotate, and position the vectors, 
convert the result to pixels, and then apply any masks or effects.
In this case, at time 04:29 the size of the bevel and drop 
shadow will appear smaller, as they are being applied at “100%” 
size rather than 200% scale (as the scaling has already been  
calculated). The layer will also appear to be much sharper –  
continuously rasterized layers look sharp at all levels of scale. 
Scrub through the timeline, and you will also observe that 
the drop shadow continues to fall in the correct direction even 
as the text rotates, which is a useful result of effects happening 
after transforms. On the other hand, as this text scales up, the 
shadow distance and bevel amount stay the same size regardless 
of the size of the text, with quite unrealistic results – a downside 
of this rewired rendering order. 
You can solve some (but not necessarily all) of these short-
comings using nested compositions to rewire the rendering 
order, or by using the Distort > Transform effect, which allows 
you to insert transformations at any point in the Effects stage 
of the render order. The Comps_Finished > Rasterization_finished folder 
contains two versions of the above composition, employing the Transform 
effect to perform select transformations. (Remember that when a layer is 
continuously rasterized, all regular transformations are rendered before 
effects, despite what the order in the timeline might suggest!)
Just to make things more confusing, the Continuously Rasterize switch  
is also used for nested compositions. In this case, it changes function and 
becomes the Collapse Transformations switch – which we’ll discuss next.
In Comps_Finished > Rasterization_finished 
> Rasterization­Pixel Fix, the Transform effect 
rotates the layer before the shadow and bevel 
are calculated, so the direction of these effects 
remains stationary. Then the normal Transform 
> Scale parameter resizes the entire effected 
layer. Unfortunately, the layer still goes soft as it 
is scaled beyond 100%; to really fix this, create 
a larger source image either in Illustrator or in a 
precomp (with continuous rasterization enabled).

Collapsing Transformations
There is one other render order exception you should be aware of: the ability  
to “collapse” the transformations of layers in a nested composition so they are  
calculated together with any additional transformations applied to the nested 
precomp layer. This can result in a considerable increase in image quality, but  
it comes with a few caveats.
1 Still in the 06h-Rasterization project, close any previous comps and open 
Comps > Collapse Transformations > Collapse*starter. It contains a watch  
face with a drop shadow, composited on top of a background layer using a 
blending mode.
2 Select watch_face.tif and press s to reveal its Scale. Set this value to 10%.
3 Right-click on watch_face.tif and select Pre-compose. Enable the Move All 
Attributes option, which means the Scale value, effect, and mode will all be 
moved to the precomp. Disable Open New Composition, give it a good name 
such as “watch face precomp” and click OK.
4 Your new nested precomp layer should be selected in your original comp. 
Press s to reveal Scale and increase this value to 1000%. Its image quality will 
look very poor, as you are taking what is now a small image and blowing up its 
pixels. Also notice that the watch face itself is opaque, as the contribution of the 
blending mode has been lost.
This default render order 
is illustrated in Figure A 
(right). The precomp’s masks, 
effects, and transforms – 
including the Scale value of 
10% – are being calculated 
and then flattened into a 
new source image. This pre-
scaled image is then passed 
into Collapse*starter, where 
it is scaled again – with poor 
results.
5 Make sure the Switches column is visible (press $ if it isn’t) and enable 
the Collapse Transformations switch for your nested precomp – it’s in exactly 
the same place as the continuously rasterize switch was for the previous exer-
cise. Now the watch face will be sharp again, and its mode will be employed.
Your new render order is shown in Figure B. When you enable the Collapse 
Transformations switch for a precomp, After Effects looks at the Transform 
4 A layer that is scaled down in a precomp 
and then scaled back up in a later comp can 
look ugly, as scaled-down pixels are being 
blow up.
Lesson 6 — PARENTING AND NESTING
202
d factoid
Beware of Flattening
To apply a mask or an effect to a collapsed 
nested comp, After Effects first flattens the 
layer(s) internally to a simple RGBA image. 
This is why you lose some of the features  
of collapse transformations. 
5 Enabling the Collapse Transformations 
switch for this precomp (below) can restore 
its original quality, as well as other settings 
such as blending modes applied in the 
precomp (above).
Active Attributes
Inactive Attributes
SOURCE
Comp2
Comp1
Composite    All Layers
FLATTEN
FLATTEN
Composite    All Layers
Masks
Effects
Transform
Masks
Effects
Transform
OFF
Figure A

The moral of this story: Don’t just blindly enable Collapse Transformations 
for nested comps; although it may indeed improve image quality by only  
transforming and antialiasing the layer(s) once, it might also have other  
unintended consequences. For example, if the precomp includes a 3D 
camera and/or lights, you’ll see the effect of these camera and lights in 
the final image when you nest it. However, if you collapse the nested 
comp layer, the layers will be rendered by the camera and lights in the 
second comp (if there is no camera, then the default camera is used). 
values for the layer(s) in the precomp and factors them together  
with the Transform values for the nested layer in the current comp. 
These transformations are then applied once at the precomp level, 
after masks and effects. Since 10% times 1000% = 100%, the image 
appears at its  original resolution.
In addition, the layers in the precomp behave as if they resided 
in the main comp. That means the settings under Modes (including 
Stencil or Silhouette) will cause a precomped layer to interact with 
other layers in the main comp. The comp boundaries of the precomp 
are also ignored, so if you were counting on the size of the precomp 
to crop its layers, you will be surprised to see this previously cropped 
material reappear in the main comp. Strange things can also happen 
with collapsed Opacity values, as each layer will render with their 
own individual opacity values.
6 Interactions become more complex if you apply masks and effects to the 
precomped layer. Press $ to reveal the Modes column in your main comp. 
Its options will be disabled for your precomp layer. Then apply Effect > Blur & 
Sharpen > Box Blur to your precomp layer: The Overlay mode applied 
in the precomp will be ignored, and the Mode popup in the main 
comp reappears. This modified render order is shown in Figure C. 
PARENTING AND NESTING — Lesson 6
203
6 Normally, the Modes popup for a 
collapsed nested layer is disabled (top), 
and the mode applied to each layer in 
a collapsed precomp is honored. But 
when you apply an effect to the collapsed 
precomp layer, the modes set in the 
precomp are ignored (above) and now you 
can only choose a single mode for the entire 
collapsed precomp (below).
Active Attributes
Inactive Attributes
SOURCE
Comp2
Comp1
Composite    All Layers
FLATTEN
FLATTEN
Composite    Layers Individually
Masks
Effects
Transform
Masks
Effects
Transform
ON
Figure B
Active Attributes
Inactive Attributes
SOURCE
Comp2
Comp1
Composite All Layers
Composite    All Layers
FLATTEN
FLATTEN
FLATTEN
Masks
Effects
Transform
Masks
Effects
Transform
ON
Figure C

Compound Effects
Another situation that requires you to pay attention to the internal render order 
is when you apply a compound effect. These are effects that refer to the color or 
alpha channel values of a second layer to decide how to process the layer they 
are applied to. Popular examples of compound effects include Compound Blur 
and Displacement Map, although any effect with a Layer popup follows the 
same rules. The “gotcha” with compound effects is that they look at the source 
of that second layer before Mask, Effects, and Transforms have been applied.
1 Open project Lesson 06 > 06i-Compound Effects.aep. In the Project panel, 
open the Comps folder, then double-click the comp Compound Effects*starter 
to open it. It contains a piece of background footage, plus an animated pulley 
that your boss thinks would make a great embossed bug for the video.
2 Select pulley.tif, press s to reveal its Scale, and reduce it to 25% of its  
original size. Press F (the apostrophe key) to toggle on the Title/Action Safe 
areas and position the pulley in the lower right corner of the outer Action Safe 
area. Press F again to hide the safe areas overlay.
3 Select Digidelic.mov and apply Effect > Stylize > Texturize. The Effect 
Controls panel will open; change the Texture Layer popup to pulley.tif. 
Initially, you will see a grid of embossed pulleys. Try the different Texture 
Placement options; none give the desired result. The problem is that the effect 
has no idea that the Texture Layer has been scaled and moved inside this comp 
as it’s looking only at layer 1 at its source. The solution is to perform those trans-
formations in a precomp. Set Texture Placement back to Center Texture; this is 
the best option for the comp chain you’re about to build.
4 Right-click on pulley.tif and select Pre-compose. Be sure to choose the Move 
All Attributes option; this will create a precomp the same size as the current comp 
with the pulley in its current position. Disable Open New Composition, name it 
“bug precomp” and click OK. The Texturize effect will update the Texture Layer 
to point to the precomp (right). Turn 
off the Video switch for bug precomp 
so it doesn’t obscure the background 
layer. Ta-da! The embossed bug now 
appears just as you intended. (Step 4  
is in Comps_Finished > Compound 
Effects_bug final.)
5 Note that this worked only because the footage you applied the compound 
effect to was the exact same size as the precomp you created. If the background 
layer was a different size, you could precompose it into a comp the same size 
Lesson 6 — PARENTING AND NESTING
204
3 Compound effects usually have options 
on how to deal with size mismatches 
between the references and underlying layer 
(the Tile Texture option is shown below).  
The best solution is to make sure there is  
no mismatch by using a precomp that is  
the same size as the layer being texturized.
1 Your goal is to convert the large pulley 
object (above) into a discrete embossed bug 
in the lower right corner (below).

as your main comp (making sure you applied the compound 
effect to its precomp layer in the final comp), or take advan-
tage of Adjustment Layers as we have in Comps_Finished > 
Compound Effects_final. Applying compound effects to  
an adjustment layer that is the same size as the comp ensures 
it will be aligned properly, regardless of what you’ve done 
with the layers underneath. (Under the hood, adjustment 
layers apply their effects to a copy of the composite of all 
layers below, cropped to the comp size.) This also makes it 
easy to swap out the footage underneath the bug, or even 
build an edit underneath the adjustment layer.
We’ll leave you with a troubleshooting tip: If you apply a 
compound effect to Image A and tell it to use Image B, but 
the result is un expected, open the Layer panel for Image B 
and set the View popup to None – this is the source that the 
compound effect is using and it may provide some clues.
Quizzler
If you learn how to manipulate the render order, you won’t 
be tempted to  compromise the design or change your ideas. 
So here are a couple of brainteasers to practice your newfound knowledge  
of the rendering order. Both may be found in the project 06q-Quizzler.aep.
Alien Puzzle
Look inside the Quiz 1 folder. There are two comps in it: Alien-1 consists of two 
layers and is nested into Alien-2 where it is masked – not much different from 
the chain of comps you explored earlier in the Render Order 
section, except that the first comp has two layers instead of one. 
Your challenge is to apply a distortion to the layers in Alien 
1 using Effect > Distort > Warp without affecting the shape of 
the mask in Alien 2. You can apply only one instance of the 
Warp effect, and you cannot create additional precomps. There 
are two solutions, using features covered in earlier lessons. 
Picture­in­Picture Effect
Now look inside the Quiz 2 folder. Double-click the Quiz 2.mov and play the 
movie in the Footage panel. Focus on the Muybridge image panning inside a 
small “picture-in-picture” shape, with blur and drop shadow effects applied. 
Then open the Quiz 2*starter comp, which just has the background layer.  
Create the same result; you’ll find the Muybridge sequence in the Sources  
folder. There are no restrictions, provided the result is essentially the same. 
PARENTING AND NESTING — Lesson 6
205
In the first quiz, your goal is to warp the inset 
movie (top) without disturbing the square 
box it resides in (above). Give it your best 
shot, then look in our Quizzler Solutions > 
Quiz 1 folder for the answers. Background 
clip DMD109 courtesy Artbeats.com.
5 By applying a compound effect to a 
comp-sized adjustment layer and making sure 
the reference layer is the same size, you can 
do what you want with the layers underneath 
without worrying about alignment.

I
n this lesson, you will become acquainted with two 
admittedly mind-stretching areas of After Effects. 
First we will cover expressions: Little bits of code 
that can help save you large amounts of time while 
animating, often taking the place of keyframes. 
After you master those, we will show you how to 
make time literally stand still – as well as speed up, 
slow down, and go by more smoothly.
Expressions 101
The geek explanation of expressions is that it’s a JavaScript-
based programming language that allows you to manipulate 
time-based streams in After Effects. The artist explanation is 
that it’s an easy way to make any keyframeable parameter 
react to what another parameter is doing – such as having 
two layers rotate or scale together without having to copy 
and paste keyframes between them. Expressions are also 
particularly good at math, including randomizing values 
and automatically creating motion.
Although expressions can be very deep and powerful,  
in reality the majority of expressions are very simple and 
therefore easy to create. Indeed, After Effects does most of 
the work for you: In many cases, all you have to do is lit-
erally point one parameter to another using the pick whip 
tool. Beyond that, the most common task you will need 
to do is add little bits of math such as “times 2” or “minus 
180.” We will also show you three simple functions (basic 
pieces of code) that will come in handy time and again.  
Not only will expressions save you a lot of time and tedium, 
they often inspire new animation ideas – something both 
geeks and artists can get enthused about.
Lesson 7
206
Expressions and Time Games
Using expressions and playing with time.
 d In This Lesson
 208 
using the pick whip to create expressions
 209 
altering expressions
 210 
stabilizing shadows
 212 
matching value ranges (the linear expression)
 214 
looping keyframes
 215 
expression tips
 216 
the wiggle expression
 217 
expression controls
 217 
keyframing the wiggle expression
 218 
creating a master controller
 219 
converting sound to keyframes
 220 
frame blending 
 221 
Pixel Motion
 222 
Pixel Motion Blur
 223 
stop-motion tricks; Preserve Frame Rate
 224 
Preserve Frame Rate with effects
 225 
adding handle with freeze frames
 226 
time remapping (varispeeding)
  228 
using the graph editor to smooth time
 d Getting Started
Make sure you have downloaded the file archive for  
Lesson 7 (as discussed in How to Use This Book) and 
decompressed it. It contains the project file and sources  
you need to execute this lesson. 

The Problem
1 Open this lesson’s project file: Lesson_07.aep. In the Project panel, the 
Comps folder should be twirled open (if not, click on its twirly arrow). In this 
folder, locate and double-click 01-Pick Whip*starter to open it.
Start a preview. The blue pulley on the left scales and spins; the red pulley 
on the right just sits there. The client says he wants them both to do the same 
thing. That’s easy enough to do the old- fashioned way. In After Effects CC 2015 
and later, you can do the following with the preview either playing or stopped:
2 The Scale and Rotation keyframes for Blue Pulley should be visible in the 
Timeline panel; if they aren’t, select this layer and type u to reveal its animat-
ing properties.
• Click on the word Scale for Blue Pulley; all of the Scale keyframes will be 
selected. Hold down S and click on Rotation: Its keyframes will be selected as 
well. Then type Cc on Mac (Lc on Windows) to copy the selected keyframes.
EXPRESSIONS AND TIME GAMES — Lesson 7
207
2 Select the keyframes for Blue Pulley, 
copy, select Red Pulley, and paste. Their 
animations will be identical – for now…
• Press H to make sure the current time indicator is at 00:00 before pasting, 
as pasted keyframes always start at the current time. Select Red Pulley and type 
Cv (Lv) to paste. Press u to reveal its new keyframes.
• Preview again (if it’s not still playing): both pulleys scale and rotate the same.
3 Now that the client sees both pulleys together, he decides he wants the rota-
tion to finish before the pulleys scale back down. Okay – move the last Rotation 
keyframe for both layers back to 04:15.
4 Preview again. Now the client thinks the pulleys are spinning too fast, so edit 
the last Rotation keyframe for both pulleys to be –1 rotation, not –2.
You can quickly see how tedious client changes can become, just with two 
layers. Now imagine if you had 10 or 100 layers! This is a perfect example of how 
expressions could make your life easier.
Your goal is to make these two pulleys 
perform the same animation. You can copy, 
paste, and hand-edit keyframes…or let 
expressions do a lot of the work for you.

The Pick Whip
The main tool you will use to create expressions is the pick whip. This tool 
makes it easy to link one parameter to another.
5 Turn off the stopwatch for Red Pulley’s Scale and Rotation to delete their 
keyframes. Press @ to deselect these parameters.
• Hold down the O (A) key, and click on the stopwatch for Red Pulley’s 
Scale. This enables expressions for the associated property. Scale will twirl  
down, revealing a line that says Expression: Scale, with a set of new icons  
next to it. Red Pulley’s Scale value will change from blue to red, indicating  
it is now controlled by an expression. You will also see some text appear: 
transform.scale. This says Red Pulley’s Scale is currently “expressed”  
to its own Transform property, Scale.
• Click on the spiral icon next to Expression: Scale – this is the pick whip tool. 
Drag it up to the word Scale for Blue Pulley; this word will highlight when 
you’re close. A line will connect the two properties as you drag. 
Release the mouse, and the text for Red Pulley’s scale will change to say 
thisComp.layer(“Blue Pulley”).transform.scale. Expression 
code can look like an alien language, but it’s not hard to read: In this comp is  
a layer called Blue Pulley; use its Transform property Scale.
• To accept this new expression, press E on the numeric keypad (not on  
the regular keyboard) or click elsewhere in the panel.
Preview: Red Pulley will now have the exact same scaling as Blue  
Pulley – but not its rotation. Expressions are applied to individual properties, 
Lesson 7 — EXPRESSIONS AND TIME GAMES
208
5 O+click (A+click) on an animation stopwatch to enable expressions. Click on the spiral icon and drag it to the parameter you want 
to copy (above). Release the mouse and press E; After Effects will write the expression and the value will be copied (below).
d factoid
Parenting versus Expressions
Parenting (Lesson 6) allows all 
transformations applied to the parent 
layer to be reflected in the child layers. 
The parent’s anchor point (Lesson 2) is 
used to rotate and scale the children as 
a group. With expressions, you need to 
create an expression for each property 
you want transferred, and the “follower” 
always scales and rotates around its 
own local anchor point.

not entire layers. If you want Red Pulley’s Rotation to follow Blue Pulley, you 
will need to create an expression for that property as well:
6 Just as you did for Scale, O+click (A+click) on the stopwatch for Red 
Pulley’s Rotation, and it will twirl down to reveal its expression. Drag its pick 
whip to Blue Pulley’s Rotation property. When it highlights, release the mouse 
and press E. Preview again; both pulleys will now scale and rotate together.
7 Edit the Scale and Rotation keyframes for Blue Pulley, then preview: Red 
Pulley will faithfully follow along. No matter how many changes you make to 
their values, or whether you move the keyframes earlier or later in time, Red 
Pulley will follow its leader. Compared with copying and pasting, there will be  
a lot less work when the client wants additional changes.
Simple Math
We know that many may consider the phrase “simple math” to be an oxymoron, 
but adding or dividing a number here and there will greatly multiply (ahem) 
what you can do with expressions. 
Continue with the composition you were working with in the previous step  
or open Comps > 02-Simple Math*starter.
8 Effects (such as Drop Shadow) are 
calculated before transforms (such as 
Rotation), resulting in the shadow spinning 
with the pulley.
EXPRESSIONS AND TIME GAMES — Lesson 7
209
8 Move the current time indicator to 02:00. Select Blue Pulley, and apply  
Effect > Perspective > Drop Shadow. Increase Drop Shadow’s Distance parameter 
to make it more obvious.
Preview, and you will notice that the shadow rotates with the pulley. To 
cancel out the layer’s rotation, you need to animate the shadow’s Direction to 
spin the opposite way. Expressions to the rescue:
9 Make sure that Blue Pulley’s Rotation property is exposed in the Timeline 
panel (press r if it isn’t) and that you have some spare room in this panel to 
see more lines of properties. 
• In the Effect Controls panel, O+click (A+click) on the stopwatch for  
Drop Shadow’s Direction parameter. The Direction parameter will be exposed  
in the Timeline panel, enabled for expressions.
9 O+click (A+click) on the stopwatch 
for Drop Shadow’s Direction parameter.
d factoid
Expressing Paths
In addition to linking parameters, you can 
link mask paths, paint paths (Lesson 10),  
and shape paths created with the Pen 
tool (Lesson 11). Make sure you enable 
expressions for them and drag the pick whip 
tool between parameters named “Path.”

• In the Timeline panel, drag the pick whip for Direction to the word Rotation. 
Release the mouse, but don’t press E yet! 
• To have the shadow rotate in the opposite direction, place the cursor at the 
end of the expression transform.rotation, and type “  * –1” (multiply by 
negative one). 
Press E and preview. The shadow now stays in the same place – but it’s  
in the wrong place, pointing straight up. A little math can fix that, as well:
10 Click on the expression text for Direction to activate it for editing. 
• To be safe, surround the current expression with parentheses so it looks like 
(transform.rotation * -1). Everything inside parentheses is calculated 
as a self-contained unit, so this is a good way to keep things separated.
• Press µ (the down arrow key) to move to the end of the expression.  
Then type “ + 135” to add the original Direction value of 135° to the current  
calculation. Press E and preview – now the shadow is where it belongs!
If you got lost, our version is in Comps_Finished > 02-Simple Math_final, 
where we also applied the same correction to Red Pulley’s shadow (by simply 
copying and pasting the entire effect). Save your project before moving on.
9 continued Enable expressions for 
Shadow’s Direction, and use the pick whip to  
connect it to the layer’s Rotation (right top). 
Then add the text * -1 to the end to  
make Direction spin in the opposite  
direction as Rotation (right bottom).
After applying the initial expression,  
the shadow points straight up at 0° (below).
Lesson 7 — EXPRESSIONS AND TIME GAMES
210
d try it
Inherent Value
If you want to add a parameter’s original 
value to an expression, type “+ value” at  
the end. Try it yourself: In Step 10, replace  
+ 135 with + value. A benefit of this 
approach is that you can scrub the Direction 
property to change the angle of the shadow 
without having to edit the expression.
10 Add an offset to the end of the 
expression (right), and now it will point 
at the desired angle (above).

Clockwork
In this next exercise, we’ll expand on the skills you’ve just learned to build a clock. 
You’ll use the pick whip and some simple math, then augment these with the 
linear function, which will make it easier to translate between different parameters.
1 Click on the current comp’s name in the Composition panel and select Close 
All from the dropdown menu. Bring the Project panel forward, locate Comps > 
03-Clockwork*starter, and open it.
This composition contains the pieces needed to make a clock: the face, plus the 
hour, minute, and second hands. There are also a couple of background layers. 
We’ve already arranged the layers and set their anchor points so that everything 
lines up and spins properly. We’ve also animated the minute hand’s rotation. 
Your task is to make the hour and second hands follow the minute hand.  
You will then create a transition between the two background layers that follows 
the minute hand as well.
EXPRESSIONS AND TIME GAMES — Lesson 7
211
2 Use the pick whip to tie the 
Rotation values for hour and second 
to minute’s Rotation. Then modify 
the expressions as needed with 
simple math such as / 12 and * 60.
2 continued After you have created these 
expressions, the hour and second hands 
should now keep their correct relationships 
to the minute hand.
2 Select the minute, hour, and second layers, and press r to reveal their 
Rotation properties. Again, only layer 1 – the minute hand – is keyframed.
Deselect these layers and think for a moment about what you need to 
do: The second hand needs to rotate 60 times as fast as the minute hand, 
while the hour hand needs to rotate at only one-twelfth the speed. 
• O+click (A+click) on the stopwatch for hour’s Rotation to enable 
expressions for it. Drag its pick whip up to the word Rotation for the 
minute layer. Release the mouse, and type “ / 12” to divide the minute 
hand’s rotation by 12. Press E.
• O+click (A+click) on the stopwatch for second’s Rotation to enable 
expressions for it. Drag its pick whip up to the word Rotation for the 
minute layer. Release the mouse, and type “ * 60” to multiply the minute 
hand’s rotation by 60. Press E.
Press ª to step through the timeline a frame at a time, watching 
the Rotation values for these three layers to verify your math. For example, 
when you move the current time indicator to 02:15 where the minute 
hand has rotated 90° (15 minutes), the second hand should have rotated 
15 times, while the hour hand should have rotated only 7.5°.
We’ve already animated the minute hand; 
now you have to animate the hour and 
second hands to follow, using expressions 
instead of keyframes. Clip DMD104 courtesy 
Artbeats.com.

4 If you simply use the pick whip  
to express Radial Wipe’s Transition 
Completion to follow minute’s Rotation 
(above), the transition will race ahead  
of the minute hand (top). Second clip 
DG101 courtesy Artbeats.com.
The Linear Expression
Now let’s have some fun and tie what’s happening in the background to the 
minute hand’s animation.
3 Select MoodyBlue.mov and apply Effect > Transition > Radial Wipe. The 
Effect Controls panel will open; scrub the Transition Completion to get a feel  
for how it sweeps away this layer, revealing the layer underneath.
4 O+click (A+click) Transition Completion’s stopwatch to enable 
expressions for it. In the Timeline panel, drag the pick whip from Transition 
Completion to the word Rotation for the minute layer. Release the mouse, 
and press E. Preview, and you’ll see a problem: The transition races ahead 
of the minute hand. Why? Well, there are 360° in one rotation, but Transition 
Completion goes from 0 to 100. As  
a result, it reaches 100% completion 
after only 100° of rotation.
The math to translate between 
these two isn’t so bad (the answer is 
to divide the Rotation value by 3.6), 
but there will be numerous other cases 
where the translation isn’t so straightforward. Therefore, we think it’s worth the 
effort to learn an expression function called linear that will translate for you:
5 To remember how to use the linear function, memorize this mantra:  
“As a certain parameter goes from A to B, I want to go from Y to Z.”  
After Effects will even help us write most of this code:
• Click on the arrow to the right of Transition Completion’s pick whip to bring 
up the expression language menu (see figure next page) and select: 
Interpolation > linear(t, tMin, tMax, value1, value2)
Release the mouse, and this text will replace the code created by the pick whip.
• Select t (being careful not to select the parenthesis before or the comma 
after). This is the parameter you want to follow – namely, minute’s Rotation.  
Use the pick whip tool and drag it to the parameter as you did before.
• Select tMin (you can double-click it to select it) and type the beginning 
Rotation value: 0.
• Select tMax and type the ending Rotation value: 360.
• Select value1 and type the desired beginning Transition Completion value: 0.
• Select value2 and type the ending Transition Completion value you need: 100.
Press E, and the Radial Wipe will now snap to line up with the minute 
hand. Preview to verify this, and save your project.
Lesson 7 — EXPRESSIONS AND TIME GAMES
212
d tip
Preset Shadow
We use the trick of having the Drop Shadow 
effect react to the layer’s Rotation quite a 
bit. Rather than create an expression for  
its Direction parameter every time you want 
to use it, set it up once, select Drop Shadow 
in the Effect Controls panel, then select 
Animation > Save Animation Preset.  
You can now apply this preset – with the 
expression intact – whenever you want.

If you like, edit the second keyframe value for minute’s Rotation, perhaps 
entering a lower value such as 120°. The hour hand, second hand, and transition 
will all update to stay in sync with the minute hand’s rotation. Hopefully, the 
beauty of expressions has now become more apparent: Once you set them up, 
you need to edit only one set of keyframes to update a complex animation.
In the Project panel, locate and open our version: Comps_Finished >  
03-Clockwork_final. We added a few tricks, such as animating a hue shift  
of the MoodyBlue.mov layer using the linear function. We also added drop 
shadows to the clock pieces, and used expressions to stabilize their  positions  
so that they didn’t spin around with the hands.
EXPRESSIONS AND TIME GAMES — Lesson 7
213
5 You can use the expression language menu (top) to remind you of the format of common expression functions. Replace each of its 
generic values with the values you need (above). After you’re done, the wipe transition will follow the minute hand correctly (below).  
Once you’re familiar with the structure of the linear expression, you can type it directly (we’ll use this approach in an exercise on page 219). 
Our version (03-Clockwork_final) includes additional tricks, such as enabling motion blur, varying the hue of the water, and adding drop 
shadows to the clock pieces. Everything that animates is driven by one pair of keyframes: those for the minute hand’s rotation.

Lesson 7 — EXPRESSIONS AND TIME GAMES
214
Going for a Loop
Time to introduce another expression into your repertoire: the ability to repeat  
a keyframed animation for the duration of a layer.
1 Open Comps > 04-LoopOut*starter. Select watch_widget.tif, and press u  
to reveal its keyframes: There are two for Rotation, at 00:00 and 01:00. Preview; 
it rocks in one direction, then stops.
Your task is to make this widget rock back and forth for the duration of the 
layer. You could create a bunch of additional Rotation keyframes, but that would 
be a pain to edit later. Or, we could introduce you to the loopOut function.
d gotcha
Return versus Enter
When you are finished working on an 
expression, remember to press the E  
key on the numeric keypad, not the normal 
R (or E) key – the latter will add  
a carriage return to the expression, as if  
you wanted to write another line.
d gotcha
Copying and Pasting Expressions
If you right-click on a parameter name in 
the Timeline or Effect Controls panel, and 
if there is an expression applied to that 
parameter, you will see an option to Copy 
Expression Only. This makes it easier to 
copy and paste expressions between layers. 
2 The combination of just a few keyframes 
and the loopOut expression (top) can create 
an animation that repeats from the first 
frame to the layer’s out point (above).
2 O+click (A+click) on the animation stopwatch for Rotation to add an 
expression to this property. Carefully type (paying attention to capitalization):
loopOut(“pingpong”)
and press E. This will tell After Effects to follow the animation from the  
first keyframe to the last keyframe, then animate in reverse back to the first  
keyframe. It will then repeat this until the out point of the layer. Preview again:  
The widget now rocks back and forth continually.
3 There are other options available for the loopOut expression:
• Click on the expression text to select it, and replace the word pingpong  
with the word cycle (don’t accidentally delete the parenthesis!). Press E 
and preview; the animation will go from the first to the last keyframe, then 
jump suddenly back to the first.

• Replace the word cycle with the word 
offset, press E, and preview: The ani-
mation will proceed from the first to the last 
keyframe, and remember the value of the last 
keyframe. It will then proceed from the first 
to last keyframe again, but the rotation will be 
offset by the value of the last keyframe, creating 
a continuous motion.
4 Slide the last keyframe earlier or later in the 
timeline, and preview again: The speed  
of the animation will change to match and 
 continue for the duration of the layer.
Our version is in Comps_Finished > 
LoopOut_final. We had fun creating several 
copies of watch_widget.tif, then moved their 
last keyframe to vary their speeds.
EXPRESSIONS AND TIME GAMES — Lesson 7
215
Here are a few shortcuts and pieces of advice that you will find 
helpful as you use expressions:
• To delete an expression, O+click (A+click) on the stop-
watch again. You can also select the expression text and delete it.
• To temporarily disable an expression without deleting it, click 
on its = icon; it will change to ≠. To re-enable it, click on the ≠.
• Selecting a layer and typing u will just reveal the properties  
that have keyframes. To reveal the properties with expressions, 
select the layer and type ee. (Yes, the U shortcut changed.)
• Expressions use the same characters as your computer’s 
numeric keypad for math functions: * means multiply (don’t  
type an “x”); / means divide.
• After Effects can convert an expression into normal keyframes: 
Select the property you want to convert and use the menu 
item Animation > Keyframe Assistant > Convert Expression to 
Keyframes.
• Expressions can be applied across multiple comps in the same 
project. To do this, you need to arrange their Effect Controls or 
Timeline panels – one panel for each comp – to see both at the 
same time, then use the pick whip to reach across them.
If you accidentally click in the wrong place in the middle of 
creating an expression, After Effects may think you’re done when 
actually you’re not. One of two things will then happen:
• If the expression fragment you wrote still makes sense as is, 
After Effects will assume that’s what you meant and enable the 
expression.
• If the expression fragment creates an invalid piece of code, 
After Effects will display an error banner.
In either case, it is easy to correct the expression. Click in the 
area where you see the code, and either delete it and start again, 
or add the missing piece you intended. When you press E, 
After Effects will clear the error banner and it will work normally.
D Alternate Loops
There are several variations on the loop function:
• loopOut() repeats the animation from the last keyframe to the end 
of the layer; loopIn() repeats the animation backward from the first 
keyframe to the start of the layer.
• If you don’t want to loop all of the keyframes, you can say how many 
to loop. For example, loopOut(“cycle”, 3) repeats just the last 
three keyframes in an animation.
• You can also define how much time is looped, rather than the 
number of keyframes. loopOutDuration(“cycle”, 1.5) would 
repeat just the last 1.5 seconds of the keyframed animation.
D Expression Tips

The Wiggle Expression
The third expression function we really feel you should learn is wiggle. This 
simple expression can add random variation to virtually any parameter. To use 
wiggle, you only need to think about two things: How fast do I want to wiggle, 
and how much?
1 Select Close All from the Composition viewer menu to close all previous 
comps. In the Project panel, locate and open Comps > 05-Wiggle*starter. It 
contains two layers: a background and a yellow gizmo that opens and closes.
2 Select Gizmo.mov and press p to reveal its Position. O+click (A+click)  
on the animation stopwatch for Position to enable expressions. In the expres-
sion text area, type the following:
• Type “wiggle(” (without the quotes) to start the expression.
• How fast do you want the object to wander, in wiggles per second? Type that 
number, followed by a comma – for example, “1,” for 1 wiggle/second.
• How much do you want this value to wiggle by? Enter that number, followed by 
a closing parenthesis – for example, type “200)” for up to 200 pixels of wanderlust.
Your final expression should be 
wiggle(1,200)
Press E, then preview – the gizmo will wander about the comp.
Lesson 7 — EXPRESSIONS AND TIME GAMES
216
d tip
Behaviors
If you want to wiggle the position, rotation, 
or other transformations of a layer, we 
suggest you apply an animation preset 
(introduced in Lesson 3). Look inside the 
Behaviors folder for the presets that start 
with the word “Wiggle.” These handy presets 
are based on the wiggle expression.
4 Duplicate the gizmo several times. Each 
copy will wiggle differently, automatically.
2–3 By adding the wiggle expression to 
Position and Rotation (right), you can make 
the gizmo fly drunkenly around the screen 
without adding keyframes (above). Gizmo 
courtesy Quiet Earth Design.
3 Let’s have the gizmo rotate as it wanders, as if it’s having trouble stabilizing. 
Say we want it to wiggle only half as fast (0.5 wiggles/second) and rotate by as 
much as 45°:
• With Gizmo.mov still selected, press Sr to also reveal the Rotation  
parameter.
• Enable expressions for Rotation.
• Type “wiggle(0.5,45)” – the values we decided on – and press E.  
Preview, and enjoy the flight of the drunken gizmo!
4 As if that isn’t cool enough…wiggle also randomizes its actions based on  
the layer it is applied to. Select Gizmo.mov and duplicate it several times.  
You will now have a flock of out-of-control gizmos. Our version is saved in 
Comps_Finished > 05-Wiggle_final.

Expression Controls
Expressions such as wiggle are great, but it can be a bit of a pain to have to edit 
the expression text every time you want to tweak their values. The solution is a 
special set of effects known as Expression Controls. These effects don’t change 
how an image looks; instead, they provide user interface elements that allow  
you to control expressions. 
1 Open Comps > 06-Effects*starter. Preview, then select underwater  
and press ee to reveal the expressions applied to it. We’ve added the wiggle  
expression to the Angle parameter of a Twirl effect to animate this text layer.
2 You may find our initial wiggle values a bit manic. What if you 
wanted to tweak it, or keyframe the amount and speed of the wiggle? 
The solution is to create your own user interface for the expression:
• With underwater selected, apply Effect > Expression Controls > 
Slider Control. The Effect Controls panel will open. Select the effect 
name Slider Control, press R to highlight it, type in a useful name 
such as “Wiggle Speed” and press R again.
• Then apply Effect > Expression Controls > Angle Control. Rename 
this effect “Wiggle Amount”.
• Twirl these controls open in the Timeline panel. You need to expose 
their parameters to drag the pick whip to them. You can also drag the 
pick whip to the parameters in the Expression Controls panel.
3 In the Timeline panel, click on the expression text to make it active. 
• Carefully select just the 3 inside the parentheses; you want to replace it.  
Drag Angle’s pick whip to the word Slider (not the effect’s name) for Wiggle 
Speed. The expression code effect(“Wiggle Speed”)(“Slider”)  
will now appear in the timeline.
• Select the 60 after the comma, 
being careful not to select the 
comma or closing parenthesis. Drag 
Angle’s pick whip to the word Angle 
for Wiggle Amount to replace it as 
well. Press E to accept this new 
 expression. 
4 Try keyframing the values for  
Wiggle Speed and Wiggle Amount, 
previewing to check your results.  
Our version is Comps_finished >  
06-Effects_final.
EXPRESSIONS AND TIME GAMES — Lesson 7
217
Expression controls will make it easier to 
tweak and keyframe the amount of wiggle 
applied to this text’s distortion. Clip 1014926 
courtesy Pond5.
3 Select the first value in the expression, then drag the pick whip to the Wiggle Speed > 
Slider parameter (not the name of the effect). You can drag either to the Slider parameter 
in the Timeline panel or the same parameter in the Effect Controls panel. 
2 Add a Slider and Angle Control, and 
rename them to reflect the expression 
parameters you want them to control. 

Lesson 7 — EXPRESSIONS AND TIME GAMES
218
Master Controls
The next step is having one layer control multiple layers using expressions. In 
this exercise, you’ll hand-wire parameters to follow Expression Controls on a 
master controller layer. You’ll also learn to use expressions to offset rather than 
replace an existing value.
1 Open comp 07-Master Control*starter, which is similar to the first wiggle 
example. This time, rather than create a swarm of individually randomized 
gizmos, you want to create an army of gizmos moving in lock step.
2 Create a Layer > New > Null Object. Because nulls don’t 
render, they make excellent containers to hold master con-
trols for a composition. Rename it “Master Controller”.
3 Apply Effect > Expression Controls > Point Control to 
your new null. This contains X/Y position parameters;  
zero out their initial values. O (A) click on its animation 
stopwatch, and add the expression “wiggle(1,50)” to it.
4 Select Gizmo.mov and press p to reveal its Position. 
You want to add your master wiggle onto the layer’s own 
Position. To do this, O (A) click on Position’s animation stopwatch, and type 
“value + ” to start the expression. This takes the expressed parameter’s current 
value and adds it to whatever comes next. Now drag the pick whip up to the 
Point Control’s Point parameter and press E.
5 Duplicate Gizmo.mov, and move the copy to another location in the comp. 
Do that as many times as you want to create an army of gizmos. Preview, and 
they all wiggle identically around their individual positions. Edit the wiggle 
expression for Master Control, and they will all take on this new animation.
You may be thinking “I could have just done that with parenting” – and in 
the case of just Position animation, you’d be right. However, you don’t have 
to stop with just one parameter under control. 07-Master Control_final shows 
an example where the Scale and Rotation values are also linked to follow the 
master, each acting around a layer’s own Anchor Point – not the parent’s.
4 By using “value +” in an expression, 
you will add the layer’s underlying value or 
keyframed animation to the expression’s 
calculations.
5 07-Master Control_final demonstrates 
influencing several parameters of 
the connected layers from one set of 
Expression Controls. Background clip 
2964497 courtesy Pond5.
d tip
Copy with Property Links
After Effects’ Copy with Property Links 
command (Lesson 3) automatically writes 
expressions for you that cause anything 
from an individual parameter to an entire 
effect to follow an identical parameter or 
effect on another layer.

EXPRESSIONS AND TIME GAMES — Lesson 7
219
D Driven by Sound
Motion graphic designs are often more  
powerful if the visuals are tied to the audio. 
The combination of expressions plus a  
special keyframe assistant make this easier  
to accomplish.
1 Open Comps > 08-Audio*starter. It  
contains a soundtrack, background movie, 
and still image of a speaker. Our goal is to 
make the speaker’s woofer bounce in and  
out in time with the music.
2 Expressions cannot directly access sound. 
However, After Effects has a keyframe assistant 
that can convert the comp’s audio into key-
frames applied to an Expression Controller.
Select Animation > Keyframe Assistant > 
Convert Audio to Keyframes. A null object 
named Audio Amplitude will be created  
at the top of the layer stack. Select it and 
press u to reveal its keyframes.
Drag the current time indicator along the 
timeline while watching the values for Both 
Channels (an average of the left and right 
channel amplitude). Some peaks go over 50, 
although it seems most values are under 30. 
(You can also use the Graph Editor to more 
clearly see how the keyframe values change 
over time; select the Both Channels > Slider 
parameter in the timeline to see its graph. 
Toggle off the Graph Editor when done.)
3 Select speaker.jpg and press # to  
open its Effect Controls panel. We’ve already 
applied a Bulge effect to it and centered the 
bulge on the woofer. Scrub the Bulge Height 
parameter and watch the speaker flex. Get  
a feel for what would be a good range of 
values – maybe –1.0 to +1.0.
4 A few exercises ago, we showed you  
how to use the linear expression to convert 
between different value ranges. Remember 
the mantra: As a certain parameter goes from 
A to B, I want to go from Y to Z.
• O+click (A+click) on the stopwatch 
next to Bulge Height to enable expressions.
• Type “linear(“ to start the expression.
• Drag the pick whip to the parameter  
you want to follow: Both Channels > Slider. 
Then type a comma to separate it from the 
numbers that follow.
• As the audio amplitude goes roughly from 
7 to 42, you want Bulge Height to go from –1 
to +1. So type “7, 42, –1, 1” followed by a 
closing parenthesis, “)”.
Press E and preview – the woofer will 
now bop along with the music! If you want to 
have some more fun, duplicate the speaker, 
and instead of hooking the expression up to 
Both Channels, hook one speaker up to Left 
Channel and the other to Right Channel.
This same basic technique can be used  
to drive virtually any parameter with audio.  
If you got lost, our version is contained in  
Comps_finished > 08-Audio_final.
If you find you like this technique, check 
out the more powerful third-party plug-ins 
Trapcode Sound Keys or Boris Beat Reactor. 
2 Convert Audio to Keyframes creates a null object with three Slider Control effects. 
Their keyframes match the amplitude of the comp’s audio.
3 Use the pick whip to help connect Bulge Height to one of the Slider parameters.
3 complete Check our version Comps_finished > 08-Audio_final if you have trouble.

Time Games
We’re going to change subjects. Now we’ll deal with time: How to speed it up, 
slow it down, make it go by more smoothly, or chop it up.
Frame Blending
There will be occasions when you wish the action in footage you receive was 
happening faster or slower. It’s relatively easy to “stretch” the footage, but this 
can result in staggered motion as frames are repeated or skipped. To help counter 
this, After Effects offers frame blending to smooth out the final motion.
1 Project file Lesson_07.aep should still be open. Select Close All from the 
Composition viewer menu to close the previous expression comps. In the Project 
panel, locate and open Comps > 09-Frame Blending*starter, and preview it. 
The comp contains one layer, which is footage of flying over clouds.
2 Say you wanted to slow down this clip to one-third of its original speed. In 
the Timeline panel, right-click on one of the column headers. Select Columns 
> Stretch to open this additional parameter column. Click on the current value 
(100%); the Time Stretch dialog will open. Change the Stretch Factor to 300% 
and notice how the duration is now three times longer. Click OK.
Preview: You’ll notice that the clouds move more slowly (each frame now 
plays for three frames), but are also jerky in their motion. Smoothing this out  
is something frame blending excels at.
3 In the middle of the Switches column header is an icon that looks like a film 
strip. This is the Frame Blending switch. Click once in the hollow area under-
neath this icon for CloudFlythrough.mov to enable Frame Mix mode frame 
blending. A duplicate of the frame blending switch’s icon will appear in this 
hollow, saying this layer will have frame blending calculated when it renders.
If you want to see the effects of frame blending in the Comp panel’s viewer 
before you render, you also need to enable the master Frame Blending switch 
along the top of the Timeline panel. To do this, click on the large filmstrip icon.  
Preview again, and the cloud motion will be much smoother! 
Ah, if only every clip worked that well… Unfortunately, you will find many 
clips that don’t blend nearly as smoothly.
Lesson 7 — EXPRESSIONS AND TIME GAMES
220
3 Enable Frame Blending for both the layer and for the entire composition to view the results in the Comp viewer.
2 In the Time Stretch dialog, change 
the Stretch Factor to 300% to make the 
duration three times longer.
Soft objects – such as clouds and blurry 
backgrounds – are excellent candidates  
to frame blend. Clip CF321 courtesy 
Artbeats.com

Pixel Motion
6 Move to around 00:27 where you can see ghosting. 
Click on the Frame Blending switch one more time, to 
where it changes to an arrow. This enhanced frame blending 
mode is known as Pixel Motion. The ghosts will disappear. 
Pixel Motion studies the movement of every pixel between 
frames and calculates where each pixel should be to create  
a new in-between frame at the requested time.
Preview; it takes longer because Pixel Motion requires 
a lot of computing power. The movement – particularly 
at the start and end of the shot – is much smoother now. 
However, that does not mean it’s perfect…
7 Move the current time indicator to 01:28, where the 
blue car is going through the frame. Press ª to 
slowly step through the next few frames, watching what 
happens between the bumper and guardrail (and around 
the car in general). Pixel Motion – and other similar time 
interpolation algorithms – has more difficulty deciding 
what to do when one set of pixels crosses another (such as 
the car crossing the guardrail), or where there’s insufficient 
visual information from frame to frame to reconstruct the 
missing information. Pixel Motion is certainly not perfect; 
you should preview and carefully study every shot you use 
it on. But when it works, it’s great!
d tip
Timewarp and Twixtor
After Effects comes with the Time > Timewarp effect, which 
performs a similar task as Pixel Motion but with more user control. 
There are also third-party solutions available; we like RE:Vision 
Effects’ Twixtor (www.revisionfx.com).
EXPRESSIONS AND TIME GAMES — Lesson 7
221
6 Clicking a layer’s Frame Blending switch a second time changes 
its icon, which indicates Pixel Motion is being used. This creates 
brand new in-between frames, resulting in cleaner images (right).
4 Open Comps > 10-Pixel Motion*starter. This comp 
contains footage of race cars zooming past the camera. 
Its Stretch column should be visible; you’ll see that it 
has already been slowed down 200%. Preview it; you will 
notice obvious staggering in the motion as frames are 
duplicated.
5 Click on the Frame Blending switch once for  
FastCars.mov to get the film frame icon. Then enable  
the large Enable Frame Blending switch in the timeline. 
Preview: The result is a bit better, but still looks rough. 
Stop the preview and press ª to step through the 
frames, and you will see echoes as the cars zip by. Frame 
blending just mixes together adjacent frames; you can 
obviously see this crossfading effect on sharp footage with 
fast motion.
5 Normal Frame Mix blending creates strong visible ghosting as it 
crossfades between layers (right). Clip 25420974 courtesy Pond5.
7 Pixel Motion can 
cause strange distortion 
when objects are 
moving across each 
other or when visual 
information is missing 
between frames, such 
as when this car’s 
bumper passes in front 
of the guardrail and 
approaches the edge  
of the frame.

Pixel Motion Blur
Sometimes you will receive footage where the frame rate is 
fine, but the shutter speed was too fast, resulting in visible 
strobing during fast motion. The problem is there’s not 
enough natural motion blur in the original footage. The same 
problem can happen in 3D renders without motion blur. 
Fortunately, there’s a plug-in that can reintroduce this blur.
1 In the Project panel, locate and open composition  
PMB-Strobing*starter. Start a preview; you may notice the 
background is a bit strobed and distracting during the pan, 
and the blue car is really jumpy.
2 With the preview still playing (After Effects CC 2015 and 
later), select FastCars.mov and apply Effect > Time > Pixel 
Motion Blur. Playback will slow down while the frames 
are calculating (make a note of the frame rate in the Info 
panel); when real-time playback resumes, the movement 
should seem smoother.
3 Stop playback and move the current time indicator to 
01:00, where the blue car is zipping by the camera. You will 
see an echoed image. Pixel Motion Blur simulates motion 
blur by subdividing frames in time by the Shutter Samples 
value, re-creating new in-between frames based on the 
motion it detects, and mixing those frames together.
Increase the Shutter Samples parameter until the car 
appears more smoothly blurred. A value of 8–12 works  
for most footage; for this very fast movement, you might  
try 16–20.
4 Start another preview, and note the frame rate; more 
Shutter Samples means slower rendering. But once real-
time playback resumes, the motion should appear even 
smoother. Toggle the “fx” switch for Pixel Motion Blur on 
and off during playback to compare before and after.
If you stop playback, you might notice individual frames 
look terrible as Pixel Motion Blur fails to accurately  
re-create the missing information. Increasing Vector Detail 
may help (at the cost of rendering speed), but this is where 
you need to trust your eyes during playback rather than 
obsess over individual still frames.
Lesson 7 — EXPRESSIONS AND TIME GAMES
222
When a fast-moving option looks too sharp in a still frame (A),  
the result will probably be visual strobing when played at speed. 
Pixel Motion Blur at its default settings re-creates additional 
in-between frames to fake motion blur (B). 
Increasing Shutter Samples will further smooth the result (C).
A
B
C

EXPRESSIONS AND TIME GAMES — Lesson 7
223
Stop-Motion Tricks
There are occasions when you don’t want your animations to 
play back smoothly – for example, if you are trying to simulate 
a low frame rate “stop motion” look, or if you are trying to slow 
down an overly nervous effect that randomizes every frame.
Preserve Frame Rate
First, we need to show you how After Effects may try to thwart your 
attempts to create a stop-motion look. Then we’ll show you how to 
thwart After Effects.
1 Select Close All from the Composition viewer menu. In the Project 
panel, locate and open Comps > 11a-Preserve Rate*starter and preview 
it; a series of businesspeople exit a private jet. Our plan is to make this 
video look like it was a series of still photographs, shot as part of an 
undercover surveillance.
2 Type Ck (Lk) to open its Composition Settings. Change the 
Frame Rate to 1 fps, and click OK. Preview, and you will see After Effects 
“holds” on some frames and skips others to create that stop-motion look.
3 Open Comps > 11b-Output Rate*starter. This has the previous comp 
nested into it. Its frame rate is also set at 29.97 fps, to simulate how your 
final render might look in the final composite. Preview again: Hey, the 
motion’s smooth again! What happened?!
The frame rate in each composition is actually a preview rate that takes 
effect just while working in that comp. If you nest it into another comp 
that has a different frame rate, After Effects will honor this second comp’s 
rate and process any nested sources at this new rate. When you render, 
After Effects honors the rate in the Render Settings and calculates all the 
animation at this final speed. But there’s a way around that… 
4 In the Timeline panel, click on the tab for the comp 11a-Preserve 
Rate*starter to bring it forward again. Type Ck (Lk) to open 
its Composition Settings again. Then click on the Advanced tab in this 
dialog. Check the box next to the text “Preserve frame rate when nested 
or in render queue” and click OK. This will lock in this comp’s frame rate 
regardless of what you do with it later.
Bring 11b-Output Rate*starter forward again, and preview: Now 
you have your surveillance look again. Notice that the text animation 
 proceeds at the same pace as before; it is obeying the frame rate of the 
comp it’s in – not that of the nested comp.
4 If you want a lower frame rate in a precomp 
to be honored throughout a project, enable 
its Preserve Frame Rate option in Composition 
Settings > Advanced.
The goal is 
to make the 
video look like 
a series of stills, 
while keeping 
the smooth 
type animation. 
Clip 32710735 
courtesy Pond5.

Lesson 7 — EXPRESSIONS AND TIME GAMES
224
d tip
Blended Motion
To create an interesting, dream-like look, 
combine stop motion and frame blending. 
Render out an intermediate movie of your 
stop-motion animation, import this render, 
add it to a composition, and enable Frame 
Blending for this new movie.
Some effects such as Numbers randomize 
on every frame. To slow them down,  
you need to place them in their own 
precomp with a lower frame rate and 
enable Composition Settings >  
Advanced > Preserve Frame Rate.
In our final version (right), we 
duplicated the nested numbers 
precomp several times, and 
used Stretch to vary their 
resulting frame rates (left).  
This trick works because the 
precomp’s frame rate is locked 
at 29.97 fps thanks to the 
Preserve Frame Rate option. 
Background clip DA101  
courtesy Artbeats.com.
Calming Down Effects
Now let’s use that Preserve Frame Rate trick to alter the behavior of effects:
1 Open Comps > 12a-Numbers*starter, and preview it. This small  
composition contains a solid with Effect > Text > Numbers applied to it;  
it’s a very handy effect for creating data readouts and similar graphics. 
2 Select the numbers layer and press # to open its Effect Controls panel;  
you will notice that we’ve checked its Randomize option. Preview: The numbers 
change every frame, making the result virtually unreadable.
3 Type Ck (Lk) to open this comp’s settings, enter a lower frame rate 
such as 5 fps, and click OK. Preview, and now you can take in each number 
before it changes. 
4 Open Comps > 12b-Nested*starter. Its frame rate is 29.97 fps. The 12a- 
Numbers*starter comp is nested into it. Preview, and you’ll see the numbers 
randomize on every frame again. This is the exact same issue as you observed 
with the footage in the previous exercise.
5 Bring 12a-Numbers*starter forward again, open its Composition Settings, 
click on the Advanced tab, enable the Preserve Frame Rate option, and click OK. 
Now when you preview 12b-Nested*starter, your lower frame rate will “stick” 
for the numbers.
Open our final versions of these two in the Comps_Finished folder – there’s a 
neat trick in there. In 12a-Numbers_final, we kept the full frame rate of 29.97 fps, 
but enabled the Preserve Frame Rate option to lock it in. In 12b-Nested_final, 
we duplicated this precomp several times, then gave each one a different Stretch 
value to slow them down while maintaining the stop-motion look. 

EXPRESSIONS AND TIME GAMES — Lesson 7
225
Time Remapping
In After Effects, you can keyframe almost anything – including time itself.  
The door to this world is time remapping. This parameter allows you to define 
which frame of a source should be playing at a specific frame of your comp. 
After Effects will then speed up or slow down the footage as needed between 
keyframes to make this happen.
Adding Handle with Freeze Frames
Before getting too insane, let’s start with a common task: extending the duration 
of a shot with a freeze frame.
1 Continue with Lesson_07.aep. If you’ve been following earlier exercises, clear 
them away by selecting Close All from the Composition viewer menu. 
In the Project panel, locate and open Comps > 13-Freeze 
Frame*starter, and preview it. It contains a pan across the facade of 
the National Archives. The problem is, the news editor wants the shot 
to be longer so he can build and hold a title animation over it.
2 Select NationalArchives.mov. Then select the menu item Layer > 
Time > Enable Time Remapping. The Time Remap property will appear 
in the Timeline panel, with keyframes set at the beginning and end of 
the original duration of the layer.
2 Select Layer > Time > Enable Time 
Remapping, and Time Remap keyframes  
will appear for the layer. As seen above, you 
can then drag the layer’s out point later to 
extend the clip. The top image is from the 
final version in the Comps_Finished folder. 
Clip A145-C086 courtesy Artbeats.com.  
(Full disclosure: The original clip from 
Artbeats had more handle; we pretrimmed  
it for the sake of this exercise.)
3 You might also notice that the area past the end of the layer in the timeline 
has changed from being empty to being a gray bar that indicates there is more  
of the clip to reveal. Drag the clip’s out point (the end of its layer bar) to the end 
of the comp. Scrub the current time indicator around the end of the timeline; 
the clip will be frozen on the last frame.
4 What if you need additional handle at the head of the clip as well? Click on 
Time Remap in the timeline to select its keyframes and drag them later in time 
(be sure to move them together, keeping the same number of frames between 
both keyframes). Alternatively, you can slide the layer bar later in time, and then 
extend the in point of the layer earlier in time. In either case, the clip will freeze 
on the first frame and start playing when it crosses the first Time Remap keyframe.
d tip
Freeze Frame
If you want to freeze a clip on a single frame 
for its entire duration, make sure Time 
Remapping is disabled, move the current 
time indicator to the desired source frame, 
select the layer, and choose Layer > Time  
> Freeze Frame. This will create a single  
Time Remap keyframe at the chosen time. 
You can scrub its value in the Timeline  
panel to change it.

You can add keyframes by clicking in the Add or Remove Keyframe at Current 
Time diamond that’s part of the keyframe navigation section for a layer. Note 
that you will not change the speed of playback until you actually move these 
keyframes in relation to each other. Shorten the work area to around 8 seconds 
and feel free to preview regularly going forward.
4 We want to keep the initial speed the same, and shift to near-realtime play-
back on the first dice bounce at 02:03. Therefore, we need to compress time after 
that keyframe. Right-click on the 
Time Remap keyframe at 02:03 and 
choose Select Following Keyframes. 
Then hold down O (A) and drag 
the last keyframe toward the left to 
Lesson 7 — EXPRESSIONS AND TIME GAMES
226
Varispeeding Time
In this last exercise, we’re going to use Time Remapping to make time speed up, 
slow down, stop, and run in reverse. We’ll sneak in some nice keyframe manipu-
lation along the way.
1 Open Comps > 14-Varispeed*starter. Preview or scrub the current time 
indicator along the timeline to familiarize yourself with the clip: It contains 
super-slow-motion footage of dice being dropped, with interesting interactions 
as they bounce off the table and each other. 
The game plan is to speed up from slow-motion to near-realtime playback, 
slow back down and freeze at some point, and then run the footage backward 
until the dice return to the player’s hand.
2 Right-click on SlomoDice.mov and choose Time > Time Remapping.  
The Time Remap parameter will appear in the Timeline panel, with keyframes 
placed at the start and end of the clip.
3 Next is creating Time Remap keyframes to remember important frames  
in the original footage, such as:
• When the dice first bounce off the table at 02:03 and 02:12.
• The bounce where the left dice really kicks up into the air, at 09:00.
• When the two dice collide in midair around 13:05.
4 Select the keyframes during the 
timespan you wish to play back faster, 
and O (A) drag the last one until 
you achieve the desired speed.
d tip
Lots of Source Frames
It is easier to varispeed footage – which 
inevitably requires new in-between frames 
– if you have lots of source frames to work 
with; therefore, slow-motion footage is a 
good starting point. Worst case, you can 
use Pixel Motion frame blending, but be 
aware that motion artifacts may appear.
3 Choose important frames where you 
want to shift the speed (top), and add Time 
Remap keyframes at these times (above). 
Clip WBM-FH153-15 courtesy Artbeats.com.

EXPRESSIONS AND TIME GAMES — Lesson 7
227
evenly compress the time between them. Preview to check the result; we liked  
it when we moved the last keyframe of the group to around 07:00.
5 The speed change is feeling a bit abrupt; it might be nice to start to accelerate 
between the first two bounces. Hold S and click on the first bounce keyframe 
at 02:03 to deselect it. Then press O (A) again, and this time use the right 
cursor key to nudge the remaining selected keyframes later in time – we found 
just one frame later worked fine.
6 Let’s freeze the motion when the dice collide. Because that’s the last frame of 
source we’ll be using, we can hold on it and lose the last Time Remap keyframe. 
Press @ to deselect all keyframes, then select and delete that last keyframe.
7 To ease into a stop, right-click on the new final Time Remap keyframe and 
choose Keyframe Assistant > Easy Ease In. Preview; if you find the stop a bit 
abrupt, you can slide this last keyframe later to allow more time to decelerate. 
We liked it around 06:00.
Now let’s play it all back in reverse to get back to where we started:
8 To hold for 2 seconds on the last freeze frame, move the current time indi-
cator to 08:00. Click on the Time Remap property name in the Timeline panel 
to select all of its keyframes, and Copy. Then Paste: All of the keyframes will be 
repeated from 08:00 onward. 
Expand the work area to at 
least 14:00, and preview your 
new animation. 
You’ll see that the 
motion isn’t quite what we 
intended: time races backwards between 06:00 and 08:00, then repeats. To play 
your time-remapped animation in reverse, make sure your duplicated keyframes 
are still selected, right-click on one of them, and choose Keyframe Assistant > 
Time-Reverse Keyframes. 
7 Freeze when the dice collide by making 
your last Time Remap keyframe the one with 
a value of 13:05.
8 Repeat your Time Remap keyframes, 
but in reverse. The gap after the former last 
keyframe will be a freeze frame.
d tip
Smoother Motion
When using Time Remapping to slow down 
a clip, enable Frame Blending to create new 
in-between frames.
9 Using time remapping with 
ordinary keyframes in the time-
line requires a lot of mental 
gymnastics to remember which 
segment is playing in which 
direction and at what speed.  
To graphically understand what’s 
going on, click on the Graph 
Editor button along the top of 
the Timeline panel to open it.
9 Open the 
Graph Editor by 
clicking on the 
circled button. 
The white line 
shows how the 
frame displayed 
is increasing 
then moving 
back to 00:00 
over time. 

10 The Graph Editor is currently using Auto-Select Graph Type, which shows 
the Value Graph for Time Remap. It initially looks smooth and pretty. But for 
really smooth playback, you also need to view the Speed Graph and minimize 
the bumps in it as you change playback speed. To see this, while still editing the 
Value Graph, click on the Choose Graph Type and Options button along the 
bottom of the Graph Editor and enable Show Reference Graph. A second white 
line will appear, with plateaus where speed is constant, curves and slopes where 
speed is changing, and kinks where the speed shifts aren’t smooth.
Time to use those Graph Editor skills you’ve been practicing (you have been 
practicing, haven’t you?) to smooth out those speed shifts. For example:
11 The transition around 04:02 from fast playback to easing into a stop has 
a kink in it. This was originally a linear keyframe, which allows abrupt speed 
shifts. Select the keyframe, and click on the Auto Bezier button along the bottom 
right of the Graph Editor. That reduces the kink significantly. Smooth it out the 
rest of the way by grabbing the left side of the Bezier handles that appeared and 
pulling it slightly downward to align with the slope coming into it. Watch the 
reference graph until the kink is as smooth as you can get it.
Lesson 7 — EXPRESSIONS AND TIME GAMES
228
10 Enable Show Reference Graph to 
see both the Value Graph, which you  
can edit, and the Speed Graph to 
double-check the results.
11 The Reference Graph, which shows 
speed, starts out with a lot of kinks around 
the Time Remap keyframes (left). As best 
you can, pull out the Bezier handles for 
problem keyframes and smooth out the 
curve through it (right).
Use a similar approach to smooth out as many other transitions as you can. 
You can start with Auto Bezier, or hold down O (A) to get the Convert 
Vertex tool and drag out Bezier handles from linear keyframes. To minimize the 
amount of work you have to do, go ahead and delete the repeated keyframes 
from 08:00 onward, perfect the keyframes and curves from 00:00 to 06:00, then 
copy/paste/reverse these new and improved keyframes later in time. Our final 
version is in Comps_Finished > 14-Varispeed_final, which includes a few extra 
tricks such as a slight overshoot and drift during the “freeze” and slowing to a 
stop as the dice fly back into the hand at the end.

EXPRESSIONS AND TIME GAMES — Lesson 7
229
In Idea3–Electric Arcs, wiggle is used 
to randomize the end points of a trio of 
Lightning effects.
Idea Corner
The single most useful thing you learned in this lesson (aside from the pick whip 
tool) may well be the wiggle expression. It’s something we use all of the time, 
creating everything from wild automated animations to slight “human” imper-
fections to our movements. The Idea Corner folder in this lesson’s project file 
contains a few simple examples of combining wiggle with effects – check it out, 
understand what each is doing, and come up with your own ways to use the 
wiggle expression to add life to an effect.
Quizzler
• Play the movie Quizzler > Quiz_Gears.mov. There are three wheels, scaled 
100%, 50%, and 25%. Only the largest one has keyframes, but they all stay in 
perfect sync. How would you make this happen using expressions? Use the 
comp Quizzler > Quiz_Gears*starter; two different solutions are saved in the 
Quizzler Solutions folder.
D Resources
There are a number of references 
available on expressions, scripts, and 
JavaScript, including:
www.aenhancers.com
This community web forum includes 
discussions, tutorials, and a library of 
After Effects expressions, scripts, and 
animation presets.
www.aescripts.com
A marketplace of scripts and plug-ins 
for After Effects and Maxon CINEMA 
4D to “enhance and automate oth-
erwise tedious functions and create 
results not possible any other way.” 
After Effects Expressions 
by Marcus Geduld (Focal Press)
The only book currently available 
dedicated to expressions in After 
Effects, starting with basic concepts 
and ending with creating physical 
simulations. 
JavaScript: A Beginner’s Guide  
by John Pollock (McGraw-Hill)
Of the many books available on the 
subject, this one contains some of  
the simplest, clearest, most useful 
explanations we’ve seen of the 
JavaScript language.
When wheels touch, they rotate in opposite 
directions. And their speeds are based 
on their relative sizes. Can you create the 
expressions needed to make this work?
• In Lesson 3, you learned how to 
loop footage. In this lesson, you 
learned how to loop keyframes. Can 
you loop an entire composition? Yes, 
you could nest it and then duplicate 
it end to end; you could also render 
it out, import the resulting movie, 
and loop that in Interpret Footage. 
But in this lesson you’ve also learned 
a pair of techniques that can be com-
bined to loop a nested composition 
as a single layer without having to 
render it first. See if you can figure 
it out using the Quiz_Looped 
Comp*starter comp. 
The answer is in Quizzler 
Solutions > Looped Comp.

3
D Space is one of the most rewarding areas  
to explore in After Effects. A simple switch 
allows each layer to move in the Z dimen-
sion – closer to and farther away from the viewer 
– in addition to left and right. Layers may also be 
rotated in 3D, which gives the ability to view  
them from new angles. You can selectively add 
cameras and lights to a composition, allowing you 
to cast shadows and move around your imaginary 
3D world. And when switched to ray-traced mode, 
certain layer types may also be extruded or bent.
The beauty of 3D in After Effects is that you don’t have to 
build an entire world to use it – you can be quite selective, 
adding a little perspective here, a little lighting there.  
If you’re new to 3D, don’t worry – we’ll go slowly, adding  
to your skill set a step at a time.
Basic 3D
Any After Effects layer can be placed into 3D space. Even 
without adding lights or cameras, this allows some neat 
perspective tricks, plus it permits objects to move more 
 naturally as they animate about your composition.
As soon as you enable the magical 3D Layer switch, 
some of the rules change with regard to how you move and 
arrange layers in the Comp and Timeline panels. We’ll use 
this first exercise to get you up to speed on this new reality.
1 Open this lesson’s project file Lesson_08.aep. In the 
Project panel, locate and double-click Comp > 01-Basic 
3D*starter to open it. It contains two overlapping text 
layers. First, let’s reinforce the way you would normally 
interact with these layers:
Lesson 8
230
3D Space
Add a new dimension to your animations.
 d Getting Started
Make sure you have downloaded the file archive for Lesson 8  
(as discussed in How to Use This Book) and decompressed it.  
It contains the project file and sources you need for this lesson.
 d In This Lesson
 
232 
moving and rotating layers in 3D space
 
234 
multiplaning effects
 
236 
3D motion paths
 
237 
multiple views
 
238 
adding a camera; camera settings
 
239 
using the camera tools; 3D views
 
240 
moving and animating cameras
 
242 
building a camera rig
 
244 
layer and camera auto-orientation
 
246 
camera depth of field blur
 
248 
3D lights
 
250 
Material Options
 
252 
casting shadows
 
254 
Light Transmission
 
256 
Light Falloff
 
258 
adjustment lights
 
259 
Ray-traced 3D renderer
 
260 
extrusion and beveling
 
262 
Fast Previews
 
263 
bending footage layers
 
264 
transparency; index of refraction
 
266 
reflections
 
268 
environment layers
 
269 
ray-tracer image quality
 
270 
CINEMA 4D renderer preview

• With 2D layers, the stacking order in the timeline determines what renders on 
top. Swap the order of Enter a New and Dimension in this comp; the higher one 
in the Timeline panel is the one drawn the most forward in the Comp viewer.
• With 2D layers, you can move them only in the X (left and right) and Y (up 
and down) dimensions. To make a layer appear to move closer or farther away, 
you need to play with its Scale value.
• 2D layers rotate like a pinwheel around their 
Anchor Point. (We’ve already centered the Anchor 
Point in these text layers to get a nice rotation.)
2 Undo any of your experimenting in Step 1 to 
return Enter a New on top of Dimension, both  
set to 100% scale. Make sure the Switches column  
is visible in the Timeline panel (press $ if it isn’t). 
Select both layers, then click in the hollow box 
underneath the three-dimensional cube icon: This is 
the 3D Layer switch. The layers will not change size 
or place in the Comp viewer. However, you will see 
red, green, and blue axis arrows sticking out of the 
Anchor Points of layers that are selected. Press p  
to reveal their Position values: There is now a third 
value, known as Z. It defaults to 0.0.
3D SPACE — Lesson 8
231
Mastering 3D space opens the door to 
natural multiplaning, bringing illustrations 
to life and creating 3D logos or other 
objects with depth and dimension.
2 When you enable their 3D Layer switch, layers gain a third Position 
value: Z (below). In the Comp panel, selected 3D layers will have a set of 
red, green, and blue axis arrows sticking out of their Anchor Points (above). 
its Scale to 100%. If the duplicate is still the 
same size or larger than the 3D version, 
you’re okay. If the duplicate is smaller, you 
are “blowing up” the 3D version: Consider 
using a higher resolution source or move the 
layer farther away from the camera.
Layers that continuously rasterize 
(covered in Lesson 6, page 200) are your 
Scaling up layers beyond 100% usually 
reduces image quality. But with 3D 
layers, you can’t just look at their Scale 
value; their size also depends on how 
close the layers are to the virtual camera.
To tell if a layer is being scaled larger 
than 100%, duplicate it, turn off the 3D 
Layer switch for the duplicate, and set 
friend in 3D space, as After Effects can 
rerender them as needed so that they 
stay sharp. This includes text and shape 
layers (Lesson 11). You can also enable 
the Continuous Rasterization switch (the  
sunburst icon) for Illustrator layers and 
solids; we’ve already done that for you  
as required throughout this lesson.
D Scale, Quality, and 3D

3 Press @ to deselect the layers to ensure you’re editing only one at a time. 
While closely watching the Comp viewer, scrub the third Position value (Z) for 
Dimension. As you scrub to the left to reduce the Z Position value, Dimension 
will appear to grow larger as it comes toward you. As you scrub to the right 
(increasing Z Position), it will appear to grow smaller as it moves away from you.
Key Concept #1: The size a 3D layer is drawn is determined by a combination of  
its Scale value and how close it is to the camera. (If you have not explicitly created  
a camera, After Effects uses an invisible default camera, simulating a 50mm lens.)
There is a second phenomenon you might have noticed: If the Z Position 
value for Dimension is less than the Z Position for Enter a New, Dimension 
will appear to pop in front of Enter a New, even though Dimension is below  
it in the timeline.
Key Concept #2: With 3D layers, stacking order in the timeline no longer determines 
which one draws on top in the Comp viewer. What matters now is how far they are 
from the camera. (If they are the same distance, then stacking order matters.)
4 In addition to scrubbing the Position values for 3D layers, you can also drag 
the layers around in the Comp panel. However, pay attention to the cursor as  
you try this:
• If you place the cursor near the layer’s Anchor Point and do not see an addi-
tional letter at the cursor’s tail, you can freely drag a layer in any direction.
• If you see an X, Y, or Z next to the cursor, your dragging will be constrained  
to that dimension. To ensure you get this special cursor, place it near the desired 
axis’ arrow. A dot instead of a letter means dragging will be unconstrained.
5 Set Dimension’s Z Position back to 0. With Dimension selected, press r: 
Instead of getting just Rotation, you will see four parameters! Here’s what they do:
• Orientation is used to “pose” a layer in 3D space – for example, to face up or 
to the right. This parameter won’t animate as you might expect, so don’t use it 
for keyframing.
• Z Rotation is the same as the normal 2D Rotation you’re used to.
• Y Rotation spins the layer around its vertical (up/down) axis. Go ahead and 
scrub it!
Lesson 8 — 3D SPACE
232
4 If you see an X, Y, or Z next to the cursor, 
your dragging will be constrained to this 
dimension. (X is red, Y is green, and Z is blue.)
3 As you reduce the Z Position value for 
a 3D layer (left), it will move toward you, 
including moving in front of other layers with 
a higher Z Position value (right), regardless 
of the stacking order in the Timeline panel.
d factoid
Multiple Renderers
You have multiple 3D rendering engines 
to choose from. This is set in Composition 
Settings > Advanced and is displayed in 
the upper right corner of the Comp panel. 
Use Classic 3D for these initial exercises; 
it’s faster. We cover two more renderers 
later in this lesson.
5 3D layers have four rotation parameters: 
Orientation, plus Rotation for X, Y, and Z. 

• X Rotation spins a layer around its 
horizontal axis.
You can scrub these Rotation values, 
or press w to select the “Wotate” 
(Rotate) tool and manipulate them 
directly in the Comp panel. (Keep an 
eye out for the axis letters replacing 
the circular cursor – like Position, they 
indicate your dragging will be con-
strained to that one dimension.) 
As you play with X and Y Rotation, notice that Dimension will intersect 
Enter a New as portions of them cross – another cool bonus of 3D space. (If 
layers ever don’t intersect as you expect, check if there is a 2D layer in-between.)
6 Scrub Dimension’s X or Y Rotation values to 90° while watching the Comp 
viewer: They will disappear when viewed on-edge.
Key Concept #3: When initially created, 3D Layers in After Effects do not have any 
thickness. If you choose the Ray-traced 3D rendering engine for your composition, you 
can extrude text and shape layers; we’ll explore that later in this lesson.
Press v to return to the Selection tool. Continue to experiment with Position 
and Rotation values for Enter a New and Dimension, including enabling key-
framing for them and trying an animation or two. 
If you feel more like watching than doing right now, twirl down the  
Comps_Finished folder in the Project panel and double-click 01-Basic 3D_final 
to open it. Preview it or scrub the current time indicator along the timeline: 
We’ve animated Z Position and Y Rotation for the two text layers to make them 
fly and swivel into position. 
Once you’ve digested this, open 01-Basic 3D_final2 and preview. In this 
comp, we removed the Position animation and instead applied a 3D Text  
animation preset to each text layer. (As discussed back in Lesson 5, individual 
characters in text layers may also exist in 3D space.)
3D SPACE — Lesson 8
233
In Comps_Finished > 01-Basic 3D_final2 we applied 3D Text animation presets to our swiveling text.
5–6 You can rotate 3D layers in each of 
their three dimensions using the Rotation 
tool. Note how Dimension intersects  
Enter a New as they cross. 
d gotcha
Avoiding the Rotation Flip Flop
When the Rotation tool is selected (W), a 
popup menu appears on the right side of the 
Tools panel. Here you can toggle the tool’s 
behavior between editing Orientation and 
editing Rotation values for a 3D layer. 
However, if you use the Rotate tool to alter  
Y Rotation or Orientation and go beyond 
±90°, the X and Z values flip by 180° (try 
it!). That’s why we prefer scrubbing values 
directly in the Timeline panel.

1 In 2D, the relationships 
between layers do not change 
when they move as a group. Image 
#1858615 courtesy iStockphoto/
RUSSELLTATEdotCOM.
Lesson 8 — 3D SPACE
234
4 The 3D View menu offers six 
orthographic views and three custom views 
in addition to the Active Camera view. Only 
the Active Camera view can be rendered.
d factoid
Disney and Multiplaning
Disney is often credited with inventing 
the multiplane animation camera to 
create more realistic cartoon animation. 
This device placed animation plates at 
different distances from a real camera.
d tip
3D View Shortcuts
You can use ), ¡, and ™ to quickly 
switch between alternate 3D Views. To 
change which view is assigned to which key, 
select your desired view, hold down the  
S key, then press ), ¡, and ™.
2 The plan is for you to arrange each of the buildings and trees at different dis-
tances from the imaginary camera. Type Ca on Mac (La on Windows)  
to select all of the layers. Enable the 3D Layer switch for any one of them, and  
it will be enabled for all selected layers. Type p until Position is revealed for all 
of the layers. Then press @ to deselect them – otherwise, you might accidentally 
edit all of the layers at the same time!
When viewing only the result, it is easy to get lost in space. Therefore, After 
Effects provides a number of alternate 3D views. You can also see more than one 
view at the same time, making it easier to understand what is going on.
3 Along the bottom of the Comp panel is the Select View Layout menu; it  
currently says 1 View. Click on it and choose 2 Views – Vertical. The Comp 
panel will split into two. (If you have a wide monitor, you might prefer 2 Views 
– Horizontal; if you do, click the right half of the Comp panel when we say top.)
4 With the Selection tool active, click in the top half of the Comp panel;  
there will be colored triangles in the corners of this half to confirm that this  
view is selected. Now look at the 3D View popup to the left of Select View 
Layout: It should say Active Camera (if it doesn’t, set it to this). The Active 
Camera is what your 3D camera sees and is the view that will ultimately render.
Click in the bottom half of the Comp panel, then on the 3D View menu.  
The first six choices below Active Camera are called orthographic views. These  
are the standard “drafting” views that observe your 3D scene from a specific  
Multiplaning
Perspective in 3D is not just placing things closer, farther away, or at an angle to 
the camera. Another important 3D trick is known as multiplaning, where objects 
close to you whiz by quickly, while those farther away appear to move more 
slowly. This phenomenon can be faked in 2D by animating each object by hand. 
In 3D space, it happens naturally. While demonstrating this trick, we’ll also 
show you some extremely useful alternate ways to view your work.
1 In the Project panel’s Comps folder, double-click 02-Multiplaning*starter  
to open it. This composition contains a set of 10 layers all parented to a Null 
Object (Lesson 6), which is a great way to group layers. Preview this comp:  
All of the buildings drift from right to left, as if locked together. Stop at 02:00.

side, with no perspective distortion. Select  
Top for now; think of this as looking down  
on your “stage.” 
Click on a layer in the Comp view; it will be 
highlighted in the Timeline panel. Scrub the Z 
Position (the third value) for this layer to a nega-
tive value: You will see it move down in the Top 
view (toward the camera), while the same object 
comes forward in the Active Camera view.
Select the lower view and click on the 3D 
View menu again. The last three choices are 
temporary camera angles you can use while  
rearranging layers. Select Custom View 3.  
Now as you scrub the Z Position for a layer,  
you get a much better idea of what’s going on 
on your “stage.”
5 Move the buildings, trees, and clouds (but 
not the null!) back and forth in Z to create an 
arrangement you like. Carefully grab the Z axis 
arrow to change the distance from the camera; 
use the X axis arrow to slide left and right.
6 When you think you’re getting close to a good arrangement, preview: 
The Active Camera view (the top) will calculate and play back your anima-
tion. Now as the buildings drift past, the objects closer to your imaginary 
camera (lower Z Position values) move faster, and those farther away 
(higher Z Position values) move more slowly, causing their relationships 
to change over the course of the animation. Note that you didn’t have to 
create any additional Position keyframes to make this happen! 
Continue to tweak. When you want to see your final animation at full 
size, set Select View Layout to 1 View and 3D View to Active Camera, and 
preview again. For comparison, our version is saved in Comps_Finished > 
02-Multiplaning_final. Save your project before moving on.
3D SPACE — Lesson 8
235
6 In 3D, the relationships between layers 
arranged at different positions in “Z space” 
drift automatically as they move.
3–5 To better visualize the position of 
objects in 3D space, it is helpful to set 
the View Layout to 2 or 4 Views, then pick 
different 3D Views for each. Here we have 
set the top view to Active Camera and the 
bottom to Custom View 3.
Triangles 
indicate 
selected 
view

3D Animation
We often joke that “it’s called 3D because it takes three times as long.” This is 
particularly true when it comes to editing motion paths for a 3D layer, as you need 
to look at the path from multiple angles to fully understand what’s happening.
1 Clean up your project by selecting Close All from the Composition Viewer 
menu along the top of the Comp panel. Return to the Project panel and open 
Comps > 03-3D Animation*starter. 
This comp contains four small layers with their 3D Layer switches already 
enabled, and slightly separated in Z. Your goal is to make the layers Under and 
Pressure fly down into their current locations.
2 Because Under and Pressure are already in their “at rest” positions, this is a 
good place to set keyframes:
• Move the current time indicator to around 01:00.
• Select Under and Pressure, and press Op (Ap) to turn on the stop-
watches for Position and reveal this property in the Timeline panel. 
3 Think about where you want these layers to fly in from. For example, it may 
be fun to have Under fly in from the upper left and Pressure from the lower 
right, both starting out closer to the viewer.
• Press H to return to 00:00.
• Press @ to deselect the layers, then reselect Under.
• Hover your cursor over Under’s blue axis arrow until you see a Z appear  
next to it. Click and drag downward, and you will pull Under forward in Z 
(confirm this by watching its Position Z value  
in the Timeline panel). 
• Drag Under to the upper left of the frame; this 
moves it in X and Y. 
• The dotted line in the Comp panel is Under’s 
motion path. Look for the slightly larger dots; 
these are the handles for the keyframes. Click and 
drag these dots to create an arcing motion path.  
If you can’t see them, press and hold g for the 
Pen tool, click on the keyframe icon in the Comp 
viewer, and drag out the handles (you may need  
to move in time so you can see the icon clearly).
• Repeat the same for Pressure, making it arc in 
from a different location at 00:00, and changing 
its Position Z value.
Lesson 8 — 3D SPACE
236
3 Pull Under forward in Z (top), and drag it to the upper left corner. 
Then drag its keyframe handles to create an arcing motion path (above).
The goal in this exercise is to have the two 
words arc in and slam down in 3D space. 
Editing their motion paths will be trickier 
than working in 2D. 

Editing in Multiple Views
By working just in the Active Camera view, you’ve seen only part 
of the picture of what’s really going on with your motion paths.
4 Set the 3D View menu to Left to view the layers edge-on from 
the side. Select Under to see its motion path. Scrub the time indi-
cator and you might see that this layer is actually sliding in from 
above, rather than slamming straight down.
To edit more interactively, set the Select View Layout popup to 
4 Views. Click on the upper left view, and set its 3D View popup to 
Top. Set the upper right view to Front, the lower left view to Left, 
and the lower right view to Active Camera. This way, you can see your  
path from all angles as well as the final result.
(You may need to reduce the Magnification for each view to see everything  
at once. If you still have trouble seeing all the layers, turn the page and read 
Using the Camera Tools on page 239.)
5 Select Under again to reveal its motion path. Drag the motion path handles 
in the Left view while watching the result in the other views. Try to arrange 
a straighter entry into the second keyframe, while keeping the swooping-in 
motion you had originally. This will require some back-and-forth editing to get 
it the way you want. Preview, and the Active Camera view will play back your 
results. When you’re happy, click on the 
word Position for Pressure to highlight  
its motion path, and adjust it.
Feel free to get more creative with 
the move, such as starting the words 
completely offscreen. Our version is 
in Comps_Finished > 03-3D Anima-
tion _final. Of course, yours does not have 
to look like ours – just as long as you feel 
you have a better grasp of editing motion 
paths in 3D space. Save your project 
before moving on.
After you have set up your animation, 
select a layer and choose Layer > Transform 
> Auto-Orient. Choose the Orient Along 
Path option and click OK. The layer will 
now bank and turn as it zooms down into 
position. We used this trick in our 03-3D 
Animation_final2 comp.
3D SPACE — Lesson 8
237
4 When you view your motion path from 
the Left view, you may find it doesn’t arc 
into its final position quite as you had 
planned. This is the danger of editing 
paths only in the Active Camera view.
Left
5 Edit in one view while watching the result in the other views (the selected view 
will have colored triangles in its corners). It will take a bit of compromise to get an 
acceptable path. Remember, what really counts is the result in the Active Camera view!

Lesson 8 — 3D SPACE
238
The 3D Camera
Moving layers in 3D space is very useful, but the real fun happens when you 
move a camera through that space. Once you know how to animate a 3D layer, 
you have mastered most of what you need to animate a camera. The main 
 differences are:
• There is a different set of tools used to move and view the camera. They are 
explained in Using the Camera Tools on the next page.
• It has Angle of View and Zoom parameters (the two are linked), which affect 
how much of the composition is visible, as well as relative perspective.
• It optionally has an “anchor point” that is called its Point of Interest. Instead 
of a center point, this is where the camera is being aimed.
3 Initially, the X and Y values for the camera’s Position and 
Point of Interest are the middle of the comp. Position’s Z 
equals the Zoom value, while Point of Interest’s Z is set to 0.0.
The Position value for a camera defines 
where its body is located. It may optionally 
have a second value known as the Point  
of Interest, which helps aim the camera.  
Its field of view is illustrated by the lines 
radiating out from the camera’s body.
Point of 
Interest
Position
2 Select New > Layer > Camera, set Type to Two-Node 
Camera, and select the 50mm preset.
Adding a Camera
1 Close all previous comps by selecting Close All from the 
Composition Viewer menu. 
Return to the Project panel and open Comps > 04-Basic 
Camera*starter – it contains an expanded version of the logo 
from the previous exercise. The layers that make up the logo 
have already been arranged in 3D space for you. Rather than 
animate these layers, this time you’re going to animate a 
camera around them. They should have their Position values 
exposed; we’ve arrayed them around Z = 0.0, as this will be  
the center of our 3D world.
2 Select Layer > New > Camera; the Camera Settings dialog 
will open. Set the Type popup in the upper left to Two-Node 
Camera, which will expose its Point of Interest.
The Preset popup near the top simulates a number of 
common lenses. Higher numbers are telephoto lenses, which 
means the camera will have a large Zoom value and reduced 
perspective distortion; smaller numbers are wide-angle lenses, 
which translates to a small Zoom value and exaggerated  
perspective distortion. The 50mm preset matches the comp’s 
invisible default camera, so select it for now. Make sure  
Enable Depth of Field is disabled, then click OK.
3 Verify that your new Camera layer is selected. Press p to 
reveal its Position, then Sa to reveal its Point of Interest. 
Note that the Point of Interest’s Z value is 0.0, which places it 
in the center of our logo layers.

3D SPACE — Lesson 8
239
D Using the Camera Tools
After Effects provides a set of Camera tools 
for moving the 3D camera as well as panning 
and zooming around the alternate 3D views. 
They are selected from the Tools panel; you 
can also press c to toggle between them.
The biggest “gotcha” comes when  
you create one keyframe for the camera’s 
Position, go to another point in time, and 
move the camera using the Orbit Camera 
tool to create a second Position keyframe. 
Although you may have seen a nice arc while 
you were moving the camera in the Comp 
view, the resulting motion path will be a 
straight line between keyframes. Edit their 
Bezier handles to create a rounded arc.
Navigating the Views
If you are in any of the Orthographic (Front, 
Left, Top, Back, Right, Bottom) or Custom 
views, these tools do not edit the camera’s 
values. Instead, they zoom and pan around 
these views strictly for preview purposes.
g The Orbit Camera tool affects the Position of a default two-note camera (left) or the 
Orientation of a one-node camera (right).
g The Camera tools are used for moving 
the camera in Active Camera view, as well 
as for editing the layout of the other views.
Moving the Camera
To use these tools for manipulating the 
camera, you need to be in a Camera view 
(such as Active Camera or Camera 1) and 
have a camera layer selected.
Orbit Camera tool: Use this tool to rotate 
how the camera views the scene. If the 
camera’s Auto-Orientation is set to Orient 
Towards Point of Interest (the default), you 
will be moving the body of the camera (its 
Position), and it will pivot about its Point of 
Interest. If the camera’s Auto-Orientation  
is Off (see page 244), you will be editing  
the Orientation values for the camera.
Track XY Camera tool: This tool pans 
around a scene by moving the camera up, 
down, left, and right. It edits the X and Y 
Position and Point of Interest values.
Track Z Camera tool: Use this tool to push 
the camera in on a scene or to pull it back. 
Normally it edits just the camera’s Z Position. 
If you first click, then press C (L), then 
drag, it will edit both the Z Position and  
Point of Interest values together.
Orbit Camera tool: Use this tool to re-pose 
these temporary views on your 3D scene.  
It does not work in the Orthographic views. 
Track XY Camera tool: This replaces the 
Hand tool and pans around your view.
Track Z Camera tool: This acts as a contin-
uous zoom tool, allowing you to smoothly 
zoom in and out on your desired view 
without the camera icon changing its size.
Unified Camera Tool
If you have a three-button mouse, try using 
the Unified Camera tool. The three buttons 
switch between Orbit, Track XY, and Track 
Z modes. Make sure you assign the action 
Middle Click to your middle mouse button. 
g If you find yourself zoomed in too close in a view (left), use the Track Z Camera tool to 
zoom out and the Track XY Camera tool to recenter your view (right).

4 In the Comp panel, select 2 Views – Vertical. Set the upper view 
to Active Camera, and the lower view to Top. 
Is the Top view zoomed in too close to see the camera as well as  
the layers? Hover the cursor over the Comp panel and press c  
until the cursor changes into a two-way arrow (the Track Z Camera 
tool). In the lower view, drag down or to the left until the camera’s 
field of view outline is about half the width of the viewer. Press  
c three times to change the cursor to a four-way arrow (the Track 
XY Camera tool) and drag upward until the layers and the camera  
are centered in this view. (These tools, as well as the Unified Camera 
tool, are discussed in Using the Camera Tools, page 239.)
Moving the Camera
5 As with any 3D layer, you could scrub the camera’s values in the 
Timeline panel or drag it directly in the Comp panel (the same rules 
for axis constraints apply). 
For a more interactive experience, select the Orbit Camera tool: 
With the cursor over the Comp panel, press c until it changes into 
a ball with an arrow curving around it. Drag around in the Active 
Camera view (the upper one) and watch how the camera moves in 
the Top view below. You can also watch the Position values change 
in the Timeline panel.
4 Set up 2 Views in the Comp panel: Active Camera 
(upper) and Top (lower). It’s important to use the Camera 
Track tools (instead of Magnification) to zoom out and 
pan the Top view until you can see the camera and the 
layers. (Magnification reduces the size of the icons, which 
can make them so small they are difficult to select.) 
Background clip LAB113 courtesy Artbeats.com.
Lesson 8 — 3D SPACE
240
D The Camera Settings Dialog
This initially daunting dialog is really just asking you two things:  
how wide or narrow is the camera’s field of view, and how much 
should it blur out-of-focus layers.
If you are familiar with cameras and lenses, this dialog gives you  
a number of ways to precisely define your camera, including by  
Angle of View (a common 3D program parameter) or by Focal  
Length and Film Size (the camera sensor size). You can also define 
your depth of field by  aperture or f-stop.
If you are a camera newbie, the parameter you’ll be most inter-
ested in is Zoom. Set Units to Pixels: When the camera is the Zoom 
value’s distance from a layer, the scale of the layer will not be altered 
in 3D space. All other layers will appear larger or smaller depending 
on how close to or far away they are from the camera. The smaller 
the Zoom value, the more exaggerated this effect will be.

5 Use the Orbit Camera tool to pose the camera off-axis to 
the logo. 
Motion blur enhances the effect of fast 3D camera moves – but there is a render penalty involved.
3D SPACE — Lesson 8
241
6 Use the Selection tool to move the Point of Interest, 
changing what is centered in the camera.
Press v to switch back to the Selection tool. In the Top view, 
drag the boxy camera icon (this is its Position); notice how 
moving it changes the perspective in Active Camera view. 
6 Make sure the lower view is selected – there will be colored 
 triangles in its corners. Set the 3D View popup for it to Front. 
In the Front view, with the Camera layer selected, carefully 
click on the crosshair: This is the camera’s Point of Interest, which 
determines what is centered in its sights. Drag it while watching 
the result in the Active Camera above to get a feel for how it 
works. Also try dragging it in other views, such as Custom View 3.
7 Time for the payoff: setting up a camera move!
• Press H to make sure you are at 00:00.
• Click on the stopwatches for Camera’s Point of Interest and 
Position to enable keyframing.
• Use whatever combination of tools and views you prefer to  
set up a camera pose you like.
• Press N to move to the end of this comp and set up a new 
camera pose.
Preview and carefully observe your camera move. Even though 
you set up the start and end poses, you might not be happy with 
how it looks in the middle. Rather than adding a third keyframe, 
try adjusting the motion paths for the camera’s Position and  
Point of Interest. These are common Bezier paths, just like those 
you edited for 3D layers in the previous exercise. You can switch  
Select View Layout to 4 Views to get a better picture of your path, 
or pick one view at a time to work in.
Our version is Comps_Finished > 04-Basic Camera_final.  
We decided to leave the Point of Interest focused on the middle  
of the logo, and instead created a series of alternating fast and 
slow Position moves to generate surprise and excitement. We 
enabled motion blur for the logo layers to further enhance the 
impression of speed.

Camera Rigs
It can be challenging to move a camera precisely the way you want using just 
the Camera tools and Bezier paths. Some advanced animators build camera rigs 
in which the camera is attached to one or more null objects using parenting 
(Lesson 6). This allows you to break down complex animations into simpler 
components, with each null dedicated to a specific movement such as rotation. 
As mentioned back in Using the Camera Tools (page 239), orbiting – when the 
camera circles around an object or point in space – is one of the harder moves  
to perfect using conventional tools. Fortunately, After Effects makes it very easy 
to build an orbit camera rig.
1 Return to the Project panel and open Comps > 04b-Camera Rig*starter.  
It contains a scene similar to the previous exercise, where all the layers are 
arranged around a Position of 360,240,0. Make sure the Parent column is 
exposed in the Timeline panel; if it isn’t, press S$.
2 Add a Layer > New > Camera. Make sure Type is set to Two-Node Camera, 
select the 35mm preset, and click OK. Note how the layers separate slightly in 
space: Their Position values didn’t change; the 3D perspective has been exagger-
ated by using a “shorter” lens with a wider Angle of View. The default camera is 
50mm; toggle your new camera off then on again to confirm.
3 With your new camera selected, press p and then Sa to reveal the 
camera’s Position and Point of Interest (POI). Note that the Point of Interest is 
also at 360,240,0: For the orbit rig to work as expected, the POI must be located 
at the point you wish to orbit around; life will also be easier if the camera’s  
X and Y Position values are the same as its POI before you build the rig.
Lesson 8 — 3D SPACE
242
4 With an orbit 
camera rig, the 
camera is parented 
to a null object with 
its Point of Interest 
equaling the null’s 
Position. 
3 For best results, make sure the Camera’s 
Point of Interest is located at the point you 
wish to orbit around. 
d tip
Look at Layers Shortcuts
To automatically zoom and center your  
view to see all of the desired layers, use  
View > Look at Selected Layers or View > 
Look at All Layers. If one of the Camera  
tools is selected, press f to Look 
at Selected Layers, and CSf 
(LSf) to Look at All Layers.  
You may still want to adjust the resulting 
view using the Camera tools, but the 
shortcuts can be a good start!

4 With Camera 1 still selected, choose Layer > Camera > Create Orbit Null. 
A new layer named Camera 1 Orbit Null will be added to the comp, and the 
camera will be parented to it (see figure previous page). Press p to reveal the 
new null’s Position. Note that the camera’s original Point of Interest value has 
been copied to Camera 1 Orbit Null’s Position. The camera’s Point of Interest 
has been zeroed out, and its Position reflects just its offset from its parent. 
5 Change the Select View Layout popup to 2 Views – Horizontal. If needed,  
set the left side view to Top and use the Camera tools to zoom back until you 
can see the logo layers in the middle and camera at the bottom of the view.  
Press v to return to the Selection tool.
6 Select Camera 1 Orbit Null and press Sr to reveal its Rotation and 
Orientation values in the timeline. With the current time set to 00:00, enable 
keyframing for Y Rotation. Then locate to 3:00 in time and scrub the Y Rotation 
value: The camera will be swung around the null as if on the end of a pole. 
Set Y Rotation to 1×+0° (precisely one rotation). Press • to go back one 
frame to 02:29 and press n to end the work area here. Preview the work area; 
you will now have a perfectly looping orbit animation.
7 Scrub the camera’s Z Position value. Because the camera is parented to 
Camera 1 Orbit Null, this value now controls how far away the camera is from 
the center of the orbit. Keyframe the camera’s Z Position to create a push-in or 
pullback during the orbit.
8 Scrub Camera 1 Orbit Null’s Y Position. This simulates an “elevator” move 
with a camera crane, moving up and down relative to the objects in your world. 
Keyframe this parameter as well. Preview again, and imagine how hard it would 
have been to create the same move using a Bezier motion path! 
3D SPACE — Lesson 8
243
8 Camera rigs make it possible to create 
complex, precise movements out of a series 
of very simple animations such as Y Rotation 
or Z Position.
Our result is in Comps _Finished > 04b-Camera Rig_final. Don’t forget 
that you can stagger the timing of the individual property movements, as 
well as use the Graph Editor (Lesson 2) to add speed changes. 
D Rendering Breaks
Be careful of how 2D and 3D layers 
are arranged in your timeline. Only 
those 3D layers that are adjacent 
to each other in the timeline stack 
will render as a group inside the 3D 
renderer. When they are part of the 
same group, they can intersect and 
cast shadows on each other. 
You can easily break this inter-
action by placing certain types of 
layers between the 3D layers. These 
layers include: 2D layers (with the 
exception of null objects); any  
adjustment layer other than lights 
(even if its 3D switch is enabled);  
and any layer that has a layer style 
applied to it – indeed, that’s why  
we removed the layer styles from the 
text and stone layers in this exercise. 
If needed, rearrange the layers in the 
timeline to keep 3D layers together.

Cameras and Auto-Orientation
Both 2D and 3D layers can be set to automatically orient themselves along their 
motion paths. 3D cameras bring a couple of additional twists to this idea…
3 The Type setting determines whether it has a Point of 
Interest (Two-Node Camera) or not (One-Node Camera).
Lesson 8 — 3D SPACE
244
1 In the Project panel’s Comps folder, double-click  
05-Orientation*starter to open it. This composition  
contains a number of music symbols hanging in 3D space,  
a 3D camera, and a 2D background plus soundtrack.  
Preview; the camera gently weaves through the notes.
2 Set Select View Layout to 2 Views – Horizontal. Verify  
that the left view is set to Top and the right view is set to 
Active Camera. 
Select the camera and study its path: We have set its  
Point of Interest to focus on the last symbol and animated  
its Position (the camera’s body). As the camera body moves 
left and right, it turns to always face its Point of Interest.
Alternate Orientations
Let’s say we want a more exciting animation. The Two-Node 
Camera type we originally chose can be a bit tricky to 
animate for complex flight paths, as you would have two 
motion paths to worry about – so let’s try some alternatives.
3 Select the Camera layer and press p followed by Sa 
to reveal its Position and Point of Interest. Then double-click 
it to open its Camera Settings dialog. Change the Type to 
One-Node Camera and click OK. The Point of Interest param-
eter, as well as the line that connects it to the camera in the 
Comp views, will disappear, leaving just the Position value 
for the camera’s body. Scrub the current time indicator and 
note how the camera always points straight ahead.
If the camera were a car or airplane, it would turn to follow 
its motion path rather than always face the same direction. 
You can animate the rotation of the camera to simulate this 
turning. Or you can let After Effects do the work for you!
4 With the camera still selected, open Layer > Transform > 
Auto-Orient. Off is the same as a one-node camera. Select  
the option Orient Along Path and click OK.
As you drag the current time indicator through the time-
line, in the Top view you will see the camera automatically 
2 In the layout 2 Views – Horizontal, with the Camera layer 
selected, you can see an overview of the camera path from 
the Top view (left) and the result in Active Camera view 
(right). Initially, the camera always points toward its Point of 
Interest; a graphical line connects the camera’s body to this 
point. Background clip DMD109 courtesy Artbeats.com.
4 The Auto-Orientation dialog provides an alternative way to 
determine where the camera is pointed.

turn to follow its path. In the Active Camera view, the result 
will be a much more obvious movement as the camera swoops 
around. This makes it easy to create thrill-ride-style 3D camera 
animations.
However, be aware that using the Orient Along Path option will 
often require more work on your part! Make sure there is always 
something interesting to look at as the camera swings around.  
You may also need to smooth out kinks in your motion path  
that will cause sudden camera movements. This is where mastery 
of the Graph Editor and use of the roving keyframes option  
(both discussed in Lesson 2) come in handy.
Orient Towards Camera
Preview or scrub the current time indicator through the timeline.  
As the camera swings along its path, it occasionally looks at some 
of the musical symbols from quite a skewed angle. The resulting 
perspective distortion can often look interesting. Other times, it  
distorts objects such as client logos a bit too much for their taste, and can  
break the illusion of 3D space as you view layers from their sides. Therefore, 
there’s one more auto-orientation trick you should know about:
5 Click on layer 2 (repeat), then S+click on layer 14 (demisemiquaver) to 
select all of the music symbols. Study the Comp panel for a moment, in particu-
lar how the axis arrows for the symbols are all pointing in the same direction.
3D SPACE — Lesson 8
245
4 Setting the camera to Orient Along 
Path means it will automatically steer along 
its motion path, creating more obvious 
movements during its flight. (However, it 
does not “bank” the camera to lean into its 
turns the way an airplane or bike rider might. 
To simulate this, you will need to manually 
keyframe the Z Rotation for the camera.)
5 Normally, layers point where they’re told 
by their Orientation and Rotation parameters 
(left). However, 3D layers can be set to 
automatically orient toward the 3D camera 
(circled in red) as it moves around (right). 
Open Layer > Transform > Auto-Orient again – this time for the 3D layers, 
rather than the camera. Select the option Orient Towards Camera and click OK. 
Watch what happens in the Comp panel: All of the symbols swivel to face directly 
toward the camera. You can really see this behavior when you scrub the current 
time indicator. (If you are uncertain whether you followed our directions cor-
rectly, compare your result with our Comps_Finished > 05-Orientation_final.)

Camera Depth of Field Blur
An important visual cue is focusing sharply on a point in space and blurring 
other layers that are either closer or farther away. After Effects has long sup-
ported this depth of field blur, and its quality has improved in recent versions. 
Let’s work through an example of enabling Depth of Field and employing it  
to focus on a specific layer:
1 Open Comps > 05b-Depth of Field*starter. It contains a variation of the 
scene you worked with in the previous exercise, employing a Two-Node camera. 
Initially, all of the musical symbol layers (as well as the 2D background) are  
perfectly sharp. View Layout should be set to Two Views – Horizontal, with  
the left view set to Top and the right view set to Active Camera.
2 Double-click the Camera layer to open its Camera Settings dialog. To better 
simulate a real camera’s measurements, the Units popup in the lower left should 
be set to millimeters. Note that the Film Size parameter defaults to 36mm, which 
matches the width of traditional 35mm still image film. This also matches 
the “full frame” sensor size of DSLR cameras such as the Canon 5D, which are 
popular for shooting video.
3 Check the Enable Depth of Field switch in the lower right portion of this 
dialog. This enables a set of parameters underneath, including the interrelated 
Aperture size and F-Stop. Make sure Lock to Zoom is disabled (you will be setting 
the Focus Distance in the next few 
steps) and set F-Stop to 4, which 
is a common setting for a fairly 
shallow Depth of Field effect.  
Click OK when done.
4 With Camera still selected, 
type aa (two As in quick succes-
sion) to open its Camera Options  
in the Timeline panel. These 
parameters are near identical to 
the ones you saw in the Camera 
Settings dialog, with the ability  
to keyframe them.
Move the current time indicator 
to 01:14. Scrub the Focus Distance 
parameter while watching your 
two Comp panel views. In the Top 
view, you will notice an additional 
line moving perpendicular to the 
Lesson 8 — 3D SPACE
246
d tip
Lock to Zoom
The camera’s Zoom parameter defines at 
what distance layers are scaled 100% by 
3D perspective. You can optionally enable 
Lock to Zoom in the Camera Settings dialog 
so the focal plane for depth of field blur 
matches the 100% zoom plane.
3 The bottom half of the Camera Settings 
dialog helps you simulate real cameras.

Point of Interest line. This is the focal plane: Layers 
that are along this line will be perfectly in focus. You 
can visually confirm this by glancing at the Active 
Camera view. Layers will get progressively blurrier the 
farther away they are from this line. If this blur is hard 
to see, you can magnify its effect by increasing the 
Blur Level to 200% (if only temporarily).
5 After Effects can help set the Focus Distance param-
eter. Set the current time to 04:27 or later, which is the 
end pose. Select the repeat layer (#2), then press C 
(L) and click the Camera layer to select it as well. 
Then choose Layer > Camera > Set Focus Distance to 
Layer. The repeat layer will become sharp. Scrub the 
current time indicator; notice how the various layers 
fall into and out of focus as the focal plane passes 
through them during the animation.
3D SPACE — Lesson 8
247
4 Most of the camera’s parameters may also be edited (and 
animated!) directly in the Timeline panel.
5 Selective use of depth of field blur can help guide the user’s 
focus during an animation.
g The Iris parameters (both in the 3D camera and the 2D Camera 
Lens Blur effect) can create beautiful looks with bright highlights.  
Clip AGG-FH122-06 courtesy Artbeats.com.
6 Say you want to “pull focus” so the repeat layer is always 
sharp. With Camera and repeat still selected, choose Layer 
> Camera > Link Focus Distance to Layer. After Effects will 
create an expression that dynamically adjusts the Focus 
Distance parameter to keep the chosen layer on the focal 
plane. (Note that this works only with two-node cameras.) 
Return to 1 View and preview; you can also open our 
Comps_Finished > 05b-Depth of Field_final.
You also have a number of Iris and Highlight parame-
ters you can adjust to tweak the visual qualities of the blur 
– such as changing the Iris Shape from Fast Rectangle to 
the more realistic Hexagon. These parameters have been 
duplicated in the Blur & Sharpen > Camera Lens Blur effect, 
which may be applied to 2D footage. Experiment with the 
effect settings in Comps_Finished > 05c-Camera Lens 
Blur_final for a taste of its creative possibilities.

Lesson 8 — 3D SPACE
248
3 You can edit the Light Settings when you make 
a new light or any time later during a project. These 
settings can also be edited in the Timeline panel.
1 If no lights are present, 3D layers are evenly lit. 
Clip 10744776 courtesy Pond5.
3D Lights
If you don’t add a light to a scene, After Effects will automatically 
illuminate all 3D layers equally so that they are just as bright as 
they were as 2D layers. However, adding a 3D light can considerably 
enhance the mood of a scene – even with normal video footage!
1 Save your project, and select Close All from the Composition 
Viewer menu. Then open Comps > 06-Basic Lights*starter. It  
contains a single 2D video layer.
2 To see the results of 3D lights, you need at least one 3D layer. 
• Enable the 3D layer switch (the cube icon) for WomanPhone.mov.
• Then enable the Lock switch for the layer so you don’t  
accidentally move it while playing with your light.
3 Select the menu item Layer > New > Light. The Light Settings 
dialog will open. Let’s go over some of its parameters:
• Light Type decides how the light rays are cast. Ambient illuminates 
everything evenly; Parallel casts straight rays as if from a distant 
source. More useful are Spot and Point. Point is akin to a bare light 
bulb hanging in space. Spot is the most versatile, as you can control 
how narrow a cone of illumination it casts. Choose Point for now.
• Intensity is the brightness of the light. It can be cranked over 
100% to blow out a scene or reduced below 0% to create pools of 
darkness in a complex scene. Set it to 100% for now.
• Cone Angle and Cone Feather are available only with the Spot 
light type (and are disabled with a Point light). They control how 
wide an area of light is cast and how soft its edges are.
• Color is – ta da! – the color of the light. Start with a white light. 
You can later change it to a pale blue to cool down a scene, or a  
pale orange to warm it up.
• We’ll deal with falloff and shadows in later exercises, so leave 
them off for now. 
• Give your light a useful name such as “First Light” and click OK.  
(If you get a warning dialog, you missed Step 2.)
4 The corners of WomanPhone.mov will darken a bit as the light 
falls away, creating a subtle vignette. First Light will be selected; 
press p to reveal its Position, then St to reveal its Intensity.

• Scrub the Z Position parameter for First Light. As the light moves closer to  
the layer, the illuminated area will become smaller and more focused; back it 
away, and the layer will be illuminated more broadly and evenly.
• You can also scrub the X and Y Position values or place your light interactively 
by dragging it around the Comp viewer. The same rules apply as for any other 
3D layer: If you click on one of the axis arrows or otherwise see an axis character 
next to your cursor, your dragging will be constrained to that dimension.
• Scrub Intensity: It controls how brightly the layer is lit. (Return it to some-
where between 100% and 150% for now; don’t be shy about editing it later.)
5 Double-click your light layer to reopen its Light Settings. Set Light Type to 
Spot, Cone Angle to 60, Cone Feather to 0, and click OK. Now you will have 
a sharply defined pool of light, rather than a soft vignette. (If the pool is very 
small, try setting the light’s Z Position to –400 to back it away from the layer.)
A longer list of parameters should twirl open in the Timeline panel. You will  
see that Spot lights are similar to normal 3D cameras in that they have both a 
Position and a Point of Interest. Just like a camera, the Point of Interest helps 
you aim the light. If the light is selected, you will see both the light’s body and 
its anchor-point-like Point of Interest in the Comp panel. Practice dragging  
these around to develop a feel for how they work.
Now experiment with scrubbing its 
Cone Angle and Cone Feather parame-
ters. You can quickly achieve a variety 
of cool looks – especially when you 
also manipulate its Position and Point 
of Interest to control the angle the 
light is cast! In Comps_Finished >  
06-Basic Lights_final we had fun  
animating the light’s parameters.  
Play with your own light and save 
your project before moving on.
5 You can achieve a variety of interesting 
looks with Spot lights.
3D SPACE — Lesson 8
249
d tip
Flickering Lights
Try adding a wiggle expression (Lesson 7)  
to a light’s Intensity to make it flicker. Cone 
Angle and Cone Feather are fair game as 
well. Apply wiggle to a Spot light’s Point of 
Interest to create an automatic searchlight.
d tip
Light Settings
To edit a light’s settings, double-click it, or 
select the layer and type aa to reveal 
its parameters in the Timeline panel.
4 Point lights can be used to create simple 
vignettes and hot spots by playing with  
their position and increasing their intensity.

Material Options
Two things contribute to the way a 3D layer is illuminated: the 3D light settings 
you’ve used so far and the layer’s own Material Options. Many users leave the 
Material Options at their defaults – but learning how to manipulate these can 
take your compositions to the next level.
1 Return to the Project panel and double-click MO-Material Options*starter to 
open it. It contains a violet text layer with its 3D Layer switch already enabled 
and a 3D light that is currently turned off.
2 Turn on the Video switch (the eyeball) for the Bright Light layer. Its 
Intensity (shortcut: t) is set to 175%, so it is over-illuminating the text layer. 
As a result, its color shifts toward light pink directly under the light. This pinkish 
area is the specular highlight, also called the “hot spot.” 
The cause of the color shift is that the individual RGB color values are being 
increased to the point where one of them is clipping at its maximum value 
before the other channels do. This selective clipping changes the ratio between 
the original color values, causing the color to shift. If all three channels were to 
clip at their maximum value, you would have white.
1–2 The original color of the text layer 
without illumination (A), and how it shifts 
after it is over-illuminated by a 3D light (B).
3 Select the text layer and type aa (two as in quick succession) 
to reveal the Material Options; the default settings are shown above.
Then isolate the  
Diffuse and Specular 
Intensity parameters to 
get a feel for what each 
one is contributing to 
the mix.
Lesson 8 — 3D SPACE
250
A
B
3 Select the on the surface text layer and type aa  
(two as in quick succession) to reveal its 3D-specific 
parameters: its Material Options. The first four parameters 
have to deal with shadows, which we’ll cover later. The 
next three parameters control how brightly a light will  
illuminate a layer:
• Ambient controls how sensitive a layer is to Ambient 
lights in the scene. Because we don’t have an ambient light  
in this comp, it has no effect here.
• Diffuse can be thought of as the overall illumination  
of a layer if it was completely matte.
• Specular Intensity controls the strength of the specular 
highlight, which makes a layer appear more reflective.
Diffuse and Specular Intensity default to 50%. 
• Set Diffuse to 100% and Specular Intensity to 0% to get  
a feel for the broad effect of diffuse lighting. 
• Then set Specular Intensity to 100% and Diffuse to 0%: 
Notice the edges are not as brightly illuminated as the  
hot spot, although this default highlight is rather broad.

4 Specular Shininess controls how broad the specular 
highlight is. The shinier an object, the smaller its hot 
spot. Shininess defaults to a rather low value of 5%; scrub 
it higher and watch the hot spot shrink in size. Set it to 
around 50%.
5 Return the Diffuse value to its default of 50%, and play 
with the Specular Intensity. The smaller specular highlight 
area makes it much easier to control how “hot” the hot 
spot is without over-illuminating the rest of the layer.  
Move the light around the scene and notice how easy it is 
to “paint with light” with a tight specular highlight. We 
often set Specular Shininess to 50% or higher.
By default, the specular highlight takes the layer’s  
underlying color and adds it on top of its diffuse color.  
But what if a layer is dark in color, or even black? 
6 Select on the surface, and open Window > Character. 
Click on the main color swatch in the Character panel 
and change the color to black (or click on the small black 
swatch to its left). Where did the layer go? It’s still there, 
but a color of black plus black (in add mode) equals black, 
no matter how much illumination you throw at it.
7 Scrub on the surface’s Metal value lower; the text – or to 
be specific, the specular hot spot on the text – will reappear. 
Metallic objects have specular highlights that are the color 
of the underlying metal, while plastic objects have high-
lights that are the color of the light – white, in this case. 
Remember this important point if you are having trouble 
illuminating a layer – especially dark areas of an image.
5 Mixing an average Diffuse value with high Specular Intensity and 
Specular Shininess values creates a more mysterious look that is very 
dependent on the light’s placement and animation in the scene.
7 To illuminate a dark-colored layer such as black text, you need to 
reduce the Metal value for that layer – otherwise you may never be 
able to light it bright enough.
3D SPACE — Lesson 8
4 Increasing 
Specular 
Shininess (left) 
allows you 
to create a 
very focused 
specular 
highlight (right).
251

Lesson 8 — 3D SPACE
252
Casting Shadows
Lights in After Effects also have the ability to cast shadows.  
For shadows to happen, you need three things:
• A light enabled to cast shadows.
• A 3D layer to cast the shadows.
• A 3D layer to receive shadows that is also farther away from 
the light than the layer casting the shadows.
In this exercise, you will become familiar with setting up 
shadows, plus see how lights, layers, and shadows interact.
1 Return to the Project panel and double-click Comps >  
07-Shadows*starter. It contains two layers that are already 
enabled for 3D and spread out in Z space: Layer 1 (shadows)  
is a text layer, and layer 2 (shadow catcher) is a still image.
2 Select Layer > New > Light. In the Light Settings dialog,  
set the Light Type to Point and Intensity to 125%. Enable the 
Casts Shadows option, and for now set Shadow Darkness to 
50% and Shadow Diffusion to 0 pixels. Click OK, and a new 
Light layer will be added to your comp. The illumination of 
the layers will change, but no shadows will be visible yet…
By default, 3D layers can receive shadows, but do not cast 
them. This is because shadows require a lot of computing 
power and After Effects does not want to slow you down  
if you didn’t want them. In this case, we do want them:
3 Select the layer shadows and type aa to reveal its 
Material Options. The very first parameter is Casts Shadows;  
as we hinted, it defaults to Off. Click on Off to toggle it to On; 
the shortcut to toggle shadows on and off for selected layers  
is OSc (ASc). Now you will see some rather 
large shadows cast from the text!
A
B
C
3 continued Casts Shadows can be toggled between Off (A), On (B), and Only (C). Background courtesy Artbeats.com/Exteriors.
3 Type aa (two as in quick succession) to reveal a layer’s 
Material Options, including Casts Shadows.
2 Create a new light and make sure you enable Casts Shadows.

While you’re here, let’s quickly explore two other useful options:
• Click on the Casts Shadows value one more time: It will toggle to Only. Now 
you will see only the shadow, not the original layer.
• Toggle Casts Shadows back to On, then scrub the Light Transmission param-
eter. At 0%, the shadow is black; at 100%, it is the color of the layer casting the 
shadow. (By the way, this also applies to multicolored layers, including video…) 
Set it back to 0% for now. Then press p to reveal this layer’s Position again,  
just to remember where it resides in 3D space.
• Select shadow catcher and type aa to reveal its Material Options. Click its 
Accepts Shadows parameter to toggle through its options; Only comes in handy 
when you want to use modes with shadows. Return it to On when done.
4 Select the Light layer to see its axes in the Comp panel and press p to reveal 
its Position. Move the light either by scrubbing its Position values or interac-
tively dragging it in the Comp panel. As you do so, the size and position of 
the shadow changes. Note that as the light gets closer to the layer casting the 
shadow, the shadow gets wider. Back the light away in Z space (high negative 
values) and the shadow will get smaller.
5 Scrub the Z Position values for shadows and shadow catcher. The closer 
these two layers are to each other, the tighter the shadow. Return them to  
their original positions when done (shadows at 480,308,0; shadow catcher  
at 462,72,250). 
3D SPACE — Lesson 8
253
6–7 You can quickly create interesting looks by altering 
the position and rotation of the 3D layers and the light. 
Increasing the light’s Shadow Diffusion parameter creates 
soft shadows – at the price of longer render times.
6 Select shadow catcher and press r to reveal its 
Orientation and Rotation properties. Scrub its X or Y 
Rotation values to tilt it in relation to the layer casting 
the shadow: The shadow will be angled too. (If you rotate 
it too far, you may see the edge of this layer; there will be 
numerous occasions where you need to enlarge layers to 
avoid this embarrassment during 3D animations!)
7 Select Light again, and type aa (two as in quick 
succession) to reveal its Light Options. Scrub the Shadow 
Diffusion parameter: This controls how soft the shadow  
is at the cost of longer render times. Then scrub Shadow 
Darkness: It controls how dark (“dense”) the shadow is.
Now that you have an idea of how shadows interact, 
go ahead and put your newfound skills to work by setting 
up an animation for the light and perhaps the 3D layers. 
d tip
Shadow Only
The Shadow Only option for a layer is useful 
for creating “shadow catcher” layers; these 
can simulate 3D shadows falling on 2D 
layers. More on this technique in Lesson 9.
D The Comp Viewer
An initially disconcerting feature of 
working with the alternate 3D views 
is that a portion of the Comp panel 
will render your layers, while the rest 
(the pasteboard) will not. The size of 
this area has no effect on your final 
render; it merely reflects your current 
zoom level. This is why we suggest 
keeping Magnification set to Fit up 
to 100% (or as appropriate for your 
display) and using the Camera tools 
to zoom and pan around your views.

Light Transmission
Shadows can also project the colors of the layer receiving the  
light, rather than just cast a pool of darkness. The secret lies in  
the layer’s Light Transmission value. Perfecting the result requires 
a further understanding of the Light Options, including taking  
the ability to subtract rather than add light to a scene.
1 Open Comps > LT-Light Transmission*starter. This simple  
3D scene contains two lights: a broad overall light and a spot light 
behind the video casting shadows. Toggle off the Video switch  
(the eyeball) for Light/overall, and you will see just the shadow.  
We adjusted the Light Falloff parameters (see page 256) for Light/
shadow so that the illumination ends just before the shadow does.
2 Normally, layers block light when casting shadows, meaning 
the side of the layer opposite the light is also dark – but this is 
merely the default setting. Select Elephant.mov and type aa 
to reveal its Material Options. Scrub Light Transmission to 100%. 
Two interesting things happen:
• The back side of the layer changes from black to show the  
original colors in the layer.
• The shadow cast by the layer also changes from black to the 
layer’s original image, as if it was a video screen projecting onto 
the floor. Just as with shadows, the position of Light/shadow  
controls the direction and size of this projection. (We’ll cover 
actual reflections later in this lesson.)
1 Our original scene (top), and with 
just the shadow-casting light (above). 
Clip ASC113 courtesy Artbeats.com. 
Lesson 8 — 3D SPACE
254
2 Increasing Light Transmission to 100% (above) 
results in the shadow color changing from black to 
the layer’s color (right).

3 Toggle the Video switch for Light/overall back on. The result is a washed-out 
scene where the overall light is adding to the projected light. Also, the cone of 
illumination from Light/shadow no longer makes visual sense if the video is 
supposed to be the light source. If there was only a way to subtract the contribu-
tion of the light, while keeping the colored shadow…
4 Select Light/shadow, and choose Edit > Copy with Property Links (Lesson 3). 
This copies the light plus creates expressions (Lesson 7) that will link all of the 
parameters of the copy back to the original. Then paste: A third light will appear 
in your comp; rename it “Light/subtract”.
3D SPACE — Lesson 8
255
5 Edit the expression that Copy with Property Links applied 
to the duplicate light’s Intensity parameter to always give the 
negative of the master light it was copied from (above). Turn 
off its Casts Shadows parameter as well, and the light will be 
canceled out, but not the projected shadow (below). (To create 
blurry projections or faux reflections with Light Transmission, 
increase Shadow Diffusion for the projecting lights above 0.) 
5 With Light/subtract selected, type aa to reveal its 
Light Options. We need to modify these slightly to subtract 
the light, but not the shadow:
• Twirl open its Intensity parameter to reveal the expression 
that was automatically applied to it. Select the expression 
text, move the cursor to the end, and type “ * –1” (without 
the quotes). Press E or otherwise deselect the layer; the 
shadow-casting light will now be removed from the scene.
• Toggle Light/subtract’s Cast Shadows parameter to Off. 
Because the shadow is no longer being subtracted, the  
projected light will reappear.
• Twirl up Light/subtract and lock the layer; edit just 
Light/shadow’s parameters to change the character of the 
projection.
Feel free to edit the two remaining lights, as well as the 
Material Options for Elephant.mov and ConcretePanel.jpg. 
For example, increasing the Diffuse value for Elephant.mov 
will improve its brightness without changing any of the 
other lighting in the scene. 
d tip
4 Views
Change the Select View Layout menu from  
1 View to 4 Views to get an idea of how  
we’ve arranged the lights, layers, and 
cameras in this scene.

Light Falloff
So far, the lights you’ve created have gone on forever to illuminate all layers 
in a composition. This is not realistic; the strength of real light falls off over 
distance. You can simulate that in After Effects:
1 Close your preview comps, and open Comps > 08-Light Falloff*starter.  
It contains a set of layers arranged at varying distances from the camera.  
You can confirm this numerically by selecting all the layers and pressing  
p to reveal their Position values or visually by setting Select View Layout  
to 2 Views – Horizontal and setting the left view to Top.
2 Add a Layer > New > Light. Set Light Type to Point, Color to white, and 
Intensity to 125%, and disable Casts Shadows. Click on the Falloff dropdown 
menu to reveal options: None, Smooth, and Inverse Square Clamped. The  
last one is a more accurate representation of reality, where light gets weaker 
over distance; so choose Inverse Square Clamped for now. Set Radius to 500 
and click OK. 
3 You should notice the illumination varying across your layers. With your 
light selected, press p to reveal its Position, scrub Z Position to –600, and 
move the light to the right so it’s in front of the right-hand speaker.
Lesson 8 — 3D SPACE
256
2 The Falloff parameters help simulate 
real lights.
3–4 With Falloff 
set to Inverse 
Square Clamped, 
layers that are within 
the Radius value 
are fully illuminated, 
while layers farther 
away are lit more 
dimly. Illustration 
#2066496 courtesy 
iStockphoto/exdez.

4 Type aa to reveal the Light Options in 
the Timeline panel. The Radius determines 
how large your light is; the Intensity of the 
light starts falling off from this distance 
outward. At its initial value of 600, this point 
of full illumination just touches the middle 
layer (flourishes). Scrub the Radius value to  
get a feel for how this size interacts with 
the illumination of the various layers. For 
example, a value of 450 means the outer edge 
of full illumination just touches the surface of 
the right speaker and falls off across the rest of 
its face as well as the other layers in the scene.
5 Change Falloff to Smooth. This makes 
Light Falloff easier to control: Radius still sets 
the size of the light, while Falloff Distance 
determines how far away from the Radius the 
light stops completely. Start with a Falloff 
Distance around 300, which is the distance 
between the speakers and the rays layer  
furthest back.
6 Now set Falloff Distance to 10 – a very 
shallow falloff distance – and scrub Radius. 
Now you can use the light to “reveal” the 
layers as the light expands to touch and 
encompass more of their surface. You can use 
one of the Custom Views to get a better idea  
of what the light is doing to the layers that  
are farther back.
7 Experiment with balancing the Falloff 
Distance, Radius, and light’s Position against 
each other to control which portions of the 
layers are revealed. We’ve created an anima-
tion demonstrating some of the possibilities  
in Comps_Finished > 08-Light Falloff_final. 
Both the starter and final compositions have 
Casts Shadows enabled for the image layers; 
enable Casts Shadows for the light as well 
to create additional interaction between the 
placement of the light and receiving layers.
5 A Falloff type of Smooth gives 
you precise control over how far a 
light reaches into a scene. 
3D SPACE — Lesson 8
257
d factoid
Light Default Values
The Light Settings for each new light you 
create defaults to the values of the last light 
you created or edited. Keep an eye on this, 
especially if you used unusual or special 
options for your previous light.
6 A shallow Falloff Distance creates a more sharply defined circle of light, with 
fewer layers illuminated.

Adjustment Lights
Another way to alter how much illumination each layer receives is to use 
Adjustment Lights. These are related to adjustment layers (Lesson 3), in that 
only the layers below them in the timeline receive that particular light – regard-
less of their relative positions in 3D space.
Lesson 8 — 3D SPACE
258
3 Enable the Adjustment Layer switch for your second light (above), 
and only the layers underneath will receive its illumination (top).
4 Setting Light 
– Adjustment’s 
Intensity to a 
negative value 
(below) subtracts 
illumination for the 
layers beneath it 
(right). Enabling 
shadows for just that 
light means only the layers underneath 
will cast and receive its shadows.
1 Open Comps > AL-Adjustment Lights*starter. This is 
based on the Light Falloff scene, with a 3D light already 
added to nicely illuminate the speakers. However, the 
flourishes and rays layers are too bright and distracting. 
You could experiment with Light Falloff to reduce the 
amount of light on the layers behind, or dive into the 
Material Options for the layers to fine-tune how much 
illumination each receive. Both approaches require 
careful balancing of multiple parameters. An easier 
approach is to use Adjustment Lights to break the layers 
into groups that are illuminated differently.
2 Select Light 1 and press Cd (Ld) to duplicate 
it. Rename it “Light – Adjustment”. In the Timeline 
panel, drag it downward in the layer stack so that it is 
underneath speaker right but above flourishes.
3 Make sure the Switches column is visible; press $ or 
click the Toggle Switches/Modes button at the bottom 
of the timeline if it isn’t. Then enable the Adjustment 
Layer switch (under the half-moon icon) for Light – 
Adjustment. Now, only the flourishes and rays layers 
are receiving its illumination.
4 With Light – Adjustment selected, press t to reveal 
Intensity, and scrub its value to below 0%, which means 
you will now be subtracting illumination from the layers 
underneath. Type OSc (ASc) to enable 
Casts Shadows for just Light – Adjustment; now only 
those layers will cast shadows between themselves.
Experiment with dragging different layers above or 
below Light – Adjustment and varying the Intensity 
of the two lights in the scene. Another approach is to 
use lower positive values for Intensity and place just the 
speakers below Light – Adjustment so that only they 
receive illumination from both lights.

3D SPACE — Lesson 8
259
The Ray-traced 3D renderer enables 
a number of looks beyond simple 
“postcards in space.”
d tip
Draft Mode
If you find your computer is too slow to 
work through these exercises, click on  
the Fast Previews button at the bottom  
of the Comp panel and select Draft mode. 
This reduces the quality of the ray tracer, 
speeding it up in exchange. (Fast Previews 
is covered on page 262.)
Ray-traced 3D Renderer
The Classic 3D rendering engine does not allow “3D” layers to have any thick-
ness, which becomes readily apparent when viewing layers on-edge. Fortunately, 
After Effects has the provision for other rendering engines (also known as an 
“artisan”) to be plugged in. The first addition was the Ray-traced 3D renderer 
(the new CINEMA 4D renderer is previewed on page 270).
The Ray-traced 3D rendering engine allows vector-based text and shape layers 
(Lesson 11) to be extruded and beveled, giving them thickness. Pixel-based layers 
such as movies may not be extruded, but they can be bent, which can still add 
dimension to a scene. Additional features offered by the Ray-traced 3D renderer 
are the ability for 3D layers to be transparent as well as reflective, plus the ability 
to wrap a layer around a composition as an environment map.
Using the new Ray-traced 3D renderer does come at a cost:
• It is significantly more computationally intensive than the Classic 3D  
renderer. Once you introduce features such as transparency or reflections, your 
render times will skyrocket. The solution is to use a computer with an Adobe-
approved NVIDIA video card or chip (“GPU”) that supports its proprietary 
CUDA programming language. A list of these supported cards can be found at 
www.adobe.com/products/aftereffects/tech-specs.html; if this feature is important 
to you, check it before purchasing a new computer or video card as the list will 
expand over time. Note that many Mac laptops do not have an NVIDIA CUDA-
compatible chip, which severely handicaps their usability with this feature.
• It does not support many 2D-related compositing features, such as effects, 
masks, mattes, stencils, and blending modes. Other 2D layers inside the same 
composition may use these features, just not 3D layers while the Ray-traced 3D 
renderer is selected.
Each composition may use either the Classic 3D renderer or Ray-traced 3D 
renderer, but not both. You will find yourself choosing between these rendering 
engines depending on which features you need (for example, blending modes 
versus extrusion) as well as speed. For the next several exercises, we will explore 
features unique to the Ray-traced 3D renderer.
d tip
Animation and Extrusion
You can use any of the text animation 
tricks you learned back in Lesson 5 along 
with extruded and ray-traced text; the 
new 3D geometry will be rendered for 
each frame on the fly.

Extrusion and Beveling
Choose Close All from the Composition Viewer menu to clean up 
your project, and let’s dive in:
1 Open Comps > RT1-Bevel & Extrude*starter. It contains a text 
layer with its 3D Layer switch enabled, plus a camera positioned 
at an angle to the text. Even from this shallow angle, you can tell 
the text layer has no thickness. Twirl open the layer extrude in 
the Timeline panel; you will see the parameter categories Text, 
Transform, and Material Options.
2 This composition was created using the Classic 3D renderer; 
you can confirm this by glancing at the upper right corner of the 
Composition panel, which includes a new Renderer button. This 
currently says Classic 3D. To change the rendering engine, click this 
button, which opens the Advanced tab of Composition Settings. 
Change the Renderer dropdown menu to Ray-traced 3D and click OK. 
If this is the first time you’ve selected the Ray-traced 3D renderer 
since launching After Effects, you will see an Alert dialog about 
what you will gain and lose. Read this dialog to remind you of the 
consequences of your choice, then click OK again. A new parameter 
category named Geometry Options will appear in the Timeline panel 
for extrude.
3 Twirl open extrude > Geometry Options and slowly scrub 
Extrusion Depth while watching the Comp panel: The text will get 
thicker. However, this is hard to see, as the sides of the text have the 
exact same color as the face. To shade them differently, you need to 
add at least one light.
Lesson 8 — 3D SPACE
260
1 This composition initially uses the Classic 3D renderer 
(displayed in the upper right corner of the Composition 
panel), meaning the characters can’t have thickness.
3–4 When you initially extrude your text, it can be hard to tell the difference between the 
faces and the sides of the characters (left). You will need to add at least one light so these 
surfaces are shaded differently, revealing the layer’s true dimension (right). (Note that this  
comp has Fast Previews set to Adaptive Resolution; see page 262 for details.)
4 Add a Layer > New > Light. 
Change its name to “Light 1 – Key”, 
set Light Type to Point, Color to 
white, Intensity to 200% (ray-traced 
scenes tend to need more light),  
and Falloff to None; enable Casts 
Shadows and set Shadow Darkness 
to around 60%. Click OK: Now the 
sides and faces are more clearly 
defined. Drag this light toward the  
upper right of the Composition 
panel so you can see the sides of 
your text more clearly.
2 When you change the Renderer to Ray-traced 3D in 
the Composition Settings > Advanced dialog, you may 
see an alert of the features that will be enabled and 
disabled by this choice.

3D SPACE — Lesson 8
261
5 It is impossible to light the front, back, and all sides of an extruded layer  
with a single ordinary light. You will need to add at least one other Point, 
Parallel, or Spot light on the opposite side to illuminate the dark areas, or use  
an Ambient light, as it illuminates all parts of all layers equally. Add Layer >  
New > Light; set Light Type to Ambient and Intensity to a low value such as 
15%. Change the name to “Light 2 – Ambient Fill” and click OK. (Note that 
ambient lights have no Position value.)
6 To add some style to your text – as well as to enhance the way it catches  
light – change extrude > Geometry Options > Bevel Style to Angular, which  
will add a flat chisel-style bevel to your extruded type. Scrub the Bevel Depth  
to get a look you like. 
7 Try the other Bevel Style options. Convex produces a rounded bevel, which  
is good for softer looks. Concave produces a scooped-out bevel, which creates 
more opportunities to catch light and produce shadows in interesting ways;  
use Concave for the following steps. 
8 Increase Bevel Depth to 10. Notice how the insides of 
the “e” and “d” characters are starting to swell shut? Reduce 
Geometry Options > Hole Bevel Depth: This parameter 
scales back the Bevel Depth value just for these closed 
shapes, known in typography as counters. (Feel free to 
reduce Bevel Depth to something that looks less bloated.)
9 To make the lighting effect more dramatic, take advantage 
of the Material Options (discussed on page 250): Twirl 
open this parameter section for extrude, increase Specular 
Intensity to 100%, and slightly increase Specular Shininess 
until the specular hot spots look more like small glints. 
Also set Cast Shadows to On, as characters can cast shadows 
onto themselves and each other with the Ray-traced 3D  
renderer. Drag Light 1 – Key around the composition and 
note how the light plays off the various surfaces.
d tip
Bevels and Fonts
Be aware that bevels increase the size of 
each character, to the point where they 
might start touching each other. You may 
need to use a lighter font weight than  
you otherwise might expect, increase  
the tracking of the entire word or line, or 
increase the kerning between problematic 
pairs of characters. Some of these concepts 
are discussed in Lesson 5.
6–7 The Ray-traced 3D renderer provides 
three basic bevel styles (aside from None): 
Angular, Concave, and Convex.
Angular
Concave
Convex
9 For a classy look, try lower Bevel Depth and Extrusion Depth 
values, and increase the Specular values under Material Options. 
Also enable Cast Shadows for the text layer.

Lesson 8 — 3D SPACE
262
Ray-traced rendering looks beautiful, but 
it can be very slow – even if you have an 
Adobe-approved CUDA-enabled NVIDIA 
GPU. We suggest you become familiar with 
the available Fast Preview modes to trade 
off quality versus interactivity while working. 
Rest assured that rendering always takes 
place at full quality, regardless of the Fast 
Previews setting.
For some practice, open Comps > RTFP-
Fast Previews*starter. The Fast Previews 
mode is initially set to Off, which means After 
Effects is always rendering at its final image 
quality. Click on the Camera icon in the  
Tools panel along the top of the application 
window. If you have a three-button mouse, 
select the Unified Camera tool;  otherwise 
select Orbit Camera tool. Click in the Comp 
panel and drag to orbit around your view  
to test each mode. Unless you have an 
exceptional graphics card, updates with  
Fast Previews set to Off will be sluggish. 
Click on the Fast Previews button along 
the bottom-right of the Comp panel; a menu 
of choices will appear:
Adaptive Resolution: This mode reduces  
the resolution of your image on the fly  
while you’re dragging a layer or scrubbing  
a parameter, making it appear pixelated; 
once you release the mouse, After Effects  
will rerender the scene at final quality.  
You set the minimum resolution for this 
mode by clicking the Fast Previews button 
and selecting Fast Previews Preferences.
Draft: This choice still uses the Ray-traced  
3D renderer, but sets Ray-tracing Quality 
down to one ray per pixel. You still have 
extrusions, reflections, and transparency,  
but the reflected or transparent images  
will look very noisy. 
Fast Draft: This mode dispenses with 
reflections, transparency, shadows, and 
environment layers, keeping just extrusions, 
color, and basic lighting, and relies on just 
your CPU instead of a graphics card.
D Fast Previews
The Fast Previews mode is set along  
the bottom of the Composition panel. 
Adaptive Resolution
Draft
Fast Draft
Wireframe
Wireframe: This only renders outlined boxes 
in place of your layers. 
The color of the Fast Previews button 
gives a clue as to its state: White means Off; 
temporarily blue means Adaptive Resolution 
is engaged; solid blue means Draft, Fast 
Draft, or Wireframe is engaged. 
There are shortcut keys for quickly  
switching between the Fast Previews modes:  
Hold CO (LA) and press 1 for Off, 
2 for Adaptive Resolution, 3 for Draft,  
4 for Fast Draft, and 5 for Wireframe. 
Fast Previews is normally set for the cur-
rently active view; if you have multiple 3D 
views open and want them all to switch to 
the same setting at once, open the Select 
View Layout menu and select Share View 
Options to enable it.

Bending Layers
Although you cannot extrude video or still image layers with the Ray-traced 3D 
renderer, you can at least bend them:
1 Open Comps > RT2-Bend Layers*starter. It contains a still image sequence 
that already has its 3D Layer switch enabled. We’ve also increased its Specular 
Intensity, Specular Shininess, and Metal Material Options to provide an obvious 
specular “glare” from the golden light already in this composition. Feel free to 
move the light around to see how the specular highlight moves in response, 
then undo to return it to its original location.
2 Twirl open the Muybridge_
[01-10].tif layer to reveal its 
Geometry Options. Scrub 
Geometry Options > Curvature, 
and note how the layer bends 
toward you and away from you. 
At maximum curvature, the layer 
forms a half-cylinder, pushed 
forward or back from its origi-
nal surface. (To make this more 
obvious, you may enable the Video 
switch for the Camera 1 layer.)
The specular highlight also 
appears to travel across the layer as 
you do this, even though the light, 
camera, and layer are not chang-
ing position. This is a result of the 
varying angle between the light, 
surface of the layer, and camera. Indeed, a common 3D trick is to add a slight 
curvature to otherwise flat layers so that animating the light, camera, or layer 
will result in more interesting movement of the resulting lighting patterns.
3 You may have noticed that the layer folds in obvious segments as you 
increase the Curvature value; set Curvature to 100% to make this more apparent. 
To create a more smoothly rounded surface, increase the Geometry Options > 
Segments value. A value around 20% cures most problems with bending.
4 With Muybridge_[01-10].tif still selected, press r to reveal its Rotation and 
Orientation values. Have fun posing and animating the layer in various ways. 
Note that layers are curved only around the Y axis; to curve around a different 
axis, you will need to first pose the layer in a precomp (Lesson 6), then curve 
and reorient the layer in your final comp; see our example in Comps_Finished.
2 Flat layers tend to 
have broad specular 
highlights. As you 
increase or decrease 
the Curvature, the 
highlight moves and 
becomes thinner as it 
illuminates a reduced 
area of the curved 
surface. Muybridge 
sequence courtesy 
Dover; background  
clip U08_B21 courtesy 
12 Inch Design.
3D SPACE — Lesson 8
263
No 
Curvature
Increased 
Curvature
Decreased 
Curvature
3 At maximum curvature, the layer takes on 
the appearance of a series of folded panels 
(A). Increase its Segments parameter to 
smooth it out (B).
B
A

Transparency
Another advantage of the Ray-traced 3D renderer over Classic 3D is its support 
for true transparency, compared with simple opacity.
1 Close your previous comps, then open RT3-Transparency*starter. It contains 
an already-extruded 3D text layer in front of what is currently a 2D background. 
Note the broad diffuse lighting of this text layer, plus the specular hot spots in 
the bevels as well as the dot of the i.
2 Select the Cairns text layer and press t to reveal its Opacity. Scrub its  
value to get a feel for how it affects each surface of the extruded text, allowing 
you to see the back surfaces. Note how the specular highlights also fade with  
the Opacity value. Set Opacity to 50% and click the Take Snapshot button  
(the camera icon) along the bottom of the Composition panel to take a  
snapshot of this look; the shortcut is S%.
3 Return Opacity to 100%, and with Cairns still selected, type aa to reveal 
the expanded Ray-traced 3D Material Options. Slowly scrub the Transparency 
parameter and note that the specular hot spots keep their original brightness as 
the diffuse lighting on the text fades away. Set Transparency to 50% and press 
the Show Snapshot button (the eye+camera icon; the shortcut is %) to compare 
your previous snapshot with this new look.
4 Set Transparency to 100%. Now you will see only the specular highlights, as  
if your text was made of a polished, perfectly transparent material. To add more 
definition to the layer, increase Transparency Rolloff: This parameter reduces  
the transparency of surfaces that are at an angle to the camera. At 100%, the 
sides of the text (which are edge-on to the camera) reappear.
Lesson 8 — 3D SPACE
264
3 Set Transparency to 50% then compare 
this look to the snapshot you took earlier 
with Opacity set to 50%.
4 When Transparency for an extruded layer is set to 100% (left), its diffuse lighting disappears, and only the specular highlights remain.  
To add definition, increase Transparency Rolloff, which makes surfaces at angles more opaque (right).
The goal in RT3-Transparency is to make 
this text translucent but still readable.

5 In the real world, light rays are deflected at angles 
when they hit the transition between two different 
materials such as air and glass. To simulate this,  
After Effects has an Index of Refraction parameter. 
Slowly increase it, and note how the back bevels 
appear to move closer as their light rays are bent  
by the front of the text.
6 2D layers are visible through transparent 3D layers, 
but they otherwise do not interact with each other. To 
get a more dramatic look, enable the 3D Layer switch 
for Whimsical.jpg. Portions of the background image 
will now be offset as it is viewed through your trans-
parent, refractive text. When Index of Refraction is at 
1.00 for the Cairns layer, there is no change; slowly 
increase this value to see the effect more clearly.
7 The farther apart layers are, the more obvious the 
effects of refraction. Select Whimsical.jpg and press 
p to reveal its Position. Scrub its Z Position to the 
right to push it farther away from the camera and 
note how it is distorted through your transparent text. 
Set its Z Position to 1400, then slowly scrub Index of 
Refraction for Cairns to see how much more quickly 
the background 3D image is offset inside the faces of 
your transparent text.
Although text made out of blocks of glass or acrylic 
is cool, it can be hard to read. Fortunately, After Effects 
gives you a way to set different colors and Material 
Options for each set of surfaces of an extruded object:
8 Twirl up the Cairns layer and twirl it back down 
again until you see the Text category subhead in the 
Timeline panel. On the same line as the subhead Text 
is an Animate button – you may remember this from 
Lesson 5 when you worked with Text Animators.  
Click Animate and select Bevel > Transparency. This 
will create a new Animator and Range Selector in 
the timeline, with Bevel Transparency defaulting to 
0%. This makes the bevels opaque, providing a good 
outline for your otherwise transparent extruded text. 
Use the Add button on the same line as Animator 1  
to add other properties or treat other surfaces. 
3D SPACE — Lesson 8
265
7 Index of Refraction bends light rays as they travel through transparent 
objects. This distortion is more pronounced if the layers are farther apart. 
(We temporarily set Specular Intensity to 0% so you could see through  
the text more easily.)
8 Target the color 
and Material Options 
of individual groups of 
surfaces by using the 
Animate and Add buttons 
for text layers (above). 
We made the bevels 
opaque to add definition 
to the text (below).

Reflections
An alternative to seeing through a layer to another behind, is seeing 
the reflections of other layers that may be in front or off to the sides 
of the layer you’re working on:
1 Open Comps > RT4-Reflections*starter. We’ve already set up 
some beveled and extruded text as well as a large still image behind. 
The only layers currently in front of the text are a camera (with a 
short lens length, to exaggerate the perspective distortion so that  
we can see the sides of the extruded text) and a Point light (with  
a slight orange tint to help warm up the color of the text). 
2 Select the Reflect layer and type aa to reveal its Material 
Options. Slowly increase the Reflection Intensity to 100%; the text 
will go black! What’s going on?
After Effects employs what’s known as an energy conserving shader. 
This means that as Reflection Intensity is increased – which would 
normally add illumination to a layer – the effects of diffuse and 
ambient lights as well as transparency are reduced to help avoid 
over-illuminating a scene. (Note that the specular highlights keep 
their intensity; they’re affected by Reflection Rolloff, which we’ll 
keep at 0% for this exercise.) As there is no other layer in front of 
your text, there is nothing to reflect. Combined with the attenuation 
of the lighting, this means the layer appears darker.
2 Reflections in After Effects are “energy 
conserving” – as you increase Reflection 
Intensity, diffuse and ambient lighting is 
reduced. If there’s nothing to reflect, your 
layer will go black. However, you can see 
reflections in the extruded sides of the text.
4 To see reflections with the default 
Material Options settings, the reflection 
source must not be between the camera 
and the layer you are viewing. It must also 
be illuminated to bounce light rays back 
toward your hero layer.
Lesson 8 — 3D SPACE
266
Because the Ray-traced 3D renderer does not support 
texture maps, you may want to use reflections to add more 
interest to the faces of otherwise boring text or shapes.
d tip
Ray-tracing Quality
If you notice any unpleasant artifacts,  
they can be addressed by increasing the  
Ray-tracing Quality (covered on page 269).

However, look at the extruded sides of the text: You will see some reflections 
there, based on light rays bouncing from the layer behind off the sides and 
toward the camera. That’s nice, but clearly what we need is a layer in front  
of our text for it to reflect.
3 Choose a view layout of 2 Views – Vertical, with the lower view set to Top.
4 Select the layer Toadstool Rock.jpg and press p to reveal its Position.  
Scrub its Z Position to the left to pull the layer forward. Initially, the layer  
will be between the camera and the text, blocking your view; hold S while  
scrubbing to move the layer faster. Once it is behind the camera, you can see  
the text again, but you may not see a reflection yet; you need to illuminate  
the reflection source for it to bounce light rays back toward the text. Keep  
scrubbing until Toadstool Rock.jpg is behind the light as well.
5 Here are a couple of tricks to sidestep these obscuration and illumination 
issues: With Toadstool Rock.jpg still selected, type aa to reveal its Material 
Options. Toggle Appears in Reflections to Only; that solves the camera obscu-
ration problem. Then toggle Accepts Lights to Off; that returns the layer to its 
original color values regardless of your scene’s lighting.
6 With Toadstool Rock.jpg still selected, press p to reveal its Position again and 
scrub its values, or move it in your 3D views. Its placement relative to the Reflect 
layer – including rotation – determines the size and framing of the reflections.
7 Reflections are not always 
mirror-sharp in the real 
world; quite often they are 
softened by imperfections 
on the surface of an object. 
For the Reflect text layer, 
slowly decrease Reflection 
Sharpness; the reflections will 
become blurry. This parame-
ter interacts with the distance 
to the layer being reflected: If 
the reflection source is close, its reflections will appear sharper. If you are having 
trouble getting your reflections as soft as you like, move the reflection source 
farther away and optionally scale it to get the reflection pattern you desire.
You may have noticed that soft reflections look noisy. This is from not  
having enough rays active in the Ray-traced 3D renderer. We’ll deal with image 
quality issues like this in a moment. But first, we want to show you one more 
trick with reflections.
3D SPACE — Lesson 8
267
7 Decrease Reflection Sharpness to create 
blurry reflections. If a layer is being used 
only as a reflection source, you can also 
apply a blur effect to it. 
5 To make the position of the reflection 
source less critical, set Appears in Reflections 
to Only and Accepts Lights to Off.

Environment Layers
Another way to simplify the placement of a reflective source (or a background 
image) is to wrap a layer completely around your world:
1 Open Comps > RT5-Environment Map*starter. 
2 The still image Ruins Panorama 
is special: It contains a seamless 
panorama. Select it and choose the 
menu item Layer > Environment 
Layer. Now you will see only a small 
portion of the image, as it has been 
stretched to wrap 360° around your 
3D world.
3 Select the enviro text layer and 
type aa to reveal its Material 
Options. Increase its Reflection 
Intensity; the portion of the envi-
ronment layer behind the camera will be reflected.
4 Twirl open Ruin Panorama.jpg, and you will see that its normal Transforms 
and Material Options sections have been replaced with a minimal set of 
Options. Scrub Y Rotation: The background image will pan in one direction, 
and the reflection will pan in the other.
5 Toggle the Appears 
in Reflections parameter 
for Ruin Panorama.jpg. 
This allows you to 
choose if the environ-
ment layer is used only 
as a backdrop (Off),  
only as a source for 
reflections (Only), or 
both (On, the default).
Lesson 8 — 3D SPACE
268
d tip
Optimal Environment
The best candidate for an environment layer 
is a 360° panorama that also covers 180° 
from above to below. It should have a 2:1 
aspect ratio and be very large: at least 6k  
for standard-def video and as high as 18k  
for high def. You can build an environment 
map out of multiple images in a precomp.
2 Setting Layer > Environment Layer takes  
a selected panoramic image and wraps it 
completely around your 3D world. Ruins 
image #1350819 courtesy iStockphoto/bischy.
5 Use an environment layer’s 
Options (left) to orient it as desired 
for both the background and 
reflections (above).
D Math for Maps
To calculate how much of the envi-
ronment layer is visible, take the 
Camera’s Angle of View, divide it by 
360°, and multiply it by the width in 
pixels of your image. In the case of 
Ruins Panorama.jpg (which is 6000 
pixels wide) and Camera 1 – 28mm 
(which has a 65.5° Angle of View),  
the calculation is 65.5 ÷ 360 x 6000 
= 1092 pixels visible at once: okay 
for this 960-pixel-wide composition, 
but not enough to stretch across 
a 1920-pixel-wide high-definition 
video frame without degradation. 
Disable the Video switch for 
Camera 1 – 28mm to use the comp’s 
default 50mm camera, which has a 
39.6° angle of view. In this case only 
660 pixels are visible; notice it now 
looks a bit soft. Turn Camera 1 back 
on when done.

Ray-tracer Image Quality
You can adjust the quality produced by the Ray-traced 3D renderer.  
As increasing quality drastically increases render times, this is a step 
best left for last, just before you render your final output.
1 Open Comps > RT6-Ray-tracer Quality*starter. It includes some 
highly reflective text. Although the reflected image is sharp, if you 
look closely you may notice the edges look a bit noisy or aliased; this 
is the first clue that you may need to increase the quality settings.
2 Select the text layer rays and type aa to reveal its Material 
Options. Decrease Reflection Sharpness to around 50%. The reflections 
will become blurrier – as well as noisier.
3D SPACE — Lesson 8
269
4 The default setting of 3 for Ray-tracing Quality often produces 
visual noise in soft reflections as well as around the edges (above); 
higher settings in a range of 8–10 provide acceptable results for most 
scenes (below).
3  Click on the Ray-traced 3D button in the upper 
right corner of the Comp panel, or open Composition 
> Composition Settings and click on the Advanced 
tab. On the same line as the Renderer popup menu is 
a button labeled Options – click it. A Ray-traced 3D 
Renderer Options dialog will open. 
Ray-tracing Quality determines how many light rays 
are calculated per pixel. Its effect is more obvious in 
soft reflections and motion blur, as well as extruded 
edges. A setting of 3 means a box of 3×3 rays (9 total) 
will be used. 
The Anti-aliasing Filter affects how these rays 
overlap between adjacent pixels. Box is the default; 
higher settings (Tent, then Cubic) blur them together 
more, which smoothes out aliased edges at the price  
of slightly softening the final image. Subjectively, the 
Ray-tracing Quality setting has a far larger impact on 
the image quality; the Anti-aliasing Filter sets the final 
bit of polish and can often be left at Box.
4 Increase the Ray-tracing Quality to 8 (which is  
64 rays per pixel) and click OK but do not close the 
Composition Settings dialog – the Comp panel will 
update in the background (assuming that the Preview 
switch is enabled). After a pause, the image will 
improve considerably. Tweak Ray-tracing Quality to 
find the lowest value that produces acceptable results, 
then click OK in the Composition Settings dialog.
3 Composition > Composition Settings > 
Advanced > Options opens the Ray-traced 3D 
Renderer Options, which controls its image quality.

Lesson 8 — 3D SPACE
270
CINEMA 4D Renderer
As we were finishing this book, Adobe started testing a new ren-
dering engine for After Effects based on MAXON CINEMA 4D’s 
standard renderer. Here is a quick preview of it, with the warning 
that details may change by the time it is released.
In its initial form, the CINEMA 4D renderer will bear many 
similarities to the Ray-traced 3D renderer: It will allow you to 
extrude Shape and Text layers, bend video and still image layers, 
and reflect Environment layers. Most of the individual parame-
ters available in the Ray-traced 3D renderer will also be available 
in the CINEMA 4D renderer. This means you can take most of 
what you’ve learned in the Ray-traced 3D renderer section of this 
lesson and apply it directly to the initial release of the CINEMA 
4D renderer. However, as the CINEMA 4D renderer is not ray-
traced, the results will not look the same, and some identically 
named parameters may respond differently. 
After the CINEMA 4D renderer is released, open the comp 
C4D-New Artisan*starter, which uses it. Layer 4 – artisan 
– should already have its Geometry Options and Material Options 
revealed; if not, select the layer and press aa to open them. 
Assuming you have worked through the Ray-traced 3D renderer 
exercises in the preceding pages, you should be somewhat famil-
iar with how these parameters 
work; try tweaking them for the 
artisan layer in this composition. 
The Geometry Options are iden-
tical between the two renderers. 
However, the Diffuse, Specular, 
Metal, and Reflection properties 
may react a bit differently, and 
the Transparency parameters were 
not implemented in the prelimi-
nary version we tested.
Press c to choose the Camera 
tool, and drag it around in the 
Comp panel to get a feel for how 
responsive this rendering engine 
is. Depending on the computer,  
it should feel more responsive 
than the Ray-traced 3D renderer.
The new CINEMA 4D rendering engine (also 
known as an “artisan”) supports similar options 
as the Ray-traced 3D renderer (above), but with 
a potentially softer look (below).

There will be three choices for Renderer 
in the Composition Settings > Advanced 
section (above). Click on Options to open 
a second dialog that determines the final 
image quality (below; subject to change).
3D SPACE — Lesson 8
271
Pros and Cons
The main advantage of the CINEMA 4D renderer is that it is 
CPU-based, meaning you do not have to install a specific brand 
of video card or GPU chip for good performance. The more CPU 
cores your computer has, the faster it will perform. Based on this 
work in progress, there are also some aspects of the CINEMA 4D 
renderer we prefer; for example, the shadows are subjectively 
nicer and there are fewer issues with aliasing and noise. In 
general, the version of the CINEMA 4D renderer we tested had  
a softer look than the Ray-traced 3D renderer.
At least initially, not all of the features of the Ray-traced 3D 
renderer may appear in the CINEMA 4D renderer, including:
• Transparency, Transparency Rolloff, and Index of Refraction: 
To fake transparency, you may have to use the layer’s normal 
Opacity parameter.
• Light Transmission and the option of Shadows = Only.
• Environment layers are not yet directly visible, although 
they do show up in reflections.
• Metal parameter currently has less resolution.
• Ambient intensity per layer is currently not supported – 
Ambient lights may render the same for all layers in a comp.
Renderer Settings
The name of the current rendering engine is displayed in the 
upper right corner of the Comp panel. To change it, click 
on it to open the Composition Settings’ Advanced section. Change the Renderer 
menu to Ray-traced 3D and wait several seconds; the surface qualities of the 
artisan 3D text layer will change and the Environment layer will become visible 
in the scene.
Change the Renderer menu back to CINEMA 4D and click the Options button 
to its right. The CINEMA 4D Renderer Options dialog will open; the shortcut is 
to hold C (L) and click on the renderer’s name in the Comp panel. As of  
the prerelease version, there is a single slider to trade off speed versus quality; 
this one control orchestrates several parameters under the hood. For final 
renders, we prefer settings toward the right end of its range where the words 
“Best AA” (antialiasing) appear underneath it (circled at right).
Adobe and MAXON plan to evolve the CINEMA 4D renderer over the next 
few versions of After Effects, so look for its capabilities to expand. But even this 
initial work in progress we tested is shaping up to be a very useful alternative  
to the Ray-traced 3D renderer.
The same scene with the Ray-traced 3D renderer. One major 
difference initially is that the environment layer is visible with 
this rendering engine. A more subtle difference is ray-traced 
shadows are harder than those with the CINEMA 4D renderer.

Quizzler
Earlier in this lesson in comp RT2-Bend Layers, you learned how to bend flat 
artwork such as image scans. For your challenge, open the composition Quizzler 
> Butterfly*starter. It contains a scanned butterfly illustration, which we’ve 
already arranged in 3D space for you, including setting up a light and a camera, 
and setting Material Options > Light Transmission for Butterfly_2.psd to 100% 
so that the light shines through the butterfly. 
Your job is to make the butterfly flap its wings and float across the top of the 
tulips in the scene, maintaining a somewhat even height. Watch the movie 
Quizzler > Butterfly.mov for reference. For an additional challenge, think about 
how you could make it appear to fly behind some of the flower petals; we’ll 
show you an advanced solution to this problem in Lesson 10.
Lesson 8 — 3D SPACE
272
d tip
Draft 3D Button
If you find your computer is particularly  
slow while working in 3D, toggle Draft 3D 
along the top of the Timeline panel: This 
switch disables lights and camera depth of 
field. If your shadows disappear, make sure 
you didn’t accidentally turn this switch on!
Butterfly courtesy Dover; flower clip 
CC-FH101-74 courtesy Artbeats.com.
The source file has many more buildings for you to play with to 
create your city scene. Duplicate layers to create even more. 
Idea Corner
Here are a few ideas for how to take what you’ve 
learned in this lesson to the next level:
• To keep the 02-Multiplaning exercise simple, we 
did not use all of the buildings in Russell Tate’s orig-
inal illustration. In the Project panel, twirl open the 
Sources > illustrations folder; the Cityscape_full 
comp has more than twice as many elements for 
you to play with. In addition to arranging them in 
a horizontal line, you can also try arranging them 
as a street to travel down in Z space, akin to the 
music symbol flythrough in 05-Orientation. Also 
try using Depth of Field blur to focus on buildings 
in the middle, while buildings closer or farther away 
are progressively blurrier.

• Twirl open the Idea Corner folder and then open the Multiple Cameras 
comp. You can cut between multiple cameras inside a composition in the same 
way you cut between full-frame source layers back in Lesson 3: The camera 
layer on top in the Timeline stack will take priority while the current time  
indicator is between its in and out points. (Unfortunately, you cannot use 
Opacity to crossfade between different cameras inside the same composition.)
By the way, in this comp we used beveling and extrusion to improve upon 
the Camera Rig exercise from earlier in this lesson; although it makes the scene 
more attractive, it slows down the rendering. Try changing the 3D renderer for 
the comp to get better performance.
3D SPACE — Lesson 8
273
You can perform hard cuts between multiple 
cameras inside the same composition. 
Crossfading between cameras requires 
creating a separate comp per camera move, 
and crossfading between those. The scene 
shown here has been enhanced using 
extrusion, beveling, and bending with  
the Ray-traced 3D renderer.
• You learned while working through RT2-Bend Layers 
that you can bend a single layer by 180° into a half cyl-
inder. Try forming a full cylinder by pairing two layers 
together. Once you have that, parent them together  
(Lesson 6) and animate them as a single object. 
We have an example of this concept in Idea Corner > 
RT2-Bend & Spin Layers. The trick is making a portion 
of your cylinder transparent so you can see through to 
the other side. You learned several techniques for creating 
transparency in Lesson 4; in our example here we used 
Effect > Channel > Set Matte to convert the luminance of 
the grayscale Muybridge scans into the layer’s own alpha 
channel. Once you’ve done that, try placing or animating 
objects, such as a ribbon of type, through the center of  
your cylinder.
• You can combine text animation with 3D text. Try cre-
ating a line of text; extrude and bevel it using what you’ve 
learned in this lesson, then apply a text animation preset 
(or even better, create your own text animation using what 
you learned in Lesson 5). Experiment with shadows, trans-
parency, and reflections to get some interaction between 
the characters as they animate into place.
You can re-create many “primitive” shapes by arranging groups 
of 3D layers and taking advantage of bending layers with the  
Ray-traced 3D renderer. Here a pair of flat layers are bent and 
parented together to form a rotating cylinder.

L
ife is easy when you can capture everything 
exactly the way you want it. But reality often 
intervenes: Maybe the camera shook too 
much. Or maybe it wasn’t possible to shoot an 
actor or object in the desired environment. And 
you might not get permission to shoot arcs of  
electricity across a canyon, or hang a huge banner 
from a skyscraper.
Therefore, if you are interested in a career creating visual 
effects, you need to learn how to stabilize footage plus 
motion track objects already in footage. 
Overview
The basic concept behind Motion Tracking and 
Stabilization (“tracking” for short) is to follow specific 
 features in a shot as they move around from frame to 
frame. Once that is done, you can perform some tricks:
• Stabilize the footage: If you know a feature was supposed 
to be in the same place from frame to frame, but it actually 
moves, After Effects can track that movement, then warp 
or animate the layer in the opposite direction so the shot 
appears to be steady.
• Make one object follow another: If you know how a 
feature is moving through a scene, you can make another 
layer follow the exact same path. For example, you can 
replace one computer screen, license plate, or poster with 
another, or have words follow a person around. Effect 
control points may also be animated to follow a feature 
throughout a shot.
• Reconstruct where the camera was: After Effects features 
a 3D Camera Tracker that automatically identifies hundreds 
Lesson 9
274
Track and Stabilize 
A key to visual effects work is removing or re-creating camera movement.
 d Getting Started
Make sure you have downloaded the file archive for  
Lesson 9 and decompressed it. It contains the project file 
and sources you need to execute this lesson.
 d In This Lesson
 276 
Warp Stabilizer
 279 
Reversible Stabilization
 281 
point-based tracking and stabilization
 282 
creating track points
 284 
applying stabilization
 285 
when tracks go wrong
 286 
2D motion tracking
 287 
applying a motion track
 288 
tracking interlaced footage
 288 
Radio Waves effect
 289 
applying tracks to effect points
 291 
planar tracking with mocha AE CC
 294 
pasting the mocha track into After Effects
 295 
mocha Shape
  297 
pasting mocha shape into After Effects
 298 
3D Camera Tracker
 299 
defining the plane; moving the target
 300 
creating a Track Null; parenting
 302 
adding 3D text
 302 
creating a shadow catcher
 304 
Rolling Shutter Repair

of features and analyzes their movements. It uses their relative 
movement to reverse-engineer where the camera originally 
was and how it moved through a scene, and how far away 
various surfaces such as walls were from the camera.
After Effects offers a variety of tracking tools with their 
own strengths, weaknesses, and methods of working. Two of 
the newer tools – Warp Stabilizer VFX and the 3D Camera 
Tracker – are highly automated, choosing the features to track 
for you. By contrast, the legacy “point” tracker in After Effects 
requires you to identify one or more features in the footage for 
it to then track. Similar but different, the third-party “planar” 
tracker mocha AE CC (from Imagineer Systems) requires you 
to identify a flat surface for it to follow throughout a shot. 
In all cases, the best features to track have clearly defined 
shapes with distinct edges that don’t change their underlying 
shape over time. These features should also have contrasting 
color or brightness compared with the pixels around them. 
Once After Effects (or mocha AE) has this initial idea of what 
to look for, it searches for the same feature in the next frame of footage.  
Once it finds the same feature, it updates its understanding of where the  
feature is and what it looks like now, and looks for it in the next frame.
Tracking one feature is often enough. However, sometimes it is useful to track 
multiple features. If you track two points, After Effects can calculate the angle 
and distance between them, allowing you to rotate and scale the layer being 
attached or stabilized. And if you track four points (such as the four corners of 
a poster) or an entire plane, then After Effects or mocha AE can take perspective 
distortion into account and “corner pin” a new object over the object you are 
tracking. And, as alluded to above, the Warp Stabilizer VFX and 3D Camera 
Tracker track hundreds of points. This is so Warp Stabilizer VFX can construct 
a mesh to warp the moving image into the desired shape, or the 3D Camera 
Tracker can reconstruct the original 3D world these features occupied.
In this lesson, we will explore each of these tracking and stabilization tools, 
suggesting which ones to use for specific tasks.
TRACK AND STABILIZE — Lesson 9
275
After Effects CC features multiple trackers 
and stabilizers. If you do not have a mask 
selected (Lesson 4), the choices in the 
Tracker panel are the 3D Camera Tracker 
(A), the Warp Stabilizer VFX (B), plus the 
legacy point-based motion tracker (C) and 
stabilizer (D). The first two are used in the 
Composition panel; the second two must 
be used in the Layer panel. The remaining 
options in the Tracker panel apply to the 
legacy tracker and stabilizer. 
In addition to the options shown here, 
mocha AE CC from Imagineer Systems  
is also bundled with After Effects, and  
is accessed from the Animation menu.
A
C
B
D

Warp Stabilizer VFX
As cameras keep getting smaller, more of them are being carried by hand or 
attached to unusual places such as the side of a car or handlebars of a bike. 
Although many cameras have some form of image stabilization built in, the 
often-shaky result may still be distracting. Warp Stabilizer VFX can smooth out 
the camera shake in many (but not all!) shots.
1 Open this lesson’s project file: Lesson_09.aep. In the Project panel, the 
Comps folder should be twirled open (if not, do so now). In this folder, locate 
and double-click WS-Warp Stabilizer*starter to open it.
2 This comp contains one layer: Elephant.mov. Preview the clip and watch it 
closely: Despite the camera operator’s best efforts to create a smooth pan, there 
are wobbles in the motion – particularly near the end of the clip when  
the camera stops panning.
Lesson 9 — TRACK AND STABILIZE
276
3 Select Elephant.mov and press H to return to its start at 00:00. Open 
Window > Tracker, and click Warp Stabilizer.
When you do so, the Effect Controls panel will open, showing the Warp 
Stabilizer VFX effect applied to your clip. Initially, a blue banner will be  
displayed over the Composition panel – this indicates Warp Stabilizer VFX 
is analyzing the clip frame by frame; progress will be updated in the Effect 
Controls. Next, an orange banner will appear as After Effects stabilizes the clip.
4 When the analysis and stabilization are complete, the clip will appear to be 
scaled up slightly. Preview again: The panning movement will be smoother, 
especially at the end of the clip. 
Underneath the hood, After Effects has tracked multiple features of the 
shot, determined what areas contained the dominant movement (usually the 
 background) and what areas had opposing movement (usually the foreground, 
such as the elephant), figured out the motion path for the background, and then 
3 Open the Tracker panel and apply 
the Warp Stabilizer (top). After Effects 
will analyze (A) then stabilize (B) the clip 
automatically. Clip ASC113 courtesy 
Artbeats.com.
A
d factoid
Multitasking
Analyzing and stabilizing a clip can take 
Warp Stabilizer VFX some time – especially 
on larger or longer clips. Therefore,  
After Effects will allow you to continue to  
work on other compositions while these 
computations take place in the background.
B

smoothed that movement. It then panned and scaled up the clip to 
make sure it always covered the entire viewing frame; the amount 
of scaling is  displayed in Warp Stabilizer > Borders > Auto-scale.
After viewing the resulting dreamlike motion, you may be 
tempted to say “That’s great; I’m done!” – but you can tweak the 
shot further if you desire.
5 In the Effect Controls panel, increase Warp Stabilizer VFX > 
Stabilization > Smoothness from its default of 50% to 200%. After 
Effects will restabilize the clip (requiring it to be scaled up slightly 
more). Preview again; the panning movement will be even more 
constant and sedate. Tweak this parameter to taste.
6 Stabilization > Method controls how After Effects rearranges  
the pixels to create smooth motion. The default of Subspace Warp 
has the ability to warp the background differently than the fore-
ground to correct parallax errors between the two. If the result  
has a noticeably rubbery look, try less-sophisticated methods: 
Perspective warps the entire frame as a unit; the other two choices 
perform no warping and merely offset transform properties  
(scale, rotation, and position) for the layer. Choose the option  
that is least distracting to watch.
7 Borders > Framing determines how After Effects will then treat 
the stabilized image to make it more presentable:
• Stabilize, Crop, Auto-scale (the default) performs the minimum 
amount of scaling required to make sure the entire frame is covered 
by a portion of the original image. 
• Stabilize, Crop keeps scale at 100% (maximizing image quality) at 
the expense of not covering the entire frame. Instead, it performs 
the minimum amount of cropping required to keep the edges stable. 
• Stabilize Only leaves it to you to deal with the edges that are 
exposed by the stabilization process (note the pink background 
color in the figures below).
TRACK AND STABILIZE — Lesson 9
277
A
B
C
4 The Warp Stabilizer effect contains a number of 
parameters you can tweak to improve the stabilized shot.
7 The default framing method of Stabilize, Crop, Auto-
scale (above) fills the frame by balancing off smoothed 
movement with automatic scaling (A). Stabilize, Crop 
doesn’t scale the result, but crops the edges so they remain 
consistent for the duration of the shot (B). Stabilize Only 
leaves any scaling, cropping, or reframing up to you (C).

• Synthesis Input Range: Twirl down the Advanced 
section and increase this parameter. This allows 
Warp Stabilizer to search earlier and later in time 
to find replacement pixels. For this clip, set both 
Smoothness and Additional Scale to 100% and 
locate to 04:00 in time: There is a small gap along 
the top of the frame. Increase Advanced > Synthesis 
Input Range, and more of the gap will be filled in.
Sometimes your original clip will have artifacts 
around the edges that you don’t want used to fill 
in missing pixels. You can crop out these unde-
sired pixels using the Advanced > Synthesis Edge 
Cropping section. Advanced > Synthesis Edge 
Feather determines how softly the new edges are 
blending into the existing frame.
There are two more Advanced parameters that are not required by this 
example, but are still good to be aware of:
• Detailed Analysis tracks even more elements in the original clip, at the 
expense of calculation time and larger file size (all of Warp Stabilizer VFX’s  
internal data are stored with the effect in the project file).
• Rolling Shutter Ripple attempts to remove the “jello-cam” artifacts caused by 
the type of image sensor used in cell phones, DSLRs, and some other cameras.  
If some of this wobble is still visible after stabilization, try setting it to  
Enhanced Reduction.
8 The Framing option of Stabilize, 
Synthesize Edges (top) copies pixels from 
adjacent frames in time to fill in the edges 
as well as possible without scaling (above).
Lesson 9 — TRACK AND STABILIZE
278
8 Set Borders > Framing to Stabilize, Synthesize Edges. This mode 
turns off Auto-scale and deals with edge issues by looking for 
visual information in adjacent frames that it can copy and paste 
to the current frame to cover the missing areas. At the start of 
this clip, there is no additional information for the left edge of 
the frame – but by the time you get to 00:22, it has found enough 
pixels elsewhere in time to cover the gap. To see how much 
area Synthesize Edges is synthesizing, toggle Framing between 
Stabilize Only and Stabilize, Synthesize Edges.
When Synthesize Edges cannot find enough material to cover 
the entire frame, there are three parameters you can balance off 
each other to help make up the difference:
• Decrease Smoothness: Decreases how much After Effects  
has to offset the original image to compensate for undesired  
movements.
• Borders > Additional Scale: Increase until the edges are covered.

Reversible Stabilization
One of the main uses of stabilization is to temporarily remove the camera  
movement from footage, insert a new object into the scene, and then reintro-
duce the original movement. That’s the goal of our next exercise. But first,  
we’re going to deal with a common problem that arises when using Warp 
Stabilizer VFX – and its solution.
1 Return to the Project panel (if necessary, click the Overflow menu to the right 
of the Effect Controls tab and select Project) and double-click WS2-Reversible 
Stabilization*starter to open it. Preview; it’s a hand-held shot of a person typing 
on a computer, and the audio of a speech he’s supposedly transcribing.
2 Select Laptop.mov and apply Animation > Warp Stabilizer VFX. When it is 
done, set its Stabilization > Result menu to remove all camera movement, and 
preview. The video warps and wobbles unacceptably.
If Warp Stabilizer produces results like these, the usual 
culprit is that After Effects is also trying to stabilize a part 
of the image that is moving contrary to the rest of the 
scene. In this case, the walls and laptop are stationary 
parts of the room, but the person is moving. We need 
to get Warp Stabilizer VFX to ignore the person and just 
track those stable areas.
TRACK AND STABILIZE — Lesson 9
279
d tip
Docked Layer Panel
In some of the earlier lessons, we had you 
dock the Layer panel alongside the Comp 
panel, so you could see both at the same 
time. In this lesson, it is fine to have the 
Layer panel docked into the same frame 
as the Comp panel; you can simply switch 
between the two as needed.
d tip
Panning and Zooming
To zoom into and out of a display such as  
the Layer panel, you can use the C on Mac 
(L on Windows) and the + and - keys 
above the normal keyboard, or the scroll 
wheel on a mouse. Press and hold z to 
temporarily switch to the Zoom tool, then 
click to zoom in. To pan around the display, 
hold either ß or h, then click and 
drag inside the display.
D Locked Down Camera
Most traditional motion stabilizers remove all camera motion in a shot, compared 
with Warp Stabilizer’s attempts to merely smooth out this motion. However, Warp 
Stabilizer can also remove all motion. To do this:
• Set Stabilization > Result to No Motion.
• Ignoring the edges for now, choose the Stabilization > Method that produces  
the fewest visual artifacts.
• Set Borders > Framing to the desired method for dealing with missing edge 
information. Because Warp Stabilizer is no longer allowed to pan the image to help 
recenter it, more severe cropping or scaling will be required. 
For example, with WS-Warp Stabilizer*starter, a Framing method of Stabilize, 
Crop, Auto-scale requires us to twirl open the Borders > Auto-scale section and 
increase Maximum Scale to 239%. This is a case where Synthesize Edges can really  
help – as long as you have lots of additional source material earlier and later in time 
(often called “handle”) for After Effects to use.
2 At its default, 
Warp Stabilizer VFX 
introduces warping into 
the footage, rather than 
stabilizing it. The effect 
needs your help to work 
better. Clip F129-02 
courtesy Artbeats.com.

6 Add the Audio Spectrum effect (top) 
and position it over the footage (below).
Lesson 9 — TRACK AND STABILIZE
280
d tip
Missing Track Points?
If you’ve enabled Show Track Points and 
can’t see them, make sure Warp Stabilizer 
VFX is selected in the Effect Controls  
panel. If they are too small or large,  
scrub Advanced > Track Point Size.
3 Select all the track points on the man’s 
body and delete them. Repeat this every 
15–30 frames through the end of the clip.
3 Return to 00:00, and in the Effect Controls twirl down the Advanced section. 
Enable Show Track Points. The stabilization will be temporarily removed and 
you will see a number of colored crosses over your footage in the Composition 
panel. Drag a selection lasso around the points on the person’s body, hands, 
and arm, and press D. You can hold down C (L) and click on addi-
tional points to select them.
• Scrub the current time indicator later in time until you see a lot of points 
reappear on the hands and body. Select and delete those. Move later in time, 
and repeat the process, on through the end of the clip. Warp Stabilizer VFX has 
some internal intelligence to ignore bad points on its own, but better informa-
tion will yield better results.
• When you’re done deleting bad points, toggle Show Track Points back off, 
and preview: The result should be a nice stable image. (If it’s not, go back and 
delete more bad points.)
5 Set Advanced > Objective to 
Reversible Stabilization (right). This is 
similar to Result > No Motion, except 
Warp Stabilizer does no scaling or 
cropping of the image.
6 Time to add our special effect. With Laptop.mov still selected, apply Effect 
> Generate > Audio Spectrum. At the top of its effect controls, set Audio Layer 
to audio to transcribe, and at the bottom of its controls, enable Composite on 
Original. Move the Start Point and End Point (the ends of the waveform line) 
to go across the width of his laptop display, as if he is looking at the audio as 
well as listening to it. While you’re at it, change the Inside and Outside Colors 
to something that blends better with the display than the default pink. When 
you’re done, twirl its effect controls closed to save space.

Point Tracker and Stabilizer
There are many occasions when you want to explicitly decide which features  
in a shot to track and what to do with the resulting information. This is where 
the legacy point-based motion tracker and stabilizer are useful. Both require 
similar workflows to perform the initial track. After you learn the basic setup, 
we’ll show how to apply this track to stabilize a clip, followed by having 
 additional layers and effects follow a feature in the clip.
1 Close your previous comps, and open 01-Stabilization*starter. 
This footage was probably shot with a long telephoto lens, which 
is hard to keep stable. Preview and watch closely: You can see the 
image bob up and down slightly. If this movement isn’t obvious, 
place your cursor near a rock; you will see the ground move as the 
preview plays. 
2 Just for fun, apply Warp Stabilizer VFX, optionally set 
Stabilization > Result to No Motion, and preview – it wobbles more 
now than it did before! Enable Advanced > Show Track Points; more 
of the points are assigned to the moving animals than the rest of 
the scene. That’s going to make it impractical to remove all the bad 
track points. So delete Warp Stabilizer VFX, and let’s try a different 
approach.
Study the footage for features that might make good features to base your  
stabilization off of: something that has good contrast, that keeps the same shape 
and position throughout the shot, and that isn’t obscured by another object.
7 A duplicate of Warp Stabilizer VFX – 
with the stabilization data stored inside the 
effect – is placed below your alterations 
to the clip, with its Objective set to 
Reverse Stabilization (left). The result is the 
original camera movement, with the Audio 
Spectrum effect following along (above).
TRACK AND STABILIZE — Lesson 9
281
3 Double-click the Wildebeests.mov layer 
to open it in the Layer panel. Features that 
have good contrast are good candidates for 
the tracker to follow. Clip BCT-FH100-68 
courtesy Artbeats.com.
7 Now let’s reintroduce the original camera move. Select 
the Warp Stabilizer VFX effect, and Edit > Duplicate it. Drag 
the Audio Spectrum effect between the two copies of Warp 
Stabilizer VFX. Then set the Objective menu for the bottom 
copy of Warp Stabilizer VFX to Reverse Stabilization: the origi-
nal footage will fill the screen again. 
Preview, and you have your original hand-held camera move-
ment (often desirable over a locked-down shot), with the Audio 
Spectrum effect following the movement of the laptop screen. 
An alternate approach to duplicating the Warp Stabilizer VFX 
effect on the same layer is to copy it and apply it to an adjust-
ment layer (Lesson 3) at the top level of the composite. Set 
Objective to Reverse Stabilization, and everything underneath – 
including new layers – will get the original camera movement. 
This is demonstrated in WS2-Reversible Stabilization_final2.

Track Points
3 Setting up the point-based 
tracker and stabilizer needs to 
take place in the Layer panel, so 
double-click Wildebeests.mov to 
open its Layer panel. Then make 
sure Window > Tracker is open.
4 Click the Stabilize Motion button in the Tracker panel. 
This will create a track point, which consists of two boxes 
and a crosshair:
• The inner box is the feature region, which you will use 
to enclose the feature you wish to follow.
• The outer box is the search region, which is where After 
Effects will search in the next frame for pixels that match 
what was in the feature region in the previous frame. 
• The crosshair in the middle of these boxes is the  
attach point. It is the center for any stabilization that 
takes place. (When tracking, it defines where the  
Anchor Point for the new layer will be placed.)
5 You need to set up your track point at the time you 
plan to start the track; press H to return to 00:00. 
Hover over the track point until the cursor changes to a 
black pointer with four arrows at its tail, which indicates 
you can move the entire track point as a unit.
Drag the track point to a feature you identified in Step 
2. The rocks in the lower right make good candidates. 
Center the track point over your desired feature. While 
you’re dragging, you’ll notice that the track point turns 
into a magnifier, making this easier. 
6 The feature we chose to track is larger than the default 
size of the feature region. Drag the feature region’s 
corners until it encloses a good set of rock edges, with a 
few spare pixels around them. Also make sure the search 
region is big enough to take into account how much the 
feature moves from frame to frame.
Lesson 9 — TRACK AND STABILIZE
282
Search Region
Feature Region
6 Drag the inner feature region large enough to just enclose 
your feature; drag the search region a little larger than the 
feature region. Note that dragging a corner of the feature or 
search regions will move all corners symmetrically around its 
center. To move just one corner, press C (L) while dragging.
5 When you see a cursor with four arrows at its tail, you 
can then move the track point as a group (left). While you’re 
dragging the track point, it turns into a magnifier (right).
4 Click Stabilize Motion in the Tracker panel (above, right). 
A track point will be created (above).

Performing the Track
7 In the Tracker panel, click on Options. Many tracks fail because of bad  
option settings, so it’s worth a few seconds of thought.
• The most important section is Channel. Set this based on how your feature 
stands out from the pixels around it. In this case, the rocks and water both lack 
color and saturation, but they have a lot of contrast, so check Luminance.
• You can usually leave Enhance Before Match disabled; use it only if the  
feature you are tracking is blurry and you have trouble tracking it.
• You always want to leave Subpixel Positioning on, and most of the time  
you want to leave Track Fields off (see the sidebar When Tracks Go Wrong on 
page 285). Enable Adapt Feature On Every Frame only if your feature constantly 
changes shape or size every frame. We often set the popup below to Adapt 
Feature and leave Confidence at 80% – this tells After Effects to keep looking  
for the same feature unless it thinks it has changed too much.
Click OK when you’re done.
8 Click on the Analyze Forward button in the Tracker. After Effects will  
search each frame for the feature you’ve defined. When it is finished, you will 
see a motion path created for Track Point 1. 
In this case, its individual points will be all 
bunched together, as the feature doesn’t move 
that much and when it does, it’s mostly in 
the vertical direction. Press u, and in the 
Timeline panel you will see a large number  
of keyframes applied to Track Point 1. 
It’s a good idea to save your project right 
after performing a successful track so that you 
can revert back to it if something goes wrong 
afterward. After that, the next step is taking 
these keyframes and doing something useful 
with them!
TRACK AND STABILIZE — Lesson 9
283
7 Always check the Motion Tracker 
Options before performing a track. Most 
important is to set Channel based on 
what’s unique about your selected feature.
8 Click Analyze Forward (above, left). 
After Effects will then chase your feature 
around the shot from frame to frame 
(above). When done, you will see a motion 
path for your track point in the Layer panel 
and a large number of keyframes in the 
Timeline panel (left).
d tip
Motion Blur Baked In
Stabilizing a clip will not remove motion blur 
already in the original shot. Shots with a 
lot of motion blur can even look strange if 
they’re rock-steady, but blurred.

Applying Stabilization
9 In the Tracker, make sure Track Type is set to Stabilize and Motion Target  
is set to Wildebeests.mov (if it isn’t, click on Edit Target). Then click Apply.  
A Motion Tracker Apply Options dialog will open; set Apply Dimensions to  
X and Y Dimensions and click OK.
After Effects will bring the Comp panel forward; press Sa to reveal the 
new Anchor Point keyframes in the Timeline panel. These keyframes offset the 
movement detected for your feature region, causing the footage to be stabilized. 
To verify that your stabilization worked, preview. You might want to place 
your cursor over a feature in the Comp viewer to verify that the footage is no 
longer bobbing as much as before. It may still wander very slightly; it is hard to 
get a perfect track – especially 
on your first try!
Congratulations: You now 
have the basic skills required 
to perform most motion track-
ing and stabilization chores.
Lesson 9 — TRACK AND STABILIZE
284
After stabilizing, you may see some of 
the background color (pink, in this case) 
around the edges of the Comp viewer. 
9 Verify the Tracker settings, click Apply 
(above), and keep the default of applying  
to both X and Y dimensions (right).  
Keyframes will then be created for the layer’s 
Anchor Point to stabilize the clip (below). 
d tip
Matching Blur
To create a more realistic composite,  
it is a good idea to enable motion blur 
for a new layer that tracks a feature 
in a clip – especially if the tracked 
object is moving fast. 
Cleaning Up
Now for the bad news: Scrub the current 
time indicator along the timeline and 
watch the top edge of the Comp viewer. 
That pink area you see is the comp’s 
background color peeking through (we 
made it an obnoxious color to make it 
more noticeable). As a result of the layer 
being moved to make it appear stable, 
it is no longer centered, and therefore 
doesn’t cover the entire frame.
Let’s try a few ways to compensate for 
this. The best solution will vary from job 
to job, depending on how much the layer 
moves and what looks best.

10 Select Wildebeests.mov and press s to reveal its Scale.  
Scale up the footage slightly until it covers the entire frame 
throughout the entire timeline. The cost of this is a slight soften-
ing of the image as you scale over 100%. If the unwanted gaps  
are biased toward a particular side, shift the Position of the clip 
slightly in that direction to reduce the amount of additional Scale 
needed. (This is where the Warp Stabilizer demonstrated earlier 
shines, as it automatically scales and recenters the stabilized shot.)
TRACK AND STABILIZE — Lesson 9
285
11 You can also clean up the edges by using a 
carefully colored solid or a copy of the original footage.
11 Return the layer’s Scale to 100%, and press F (the apostrophe 
key) to reveal the Action and Title Safe grids. If the offending area 
is well outside the Action Safe area, you may be able to rely on 
the television’s bezel cutting it off. However, you should fill these 
areas with something, just in case. Here are a couple of ideas:
• Cover the background with a solid. Select Layer > New > Solid. 
Click on the Make Comp Size button, and eyedropper a color  
from around the edges of the footage. Click OK and drag this  
new solid down the layer stack to sit behind your tracked footage. 
This creates a solid color border to fill the revealed areas.
• Select Wildebeests.mov and type Cd on Mac (Ld  
on Windows) to duplicate it. Select the copy on the bottom 
(layer 2), press H, then press a to reveal its Anchor Point; 
its value should read 480,270 (its initial location at the center  
of the comp). Click on Anchor Point’s stopwatch to delete  
the keyframes created by applying the stabilization (see figure 
to the right). You will now have an echo of the footage in the 
revealed areas. This is the approach we took in our version, 
Comps_Finished > 01-Stabilization_final.
• If drastic correction is needed, consider cropping the  
stabilized clip in a precomp, then creating a frame around it  
for a “picture in picture” effect.
10  One solution is to scale up the footage until it covers the entire frame. 
D When Tracks Go Wrong
Not all footage can be tracked accurately; be pre-
pared for some disappointment and compromise.  
If you notice the track point wandering away from 
the targeted feature during the Analyze step, press 
any key to stop, then try these corrective actions:
• Scrub the time marker in the Layer panel back 
until the track point looks correct, then click Analyze 
Forward again.
• If that doesn’t work, return to the start and 
modify your track point, try different Options, or  
try tracking a different feature.
• If the feature grows larger over time, you might 
need to delete this track, press N, set up your 
track points there, then click Analyze Backward 
instead of Forward.
• If there is no one good feature to track over the 
entire shot, track one feature until After Effects loses 
its way, hold down OS (AS), and drag the 
track point to a new feature while leaving the attach 
point where it was (otherwise, the resulting track will 
jump suddenly at this point).
• If the feature you want to track goes off screen, 
you may need to create an offscreen keyframe  
manually and let After Effects interpolate between 
this and the last good tracker keyframe.

2D Motion Tracking
Now that you know your way around the legacy point tracker, let’s put your 
newfound skills to work with a typical motion tracking exercise: adding a 
“thought bubble” to a moving person.
1 In the Project panel, double-click Comps > 02-Tracking+Null*starter to 
open it. Layer 5 at the bottom (TroubledGirl.mov) is the video we want to 
track; the four text layers above it will comprise the thought bubble. 
2 After making sure the Tracker panel is visible, press H. Select the 
TroubledGirl.mov layer, then click Track Motion in the Tracker panel. This  
will open the clip in its Layer panel and create a track point.
We’re going to try to track her head; where her hair changes color should give 
us good contrast. Drag the edge of the Feature Region to make it large enough  
to enclose the crown of her head, and then move the track point over her head. 
Increase the Search Region to take into account how much she moves from 
frame to frame; bias it toward the right, as that’s the direction she’s walking.
3 Click on the Options button in the Tracker and position the Motion Tracker 
Options dialog where you can still see the girl’s head.
The first option is setting Channel. What sort of contrast is there between the 
light and dark areas of her hair? Luminance – so select that option.
Next comes the Adapt Feature settings. As she’s moving her head quite a bit 
over time, enable the Adapt Feature On Every Frame option. (Fortunately, we 
don’t need a pixel-perfect track for a thought bubble graphic like this.) Set the 
popup below to Stop Tracking so it will be obvious if After Effects can’t follow 
this feature any longer. Then click OK to close the dialog.
Press H and click the Analyze Forward button in the Tracker. After it is  
finished, After Effects will display the track path in the Layer panel.
Lesson 9 — TRACK AND STABILIZE
286
2 Make sure the Feature Region encloses 
the crown of her head where her hair 
changes color, and expand the Search 
Region in the direction she’s walking.  
Clip 45384922 courtesy Pond5.
3 Since she moves her head during the 
shot, enable Adapt Feature on Every Frame 
(above). To know if After Effects loses the 
scent, set the popup below to Stop Tracking. 
Click OK, then click Analyze Forward in the 
Tracker panel; when done, you will see the 
track’s motion path (right).

Applying the Track
Time to apply the results of your motion tracking. There’s a quick and 
dirty way to do this, and a more clever way…
4 To decide which layer will receive your motion track, click the Edit 
Target button in the Tracker panel. In the Motion Target dialog that 
opens, there will be a popup for Layer. Hmm…four layers want to get  
the track, and you can select only one. You could apply the track twice,  
or you could use a trick you picked up back in Lesson 6: using parenting 
and null objects.
5 Click Cancel in the Motion Target dialog. Instead, create a dummy 
layer to receive the track to which you can later attach as many other 
layers as you want.
Choose Layer > New > Null Object; it will appear in the Timeline panel. 
Its initial position is unimportant. Back in the Tracker panel, click on Edit 
Target again, and this time select your null. Click OK and verify that the 
name of the null appears next to Motion Target. 
Click on Apply and click OK in the Motion Tracker Apply Options 
dialog that appears. The Comp panel will come forward. Select your null 
object and you will see its new motion path in the Comp panel. 
Type @ to deselect all and clean up the display. Scrub the current time 
indicator and note how the upper left corner of the null follows the head.
6 Time to parent your other layers to this null:
• Position the text layers to taste around the girl’s head. You can do this 
at any point in the timeline; we suggest you do it roughly in the middle 
so you have room around the girl’s head to place them. When you’re 
done, S+click on the text layers to select them all.
• Press S$ to reveal the Parent panel (if it’s not already visible).  
With your four layers still selected, click on the Parent popup for any one 
of them and choose your null. (You can turn off the Video switch for the 
null; it will still work as a parent.) 
Preview to enjoy your result. Our 
version is in Comps_Finished > 
02-Tracking+Null_final – we added 
a wiggle expression (Lesson 7) to 
each text layer to make it appear her 
thoughts were swirling around her 
head, while still tracking it. And  
don’t forget to save your project…
TRACK AND STABILIZE — Lesson 9
287
6 Use parenting to attach your additional graphical layers to the null (above); now they 
will all follow the girl as she walks (top).
5 Create a new null and choose it in the Tracker’s 
Motion Target dialog (above). Click Apply and the 
null will now follow the girl’s head (below).

Tracking for Effects
In addition to making a layer follow an object in another layer, you can also use 
motion tracking to have effects follow a feature around a layer by assigning the 
tracked motion to an effect point. In this exercise, you will track a mountain 
peak and use results to send out radio waves from that peak.
1 In the Project panel, double-click Comps > 03-Effect Track*starter to open 
it. It contains one layer, which is an aerial pullback over a range of mountain 
peaks. Preview it, thinking about which peaks might be candidates for tracking.
2 Select MountainPeaks.mov. Then apply Effect > Generate > Radio Waves, 
and preview. The mountain footage will be replaced by a series of concentric 
blue circles  emanating from the center. Either continue playing the preview,  
or stop it and press N so you can see several waves on screen and become 
familiar with the Radio Waves controls:
• In the Effect Controls panel, make sure the Wave Motion section is twirled 
down, and increase Frequency to increase the number of waves (we used 2.00). 
Alternatively, you can reduce the Expansion value to slow down how fast the 
waves fly off screen. Then try decreasing the Lifespan (we tried 2.000): You will 
notice that the waves start to die away as they get older. 
• Twirl down the Stroke section if it is not already open. To make the waves 
start skinny and grow thicker as they age, decrease the Start Width and increase 
the End Width (we used 1.00 and 20.00, but set these to taste). 
2 The Radio Waves effect (inset) creates  
a series of shapes that appear to be “born” 
from a movable Producer Point (right). 
These shapes can change size and opacity 
over time.
Lesson 9 — TRACK AND STABILIZE
288
In this exercise, you will track a mountain 
peak as we fly past it and apply an effect 
that will make it seem like radio signals 
are being broadcast from it. Clip MP221 
courtesy Artbeats.com.
D Tracking Interlaced 
 
Footage
Usually, you want to separate fields 
plus remove 3:2 pulldown, if present 
(these options are covered in the 
Appendix chapter). Then you can 
disable Track Fields in the Motion 
Tracker Options for most footage. 
However, if there are sudden 
changes in the movement of the 
tracked feature where one field is 
very different from another, you 
may need to enable Track Fields to 
more accurately follow this motion. 
Conversely, if you are having trouble 
locking onto a feature to track and 
there is very little motion in this 
feature, try turning off field separa-
tion just while you are tracking.

• Stop the preview and press 
H. The waves remember 
where they were born, which can 
create an interesting trail over 
time. Click on the stopwatch 
next to Producer Point (near 
the top of the Effect Controls) 
to enable keyframing. Move the 
time indicator a few seconds 
later, click on the crosshair icon 
next to Producer Point, then click 
somewhere in the Comp viewer. 
Do this a couple more times until 
you reach the end of the comp, 
and preview to see the result.
3 Verify that the Tracker 
panel is visible; if not, select 
Window > Tracker. Make sure 
MountainPeaks.mov is still 
selected, then click Track Motion in the Tracker panel.
The Layer panel will open. The original footage should now 
be visible again, even though the Radio Waves effect is still 
applied. This is controlled by the View popup along the bottom 
of the Layer panel: Switch it to Radio Waves (the motion path for  
Producer Point will be visible), then back to Motion Tracker Points.
4 Press H to make sure you are at the start of the clip. Hover the cursor  
over the track point until the now-familiar black pointer with the four-arrow  
tail appears. Click and drag the track point over one of the peaks. We chose the 
pointy peak near the middle of the frame, as it remains visible for the entire shot 
and keeps good contrast with its background during the shot. Be sure to enlarge 
the track and search regions to enclose a good part of the peak. Then hold 
C(L) and drag the Attach Point to the tip of the peak.
5 Click on Options in the Tracker. The foreground peaks are about the same 
brightness as the mountains behind but are a different color; therefore, set 
Channel to RGB. The mountain peaks only change shape a little during the  
shot, so go ahead and disable Adapt Feature on Every Frame, and instead set  
the popup below to Adapt Feature (meaning it will adjust its search only when 
the feature has changed quite a bit). Finally, give your track point a name at  
the top of the dialog, such as “middle peak”. Click OK.
TRACK AND STABILIZE — Lesson 9
289
5 In the Motion Tracker Options, set 
Channel to RGB, disable Adapt Feature 
On Every Frame, and set the bottom 
popup to Adapt Feature.
3–4 Click on the Track Motion button in the Tracker panel, 
and select Motion Tracker Points from the Layer panel’s 
View popup. Place the track point over one of the peaks, 
looking for an area with clean edges and good contrast.

6 Click Analyze Forward in the Tracker. If the track stops before the end 
of the clip, press Analyze Forward again – this will refresh and continue 
the track. When finished, click Edit Target to open the Motion Target 
dialog. Make sure that Effect Point Control option is selected, and that 
Radio Waves/Producer Point is selected in the  adjacent popup. Click OK. 
Back in the Tracker, click Apply, set Apply Dimensions to X and Y,  
then click OK. This will replace your trial animation in Step 2 with the 
Motion Tracker’s data.
7 Preview, and Radio Waves will create a nice set of moving circles for you. But 
where are the mountains? Radio Waves does not have any “composite” options 
that allow you to see it and the underlying layer. No problem – just duplicate 
the layer and use that:
• Twirl up the open parameters in the Timeline panel to reduce the clutter. 
Select MountainPeaks.mov and use Edit > Duplicate.
• Select the bottom copy, MountainPeaks.mov, and select Effect > Remove All.
Tweak the Radio Waves effect on the top layer to taste. Press $ to reveal 
the Modes column and try compositing the waves with modes such as Add or 
Overlay. Our version is saved in Comps_Finished > 03-Effect Track_final.
Make sure you save your project. In an Idea Corner at the end of this lesson, 
we’ll also challenge you to continue working with this composition and track a 
second peak, applying the results to an effect with two effect points. 
Applying tracks to effect points is a skill that is useful in both motion graphics 
and visual effects. For example, you can apply the track to the center of a radial 
blur effect to create an interesting selective focus look. It is also quite common 
to track light sources in 
real scenes or 3D renders 
and apply them to lens 
flare centers.
Next, you’ll move up 
to a more challenging 
task that involves planar 
tracking and the corner 
pin effect. 
Lesson 9 — TRACK AND STABILIZE
290
6 After the track is finished, verify that the 
Motion Target is the effect’s Producer Point 
before trying to apply the track.
d tip
Storing Multiple Tracks
If you have a track or stabilization that you 
think might work, but want to try another, 
click on Track Motion or Stabilize Motion 
again. Your previous and new tracks 
will be saved as keyframes for the same 
layer and you can apply either one later. 
Rename tracks in the Options dialog to 
keep straight which track is which.
7 After you apply the track, 
the Radio Waves will animate 
across the screen (A). To 
composite the waves over the 
mountains, duplicate the layer, 
delete the effect from the copy 
underneath, and use a blending 
mode on the top layer to mix 
(B, and right).
A
B

Planar Tracking with mocha AE CC
A common tracking task is to follow a  
computer screen or mobile device display, 
a poster on a vehicle or wall, or other rect-
angular image, and replace it with a new 
image. To perform this with the legacy point 
tracker in After Effects, you need to track the 
four corners of the source rectangle – which 
means four times the chance for error. A far 
better tool is mocha AE CC, which is bundled 
with After Effects CC. mocha tracks the 
entire shape of the target rectangle (or other 
plane) rather than individual corners, often 
producing superior results. However, its user 
interface is very different from After Effects’. 
Let’s work through an exercise so you can 
gain some familiarity with mocha.
Tracking in mocha
1 Close any previous comps and bring  
the Project panel forward. Open 04-mocha 
AE*starter. It contains two video layers: 
DoctorsMRI.mov, which you will be tracking, and 
HeartMonitor.mov, which is your replacement 
screen. We’ve initially disabled HeartMonitor.mov’s 
Video switch so it won’t obscure DoctorsMRI.mov.
2 Select DoctorsMRI.mov and choose the menu item 
Animation > Track in mocha AE. If this is the first time 
you’ve opened mocha AE, you will see a registration 
screen. If mocha does not come forward, press CT 
(AT) and select it. After the registration screen 
may be a prompt to configure preferences, which you 
can cancel. When the splash screen appears, click 
Start. A New Project dialog will open that points to 
this clip, already loaded with its duration, frame rate, 
pixel aspect ratio, and other data. If you had trimmed 
the clip, this would also be reflected inside mocha.
Click OK to open the clip in mocha. Use the View 
menu to scale the clip to fit the available display space. 
To pan the image, press the x key while dragging.
TRACK AND STABILIZE — Lesson 9
291
2 A mocha project is based on the clip you wish to track or stabilize. 
Therefore, the New Project dialog contains detailed information about 
the source clip.
mocha is a powerful tracking and stabilization system that is optimized for 
tracking planar surfaces. Clip 45456928 courtesy Pond5.

3 Move the current time indicator 
(drag the vertical bar, not the triangle 
above) to the end of the clip where 
you can best see the “hero” monitor. 
You define the plane to track by 
drawing a shape around it. mocha has 
tools for Bezier masking (akin to that 
used by After Effects) and for X-Splines. 
To get some practice with the latter, 
select the Create X-Spline Layer tool 
and click around the four corners of 
the hero monitor. You can be some-
what loose, but be careful not to enclose 
too much of a separate plane such as the second monitor on the left. Click on 
the first point to close your shape; mocha will return to the Pick (selection) tool. 
• X-Splines create rounded corners by default, which are helpful for organic 
shapes. To square off the corners, pull out the blue handles extending from  
each point to change the “tension” of the shape through that corner.
• Clean up the location of your corners by clicking and dragging them.  
A magnified version will be displayed along the left side of your image.
Fortunately, this clip is easy for mocha to track. For more complex tracks you 
could draw additional shapes to define more areas to track by using the Add 
X-Spline to Layer tool (see figure above right). This is particularly handy when 
you have only a few identifiable features to track that are spread out on the  
same plane. Overlaps between shapes are excluded from the track; it is useful  
to exclude reflections, shadows, and people moving in front of your plane.  
You can define and animate shapes to remove these so-called obscurations.
4 Click the Track Backwards button along the bottom of mocha’s timeline (see 
figure above left). After mocha has finished analyzing the shot, scrub its time 
indicator and check how well the shape you drew stuck to the face of the monitor.
5 Next is defining the surface you wish to paste a new graphic onto. Enable Show 
Planar Surface (see figure to the left); a blue rectangle will be overlaid on top of 
your clip. Move the four corners of this rectangle to the corresponding corners of 
the image on the monitor. Place the corners just beyond the edges of the display 
inside the bezel, as you want your new graphic to completely cover this image.
Lesson 9 — TRACK AND STABILIZE
292
Add X-Spline 
to Layer
Create X-Spline 
Layer Tool
Show Planar Surface
Show Planar Grid
3 Select the Create X-Spline Layer tool 
and click around the outer edges of the 
monitor (top). Adjust the tension and 
position of your four corners (above).
Current Time 
Indicator
Track Backwards

TRACK AND STABILIZE — Lesson 9
293
6 To better visualize whether you have a solid track, enable Show Planar Grid:  
A pink grid will be attached to your planar surface, extending well beyond its 
boundaries. The current grid spacing may not be optimal for viewing your scene; 
open View > Viewer Preferences and adjust the size of the grid dividers. Unlike 
After Effects, you don’t scrub these values left and right; click and move the 
mouse in a circular direction to change their values, or enter values directly. 
Values of 24,24 worked well for us.
Scrub the current time indicator or press ß for realtime playback,  
and observe how solid the track is. If the track wanders, there are a couple of 
ways to correct it (short of performing a new track from scratch):
• You can nudge the location of the Planar Surface; mocha will automatically 
keyframe and interpolate changes for you.
• mocha has a dedicated Adjust Track panel along the bottom of the display 
with tools to help your fine-tuning. Using this advanced feature is covered in 
mocha’s online documentation (press ! to access).
7 It’s time to export your track. Select the Track tab along the bottom left of  
the mocha display and click Export Tracking Data, or use File > Export Tracking 
Data. Select the middle Format choice of After Effects 
Corner Pin [supports motion blur]. Click Save for a text 
file to be saved to your drive for archiving. If you are ready 
to return to After Effects right now (which we are), open 
Export Tracking Data again and click Copy to Clipboard. 
You can quit mocha now if you like. You will be asked if you would like to 
save your project; mocha has already been auto-saving your intermediate results 
inside the 09_Sources > Results folder (alongside the source clip mocha was using).
5–6 Set up the Planar Surface to 
correspond to the existing display (left) 
and view the Planar Grid to make sure 
that the perspective is correct and the 
track is solid (above).
To scrub the timeline smoothly, drag  
the current time indicator from the white 
vertical line (not the triangle above). 
7 You can export your tracking data to a 
text file or directly to the clipboard to then 
paste onto a layer in After Effects.

Pasting the Track into After Effects
For those who did not have success performing the track in mocha (or were  
just feeling lazy today), we’ve saved both our mocha project and our results.  
To see how we set up our project, open mocha from inside After Effects, 
then open Lesson 09-Track and Key > 09_Sources > mocha AE results > 
DoctorsMRI.mocha (you may be prompted to relink to the original movie in 
the Sources folder). If you want to use our exported track, open mocha screen 
track.txt from that same folder in a text editor, select all, and copy.
8 Bring After Effects forward again. Because pasted 
keyframes start at the current time indicator, select 
DoctorsMRI.mov and press i to locate to its in point.
Select HeartMonitor.mov (your replacement display), 
enable its Video switch, and paste. Press u to reveal its 
keyframes, and you will see that the Corner Pin effect has 
been applied to this layer, with each of the four corners 
keyframed. The Transform properties Position, Scale, and 
Rotation have also been keyframed. By choosing the “sup-
ports motion blur” export option, mocha calculated where 
the center of the tracked surface was and how it moved over 
time. This allows you to enable motion blur for the new 
layer (although it’s not necessary on this slow-moving shot).
Lesson 9 — TRACK AND STABILIZE
294
8 Paste the track data onto the new  
display layer. It will be pasted over the 
original display (top), with both Corner Pin 
and normal Transform properties keyframed 
to match the movements of the underlying 
layer (above). Data display clip CP121 
courtesy Artbeats.com.
9 If there are mismatches between layer and comp sizes (which there are here), 
the new graphic will not align with the underlying clip. Press Sa to add 
HeartMonitor.mov’s Anchor Point, hold C (L), and slowly scrub its values 
until the new screen better aligns with the old monitor – in our case, we moved 
it to around 531,270. Our version 04_mocha AE_final includes additional tricks, 
such as blurring and desaturating the display to match it to the scene.
d tip
mocha Resources
To access the mocha AE CC documentation, 
press ! while inside mocha. The Tracking 
Basics section is a particularly worthwhile 
read for a new user. And mocha’s product 
page www.imagineersystems.com/products/
mocha-plus/ is a good jumping-off place for 
additional tips and tutorials.

TRACK AND STABILIZE — Lesson 9
295
3 Define a shape path around the  
high-contrast sections of the side of the  
bus – namely, the windows. The default  
red color for the path is hard to see against 
the red bus. In the Layer Controls panel 
(upper left), click on the color swatch for 
Layer 1 and change the color to something 
more visible such as green. Clip 46092682 
courtesy Pond5. 
mocha Shape
Another use for motion tracking is to assist rotoscoping: creating an animated mask 
to cut out an object or isolate an area for treatment. After Effects has a pair of 
automated trackers that work with masks, but when they fall short, you need to 
consider a more powerful solution such as mocha AE CC and its “shape” feature.
1 Open MS-mocha Shape*starter. It contains the same source as the Rigid 
Mask Tracker exercise in Lesson 4. Our goal is the same: to change the color of 
the poster on the side of the bus.
2 Select Bus.mov and choose Animation > Track in mocha AE. mocha’s New 
Project dialog will open with the clip already loaded; click OK.
The basic workflow is to track the shot (the bus), create a mask shape around 
what you want to cut out (the poster), and then attach that shape to the track.
3 The slab-like side of the bus provides a good plane for mocha to track. Select 
the Create X-Spline Layer tool and define a shape around the upper portion of 
the side of the bus including its windows, as they provide some nice contrast 
and edges. Be careful that you don’t confuse mocha by also selecting the front of 
the bus, as that is on a different plane.
d tip
Bring mocha Forward
If mocha AE does not come forward 
automatically, press CT (AT) and 
select it from the list of open applications.

4 The bus stays relatively centered in the shot, but its perspective changes  
over time. In the Parameters section (the lower third of the interface), select  
the Track tab and look for the Motion panel. Enable the Perspective option,  
and choose Small Motion instead of the default Large Motion – this will reduce 
the search region, reducing the chance of tracking the wrong features.
5 With the current time indicator at the start of the clip, click the Track 
Forward button. To verify you have a good track, enable the Show Planar Surface 
option you used in the previous exercise and use it to enclose the top section of 
the poster. Press ß to preview; if the defined surface wanders unaccept-
ably, you’ll want to redo the track. If it drifts just a little, you can fix that when 
you create the rotoscoping shape. 
When you’re satisfied, turn off Show Planar Surface. In the Layer Controls panel, 
double-click Layer 1, change its name to “track”, and enable its Lock switch.
6 Now you want to create a more precise shape that defines the poster’s outline. 
Click the Goto In Point button (see figure left) to jump to the start of the clip. 
Select the Create X-Spline Layer tool and click in the six corners of the poster 
(don’t worry that the corners are not sharp!). Again, a red path is hard to see 
against a red bus, so click Layer 2’s color swatch in the Layer Controls panel and 
change its color to blue. While you’re there, change the layer’s name to “mask”.
7 To sharpen the corners, right-click on any one of the path corners you 
created, and choose Selection > Select All in Spline. Then right-click again, 
and choose Point > Corner. Now carefully position each point in its respective 
corner, taking advantage of the magnifying display that pops up.
7 Create a second layer that 
precisely masks the poster 
(above). Right-clicking on the 
corners gives you some nice 
selection and shape options 
(right).
g In the Play Controls, click the Change 
Playback Mode to toggle between Bounce, 
Loop, and Play Once playback modes.
Lesson 9 — TRACK AND STABILIZE
296
4 In the Parameters > Track > Motion 
panel, optimize the default settings by 
selecting Perspective and Small Motion.
Goto Out Point
Change Playback Mode
Goto In Point

8 Look for the Layer Properties panel directly below the Layer Controls. With 
the mask layer selected, click on the Link to Track menu and change it to track. 
Preview; mask’s path will now follow the bus.
9 Is the blue mask path slipping slightly over time in relation to the poster? 
You can keyframe corrections to it. mocha already created an initial keyframe at 
the start of the timeline; move to the end of the clip and reposition the corners 
as needed. The path will interpolate between keyframes; keep subdividing the 
clip into halves and add adjustment keyframes as needed. Take advantage of  
the magnifier windows that pop up showing you where the corner was placed 
on adjacent keyframes.
10 Return to the Parameters > Track tab and look for the Export Data panel  
at the far right. Click Export Shape Data. This will remember the mask shape  
you created in addition to its position data. Save a copy of the text file if 
you like, and save a copy to the clipboard.
Next you’ll apply the shape data as an After Effects mask, which teams 
well with the Compositing Options built into every effect:
11 Return to After Effects. Press H, select Bus.mov, and choose 
Edit > Paste Mocha Mask. Preview, and you should see just the poster 
floating in air. If needed, tweak Mask Feather and Mask Expansion to 
improve its outlines. 
(An alternate way to apply shape data to a layer in After Effects is to 
select a layer and paste normally, the mocha Shape effect will be applied, 
named after the corresponding layer in mocha. It has a few compositing 
options, including the ability to cut out the layer based on that shape.)
8 In the Layer Properties panel, link the 
mask layer to follow the track layer.
TRACK AND STABILIZE — Lesson 9
297
12 Use the Compositing Options of a Color 
Correction effect such as Hue/Saturation (above) to 
change the color of just the poster on the bus (below).
12 Apply Effect > Color Correction > Hue/
Saturation. In the Timeline panel, twirl open 
Effects > Hue/Saturation and click the + next to 
Compositing Options. It will automatically select 
the mask you just pasted from mocha AE CC, 
and the rest of the bus will reappear. Now when 
you adjust Master Hue, only the poster will 
change color.
Our final version is in Comps_Finished as 
MS-mocha Shape_final. We also included 
RMT-Rigid Mask Tracker_final, which was 
created with the Rigid Mask Tracker in Lesson 4; 
although it was far faster to create, you can see 
its results are not as clean as mocha AE CC’s.

3D Camera Tracker
The 3D Camera Tracker is fundamentally different from the other trackers 
you’ve used so far in this lesson: Instead of providing access to the movements 
of individual features in a piece of footage, it calculates how the original camera 
moved through a scene and creates a 3D camera to replicate these movements. 
Additionally, it provides the stationary 3D coordinates of various points in the 
original footage. By placing new 3D layers at these coordinates, they will appear 
to move with the same perspective as in the original shot. This makes it possible 
to add new signs to walls, float text in the middle of these worlds, and perform 
other tricks.
To get some practice using the 3D Camera Tracker, we’ll use aerial footage of 
downtown Los Angeles as a starting point to develop some promotional ideas  
for the LA Philharmonic.
Hanging a Poster
Our first idea is hanging a large poster on one of the buildings. In this exercise 
we will cover the fundamentals of using the 3D Camera Tracker. We recommend 
you work through this composition before tackling the next exercise (page 302).
1 Close any previous comps and open Comps > CT_1-Poster*starter. It con-
tains our aerial footage plus a precomp that holds a mockup of the poster.  
For now, we’ve turned off the Video switch for LA Phil Poster.
2 Make sure Window > Tracker is open. Select LosAngelesAerial.mov and click 
Track Camera. (Alternatively, you can choose Animation > Track Camera.)
3D Camera Tracker can be used to add 
other images or text to already-shot footage. 
Clip C032v1 courtesy Artbeats.com; photo 
20039696 courtesy iStockphoto/Kativ.
Lesson 9 — TRACK AND STABILIZE
298
2 Click Tracker > Track Camera (top), and 
After Effects will locate and track hundreds 
of features in your clip (above). It will use 
these tracks to re-create where the camera 
was and displays the track points it used in 
the Comp panel (right).
d tip
Reasons for Failure
If the 3D Camera Tracker fails when trying  
to solve the camera’s location, the most 
likely culprit is a wrong default camera 
definition. Change the Shot Type popup to 
Variable Zoom or enter its fixed angle of 
view (if known) and analyze again. If it still 
fails, try the different Advanced > Solve 
Method choices. For more accurate tracks, 
remove lens distortion in a precomp using 
the Distort > Optics Compensation effect.

The Effect Controls panel will open with the 3D Camera Tracker effect applied 
to your clip. Similar to the Warp Stabilizer demonstrated earlier, you will see  
a pair of banners informing you of the progress in analyzing this shot. This 
process can take some time; you can work on other compositions (or make  
a nice cup of tea) while the 3D Camera Tracker works in the background.
When After Effects has finished calculations, you will see a number of colored 
crosses overlaid on your clip. These crosses indicate points After Effects tracked 
throughout the shot. They are visible only when the 3D Camera Tracker effect  
is selected in the Effect Controls or Timeline panels. Their sizes indicate their  
relative distance from the camera; notice that the crosses on the background 
buildings are smaller. If the crosses are too big or too small for your taste, you 
can adjust 3D Camera Tracker > Track Point Size. 
Scrub the timeline; track points appear and disappear as After Effects uses and 
discards them. If you notice any track points sliding along a surface, they are in 
error; select and delete these bogus points to improve the quality of calculations.
3 Press N to jump to the last frame of the comp where you can see the right 
side of the central building more clearly. To place a new layer at a location in  
3D space that matches the orientation of this (or any) wall, you must choose at 
least three points to define your target plane. There are three ways to do that:
•  With the track points visible, hover your cursor over the Comp panel (but not 
directly on a point). After Effects will triangulate three nearby points and display 
a red target in the center. Click, and those three points will be selected to use.
• Click and drag to “lasso” (surround) a cluster of points. After Effects will 
average them together to define the target plane. If the points are close together, 
you’ll need to reduce the Track Point Size to see the resulting target sitting 
behind them.
• Click on the first desired point, then S+click additional points. Again, 
After Effects will average them together to define the target plane. 
We tend to use a combination of the second and third techniques. For  
more accuracy, choose points that are far apart, making sure they are on the 
desired wall. Then add more points around the center to get a better average. 
The target’s orientation will give you a clue as to whether you are picking  
good points; if you see it skewed at an angle that does not match your plane, 
deselect your most recent points and try others.
4 Hover the cursor over the center of the target until you see a four-headed 
arrow appear at the base of the cursor. This means you can move the target, 
which will be the center of the new layer you are about to create. Drag the  
target to where you would like to locate your poster. While you see this cursor, 
you may also press O (A) and scrub to resize the target as desired.
TRACK AND STABILIZE — Lesson 9
299
3 You can define the plane you are about 
to create a layer on by hovering the cursor 
and having After Effects pick three points for 
you (A), lasso a group of points (B), or hand-
select points by S+clicking them (C).  
(The 3D Camera Tracker results will vary 
depending on the computer used. Set the 
Track Point Size and Target Size as needed.)
A
B
C

5 After locating the target, right-click anywhere on the 
ghosted white shape between your chosen points (be 
careful not to click normally or you will lose your selec-
tion!). You will be presented with a list of choices of 
whether you want to create a text, solid, or null object 
layer, as well as whether you want to create one layer  
at the center of the target or one for each point you 
selected. As 3D Camera Tracker has not yet created a 
camera that corresponds to the camera position it solved 
for this clip, each choice will also contain the option 
“and Camera.” Choose Create Null and Camera.
6 Enable the Video and 3D Layer switches for the  
LA Phil Poster precomp layer. Press S$ to reveal  
the Parent column. Click on the Parent popup for LA Phil Poster; to the  
right you will see a note appear that you can hold the S key to move this 
prospective child directly to the location of the null (instead of the normal 
behavior of keeping any offset that currently exists between the two). Because 
we’d like to move the child, add S and select Track Null 1. After you release 
Lesson 9 — TRACK AND STABILIZE
300
5 After choosing a set of points to define 
the desired plane and relocating the target to 
the desired location on that plane, right-click 
and choose the new layers you would like 
After Effects to create with this information.
the mouse, the poster will appear on the side of the building (if not, check that 
the 3D Layer switch is enabled).
7 The poster will initially appear askew. The 3D Camera Tracker has no concept 
of where the ground is, so the Z orientation of the layers it creates can be off. 
Select Track Null 1 and press r to reveal its Orientation and Rotation and set  
Z Orientation (the third value) to 0°.
• Select LA Phil Poster and drag it beneath Track Null 1 to visually group the 
layers in the timeline. Press s to reveal its Scale. Scrub this value as needed to 
make the poster cover the width of that side of the building. Don’t worry about 
scaling past 100%, as the layer is being scaled down by its placement in 3D 
space. We edited Scale for the poster instead of the null because we prefer  
to leave the null at 100% in the event we parent different-sized layers to it later.
6 Enable the Video and 3D Layer 
switches for the poster precomp and hold 
S while parenting it to the Track Null 
created by the 3D Camera Tracker (top). 
The poster will appear where your target 
was located, although it’s a bit askew! 

• If the poster still looks a bit askew, hold C (L) 
and slowly scrub the X and Y Rotation values for 
Track Null 1 (not the poster) by small amounts  
until the poster looks nicely squared-up compared 
with the windows and sides of the wall. Here, we’re 
perfecting the null’s location in case we parent other 
layers to it later.
• With Track Null 1 still selected, drag its X or Y 
axis arrows in the Comp panel to slide the poster into 
its desired location on the wall. Editing in the Comp 
panel rather than the Timeline panel takes the orientation of the 
null into account, so dragging an axis arrow slides the poster along 
the building rather than through the world’s coordinate system.
8 Preview. The poster should appear to stick to the side of the 
building. If you notice some slight sliding of Position, that’s due 
to errors in the track. You could try tweaking the null’s Z Position 
until you get better results, creating another null using different 
track points. Or, deleting your current null and camera, enable  
3D Camera Tracker > Advanced > Detailed Analysis and try again. 
Life lesson: Automated tracking is rarely perfect; you look for 
acceptable compromises and hand-tweak the results if necessary.
9 Back to the fun stuff: It’s unrealistic to have our poster blot out 
the building completely. These banners often have a grid of holes 
in them to allow people inside the building to look out, as well as 
to reduce catching the wind. 
To improve a composite like this, you can use blending modes. 
Press $ to reveal the Modes panel, and try modes such as Overlay, 
Soft Light, and Hard Light for the LA Phil Poster layer. The advan-
tage of using modes is that the reflections traveling across the 
building’s windows during the shot will still be visible in the final 
composite, adding to its realism. Soft Light got the closest to our 
personal vision; to beef it up we duplicated the LA Phil Poster 
layer, set its mode to Normal, and reduced its Opacity until we  
got our desired look.
Note that as of the time this book was written, only the Classic 
3D Renderer supports blending modes for 3D layers. If you had 
set Composition Settings > Advanced > Renderer to Ray-traced 
3D, modes (as well as masks, mattes, effects, and other processing) 
would be disabled. Which rendering engine you use with the  
3D Camera Tracker depends on the final look you’re going for.
7 To make the poster appear less skewed, zero out the 
null’s Z Orientation and carefully tweak its X and Y Rotation 
(above) (in this situation, we find Rotation operates in a 
more intuitive fashion than Orientation). Drag the null’s 
X and Y 3D axis arrows in the Comp panel to slide it into 
position along the building’s face (below).
TRACK AND STABILIZE — Lesson 9
301
9 Blending modes help composite your new layer on top 
of the original footage. We also added the Channel Blur 
effect and blurred just the alpha channel to soften the edges.

Text and Shadows
Next we’re going to extend our use of the 3D Camera Tracker by adding text, 
letting it float in space in front of the building, and adding a “shadow catcher” 
so the 2D footage will appear to receive a shadow from the 3D text with the 
proper perspective. You can continue with the composition you were using in 
the previous exercise or open Comps > CT2-Text*starter. 
1 We’re going to add text to the face rather than side of the central building,  
so press H to locate to 00:00 where this face is most visible.
2 Select the 3D Camera Tracker effect applied to LosAngelesAerial.mov.  
You can do this in the Timeline panel (press e to reveal effects) or Effect 
Controls panel (press # to bring forward). The track points will reappear in  
the Comp panel (if you can’t see them easily, increase the Track Point Size).
3 Select a set of track points on the face of the building. We used the lasso 
method to grab a large set of points to average together. Drag the target to  
where you think you’d like to center your text.
4 Right-click on the target and choose Create Text. (If you are using our  
CT2-Text*starter comp, or had closed and reopened your project, you will also 
see “and Camera” appended onto your choice, as 3D Camera Tracker doesn’t 
realize it already created a camera earlier. That’s okay; just delete the duplicate 
camera.) Select the Text layer, press r, and enter 0° for its Z Orientation.
5 Double-click the Text layer to select the text, type in your preferred wording 
such as “new season”, and press E (the text will be selected in layer mode). 
The Character and Paragraph panels will open: In the Paragraph panel, click on 
the Center Text option. In the Character panel, set the Font Family and Style, 
Font Size, Leading, and Fill and Stroke Color to taste. We chose Myriad Pro to 
match the poster and eyedroppered colors from the surrounding buildings.  
Press v to return to the Selection tool when you’re done.
Lesson 9 — TRACK AND STABILIZE
302
4–5 Use the 3D Camera Tracker to 
create a new text layer (above) and 
edit it to taste (below).
6 Choose the 3D Camera Tracker effect again, lasso a number of 
points on the face of the building as you did in Step 3, and move  
the target a little lower than the center of the text (where its shadow 
would fall). Right-click, and this time choose Create Shadow Catcher 
and Light. The 3D Camera Tracker effect will create a light with Casts 
Shadows enabled, as well as a shadow catcher layer with its Material 
Options set to only receive shadows and otherwise be invisible.
7 Select Shadow Catcher 1, press r, and set its Z Orientation to 
0°. Then press s and scrub its Scale until the outline of the shadow 
catcher aligns with the right edge of the face of the building. 
7 Align the shadow catcher’s outlines 
to the edge of the building.

8 Select your text layer and drag 
its Z axis arrow (the blue one) to  
the left until the text separates away 
from the front of the building.  
You will see a shadow appear on 
the building itself. 
9 The text will probably be under-
lit and the direction of the shadow 
may not match the rest of the 
scene. Take advantage of the alter-
nate 3D Views (Lesson 8) to move 
the light into a more advantageous 
position. You can also adjust the 
Intensity and Shadow Darkness of 
Light 1 (and, optionally, the other 
Material Options for the text layer) 
to get your desired look. You can 
return to the normal single Active 
Camera view when you’re done.
10 You have a nice shadow on 
the front of the building – but 
not the side. No problem; repeat 
Steps 6 and 7, this time creating a 
Shadow Catcher for the right side 
of the building. Carefully scale and 
reposition the shadow catcher so 
it just covers the right side and is 
underneath where the shadow falls. If necessary, tug 
on the handles for the shadow catcher layers to scale 
them taller to catch all of the shadow. (If you can’t see 
a shadow on the side of the building, you may need 
to move Light 1 in the positive X direction to bring it 
around to the corner of the building.)
11 You might have noticed that the poster is no 
longer illuminated. This is because the light is not 
hitting it directly. The easiest way to make it visible 
again is to select your poster layer(s), press aa to 
reveal its Material Options, and set Accepts Lights to 
Off to restore its 2D color values. If you’re curious, our 
final version is Comps_Finished > CT2-Text_final.
TRACK AND STABILIZE — Lesson 9
303
8 Pull the text 
away from the 
building using 
its Z axis arrow.
11 Our final version,  
after tweaking the position 
of the light as well as  
other details such as text 
tracking and position.
9 Take advantage of additional 3D views to tweak the placement 
of the light to get good illumination plus interesting shadows.

Lesson 9 — TRACK AND STABILIZE
304
D Rolling Shutter Repair
Some fast-moving objects will 
exhibit an unnatural skew when  
shot with some cameras (A).  
Rolling Shutter Repair (left) can 
remove some or all of that skew (B). 
Try the different Method options; 
quite often one works noticeably 
better or worse (C). Clip 25420974 
courtesy Pond5.
Digital cameras with CMOS sensors – including cameras ranging from 
cell phones to video-capable DSLRs to the RED – typically have what 
is commonly known as a “rolling” shutter, which captures a frame of 
video one scan line at a time. Due to time lag between scan lines, 
not all parts of the image are recorded at exactly the same time, 
causing motion to ripple down the frame. If the camera or the subject 
is moving, the rolling shutter can cause distortions, such as leaning 
buildings and other skewed images. Dealing with this footage can 
cause head aches, especially when you’re attempting to composite  
the footage with non  distorted images, such as 3D layers and text.
After Effects CC features a Rolling Shutter Repair effect that 
contains a pair of user-selectable algorithms to help fix problematic 
footage such as hand-held shots and tripod pans. It can’t fix every 
shot – for example, it has problems if the camera is “locked off” (not 
moving) and there is strong motion in the scene – but it can improve 
the production value of a number of clips. 
To see it at work, open Comps > RS-Fast Cars*starter. It contains 
a short clip of a pair of cars racing past a camera. Press the ª 
key to step through the clip a frame at a time, and note how the cars 
seem to be leaning backwards. This is especially obvious when the 
blue car passes by; move to 01:00 to observe a good reference frame. 
Select FastCars.mov and apply Effect > Distort > Rolling Shutter 
Repair. Some of the distortion has been removed, but not all. Look  
at the wheels for a clue: They should be round and upright instead  
of leaning forward or back. In the Effect Controls panel, slowly 
increase the Rolling Shutter Rate value until the wheels look correct. 
Press • and ª to step through a few frames, and find 
a good compromise value as the result may change from frame to 
frame. Toggle on Detailed Analysis, which helps when you have an 
object crossing another moving in another direction; you may find  
you can use a lower Rolling Shutter Rate value with this engaged.
Change the Advanced > Method popup to 
Pixel Motion. Whereas the default Warp setting 
merely distorts the existing image, Pixel Motion 
reconstructs new pixels based on their motion, 
at the cost of longer renders. In some situations, 
this can result in a sharper image, but with this 
extreme shot, the result looks more distorted. 
The Pixel Motion Detail parameter creates a 
tighter grid to detect motion, again at the cost 
of longer render times.
A
B
C

TRACK AND STABILIZE — Lesson 9
305
Quizzler
• In the Quizzler > Quizzler 1 folder, open the comp  
Mask problem*starter and preview. The wildebeests footage 
has an added mask. However, even though the footage has 
been stabilized, the mask is wobbling. Your mission is to make 
the stabilized animals play inside a static mask so it looks like 
Mask_fixed.mov in the same folder. Give it your best shot, 
then check it against the solution in Quizzler Solutions > 
Quizzler 1. 
• Quizzler 2 contains a movie that shows a stabilized shot of 
our elephant from earlier in this lesson, with a thought bubble 
tracking it. Try to re-create this result using Elephant*starter. 
Hint: Lesson 6 contained some essential wisdom…
• Time-based effects such as Rolling Shutter Repair (previous 
page) and Pixel Motion Blur (Lesson 7) need to access the 
original frames in the layer they are applied to, and therefore 
ignore any effects applied before them. That means you can’t 
use Rolling Shutter Repair and Pixel Motion Blur in the same 
composition. So how do you use them both on the same clip? 
The answer is in the Quizzler 3 folder.
How do you both track and stabilize the same shot, and still 
get the new layers to match the resulting motion? Try to find 
a solution with Quizzler 2.
Track two peaks in MountainPeaks.mov and use this to 
make the Generate > Advanced Lightning effect jump from 
peak to peak.
Idea Corner
• If you have access to a camera, shoot your own footage of 
people walking across campus or down the street. Practice  
tracking them and placing text or other objects over their  
heads and the like. Then use the 3D Camera Tracker to place 
new signs on the sides of the buildings in the shot.
• Open the Lightning_starter comp in the Idea Corner folder 
and track another mountain peak, but this time from the moun-
tain range in the background. Then apply Effect > Generate 
> Advanced Lightning, apply your tracks to Lightning’s two 
effect points, and set Lightning Type to Strike. Our version is 
the Lightning-final comp. Alternately, add a soundtrack to 
your project and use Generate > Audio Spectrum or > Audio 
Waveform in place of Lightning.
• For the 3D Camera Tracker exercise, use the Ray-traced 3D 
renderer (Lesson 8) so that you can extrude and bevel the text, 
and make it partially transparent. The downside is you won’t  
be able to use blending modes for the poster.
The more realistic Ray-traced 3D Renderer looks good 
combined with the results of the 3D Camera Tracker.

T
his lesson will focus on advanced techniques 
for manipulating and enhancing layers: 
Paint, Roto Brush, and the Puppet tools.
After Effects Paint is based on a simplified version of 
Adobe Photoshop’s paint tool, with the added element of 
time. It allows you to paint nondestructively onto a layer 
and to reveal or erase parts of an underlying image; Paint 
can also clone from one area of an image to another, as well 
as from a different frame. Paint only works in the Layer 
panel, but every single stroke is exposed in the Timeline 
panel, allowing you to retime, edit, and animate the brush 
settings and location of the stroke after the fact.
Roto Brush is an intelligent paint 
tool that helps automate the time-
consuming process of separating a 
foreground object (such as an actor) 
from its background, allowing new 
imagery to be placed behind it. To 
accomplish this, you draw simple 
strokes that define the foreground and 
background, and After Effects deter-
mines the boundary between the two. 
The Puppet tool provides an alter-
nate way to warp layers. Imagine 
your image being printed on a sheet 
of rubber, which is automatically 
trimmed to the outline of your layer. 
Then imagine pushing pins through 
areas of that layer, such as where feet 
and hands are. Then imagine  dragging 
some of those pins around…
Lesson 10
306
Paint, Roto, and Puppet
Exploring Paint, Roto Brush, and the Puppet tools.
 d In This Lesson
  307 basic painting
 309 erasing strokes
 309 Paint Channels
 310 Paint blending modes
 310 brush duration bar
 311 animating strokes
 312 revealing a layer
 313 creating organic textures
 314 tablet settings
 315 cloning
 316 transforming strokes
 317 basic Roto Brush
 320 Roto Brush workflow; the base frame
 322 propagating strokes
 324 corrective strokes
 326 refining the matte
 328 Refine Edge
 330 Puppet Pin tool
 331 animating puppet pins
 332 Puppet Overlap tool
 333 recording puppet animation
 333 Puppet Starch tool
 334 multiple shapes
 d Getting Started
Make sure you have downloaded the file archive for Lesson 10 
and decompressed it. It contains the project file and sources 
you need to execute this lesson.

Paint Basics
We’ll start by becoming familiar with After Effects Paint. It contains three tools: 
Brush, Clone Stamp, and Erase. In this exercise, we will practice using all three.
1 Open the project file Lesson_10.aep. In the Project 
panel, make sure the Comps folder is twirled down,  
then double-click the comp 01-Paint Basics*starter to 
open it. This comp consists of a still image of a fanciful 
mask that has an alpha channel. 
2 Click the Paint workspace button along the top; if you can’t see it, click on 
the Overflow menu and select it. This will open the Paint and Brushes panels, 
which allow you to control and customize the Paint tools. It will also rearrange 
your viewers so that the Comp panel takes the place of your Project panel and 
PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET — Lesson 10
307
There are three main Paint tools: 
Brush, Clone Stamp, and Erase.
Brush 
Tool
Clone Stamp 
Tool
Erase 
Tool
2 Open or create a Workspace that includes the Paint and Brushes panels. These are essential for working with After Effects Paint. You can 
choose to Save Current Settings as New Brush by clicking the icon circled in red. Note that the Paint tools must be used in the Layer panel.
Comp panel
Layer panel

The Paint panel can expand to show more options. 
Each tool has its own set of Paint panel settings. When 
you change the brush size for the Brush tool, for example, 
this does not affect the size of the Eraser. The Erase popup 
is active only when the Eraser tool is selected. Likewise, 
the Clone Options in the lower half of the panel will be 
grayed out unless the Clone Stamp tool is selected.
If this is the first time you are using Paint, the defaults 
are fine for now. Feel free to pick a foreground color other 
than bright red plus a dif-
ferent brush size. However, 
make sure that the Paint 
panel’s Mode popup is set 
to Normal, Channels is set 
to RGBA, and Duration to 
Constant. Opacity should 
also be set to 100%.
4 Check the bottom of the Layer panel: The Render 
switch should be enabled. Then draw a few strokes on the 
image in the Layer panel to get the hang of things. Try a 
few different Brush Tip sizes and foreground colors.
Key concept: Changing the settings in the Paint panel 
affects new strokes only, not existing strokes. But every 
stroke you draw will appear in the Timeline panel, where 
you can edit and even animate them. Press pp to 
reveal the Paint parameters in the Timeline panel. 
Paint is an “effect” as far as After Effects is concerned. 
However, if you open the Effect Controls panel, the only 
option is Paint on Transparent, which is also available in 
the timeline. The View popup in the Layer panel confirms 
that Paint renders after Masks in the rendering order. 
the Layer panel takes center focus. This is because the Paint tools must be used 
in the Layer panel. If you use this layout, we suggest you dock the Project panel 
to the left side of your workspace (see figure on previous page); this will make it 
easy to open other comps when instructed. Of course, you can also make your 
own custom workspace that includes the Paint, Brushes, and Layer panels.
3 Double-click gold mask.tif to open it in the Layer panel. Then select the 
Brush tool. The shortcut is Cb on Mac (Lb on Windows); this will toggle 
through the three Paint tools. Note that the Paint panel will be grayed out  
unless one of the three Paint tools is selected. 
Lesson 10 — PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET
308
4 In the Layer panel, once you make a stroke with the Brush tool, 
the View popup will change to Paint. Try different brushes and paint 
colors. Image #1914878 courtesy iStockphoto/JLGutiérrez.
d tip
Quick Size
To interactively resize the brush tip 
for either After Effects or Roto Brush, 
press C on Mac (L on Windows) 
and drag to set the diameter; release 
the modifier key and continue to drag 
to set the feather amount (Hardness). 

PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET — Lesson 10
309
5 Painting with Channels set  
to RGBA results in your strokes 
going outside a layer’s original 
alpha channel (left). Toggle on 
the Transparency Grid in the 
Layer panel to see which pixels 
are transparent.
5 continued Set Channels to RGB (left), and your strokes will be 
confined to draw inside the underlying layer’s alpha (right).
Painting the Eyes
Now that you’ve had time to play, let’s work through  
some exercises and explore the various options available.  
To quickly delete all your practice strokes, use the menu 
command Effect > Remove All. Press H to ensure the 
current time indicator is at 00:00. Set the Layer panel’s 
Magnification to 100% (or higher) to better see what you 
are doing; remember you can hold down ß and  
drag the image in the Layer panel to reposition it.
5 Let’s start by adding some eye shadow to the eyelids  
of our mask. Make sure the Brush tool is selected. Select  
any color you like in the Paint panel. In the Brushes panel,  
pick a soft brush around 20 to 30 pixels in size. 
Paint around the eyelid on the left side, making sure you 
slightly overlap the empty eye socket. Notice how the paint 
draws inside the eye socket? This is because the Channels 
popup in the Paint panel defaults to RGBA: the RGB color 
channels, plus the Alpha transparency channel. As a result, 
your paint stroke’s alpha channel is added to the underlying 
layer’s alpha. 
Undo to remove the first stroke, change the Channels 
popup in the Paint panel to RGB, and paint the left eyelid 
again. Now the stroke is confined to the RGB channels only.
D Erasing Strokes
If you made a mistake while painting, you might be inclined to reach for the Eraser tool. 
Be aware that this tool also creates vector-based Eraser strokes in the Timeline panel, 
resulting in more items for you to manage. 
However, if you set the Erase popup in the Paint panel to Last Stroke Only and pick  
a small brush tip, you can erase portions of the last brush stroke without creating a new 
Eraser stroke. Try out both methods so you can compare the results. 
You can invoke the Erase Last Stroke Only mode while the Brush tool is selected by 
pressing CS (LS) and then erasing. Note that when you do this, the Brush  
Tip size used for erasing is defined by the Eraser tool’s last brush size, not the Brush tool’s 
current size! If you want to use this handy shortcut, we recommend you first set the Eraser 
to a smaller brush size with a similar Hardness value as the Brush tool before starting to 
paint. Then you’ll be able to quickly switch modes and erase pixels as you paint. 
g The Last Stroke Only option in  
the Erase menu allows you to erase 
portions of the last stroke without 
creating Eraser strokes in the timeline.

Lesson 10 — PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET
310
6–7 Set the Brush’s mode to Overlay,  
and your stroke will be blended into the 
underlying image (above). Many of the 
Paint and Brush Tip parameters for each 
brush stroke appear in the Timeline panel 
for later editing and animation (right). 
6 Press pp to reveal Brush 1 in the Timeline panel. To the right of Brush 1 is 
a Blending Mode popup for the individual stroke (not to be confused with the 
Mode popup for the entire layer). To better blend the stroke with the underlying 
image, select Overlay or Color mode, or another one that suits your fancy.  
By selecting the Brush, you will also see a thin line appear in the Layer panel 
that illustrates the middle of your stroke.
While you’re here, twirl down Brush 1 > Stroke Options. Notice that you can 
change the size, color, opacity, and much more of any stroke after you’ve created 
it! (You can even change the Channels – you don’t have to redo the stroke!)
7 Before painting the right eyelid, set the Mode popup in the Paint panel to the 
same mode as you just chose for Brush 1. Channels should still be set to RGB. 
Important! Press @ to deselect Brush 1 – otherwise, you will replace it with 
your new stroke! Now paint over the right eyelid; your new settings will be used. 
When you’re done, Brush 2 will appear in the timeline with its Mode already set.
Painting the Lips
8 Next we’re going to animate putting on some lipstick. In the Paint panel, 
pick a nice red color for the lips and set the Mode menu to Color. In the Brushes 
panel, again select a smallish brush (we used the Soft Round 21 pixels brush). 
Press H to make sure you are at 00:00. Check that no existing Brush 
strokes are selected (press @ if so). Using one continuous stroke, paint the  
top lip and continue around painting the bottom lip until the lips are com-
pletely covered. When you release the mouse, Brush 3 will be added to the  
Timeline panel. 
d tip
Painting Order
Because Paint is an effect, you can apply 
multiple instances of Paint to the same layer 
and combine it with other effects. You can 
determine the order in which the effects 
render by dragging them up and down in  
the Effect Controls or Timeline panels.
D Brush Duration Bar
Because the Duration popup in the 
Paint panel was set to Constant, both 
Brush strokes will appear for the 
entire duration of the layer. However, 
you can drag these gray duration bars 
to move them earlier or later in time, 
and trim them – just as you can with 
ordinary layer bars. By animating the 
Opacity parameter in Stroke Options, 
you can also make individual strokes 
fade up and down.

9 As you are finished creating paint strokes for now, press v to return to the 
Selection tool; it’s best not to edit with the Brush tool active as it’s too easy to 
replace a selected stroke. 
• In the Timeline panel, twirl down Brush 3 > Stroke Options.
• Scrub the Stroke Options > Start parameter: Your stroke will wipe off as the 
value increases. Return Start to 0%.
• Now scrub the Stroke Options > End 
parameter; reducing the value wipes 
the stroke off in reverse. 
• Set End to 0% and enable its anima-
tion stopwatch to set the first keyframe 
at 00:00.
• Move later in time to 01:00 and set 
End to 100%. 
Preview your animation: The “lipstick” will now animate on over 1 second, 
following the same path you used to paint it. Note that if the Timeline panel  
is selected, the preview will play in the Comp panel; to preview in the Layer 
panel, make sure it’s selected before you start the preview.
10 Feel free to also animate Brush 1 and 
2 to draw on the eye shadow over time. 
Your strokes are already done; all that’s 
left is to animate the End parameter:
• Click on the word End for Brush 3 to 
select both keyframes and Edit > Copy.
• Press H (as keyframes are pasted 
starting at the current time). 
• Select Brush 1, then S+click Brush 
2 to select it as well. 
• Paste, and both of these brushes will 
also get your End keyframes.
Preview, and all three brush strokes 
will animate in sync. To offset them in 
time, simply drag the stroke bars in the 
timeline so that they are staggered in 
time. A handy shortcut is to move the 
current time indicator to where you want 
the stroke to start. Start dragging the 
stroke bar, then press S as you get 
close; it will snap to this time. 
PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET — Lesson 10
311
9 As you scrub either Start or End under a 
Brush’s Stroke Options (above), your brush 
stroke will write on (left). 
10 After you twirl up a Brush in the Timeline panel, dots along its bar will indicate 
where its underlying keyframes are located. Note that in our final version, we animated 
the Start parameter for Brush 1 (left eyelid) to reverse the animation. We’ve also moved 
Brush 3’s duration bar so that it starts later in time. To name a stroke, select it, press 
R, enter a new name, then press R again. 

Painting to Reveal
Quite often, you will not use Paint to directly create visible strokes; instead, you 
will use Paint to reveal other layers you’ve already created. This can give the 
impression that you are “painting on” more complex imagery. This trick will  
be the focus of our next exercise.
1 Close your previous comp by selecting Close All from the Comp Viewer 
menu. Type C0 (L0) to reopen the Project panel if needed. (If the Project 
panel is taking up valuable space, you can always dock the Project panel into the 
Comp panel’s frame.) Double-click Comps > 02-Write On*starter to open it.
Select all the layers in this colorful composition and press u to see any 
keyframes. Preview the comp. The individual layers were created by hand (see 
the sidebar Creating Textures, opposite page), then combined using techniques 
you’ve learned in earlier lessons, including blending modes, track mattes, frame 
blending, and wiggle expressions (with all layers selected, press ee to reveal 
expressions). When done, twirl up all layers and deselect all. 
To add even more interest to this composition, you’re going to “paint on”  
the first few layers using animated paint strokes. If you want to see where  
you’re heading before diving in, play Finished Movies > 02-Write On.mov. 
2 To reveal an image, its layer has to start off invisible, then gradually be 
revealed over time. Painting on an invisible layer isn’t very easy, though – so 
you’ll make the layer transparent in a later step. You’ll start by painting in its 
new alpha channel:
• Double-click layer 1 – auto-bird.tif – to open it in its Layer panel. Make sure 
your comp is at Full Resolution by pressing Cj (Lj). 
• O+click (A+click) on the Show Channel icon along the bottom of the 
Layer panel to view just the Alpha. You will see a textured white shape against  
a black background. 
• Select the Brush tool. In the Paint panel, check that Opacity and Flow are  
both set to 100%. Set the Mode popup to Normal.
• Select Alpha from the Channels menu. The colors change to black and white; 
click the crooked double-arrow icon to toggle the colors so that the Foreground 
color is white. It’s important to paint these strokes only in the layer’s alpha 
channel; painting in the RGB channels will obliterate the layer’s original color. 
• Set the Duration menu to Write On. The Write On option will automatically 
set the keyframes for the stroke’s End parameter (based on how fast you paint).
• In the Brushes panel, select a round brush with a diameter of around  
50 pixels. Change its Hardness value to around 80%. 
Lesson 10 — PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET
312
2 To quickly view just the alpha channel, 
O+click (A+click) in the Show Channel 
switch along the bottom of a viewer (the 
Layer panel is shown here). The alpha of our 
bird shows the rough paper texture used.
The goal in this exercise is to use Paint 
to reveal a series of shapes during this 
colorful animation. 

• Press H to make sure you are starting  
at 00:00. In the Layer panel, paint from the 
bottom up in one continuous stroke over the 
course of a few seconds, moving your brush as 
necessary to eventually cover the entire bird. 
When you release the mouse, the paint stroke 
will disappear. This is because Write On auto-
matically created keyframes for End, starting at 
End = 0%. Press u to see these key frames in the 
Timeline panel, then scrub the time indicator to 
see the stroke animate. If you’re not happy with 
the stroke, undo and try again. 
(Note: If you took longer than 10 seconds to 
draw your stroke, the second End keyframe may  
not be visible. In the Timeline panel, drag the  
Brush 1 bar to the left until you can see the  
second keyframe, and move it earlier in time.  
Then return the Brush 1 bar to start at 00:00.) 
PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET — Lesson 10
313
2 continued Configure a roughly 50-pixel brush to paint on just the 
Alpha channel, using Write On for its Duration, and paint over the 
image from the bottom up. 
f Feel free to drag 
the top of the Brushes 
panel to cover the 
Clone Options.
D Creating Textures
• The “rough” icons were created loading India ink into a  
folded pen – another calligraphy tool. Drawing on rough water-
color paper gives the edge texture, which is more organic than 
the otherwise beloved Stylize > Roughen Edges plug-in. 
• sunprint sequence contains a series of 10 images cropped out 
of a blurred abstract watercolor. This sequence was slowed down 
and looped in its Interpret Footage settings, then frame blended 
in the comp to create crossfades. 
• We also created some of our own stamps by heating special 
foam and pressing found objects into them. 
Have fun creating some of your own textures and marks. 
Check out your local library and the web for more ideas on  
creating textures from the fine arts and crafts world. Automatic, 
folded, and ruling pens all make great marks; a web search will 
show instructions for how to make a folded pen from a soda can! 
For this exercise, we created a variety of fun sources using  
inexpensive art supplies. After they dried, we scanned them  
into the computer. They are contained in the Sources >  
Crish Design folder. Here is how some of them were made: 
• ink texture was created by smearing printing ink on paper 
with a putty knife.
• waxpaper matte was created by rolling printing ink on wax 
paper then pressing it onto paper.
• The four sources beginning with the word “auto” were 
created with India ink and a calligraphy tool known as an  
automatic pen. They were all scribbled in one pass in just a  
few seconds – it’s best not to think too hard to get this look!  
Once scanned, we created a Photoshop action to invert these 
black-and-white images and move them to an alpha channel so 
their backgrounds would be transparent in After Effects.

Our version is in Comps_finished > 02-Write On_final if you’d like to check it out.
Lesson 10 — PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET
314
B
C
3 Press v to return to the Selection tool. 
Return the Layer panel Channels popup to 
RGB mode and scrub the timeline. Hmm…a 
black “blob” on a black bird – not our inten-
tion. Time to finish the illusion:
• With auto-bird still selected, press pp to 
reveal the Paint effect in the timeline. Toggle 
the Paint on Transparent option to On. Now 
the layer will start off transparent. 
• The remaining problem is that the original 
alpha has been replaced with the paint stroke. 
To retrieve it, apply Effect > Channel > Set 
Matte. The default options reapply the alpha 
from the layer’s source, which cuts out the  
animated blob with the original shape.
Bring the Comp panel forward and preview 
your reveal in the context of the other layers. 
Adjust the timing of Brush 1 > Stroke Options 
> End keyframe to taste. 
A
3 When the RGB channels are viewed, you’ll initially see paint blobs plus your 
bird (A). Toggle the Paint on Transparent option On, and you’ll see just your 
strokes (B). Apply Effect > Channel > Set Matte, and the bird’s original alpha 
channel will cut through your strokes, yielding the desired effect (C).
Don’t stop here! Repeat the previous steps  
with the rough-triangle layer (you may need 
to keyframe the brush diameter for this one  
as it starts skinny in the center and gets thicker 
as it unwinds), the stairs layer (adjust Brush 
Tip Roundness to create a flatter brush to get  
more of a wiping effect), and the zigzag layer 
(experiment with adjusting the Brush Tip 
Angle parameter). 
Our version is in Comps_finished >  
02-Write On_final, where we’ve also staggered 
the timing of the layers, scaled and rotated 
rough-triangle, and added some wiggle 
expressions to heighten the craziness.
D Tablet Settings
A pressure sensitive tablet such as a Wacom 
is a great companion for Paint. The Brush 
Dynamics section at the bottom of the  
Brushes panel allows you to set how the 
pen’s pressure, tilt, or stylus wheel affects 
the brush as you paint. Click on the Save 
Current Settings as New Brush button to 
remember your favorite configurations.

PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET — Lesson 10
315
Using the Clone Stamp Tool
If you are familiar with cloning in Photoshop, you’ll notice that the Clone 
Stamp tool in After Effects works in a similar fashion: It samples pixels from  
one part of a layer and copies them to another part. But in After Effects, you  
can also animate the timing of clone strokes as well as transform them. 
1 Close the previous comp and open Comps > 03-Cloning*starter. For this 
exercise, we suggest you continue using the Paint workspace so you can view  
the Comp and Layer panels side by side.
The background is a series of frame-blended still images; focus on the  
misc splats.tif layer. A variety of “ink splats” are scattered around this footage. 
You’ll use the Clone Stamp tool to add a few more, then transform them.
2 Just like the other Paint tools, you can use the Clone Stamp tool only in the 
Layer panel. Press H to return to 00:00, then double-click misc splats.tif  
to open its Layer panel. Verify that the Channels popup at the bottom of the 
Layer panel has been set back to RGB. 
3 Select the Clone Stamp tool. The Paint 
panel will update to show the last settings 
used for this tool. Opacity and Flow should 
be at 100%; set Mode to Normal, Channels 
to RGBA, and Duration to Constant. 
• Verify that the Clone Options are visible at the bottom of the Paint panel (if 
not, expand the panel taller). The Aligned switch should be disabled; this will 
allow you to clone multiple copies without having to reset the origin point. 
• Set your Brush size to a largish Diameter such as 80 px so you can clone the  
splats easily. Increase the Hardness value to reduce the possibility of picking  
up stray pixels. 
4 Finally, you are ready to start cloning:
• Press the O (A) key; the cursor will change to a 
crosshair icon (left). Click on the first splat you want to 
copy. The Source Position will update in the Paint panel.
• Release the O (A) key. Then paint where you’d  
like to drop a new splat. Because the Aligned switch is 
off, you can click again in a new location to repeat the 
same item elsewhere on the layer. 
• As soon as you create one stroke, the Paint effect is applied. (If the Effect 
Controls panel comes forward, feel free to close it or dock it out of the way so 
you can see the Comp and Layer panels side by side.) 
In this exercise, you will clone some of  
these ink splats to create a busier layer, and 
animate them to appear at different times.
3 Select the Clone Stamp tool (top left). 
The Clone Options will become active in the 
Paint panel (above). Use the above settings 
for Paint and Brushes. For this exercise, 
Aligned should be disabled (circled). 

Have fun cloning other spots until 
your layer is nicely populated with 
splotches (see figure, right), which 
you can then practice animating:
5 Press pp to reveal the Paint 
effect in the Timeline panel and see 
all of your individual Clone stroke 
bars. You can then edit  parameters 
of the individual strokes:
• Press v to return to the Selection tool. To move a cloned 
object after the fact, select one of your Clone strokes in the 
timeline and its Anchor Point (plus the centerline of any 
“brushing” you did) will appear in the Layer panel (right). 
Drag it to a new position; when you release the mouse, the 
Comp panel will update to show its new location in context. 
• To create variations on the cloned originals, twirl down one of your Clone 
strokes in the Timeline panel, then twirl down its Transform settings. Scrub the 
Rotation and Scale settings while watching the Comp panel. Go ahead and key-
frame these parameters to animate the clone.
• Try offsetting some of the Clone strokes in the Timeline panel so that they 
start at different points in time. That way, they will appear to “pop” on. To fade 
them on, animate their Stroke Options > Opacity parameter.
• To remove a cloned stroke, select it (in the Layer panel or the Timeline panel) 
and press D. 
• To remove a splat on the original layer, use the Eraser tool: Set the Channels 
to RGB and the background color to white, then you can erase without creating 
a “hole.” The render order of the strokes goes 
from bottom to top in the Timeline panel, so 
make sure After Effects gets a chance to render 
the clone before you erase its source! 
• You can also clone a clone, just like you can in 
Photoshop. And if you clone an animated Clone 
stroke, the second clone will also animate!
Continue cloning, erasing, and transforming 
until you have a nice balance and arrangement 
of ink splats. 
If you want to compare results, bring the 
Project panel forward and view our version 
Comps_Finished > 03_Cloning_final.
Lesson 10 — PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET
316
d gotcha
Replacing Strokes
Be warned that if a Brush stroke is already 
selected in the Timeline panel, and you 
draw a new stroke, the selected stroke 
will be replaced. Press @ to deselect all 
strokes before drawing new strokes. 
d tip
What’s in a Stroke
In After Effects, Mask Paths and Brush Paths 
are both vector based, and you can copy 
and paste between them. You can also copy 
paths from Illustrator. Before you paste, be 
sure to click on the existing property name 
(such as Brush 1 > Path) to “target” it.  
You can also use expressions to link all paths 
that have been created with the Pen tool. 
d tip
Paint & Stick
The Paint & Stick effect (available from 
aescripts.com) lets you paint directly in the 
Comp panel for immediate results. Features 
include onion skinning; using Photoshop 
brushes and creating custom brushes; plus 
“sticking” paint directly on 3D renders.
5 In the Timeline panel, you can slide the Clone stroke bars in time and 
transform how each stroke is drawn. Transform properties can also be animated. 

Roto Brush
Roto Brush is an intelligent paint tool that helps automate the process of creat-
ing an alpha channel for an object (the foreground) to separate it from the rest 
of the image around it (the background). To accomplish this, you draw simple 
strokes that define the foreground and optionally the background, and After 
Effects determines the boundary between the two. After Effects then uses motion 
estimation to track how this boundary changes over time, with help from you 
in the form of corrective brush strokes. It’s not perfect, but it’s often better than 
trying to paint or mask every frame by hand.
We’ll start with a simple task so you can gain familiarity with Roto Brush’s 
basic tools. We’ll move on to a more challenging exercise, guiding you through 
the preferred workflow for achieving optimal results. Mastering this workflow 
will provide you with a far more rewarding experience than simply applying 
Roto Brush at its default settings.
Instant Gratification
1 Close any previous compositions, and select the Standard workspace (select 
Reset to Saved Layout if necessary). Open Comps > RB1-Butterfly*starter and 
preview it: a butterfly wafts over a tulip garden. The problem is that the butter-
fly looks unnatural flying in front of all the flowers – from this camera angle it 
should be behind the foreground tulips. To make this happen you need to cut 
out the foreground flowers and paste a copy of them in front of the butterfly.
2 Select Tulips.mov and press Cd (Ld) to duplicate it. Press R  
to highlight the duplicate layer’s name and change it to “Tulips – Foreground”. 
Press R again to accept the new name. 
3 Using Roto Brush can be time consuming and tedious, so you don’t want  
to use it on more frames than necessary. Scrub the current time indicator until  
you reach the frame where the butterfly’s wing first touches a tulip petal. With 
Tulips – Foreground selected, press O[ (A[) to trim the layer’s in point. 
Then scrub the time indicator to the last frame where the butterfly touches a 
petal and press O] (A]) to trim the layer’s out point.
4 Move to 01:10, where the butterfly is in front of the tulips. We want the but-
terfly to go behind them. In the Timeline panel, drag Tulips – Foreground above 
ButterflyFlight.mov. Tulips – Foreground currently obscures the butterfly.
PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET — Lesson 10
317
The Roto Brush tool is to the right of the 
Paint tools. Like the Paint tools, it must be 
used while in the Layer panel.
1 The goal is to make the butterfly fly 
behind the foreground flowers without 
having to paint or mask every single frame. 
Tulips clip CC-FH101-74 from Artbeats.com; 
butterfly illustration from Dover.
d factoid
Rotoscoping
The term rotoscoping was originally used 
to describe the process in which the 
movement of live actors was traced to 
create an animation. It is now commonly 
used to describe the process of cutting 
out a foreground object (such as an 
actor) from its background.
4 Trim a duplicate of the background to 
cover the time span you wish the flowers 
to be in front of the ButterflyFlight layer.
Roto Brush Tool

Roto Brush Span
Base Frame
5 Make sure the Comp panel’s Resolution is set to Full by 
pressing Cj (Lj) – this is required to work accu-
rately with the Roto Brush tool. Then double-click Tulips 
– Foreground to open it in the Layer panel: As with Paint, 
Roto Brush must be used in this panel so you have an  
unaltered view of your source layer.
6 Select the Roto Brush tool (it’s the icon of a little man 
with a large paint brush). Move the cursor over the Layer 
panel; a green circle with a + symbol in the middle will 
appear. As with the Paint tools, you can resize this brush by 
pressing C (L), then clicking and dragging. Set it to be 
roughly twice the width of the tulip stems.
7 Click near the top of the middle petal of the foreground 
tulip and drag downward toward the base of the petals.  
You don’t need to be precise, but it’s essential that your 
brush touches only the flower petals (the foreground) and 
not the sky (the background). Release the mouse and a pink 
Segmentation Boundary will be drawn around this flower’s 
petals. The Effect Controls panel will also open with a  
Roto Brush & Refine Edge effect applied to this layer.
8 Remember that the butterfly’s wings touched more than 
one flower. Click and drag through the petals of the second 
foreground flower to the right; a Segmentation Boundary 
will also surround it.
9 Turn your attention to the Layer panel’s timeline.  
You will see a short yellow bar at its time marker. This  
indicates a Base Frame, which contains the foreground  
and background definitions Roto Brush will use to guess 
motion in the rest of the clip. Now look for the gray bar 
with arrows pointing away from the Base Frame: This 
defines the Roto Brush Span, which is how far before and 
after the Base Frame After Effects will try to “propagate” 
your strokes. Note that it does not completely cover the 
trimmed segment for this layer.
Lesson 10 — PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET
318
7–8 Drag the Roto Brush Foreground tool inside of the area 
you wish to keep. Add as many strokes as necessary to fully 
define your desired foreground (above). After Effects will draw a 
pink Segmentation Boundary between what it believes to be the 
foreground and the background (below). 
9 The short yellow bar is your Base Frame (right) where  
you initially drew strokes to define the foreground and the 
background. The Roto Brush Span indicates how many frames 
before and after the Base Frame this information will be 
propagated. The thin green bar indicates which frames Roto 
Brush has calculated; it must calculate them in sequential order.

Just as with the Paint tools, the 1 and 2 keys may be used to step backward 
and forward in the Layer panel when the Roto Brush tool is active. Press 2 to 
step forward: After a pause, a green bar will extend from the Base Frame to the 
time marker’s location. This indicates After Effects has calculated any movement 
between frames and has updated the Segmentation Boundary to match. Refining 
this propagation is the secret to achieving good results with Roto Brush; we’ll 
discuss this at length in the next exercise.
10 Click the Composition panel’s tab to bring it 
forward. The butterfly is behind the flower petal – 
hurray! But before you get too excited, perform a 
preview: After a pause for Roto Brush to calculate each 
frame, the butterfly disappears briefly starting around 
02:00. This is because your Roto Brush Span did not last 
for the duration of this layer.
11 Click the Layer panel’s tab to bring it forward again 
and locate its time marker just after the Roto Brush Span 
ends. The Segmentation Boundary will surround the 
entire frame. Because Roto Brush seemed to be working fine up until this point, 
you can drag the right end of the Roto Brush Span to the right until it covers the 
entire trimmed segment for this layer. Bring the Comp panel forward again and 
preview; the butterfly will now fly behind the foreground flowers as desired. 
12 Move to 01:12 in time and closely observe the edge between the petal 
and wing: A faint black “matte line” is visible. To improve this, enable 
Decontaminate Edge Colors in the Effect Controls panel (Fine-tune Roto Brush 
Matte must be enabled). This removes the contribution of the blue sky along the 
flower’s edge, which was causing that dark line. As a final touch, slightly reduce 
the Opacity for Tulips – Foreground to make the petal translucent. 
Trust us; using Roto Brush is rarely this easy, but now you have a taste for 
what is possible and why it’s worth learning this tool. So let’s move on to a  
more typical, challenging example.
PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET — Lesson 10
319
12 Initially, Roto Brush may create hard 
edges around your foreground shapes, such 
as the flower petal here (A). Enable the  
Decontaminate Edge Colors (above) to 
improve this. In Comps_Finished > RB1-
Butterfly_final, we also reduced the layer’s 
opacity to make the petal translucent (B).
A
B
11 If necessary, trim the Roto Brush Span 
to extend it for the desired number of 
frames.

Screen Replacement Roto
This next exercise is based on replacing the screen graphics on a computer.  
The screen replacement part is relatively easy; we’ve already done it for 
you using mocha (introduced in Lesson 9). The challenge is that the actor 
obscures part of the screen – and that just won’t do. 
Workflow
Although the details will vary with each job, there is a general workflow to 
follow with Roto Brush to achieve optimal results:
• Identify the foreground you wish to separate from its background.
• Choose a representative Base Frame where the maximum amount of the 
foreground is visible.
• Define the Base Frame using a collection of Foreground and Background 
Roto Brush strokes.
• Move a few frames away from the Base and tweak the Propagation 
parameters to optimize Roto Brush’s tracking of the shot.
• Return to the Base frame, then step away from it one frame at a time, 
adding Foreground and Background Strokes as needed. 
• Tweak the Matte parameters to refine the resulting alpha channel.
Lesson 10 — PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET
320
2 Duplicate the main footage  
(Laptop.mov), rename it (Actor Roto), 
and drag it above the layer it is supposed 
to appear in front of (ControlPanel.mov).
We want to replace the original word 
processor screen with a far sexier data 
control screen (top). To do so, you’ll 
need to cut out the hands and arm so 
they reappear in front of the monitor 
(above). Clips F129-02 and CP222 
courtesy Artbeats.com.
Creating a Base Frame
1 Open Comps > RB2-Screen Replacement*starter. This comp contains three 
layers: the already tracked replacement screen (ControlPanel.mov), the original 
shot (Laptop.mov), and Shape Layer Gradient to control the blur across the 
screen. Scrub the current time indicator through the shot, noting which parts 
of the actor are obscured by the new screen: his hands as well as portions of his 
right wrist and upper arm.
2 Your goal is to create a version of the original shot that contains just 
the obscured sections to paste in front of the new screen. In the Timeline 
panel, duplicate Laptop.mov, rename it “Actor Roto”, and drag it above 
ControlPanel.mov.
3 Double-click Actor Roto to open it in the Layer panel and resize if necessary. 
Scrub the Layer panel’s time marker through the clip to become familiar with it. 
An optimal Base Frame is where the foreground is most clearly revealed.  
Roto Brush finds it easier to propagate its Segmentation Boundary when  
details disappear (for example, when gaps between individual fingers close up), 
compared with the sudden appearance of new details (such as a closed hand 
opening into separated fingers).

5 Click near the top of the actor’s 
middle three fingers and drag a con-
tinuous stroke along the arm and up 
across the shoulders. The green color 
indicates you are drawing a Foreground 
stroke. When you release the mouse, a pink 
Segmentation Boundary will loosely sur-
round the actor where Roto Brush detected 
edges between foreground and background.
6 Roto Brush initially defined too much  
of the clip as the foreground; you need to 
teach it which areas are actually part of the 
background. Resize the brush smaller, then 
hold O (A): The brush will turn red with 
a – sign in the middle, indicating you’re 
about to draw a Background stroke. Starting 
in the background area, drag through 
areas that are supposed to also be in the 
background (not included in the cutout), 
including the laptop’s frame and keyboard. 
Chances are some of the foreground will 
now be selected as background. The next 
step is fine-tuning this distinction. 
You may create multiple Base Frames during the course of a shot. In this  
case – where there are multiple instances when the gaps between fingers open 
then close again – we’ll pick one instance to work on for now. The frame at 
01:04 is a good candidate, as there is a gap between the index and middle finger 
of the left hand and we can still see most of the little finger on the right hand.
4 Select the Roto Brush tool. Move the cursor over the Layer panel, press  
C (L), then drag to resize the brush to be just smaller than the right wrist. 
Our focus is to create a good matte (alpha channel) for the hands and right 
sleeve, as they actually move in front of the screen. Because we’re going to grab 
part of the sleeve, we need to go ahead and select the entire shirt as our fore-
ground element; otherwise, the resulting matte edge may cause visual artifacts  
if just part of the shirt is grafted back 
on top of the original shot. Fortunately, 
we don’t need to be as critical in 
cutting out the rest of the shirt as  
we have to be with the hands.
PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET — Lesson 10
321
6 Hold O (A) and drag a red Background stroke to remove the laptop from the 
Segmentation Boundary; notice that the stroke starts in the background area when 
extending the background. 
5 Drag a broad green Foreground stroke along the arm and shirt (left). The 
Segmentation Boundary will loosely enclose the actor, and a Base Frame plus 
Roto Brush Span will be created in the Layer panel’s timeline (right). 
3 The frame at 01:04 should make a good 
Base Frame, as we can see most of the 
hands plus gaps between individual fingers. 

Lesson 10 — PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET
322
d tip
Broad Strokes
Unlike traditional rotoscoping, in which 
you need to carefully draw along the edge 
of an object, with Roto Brush it is better 
to initially make broad strokes through 
the middle of the object. Use smaller 
strokes to pick up or exclude details; 
just make sure each stroke stays inside 
the foreground or background – do not 
straddle the edge between the two.
A
B
C
7 Zoom in to 200% or 400% to see details; press and hold ß and drag 
to pan around the screen. Work on correcting the fingers: If they’re outside the 
Segmentation Boundary, drag Foreground (green) strokes through them. If gaps 
between the fingers are also enclosed by the Segmentation Boundary, resize  
the brush smaller, hold O (A), and carefully drag Background (red) strokes 
between the fingers. If you touch the fingers accidentally while doing so,  
undo and try again.
Draw additional Foreground and Background strokes as needed to create a 
really good Base Frame, paying special attention to the fingers. Don’t be too  
distracted by small imperfections in the Segmentation Boundary; it is just a 
rough centerline between the foreground and background – as long as it’s  
within a pixel or so of the desired edge, you’re good.
Propagation
Now that you’ve taught Roto Brush the difference between the foreground  
and background, your next step is to refine how Roto Brush propagates this 
information across adjacent frames. 
8 Return to 100% zoom so you can see the entire image. Press 1 or 2 to 
move a few frames earlier or later than the Base Frame and check how well Roto 
Brush is propagating your initial input. Depending on how you defined that 
Base Frame, you might see some problems crop up such as a gap reappearing 
between the fingers on the left hand.
9 In the Effect Controls panel, twirl down the Roto Brush Propagation section 
of the Roto Brush & Refine Edge effect. Enable View Search Region, and the 
image will be converted to grayscale, with yellow zones showing you where  
Roto Brush is looking for the boundary between foreground and background. 
There are three parameters that control the Search Region:
• Search Radius controls how far Roto Brush searches for movement from frame 
to frame. If the Segmentation Boundary appears to be left behind as your fore-
ground moves, increase Search Radius. If your foreground is moving slowly but 
the Segmentation Boundary reaches out and grabs an area it shouldn’t, decrease 
7 Use Foreground strokes to include the 
fingers inside the Segmentation Boundary 
(A); notice that our new stroke overlaps the 
existing foreground area. Use Background 
strokes to exclude areas between fingers 
and other undesired details (B). Spend some 
time carefully defining the boundary around 
the hands; beyond the screen, we’re just 
interested in a consistent edge between 
differing colors (C).

it. At 01:00 in our version, the region missed the tip of the right little finger; 
increasing Search Radius to 33 cured it.
• Motion Threshold affects how Roto Brush determines if an edge is moving.  
In our version, at 01:07 this yellow zone disappears around the left edge of the 
right hand, suggesting Roto Brush might be missing slow movement along this 
edge. This indicates that Motion Threshold may be set too high, so reduce it 
slowly until yellow is visible all around the edge – about 35–40% worked for us.
• Motion Damping controls how tight Roto Brush makes the Search Region for 
edges that are moving slowly. Noisy footage may fool Roto Brush into thinking 
an edge is moving when it isn’t; in that case, increase Motion Damping. If the 
Segmentation Boundary is failing to pick up slight movements, decrease Motion 
Damping. The default is fine for this shot.
When you’re done tweaking these parameters, disable View Search Region.
10 Now let’s deal with how the actual Segmentation Boundary is calculated  
to see if we can improve the problem with the gap in the left hand:
• Edge Detection sets how Roto 
Brush determines the Segmentation 
Boundary between foreground and 
background. The Favor Predicted 
Edges option estimates where the edge 
should be based on the location of 
those edges in adjacent frames, and 
works best in this case. The Favor 
Current Edges option puts an empha-
sis on edges found just in the current 
frame, which can work better with rapidly changing imagery (but not on this 
shot). The Balanced option considers both equally. 
• Use Alternate Color Estimation alters the internal algorithm used to determine 
what is foreground and what is background. In this shot, enabling it fixed some 
problems and created others; choose the one that looks best for your strokes.
PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET — Lesson 10
323
A
10 Setting Edge Detection to Balanced or 
Favor Current Edges causes problems with 
the gap in the left hand (A). Setting it to 
Favor Predicted Edges works much better (B). 
A
9 Enable Roto Brush > View Search Region 
(below) to see where Roto Brush is looking 
for movements in the segmentation between 
foreground and background. 
A fast-moving finger sticking outside the 
yellow outline (A) may mean the Search 
Radius needs to be larger. 
We fixed a gap in the yellow outline (B) by 
decreasing Motion Threshold to pick up the 
slight movement.
B
B

12 Make sure Roto Brush > Matte is twirled open in the Effect Controls panel 
and slowly decrease Matte > Feather while watching the Segmentation Boundary. 
The goal is to allow the boundary to travel as far into this narrow space as 
needed, without causing a jagged outline for the rest of the boundary between 
foreground and background. You can tweak the Matte parameters later as 
needed; for now, setting it around 3.2 should give you a more satisfying outline.
11–12 Getting the Segmentation 
Boundary to properly outline tight spaces 
with sharp angles requires a combination of 
small Roto Brush strokes (A) and judicious 
reduction of Matte > Feather (center, B).
Lesson 10 — PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET
324
A
B
Making Corrections over Time
You’ve done what you can to aid Roto Brush’s automated process of propagating 
your Base Frame across adjacent frames. From here on you’ll have to perform 
some manual labor to correct Roto Brush when it goes astray.
All corrections are propagated from the Base Frame outward along the Roto 
Brush Span. Therefore, it’s important to catch and correct errors as close to 
the Base Frame as possible to reduce the number of corrections you’ll have to 
perform later (or earlier) in time.
11 Return the Layer panel’s time marker to where you created the Base Frame 
(01:04). Press 1 to step earlier in time. Carefully scan the Segmentation 
Boundary, looking for places where it deviates from the outline of the hands.  
For example, at 01:03 we noticed that the gap between the fingers on the left 
hand could be better defined. So zoom in close, resize the Roto Brush small 
enough to fit into the remaining gap, hold O (A), and draw a Background 
stroke into this gap.
When you make small corrective strokes into areas with sharp angles – such  
as between these fingers – you may be disappointed to see the Segmentation 
Boundary did not outline the space you thought you defined. Part of the reason 
is this boundary is displaying the approximate centerline for what may later be  
a softly defined semitransparent area. Another is that the Roto Brush Matte > 
Feather parameter, which smoothes the boundary outline, may be too high.
d factoid
More Is Better
Don’t worry about making too many 
Roto Brush strokes: More information 
helps Roto Brush perform more accurate 
calculations. Just don’t ever keep an 
incorrect stroke that crosses over 
between foreground and background; 
undo if you make a mistake. If you don’t 
undo, the incorrect stroke will pollute the 
information pool Roto Brush is working 
from, potentially causing trouble. On 
the other hand, if Roto Brush keeps 
misinterpreting a correct stroke, give 
Roto Brush more information by adding 
additional small strokes. 

13–14 Corrective strokes will be propagated earlier or later in time 
in the direction the Roto Brush Span arrows are pointing (away from  
the yellow Base Frame). If the 
Segmentation Boundary outlines 
the entire frame (above), drag 
the Roto Brush Span longer 
to cover additional frames as 
required (right).
13 Continue stepping earlier in time, carefully scan-
ning the Segmentation Boundary on each frame for 
irregularities. In this clip, the bracelet, fingertips, and 
spaces between fingers are the most susceptible to prob-
lems – in particular, watch for a gap opening and closing 
in the left hand before 01:00. Correct any problems with 
additional Foreground and Background strokes. Focus 
most on the hands, but make sure you don’t suddenly 
lose track of the shirt or keyboard.
Your corrective strokes will be propagated to subse-
quent frames in the direction that the Roto Brush Span 
arrows are pointing (away from the Base Frame). If you 
notice a new problem crop up that you didn’t spot 
before, back up a frame or two and verify it didn’t  
actually appear on a previous frame (that’s closer to  
the base frame). Again, the sooner you can catch and  
fix problems, the less work you’ll have to do later.
14 Every time you add a corrective stroke, the Roto 
Brush Span is extended in the direction indicated by its 
embedded arrows. If you are fortunate enough to step 20 
frames in a row without correction, you will go beyond 
the end of the span and the Segmentation Boundary will 
surround the entire frame. No problem; either step back 
a frame and make a new corrective stroke, or drag the 
end of the Roto Brush Span to cover additional frames.
15 Once you’re satisfied that you’ve created a good 
Segmentation Boundary for the first portion of this clip, 
return the time marker to the Base Frame at 01:04 and 
repeat this process stepping forward a frame at a time. 
Remember to scan around the entire Segmentation 
Boundary and to make corrections as early as possible.
Create a good Segmentation Boundary out to 01:27 
and press n to end the work area here. After this frame, 
the left hand starts to rise again, creating new gaps 
between the fingers. On a real production job, it would 
be a good idea to create a new Base Frame later in time 
(perhaps around 02:09) and start a second Roto Brush 
Span to cover this new set of movements. Roto Brush 
will seamlessly join together spans that touch each  
other in the Layer panel’s timeline.
PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET — Lesson 10
325
15 When the fingers on the left hand start to rise again at 02:09,  
it might be a good idea to stop working on your original Roto Brush 
Span and start another.

Refining the Matte
You’ve done the tedious work; now it’s time to have Roto Brush clean up the 
edges. (If you gave up during the earlier steps, open Comps_finished > RB2-
Screen Replacement-Step 16 to pick up from this point in the exercise.)
16 In the Layer panel for Actor Roto, return to your original Base Frame at 
01:04, set the Magnification to 200%, and center the hands in the Layer panel. 
Click the Toggle Alpha Boundary button along the bottom left of the Layer 
panel to disable viewing of the Segmentation Boundary and observe your cut-out 
hands. At this point you’re viewing the raw results of Roto Brush’s matte.
16–17 Click Toggle Alpha Boundary 
(above) to turn off the Segmentation 
Boundary and see your raw matte (A). 
Enable Roto Brush > Matte > Refine Matte 
to allow the Roto Brush effect to perform 
automatic cleanups (B).
Lesson 10 — PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET
326
A
B
18 A low Smooth setting may look good 
on some frames, but can cause unsightly 
edges to appear on other frames (circled 
above). Always check your edits across 
multiple points in time.
17 In the Effect Controls panel, the Fine-tune Roto Brush Matte checkbox 
should be enabled. When it’s enabled, options for partial transparency, motion 
blur, and decontamination of edge colors are made available.
18 Click on the tab for the Composition panel to view your composited image. 
Earlier we suggested you reduce Matte > Smooth to allow the Segmentation 
Boundary to cut further into the gaps between fingers; the result is a slightly 
rough matte outline. Now that you’ve finished defining the boundary, balance 
Feather, Contrast and Shift Edge off of each other to create a smooth, antialiased 
(slightly soft) edge without uninvited colors becoming visible around the edges. 
Check different points in time to make sure the parameters you choose 
look good everywhere. For example, we found that Feather ≈ 4 looked okay at 
01:03, but looked terrible around 00:15. We settled on Feather ≈ 10 to get rid of 
unsightly aliasing, Contrast ≈ 50% to create a softer edge, and Shift Edge ≈ –20% 
to compensate for this wider feather revealing a bit of the background – but your 
results may vary depending on the Segmentation Boundary you created. Also 
remember that you can keyframe these values over time, depending on what  
a shot requires. This comes in handy if focus changes during the shot.
If your foreground isn’t moving, but the matte around its edges is changing 
from frame to frame anyway, increase Roto Brush > Matte > Reduce Chatter.  
By contrast, if Roto Brush seems to be ignoring slight movements or if it erodes 
fast-moving edges, try decreasing Reduce Chatter.
Toggle Alpha
Toggle Alpha 
Boundary
Alpha Boundary/ 
Overlay Color
Toggle Alpha Overlay

19 Move to around 00:26 where the right hand is 
moving quickly and note the partially transparent 
motion blur along the top of the hand. Twirl down  
the Motion Blur section; this is where you can further 
tweak its look. For this shot, we found enabling Higher 
Quality yielded a slightly more natural look around the 
right fingertips.
20 Twirl down Decontamination and enable View 
Decontamination Map. The white band is where Roto 
Brush is performing color correction. This area changes 
size depending on how much motion blur or other 
partial transparency exists. If visible color spill extends 
beyond this area, use Increase Decontamination Radius 
to correct a wider zone. 
Disable View Decontamination Map and tweak these settings as required by 
each individual shot to increase or reduce the amount of decontamination Roto 
Brush performs. For this shot, we also found enabling Extend Where Smoothed 
made tiny improvements in small areas such as where fingers came together.
21 Preview and observe how your composite is working at normal speed. 
Stubborn artifacts that are apparent on still frames may be less noticeable when 
the scene is moving. On the other hand, you may find some areas where you 
didn’t get the Segmentation Boundary quite right, or otherwise need to tweak 
your settings.
20 When Roto Brush > Decontamination 
> View Decontamination Map is enabled, 
the white area shows you where Roto Brush 
will be performing smoothing and color 
correction. Disable this option and examine 
these areas in the final composite for 
potential problems such  
as colored outlines.
21 The final composite looks clean and 
natural. It took some work to get here, but 
less than the alternatives.
PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET — Lesson 10
327
The two biggest mistakes users make with Roto Brush are assuming it is fully 
automatic after you create your initial Foreground strokes, and assuming the 
results will be perfect. Neither is true; some shots will require a lot of work  
on your part, including using the Paint tools to fix edges in the alpha channel 
that Roto Brush just can’t get right. Some may require you to simply start over 
(we performed this roto four times before we were sort of happy) or to break the 
shot into smaller sections. But in the end, Roto Brush can still save a lot of time 
compared with having to paint or mask every detail of every frame by hand.

Refine Edge
Roto Brush creates an alpha channel matte with a consistent edge. This doesn’t 
always match reality – for example, a shoulder would have a hard edge, where 
hair may have a soft edge with individual strands of hair. The second part of the 
Roto Brush & Refine Edge effect deals with the latter.
1 First, create the best matte you can with Roto Brush for the entire length of the 
clip. Refine Edge builds on top of that. Open Comps > RE-Refine Edge*starter; 
we’ve already performed the required Roto Brush work for PeruvianCouple.mov, 
but have effects turned off initially. Press # to open the Effect Controls panel. 
Preview, then enable the “fx” switch in the timeline: Their hair looks terrible.
2 Double-click PeruvianCouple.mov to 
open the Layer panel, and make sure the View 
popup is set to Roto Brush & Refine Edge.  
If the Segmentation Boundary is not visible (and you see a blue background), 
click the Toggle Alpha Boundary switch along the bottom of the Layer panel. 
Move the current time indicator to the Base Frame at 00:00, click on the Roto 
Brush tool, and choose Refine Edge tool from the flyout menu.
3 Your first refinement stroke must touch the Segmentation Boundary, while 
also covering the area beyond the boundary where you wish to recover some 
detail. Hold C (L), click, and scrub to resize the brush large enough to cover 
most of the strands of her hair beyond the edge of her head.
Click and drag along the Segmentation Boundary around 
her head, making sure you always touch that boundary 
while enclosing her wisps of hair. Release the mouse;  
Lesson 10 — PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET
328
1 Loose strands of hair (top) are not a 
good match for Roto Brush’s simple binary 
matte (above). Clip FWR127 courtesy 
Artbeats.com.
2–3 Select the Refine Edge tool and resize the brush large enough 
to cover the unruly strands of hair. Paint a stroke around the edge 
of her head, picking up those loose strands (A). When you’re done, 
you’ll see an x-ray view of the new alpha channel in this region (B).
A
B

the black and white region that appears is called the Refine Edge  
X-ray view. It shows the alpha channel in the edge refinement region 
you just defined.
4 Toggle the Render button along the bottom of the Layer panel off 
and on to remind yourself what the original looked like. Refine Edge 
probably mistook some of the highlights in her hair as partial transpar-
ency. Hold O (A) while you paint to remove those areas from the 
refinement region. 
Edit the refinement region until you are not missing any hairs, but 
also not picking up any portions of the background for foreground that 
you don’t need. As with the Roto Brush, spending time perfecting the 
first Refine Edge frame will make your life easier later.
5 Draw a relatively thin Refine Edge stroke around the boy’s head.
6 Step forward frame by frame, repairing the refinement region as 
needed. For example, a gap may appear where her hair curl touches 
the bottom; fill that in. If the refinement region has a hazy gray area, 
Refine Edge is probably picking up false information in the background; 
remove the solid black areas until the alpha is better defined.
7 When you’re done, either enable the Toggle Alpha switch along 
the bottom left of the Layer panel, or switch back to the Comp panel 
and enable Decontaminate Edge Colors so you can see her hair clearly 
against the background. You can improve your alpha using the Roto 
Brush Matte parameters:
• Smooth and Feather soften the alpha, which can reduce jitteriness at 
the cost of detail. Feather works like a blur; Smooth clumps together 
similar colors.
• Contrast can clean up cloudy areas in the alpha. Increasing it to about 
15% helps this clip. If Contrast erodes the fine details too much, use 
Shift Edge to help restore them.
• Chatter Reduction helps solve issues with semitransparent areas flickering, 
with two different algorithms as well as a Reduce Chatter percentage.
We still had issues with that hair curl, even with chatter reduction. 
We would use the Paint tools to fill in the alpha channel through the 
problematic area. And that’s the big cautionary tale with Roto Brush & 
Refine Edge: Despite your best efforts, quite often you won’t get perfect 
results; the idea behind them is to reduce the amount of work you need 
to do with paint and masking to create that perfect cutout.
PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET — Lesson 10
329
4 Add to and subtract from the refinement region to 
focus Refine Edge on just the semitransparent areas it 
should be working on. As you do so, you will see the 
quality of the alpha channel improve inside this region.
7 Enabling Decontaminate Edge Colors and slightly 
increasing Refine Edge Matte > Contrast did a nice 
job recovering fine strands of hair.
d tip
Side-by-Side View
If you have a large enough screen, it is very helpful 
and instructive to view the Layer and Comp panels side 
by side when you work with Roto Brush & Refine Edge 
so you can quickly see the results of your actions.

Lesson 10 — PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET
330
The Puppet Tool
After Effects contains a set of three distortion tools collectively known as the 
Puppet tool. These provide an alternate way to warp layers. As you might 
guess from the name, they are particularly well suited for character animation, 
although they can also be used for entertaining effects on other types of layers.
The core element of the Puppet tool is the idea of a pin. Pins serve two  purposes:
• They stabilize elements that you don’t want to move, such as feet that are 
 supposed to stay on the ground.
• They act as handles to drag elements that you do want to move, such as a 
hand reaching or waving.
After the pins are placed, the Puppet tool then warps the layer between the 
stationary pins and the moving handles. It also includes other useful options, 
such as a Starch tool that reduces how much an area warps, and an Overlap tool 
that ensures that the part of the layer you are dragging will cross over in front  
or behind another part of the same layer.
2–3 Select the Puppet Pin tool and enable Mesh: Show (circled). Clicking on the 
layer with this tool places a yellow pin (where the arrow is pointing), plus reveals 
the mesh of triangles the Puppet tool will use to break up and warp your layer. 
Credit: We drew this character in Adobe Illustrator while referring to an image  
in the Dover book of public domain art Treasury of Fantastic and Mythological 
Creatures. He is based on a character in the Joan Miró painting The Harlequin’s 
Carnival (Le Carnaval d’Arlequin), 1924/25.
Puppet Pin Tool
1 Close your previous compositions. If you skipped the Roto Brush 
section and are still using the Paint workspace, select Standard (and if 
the layout still looks odd, choose Standard > Reset to Saved Layout). In 
the Project panel, locate and open Comps > 04-Puppet*starter. Select 
MiroMan.psd: a fanciful character with a few appendages to play with.
2 Select the Puppet Pin tool in the Tools panel; a set of options will 
appear to the right in the Tools panel. Enable Mesh: Show, leave 
Expansion at 3, and set the Triangles value to 500 or so. 
Press H to make sure you are at 00:00 – this is important because 
unlike most other parameters inside After Effects, the Puppet tool 
enables animation and creates a keyframe as soon as you create a pin.
3 Click on one of MiroMan’s ankles to pin it in place. A yellow pin 
will appear where you clicked. MiroMan.psd will also be overlaid with 
a mesh of triangles, which indicate how the layer has been divided for 
warping. Click on the other ankle to pin both into place.
Three Puppet tools give you new 
possibilities in warping layers.
d factoid
A Single Mesh
While you can apply the Puppet tool to a 
movie or a nested comp layer, be aware that 
the mesh is only created once and is based 
on the alpha channel of the current frame.

4 Click on the arm on the left, at the point where it meets 
the pencil. This is a handle we want to move. 
Now for the fun bit: Click on the yellow dot for the pin 
you just created (the cursor will turn white, with a four-
way arrow at its tail) and drag it around the Comp panel. 
MiroMan will warp to follow your dragging, with the 
ankles remaining pinned in place. 
Notice how the feet beyond the ankles counter-rotate 
slightly as you drag, helping give the impression of the 
character stretching on his tippy-toes. If you don’t want  
the toes to move, undo to a prestretched pose, pin the toes 
as well, then get back to dragging and stretching the arm 
with the pencil.
5 Click on the top of the pencil to add another pin. Hover 
the cursor over this new pin; it will change to the four- 
arrow pointer. Drag this new pin, and the pencil will bend.
PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET — Lesson 10
331
6 After Effects automatically enables every Puppet Pin for keyframing.
f When you 
select an 
individual pin, 
its motion path 
is displayed in 
the Comp panel; 
drag handles to 
edit it. 
g You can give each pin a descriptive 
name in the Timeline panel: Simply 
select it, press R, type a new 
name, and press R to accept.
4 Dragging the pin on the arm warps the entire character, pivoting 
around the pins (at the ankles) that you’re not moving.
Animating Pins
6 Now let’s animate your arm and pencil:
• Hold S and press ª to move 
forward 10 frames. Move the tip of the 
pencil into a new position.
• Press N to move to the end of the 
comp. Select the pins for both the pencil 
tip and where the arm meets the pencil. 
You can drag a marquee around them, or 
S+click them. Drag this pair together 
into a new position.
With the layer selected, press u and you 
will see your keyframes. As we noted earlier, 
After Effects enabled keyframing for you 
automatically to save you from having to 
dive into the Timeline panel chasing after 
every single pin. Start a preview and watch 
your simple animation. 
We’ve  animated a few more pins in our 
version Comps_Finished > 04-Puppet_final; 
select MiroMan > Puppet in the Timeline 
panel to see these pins.

Lesson 10 — PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET
332
Puppet Overlap Tool
An important feature of the Puppet tool is the ability to control how your 
character behaves when you drag one piece to overlap another. 
1 Open Comps > 05-Puppet-overlap*starter. This is the same character 
you’ve been working with. 
2 Select MiroMan.psd. If Puppet isn’t visible in the Timeline panel,  
press e to reveal effects. Select the word Puppet in the Timeline panel and 
you will see three small circles in the Comp panel that show where we’ve 
already placed pins for you: on the two ankles and on the wrist on the left 
(the one holding the pencil). 
3 Select the Puppet Pin tool and turn off Mesh: Show in the Tools panel 
to make it easier to see what’s going on. Drag the pin on the wrist so that it 
moves across his left hip: The warped element will go behind the body. Now 
drag the pin up and over this shoulder: The pencil will move in front of the 
body. You can control what element passes in front of or behind another:
• Undo to return to the initial pose. Select the Puppet Overlap tool. A fine 
outline of the unwarped body will appear. Inside this gray outline, click 
on what would be the middle of the pencil. A blue dot will appear, and its 
outline will be shaded in white, following the size of the mesh  triangles.  
The size of the shaded area is determined by the Extent parameter in the 
Tools panel. Increase Extent value until the entire left arm is filled in. 
• Press v to return to the Selection tool. Drag the pin on the wrist over the 
character’s hip – now the arm and pencil will pass in front of his body! (Note 
that setting the In Front parameter to a negative value will move it behind.)
This is a fairly simple animation. For more complex moves, you may need 
to set Overlap pins on the body as well. The In Front parameter controls 
which part is in front of another; you can even keyframe it if needed.
3 Normally, the arm will pass 
behind the body when you drag 
it behind his hips (A). 
Place an Overlap Pin on the 
pencil, and set the Extent value 
(see above) to cover the pencil 
and arm (B); now it will pass in 
front of the body (C). 
A
B
C
g In Comps_finished > 05-Puppet-
overlap_final, the left arm moves in  
front of the body, but the right arm goes 
behind due to a negative In Front value.
D Puppet Part  
 
Stacking Order
You have control over which layer pieces 
will pass in front of or behind other layer 
pieces. Using the Puppet Overlap tool, 
click on specific sections of the body, 
then increase or decrease the Extent 
value to include more or less of the area. 
(Increase the Mesh Triangles value for 
finer increments.) Once the Overlap 
regions are set, the In Front values for 
each pin determines the stacking priority 
for a pin’s area.

PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET — Lesson 10
333
Recording Puppet Animation
The Puppet tool has a version of Motion Sketch 
(discussed in Lesson 2) to make it easier to 
animate pins. To practice this, open Comps >  
06-Puppet-sketch*starter:
4 Select MiroMan.psd, press u, and select 
the Puppet effect in the timeline. We’ve already 
placed pins on the ankles and the left arm. 
Select the Puppet Pin tool, press the C (L) 
key, and hover the cursor over the yellow pin on the left arm:  
The cursor will look like a stopwatch (left). While still holding  
C (L), click on this pin and start dragging it around. After 
Effects will start recording your animation as you drag. It will stop 
either when you release the mouse or time runs out in the comp. 
In the Comp panel, you will see a motion path for the pin you 
dragged as well as keyframes in the timeline. Preview your animation.
If you don’t like the results, you can always undo and try again, edit the 
motion path, or refine your animation using the Graph Editor (Lesson 2). You 
can also use the Smoother keyframe assistant (Lesson 2) to simplify the path, 
making it easier to edit. If you have trouble drawing a path you like in real time, 
select the Puppet tool and click on the Record Options in the Tools panel. This 
will allow you to record at a different speed than it will play back at, as well as  
to control the display and how much automatic smoothing will take place.
Puppet Starch Tool
Sometimes, portions of your layer may be more flexible than you wish, or other 
kinks may appear. One solution is to increase the number of triangles for a layer. 
Another is to use the Puppet Starch tool.
1 Open Comps > 07-Puppet-starch*starter. Select the layer MiroMan.psd. 
Press u and select the Puppet effect in the timeline. In the Comp viewer, look 
for the yellow circles: We’ve added pins to his feet, plus three for his big red tie.
2 Click on one of the pins at the ends of his tie and drag it around. As you move 
to more extreme positions, you might notice some strange kinks in the neck.
3 To fix these kinks, select the Puppet Starch tool. A gray outline will illustrate 
the shape of the original unwarped layer. Click in this gray area in the middle  
of the neck where the tie would cross it – this will add a red starch pin to your 
layer. Wait a second while After Effects calculates; the neck will straighten out. 
Return to the Selection tool and try dragging the tips of the tie again to compare.
4 Hold C (L) while dragging a  
pin, and its animation will be recorded 
automatically (left).
h In our comp, 06-Puppet Sketch_final 
(below), we animated the wrist and pencil, 
then copied the keyframes for Pin 4 (the 
pencil tip). These keyframes were pasted 
to the Brush Position of the Write-on effect 
on a solid layer. A little tweaking, and our 
MiroMan is “write on”! 
3 When warping a layer, kinks may appear, 
such as in the neck here (above). Clicking  
in the problem area with the Puppet Starch 
tool selected will “stiffen” the neck (below), 
helping to straighten out the kinks.

4 Open Window > Effect Controls (shortcut: #). In addition to the 
aforementioned Ramp and Bevel Alpha effects, you will see the Puppet 
effect that performs the deformations. Deselect all effects (shortcut: @) 
and look at the Comp panel: Despite your deformations, the blue-to-
white gradient still reaches from the top to the bottom of the character. 
This is because Ramp and Bevel Alpha are being calculated before Puppet. 
Press the Take Snapshot button (the camera icon) to take a snapshot of 
this state.
5 Drag the Puppet effect before (above) Ramp and Bevel Alpha, and 
again deselect all effects. Now the gradient and bevel are rendered after 
the deformations. Note how the gradient in the r starts and stops in the 
same place as the other characters, 
despite its deformation. Press the  
Show Snapshot button to recall the 
snapshot and compare this look with 
the original arrangement. Which look 
is better depends on the requirements 
of each job. For this, we prefer the 
original arrangement as it helps the 
r stand out when its shape overlaps 
adjacent characters.
Deforming Multiple Shapes
Quite often, the alpha channel for a layer defines a single enclosed shape. When 
you apply a puppet pin to this shape, you get a single mesh to distort. However, 
some layers have complex alpha channels that define multiple discrete shapes.  
A perfect example is text: Each character forms its own shape; the letters “i” and 
“j” contain multiple shapes. With these layers, you can use Puppet to deform 
each shape independently or have it deform the entire layer as a single shape. 
We’ll play with both of these techniques, plus learn a bit about rendering order 
and effects.
1 Close any previous comps and open Comps > 08-Multiple Shapes*starter.  
It contains a text layer with a Ramp effect filling the text with a linear gradient 
from top to bottom, followed by a Bevel Alpha effect to stylize the edges.
2 Select the Puppet Pin tool. Make sure Mesh: Show is enabled in the Tools panel; 
the default settings of Expansion = 3 and Triangles = 350 are otherwise fine.
3 Click near the bottom of the “r” to place your first pin. The r – but no other 
characters – will be filled with a mesh. Add pins to its top left and right, and have 
fun dragging these pins to deform the character. Leave it in a deformed state.
Lesson 10 — PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET
334
A
B
3 Placing a puppet pin inside one character 
of a text layer creates a mesh for just that 
character (A). Add multiple pins and you  
can deform that character independent of 
the others (B).
Puppet > Effects
4–5 Effect rendering order is very 
important – particularly when using 
Puppet. If Puppet follows other 
effects (above), the deformations 
happen after the image treatments; 
if the Puppet effect is first, the 
image is treated after deformation 
(right). Study the gradients and 
edges in these two images to 
understand this impact.
Effects > Puppet

6 Add a puppet pin to the dot on top of the i and note that it receives 
a mesh – but not the stem of the i. After Effects does not know these 
two shapes are part of the same character, so they will get separate 
meshes. This makes it more difficult to animate the whole character as a unit.
7 Delete the Puppet effect to return to your starting point.
• With the layer still selected, choose the Rectangle tool. Drag a generous rect-
angular mask around the i, being careful not to touch the adjacent characters.
• Characters outside the mask shape will disappear. To make them visible again, 
reveal Miro > Masks > Mask 1 in the Timeline panel and change its Mask Modes 
popup from Add to None. This disables the masking operation while keeping the 
mask shape. (Remember the location of the mask 
outline in the Comp panel, as it’s possible to get 
After Effects into a state where you won’t see this 
outline for the next step.)
8 Select the Puppet Pin tool again. Carefully click 
inside the mask outline, but not on the i itself. After 
Effects will fill the entire mask shape with a mesh. 
Add another pin at the opposite end of the mesh, 
and now you can deform the i as a whole.
9 Delete Mask 1 as well as the Puppet effect. Now 
draw a mask around the entire word. Add a puppet 
pin inside one of the corners of the mask to define 
the mesh. Then add more pins and move their posi-
tions: The entire word will deform as if on a single 
sheet of rubber, regardless of the shapes defined 
by the alpha channels for each individual character. 
Hopefully these examples will open your mind to  
additional creative possibilities with the Puppet tools.
PAINT, ROTO, AND PUPPET — Lesson 10
335
7–8 Mask just the i (left), set its Mask 
Mode to None (center) to not have the mask 
create transparency, and then click inside the 
mask shape but not on the i itself (above). 
Puppet will then use the mask shape to 
define the mesh (above).
9 Mask as many characters as you want, and add pins inside the  
mask shape: Now the entire layer can be warped as a unit, rather 
than as individual characters. Increase the number of Mesh Triangles 
or use the Starch tool to smooth out kinks in the final deformation.

O
ne of the most versatile features in After 
Effects is shape layers. You can draw free-
form shapes or a number of standardized 
parametric shapes, each with its own Stroke and 
Fill. You can also apply shape operators (effects)  
to modify and animate the shapes.
Shapes can be used to create anything from simple 
abstract objects to entire cartoons. Our focus here will be 
on graphical elements. We’ll start by leading you through  
a grand tour of what you can do with the basic tools.  
We’ll then show you how to create a few useful objects,  
as well as perform common tasks ranging from creating 
abstract imagery to animating a path along a map.
Make a Shape
1 Open this lesson’s project file Lesson_11.aep.  
In the Project panel, locate and double-click Comps >  
01-Shape Play*starter to open it. It is currently empty.
2 Click on the Shape tool in the Tools panel along the  
top of the Application window and hold the mouse 
button down until a menu pops open. Select the Rounded 
Rectangle option. When you select this tool, Fill, Stroke, 
and Stroke Width options will appear in the Tools panel 
to the right. You can use these to change the color of your 
shapes before or after you create them.
• Click on the word Fill (not the color swatch) to open 
the Fill Options dialog (see figure next page). Here you 
may select between fill type buttons: None, Solid, Linear 
Gradient, and Radial Gradient. You can also set the Blend 
Mode popup and Opacity for the fill. Choose Solid Color 
and Normal mode. Set Opacity to 50% and click OK.
Lesson 11
336
Shape Layers
Creating, animating, and extruding vector-based shapes.
 d In This Lesson
 336 
creating a shape layer
 337 
Fill and Stroke settings; editing shapes
 338 
multiple shapes
 339 
Even-Odd Fill
 340 
shape effects
 342 
Bezier Shapes; Pen tool
 344 
Convert to Bezier Path
 345 
Create Shapes from Text
 346 
Repeater
 348 
compound shapes; Merge Paths
 350 
gradients
 352 
Wiggle Transform
 354 
advanced strokes; dashes and gaps
 356 
animating a stroke
 357 
Create Shapes from Vector Layers
 358 
extruding shape layers
 d Getting Started
Make sure you have downloaded the file archive for Lesson 11 
and decompressed it. It contains the project file and sources you 
need to execute this lesson.
As previously noted in Lesson 4, the Shape and Pen tools are 
context sensitive:
• If any layer other than a shape layer is selected, After Effects 
assumes you want to draw a mask on the selected layer.
• If no layer is selected, After Effects assumes you want to  
create a new shape layer.
• If a shape layer is selected, you can choose between  
drawing a new shape or a mask.

• To the right of Fill is its color swatch. Click on it to select your color (choose 
what you like; we’ll use red). You can also O+click on Mac (A+click on 
Windows) this button to toggle between the fill types.
• Next is Stroke Options; it has the same choices as Fill Options. Choose a  
Solid Color fill with Blend Mode set to Normal and Opacity = 100%.
• Next is Stroke Color, which has the same choices as Fill Color. Choose  
whatever color you like; we’ll go with white.
• The last option is Stroke Width, with a scrubbable value. Start with 6 pixels.
3 Click and drag in the Comp panel, and your shape will appear. An object 
called Shape Layer 1 will also be added to the Timeline panel, already twirled 
open to reveal your first shape group: Rectangle 1 in this case. 
Edit a Shape
4 Twirl down Rectangle 1 to reveal what makes up your initial 
shape group: Path, Stroke, Fill, and Transform.
Temporarily twirl down Stroke 1 and Fill 1 – you will see the 
same parameters as in the Tools panel, and more. We’ll experi-
ment with them later; twirl them up for now.
The default arrangement is Stroke over Fill. Click on Fill 1 in the 
Timeline panel and drag it just above Stroke 1 until a black line 
appears above it. When you release the mouse, the fill will now be  
over the stroke (you will see some of the stroke’s line because you  
set the Fill to 50% in Step 2). Undo to get back to stroke over fill.
SHAPE LAYERS — Lesson 11
337
Tool Creates 
Shape
Shape Tool
Fill Options
Stroke Options
Stroke Width
Pen Tool
Fill Color
Stroke Color
Add Shape 
Operator
Tool Creates 
Mask
3 Click and drag directly in the Comp 
panel to create a new Shape.
4 Twirl down Rectangle 1.
2 When you select a Shape tool, Fill and 
Stroke options will appear along the right  
of the Tools panel (above). To create a full-
frame shape, select the shape you want,  
and double-click the Shape tool.
Clicking on Fill or Stroke will open an 
options dialog (left) where you can set the 
desired fill type, opacity, and blend mode. 
Click on the swatches to select a color. 
d tip
Reshape as You Draw
You can use the up/down arrow keys or 
mouse scroll wheel while you drag a shape 
to change the roundness of its corners 
(Rounded Rectangle) or the number of 
points it has (Polygon or Star). These are 
the same as for mask paths; see Lesson 4 
for more details.

5 Twirl down Rectangle Path 1 and 
explore its parameters:
• Size is akin to a shape path’s scale. 
Scrub its values, trying it with the 
Constrain Proportions switch (the 
chain link) turned on, then off. Set  
it to 200,200 when you’re done.
• Position offsets this path 
(Rectangle Path 1) inside its group 
(Rectangle 1). Leave it at 0,0.
• Roundness controls how rounded 
your rectangle is, ranging from 
square-edged to a circle. Set to taste.
Unless you were very careful with 
how you dragged your shape, it is 
probably not centered in the Comp 
panel – even though the shape’s 
Position value is 0,0. This is where 
the shape group’s Transform properties come in:
6 Twirl down Transform: Rectangle 1. These parameters are for an entire shape 
group. Currently, you have only one shape in your group, but these come in 
really handy as you create more complex composite shapes.
Play with these parameters to become familiar with them. Then set Transform: 
Rectangle 1 > Position to 0,0 to center your rectangle in the Comp panel.
Multiple Shapes
A shape layer can contain more than one shape path. 
7 Click and hold on the Rounded Rectangle tool until its popup menu appears, 
then select the Ellipse tool.
Make sure Shape Layer 1 is still selected (otherwise, you’ll create a new layer!). 
Drag out your new shape in the Comp panel. When you release the mouse, a 
new shape group called Ellipse 1 will be added 
to Shape Layer 1 in the Timeline panel (above 
Rectangle 1). Twirl Ellipse 1 down, and you 
will see it has its own Path, Stroke, Fill, and 
Transform. Feel free to play with these  
parameters if you like. 
When done, select Ellipse 1 and delete it.
Lesson 11 — SHAPE LAYERS
338
5–6 Each shape path has its own Size and 
Position, plus parameters (such as Roundness) 
that control the shape. In addition, a shape 
group has its own set of Transform properties.
7 With Shape Layer 1 selected, click 
and drag a new shape in the Comp panel 
(right). A new shape group will be added 
in the Timeline panel (above). Delete 
Ellipse 1 when done. 
D Shape Positions
There are three different types of 
Position values (and, for that matter, 
Transform properties) in a shape 
layer, each of which may be edited 
and animated:
• Each shape path – such as 
Rectangle Path 1 – has its own 
Position inside its shape group. 
• Each shape group – such as 
Rectangle 1 – has its own Transform 
> Position. Its initial value is based 
on where you drew the first shape 
path and is shown as an offset from 
the center of the overall layer. To 
center a new shape in its layer and 
the composition, set this to 0,0.
• An overall shape layer (including 
all of its groups) also has a normal 
Transform section, which includes 
Position.

9–10 The Polystar is one of the most 
versatile shape paths (left). Adjust it 
until it partially overlaps the rectangle 
underneath (A), then change Fill 1 >  
Fill Rule to Even-Odd to create a 
pattern of filled areas and holes (B).
8 Instead of creating a new shape group, you can add a 
new shape path to the group you’re already working on. 
To do this, select the group’s name (i.e., Rectangle 1) in the 
timeline, or a member of its group (such as Rectangle Path 
1). Then click on the Add button either in the Timeline 
panel (to the right of Contents) or in the Tools panel (to 
the right of Stroke Width). Just for something different, 
select Polystar. It will share the same Fill and Stroke settings 
as Rectangle Path 1, as they belong to the same shape group. 
9 Twirl down Polystar Path 1 and experiment with its 
parameters. This is one of the most versatile shape paths:  
It has a popup to turn it into a Star or a Polygon, plus you 
have a lot of control over how many points or sides it has 
and how rounded its corners are. 
To create interesting looping 
shapes, try setting Inner and Outer 
Roundness to very large positive or 
negative values. After you’ve had some 
fun playing, set up a shape where the 
Polystar’s outline forms interwoven 
or overlapping lines, either within the 
Polystar’s own shape or intersecting 
the Rectangle.
10 Twirl down Fill 1. Set its Fill Rule 
popup to Even-Odd. Now alternating 
sections of the overlapping shapes, 
rather than the entire shape, will be 
filled. 
There is a lot more that can be done 
with combining shapes, which we’ll 
explore in later exercises. For now, 
either delete Polystar Path 1 or twirl it 
up and click on the eyeball next to it 
to turn it off.
Save your project before continuing. 
You can also open Comps > 01-Shape 
Play*starter2 to pick up this exercise 
at this step so you can jump into 
playing with shape operators (also 
known as shape effects).
SHAPE LAYERS — Lesson 11
339
8 Select the shape group (not just 
the layer), click on the Add button, 
and select a new shape path type 
(right). Your new shape will appear 
in the Comp panel (below right).
B
A

11 Click on Add (above), 
then select Trim Paths from 
the popup menu. Twirl down 
Trim Paths in the Timeline 
panel and scrub Start and End 
while watching the Comp 
panel: Only a portion of your 
shape will be drawn. Set one or 
both to a value between 0 and 100%, then scrub Offset:  
The shape will appear to rotate or chase itself. This operator 
is particularly useful when you don’t have a fill, as it allows 
you to create animated stroke effects. When you’re done, 
twirl up Trim Paths and turn off its eyeball to disable it.
12 Select Add > Twist, twirl it open, and scrub its Angle 
parameter: This adds a nice, organic distortion to stiff 
shapes. Twirl it up and disable it when done.
13 Select Add > Pucker & Bloat; your rectangle will take 
on an overstuffed appearance. This attribute bends the path 
segments between the shape path  vertices: in this case, the 
lines between the corners and the rounded corners them-
selves. Twirl down Pucker & Bloat and scrub its Amount 
(try positive and negative values): You can create some 
really wild shapes this way. When you’re done, twirl it up 
and turn off its eyeball.
14 Select Add > Zig Zag. This can be thought of as a spiky 
version of Pucker & Bloat. Twirl it down and scrub its Size 
and Ridges parameters: You can quickly create anything 
from mad scrawls to cool, angular, geometric figures. 
Change the Points popup from Corner to Smooth to  
create a more freehand-drawn look. When you’re done, 
twirl it up and turn off its eyeball.
Shape Effects
In addition to creating shape paths, there is a wide variety 
of shape operators that can be employed to modify those 
shapes. Continuing with the comp you’ve been working 
with, let’s have fun exploring a handful of them:
Lesson 11 — SHAPE LAYERS
340
Trim Paths
Twist
Pucker
Bloat
Zig Zag

15 Select Add > Wiggle Paths. Initially, it will look like 
static has been added to your shape’s path! Twirl it down 
and experiment initially with its Size and Detail parameters, 
along with the Points popup. 
This effect is special in that it self-animates: Preview, and 
your shape will dance for you! Play with Wiggles/Second 
and Correlation to change the dance speed and pattern. 
When you’re done, twirl it up and turn off its eyeball.
16 Select Add > Wiggle Transform. Initially, nothing 
happens; Wiggle Transform defaults to having no effect. 
Twirl down Wiggle Transform 1, then the Transform 
section underneath it. Scrub the two Position parameters; 
your shape will be offset in the Comp viewer. Like Wiggle 
Paths, Wiggle Transform auto-animates: Preview, and 
your shape will now wander about the composition. Scrub 
Wiggle Transform 1 > Wiggles/Second to alter how fast it 
moves (preview again to see the result of your changes). 
Experiment with the other Wiggle Transform 1 > Transform 
parameters such as Scale and Rotation.
Wiggle Transform really comes into its own when com-
bined with the Repeater, which is what we’ll play with in an upcoming exercise. 
Save your project, and we’ll move on to second way of creating shapes: the pen.
SHAPE LAYERS — Lesson 11
341
Wiggle Paths
Wiggle Transform
lighting from the center to the outer edges 
of a button; set Type to Linear to get color 
changes across bars.
• Layer > Layer Styles have far more inter-
esting bevels and drop shadows than normal 
effects. These give your buttons and bars 
apparent thickness and perspective.
• Explore other layer styles. For example, 
Layer Styles > Inner Shadow can add inter-
esting coloration and gradations to buttons: 
Change the Color, try different Blending 
Modes, and experiment with Angle and 
Distance. Also experiment with Bevel and 
Emboss > Altitude: Increasing its value can 
add stronger specular highlights to a shape. 
g The bar on top is a simple 
rectangular shape with a gradient. 
The two underneath add Pucker & 
Bloat, Skew, Bevel and Emboss, Inner 
Shadow, and Drop Shadow to create 
more dimensional looks.
The combination of shape layers plus 
layer styles (Lesson 3) will help you create 
far more interesting buttons, text bars, 
and other graphical elements. Here are  
a few ideas worth exploring:
• A slight amount of Pucker & Bloat can 
add interest to shapes, such as a slight 
“bow” to rectangular buttons; same for 
Twist and Zig Zag. These work better  
on simple shapes, such as rectangles.
• Inside a Shape group’s Transform 
properties is a Skew property that can 
cause a button or bar to “lean.”
• Gradient Fill with Type set to Radial 
can be used to simulate a change in 
D Building Better Buttons

5 When you are about to close a 
shape, a small circle will appear at 
the tail of the Pen’s cursor.
2 Choose the Pen tool, just as you would 
to create a mask. If no layers are selected, 
you will create a shape layer instead; the 
appearance of the Fill and Stroke options 
in the Tools panel are clues that you’re 
about to create a shape.
Lesson 11 — SHAPE LAYERS
342
Bezier Shapes
So far, you’ve been working with parametric shape paths that are defined  
numerically by their width, height, position, and other values. Just as with 
masks (Lesson 4), you can also use the Pen tool to create freeform shapes.
1 Continue working in 01-Shape Play*Starter. Turn off the Video switch  
(the eyeball) for Shape Layer 1, and deselect it. If you have another layer 
selected, After Effects may think you’re trying to mask the selected layer, rather 
than create a new one. Your previous settings for Fill and Stroke were fine; 
change the Fill Color if you like.
d tip
Transformations
If you double-click a shape group in the 
Timeline panel, you will see a Transform 
box drawn with a dotted line instead of 
a solid one. This means you are editing 
the shape group’s Transform properties, 
not the shape’s Path.
2 Select the Pen tool; the shortcut is g. Disable the RotoBezier checkbox 
(circled above); we want to get some practice editing Bezier handles.
3 Click in the Comp panel and drag to pull out the Bezier handle for your first 
vertex. A new shape layer will be created in the Timeline panel.
4 Click and drag your second point. 
If you have Fill enabled, After Effects 
will try to fill the partial shape you 
have drawn.
Click and drag out as many addi-
tional points as you like. You can go 
back and edit prior points before you 
close your shape, but remember to 
select the last vertex you drew before 
trying to add more points onto the 
same shape – otherwise, After Effects 
will think you’re starting a new shape.
5 To close your shape, hover the 
cursor over the first vertex point  
you drew. A circle will appear at  
the bottom of the cursor, indicating  
you’re about to close it. Click on  
that first vertex, and your shape  
will be closed.

6 A pen-based shape has just a path that can be 
keyframed – no parameters. Otherwise, it has the same 
Stroke, Fill, and Transform that parametric shapes do; 
you can even add shape effects.
8 Double-click a vertex to enter Free Transform mode, 
where you can rotate and scale the entire shape path at 
once. Note this does not alter the Transform properties 
in the timeline; you are editing the path and its vertices.
SHAPE LAYERS — Lesson 11
343
6 In the Timeline panel, twirl open Shape Layer 2 > 
Contents > Shape 1. Path 1 is the Bezier path you just drew, 
followed by the same Stroke, Fill, and group Transform 
attributes you’ve seen with parametric shapes. Twirl open 
Transform: Shape 1 and note that its default Position is 0,0; 
the position of a pen-based shape path relative to its group 
and layer are determined by the location of its vertices in 
the Comp panel. Indeed, twirl open Path 1 and you will see 
no parameters other than an animation stopwatch for Path. 
Editing Pen Shapes
7 It is easy to edit Bezier paths after you’ve created a shape. Select 
just Path 1 in the timeline; you should see hollow vertex squares 
along the path. (If they are solid, you may have selected Path 1 > 
Path, which selects all points in the path.) Click on a vertex or draw 
a marquee selection around it; the hollow square turns solid when 
selected. This also reveals the Bezier handles for that vertex as well  
as the adjacent vertices. With the Pen tool still active:
• To move a vertex, drag it or use the cursor keys.
• To alter the path between vertices, drag the Bezier handles. Or, 
press C (L) to toggle to the Selection tool, click on the line 
segment, and drag to reshape.
• To toggle between a “corner” point (no handles) and a Bezier 
point, press O (A) to toggle to the Convert Vertex tool and click 
on a vertex.
• To break the Bezier handles and move them independently, press 
O (A) to toggle to the Convert Vertex tool and drag a handle.
• To delete a vertex, press C (L) to toggle to the Delete Vertex 
tool and click on the vertex.
• To add a vertex, click on the path between vertices.
8 You can also transform the overall shape. Double-click on a vertex 
point, and handles connected by a solid white line will appear. This 
is Free Transform mode: Drag on any of these handles to stretch and 
squish the shape; the rotate cursor appears when you hover along the 
white line between handles. To change the center around which the 
shape is rotated, drag the crosshair icon inside the shape. To also scale 
around this point, press C (L) as you drag the handles. To exit 
Free Transform mode, press E or double-click outside the box.

3 This time, do not press O 
(A) while dragging out your 
shape. You will see the fill and 
stroke colors as you drag, as well as 
handles around an invisible bound-
ing box. These are clues you are 
dragging out a parametric shape. 
Before you release the mouse, press 
S to remove the rotation; press 
ß and drag to reposition 
your star in the comp. 
Release the mouse, twirl open 
Shape Layer 1 > Contents > 
Polystar 1 > Polystar Path 1, and 
you will see a long list of parameters to edit your perfectly 
symmetrical star. Have a bit of fun editing it to create a 
complex, looping shape – one that would have been very  
difficult to draw by hand.
4 Right-click on Polystar Path 1 in the timeline and select 
Convert to Bezier Path. The parametric shape will be replaced 
with a Bezier path that re-creates its shape. (Note: Any shape 
effects you’ve applied will not be re-created in the path.)
5 Return to the Selection tool. Click Polystar 1 > Path to 
display its vertices. Click on one in the Comp panel and you 
will also see the Bezier handles for the selected vertex as well 
as those on either side. Have fun modifying the previously 
symmetrical shape to taste. Remember that you can keyframe 
the path as well. Indeed, we’ll do that in our next example.
Lesson 11 — SHAPE LAYERS
344
Convert to Bezier Path
There are two ways to combine the convenience and symmetry of parametric 
shapes with the editability of Bezier path shapes.
1 Open Comps > CP-Convert Parametric*starter, which is currently empty. 
Select a parametric shape such as the Star tool.
2 Press O (A), then drag out your shape. You will initially see an unfilled 
outline with vertex squares visible at the points. Release the mouse, and the 
shape will fill in. Twirl open Shape Layer 1 > Contents > Polystar 1, and you  
will see that this shape group contains a simple Path instead of a parametric 
Polystar Path. Delete this shape layer when you’re done.
Complex objects are easier to create if you 
start with a parametric shape then edit it as 
a Bezier shape.
5 Once you have a Bezier path, you can edit the individual 
vertices to create a complex, asymmetrical shape.
3–4 Edit the polystar’s parameters 
to create a looping symmetrical figure 
(above), then right-click Polystar Path 
1 and convert it to a Bezier path.

5 After converting text to shapes, you can 
select individual vertices (left) and animate 
the character outlines over time (right).  
Clip UW226 courtesy Artbeats.com.
SHAPE LAYERS — Lesson 11
345
Create Shapes from Text
You can also convert text layers to shape layers with Bezier paths,  
allowing you to animate the outlines of characters.
1 Open Comps > CT-Convert Text*starter. Layer 1 – drift – is a text  
layer (Lesson 5), which normally requires a trip to the Character panel  
to alter its color, stroke, and other parameters.
2 Select drift and choose Layer > Create Shapes from Text (you can also 
right-click on it and access the same choice). The original text layer will 
have its Video switch turned off. A new shape layer named drift Outlines 
will appear above it in the timeline. This new layer will pick up its color 
and stroke, as well as Transform settings such as Opacity and Position, 
from the original text layer. However, text animators will not be translated.
3 Twirl open drift Outlines > Contents: You will see a shape group for 
each character in the original word. Twirl open the “f” group, and then 
the second “f” to reveal its Path. You will also notice that separate Stroke 
and Fill operators are dedicated to each letter.
3 After conversion, each character gets its own 
shape group. The characters themselves are Bezier 
paths. Compound shapes (such as “i”) contain 
multiple paths followed by Merge Paths operators.
4 With the current time indicator at 00:00, enable the animation stopwatches 
for drift Outlines > Contents > f > f > Path as well as for f > Fill 1 > Color.
5 Move to the end of the composition at 04:29. In the Comp panel, drag a 
marquee selection around the bottom of the f and drag it downward, maintaining 
a nice flow in the character’s outline. Then click the Fill Color swatch either in 
the timeline or along the Tools panel. Change the color to white, then preview.
Continue with animating the other characters to taste. Our version is in 
Comps_Finished > CT-Convert Text_final1, where we also used Overlay  
mode to better composite it. In the comp CT-Convert Text_final2, we used  
a displacement map to further integrate the text and moving background.
Our final 
version also 
animates select 
Fill and Stroke 
colors, and 
employs other 
compositing 
techniques.

Repeating Shapes
One of the most useful shape effects is the Repeater. It takes the contents of  
a shape group – both parametric and pen paths – and replicates it, with each  
replication having an altered position, scale, and/or rotation.
1 Close your previous comps, and open Comps > 02-Repeater*starter.  
It contains a shape layer that looks a bit like a flower petal or a flame. Twirl 
down Shape Layer 1 > Contents > Group 1 in the Timeline panel: This layer 
contains a freeform Path created using the Pen tool, and it employs a Gradient 
Fill (we’ll get to the Gradient Editor in an upcoming exercise).
2 Select Shape Layer 1 and choose Add > Repeater. Twirl down Repeater 1  
and increase the value for Copies to 5 to create more petals.
3  Twirl up Group 1 to save space in the Timeline panel, and twirl down 
Repeater 1 > Transform: Repeater 1. These parameters control how each repeat 
varies from the original. The values accumulate for each copy. The Position 
value defaults to X = 100 and Y = 0, which means each copy is offset to the right 
by 100 pixels.
Hold down the C (L) key and scrub Offset. This modifier allows you  
to scrub slowly in finer increments than whole numbers. As you set Offset to 
negative values, petals will appear to the left of the original, in the negative X 
direction. “Negative copies” get the opposite treatment of positive copies. 
As you scrub Offset, the copies will seem to “animate through” the original 
petal’s position. When you’re done experimenting, set Copies to –2. You should 
now have five petals centered around the original.
4 Slightly increase the value for Transform: Repeater 1 > Scale. The copies 
before the original will be smaller; the copies after the original will be larger. 
Scrub Transform: Repeater 1 > Rotation and again observe how copies before  
and after the original behave.
5 Set Transform: Repeater 1 > Position to 0,0 and > Scale to 100%. The petals 
will now be stacked on top of each other. Next, set Transform: Repeater 1 > 
Rotation to some small value such as 30°, and note how they pivot in an  
array around the original shape’s Anchor Point. 
Lesson 11 — SHAPE LAYERS
346
4 “Positive” copies of the original shape (to the right of center) receive successive 
applications of the Repeater’s Scale and Rotation values, growing larger and rotating 
more (above and right). “Negative” copies receive the opposite treatment, in this 
case growing smaller and rotating in the opposite direction. 
The Repeater makes it easy 
to convert single shapes 
(left) into more complex 
arrangements (below).
d tip
More Shapely
After Effects ships with dozens of animation 
presets for shape layers. You can download 
more at bit.ly/ShapeTextPresets.

6 Scrub Transform: Repeater 1 > 
Anchor Point’s values and observe 
how the petals move through this 
central point. What the Repeater is 
doing is offsetting the Anchor Point 
(the object’s center) for each indi-
vidual copy of the original layer. 
7 The shape you feed into the 
Repeater affects the replicated 
result. Twirl down Group 1 > 
Transform: Group 1. If you scrub 
the Scale or Rotation values in the 
group’s Transform, the entire result 
will rotate or scale, as you are affect-
ing the original shape that is getting 
repeated. Undo to return these values to their starting point. Also reset 
Transform: Repeater 1 > Anchor Point to 0,0 (petals will be stacked).
Now set Transform: Group 1 > Anchor Point to X = 0 and Y = 100: The 
petals will spread out in an arc. This is because the original shape is now 
offset from the center of the shape group and the Repeater is rotating 
copies of that offset shape around the group’s center. Go back to the 
Repeater and have fun playing with its Copies and Rotation values until 
you create a sunflower, adjusting the group’s Anchor Point value to taste.
8 The order of shape effects in relation to the Repeater has a big impact 
on the final result. With Shape Layer 1 selected, choose Add > Wiggle 
Transform; it should appear above the Repeater in the Timeline panel.  
Twirl down Wiggle Transform 1 > Transform and scrub 
its Position or Scale values: All of the petals will be 
moved or scaled by the same amount. This is because the 
original petal is being transformed, and then that one 
petal is being replicated. Preview to see how all the petals 
pulse in unison.
Now drag Repeater 1 above Wiggle Transform 1: 
All the petals will be transformed individually. This is 
because the original petal is being replicated and then all 
of those replicated petals are being wiggled individually. 
Preview and note how they pulse independently of each 
other. The Wiggle Transform 1 > Correlation parameter 
controls how unified or disparate the pulsing is. Our 
version is Comps_Finished > 02-Repeater_final.
7 With no positional offset, repeated 
and rotated shapes stack on top of each 
other (above left). Offsetting the original 
shape group’s Anchor Point (right) helps 
array them in a circle (above right).
SHAPE LAYERS — Lesson 11
347
A
B
8 When Wiggle Transform is added before the Repeater, all petals 
are transformed equally (A). When Wiggle Transform is placed after 
the Repeater, each repeated petal gets a different transformation (B).

Lesson 11 — SHAPE LAYERS
348
One of the more useful shape effects is 
Merge Paths. This effect helps you make 
“compound” shapes – for example, the 
cutout in the middle of letters like O. We’ll 
employ them in this exercise to create a gear.
1 Click on the Comp panel’s viewer menu  
and select Close All to close your previous 
comps. In the Project panel, double-click 
Comps > 03-Gear*starter to open it. It is 
currently blank.
2 We’ll start by making the teeth of the 
gear:
• q is the shortcut key to toggle through 
the Shape tools. Type q until you see a  
star shape in the Tools panel.
• Click on the word Fill in the Tools panel, 
make sure Solid Color is selected, set 
Opacity to 100%, and click OK.
• Click on the word Stroke. Set it to Solid 
Color and 100% Opacity. 
• Set Fill Color, Stroke Color, and Stroke 
Width to taste.
• Click in the middle of the Comp panel 
and drag outward to create roughly the size 
of gear you want; add the S key while 
dragging to prevent the shape from rotating. 
Release the mouse and a new Shape Layer 
containing the shape group Polystar 1 will  
be created in the Timeline panel.
• Since you’ll be adding shapes to this 
group, let’s rename it: Select Polystar 1,  
press R, type “Gear Group” and press 
R again.
3 Next, let’s tweak the default Star into 
something that more resembles a gear:
• First, center the shape in the comp. Twirl 
down Gear Group in the timeline, then twirl 
D Compound Shapes
3 Tweak Polystar Path’s 
parameters to set up the number, 
size, and slope of your gear teeth.
5 Add Merge Paths, and set it to Intersect.
4 Add an Ellipse shape path.
down Transform: Gear Group. Set Position  
to 0,0 and twirl up Transform: Gear Group.
• Twirl down Polystar Path 1. Set Points to 
the number of teeth you want in your gear. 
• Tweak Inner and Outer Radius to set up 
what will be the angle of your gear teeth. We 
find that making Outer Radius about twice 
the value of Inner Radius works well for gears. 
• Zero out the Roundness values; we want 
sharp teeth for our gear. Twirl up Polystar 
Path 1 when done.
4 Next, trim off the spikes on your teeth:
• Make sure Gear Group is selected (not 
just the entire Shape Layer), click the Add 
button, and select Ellipse.
• Twirl down Ellipse Path 1. Scrub Size until 
the ellipse is just inside the star’s outer points.
5 At this point, the ellipse is being filled and 
stroked as well, when you really want to use 
it just to chop off the star’s points. Time to 
combine them into a compound path:
• Make sure Gear Group is selected.  
Select Add > Merge Paths. 
• Twirl down Merge Paths 1 and set its 
Mode menu to Intersect. (Feel free to try  
out the other options, of course.) 

5 continued The ellipse chops off the 
star’s points.
6 Add a second Ellipse path to fill in 
the bottom of the gear teeth.
6 continued Add a second Merge Paths and drag it after your new Ellipse (left). Now the 
stroke will follow the result of the compound path, instead of the individual shapes (right).
7 The last step is adding a third Ellipse Path and Merge Paths pair to cut the hole out 
of the middle (above).
SHAPE LAYERS — Lesson 11
349
• Further tweak Ellipse Path 1’s Size to  
taste. Then twirl up Ellipse Path 1 plus  
Merge Paths 1 when done.
6 Now, let’s fill in the bottom of your teeth. 
Making sure Gear Group is selected (so that 
you don’t accidentally start a new group):
• Select Add > Ellipse again. Drag Ellipse 
Path 2 underneath Merge Paths 1. 
• Twirl Ellipse Path 2 down, increase its  
Size to fill in the bottom of the teeth, and 
twirl it up. This new ellipse will also be 
stroked; Merge Paths can fix that as well.
• Select Add > Merge Paths again.  
Drag Merge Paths 2 below Ellipse Path 2.
• Twirl down Merge Paths 2 and verify that 
its Mode is set to Add. The ellipse will be 
added to the result of the first Merge Paths 
attribute to make one shape.
7 The last step is the hole in the middle:
• Make sure Gear Group is still selected. 
Then select Add > Ellipse and drag Ellipse 
Path 3 underneath Merge Paths 2. Tweak  
its Size to taste and twirl it up.
• Select Add > Merge Paths. Drag Merge 
Paths 3 below Ellipse Path 3.
• Twirl down Merge Paths 3 and set its 
Mode to Subtract to have the final ellipse  
cut out from the composite shape.
If you got lost along the way, feel free to 
explore our versions. In Comps_Finished > 
03-Gear_final2, we used polygons instead of 
ellipses to file down and fill in the gear teeth 
to get a chunkier look (below).

Crosshairs
Dials, crosshairs, and other objects that can help you build faux informational 
displays are often useful. While building a sample crosshair, we’ll employ a few 
additional shape layer tricks: gradients, pen paths, and groups.
Gradient Editor
1 Close your previous comps, and open Comps > 04-Display*starter. Because 
this is an element to be used in a later composite, we created this comp to be a 
smaller square. We also set the background color to a grayish tint, which helps 
us better see what’s happening with our transparency and colors.
We’ve also made a starter rounded rectangle for you. Rectangle 1 should be 
twirled open in the Timeline panel; if it isn’t, twirl down Shape Layer 1, then 
Contents, then Rectangle 1. 
2 Rather than use solid colors, let’s fill the center of our crosshair with a 
 partially transparent gradient:
• Select Shape Layer 1 (the highest level of the layer).
• Hold down the O (A) key and click twice on the Fill Color swatch in the 
Tools panel. It should change from a solid to a radial gradient.
We created a crosshair with shapes in 
Comps_Finished > 04-Display_final, then 
used it to track a subject in Display_final2. 
Clip 32710735 courtesy Pond5.
Lesson 11 — SHAPE LAYERS
350
2 The Gradient Editor allows you to set the 
color and transparency of your gradient.
d try it
Crosshair Shape
The Rounded Rectangle is the basis of our 
crosshair shape; it can be easily made into 
a square, circle, or shapes in-between.  
In this exercise, twirl down Rectangle 1 > 
Rectangle Path 1 and play with Roundness.
• Release O (A) and click on the Fill Color swatch 
again. The Gradient Editor will open. Position it so that you 
can also see the Comp panel while editing your gradient.
• The Radial Gradient mode should be selected in the 
upper left corner (the icon to its left is Linear Gradient).
• Click on the pointer at the upper left corner of the 
 gradient bar: This Opacity Stop sets the opacity of the 
center of the gradient. We want to see through the center  
of our crosshair, so set its Opacity to something low, such  
as 15% or less.
• Click on the Opacity Stop along the right; this is for the 
outer edge of the  gradient. We want to keep some transpar-
ency in the corners, so set it roughly around 50%.
• Click on the pointer in the lower right corner of the 
 gradient bar: This is the Color Stop for the outer edge of  
the gradient. Set it to black.
• Finally, click on the Color Stop to the left: This is the 
center color. Pick a color to taste and note how it tints  
the center of the gradient in the Comp viewer. Click OK 
when finished to close the Gradient Editor.

• Press v to make sure the Selection tool is active and verify that Gradient Fill 
1 is selected for your shape layer in the Timeline panel. In the Comp panel, you 
should see a pair of solid dots with a line between them: These define where the 
 gradient starts and ends (see figure to the right). Drag the outer dot until you are 
happy with the way the gradient “falls off” in your display.
Pen Tool
Earlier in this lesson you used the Pen tool to create closed shapes. You can also 
create open paths, which are useful for lines and strokes: 
3 To help precisely draw our lines, make sure the Window > Info panel is open 
and visible. Also make sure Shape Layer 1 (not Rectangle 1) is selected. 
4 Press g to select the 
Pen tool. In the Tools 
panel, make sure Tool 
Creates Shape is enabled.
We want to draw a vertical line centered in our 400-pixel-wide comp, so move 
the cursor over the Comp panel until Info says X = 200 and Y = 20, then click. 
Press S (to constrain movement to the vertical axis), move the cursor down-
ward to Y = 380, and click again: Your line will appear. 
5 In the Timeline panel, a new group called Shape 1 will appear. Twirl it down; 
it will contain your new Path, plus its own Stroke, Gradient Fill, and Transform. 
You do not want to fill your line, so either disable or delete Gradient Fill.
You still need to create the horizontal crosshair; best to place it in the same 
group as the vertical one. Select Shape 1, then Add > Path. Path 2 will appear.
In the Comp panel, with the Pen tool still selected, place the cursor at  
X = 20 and Y = 200, and click to start your new path. Press S and place 
the cursor at X = 380, and click again to finish your horizontal crosshair.  
Press v to return to the Selection tool.
SHAPE LAYERS — Lesson 11
351
6 By placing the crosshair paths 
in their own group, they can also 
have their own Stroke settings 
(above and right).
4 Select the Pen tool and enable Tool 
Creates Shape (above left). With the help of 
the Info panel, create a vertical line (above).
Start
End
6 The advantage of having a separate group 
for the crosshairs is that you can make  
them a different color and width. Twirl 
down Shape 1 > Stroke 1 (under Path 2)  
and change the Color, Opacity, Stroke 
Width, and Line Cap to taste. You now  
have your crosshair!
Our crosshair shape is in Comps_Finished 
> 04-Display_final; we then used it to track 
a “person of interest” in 04-Display_final2.

Abstract Imagery
A combination of simple shapes, Wiggle Transform, and the Repeater can be 
used to create random, self-animating textures. Apply a few effects or layer 
styles, and suddenly you have a complex graphical element that otherwise 
might have taken hours to create.
1 Select Close All from the Composition Viewer menu to close all previous 
comps. Open Comps > 05-Abstract*starter. It contains a simple rounded rectan-
gle. We like using Rounded Rectangles because it is so easy to change them from 
lines to circles to squares by simply adjusting their Size and Roundness parameters.
2 Twirl down Shape Layer 1 > Contents. Select Rectangle 1, and choose  
Add > Wiggle Transform. The Wiggle Transform shape effect will appear below 
Rectangle Path 1 but above Stroke 1. 
We often find it better to wiggle and repeat an already colorized shape path 
so that the copies of the original shape can interact with each other. Otherwise, 
you’ll be applying a single fill and stroke to the composite image. Therefore,  
drag Wiggle Transform below Fill 1 in the shape attributes stack.
3 Twirl down Wiggle Transform 1, then the Transform section inside this effect 
(not the shape group’s nor layer’s Transform). This composition is 960 pixels 
wide, so set Wiggle Transform’s Position value to X = 480 to have the shape 
move across the entire width of the comp. It would also be fun to have the 
shape change in size as it moves, so increase Wiggle Transform’s Scale to 100%. 
Finally, we want a slower, more mysterious movement, so lower the Wiggles/
Second speed to around 0.6.
4 Perform a preview and observe the result: The shape does indeed “wiggle” 
around in a random manner. However, as the shape moves to the left, it always 
gets smaller, and as it moves to the right, it always gets bigger. Unfortunately, 
Wiggle Transform’s properties wiggle in unison: They move in a positive 
direction together, and in a negative direction together – they’re both getting 
the same wiggle! Fortunately, you can apply more than one copy of Wiggle 
Transform, and each copy will animate independently of the others.
5 Select Wiggle Transform 1 and press Cd (Ld) to duplicate it. In  
Wiggle Transform 1, set its Position value to 0,0 while keeping its 100% Scale. 
Then twirl down Wiggle Transform 2 > Transform and set its Scale to 0% while 
keeping its Position value of X = 480, Y = 0.
5 To wiggle more than one transform property independently of each other 
(such as Scale and Position), you will need to add one Wiggle Transform shape 
effect per transform property. Here we duplicated Wiggle Transform 1.
Lesson 11 — SHAPE LAYERS
352
Our goal in this exercise is to take a single 
shape (above) and turn it into a swarm of 
objects animating left and right (below).
2 Add > Wiggle Transform, then drag it 
below Stroke 1 and Fill 1.

Preview again, and now you will observe that the object’s changes in size are 
no longer linked to its changes in position.
6 Now it’s time to create that swarm we promised: Twirl up Wiggle Transform 
1 and 2, select Rectangle 1, and choose Add > Repeater. It will initially appear 
below Wiggle Transform 2.
Twirl down Repeater 1 > Transform: Repeater 1, and set 
its Position value to X = 0, Y = 0; Wiggle Transform 2 will 
be providing the position offsets.
Wait a second: There’s only one shape in the Comp 
panel, even though the Repeater defaults to Copies = 3.  
What’s going on? Right now the repeats are happening after the wiggles. 
To have each copy wiggle independently, drag Repeater 1 above Wiggle 
Transform 1 so that the repeats happen before the wiggles. Now you  
will see three copies.
Increase the number of Repeater 1 > Copies until you have a nice 
swarm; we used a value of 20. Preview and enjoy the mayhem.
7 Now that you have the basic motion happening, you can make 
several modifications to enhance the end result:
• Set the Blend Mode popups for Stroke 1 and Fill 1 to something more 
interesting, such as Color Dodge, Pin Light, or Vivid Light. This will 
cause the colors in the duplicated shapes to interact with each other.
• Add a blur effect, such as Effect > Blur & Sharpen > Box Blur, and 
increase the Blur Radius. At Box Blur’s default of Iterations = 1, the  
result is a “squinting” effect; increase Iterations to get a smoother blur. 
At higher Iterations values, the result is a floating haze. Or, reduce Iterations  
to 1 or 2, and add Layer > Layer Styles > Outer Glow. Twirl down Outer Glow, 
and experiment with its parameters, such as Size and Color.
• Feel free to modify the original shape, either by altering Rectangle Path 1’s 
parameters, or adding other shape effects such as Pucker & Bloat.
Our result is saved in Comps_Finished > 05-Abstract_final.
5 continued Employing independent 
Wiggle Transforms for Scale and Position 
gives us the randomness we’re after. 
SHAPE LAYERS — Lesson 11
353
7 The addition of Box Blur plus a few shape 
effects create a hazy, amorphous result.
6 Add > Repeater and place it above the Wiggle 
Transform effects (below). Increase the number of 
Copies and enjoy the resulting swarm (above).

2 We locked the Indian Territory.jpg layer so you can’t draw a mask on it by 
accident when you actually want to create a new shape layer. Press g to select 
the Pen tool, then enter the following settings using the Tools panel:
• Enable the RotoBezier option to make it easy to create a fluid path.
• Because you’re drawing a line, your shape will not need to be filled. Press  
O (A) and click on the Fill Color swatch until it is a gray box with a red line 
through it, which means “no fill.”
Stroked Paths
Let’s add to our knowledge of shape layers by tackling another common task: 
drawing a path on a map or underscoring other elements in a composition,  
then stroking that path. Shape layers are particularly well suited to this job as 
you can design interesting dashed patterns to stroke your path. 
1 Save your project and close your previous comps. Then open Comps >  
06-Map Path*starter.
This large comp contains a scan of a map of Indian Territories in the 1890s. 
Resize your Comp panel’s frame to view it at 50% Magnification or higher.
Lesson 11 — SHAPE LAYERS
354
3 Click several points to define a path across the map.
d factoid
The Hidden Path
The Toggle Mask and Shape Path 
Visibility button along the bottom left  
of the Comp panel controls whether a 
shape’s outline is drawn when selected. 
It must be on to edit a pen path or a 
gradient; otherwise, you can turn it off.
• Click on Stroke, make sure it is in Solid Color mode,  
and set its Opacity to 100%. Click OK.
• Set the Stroke Color to taste, thinking of what might 
provide a good complement to the map’s colors. We 
choose a dark turquoise green.
• You want a thick stroke to outline your path, so  
increase the Stroke Width to around 16 pixels.
3 Visualize a path you want to create across this map, 
perhaps telling a story of an expedition from east to west. 
Click on the dark line along the right edge of the map 
to start your path. Then click several additional points 
across the map until you reach the left-hand border. 
There is no need to click and drag; RotoBezier automati-
cally calculates the curve between the points you create. 
To edit your path, click and drag your existing points. 
2 Select the Pen tool, enable 
RotoBezier mode, set Fill to 
None, and set the Stroke to 
taste (you can always edit its 
color and width later).
d try it
Fill and Stroke are Live
When a shape is selected, the Fill and 
Stroke parameters in the Tools panel 
are still “live” – edit them and your 
shape will update.

SHAPE LAYERS — Lesson 11
355
4 Click on the + switch next to Stroke 1 > Dashes to convert the 
line from solid to dashed.
4 The default stroke is a solid line, but it’s possible to 
design your own pattern along the stroke. In the Timeline 
panel, twirl down Shape Layer 1 > Contents, then Shape 1, 
then Stroke 1 to reveal the Stroke’s parameters.
The last Stroke parameter is Dashes. Twirl it down; it does 
not contain any segments yet. Click on the + button; the 
stroke will now be a dashed line. 
5 Let’s get a better look at that stroke. Increase the Comp 
panel’s Magnification. Press ß to toggle to the Hand 
tool, then click and drag in the Comp panel to recenter the 
display so that you can see the starting point of your stroke.
The default stroke has squared-off edges. Click on the 
popup for Stroke 1 > Line Cap and set it to Round Cap. 
Then scrub the Dash value for Stroke 1 > Dashes to spread 
out the segments.
As you increase Dash, you might have noticed that the 
length of the dashes and the space between them grow at 
the same time. If you want independent control over these, 
click on the + button again. A new parameter called Gap 
will appear. Tweak Dash and Gap to get a segment/space 
pattern you like.
5 To create more elegant dashes, set Stroke 1’s Line Cap popup to 
Round Cap. Tweak the Dash and Gap values to taste.
Press v to switch back to the Selection tool when done. 
A line indicating the stroke’s path will be drawn down the 
middle of your stroke. (If you like, toggle off Mask and 
Shape Path Visibility to see your stroke more clearly.)
3 continued Click the Toggle Mask and Shape Path Visibility button 
at the bottom of the Comp panel to hide the yellow path.

6 Say you want alternating dots and 
dashes. Click on + twice more to add 
another Dash and Gap. Set the value 
of the second Dash to 0 to create dots 
between segments. Set the two Gap 
values the same to have even spaces 
on either side of the dots.
7 Type S/ to see the entire map in the Comp panel again. Scrub 
Dashes > Offset and watch your stroke travel along its path. (Think of the 
uses you would have for animating this…) Tweak the Dashes settings – and 
the other parameters in Stroke 1 – until you are happy with your line, then 
twirl up Stroke 1.
Animating the Stroke
A line tells you what to look at; an animated line tells you a story. Think 
back to the first shape exercise, where you took a whirlwind tour of some of 
the available shape attributes: Which one trimmed a shape’s path? That’s 
right: Trim Paths.
8 Select Shape 1, then Add > Trim Paths. Twirl down Trim Paths 1 and 
scrub the End parameter: The path will shorten and lengthen as you do so.
• Press H to make sure you are at 00:00, set End to 0%, and click on its 
stopwatch to enable keyframing for it.
• Press N and set Trim Paths 1 > End to 100%.
• This is a big map to load into RAM for a preview; if you are looking at 
it at a reduced Magnification, why render more pixels than you’re seeing? 
Click on the Resolution popup along the bottom of the Comp panel (it 
should say Full) and select Auto. Then start a preview.
9 The flat dashed line can be a little hard to read against the flat map. 
Because shape layers are indeed their own layers, you can apply layer styles 
or effects to help them stand out from the other layers in your comp:
Make sure Shape Layer 1 is still selected, then apply Layer > Layer Styles 
> Drop Shadow. Twirl it down in the Timeline panel, and increase the 
Distance and Size parameters until the line starts to “lift off” of the map.
If you had any trouble following this exercise, go ahead and peruse our 
version, Comps_Finished > 06-Map Path_final. We added one more touch: 
Layer > Layer Styles > Bevel and Emboss, which adds further dimension to 
the dashed line.
Lesson 11 — SHAPE LAYERS
356
6 Add two pairs of Dash and Gap values to 
your stroke to alternate line segments with dots.
9 Our final map, with animated dash 
illustrating our journey; shown with Bevel 
Alpha and Drop Shadow layer styles added. 
D The Public Domain
This map of Indian Territories was 
scanned from Cram’s Unrivaled Family 
Atlas of the World, printed in the 
1890s. It is old enough that its copy-
right has expired, and therefore it is in 
the public domain. 
Many people misunderstand what 
really is and isn’t in the public domain 
(call it wishful thinking). We recommend 
reading The Public Domain by Stephen 
Fishman J.D. (Nolo Press): It contains 
sound legal advice on what can and 
can’t be used, as well as numerous 
sources for public domain materials.

1 Save your project and close your previous comps. 
Then open Comps > 07-Vectors to Shapes*starter.  
It contains an Illustrator file that has been imported 
into After Effects as Footage (Merged Layers).
2 Select Quarry Studios logo.ai and choose Layer > 
Create Shapes from Vector Layer. The Video switch 
for this layer (the eyeball icon) will be turned off, and 
a new layer named Quarry Studios logo Outlines 
will appear. The image in the Comp panel will be 
unchanged, as After Effects has accurately converted 
this Illustrator vector artwork into a shape layer. Not all 
attempts will be this successful; for example, Illustrator 
gradients will be converted to a solid color, and some 
compound paths may have issues.
3 Twirl open Quarry Studios logo Outlines > Contents. 
You will see that 18 shape groups have been created: 
one for each letter, plus one for each colored shape and 
black stroke. Enable the Shape Path Visibility switch 
along the bottom of the Comp panel; as you select a 
shape group, it will be outlined in the Comp panel, 
and its Fill or Stroke color will be displayed above in 
the Tools panel. Remember that you can rename shape 
groups to something more descriptive.
4 Select Group 18, which is the large purple shape. 
Click Add and choose Pucker & Bloat: It will now 
become a rounded shape. Feel free to try other shape 
effects such as Wiggle Paths or Wiggle Transforms to 
animate the letters or pieces.
Comps_Finished > 07-Vectors to Shapes_final  
contains our version, where we added gradients, 
wiggled paths, v modes, and transformations. We also 
used Add > Group and dragged all the characters into 
this new shape group to make them easier to manage.
Create Shapes from Vector Layer
Earlier in this lesson we showed how to convert type layers to shape layers. You 
can also do this with vector-based layers, such as artwork from Adobe Illustrator. 
Once you have, you can change its color and edit its shape paths while staying 
inside After Effects, plus add shape effects and otherwise animate it.
SHAPE LAYERS — Lesson 11
357
4 After conversion, you can apply shape effects to the resulting  
shape groups. Here, the purple shape has had Pucker & Bloat applied, 
rounding it compared with the other untouched colored shapes.
Once vector layers have been converted into shapes, they can be 
animated and otherwise altered inside After Effects (as in our final comp).
2 After using Layer > Create Shapes from Vector Layer, the original 
layer remains with its Video switch (the eyeball) turned off, and a new 
shape layer will be created above it.

Extruding Shape Layers
In Lesson 8 on 3D Space, we demonstrated the use of the new Ray-traced 3D 
renderer with text layers. Shape layers also work wonderfully with this rendering 
engine, including support for extrusion, beveling, transparency, and reflections. 
If you are new to the Ray-traced 3D renderer, we suggest you first work through 
the “RT” exercises in Lesson 8 (including the sidebar on the various Fast Preview 
options), before playing with this next exercise.
1 Close your previous compositions and from Lesson_11.aep open Comps > 
08-Extruding Shapes*starter; it may take a moment to render. We’ve already 
set up an initial scene, including a star-like shape layer with its 3D Layer switch 
enabled, a pair of lights (one with a Type of Spot, and the other Ambient), and 
an Environment Layer (Ruins Panorama.jpg) wrapped around our world. The 
Renderer button in the upper right corner of the Composition panel indicates 
we’ve already set this comp to use the Ray-traced 3D renderer (edited by clicking 
this button). If the shape layer appears to be intersecting the background image, 
the Classic 3D renderer is probably selected; it may be much faster, but it does 
not give you the extrusion and surface options we need here.
2 Twirl down Shape Layer 1 > Geometry Options. Scrub Extrusion Depth;  
the shape will get thicker.
3 Set Bevel Style to Angular, and a bevel will appear between the face and sides 
of the shape. Try out the different styles: Convex gives a soft rounding to the 
shape; Concave creates a scooped bevel. 
4 Increase Bevel Depth to 5 or greater. Bevels add to the bulk of shapes; you 
may find you need to decrease the size of your shape – or at least the Extrusion 
Depth – to get back down to the overall size you intended.
5 The original shape parameters remain live. For example, click on the Fill 
swatch in the Tools panel and use the eyedropper to select the sky for your 
shape’s color.
6 Twirl down Shape Layer 1 > Material 
Options and increase the Transparency value. 
The Fill color of the shape will become translu-
cent although its specular highlights will remain 
visible. Set it to a value around 90% so you can 
still make out the shape (see figure to the right). 
If you want to add more definition, increase  
the Transparency Rolloff value: This alters the 
transparency of surfaces that are at more severe 
angles to the camera, such as the sides.
1 Your starting shape in its 3D world.  
Your goal is to extrude it as well as make  
it translucent and reflective. Note that the 
Ray-traced 3D renderer has been selected. 
Panoramic environment image #1350819 
courtesy iStockphoto/bischy.
Lesson 11 — SHAPE LAYERS
358
2–5 Use the Geometry Options (above) 
to extrude and bevel the shape (below).

7 The real magic of transparent 
objects comes when you increase 
the Index of Refraction parameter. 
At its default value of 1.00, your 
object is just a ghost in thin air,  
not actually altering the light rays 
going through it. But as soon as  
you increase it, the light rays of  
3D layers are deflected at angles 
as they travel through transparent 
objects, causing visual distortions.
8 Increase Reflection Intensity: 
Now the sky plus other scenery on 
the other side of the environment 
layer’s world will be reflected, tinted 
by the Fill color of the shape.
9 By default, the Material Options affect every surface of your 
shape. However, you can target the front, back, sides, and bevels 
individually. Let’s create a chrome frame for the star shape. 
• Set Reflection Intensity back to 0%. Twirl down Contents and 
select the shape group Polystar 1 to target it. Click on the Add 
button you used for shape effects earlier in this lesson and choose 
Bevel > Refection Intensity. An operator called Material Options: 
Polystar 1 will be added below this shape group’s Transform 
section. Increase Bevel Reflection Intensity to 100%. 
• If you want to remove the blue tint coming from the Fill color, 
choose Add > Bevel > Color and set the Bevel Color to white.
10 You can add (and animate!) 
normal shape effects as well. For 
example, with Polystar 1 still selected, 
choose Add > Twist to create a more 
interesting shape. In Comps_Finished 
> 08-Extruding Shapes_final we  
had additional fun changing the 
Roundness settings for the Polystar  
to create looped shapes at the points 
of the star, then used Offset Paths set 
to a negative value to detach the loop 
shapes to create little droplets.
6–7 Transparent objects are ghost-like. The 
Index of Refraction (right) makes them appear 
more glass-like (above).
SHAPE LAYERS — Lesson 11
359
8 Increase 
Reflection Intensity 
to see other 3D 
layers in your  
ray-traced object.
9–10 You can add shape effects as well as animate the parameters of extruded shape layers.

N
ative After Effects 3D layers have many uses, 
but many limitations as well. Fortunately, 
After Effects CC comes bundled with a  
full 3D application – MAXON CINEMA 4D Lite  
(C4D Lite for short) – and a pipeline to integrate  
its output directly into the After Effects timeline.
That pipeline runs through the CINEWARE effect. Inside 
an After Effects composition you choose Layer > New > 
MAXON CINEMA 4D File, which creates a 2D layer with 
CINEWARE applied. This action also opens a corresponding 
blank project in C4D Lite. You can build 3D objects from 
scratch in C4D, or “merge” existing projects into your new 
project file. As you step through the After Effects timeline, 
CINEWARE requests a frame from the C4D Lite rendering 
engine and presents the results inside this After Effects layer. 
If you need to reopen the underlying C4D project file later, 
you just select the layer with CINEWARE applied and go 
Edit > Edit Original. CINEWARE also offers a number of 
useful options, including deciding which layers you’ve 
grouped in the C4D project or portions of the 3D render 
you want to see, whether to use the C4D or After Effects 3D 
camera, and the ability to extract camera and light data from 
the C4D file and re-create it inside After Effects.
As nice as this system is, it does have its limitations.  
One, 3D renders are often much slower than 2D, meaning 
you will find it slower to move through the After Effects 
timeline. Two, because CINEWARE is rendering the C4D 
scene all by itself, its results cannot currently intermingle 
with After Effects’ 3D layers; in other words, there are no 
intersections or automatic shadows between those worlds. 
This is the way essentially all “3D” plug-ins in After Effects 
work – including popular choices 3D Invigorator and 
Lesson 12
360
Integrating a 3D application into the After Effects timeline using CINEWARE.
 d Getting Started
Make sure you have downloaded the file archive for  
Lesson 12 (as discussed in How to Use This Book) and 
decompressed it. It contains the project file and sources  
you need to execute this lesson. 
Cinema 4D Lite 
 d In This Lesson
 
362 
CINEMA 4D user interface
 
363 
Project and Render Settings
 
364 
frame rate issues
 
366 
navigating the Viewport
 
367 
Extrude object
 
368 
Light Setups
 
369 
Materials
 
370 
texture selection and projection
 
371 
Ambient Occlusion
 
372 
cameras
 
373 
keyframing
 
374 
CINEWARE Render Settings
 
375 
extract camera and lights
 
376 
creating text
 
378 
importing Illustrator files
 
379 
Fracture object
  380 
Plain effector
 
383 
render quality; Interactive Render Region
 
384 
Target Light
 
386 
using the After Effects camera
 
387 
Object Buffers
 
390 
importing model
 
392 
shadows
 
393 
using layers
 
394 
Multi-Pass

ProAnimator by Zaxwerks and Video Copilot’s Element 3D. Also, C4D Lite is 
indeed a feature-reduced version of the full program. If you already have a full 
version of CINEMA 4D or another full 3D program, in most cases you’re better 
off using it instead of C4D Lite. But if you need more robust 3D than After 
Effects itself provides, and you don’t have the budget for any of these other  
solutions, C4D Lite can be very useful.
This lesson assumes you have no prior experience with a full 3D application, 
but are somewhat comfortable with After Effects’ own 3D implementation (if 
not, go back and work through Lesson 8). Learning modeling and 3D animation 
is the subject of a book in itself; we’ll be only touching on these lightly. But you 
will learn enough to be dangerous, including creating a videowall, animating 
text or a flying logo, and integrating an already built 3D model into an existing 
video scene. Although these are separate tasks, we urge you to go through all of 
them in order, as you will pick up progressively more tips about using C4D Lite 
with After Effects in each one. But first, we’re going to start with the setup tasks 
that are common to any project that uses After Effects and C4D.
d tip
Using the Full Version of C4D
If you own a full version of CINEMA 4D, 
you can tell CINEWARE to connect to that 
instead of C4D Lite. With CINEWARE applied 
to a layer, click on Options along the top of 
its effect controls. A dialog will open where 
you can relink which version is used for 
editing, as well as for rendering. 
In this lesson, you will learn how to build 
a videowall (A), animate 3D text (B), and 
integrate a 3D model into existing footage 
(C). A movie of each finished exercise can  
be found in the 12_Finished Movies folder.
CINEMA 4D LITE — Lesson 12
 D Additional C4D Reference
There are numerous books available from which to learn more about CINEMA 4D  
and C4D Lite, including:
• After Effects and CINEMA 4D Lite by Chris Jackson: Currently the only book 
dedicated to C4D Lite; includes its limitations compared to the full version of  
CINEMA 4D. It’s the perfect next step after reading this lesson.
• CINEMA 4D Apprentice by Kent McQuilkin: Another book in the Apprentice series, 
with in-depth information organized by topics, such as Lighting and Motion Graphics. 
Written for the full version of CINEMA 4D.
• CINEMA 4D: The Artist’s Project Sourcebook by Anne Powers and Kent McQuilkin: 
Also dedicated to the full version of CINEMA 4D, with numerous small projects.
A
B
C
361

The CINEMA 4D interface (version R16) is divided into major sections, outlined here. 
Throughout this lesson, we assume you are using the Startup or Standard Layout  
(selected in the upper right corner). The icons we use in this lesson are called out below.
Lesson 12 — CINEMA 4D LITE
362
The CINEMA 4D interface (version R17).  
Note the new icon for the Spline tool.
Render 
View
Render 
Submenu
Edit Render 
Settings
Object 
Submenu
Spline 
Submenu
Modeling 
Submenu
Camera 
Submenu
Light 
Submenu
Generators  
Submenu
CINEMA 4D User Interface
Objects Manager
Viewport
Materials Manager
Attributes Manager
Coordinates Manager
Main Icons
Viewport Menu
Viewport Navigation
Materials Menu
Tabs
Layers
Objects Menu
Content Browser
Main Menu
Animation Toolbar
Time Indicator
Play Forwards
h The Animation toolbar.
h The Icon panel.

CINEMA 4D LITE — Lesson 12
363
Project Setup
There are a few steps you need to perform every time you 
use C4D Lite and CINEWARE in an After Effects project. 
We’ll detail those steps here and then just quickly refer to 
them in the remaining exercises.
1 Open Lesson_12.aep. Both the Lite and full versions  
of CINEMA 4D expect After Effects to be working in a  
very specific color space, so that color and compositing 
operations react the same in both programs. Open File > 
Project Settings, and verify the following changes in the 
Color Settings section:
• Set Working Space to sRGB IEC61966-2.1; the default  
for this is None.
• Enable Linearize Working Space; it defaults to Off.
• Optionally set Depth to 16 bits per channel (bpc).  
This will reduce color banding in your renders, with the 
trade-off of slower renders. You can work in the default 
8-bit mode for speed, then enable 16-bit mode in the 
Render Queue > Render Settings dialog.
You only need to do the above once per project file.  
Be warned that these settings will apply to all compositions 
inside that project, so we recommend you maintain a separate project file  
if you need to process other comps with a normal workflow. We have  
already performed this step for you in Lesson_12.aep; it’s good to always 
check when you receive a project from someone else. When you start a  
new After Effects project that will include C4D layers, you will need to 
perform this setup again.
2 In the Project panel, double-click 01-Project Setup*starter to open it. 
Open Composition > Composition Settings to note its frame size (960×540 
pixels) and frame rate (29.97 frames per second); click OK when done. Go 
to the end of the comp and note the frame number count under the time 
display in the upper left corner of the Timeline panel – C4D thinks in terms 
of frames, not SMPTE timecode. Then return the current time indicator to 
the start of the comp.
3 Choose Layer > New > MAXON CINEMA 4D File. A file dialog will open; 
name the file based on the content you’re about to create (let’s say Test.c4d) 
and save it next to your After Effects project or where you’re keeping its 
sources. Click Save, and C4D Lite will open.
D First Launch
The first time you launch CINEMA 4D Lite, you will see a 
Registration screen. Do register, as it activates additional 
tools that you need to complete this lesson. 
You may also see an Updates screen; if you don’t,  
to access it choose Help > Check for Updates from the  
Main menu along the top. Update to the latest version of  
CINEMA 4D. Also click on the Optional tab and download 
the Help Documentation/Language Pack (and, if available, 
the QuickStart) for your language. After you do so, you can  
right-click on virtually any tool or parameter in C4D Lite  
and be taken directly to the Help section on that subject. 
2 The number in small type underneath 
|the main time display for the Timeline panel 
in After Effects is the frame count; this is 
|how C4D measures time. If you prefer  
to always count in frames, C on Mac  
(L on Windows) click on the value to 
switch the time display (as covered on  
page 68 in Lesson 2). 
1 CINEMA 4D defaults to sRGB working 
space and linear color blending; duplicate 
this in After Effects’ Project Settings.

Lesson 12 — CINEMA 4D LITE
364
5 Transcribe your After Effects 
composition’s frame size into 
C4D Lite’s Render Settings.
4 In C4D Lite, choose Edit > Project Settings from its Main 
menu. It will open in the Attributes Manager in the lower right. 
Set the Maximum Time and Preview Max Time to equal the 
last frame number in your After Effects comp. Copy your frame 
rate into the FPS field. Note that CINEMA 4D does not support 
fractional frame rates; 29.97 gets rounded to 29(!) – so set it to 
the nearest whole number (60 for 59.94, 30 for 29.97, or 24 for 
23.976), and we’ll fix the difference in After Effects. You’ll also 
note at the bottom of this dialog that Linear Workflow has been 
enabled and the Input Color Profile has already been set to sRGB.
5 Click on Edit Render Settings from the main icons above 
the Viewport, or choose Render > Edit Render Settings. Choose 
Output along the left and change Output > Width and Height to 
match your After Effects composition in pixels. Ignore the Image 
Resolution warning that appears; the connection between C4D 
Lite and After Effects is resolution independent. In general, this 
panel pertains to rendering frames directly out of C4D Lite;  
we’re only setting the frame size here so CINEMA 4D’s viewer 
shows you the correct aspect ratio when you arrange your objects. 
Close this dialog when finished.
4 Transcribe your After Effects composition’s frame 
rate and duration into C4D Lite’s Project Settings 
(you may need to round up the frame rate to the 
nearest whole number). 
6 When you return to After Effects, 
you will see the ground plane grid 
from C4D in your Comp panel.  
Clip FCL220 courtesy Artbeats.com.
6 Choose File > Save from the Main menu. You 
must save your changes in C4D Lite for them to 
appear in After Effects. Then return to After Effects: 
You will see a grid overlaid in your composition; 
this is the ground plane in your C4D layer. Also 
note that your .c4d file appears as a source in  
After Effects’ Project panel; feel free to move it  
into your Sources or Media folder. 

8 To compensate for CINEMA 4D’s lack 
of support for noninteger frame rates, you 
need to conform the frame rate of your .c4d 
footage items to the correct fractional frame 
rate in the Interpret Footage dialog. 
7 Retrim the length of the C4D layer to 
match the comp’s duration.
CINEMA 4D LITE — Lesson 12
365
7 You will notice that the new layer in your comp for the C4D file has been 
pretrimmed to 3 seconds long, which is the default file duration in C4D Lite. 
Retrim its end to match the end of your composition.
8 This step only applies if your comp has a fractional frame rate such as 
23.976, 29.97, or 59.94 fps. To compensate for CINEMA 4D supporting 
only integer frame rates, do the following:
• Right-click on the CINEWARE layer (the one that ends in “.c4d,” such 
as setup.c4d) and choose Reveal Layer Source in Project. The Project 
panel will be brought forward with this footage item selected.
• Choose File > Interpret Footage > Main, and set Frame Rate >  
Conform Frame Rate To so it matches your original fractional frame  
rate (i.e., 29.97 in this case).
• If you extract any 3D scene data from the CINEWARE layer in your 
composition – such as the camera move, which you will in the next 
exercise (Step 25) – select that extracted layer and choose Layer > Time 
> Time Stretch. Set the Stretch Factor to 100.1: This slows down the 
extracted data back to the original fractional frame rate (i.e., 30 to 29.97).
(There is a possibility that you may not need to perform the Stretch Factor  
adjustment in future versions. We’ll update this book’s online page at  
www.routledge.com/cw/meyer if that’s the case.) 
Yes, that last step was tedious, but crucial to make sure your C4D animation 
does not fall out of sync with the rest of your After Effects composition.
8 continued You also need to stretch any animations you extract from .c4d layers 
by 100.1%. You can stretch layers either in the Layer > Time > Time Stretch dialog 
(left), or by revealing the Stretch column in the Timeline panel (above).

3 Create a new Rectangle (above) and size 
it to match your video’s aspect ratio (below).
Lesson 12 — CINEMA 4D LITE
366
Part 1: Creating a Videowall
A common motion graphics task is to create a virtual “videowall” and to move 
around it. In this exercise you will create a simple model from scratch and 
“texture” it with a sports video.
1 In After Effects, close your previous comps. In the Project panel, open  
Comps > 02-Videowall*starter. Open Composition > Composition Settings  
and note the frame rate (29.97), frame size (960×540), and duration  
(10 seconds × 30 fps = 300 frames) of the comp, and close the dialog.
2 Choose Layer > New > MAXON CINEMA 4D File. Change the name to 
“Videowall.c4d” and save it alongside Lesson_12.aep. 
• Update C4D Lite’s Project and Render Settings as outlined in first exercise’s 
Steps 4 and 5 (page 364). Save your C4D Lite project and return to After Effects. 
• Locate Videowall.c4d in the Project panel, choose File > Interpret Footage > 
Main, and enter “29.97” for Frame Rate > Conform Frame Rate To. Save your 
After Effects project and return to C4D Lite.
3 We want to create a rectangular videowall face that has the same aspect ratio 
as the video we plan to map onto it. To start, click on the Spline submenu icon 
above the Viewport (its tooltip will say Freehand), and choose Rectangle. (You 
can also choose Create > Spline > Rectangle from the Main menu.) A Rectangle 
object will be added to the Objects Manager, and a square outline will appear 
in the Viewport centered at the origin (0,0,0). When that object is selected, its 
parameters will appear in the Attributes Manager.
With Rectangle selected, click the Object tab in the Attributes Manager and 
set its Width to 960 and Height to 540 to match the aspect ratio of the comp 
and video (you can ignore units like “cm”). To make the corners more interest-
ing, enable the Rounding checkbox; the initial Radius value of 50 is fine for now. 
4 The outline may be larger than your Viewport display, so it’s time to get 
familiar with zooming and panning around it. There are four icons in the 
Viewport Navigation section in the upper right corner; you can click and drag 
the three leftmost ones to pan, zoom, and rotate your view, akin to After Effects’ 
Camera tools. You can also press and hold down 1, 2, or 3 as you click 
and drag to get the same actions. Pan and zoom the rectangle so you can see it 
comfortably inside the Viewport (see figure on opposite page), with some room 
around the edges.
If you accidentally deselect your model, select Rectangle in the Objects 
Manager or click its outline in the Viewport. 
Move 
Camera 
(1)
Zoom 
Camera 
(2)
Toggle 
View
Rotate 
Camera 
(3)
g To use a hotkey, press and hold down  
the key then drag the mouse in the viewer.

4 Click and drag the three Camera tools in the upper right of the 
Viewport to fit the rounded rectangle outline inside your display.
5 Add an Extrude object (left), and drag Rectangle on top of it (center) 
so it becomes a child of Extrude (right). 
CINEMA 4D LITE — Lesson 12
367
5 You want to turn this outline into an object with volume 
and depth. To do that, you’ll use the Extrude object. Click 
on the Generators icon (its tooltip will say Subdivision 
Surface), and choose Extrude. (You can also choose Create > 
Generators > Extrude from the Main menu.) In the Objects 
Manager, click on Rectangle and drag it onto Extrude; 
watch for the cursor to change to a downward-pointing 
arrow, which indicates the object you’re dragging is about 
to become the child of the object underneath the cursor. 
Release, and now you’ll see a gray slab in the Viewport. 
Click the Toggle View icon in the upper right corner of the 
Viewport to see the Perspective view along with the Top/ 
Right/Front all at the same time. If necessary, pan and zoom 
the other views to make sure you can see the entire rectangle.
5 continued 
The rectangular 
outline will now 
be extruded into 
a gray slab.
g Click the Toggle 
View icon in the 
upper right corner of 
the Viewport to see 
the Perspective view 
along with the Top/ 
Right/Front all at the 
same time. Click the 
Toggle View icon in 
any individual view 
(Top view is circled) 
to solo that view.

6 In the Attributes Manager, add an 
Engraved Fillet to the cap of your extruded 
object (left); your videowall is starting to 
take shape (right).
Lesson 12 — CINEMA 4D LITE
368
6 Let’s make that slab more interesting. Reselect Extrude in the Objects 
Manager; its parameters will appear below in the Attributes Manager. In the 
Viewport, you will see that the axis arrows are aligned with its face; in the 
Coordinates Manager (Coord. tab) below you will see that this face is at a 
Position of 0,0,0.
• Select the Object tab and give it more depth by increasing Movement’s Z 
parameter from 20 to roughly 65.
• Under the Caps tab, set Start to Fillet Cap. This will add a bevel, also known as 
a fillet or rounding. Note that the header says “Caps and Rounding” (C and R) – 
that’s a clue that will be important later.
• To make the bevel more obvious, increase Radius to around 30. In the Viewport, 
note that the rectangle’s face protrudes in front of the 0,0,0 origin point.
• Set Fillet Type to Engraved. Now the original face is inset inside the bevel. 
(We’ll explore the other Fillet Types in the next exercise.)
Lighting and Texturing
Save your C4D Lite project. If you like, switch back to After Effects; the same 
object will render inside your Composition panel. Switch back to C4D Lite,  
and we’ll proceed with making this gray slab more interesting. Let’s start by 
adding some lighting.
7 In the Objects Manager, click on the tab along the right edge for Content 
Browser. Double-click the Presets icon, then Lite. This will give you access to  
a number of preset objects and texture materials, plus camera and lighting rigs 
D C4D Hotkeys
To use a hotkey, hold down 
the key and drag the mouse. 
The default hotkeys for the 
view panel are:
1 Move camera
2 Move camera in  
direction of view
3 Rotate camera
4 Move object
5 Scale object
6 Rotate object
7 Move object without 
Child objects
8 Lasso selection
9 Live selection

7 Take advantage of the lighting rig 
presets shipped with C4D Lite (left) to 
quickly add complex lighting to your 
videowall (right). Resize your views as 
needed to see the videowall and lighting rig.
g Content Browser > Presets > Light Setups.
CINEMA 4D LITE — Lesson 12
369
that come with C4D Lite. Double-click Presets, then Light Setups, then Studio 
Ring Spots to load it into your project. This gives you an instant array of lights 
aimed at the scene’s origin. Reselect the Objects tab along the right edge of this 
panel and you will see this complex light object has been added to your scene. 
8 The default size of the lighting rig is too small to illuminate the sides of the 
videowall. With Studio Ring Spots selected in the Objects Manager, click the 
Spot Options tab in the Attributes Manager, and scrub Ring Options > Radius 
higher until the sides are lit – around 1200 will do for now.
Next is texturing the videowall. Click the Toggle View icon in the upper right 
of the Viewport to go back to a single display. The last-selected viewer will now 
fill the Viewport. If it’s not the Perspective view, 
choose Panel > View 1 from the Viewport menu. 
Save your C4D Lite project so you don’t lose 
your work so far.
9 Next you’ll give your videowall a nice metal 
texture, continuing to take advantage of the 
presets that ship with C4D Lite. In the Materials 
menu above the Materials Manager panel in the 
lower left, choose Create > Load Material Preset 
> Lite > Materials > Metal; several choices are 
on offer (see figure to the right). Select Metal – 
Corroded Iron for starters. A textured dark gray 
sphere will appear in the Materials Manager.
9 Materials Manager: Load Material Preset > Lite > Materials > Metal.

Lesson 12 — CINEMA 4D LITE
370
10 After adding a metal preset to the Materials 
Manager, drag it onto the Extrude object. Click 
Render View, and you can see how much richer 
the textures are in C4D Lite compared to what’s 
currently possible using After Effects’ native 3D.
13 
Double-click on Video’s Texture Tag to open 
its Material Editor. You want your video texture to 
interact with shadows and lights in the scene, so 
you should load it into the Color channel. With 
Color selected, click inside the blank bar to the 
right of Texture to open a file dialog. Navigate 
to Lesson 12 > 12_Sources > Movies. Select 
Baseball_4k.mov and click Open. You will see a 
dialog saying CINEMA 4D Lite would like this file 
to be in the search path it uses to find textures; 
click Yes and C4D Lite will copy it into a Tex 
folder alongside the project file. 
Here is where the frame rate issues mentioned 
at the end of the previous exercise come back to 
haunt you: Click on the tiny black arrow to the 
left of Texture to reveal more options (see figure on the next page), 
then click the Animation tab. Look for Movie Frame Rate: It has been 
rounded down from 29.97 fps to 29! You can change this to 30, but 
the failsafe workaround is to change the Timing menu from Exact 
Second to Exact Frame; this will use one frame of source per frame  
of animation. You can then close the Material Editor.
10 Drag your new texture onto Extrude in the Objects Manager; 
before you release the mouse, verify that the cursor changes to a 
downward arrow aimed at a + symbol. This will add a Texture Tag  
to Extrude.
The default render in the Viewport is fast, but kind of dull. Click  
the Render View icon along the top of the Viewport to see what a  
final render would look like. The shortcut is Cr (Lr).
11 It’s easy to change materials. Back in the Materials menu, choose 
Create > Load Material Preset > Lite > Materials > Metal > Metal – 
Multicolored 02. Drag this new texture from the Materials Manager 
directly on top of the existing Texture Tag (the tiny sphere) to the 
right of Extrude in the Objects Manager. This will replace the material 
rather than add a new one. It looks dark initially, but it will bounce 
the lights and reflect the video quite nicely.
12 To apply a video onto your wall, you need to create a custom 
material that includes your video. In the Materials menu, choose  
Create > New Material. Double-click its default name “Mat” in the 
Materials Manager below and replace it with “Video”.
11 To replace a material already applied to an object 
with a new material, drag a new material directly on 
top of the existing Texture Tag in the Objects Manager.
13 Create a custom material with your video 
loaded into the Color channel. Note: When you 
zoom close to a 3D object, image-based textures 
applied to it must have a lot of resolution, or they 
will appear blurred. For example, if you plan to 
zoom close to a virtual videowall, if possible use 
4k or larger footage to map onto it.

13 continued Click on the tiny black arrow (circled in red) to reveal 
more options. Set Timing from Exact Second to Exact Frame to 
override C4D Lite’s unfortunate decision to round 29.97 fps to 29.
14–15 Edit the Texture Tag for your Video texture to only appear 
in the first cap (Selection = C1). Edit its Offset and Length so it just 
covers the cap of your videowall model. Clip 39664449 courtesy Pond5.
CINEMA 4D LITE — Lesson 12
371
14 To add your video to your videowall rather than 
replace its existing texture, drag your Video material onto 
the Extrude object (not the Texture Tag icon already 
applied to it). Initially, it seems to cover the entire model; 
you want it to appear just on the original rectangle – the 
“cap” of your extruded object. Well, there are some secret 
codes in CINEMA 4D to do just that.
Select the Texture Tag for Video; it will be loaded into 
the Attributes Manager. In the Selection field under the  
Tag tab, type “C1” and press E – this will direct C4D 
Lite to use this texture only for the front cap. Entering C2 
would mean use it on the back cap; R1 or R2 would apply  
it to just the front or back bevel (rounding).
15 Next you need to adjust the video to best fit the front 
cap. Click on the Projection menu under Tag and set it to 
Flat. Disable the Tile checkbox, then adjust Offset U and 
Offset V to move the image into the top left corner. Now 
you can adjust Length U and Length V until the video is 
stretched across the entire cap. It may help to press 3 and 
drag in the Viewport to orbit the display around to where 
you can see it head-on; otherwise, some of the inset video 
will be obscured by the videowall’s bezel. It’s okay to crop 
a bit around the edges; the bezel of a real television would 
chop off part of the image as well (see figure below).
16 To create a nice shadow vignette where the video 
meets the bezel, click on the Edit Render Settings icon, click 
Effect along the left side, and select Ambient Occlusion. 
This usually adds attractive detail to shadows. Its Contrast 
parameter affects how dark those new shadows are; 10% is 
a good number to start with. Close Render Settings, click 
Render View to see the result, and save your project.

17 Click the Camera icon and select 
Target Camera from its submenu.
Lesson 12 — CINEMA 4D LITE
372
Camera Move and Making Changes
Finally, let’s create a simple camera move in C4D Lite and bring the results back 
into After Effects. 
17 Click on the Camera icon above the Viewport and choose Target Camera 
from its submenu (or select Create > Camera > Target Camera from the Main 
menu). This is the equivalent of a two-node camera in After Effects. In the 
Objects Manager, Camera is the camera back, while Camera.Target.1 is the 
Point of Interest. The target defaults to Position 0,0,0, which happens to be the 
same as the center of our videowall model – a good place for it. 
18 In the Viewport menu, choose Cameras > Use Camera > Camera (see figure 
to the left) to see what your camera sees in the Perspective view. Then choose 
Panel > All Views to see your scene from all sides to help you place the camera. 
The default pose isn’t a bad place to 
end the animation; with the Camera 
object selected, click and drag the back 
of the camera in the orthographic 
views (Top/Right/Front) to tweak its 
position, or press 1, 2, or 3 while 
you click and drag in the Perspective 
view to edit the chosen camera. As 
in After Effects, you can drag the axis 
arrows to constrain your movements 
to a particular direction.
19 Our first guess at an animation 
duration is 5 seconds. To set a keyframe 
for this ending pose, drag the green 
time indicator below the Viewport  
to frame 150 (5 seconds × 30 fps). 
With Camera still selected in 
the Objects Manager, select the 
Coordinates (Coord.) tab in the 
Attributes Manager. Click inside the 
circle to the left of P.X, P.Y, and P.Z 
to set initial keyframes for these three 
Position values. Red dots in these 
circles will confirm that keyframes 
have been set, and a small keyframe 
nubbin will be added at frame 150  
in the timeline.
19 Set your final pose for your camera animation at frame 150 (above) and enable 
keyframes for Camera’s X, Y, and Z position values (below).

CINEMA 4D LITE — Lesson 12
373
20 Move the time indicator back to 
frame 0. Move the camera to create  
an interesting view of the videowall – 
we suggest starting with a close-up of 
the video, which will then pull back  
to reveal it’s actually mapped to a  
3D object. Type Cr (Lr)  
whenever you want to check what  
the final render will look like. 
Back in the Coordinates tab of the 
Attributes Manager, there will be 
yellow rings next to the X, Y, and Z 
position values to indicate they have 
been edited, but not frozen as key-
frames yet. Unlike After Effects, in 
CINEMA 4D you have to confirm the  
creation of keyframes every time you 
change a value. Click inside these circles 
to set keyframes. (If you don’t see yellow rings, 
check that Camera is still the selected object.)
To test your animation, click the Play Forwards 
button in the Animation toolbar under the 
Viewport, or press * (not ß – another  
big difference from After Effects). C4D Lite auto-
matically “eases” your animation move, making 
it smooth. If you want to edit your move, set the time indicator to the point  
in time you want to edit, move the camera, and reset the keyframes for camera’s  
X, Y, and Z Position values – otherwise, your edit will be lost. Note that during 
previewing, only the first frame of the video will be displayed. 
21 Save your C4D Lite project and return to After Effects. Bring the comp 
02-Videowall*starter forward, drag out the end of the layer bar for Videowall.
c4d to the end of the comp, and start a preview to check your animation with 
the video. The default resolution is very low, but this will process much faster 
than a full-quality render. 
If you don’t like the move, simply switch back to C4D Lite and edit it. For 
example, now that we’ve seen it with the actual video, we think the camera 
move should end just after the umpire throws back the new ball. So in C4D Lite, 
select Camera and drag its 
keyframe nubbin at frame 
150 to frame 180.
21 To change the timing of a keyframe, 
select the object it is attached to (Camera 
in this case) and drag it along the timeline 
to its new position.
20 After setting an initial pose and 
checking it at full render quality (top), 
update your keyframes (above). The yellow 
dots mean the new parameters have not 
been saved yet; click so they turn red.

Lesson 12 — CINEMA 4D LITE
374
22 While we’re here, let’s improve the look of the scene. 
Choose Panel > View 1 to focus on the Perspective view, and 
move the time indicator to frame 180 or later. Type Cr 
(Lr); the video is looking too washed out. One cure for 
this is to tighten up the specular highlights on the screen.
Double-click the Video Texture Tag applied to Extrude, and 
select the Reflectance tab in the Attributes Manager. Click on 
the rectangle for Reflectance > Default Specular; a black sphere 
with a specular highlight should appear underneath. Decrease 
Width to 15–20% to create a tighter specular hot spot; render 
the scene to check the result. The video is no longer washed 
out, but now the speculars are hard to see, so increase Specular 
Strength to 30–35%. Render to check the result.
Tightening up the specular highlights did help, but the 
white uniform is still looking blown out. This is caused by the 
light amplifying the color values in the video to the point that 
they are clipping. The videowall frame is already pretty dark, 
so turning down the lights is not a preferred option. The other 
solution is to turn down the video so its color values are no 
longer overamplified.
23 Still in the Attributes Manager for the Video Texture Tag, 
select the tab for Color. Click the color swatch and change 
it to black; this is the color that will be mixed with the 
video when we reduce the video’s opacity. Now reduce the 
Mix Strength and render to check your results. We thought 
50–60% provided a balance between blowing out the uniform 
versus the rest of the video appearing bright enough. 
Save, and return to After Effects.
24 To see the final render quality in After Effects, select the 
Videowall.c4d layer and turn your attention to CINEWARE 
in the Effect Controls panel. The default Render Settings > 
Renderer is Software. Changing Renderer to Standard (Draft) 
will render the video cleanly, but not the texture applied to 
the rest of the videowall. Changing Renderer to Standard 
(Final) renders that lovely reflective metal surface, as well as 
the lighting specular highlights (see figure on the next page).
One nice feature of CINEWARE is the ability to copy the 
cameras and lights from your C4D Lite scene into After Effects. 
This allows you to add 3D layers in After Effects that have the 
22–23 To tame how the lights are washing out the video 
texture, decrease the Width of the specular highlight (above), set 
the Color to black, and reduce the video’s Mix Strength (below).

same camera move as the C4D Lite scene, even if the two worlds are 
completely separate. 
25 With Videowall.c4d still selected, in CINEWARE click Commands 
> CINEMA 4D Scene Data > Extract. A camera and light will be added 
to the timeline. 
Select the Camera layer and press u to reveal all properties that 
are animating. A Position keyframe has been created for every frame 
of its movement. Unfortunately, that animation was created at 30 fps, 
not 29.97 fps. Choose Layer > Time > Time Stretch, and set the Stretch 
Factor to “100.1”: This slows down the extracted data back to the  
original fractional frame rate (i.e., 30 to 29.97). Click OK. (You can also 
use the Stretch column in the Timeline panel, as shown on page 365.)
Note, however, that only one light was created; in C4D Lite, we  
had an array of seven! Unfortunately, this preset was created in C4D  
by taking a single light at the center and duplicating it in a circle using  
an Array object. So in this case, turn off the Video switch for Light  
as it does not accurately represent the lighting in C4D. As it was not  
keyframed, you don’t need to worry about setting its Stretch value.
24 Change the Renderer in CINEWARE to 
Standard (Final) (above) to see the 3D scene at 
full quality (right).
CINEMA 4D LITE — Lesson 12
375
25 In CINEWARE, click Extract to copy the camera 
and light from Videowall.c4d into the timeline. 
25 continued Choose Layer > Time > Time Stretch, 
and set its Stretch Factor to 100.1 to compensate for 
the difference in frame rates (above). In the Timeline 
panel (below), turn off the Light layer (circled).

28 The final composite with animated type 
added in After Effects (above). We used a 
3D text animation preset, which we covered 
in Lesson 5. If you got lost along the way, 
check out our version in Comps_finished  
> 02-Videowall_final (below). 
Lesson 12 — CINEMA 4D LITE
376
26 Move to 06:00 or later after the camera move has ended, and select the 
Type tool. The Character and Paragraph panels should open. Click the Center 
Text option in Paragraph, and in Character initially choose a simple font such  
as Myriad Pro. Set the color to white with a 0.5-pixel black stroke, and set the  
Font Size to 48 px. You can change all of these later if you like.
27 Click in the Comp panel and type an appropriate phrase for a sports 
program promo such as “get the latest sports results tonight at 11:00” and 
press E. Enable the 3D Layer switch for your new text layer and press p to 
reveal its Position. Remember that the videowall was centered at 0,0,0 in C4D. 
Move the text over the lower portion of the videowall (around X = 0 and  
Y = 215). To create a multiplaning effect during the camera move, pull the  
text slightly forward from the wall, such as Z = −75.
For faster previewing, select Videowall.c4d and in CINEWARE reduce the 
quality of the Renderer to Software or Standard (Draft). Preview your scene;  
the text will track the camera pullback in sync with the videowall animation.
28 You can animate the text. Place the current time  
indicator at 02:05, select the text layer, and press [ to 
move its in point to the current time. Click the Effects 
& Presets tab to bring that panel forward. Make sure 
Animation Presets is enabled, twirl open * Animation 
Presets > Text > 3D Type, and double-click 3D Flutter in 
From Left. Preview again, and the text will start falling in  
as soon as the ball hits the dirt.
Because all of your elements are “live” rather than pre-
rendered, you can tweak virtually any detail as desired. In 
addition to updating the text, feel free to return to C4D Lite 
to tweak Rectangle’s Radius; Extrude’s Object > Movement 
Z or Caps > Radius; or Studio Ring Spot’s Spot Options > Radius, Ring Height, 
or Brightness. Save before returning to After Effects and the comp will auto-
matically reflect your changes. Remember that if you change the C4D camera 
animation, delete the current Camera and Light in After Effects and Extract the 
scene data again (see Step 25). Close the C4D Lite project when you’re finished.
d tip
Reduce Banding
The colorized background layer in 
02-Videowall is a perfect example of 
footage that benefits from increasing 
the project’s bit depth to 16 bpc. You 
can do this in Edit > Project Settings, 
by O (A) clicking on the bit depth 
indicator at the bottom of the Project 
panel, or in the Render Settings when 
you render a comp.

CINEMA 4D LITE — Lesson 12
377
Part 2: Animating 3D Text
Another common motion graphics task is creating and animating 3D text. 
We’ll also use this exercise to show how to pull special information out of 
a CINEMA 4D scene and use it when compositing inside After Effects.
1 Close your previous comps, and open Comps > 03-Animated 
Text*starter. Choose Layer > New > MAXON CINEMA 4D File. Name it 
“Text.c4d” and save it next to the project file Lesson_12.aep. As detailed 
in the first exercise, update the Project and Render Settings to match your 
comp (960×540 pixels, 6 seconds × 30 fps = 180 frames long). Save, and 
return to After Effects. Locate Text.c4d in the Project panel, choose File 
> Interpret Footage > Main, and enter “29.97” for Frame Rate > Conform 
Frame Rate To. Save, and return to C4D Lite.
2 Click on the Spline submenu icon above the Viewport (its tooltip says 
Freehand), then choose Text. (You can also choose Create > Spline > Text 
from the Main menu.) Text will be added to the Objects Manager. When 
Text is selected, you can edit it in the Attributes Manager below. Under 
the Object tab, change the Text to say “electricity” (press T to see it 
update) and set Align to Middle.
3 In the Viewport menu, choose Panel > View 4 to see the text face-on. 
Select a font and weight; Helvetica Light is good for this exercise. Then 
Enable Kerning > Show 3D GUI. You can click and drag the orange tags 
above each letter to adjust the per-letter spacing. The “y” is a bit close to 
the “t” and might touch it when you bevel them, which makes objects 
fatter; drag “y” slightly to the right. In the Attributes Manager, twirl down 
the tiny arrow next to Kerning for additional controls such as Tracking. 
Disable Show 3D GUI when done.
D Font Weight Choices
By default, extruding and beveling an 
object increases its size, as the bevel is 
added to the original outline. Given this, 
it is often better to start with a slightly 
thinner weight when selecting a font for 
3D text. If you don’t have that freedom, 
the Extrude object has a Constrain option 
that you can enable to cause the bevel to 
cut into the original outline rather than add 
to it. Note that this sometimes causes odd 
spikes to appear around sharp corners and 
points. If the “counters” such as the inside 
of an “e” appear too clogged up, enable 
Hole Inwards to not bevel that section.
3 The Object tab for the Text object allows a fair amount of control over creating 
your text (right), including a graphical user interface for changing the kerning 
between letter pairs (above).

 
• Delete any unnecessary paths, such as guides.
• Create an Extrude object.
• Make your null the 
child of Extrude by 
dragging the null onto 
the Extrude object (see 
figure to the right). It 
is important that you 
connect the null instead 
of the individual paths 
underneath.
• With Extrude selected, select the Object tab in the Attributes 
Manager and enable Hierarchical (below). Otherwise, only one 
path will be extruded. Then follow the 
remaining instructions in this exercise 
for the Fracture object and Plain effec-
tor, as well as for texturing and lighting.
4 Back in the Viewport menu, choose Panel > View 1. Click on the Generators 
submenu icon (the tooltip says Subdivision Surface) and choose Extrude.  
(You can also select Create > Generators > Extrude from the Main menu.)  
In the Objects Manager, drag Text on top of Extrude to make it a child (look  
for the cursor with the downward-pointing arrow). Press 1 then click and  
drag in the Viewport slightly to the left to view the entire word.
5 Select Extrude. In the Attributes Manager, select the Object tab and scrub 
Movement’s Z value to get a depth you like. For metal looks, we prefer smaller 
depths as they look more elegant; for this exercise, you’re going to be creating 
a glass block look. Choose a depth where the dots on top of the “i”s look like 
cubes. (You can always tweak this later.)
Lesson 12 — CINEMA 4D LITE
378
D Using Illustrator Artwork
Rather than create your type or logos directly inside CINEMA 4D, 
you may receive a client’s logo as vector outlines, or prefer to 
typeset your text in Illustrator. Fortunately, animating Illustrator 
artwork is very similar to animating text in C4D Lite. Use these 
steps in place of Steps 2–4 in this exercise:
• Convert all paths in the Illustrator file to outlines – no embed-
ded fonts or pixel-based layers. (We’ve saved you a file to play 
with in 12_Sources > Outlines.)
• Save to the Illustrator 8 format – newer formats will not work.
• In C4D Lite’s Objects Manager menu, choose File > Merge 
Objects, and select your Illustrator 8 format artwork. 
• In the dialog that appears, set Scale to at least 10 to make 
values easier to edit later, and click OK. The result will be a null 
object named after your file, with each path connected under-
neath as a child; to reveal them, click the + symbol to the left of 
the object name.
• Select the null object, and in the Coordinates Manager set the 
Position values all to 0 (see figure below). Click Apply. Pan and 
Zoom the Viewport as needed to see the imported outlines.
4 You can also select Extrude from the 
Main menu under Create > Generators. 

6 A Linear fillet (A) is a good, basic bevel profile. Convex (B) and 
Concave (C) look like Linear if you leave Steps at 1; increase as 
necessary to get smooth rounding. Half-circle (D) make objects 
look like they were assembled in layers.
CINEMA 4D LITE — Lesson 12
379
6 Select the Caps tab. Change both Start and End to 
Fillet Cap. Turn your attention to Fillet Type: It defaults to 
Convex, which normally means a curved surface. But the 
bevels (fillets) look straight; press Cr (Lr) to render 
the scene to be sure. 
The issue is that C4D defaults to a Steps value of 1. More 
steps create better rounding. Increase Steps for both Start  
and End to 5 or more to create a smoother, rounded look; 
press Cr (Lr) to check the result.
Change Fillet Type to Concave and render again. This 
creates an engraved look that is good for chiseled stone  
and other sculpted materials.
Try the other Fillet Types and create a mental reference 
for what you might use them for in the future. For this exer-
cise, go with Concave; its more complex nature creates lots 
of opportunities to reflect light and create internal shadows. 
Also, reduce both Radius settings to 4 for a little more  
sophistication. Save your project before moving on.
Building the Animation
Next we’re going to create a “cascade” style animation where 
the characters zoom into position. This will employ the 
MoGraph objects and effectors that were installed when you 
registered your copy of CINEMA 4D Lite, as outlined earlier. 
You will notice similarities to text animators in After Effects, 
but C4D requires a completely different structure. It may 
seem arcane at first, but it will become second nature once 
you understand it and do it a few times.
7 Choose Panel > Arrangement > 3 Views Bottom Split from 
the Viewport menu. Pan and zoom the Top and Right views 
below to leave some space behind the text.
8 First, you need C4D to think of each 
of the letters as separate objects. To do 
that, choose MoGraph > Fracture from 
the Main menu (registration required). 
In the Objects Manager, drag Extrude onto Fracture to make 
it a child of Fracture. The text will turn white; don’t worry 
– you’re going to add textures later. Next, with Fracture 
selected, click the Object tab in the Attributes Manager,  
and set Mode to Explode Segments & Connect.
A
B
C
D

Lesson 12 — CINEMA 4D LITE
380
9 Next, you need a force – an “effector” in C4D lingo –  
to push the characters around. With Fracture selected in 
the Objects Manager, choose MoGraph > Effector > Plain. 
The text should jump up, indicating Fracture is reacting  
to Plain. (If this doesn’t happen, it’s easy to fix; select 
Fracture and click its Effectors tab in the Attributes 
Manager. Then drag Plain from the Objects Manager  
into the empty box under Effectors.)
10 Select Plain, and click its Parameter tab in the 
Attributes Manager below. In the Transform section, 
Position is enabled and P.Y is set to 100 – this is the offset 
you’re seeing. Set P.Y to 0 and P.Z to 1000; the text will 
now jump back in the scene (you may need to zoom back 
to see the text in the various views).
A single Plain effector can offset multiple parameters. 
Click on the checkbox to the right of Rotation to enable it, 
and set R.H to 180° and press R; each character will 
flip around on its Y axis. (If the whole word flipped back-
wards, for Fracture make sure that Object > Mode was set 
to Explode Segments & Connect; see Step 8.)
Finally, enable Scale, then enable Uniform Scale under-
neath. To shrink the text size by half, enter −0.5 for Scale.
11 By default, the Plain effector affects all model pieces 
the same. To change that behavior and create a “cascade” 
treatment, select its Falloff tab. Click on the Shape menu 
and choose Linear (see figure next page). 
10 To “effect” the text (above), edit the Parameter section 
of the Plain effector (below).
9 The MoGraph menu has the objects you need to build a 
procedural animation (top). Parent Extrude to Fracture (above), and 
set Plain to be an Effector for Fracture in the Attributes Manager 
(below). The text will turn white and move above the baseline (right).

11–12 The Falloff 
tab (above) controls 
the size and shape of 
the cascade for your 
character animation. 
The “Inverse” choices 
for Falloff Function ease 
the characters into their 
final location (left).
CINEMA 4D LITE — Lesson 12
381
Two yellow squares will appear in the Viewport, defining the ends of the  
Plain effector’s selection region. You want to pass this region through the 
original location of the type. Initially, it’s oriented the wrong way; change 
Orientation from +Z to −X so that it will bracket the original location of the 
letters. Now you’ll start to see a hint of the desired behavior. 
Drag the red X axis arrow for Plain in either the Perspective or Top views,  
and note how the characters move as the selection region passes through them. 
Park it centered in the world for now.
d factoid
HPB versus XYZ Rotation
CINEMA 4D uses the Heading/Pitch/Bank 
(HPB) system to define rotation; After Effects 
uses XYZ. To translate, H = Y; P = X; B = Z. 
12 Let’s refine that selection region. The red square between 
the two yellow ones defines the Falloff of the force inside that 
region. We personally find it easier to visualize that region as 
being between the two squares on the ends, so in the Attributes 
Manager set the Falloff parameter to 100%. More characters will 
now be included inside the selection, creating a wider cascade.
To create an even wider cascade, you need a wider selection 
region. Still under the Falloff tab, increase the value of Size’s X 
dimension (the first number) until you’re happy with the look 
of the transition. We used a value of 250.
Below the Falloff parameter is a menu for Falloff Function. 
This is akin to the Ease High and Ease Low used for advanced 
After Effects text animation. The choices Inverse, Inverse 
Square, and Inverse Cubic create different degrees of easing into 
the final location; try those as you drag Plain through the text.

14 C4D’s Timeline window is its equivalent 
of the Graph Editor. Click and drag the pan 
and zoom icons (circled in the upper right 
corner) to move around the display, or click 
the Frame All icon (circled upper left).
13 Remember to click the dot next to the 
value you just edited to set a keyframe.
Lesson 12 — CINEMA 4D LITE
382
13 Now for the payoff: The animation! Make sure the 
time indicator is at frame 0. Then in the Viewport, move 
the red X axis arrow for Plain to the left until the first “e”  
is all the way back at its starting position.
In the Attributes Manager, click on the Coordinates 
(Coord.) tab for the Plain effector. Click inside the circle  
to the left of P.X to set a keyframe; the dot will turn red.
Move the time indicator to the frame where you would 
like your text animation to end; for a 4-second animation at 30 fps, that would 
be frame 120. Pull the red X axis arrow to the right until the “y” has settled into 
its final resting place. Back under the Coordinates tab, P.X has a yellow circle 
next to it; click inside the circle to set your second keyframe.
Click the Play Forwards button or press * to preview your animation; * will 
also stop playback. Click inside the different views to change which one is being 
previewed. If you wish to change the timing of your animation, select Plain and 
slide the keyframe nubbins in the timeline; we decided to shorten the animation 
to 90 frames. You can also make other changes to Plain; for example, we set 
Parameter > Scale to −1.0 so the characters would be invisible at the start.
14 C4D Lite automatically adds an “easy ease” to keyframed animation. If you 
find that the start or end of the animation is too slow, you can dive into C4D’s 
equivalent of After Effects’ Graph Editor. From the Main menu, choose Window 
> Timeline, and click the F-Curve Mode icon in the upper left of the Timeline 
window – the shortcut is tapping ß. On the left side, click the + symbol 
to twirl down Plain > Position to reveal Position.X and select it. You will see a 
Value Graph for Position.X 
(if you are zoomed in too 
much, press h to view all 
or click the Frame All icon 
in the Timeline toolbar); 
pull up the Bezier handle 
for its first keyframe to 
create a more linear takeoff. 
Just as with After Effects 
CC 2015 and later, you can 
keep playing a preview 
while performing this edit. 
Close the Timeline window 
when you’re happy with 
your animation, and save 
your project.
d factoid
Preview Active View
If you have multiple views displayed in the 
Viewport, only the most recently selected 
view will play the preview. You can change 
between views during playback by clicking 
inside the desired view.

CINEMA 4D LITE — Lesson 12
383
Texture and Lighting
Now for the eye candy part of the job: making the characters look 
pretty with interesting textures and lighting. Move the time indicator 
to somewhere in the middle of your animation where you see some 
characters full size and some in the process of flying up. Select Panel  
> View 1 so you can see the text at maximum size.
15 We mentioned earlier we wanted to go for a glass look. In  
the Materials menu, choose Create > Load Material Preset > Lite >  
Materials > Glass. You have quite a few to choose from; because you 
have a theme of electricity, try Glass Halo Electric. Drag this texture 
onto Extrude in the Objects Manager. The text will become ghosted  
in the Viewport, indicating transparency. Type Cr (Lr) to 
render it. Feel free to try different glass textures; remember to drag 
them onto the Texture Tag for Extrude to replace the first one you 
applied – otherwise they’ll start piling up.
16 It can get tedious to keep hitting Cr (Lr) to preview  
each change; an alternative is to set up an Interactive Render Region. 
Click on the Render to Picture Viewer icon above the Viewport and 
choose Interactive Render Region. A box will be drawn inside the 
Viewport; drag its handles and corners to decide which portion you 
want to automatically render. There is a tiny white triangle along the 
right edge of the box that determines the render quality; unless you 
have a very slow computer, drag it all the way up. The shortcut to 
show and hide this region is Or (Ar); toggle it on and off as 
desired throughout the rest of this exercise.
You may notice some aliasing (jagged edges) in 
your 3D objects. To improve the render quality, 
in CINEMA 4D Lite click the Edit Render 
Settings button; the shortcut is Cb (Lb) 
(think “B for Best”). Along the left side of the 
dialog that opens, select Anti-Aliasing. Change 
the Anti-Aliasing menu choice on the right from 
Geometry to Best and render some test frames, 
raising the Min Level and Max Level to see their 
effect. Reducing the Threshold (say to 5%) can 
also help, as it causes more edges to be ren-
dered at Max. These will increase the rendering 
time required, but will clean up aliased edges.  
It is also a good idea to set Filter to Gauss 
(Animation); the results will be softer, but there 
will be less noise during animation. For more 
information, right-click on Anti-Aliasing on the 
right side of this dialog to open C4D’s Help file.
16 To automatically render a portion of your Viewport 
at high quality, toggle on the Interactive Render 
Region (above). You can adjust what gets rendered; 
the triangle along the right sets the quality (left).
D Improving Render Quality

17 Add the texture Metal – Multicolor 01 
to Extrude twice (top), one for each bevel. 
Set their Selections to R1 and R2 
respectively (above). The result is lovely 
glass text outlined by metal bands (below).
Lesson 12 — CINEMA 4D LITE
384
18  From the Main menu, choose Create > Light > Target Light (or press the 
Light icon and choose Target Light from its flyout menu); this is akin to a Spot 
light in After Effects. Light.Target.1 defaults to the origin, where the text is  
centered; that’s fine. Double-click Light in the Objects Manager and rename it  
“Key Light” (press R to accept). Position the light to taste using the Top, 
Right, and Front views; we went for a mostly face-on pose, angled slightly up 
and to the right. Check your results at several different points in time. (Note  
that if you also set Scale to –1 in Step 13 earlier, the text is invisible at frame 0.)
17 Now let’s add a metal band for the beveled areas. Choose 
Create > Load Material Preset > Lite > Materials > Metal >  
Metal – Multicolor 01. To add this second material to the 
extruded text, drag it onto Extrude (not the existing Texture 
Tag). Initially the entire object will take on this new texture. 
With this second Texture Tag selected, click the Tag tab in 
the Attributes Manager, and in the Selection text field type 
“R1” to apply it to just the front bevel (its rounding). If you 
want to also apply it to the back bevel, hold L while click-
ing and dragging the Texture Tag for Metal – Multicolor 01 to 
the right: This will duplicate the tag. Then in the Attributes 
Manager, edit its Selection to be “R2”. Type Cr (Lr)  
to render your entire word.
So far the scene has been using invisible default lighting; 
next you’re going to create your own light. Choose Panel > 
Arrangement > 4 Views Left Split to see your text from all sides 
while focusing on the results in the Perspective view. Use the 
1, 2, and 3 keys while dragging in the various views; your 
goal is to see the text head-on in the Perspective view and 
create space around the word in the other views so you can 
arrange lights around the text.

18 Add Target Light (inset, top right), 
and pose it to nicely illuminate your word 
(above).
CINEMA 4D LITE — Lesson 12
385
With Key Light selected, in the Attributes Manager, select the Details tab  
and increase the Outer Angle as needed to make sure it illuminates the entire 
word, including the characters at the back as they fly up. Then click the  
General tab and increase Intensity as needed to nicely illuminate your word.  
As with After Effects, you can go over 100%.
If you feel you need more illumination in the scene, you can add a second 
“fill” light coming in from another direction; for the sake of simplicity we’re 
going to go with one light for now.
Compositing in After Effects
We’re going to wrap up this exercise by bringing our animated 3D text back  
into After Effects and compositing it over a 2D background. We want our text  
to integrate with that background in a believable manner, so we will need to 
dive into the world of Object Buffers to integrate these two worlds.

20–22 In CINEWARE, change Project 
Settings > Camera to use Centered Comp 
Camera (top). Create a new two-node 
camera in After Effects and orient it to  
create a nice pose for the text (above).  
Clip RB056Bv2.1 courtesy Artbeats.com.
Lesson 12 — CINEMA 4D LITE
386
19 Save the C4D Lite project and return to After Effects. Move the current  
time indicator to the end of the comp (05:29); extend the Text.c4d layer to the 
end. Initially you will see a low-resolution version of the text, as the CINEWARE 
effect that has been automatically applied to the Text.c4d layer defaults to the 
faster Software renderer. Let’s take advantage of that speed to do some quick 
camera work.
20 By default, Text.c4d is using C4D’s camera view. Rather than bouncing 
between C4D to adjust that view and After Effects to see the result over your 
background, you can use an After Effects camera instead. With Text.c4d 
selected, look for the Project Settings > Camera menu in the CINEWARE effect. 
Change it to Centered Comp Camera. This choice takes into account that the 
center of the After Effects comp is 480,270 instead of 0,0; the new camera you’re 
about to create in After Effects defaults to looking at the former.
21 Choose Layer > New > Camera. 
Set Type to Two-Node, and start with 
the 50mm preset. If you prefer a 
bowed, wide-angle look to the text, 
try a shorter lens such as 28mm; if 
you prefer flatter text, try a longer lens 
such as 135mm. Click OK. (If you see  
a warning dialog, you can dismiss it.)
22 Select the Unified Camera tool. 
If you have a three-button mouse, 
use the left, center, and right buttons 
to orbit, pan, and zoom the camera’s 
relationship to the text. If you don’t, 
tap c to toggle through the different 
camera tools, then click and drag in 
the Comp panel. Set up an ending 
pose you like in relation to the  
background; a slight angle is fine. 
23 We like to have the camera drift slightly over the length of the comp to 
keep constant motion, even though the text animation ends halfway through. 
With Camera 1 still selected, press p and Sa to reveal its Position and 
Point of Interest. Enable keyframing for both of these values. Then move to the 
start of the comp (00:00) and slightly change the camera pose. You won’t see 
the text at this point, but the ground plane in C4D will still be visible when 
using the Software renderer. Perform a preview to test your move and note that 
you see the Effector from C4D in the Comp panel. Tweak the camera move 

24 Our glass+metal text looks great, 
but the background ought to be slightly 
distorted when viewed through the text.
25–26 Add a Compositing Tag to Fracture (above),  
and enable Object Buffer 1 (below). In the Render Settings, 
enable Multi-Pass and add an Object Buffer to match (right).
CINEMA 4D LITE — Lesson 12
387
as desired. If the preview is too slow, try a Sº 
preview where only every other frame is rendered.
24 Move the current time indicator to where you can  
see the text. Select Text.c4d, and in CINEWARE change 
Render Settings > Renderer to Standard (Final). It takes a  
few seconds to render, but it’s lovely, yes? (If aliased edges 
are a problem, see the sidebar Improving Render Quality on 
page 383.)
And yet…you might notice something looks wrong:  
The background looks the same whether it’s behind the 
glass text or not. In reality, glass would distort the image 
coming through it; you learned about this in the Transparency  
exercise back in Lesson 8. To fake this, you need to create a distorted  
duplicate of the background layer that only appears where the text is.
Creating an Object Buffer
25 Save your After Effects project, 
then return to C4D Lite. We need 
to create a matte for where the 
text appears in the scene. C4D 
refers to these mattes as Object 
Buffers. Right-click on Fracture in 
the Objects Manager and choose 
CINEMA 4D Tags > Compositing. 
Then in the Attributes Manager, 
select the Object Buffer tab. Click 
the first Enable checkbox. Note 
that the default Group ID is 1.
26 Click on the Edit Render 
Settings icon above the Viewport. 
Enable the Multi-Pass checkbox 
on the left side, then click on 
the Multi-Pass button below and 
choose Object Buffer. The default 
Group ID is also 1; it has to match 
what you set in the previous step. 
Close this dialog, save, and return 
to After Effects.

Lesson 12 — CINEMA 4D LITE
388
27 Select Text.c4d and type Cd (Ld) to duplicate it. Select the lower 
copy (layer 3) and enable its Solo switch. Then in the CINEWARE effect:
• Enable Multi-Pass > CINEMA 4D Multi-Pass. (If this option is grayed out, 
Renderer is set to Software; choose one of the Standard options.)
• Enable Defined Multi-Passes, which is what you set up in C4D Lite’s Render 
Settings. 
• Click Add Image Layers. The layer will be renamed Text.c4d Object Buffer 
and you will see a nice grayscale luma matte in the Comp panel.
28 Disable the Solo switch. Select BlueSpiral.mov and duplicate it as well. 
Set the top copy’s TrkMat to Luma Matte “Text.c4d Object Buffer”. 
29 With layer 4 (the matted duplicate movie) still selected, choose Effect > 
Stylize > CC Glass. For bonus points, you could also apply Effect > Distort > 
Transform, and slightly increase or decrease Scale. (To better understand the 
contribution of this extra layer, try soloing the BlueSpiral.mov duplicate 
layer and toggle on/off the fx switch.)
With the CINEWARE Renderer set to Standard (Final), start a preview and 
go have a nice, relaxing cup of tea. Hopefully by the time you come back,  
you can enjoy the results of your hard work.
27–29 Duplicate the C4D layer, enable 
both of its Multi-Pass options, and click  
Add Image Layers (left, top). Then duplicate 
the background layer, use the new Object 
Buffer layer as a Luma matte, and add  
a couple of glass-like distortions (left).  
Now the background will appear different 
when behind the glass text (below).

CINEMA 4D LITE — Lesson 12
389
3 Select a large number of Track Points attached to the path (above), then drag 
the target to where you’d like to place the crown (below).
Part 3: Camera Tracking
Our last exercise is a typical visual effects scenario where you need to add a 
3D-rendered object into an existing scene. Along the way we’ll take advantage 
of “Layers” in CINEMA 4D, which allow you to group chosen objects into their 
own subrenders and treat them separately inside After Effects.
1 Close your previous C4D projects and 
After Effects comps, and open Comps > 
04-Motion Tracking*starter. Preview, and 
you will see it contains a slow pan-down that 
reveals a path through a forest. Our plan is  
to reveal a king’s lost crown on this path.
2 Select ForestPandown.mov and press # 
to reveal the Effect Controls panel. The 3D 
Camera Tracker has already been applied for 
you (we used Animate > Track Camera, as 
covered in Lesson 9). Select the 3D Camera 
Tracker effect, and a series of colorful Track 
Points will appear overlaid on top of it. Scrub 
the current time indicator to around 10:00 
where a good number of Track Points are 
visible on the path. As these points appear 
smaller later in the clip, feel free to increase 
the Track Point Size to 150% or more. (If the 
Track Points disappear, reselect 3D Camera 
Tracker in the Effect Controls panel.)
3 Defining the path as your “ground plane” 
will make it easier to place the crown on it. 
Drag a selection around a large group of the 
Track Points on the path; multiple points are 
averaged together to create a more accurate 
reading. When you release the mouse, a very 
small red target will appear. Increase the 
Target Size value in the Effect Controls panel 
until it’s easier to see; around 500% is good. 
Then hover the cursor over the center of the 
target until a four-headed arrow appears at 
its tail. When you see this, click and drag the 
target to where you’d like to place the crown.

6 After merging Crown.c4d, the crown model plus a target light 
will be added to your scene. We set up the light to loosely mimic the 
direction of the light and shadows in the clip; feel free to improve it. 
Model 39591810 courtesy Pond5.
Lesson 12 — CINEMA 4D LITE
390
4 Right-click on the target and choose Set 
Ground Plane and Origin. That will define the 
center of your target as 0,0,0 in your 3D world. 
Then, in the Effect Controls panel, click Create 
Camera to add an animated 3D camera to your 
timeline derived from the analysis of this clip. If 
you created a camera before setting the ground 
plane and origin, you will need to delete the old 
camera, set the ground plane, and then create a 
new camera, as the coordinates will have changed.
5 Choose Layer > New > MAXON CINEMA 4D 
File. Name it “Crown on Path.c4d” and save it 
alongside Lesson_12.aep. As detailed in the first 
exercise, update the Project and Render Settings 
inside C4D Lite to match your comp (960×540 
pixels, 18 seconds × 30 fps = 540 frames long).
If you were a 3D modeling wizard, now you 
would create a crown. On a typical production 
job, another artist may have already been hired to 
create one or you might be directed to go buy one. 
We’ve done the latter for you.
6 In the Objects Manager menu, choose File > 
Merge Objects. Navigate to 12_Sources > crown 
model and double-click Crown.c4d. A null object 
containing the crown model pieces and a target 
light we already created for you will appear in the 
Objects Manager. We made sure the crown was 
centered at 0,0,0 and resting on the ground plane. 
Type Cr (Lr) to see it at full quality. 
4 Right-click the target to Set Ground Plane and Origin (left), and then  
click Create Camera inside the 3D Camera Tracker effect (right).

CINEMA 4D LITE — Lesson 12
391
7–8 Change CINEWARE’s Camera to 
Comp Camera; the crown is in the right 
place, but too small (above). Increase 
crown’s Coordinates > Scale to a more 
appropriate size, such as 6 (below).
7 Save your C4D project and return to After Effects. Drag out the end of the 
Crown on Path.c4d layer to last the duration of your project. 
When the crown renders, it looks way too large to sit realistically on the path. 
Is it just a problem with 3D perspective? With Crown on Path.c4d selected,  
go into the CINEWARE effect and change Project Settings > 
Camera to Comp Camera. Now the crown is too small!
8 Return to C4D Lite, select crown, and choose its Coordinates 
(Coord.) tab in the Attributes Manager. Scale it up by increasing 
S.X, S.Y, and S.Z to the same value. To see the crown comfortably 
again in the Viewport, select View > Frame Selected Objects.  
Save, return to After Effects, and see if you like your new size. 
Repeat until you have a size you like; we settled on 6. 
After Effects Camera into CINEMA 4D
To include the After Effects tracked camera in the C4D project, close 
the project in C4D Lite. Back in After Effects, select the C4D layer, 
and in CINEWARE click Commands > Comp Camera into CINEMA 4D 
> Merge. Then type Ce (Le) to reopen the C4D project. You 
will need to click on the Camera Object tag in the Objects Manager 
to enable viewing your scene through that camera.

9 In After Effects, make sure Crown on Path.c4d is still selected. In CINEWARE, 
change Render Settings > Renderer to Standard (Draft) to see a medium-quality 
version of the crown without the ground plane and light cone. Move the 
current time indicator to just before the crown becomes visible, and type O[ 
(A[) to trim the C4D layer’s in point and save rendering time. Preview; the 
crown should move as if it was resting on the path. If you want to reposition 
the crown, do not change the Position of Crown on Path.c4d – this is just a 2D 
placeholder layer displaying the rendered 3D scene. Instead, return to C4D Lite 
and adjust crown’s Coordinates > P.X and P.Y, moving Light.Target.1 to match. 
Save before returning to After Effects.
Shadows
Move the current time indicator to where you can see the crown from above, 
such as around 07:00. Change the Renderer to Standard (Final). It looks nice,  
but notice something missing? Shadows! You’ll need to create a floor in C4D 
Lite to catch them, then figure out how to composite just the shadow with the 
floor back in After Effects.
10 Return to C4D Lite. Click on the Objects icon above the Viewport (the 
cube) and choose Disc from the flyout menu. Although it appears in the Objects 
Manager, you won’t see it in the Viewport because it defaults to a size smaller 
than the crown. With Disc selected, in the Attributes Manager click the Object 
tab and increase the Outer Radius until it extends beyond the crown. If you 
nudged crown’s position in the previous step, move Disc to match. Type Cr 
(Lr) to render and 
check your work; press 3 
then click and drag in the 
Viewport to orbit around 
the crown to make sure 
your floor is big enough to 
capture the entire shadow.
10 Create a disc (above) and make it large 
enough to catch the entire shadow (below). 
Unfortunately, the disc renders in After 
Effects as well (right). 
Lesson 12 — CINEMA 4D LITE
392
9 When you preview the comp, the crown 
should move as if it was resting on the path.

CINEMA 4D LITE — Lesson 12
393
Save and return to After Effects. Now you have a crown, a shadow…and a  
big black disc. You need to separate these from each other. Return to C4D,  
and let’s put Layers to work.
11 The crown object is actually a complex hierarchy of many individual 
pieces. You want to make sure you add every single piece of that hierarchy  
to the same layer. To do that:
• Right-click on crown and choose Select Children. 
• Then right-click on it again and choose Add to New Layer. In the Attributes 
Manager section, click on the Layers tab along the right edge. Double-click Layer 
and rename it “crown layer” so you can keep track of it later. The button to its 
immediate right is its Solo switch; toggle that on then off again to check that 
you indeed got the entire crown and not just the null object at the top of its 
hierarchy.
• Then right-click on Disc and again choose Add to New Layer. Down in the 
Layers Manager, double-click on Layer and rename it “disc layer”.
12 Save your Cinema file, return to 
After Effects, and select Crown on 
path.c4d. In the CINEWARE effect:
• Enable the checkbox for Project 
Settings > CINEMA 4D Layers. 
• Click on the Set Layers button and 
choose crown layer plus Items not 
on Layers (which includes the light), 
but exclude disc layer. Click OK, and 
just the crown will render.
11 Add each of the major objects to their 
own layers so you can treat them separately 
in After Effects. Click the Layers tab (circled 
above) to view your layers; double-click a 
layer to give it a unique name. 
12 In the CINEMA 4D Layers dialog, 
choose both crown layer and Items not 
on Layers; exclude the disc layer.
Shadow Options
CINEMA 4D offers three types of shadows, which are set 
under the Shadow tab for a light. They include: 
• Shadow Maps, which generates a shadow that is 
slightly soft all around its edges. 
• Ray-traced, which is hard around the edges. 
• Area, which gets progressively softer the further away 
the shadow falls from the source object. 
We used Area for Crown.c4d. If you choose Shadow 
Maps, watch for rough edges; increasing the Shadow 
Map’s size will improve a mapped shadow’s quality.

13 Duplicate Crown on path.c4d. Select the 
copy underneath and rename it “Shadow”. In 
CINEWARE for this new layer:
• Disable Project Settings > CINEMA 4D Layers.
• Enable Multi-Pass (Linear Workflow) > 
CINEMA 4D Multi-Pass. 
• Click the Set Multi-Pass button and choose 
Shadow: You will see a large field of white with 
a dark shadow falling away from the crown. Solo the shadow layer so you can 
see that you have a black shadow on a white background; turn off the Solo 
switch when done. (Look closely and you will also notice the crown and shadow 
have jagged aliased edges. We’ll deal with that in the next step.) 
• In the timeline, make sure the Mode panel is visible ($ toggles it), and set 
Shadow’s mode to Multiply: This will drop out the white and leave the shadow. 
The 3D shadow appears much darker than the other shadows in the scene; with 
Shadow selected press t to reveal its Opacity and blend to taste.
Final Tweaks
Render a high-quality preview. By doing so, we 
noticed two things that bugged us. First, the crown 
seems to shimmer from noise as the camera moves, 
which can be attributed to insufficient antialiasing. 
CINEMA 4D defaults to low antialiasing levels. This 
speeds up rendering, and is less of an issue on still 
image, but can be a problem with video. Second, the gold bands look a bit flat. 
This can be helped by adding some definition to the shadows.
14 Return to C4D Lite, and click the Edit Render Settings icon. Select the  
Anti-Aliasing option down the left side of the dialog that opens. First, change 
the Filter setting to Gauss (Animation). 
The default method of Geometry only cleans up the outer edges; change  
Anti-Aliasing to Best. Then either increase the Min Level to 2×2, or lower  
the Threshold to 5% to increase the chances it will use the Max Level (4×4).  
The preferred settings change on a project-by-project basis; you will need to 
experiment to see what works best each time without increasing the rendering 
time unacceptably. 
Let’s try a different way to render: Press Sr to render the frames to 
Picture Viewer (see figure, next page), which shows you a history of your pre-
vious render so you can compare different tests. It also gives relative rendering 
times for each snapshot. Note that you can keep the Render Settings and  
Picture Viewer open side by side as you try different settings.
Lesson 12 — CINEMA 4D LITE
394
13 Duplicate the Crown on path.c4d 
layer. For the bottom one, enable CINEMA 
4D Multi-Pass and choose Shadow (above 
left) – the black and white shadow pass will 
dominate the scene (above right).
13 continued Then set the shadow layer  
to Multiply mode and blend its Opacity to 
taste (above). The crown and its shadow  
(but no disc) will appear on the path (below).

15 Back in the Render Settings, click Effect and choose Ambient Occlusion. 
This will increase the detail in the shadows. The Contrast value affects how dark 
these new shadows are; test different settings in the Picture Viewer by typing 
Sr after each adjustment. Also 
remember you can perform color and 
contrast adjustments to the Crown on 
Path.c4d layer back in After Effects.
Save, quit C4D Lite, and return to 
After Effects. Start a preview and go 
take a well-deserved break while it 
renders. You have the opening scene 
to a good short story here; it’s up to 
you to write the rest of the script.
Summary
Congratulations! You’ve come a very long way, from potentially being com-
pletely new to After Effects, to now integrating video footage with 3D worlds 
including advanced motion tracking tricks. If you’ve mastered the contents of 
this book, you’re now ready to take on a wide variety of tasks, including working 
at many of the studios worldwide that employ After Effects. We hope you find it 
as rewarding to use as we have the past 20+ years.
CINEMA 4D LITE — Lesson 12
395
f The Picture 
Viewer in 
CINEMA 4D 
(Sr) 
provides a 
nice way to 
compare 
snapshots 
of different 
settings.
14–15 We weren’t happy with the quality 
of the preview render, so we increased 
the antialiasing quality and added Effect > 
Ambient Occlusion (above). We’re pleased 
with our final scene (above left).

396
Appendix 
Perfecting your renders, as well as dealing with other video issues.
 d In This Lesson
 396 
rendering: under the hood
  397 
render templates
  398 
Adobe Media Encoder
  400 
rendering movies;  
rendering sequences
  401 
issues that affect image quality
  403 
flickering
  403 
subpixel positioning
  404 
resampling in action
  405 
non-square pixels
  406 
fields and interlacing
  407 
3:2 pulldown
A
fter you finish creating your masterpiece in After 
Effects, you need to render it out to a file so it  
can be edited into a film or video, or posted to a 
website. We covered basic rendering at the end of Lesson 
1; here we will give you additional advice for other situa-
tions that commonly arise. You can also press ! to open 
the After Effects Help file and scroll to the bottom of that 
introductory page to see a number of render-related topics.
Whenever possible, you should determine your output format 
before starting a project. Then you can build your compositions –  
or at least, your final composition – with this size and frame rate  
in mind. This will ultimately lead to fewer headaches than if you 
later try to conform your work to a different format.
Rendering: Under the Hood
When you are ready to render a composition, make sure that it  
is open with its Comp or Timeline panel selected, or select it in  
the Project panel. Then choose Composition > Add to Render 
Queue; the shortcut is LCm on Mac (Lm on Windows). 
The comp will be added to the Window > Render Queue panel:  
This is where you manage your renders. You can then edit the 
parameters used to render a comp in the Render Queue’s Render 
Settings and Output Module dialogs.
When After Effects renders a composition, two distinct steps  
take place in order:
• A frame is first rendered based on the Render Settings and is  
temporarily stored in RAM. 
• This frame is then saved to disk using the Output Module settings. 
This system means you can have multiple Output Modules per 
composition, saving the same render to different files during a  
single render pass – a great time saver.
d tip
Online Help
More information on rendering and file 
formats is contained in the Adobe Help 
Center: Press ! from inside After Effects 
and use the Search function.
 d Getting Started
Optional: If you’d like to follow along, download 
the file archive for Appendix (as discussed in 
How to Use This Book) and decompress it.  
It contains the project file and sources that  
we used in this chapter.

Render Templates
The parameters that make up Render Settings and the Output Module can be  
saved as templates, making it easy to render other compositions using the same 
 parameters. These templates can be selected from popups in the Render Queue; 
they may also be accessed under the Edit > Templates menu. Default templates 
may be assigned in that menu or by holding C (L) as you select a  template 
in the Render Queue. 
APPENDIX
397
The Render Queue panel, with the Render Progress, Render Settings, and Output Module 
sections all twirled open. To edit the Render Settings and Output Module parameters,  
click on the template name to the right of the words Render Settings or Output Module;  
to change the name of the rendered file and the location where it will be saved, click on 
the file name to the right of Output To.
d tip
Big Windows
The Render Queue panel normally opens 
in the same frame as the Timeline panel, 
which can be a bit cramped. With the 
Render Queue panel selected, press ~  
to temporarily expand it to take up the 
entire Application window. (This trick 
works with any panel.) Many users dock 
the Render Queue into the Composition 
panel’s frame.

Adobe Media Encoder 
There is an alternative to having After Effects render your compositions: Adobe 
Media Encoder (AME for short). Advantages include having it render in the back-
ground while you continue working in After Effects; a wide selection of presets 
for specialized media such as for Blu-ray discs, web video sites, or mobile devices; 
and the ability to automatically upload your renders to the cloud. AME also  
supports some formats such as .mp4 that After Effects no longer supports 
directly. On the downside, AME lacks some of the switches and options offered 
by the After Effects Render Queue, including color management. 
Adobe Media Encoder comes with your Creative Cloud subscription. In  
the past, it used to be installed automatically alongside After Effects; now  
you have to explicitly download it using the Creative Cloud application. Once 
you have done so, there are a few ways to add an After Effects composition to 
the AME Queue:
• Either open or select the desired composition in After Effects and choose 
Composition > Add to Adobe Media Encoder Queue. File > Export > Add to 
Adobe Media Encoder Queue will also work. After a pause, this will open AME, 
with your composition(s) added to its Queue.
Adobe Media Encoder is split into 
two main panels: the Queue along 
the left, and the Presets along the 
right. While encoding, the panel 
below the Queue displays the 
progress for the current source.
APPENDIX
398
d tip
Online Help
For more information on Adobe 
Media Encoder, press ! while 
inside AME to open its online Help 
file. A good overview article with 
links to other resources may be 
found at bit.ly/UsingAME.

• Open AME first, and then either click the Add Source 
button (the + symbol in the upper left corner of the Queue 
panel) or choose File > Add After Effects Composition. 
Select the desired After Effects project, and a dialog will 
open presenting the folders inside that project. You can 
choose your desired composition there.
Once an item has been added to AME’s Queue, you can 
select a Preset for it by clicking on the arrow to the left of 
the preset’s name. AME comes with a long list of presets 
optimized for various combinations of frame sizes, frame 
rates, and desired target data rates. Clicking on the name  
of the preset attached to a Queue item opens a detailed 
Export Settings dialog where you can inspect or customize 
the settings. You can also save your modifications as your 
own preset. 
A single item in the Queue may be output multiple 
times, just like adding multiple Output Modules in the 
After Effects Render Queue. This provides a huge time 
savings for creating several media versions of the same 
source. To add additional outputs, select the item in the 
Queue panel, then double-click the desired preset from the 
list on the right. You can also drag them from the Preset list 
onto your items in the Queue. 
Once you’re ready to encode, click the Play button along 
the top of the Queue panel. AME will keep you apprised of 
its progress in the Encoding panel below.
Note that you can Add movies – not just compositions – 
to the AME Queue. You drag those final movies into AME’s 
Queue and choose the desired presets. Our own workflow 
is to render high-quality movies for archiving or delivery 
using After Effects’ Render Queue, and to use AME for  
web- and device-specific versions. AME also supports a 
“Watch Folder” where it will immediately start encoding 
any new movie that appears in that folder, which auto-
mates this process.
APPENDIX
399
In addition to an extensive list of presets, you can click on a preset’s 
name in the Queue to modify its settings. Absent from this list is the 
ability to override certain settings for a comp, such as whether or  
not to use motion blur – AME relies on the comp’s current settings.

Which Format Should I Render To?
This is one of the most common questions among After Effects users. There is  
no simple answer, but we can give you some guidelines.
Your first choice is always to give the clients what they want. Ask what format 
they would prefer; chances are good that After Effects supports it. This may 
include a QuickTime or AVI movie, or an image sequence.
Movies
QuickTime and AVI come with a set of standard codecs (compressor/decompres-
sors or coder/decoders). Many cameras compress their captures to a specific 
codec, such as HDV or H.264; editors will often want your output in the same 
format so they can easily intercut it with other footage.
If instead you are rendering an element that will be reused inside an After 
Effects project or composited with other footage (or if you want to future-proof 
your archives), you will want to save it using the highest quality format available. 
A common choice used to be QuickTime using the Animation codec with its 
Quality set to 100, but Apple is phasing out support for this codec. Today many 
use a PNG still image sequence (discussed next), or the higher-quality variations 
of GoPro CineForm (Quality set to 3–5) or Apple ProRes (422 HQ or 4444).  
Both CineForm and ProRes 4444 support alpha channels. If you can accept  
some image compression and don’t need an alpha channel, a good alternative  
is H.264: Open its Format Settings, and verify its Profile is set to High and the 
Bitrate values are set to 6 Mbps (Megabits per second) or higher.
Sequences
QuickTime or AVI movies are handy because they wrap up all of the individual 
frames of a movie into a single file. However, there are occasions when an image 
sequence is the better choice. Some 3D software packages and high-end video 
systems (such as Autodesk Flame) prefer sequences. Several options – such as 
TIFF, SGI, or PNG sequences – are lossless, contain data compression to reduce 
the file size, offer alpha channels, and support more bits per color channel. PNG 
sequences are often used as an archival format as they support Trillions of Colors 
and alpha channels, but they can be slow to encode and decode.
To render a sequence, select the desired 
file type from the Format popup at the 
top of the Output Settings dialog; the 
word “Sequence” will follow the file 
type’s name. Each frame will get its  
own number; how many digits used is 
determined by number of # symbols.
APPENDIX
400
d tip
Trillions of Colors
To verify if a codec or file format will  
support 16 bpc color depth, see if Trillions  
is offered as a choice for Depth in the  
Video Output section of the Output Module. 
Don’t forget to also set Color Depth in the 
Render Settings to 16 bits per channel!
Image sequences are a common alternative to movie files. The image number is 
inserted into the [####] at the end of the file’s name when it is saved to disk.
d factoid
Scaling Interlaced Renders
If you have enabled Field Rendering in the 
Render Settings, be careful when using  
the Stretch section in the Output Module: 
Stretching the Height will scramble the  
field order. Altering the Width is okay.

Issues That Affect Image Quality
Delivering a high-quality render to your client is of the utmost 
concern. If you are new to After Effects, however, you may have 
concerns about why pixels appear less than perfect. Here is an 
assortment of potential problems and solutions:
APPENDIX
401
• The image in the Comp panel looks “crunchy.” 
Solution: Check if the Comp panel’s Magnification 
is set to a value other than 100% (150% or 200% 
for HiDPI displays) – numbers that are not a clean 
division of this can look bad. Preferences > Previews 
> Viewer Quality defaults to More Accurate; make 
sure it has not been set to Faster. And remember: 
Magnification affects viewing the Comp panel only 
while working, not rendering.
• The Comp panel is at 100%, but images appear 
“blocky.” Solution: Check that the composition’s 
Resolution is set to Auto or Full. When you render, 
make sure the Resolution popup in Render Settings 
is also set to Full.
• Layers are not moving smoothly, or they look 
aliased when rotated or scaled. Solution: Check that 
the layer’s Quality switch is set to Best (the default), 
which makes layers move smoothly and anti aliases 
them when they are transformed or distorted. 
When you render, make sure the Quality popup  
in Render Settings is also set to Best.
• The layer is set to Best Quality, but you’ve 
applied a blur or distortion effect and it doesn’t 
render smoothly. Solution: Check if the effect offers 
different levels of antialiasing in the Effect Controls 
panel, and if so, set the Antialiasing popup to High. 
(Note that it will also take longer to render.)
• Ray-traced 3D images look “noisy” – especially  
in areas of reflection or transparency. Solution:  
Open Composition Settings > Advanced > Renderer 
> Options and increase the Ray-tracing Quality 
setting until these areas look smooth. The Anti-aliasing 
Filter popup in this same section can also have an  
incremental effect on edges of ray-traced 3D objects.
The default Ray-traced 3D renderer Options setting of  
3 rays (left) often produces visual noise in soft reflections 
as well as around the edges (right); higher settings in a 
range of 8–10 provide acceptable results for most scenes.
When Magnification does not equal a clean value such as 100%, the image  
in the Comp panel can look crunchy (above). This will not affect your final 
render. But if you want higher-quality previews, resize the Comp panel so 
Magnification is a clean value such as 50% or 100%, or verify Preferences  
> Previews > View Quality is set to More Accurate (below), which antialiases 
these viewers at any magnification.

• There is visible “banding” in an 
image where what are supposed to be 
smooth color gradients instead appear 
as bands of distinct color. Solution: 
Click on the “8 bpc” indicator at the 
bottom of the Project panel to open 
the Project Settings, and change  
Color Settings > Depth to 16 bits per 
channel (bpc); also make sure you  
are rendering to a higher bit depth 
(discussed earlier). Alternatively, you may need to add a small amount of noise 
to the image to break up this pattern. The After Effects Help file also contains 
some useful pointers; search for “color basics.”
• The image looks fine in the Comp panel, but looks pixelated in the final 
render, exhibits banding, and otherwise looks yucky. Solution: The render is 
being compressed too heavily. If you have control over the final output speci-
fications, increase the quality or bit rate setting for the codec used. Otherwise, 
someone downstream from you may be compressing it too heavily; some of  
the advice above on reducing banding may help.
• Imported still images look a little softer in After Effects than they do in 
Photoshop or Illustrator. Solution: Create artwork in other programs where  
the width and height are an even number of pixels. See Resampling in Action  
on page 404.
• Images in the Comp panel look fatter or skinnier than they should, and  
circular objects look like eggs. Solution: D1/DV pixels are not square, so this 
could be correct behavior if you have placed a square pixel image into a D1/
DV NTSC or PAL comp. See the Non-Square Pixels section on page 405. Another 
potential issue is you’re viewing a widescreen anamorphic composition or 
footage; if this bothers you, enable the Toggle Pixel Aspect Ratio Correction 
button that resides along the bottom of the viewer.
APPENDIX
402
If alternating horizontal lines appear offset 
from each other (above), you need to 
separate the fields in your source footage 
(discussed later). The images will still appear 
a little crunchy (right), but this is far better 
than combining pixels from two different 
points in time. Clip VPE124 courtesy 
Artbeats.com.
• There are alternating horizontal lines akin 
to comb teeth running through a movie 
in the Comp panel. Solution: The movie 
is interlaced, and you need to separate the 
fields in the Interpret Footage dialog (see 
Fields and Interlacing on page 406). If you 
need to output a progressive frame with no 
fields for the web or other purposes, then 
consider using a third-party effect such as 
Fields Kit from RE:Vision Effects. 
If banding is noticeable in the image (A), 
increase Project Settings > Color Settings  
> Depth to 16 bpc (B). Clip LAB126 
courtesy Artbeats.com.
A
B

APPENDIX
403
If you view your straight-alpha render in a 
QuickTime viewer, you will see just the RGB 
color channels, which include pixels that 
extend beyond the alpha (above). View it 
in the After Effects Footage panel, which 
factors in the alpha channel, and you will  
see that it is actually clean (below).
• Movies in the Comp panel are alternating between sharp and soft. Solution: 
The source movie is interlaced and separated, but the source movie’s frame rate 
may not be in sync with the comp’s frame rate. Select the source in the Project 
panel and open File > Interpret Footage > Main. Then conform the source’s 
frame rate to the correct rate – 29.97 frames per second (fps) for NTSC video,  
25 fps for PAL, and so on. Even if “frame rate from file” says the movie is  
29.97 already, some content is fixed by conforming its Frame Rate to 29.97.  
Yes, sometimes it’s just voodoo...
• You play back a rendered movie on a television monitor and some parts  
are “flickering” slightly. Solution: You may need to selectively blur these 
high-contrast areas.
• You play back a field-rendered movie on a video monitor and the flicker  
is really, really bad. Solution: The field order of the movie may not match  
the hardware chain and the fields therefore may be reversed. Again, see the 
Fields and Interlacing section later in this chapter.
• You render a movie with an alpha channel and when you composite it in  
your editing program, it has a black “fringe.” Solution: Render with a straight 
alpha channel, not the default premultiplied alpha. Or, see if your editing 
program can unmultiply the render.
• You render with an alpha channel and the movie looks really ugly when 
viewed in QuickTime Player. Solution: Congratulations! You successfully  
rendered a straight alpha channel, but QuickTime Player is showing you  
only the RGB channels with the extra “bleed.” Import this movie into your 
editing program – and relax! (This is also discussed in the Rendering with  
an Alpha Channel exercise in Lesson 5, page 162.)
Subpixel Positioning
When a layer is set to Best Quality (the default), it will use subpixel position-
ing; this allows a layer to be positioned using less than one pixel for smoother 
motion. How much less? After Effects resolves to 16 bits of sub pixel resolution, 
so each pixel is divided into 65,536 parts width and height. With that kind  
of resolution, there are more than 4 billion subpixels. Technically speaking, 
that’s known as “a lot.” 
To see the numerical results of this precision, park the current time indica-
tor between two interpolating Position keyframes, select the layer, and press 
CSp (LSp) to open the Position dialog. The dialog will show 
values for the X and Y axes for 2D layers: Numbers to the left of the decimal 
point are the integer values used by Draft Quality, while the fractional numbers 
indicate the subpixels used by Best Quality. 
When Position is interpolating between 
keyframes, check out the current value – 
the subpixel numbers to the right of the 
decimal point are used when the layer is 
set to Best Quality (the default).

APPENDIX
404
The Anchor Point of a layer defaults to its 
center. When the layer is an odd number of 
pixels tall or wide (above), this results in a 
half pixel being used for the Anchor Point 
(below), which can unnecessarily soften the 
image under some circumstances.
When a layer is set to Draft Quality, movement is calculated using whole 
pixels only. While this lets you set up keyframes and preview them more 
quickly, you might find the results a little bumpy. 
In addition to smoother motion, Best Quality also ensures that effects and 
transformations are rendered with full antialiasing. Draft Quality renders 
without antialiasing (this is particularly noticeable with vector artwork such  
as text, shape, and solid layers, or Illustrator sources). 
Resampling in Action
A benefit of Best Quality and subpixel positioning is that layers are antialiased 
(or resampled) when they are transformed. While good antialiasing is desirable 
(especially with distortion effects), the softness that resampling adds can be 
unwanted when you’re just placing, say, a nonmoving image or title created  
in Illustrator or Photoshop in your comp at 100%. 
To avoid this unwanted resampling, we need to understand why and when 
it kicks in. As it happens, After Effects resamples a layer whenever it uses sub-
pixel positioning, and that means whenever the difference between the Anchor 
Point value and Position value is not a whole number. Check out the following 
example comps in Appendix.aep:
• Resample_1: Your layer is even sized, 300 pixels wide by 300 high, which 
places the Anchor Point in the center at 150,150. You place this image in an 
even-sized 640×480 pixel comp and Position it in the center (320,240). The  
difference between 150,150 and 320,240 is a whole number, so the layer does 
not get resampled. Toggle the layer between Draft and Best Quality, and you’ll 
see that there is no change.
• Resample_2: Toggle the layer between Draft and Best, and see 
the image shift and soften slightly. This is because this layer is odd 
sized, 301 pixels wide by 301 high, which places the Anchor Point 
at 150.5,150.5. When it’s positioned in the middle of this even-
sized 640×480 pixel comp, the difference between 150.5,150.5 and 
320,240 is not a whole number, so the layer will be resampled. 
As you can see, you can avoid resampling for nonmoving images 
by creating sources with even sizes in Photoshop or Illustrator. If  
all else fails, you may be able to avoid unnecessary resampling by 
changing the Position of the layer by a half pixel up or down, left 
or right, until the image pops into sharpness.
This resampling issue is completely separate from the previewing, 
antialiasing, and ray-tracing quality issues that may arise with 3D 
layers. We covered those in the Ray-tracer Image Quality and Fast 
Previews sections in Lesson 8.
D Artboard Gotcha
Recent versions of Illustrator added a series of 
Video and Film profiles (templates) for standard 
sizes. One of the benefits of these templates is that 
they include a second artboard (Artboard 2) that is 
much larger than the template size; any layers that 
spill onto the pasteboard are not cropped off when 
you import the file into After Effects as a composi-
tion. Unfortunately, because Artboard 2 is centered 
on a half pixel (for some unknown reason), all 
objects on Artboard 1 render softly in AE. If you 
don’t need to bleed objects onto the pasteboard, 
we recommend you delete Artboard 2. 

Non-Square Pixels
The exercises in this book use square pixels – individual image elements that are 
displayed as wide as they are tall. This matches how computers and high-definition 
televisions display images. However, there are many video formats that use non-
square pixels under the hood. The amount these stored pixels should be stretched 
when shown on a square pixel display is referred to as their pixel aspect ratio (PAR).
To view a non-square pixel composition as square pixels, use its 
Toggle Pixel Aspect Ratio Correction display switch.
APPENDIX
405
The Interpret Footage dialog’s Pixel Aspect Ratio menu determines 
how each source file will be treated throughout After Effects.
A
B
A square pixel comp can be squished to match a particular file 
format’s PAR by using the Resize section of the Output Module.
After Effects can perform the required stretching automat-
ically as long as each source is correctly labeled in its File > 
Interpret Footage settings. It guesses the ratio correctly for 
most formats (a common exception being widescreen versions 
of standard-definition video). If a source is looking abnormally 
skinny or wide, this is the first place to check.
Each composition also has its own PAR. There are two 
primary ways of working: 
• Create the composition at the appropriate square pixel size 
for the format you are working in, such as 1920×1080. If you 
need to render it to a non-square pixel file format, perform 
this scaling in the Render Settings dialog. This has the advan-
tage of letting you view undistorted images while working. 
The downside is it requires footage sources be stretched one 
way when used in a composition and then stretched the other 
way when rendering, resulting in a small loss of image quality.
• Create the composition at the same PAR and dimensions 
as the file format you will be rendering to, such as 1440×1080 
for HDV. This has the advantage of allowing sources in the 
same format to pass all the way through the rendering chain 
unstretched, preserving image quality. The downside is you 
have to view distorted images while working. A workaround 
is to enable the Toggle Pixel Aspect Ratio Correction switch 
along the bottom of the Comp panel.
The Most Common PARs
Anamorphic film 
2:1 (200%)
DVCPRO HD 1080 
3:2 (150%)
DVCPRO HD 720 & HDV  4:3 (133%)
NTSC widescreen video  40:33 (121%)
NTSC 4:3 video  
10:11 (91%)
PAL widescreen video  
119:81 (146%)
PAL 4:3 video  
59:54 (109%)
When viewed without correction, video 
formats can vary from appearing slightly 
wide (A, NTSC) to very skinny (B, HDV). 
Although these two raw frames appear to 
have roughly the same width, image A is 
supposed to have an image aspect ratio  
of 16:9 compared to image B’s 4:3.  
Clip FWR127 courtesy Artbeats.com. 

Fields and Interlacing
Higher frame rates often result in smoother motion. Video 
has a trick known as field rendering to simulate higher frame 
rates. These special frames contain two fields that were 
captured or rendered at different points in time. The two 
fields are then “interlaced” together by taking alternating 
horizontal lines from each, throwing away half of the lines 
in the process.
If you receive interlaced video sources, you want to 
deinterlace these frames to separate them into their source 
fields. This is done in the File > Interpret Footage dialog for 
each source. In general, interlaced high-definition video  
is upper field first; DV is lower field first. NTSC standard-
definition (SD) video is also generally lower, while non-DV 
PAL SD video is upper.
To tell if your sources have interlacing, set Separate Fields 
to Off, and double-click the source to open its Footage 
panel. View at full size and search for movement: Does each 
horizontal line appear to be shifted in relation to those 
above and below it? This is the telltale sign of interlacing. 
Set the footage’s Separate Fields option as just suggested, 
and step through the result a field at a time in the Footage 
panel. If the motion seems normal, you chose correctly; if 
motion seems to jerk back and forth, try the other option.
If your client asks you to deliver interlaced footage,  
this can be done in the Render Settings dialog. In the  
Time Sampling section, set the Field Render menu to match 
your delivery format. This will cause After Effects to render 
each frame twice at slightly different times, creating two 
fields. It will then interlace these fields together to create 
the final frame.
The Penguins.mov source exhibits the telltale “comb teeth” look of 
interlaced footage. Open it in the Footage panel and step through 
it frame by frame. After you separate its fields in Interpret Footage, 
you will be able to step through it field by field. Which field is first? 
That’s your final Quizzler…
Interlacing combines two fields captured at different points in 
time into a single frame (top). These can be separated in the 
Interpret Footage dialog (above).
APPENDIX
406
To field render a composition, change the Field Render menu in its 
Render Settings. Note that you would only do this for video; you 
would never do it for files to be viewed on film or a computer screen.

APPENDIX
407
D 3:2 Pulldown
3:2 Pulldown is a process originally used to convert between 
film – which normally runs at 24 fps (frames per second) –  
and NTSC-rate video, which runs at 29.97 fps. Today, it is 
more common to find video cameras use this to convert a 
filmic capture rate of 23.976 fps to the 29.97 fps that is often 
used for the captured video file.
To make this conversion work, film was slowed down from 
24 to 23.976 fps: the same ratio as between 30 and 29.97. 
Frames of film were then repeated for either two or three  
successive video fields (there are two fields per video frame) 
in a pattern that eventually led to four frames of film – or 
images captured by the camera’s sensor – being spread 
across five frames of video. 
There are several different patterns in use; After Effects 
supports two on input: classic 3:2 Pulldown and 24Pa 
(“advanced” pulldown). Each version can then have several 
different “phases” – namely, where you started in the pattern. 
In the Interpret Footage dialog, there is a Guess button 
for each that helps determine the correct phase. After Effects 
often guesses right, but not always; verify its guess by  
double-clicking the footage item to open it in its Footage 
panel, then step through the resulting frames using • 
and ª (or the Previous Frame and Next Frame buttons 
in the Preview panel). If you see the “comb teeth” pattern  
of interlacing on any frame, After Effects guessed wrong;  
use the Remove Pulldown popup in the Interpret Footage 
panel and manually try different phases until all signs of  
inter lacing disappear.
When it comes time to render, you can reintroduce the 
classic 3:2 Pulldown pattern by following these steps:
• Build your final composition at 23.976 fps. 
• In Render Settings, set Field Render to the choice required 
by your output format (for example, Lower Field First for DV; 
Upper Field First for high def).
• Below Field Render, pick a phase in the 3:2 Pulldown 
popup. If this render is going to video or DVD, any phase  
will do. You need to worry about phase only if your render is 
part of an offline film edit; if so, then make sure the clip lines 
up with the comp’s start point and use the same phase for 
 rendering as you used in the clip’s Interpret Footage dialog.
Film Frames
Video Fields (Advanced)
Video Fields (Standard)
A
A
B
C
D
B
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
D
A
B
B
C
D
A
B
C
C
D
Pulldown is a technique used to spread 4 frames of film 
across 10 fields (five frames) of video.
If your sources have Pulldown, remove it in the Interpret Footage dialog 
(above). Create your comps at 23.976 fps, which is more efficient. Then 
when you render, reintroduce Pulldown in the Render Settings (below).

408
Resources
Some of our favorites places to learn more 
about motion graphics and After Effects.
Credits
Production Credits
Cover & Interior Design
Trish Meyer
Cover Calligraphy
Denis Brown (QuillSkill.com)
Page Layout
Trish Meyer
Copy Editor & Proofreader
Sam Molineaux-Graham
Indexer
Ken DellaPenta
Media Credits
We’d like to thank Julie Hill of 
Artbeats, who provided the 
majority of the footage used in 
this book. Pond5 was also a  
significant contributor, including 
the 3D model used in Lesson 12. 
Additional still images and video 
were provided by iStockphoto,  
12 Inch Design, and Crish Design. 
All music provided by Crish 
Design. For usage rights, refer to 
the license agreements included 
in the downloadable exercise files 
for each lesson. 
Front cover: Fractal imagery 
created using the Trapcode Tao 
effect (available from Red Giant 
Software).
• Our website crishdesign.com, the Crish Design page on Facebook, and our 
Twitter feed @CrishDesign will let you know what we’re up to. Key pages to  
visit include:
facebook.com/CrishDesign/ 
books.crishdesign.com 
onlinetraining.crishdesign.com
• We create training videos for lynda.com. Sign up for a free 10-day trial at:
lynda.com/go/chrisandtrish 
• ProVideo Coalition “brings together the industry’s best writers, bloggers and 
video gurus under one URL.” Check out our PVC blog at: 
provideocoalition.com
• These are some of our favorite forums, websites, and blogs when we need to 
find information about After Effects:
blogs.adobe.com/aftereffects 
adobe.com/support/aftereffects 
subscribe to the AE-LIST at media-motion.tv/ae-list.html
• When you need to feed the other side of your brain, also visit:
motionographer.com 
artofthetitle.com 
motiongraphics.nu
• Here are good sources for scripts and plug-ins (including freebies):
aescripts.com 
motionscript.com 
toolfarm.com 
redgiantsoftware.com

INDEX
409
Numerics
3:2 pulldown, 407
3D Camera Tracker, 275, 298–303, 389–90
3D Layer switch, 230, 231
3D space. See also 3D Views
axis arrows, 231–33
cameras in, 238–41
continuous rasterization in, 231
enabling layers in, 230, 231
extrusion in, 260–61, 358–59
intersecting layers in, 233, 243
layer order in, 232
lights in, 248–53
motion paths, 236–37
moving cameras in, 238–41
moving layers in, 232
multiplaning and, 234–35
perspective, 230, 234–35, 238, 241, 245
rendering breaks, 243
rotation and orientation, 157–58, 232–33
scale and, 231
text animation, 156–61
thickness of layers in, 233, 259
3D Views
Active Camera, 234, 237
Custom, 234
menu, 8, 234
multiple, 237
navigating, 239
orthographic views, 234–35
shortcuts, 234
switching between, 234
A
action safe area, 153
Active Camera, 234, 237
Adaptive Resolution, 262
Add blend mode, 82–83
Add mask mode, 114
Add Vertex tool, 109
Adjust Exposure, 5, 8
adjustment layers
animating, 99
applying effects to, 94–95, 139, 205
blending modes and, 95
creating, 94
filmic glow technique, 95
icon, 94
scaling, 94, 99
Adjustment Lights, 258
Adobe Audition. See Audition
Adobe Bridge. See Bridge
Adobe Illustrator. See Illustrator
Adobe Media Encoder (AME), 398–99
Adobe Photoshop. See Photoshop
Advanced Spill Suppressor effect, 137
Align panel, 31, 181
alpha channels
defined, 21, 23
interpreting type, 7, 23
masks and, 126
mattes and, 126
premultiplied, 7, 23
rendering with, 162–63, 403
stencils and, 126
straight, 7, 23, 403
transparency and, 6
viewing, 6, 163, 403
alpha mattes. See track mattes
Always Preview This View, 5, 8, 10
ambient lights, 249, 257
anchor points
animation, 39, 45, 48–49, 188
defined, 46
image quality and, 404
motion control, 48–49
moving, 46–47
offset, 158–59
Per-character 3D, 158–59
precomps and, 191
rotating around, 158–59
shortcut, 38
in text animation, 151
Anchor Point tool, 3, 47
Angle Control effect, 217
Angle of View, 238, 240
animation. See also animation presets; 
keyframes; text animators
3D, 236–37
anchor point, 39, 45, 48–49, 188
character, 175, 330–33
effect point, 85–86
Hold keyframes, 66
motion control, 48–49
opacity, 39
overshooting, 69
position, 27–28
previewing, 28
Puppet tools, 330–33
rotation, 39
scale, 38
“slam down” style, 66–67
strokes, 311, 356
syncing, to audio, 170–72, 219
text, 140–41, 145, 156–61
track mattes, 131
animation presets
3D text, 161
Adobe-supplied, 90–91, 166
applying, 89–91, 166
Behaviors, 91
creating, 87–88
editing, 167
expressions in, 212, 216
organizing, 89
saving, 89, 168
searching for, 89, 166
for shape layers, 346
text, 161, 166–67
visibility of, 90
working with, 93
animation stopwatch, 9
animator. See text animators
antialiasing, 269, 271, 401, 404;  
see also CINEMA 4D Lite
application window, 2
aspect ratio, pixel, 402, 405
attach point, 282
audio
adding, to comps, 170
basics of, 170
bit depth, 170
Index
animation (continued)
adjustment layers (continued)

INDEX
410
two-node, 242, 244
Unified Camera tool, 239
View options, 234
Zoom value, 238, 240, 246
Camera Type setting, 244
Casts Shadows option, 252–53, 255
CC Glass effect, 388
CC Grid Wipe effect, 138
CC Twister effect, 138
CC Vignette effect, 107
center cut, 153
Channel Blur effect, 301
channels. See alpha channels
character animation, 175, 330–33
Character Animator, 120
Character panel, 12, 141–44, 145
children. See parenting
CINEMA 4D Lite
3D text animation, 377–88
Ambient Occlusion, 371
anti-aliasing, 383
bevels, 368, 379, 384
camera animation, 372–76
camera tracking, 389–95
Content Browser, 368–9
Disc, 392
effectors, 380–2
Extrude object, 367–8, 378–9
Falloff, 380–1
fillets. See bevels
Fracture object, 379
frame rates, 365
full version vs., 361
Help, 363
hotkeys, 366, 368
Illustrator files and, 378
Interactive Render Region, 383
lighting and texturing, 368–71, 383–85
limitations of, 360–61, 365
materials, 369–71, 383–4
MoGraph menu, 379, 380
Multi-Pass, 387–8, 394
Object Buffers, 387–88
Picture Viewer, 394–5
Plain effector, 380–2
previewing, 382
project setup, 363–65
rectangle, 366
render quality, 383
resources for, 361
rotation, 381
Paint, 310
text, inter-character, 167
blurs
Box Blur effect, 353
Camera Lens Blur effect, 247
depth of field, 246–47
face, blurring a, 120
Fast Blur effect, 94–95
motion, 62–63, 147, 283, 284
Pixel Motion Blur effect, 222
Radial Blur effect, 87–88, 110
for reflections, 267
for text, 147, 154
Boris Beat Reactor, 219
Boris FX Continuum Complete, 97
Box Blur effect, 353
Bridge, 4, 166
Bring Comp Panel Forward, 9, 10
Bring Timeline Forward, 8
Brush Duration Bar, 310
Brushes panel, 12, 307
Brush strokes. See strokes
Brush tool, 3, 307, 308–10
buttons, creating, 341
C
caching, 16, 19
calligraphy tools, creating textures with, 313
Camera Lens Blur effect, 247
cameras
3D Camera Tracker, 275, 298–303, 305
Active Camera view, 234, 237
adding, 238
Angle of View, 238, 240
auto-orientation, 244–45
CINEMA 4D Lite, 372–3, 375, 386, 391
depth of field, 238, 240, 246–47
field of view, 238, 240
f-stop, 240
moving, 238–41, 372–76
multiple, 237, 273
one-node, 244
Orbit Camera Null, 243
Orbit Camera tools, 239
Point of Interest, 238
Position, 238
rigs, 242–43, 273
settings, 238, 240, 246
shake, 276
tools, 3, 239
Track Camera tools, 239
distortion, 172, 173
Guide Layers, 173
importing, 170
mixing, 172–73
muting, 19
previewing, 19, 170
sample rate, 170
stuttering, 19
syncing to, 170–72, 219
turning on/off, 170
volume controls, 11, 172–73
waveforms, 171
Audio panel, 11, 172, 173
Audio Spectrum effect, 117
Audio Waveform effect, 117
Audition, 170
Auto Bezier keyframe, 36, 37, 54, 64
Auto-Orientation, 37, 62, 244–45
Auto Save, 22
A/V Features column, 9
axis arrows in 3D, 231–33
B
backgrounds
stencils and, 133, 138
textures for, 313
banding, 376, 402
Base Frame, 318, 320–22
baseline shift, 141
Beauty Box effect, 97
Behavior presets, 91
Bevel Alpha effect, 33
Bevel and Emboss style, 93, 341
bevels (3D)
Bevel Depth, 261
Bevel Style, 261
Bezier handles, 36, 37, 45, 58
Bezier masking, 108–9
Bezier paths
converting to, 344
drawing, 342–43
editing, 343
text layers to shape layers with, 345
Bicubic sampling, 98
Bilinear sampling, 98
bit depth, 170, 400, 402
blending modes
for 3D layers, 301
defined, 82
effects and, 84–86
overview, 82–83
blending modes (continued)
cameras (continued)
audio (continued)

INDEX
411
shadows, 392–94
text, 376
Timeline window, 382
Updates, 363
user interface, 362
videowall, creating, 366–76
CINEMA 4D renderer
pros and cons of, 271
Ray-traced 3D renderer vs., 270–71
settings, 271
CINEWARE, 360, 361, 374–75, 386–87, 388, 391
Classic 3D renderer, 156, 232, 259, 301
Clone Stamp tool, 3, 307, 315–16
cloning, 315–16
codecs, 400
Collapse Transformations, 202–3
color decontamination, 326, 327
color depth, setting, 400
Color Dodge mode, 84–85
Color mode, in Paint, 310
colors, in Info panel, 11
“comb teeth” artifacts, 402, 406, 407
comments, 171
Comp Flowchart, 8
Comp Marker Bin, 9
comp markers, 172
Composite on Original option, 117
Compositing Options, 110
Composition Mini-Flowchart, 9, 185
Composition (Comp) panel
3D views and, 253
basics of, 8
degraded image in, 8, 401, 403
managing, 28
navigating composition hierarchies, 185
Options menu, 8
switches in, 8
zooming in, 8, 28
compositions. See also Composition panel; 
nesting compositions; precomps
audio, adding to, 170
basics of, 20–21
building, 25–29
closing, 87
creating, 24
duplicating, 186
footage, adding to, 1, 20, 34, 46
foreground layers, adding to, 29
guides, 180
importing layered files as, 42–43
locking, 198–99
looping, 229
multiple cameras in, 273
multiple views of, 237
naming, 24
navigating hierarchies of, 185
previewing, 16, 18–19
render order issues, 195
rulers, 180
safe areas, 153
settings, 24
in the Timeline panel, 9
trimming, to work area, 17
compound effects, 204–5
comps. See compositions
Continuous Bezier keyframe, 37
continuous rasterization, 66, 141, 200–201, 231
contrast
Levels effect for, 82–83
luma mattes and, 130
Convert Audio to Keyframes, 219
Convert Vertex Point tool, 108
copying and pasting
effects, 32–33
keyframes, 67
Copy with Property Links, 96–97, 218
Copy with Relative Property Links, 97
Corner Pin effect, 294
Create Shapes from Text, 345
Create Shapes from Vector Layer, 357
Creative Cloud, xii, 141
crossfades, 74–76, 221, 313
crosshairs, creating, 350–51
CUDA, xii–xiii, 259
current time indicator (CTI), 18
Cycle Mask Colors, 101
D
D1 video format, 402
Darken mask mode, 114
Delete Vertex tool, 109
depth of field, 238, 240, 246–47
Difference mask mode, 115
Diffuse, 250, 251
Digital Anarchy, 97
dissolves, 75
Draft 3D switch, 9, 272
Drop Frame timecode, 68
Drop Shadow effect, 33, 96–97, 105, 106, 
129, 139, 183, 209, 341
Duration, 24
DV, 68, 402
E
Ease High/Low, 159–61
Easy Ease assistant, 29, 53, 54
Edge Detection, 323
Edit This/Look At That (ETLAT) technique, 
189, 198–99
Effect Controls panel, 12, 80, 87–88,  
189, 199
effect points, 84, 85–86, 288
effects
adjustment layers, 94–95, 139, 205
Advanced Spill Suppressor, 137
Angle Control, 217
applying, 32–33, 80–81, 84–86, 87–88
Audio Spectrum, 117
Audio Waveform, 117
Bevel Alpha, 33
blending modes and, 84–86
Beauty Box, 97
Box Blur, 353
Camera Lens Blur, 247
categories of, 80
CC Glass, 388
CC Grid Wipe, 138
CC Twister, 138
CC Vignette, 107
Channel Blur, 301
Compositing Options, 110
compound, 204–5
Continuum Complete, 97
copying and pasting, 32–33, 96–97
Corner Pin, 294
disabling, 81
Drop Shadow, 33, 96–97, 105, 106,  
129, 139, 183, 209, 341
Effect Controls panel, 12
Element 3D, 360–1
enabling, 81
Expression Controls, 217–18
Fast Blur, 94–95
Fill, 96–97, 117
Invigorator Pro, 97, 360–1
Key Cleaner, 136–37
Keylight, 134–36
Lens Flare, 84–86
Levels, 83
Lightning, 229, 305
Linear Wipe, 138, 169
Magic Bullet Suite, 97
masks and, 105, 110, 113, 139
mattes and, 129, 139
compositions (continued)
CINEMA 4D Lite (continued)

INDEX
412
Mosaic, 120
Optics Compensation, 298
Paint, 307–16
Paint & Stick, 316
parenting and, 175, 177
Pixel Motion Blur, 222
Point Control, 218
presets. See Animation Presets
ProAnimator, 97. 360–1
property links with, 96–97
Puppet, 332
Radial Blur, 87–88, 110
Radial Wipe, 212
Radio Waves, 288–90
RE:Flex, 97
render order of, 81, 196, 332
Rolling Shutter Repair, 304
Roto Brush, 306, 317–29
Roughen Edges, 313
Sapphire, 97
Scribble, 113, 117
searching for, 87
Shadow/Highlight, 121
Shape, 340–41
Slider Control, 217
stencils and, 132–33, 139
Stereo Mixer, 172, 173
Stroke, 117
third-party, 97
Timewarp, 221
Tint, 88, 89, 110, 139
tracking and, 288–90
Transform, 98, 388
Tritone, 83, 95
Turbulent Displace, 131, 133, 138
Twixtor, 97
Vegas, 117
Venetian Blinds, 138
viewing parameters, 12
Warp, 191, 205
Warp Stabilizer VFX, 275, 276–81
Effects & Presets panel, 12, 87, 89
Element 3D, 360–1
Ellipse tool, 102, 107
Enable Frame Blending, 9, 220–21
Enable Motion Blur, 9, 62–63, 147
environment layers, 268
Eraser tool, 3, 307, 309
ETLAT (Edit This/Look At That), 189, 198–99
Expression Controls, 217–18
expressions
advantages of, 175
in animation presets, 212, 216
copying and pasting, 214
creating, with pick whip, 206, 208–9
defined, 175, 206
deleting, 215
disabling, 215
editing, 215
language menu, 213
linear, 211–13
looping, 214–15
parenting vs., 208
resources on, 229
and simple math, 209–10
wiggle, 216, 229
Extract Work Area, 17
eyeball icon, 50, 52
F
face, blurring, 120
Face Tracking, 120–21
fades, cross-, 74–76, 221, 313
Falloff, Light, 256–57, 258
Fast Blur effect, 94–95
Fast Previews, 8, 259, 262
feathering masks, 105, 122–25
feature regions, 282
fields
flicker, 403
rendering with, 400, 406, 407
separating, 402
file format support, 21
File Import dialog, 4
files. See footage
Fill effect, 96–97, 117
film frame rates, 68, 407
filmic glow technique, 95
First Vertex Point, 111
flicker, 249, 403
Flicker Free tool, 97
folders
creating new, 4, 22
deselecting, 22
importing, 23
renaming, 22
fonts, xii, 141, 143, 377
footage
adding, to composition, 1, 20, 34, 46
alpha channels, 23
converting to layered comp, 43
defined, 1, 20
importing, 4, 23, 42–43
inspecting, 5
interlaced, 288, 406
looping, 77
pointers to, 1
selecting, in Project panel, 3–4
stabilizing, 274–81, 284–85
trimming, 72–73, 76
varispeeding, 226–28
Footage panel, 5, 73, 403
Frame Blending, 220–21
frame rates
common (including film, NTSC, and PAL), 68
conforming, 79, 403
Preserve Frame Rate, 223–24
pulldown, 407
stop motion, 223
frames. See also panels
defined, 2
resizing, 12, 13
Free Transform mode, 343
Free Transform Points, 104, 106
freeze frames, 225
f-stop, 240
G
garbage mattes, 134
GenArts Sapphire effects, 97
gradients, 350–51
Graph Editor
display, 9, 51
editing graphs, 45, 53–55
opening, 9, 50, 227
panning and zooming time, 52
Separate Dimensions in, 56–59
Speed Graphs, 52, 54, 64–65
Value Graphs, 51, 52, 57, 58
graphic safe area, 153
greenscreen, 134–37
grids, viewing, 5, 8, 10, 31
grouping. See expressions; nesting 
compositions; parenting; precomps
Grouping Alignment parameter, 153
guides, 5, 8, 10, 31, 180
H
H.264, 400
Hand tool, 3, 28
Help page, 1, 396
hicon (high contrast) mattes, 130
Hide Shy Layers, 9
footage (continued)
effects (continued)

INDEX
413
keyframes. See also motion paths
adding, 27
animation, 27
Auto Bezier, 36, 37, 54, 117
basics of, 21, 27–28, 44–45
Bezier handles, 36, 37, 45, 58
changing position, 28
changing timing, 28
changing type, 54, 64
Continuous Bezier, 37
coordinating, 55
copying and pasting, 67
deleting, 29
editing multiple, 53–54
enabling, 27
Hold, 66–67, 69
influence of, 44
interpolation between, 44
Linear, 37, 54
looping, 214–15
masks and, 107, 117
navigation arrows, 28
roving, 64–65
Separate Dimensions, 56–59
spatial, 37, 45
speed curves, 64–65
stretching/compressing, in time, 63, 79
temporal, 45, 117
time-reversing, 65
velocity of, 44
keying, 101, 134–37
Keylight effect, 134–36
L
layer markers, 171–72
Layer panel
anchor points, 46–47
basics of, 10
display modes, 326
docking, 279
masking in, 104–5
opening, 10
Render checkbox in, 10
tracking in, 279
trimming layers in, 73
View popup in, 10
layers. See also adjustment layers
2D, 231
3D, 230, 231–33
adding, to comps, 1, 34
adding foreground, 29
bending, 263, 273
compositions, creating new, 24, 187
compositions, duplicating, 186
context-click, xiii–xiv
Easy Ease keyframe assistant, 53, 54
Effect Controls panel, 12, 189
Enter versus Return, xiv
After Effects Help, 1, 396
Fast Previews modes, 262
footage, importing, 23
frame, maximize size, 12
Free Transform Points, 104, 106
Hold keyframe, 66
Import File dialog, 77, 78
laptops, for users of, 72
layer markers, 171
layers, selecting all, 50
layers, trimming, 72
Look at Layers, 242
mask, 101, 102
nudging position, 40
nudging rotation, 40
nudging scale, 40, 49
Opacity property, 38
Pan Behind tool, 47, 74
panning, 279
Pen tool, 86, 101, 116, 125
Position property, 38
previewing, 18–19
project, saving, 22
properties, revealing, 45
right-click, xiii–xiv
Rotate tool, 26, 38
ruler, 180
Scale property, 38
Selection tool, 26
Timeline panel, 12
transformations, 38
trimming layers, 72
Work Area Bar, 17
zooming, 28, 279
Key Cleaner effect, 136–37
keyframe assistants
accessing, 55
Convert Audio to Keyframes, 219
Easy Ease, 29, 53–54
Mask Interpolation, 112
Motion Sketch, 60–61, 99
Sequence Layers, 75–76
Smoother, 61
Time-Reverse, 65
Keyframe Interpolation dialog, 65
HiDPI displays, xiii
Hold keyframes, 66–67, 69
Horizontal Type tool, 142
I
Illustrator
artboards in, 404
importing from, 42–43
layers in, 42–43
masks and, 130
stencils and, 133
text in, 43, 378
image quality, 269, 401–4
Import As popup menu, 42
Import File dialog, 77, 78
importing
audio, 170
as composition, 42–43
folders, 23
footage files, 4, 23
Illustrator files, 42–43
image sequences, 78
Photoshop files, 42–43, 82–83
Index of Refraction, 265, 359
Info panel, 11
Inner Shadow style, 341
in points, 72
“Instant Sex” technique. See filmic glow
Inter-Character Blending, 167
interlacing, 288, 406
interpolation
animated mask shapes, 117
between keyframes, 44
Interpret Footage dialog, 3, 6, 23, 68, 77,  
79, 405, 407
intersecting, in 3D, 233, 243
Intersect mask mode, 115
J
JavaScript. See expressions
K
kerning, 141, 143–44
keyboard shortcuts
3D Views, 234
Add to Render Queue, 396
Anchor Point property, 38
audio waveform, 171
auto-orientation, 62
Brush tool, 308
CINEMA 4D Lite, 368
comp markers, 171
keyboard shortcuts (continued)

INDEX
414
constraining movement of, 26
continuously rasterized, 200–201, 231
defined, 1, 20
duplicating and replacing, 30
environment, 268
in Illustrator, 42–43
in points, 72
in the Layer panel, 10
luminance, 139
in mattes, 139
moving, in time, 71–72
multiple, arranging, 31
order of, 20, 70–71, 232
out points, 72
parenting, 174–75
in Photoshop, 42–43, 169
precomposing, 190–91, 192–93
reflecting, 266–68
revealing, with Paint, 312–14
selecting all, 50
sequencing, 75–76
size of, 21
sliding, 72
slipping, 74
snapping, 25, 31
soloing, 76
splitting, 72
trimming, 72–73, 76
layer styles
applying, 93
Bevel and Emboss, 93, 341
importing Photoshop files with, 43, 82–83
Inner Shadow, 129, 341
Outer Glow, 93, 353
uses for, 92, 341
leading, 141
Leave All Attributes option, 192, 196, 197
Lens Flare effect, 84–86
Levels effect, 83
Lift Work Area, 17
Lighten mask mode, 114
Lightning effect, 229, 305
lights (3D)
adding, 248–49
Adjustment Lights, 258
animating, 248–49
default settings, 257
editing settings for, 248
falloff, 256–57, 258
flickering, 249
shadows and, 252–53
types of, 248–49
Light Transmission, 253, 254–55
Linear Dodge mode, 85
Linear keyframe, 37, 54
Linear Wipe effect, 138, 169
Local Axis Mode, 3
Lock and Snap to Guides, 180
Lock switch, 184, 189, 198–99, 248
Lock to Zoom, 246
looping
compositions, 229
footage, 77
keyframes, 214–15
Loop options, 11
luminance (luma) mattes. See track mattes
M
Magic Bullet Suite, 97
Magnification, 8, 10, 28, 401
markers, 171–72
Mask Feather tool, 122–25
Mask Interpolation keyframe assistant, 112
masks (masking)
adding points, 109, 117
alpha channel and, 126
animating, 106
Bezier, 108–9
closed, 109
colors, 101
creating, 103, 104–5
defined, 100–101
deleting points, 109, 117
editing, 104, 109
effects and, 105, 110, 113, 139
Expansion, 107, 122–23
Face Tracking, 120–21
Feather, 105, 122–25
First Vertex Point, 111
Free Transform Points, 104, 106
greenscreen and, 134–36
interpolating between, 111
keyframes and, 117
in Layer panel, 104–5
Mask Path parameter, 106, 107
modes, 114–15
multiple, 114–15
opacity, 107, 114, 115
with Pen tool, 108–9
render order, 194–95
Rigid Mask Tracker, 118–19
RotoBezier, 116–17
Scribble effect and, 113
selecting all points on, 108
selecting single point on, 108
shapes vs., 103, 336
shortcuts, 101, 125
softening edges of, 105
tools for, 102–3, 107, 108
tracing outlines of, 108–9
turning off/hiding, 115, 116
variable mask feathering, 122–25
vignettes with, 107
Material Options, 250–51
mattes. See track mattes
MAXON. See CINEMA 4D Lite
Merge Paths, 345, 348–49
Mesh, Puppet, 330, 334–35
Metal, 251
Mini-Flowchart, 9, 185
mocha AE CC
planar tracking with, 275, 291–94
Shape feature, 118, 295–97
modes. See blending modes
Mosaic effect, 120
motion blur
applying, 62–63
enabling, 59, 62, 63, 147
Pixel Motion Blur effect, 222
Render Settings, 63
Shutter Angle, 62, 63
tracking and, 283, 284
motion control, 48–49
Motion Damping, 323
motion paths
creating, 35–37
defined, 27
for effect point, 85–86
moving, 49
smoothing, 61
tracing, with mouse, 60–61
Motion Sketch keyframe assistant, 60–61, 99
Motion Threshold, 323
motion tracking. See tracking
Move All Attributes option, 190, 196
movies
codecs, 400
image sequences, 78–79
looping, 77
rendering, 40, 400
trimming clips, 72–73
multiplaning, 234–35
Multiply mode, 82, 83
lights (3D) (continued)
masks (continued)
layers (continued)

INDEX
415
music. See audio
Mute Audio, 11
Muybridge, Eadweard, 99
N
navigating in time, shortcuts, 72
nesting compositions. See also precomps
advantages of, 129, 175, 180, 184
with common source, 184–89
described, 175, 180–82
render order and, 196–97
track mattes, 128–29
New Comp, 3
New Folder, 3
Non-Drop Frame timecode, 68
NTSC video, 68
null objects
for 3D Camera Tracker, 300
for camera rig, 243
changing size of, 178
defined, 178
for master controllers, 218
parenting with, 178
NVIDIA, xii–xiii, 259
O
Object Buffers, 387–88
opacity. See also alpha channels
animating, 39
Mask Opacity, 107, 114, 115
shortcut, 38
Open New Composition option, 196
Optics Compensation effect, 298
Options menu, 3, 10, 13
orbit camera rig, 242–43
Orbit Camera tool, 239
orthographic views, 234–35
Outer Glow, 93, 353
out points, 72
Output Module Settings, 162–63, 396–97
Overlay Edit, 5, 73
Overlay mode, 83
overshooting, 69
P
padlock icon, 189
Paint. See also strokes
basics of, 306, 307–11
blending modes, 310
Channels, 309
erasing, 309
order of strokes, 310
panel, 12, 307
revealing layers with, 312–14
tablet settings, 314
PAL, 68
Pan Behind tool, 3, 74
Panel Group Settings, 15
panels. See also individual panels
closing, 13
converting, into floating windows, 14
defined, 2
dragging, 14
locking, 189
maximizing, 12, 397
Options menu, 13
stacked, 13, 15
types of, 2–5, 8–12
undocking, 14
panning
in 3D, 234–35
in the Graph Editor, 52
Pan Behind tool, 3, 47, 74
panoramas, 268
PAR. See pixel aspect ratios
Paragraph panel, 12, 141, 142, 144, 145
paragraph text, 141
parenting
chains, 175, 178–79
character animation, 175
defined, 174–75
effects and, 175, 177
expressions vs., 208
with nulls, 178–79
opacity and, 177
scaling and, 179
setting up, 176–77
Pen tool, 3, 86, 101, 102, 108–9, 125, 337, 
342–43, 351
Per-character 3D animation, 156–61
perspective, 230, 234–35, 238, 241, 245
Photoshop
importing from, 42–43, 82–83
Layer styles in, 82–83
Text Layers, 43, 169
pick whip tool
expressions, 206, 208–9
parenting, 176
pixel aspect ratios, 402, 405
Pixel Motion, 221, 304
Pixel Motion Blur, 222
Play/Pause, 11
Point Control, 218
Point lights, 248, 249
Point of Interest, 238
point text, 141, 142
Polygon tool, 102
Polystar, 339, 344
Position property
anchor point and, 48–49
animating, 27–28
nudging, 40
in shape layers, 338
shortcut, 38
precomps
advantages of, 175, 192
anchor points and, 191
defined, 175, 182
editing, 182
of groups of layers, 190–91
Leave All Attributes option, 192, 196, 197
Move All Attributes option, 190, 196
navigating hierarchies of, 185
opening, 10, 182
Open New Composition option, 196
render order and, 196–97
of single layers, 192–93
size of, 187
preferences, xi, xiv
Preserve Frame Rate, 223–24
previewing
animation, 28
audio, 19, 170
caching and, 16, 19
customizing, 18–19
Fast Previews, 8, 259, 262
first time, 16
full screen, 19
individual layers, 76
options, 11
shortcuts, 18–19
starting, 18
stopping, 18
Preview panel, 11, 19
Preview Time, 8, 10
Primary Viewer Toggle, 5
ProAnimator, 97, 360–1
project files, xi–xii
Project Flowchart View, 3
Project panel, 3–4, 25, 34
projects
creating, 22, 50
footage in, 1, 4
moving, 1
organizing, 4
Paint (continued)

INDEX
416
saving, 22
Project Settings, 3, 68
property links, 96–97, 218
public domain, 356
Pucker & Bloat, 340, 341
pulldown, 407
Puppet tool
basics of, 306, 330
deforming multiple shapes, 334–35
Mesh, 330, 334–35
Puppet Overlap, 332
Puppet Pin, 3, 330–31, 334–35
Puppet Starch, 333
recording animation, 333
Q
Quality (Best/Draft), 401, 403–4
Quality and Sampling switch, 98
QuickSearch box, 9, 12
QuickTime, 400, 403
R
Radial Blur effect, 87–88, 110
Radial Wipe effect, 212
Radio Waves effect, 288–90
Randomize Order, 149
Range Selectors, 146, 164
Ray-traced 3D renderer
3D Camera Tracker and, 301, 305
bending layers, 263, 273
beveling, 261
CINEMA 4D renderer vs., 270–71
Classic 3D renderer vs., 232, 259, 301
environment layers, 268
extrusion, 260–61, 358–59
Fast Previews, 262
hardware for, xii–xiii, 261
image quality, 269, 401
reflections, 266–68
shape layers and, 358–59
transparency, 264–65
Rectangle tool, 102, 103
Red Giant Magic Bullet Suite, 97
Refine Edge tool, 328–29
Refine Matte, 319, 326–27
Reflection Intensity, 359
reflections, 266–68
refraction. See Index of Refraction
Region of Interest, 5, 8, 10
Render checkbox, 10
rendering. See also render order;  
Render Settings
3:2 pulldown, 407
with alpha channel, 162–63
basics of, 40–41, 396
breaks, 3D, 243
with CINEMA 4D Lite, 383
fields, 400, 406
format for, 400
image sequences, 400
movies, 40, 400
path for rendered file, 40
quality, 376, 401–4
quality, 3D, 383
stopping, 41
templates, 397
render order
2D vs. 3D, 243
breaks, render, 243
default, 194–95
of effects, 196
exceptions, 200–205
precomps and, 196–97
solving issues of, 195–97
Render Queue panel, 40–41, 162–63,  
397, 407
Render Settings
3:2 pulldown options, 407
color depth, 400
default, 40
interlaced footage, 406
motion blur options, 63
templates, 397
Repeater, 346–47, 353
resampling, 404
Reset Exposure, 5, 8
Resolution, 8
Retina displays, xiii
Reverse and Reversible Stabilization, 279–81
RE:Vision Effects, 97
Rigid Mask Tracker, 118–19
Ripple Edit, 73
Ripple Insert Edit, 5
Rolling Shutter Repair effect, 304
Rolling Shutter Ripple, 278
rotation
3D, 157–58, 233
animating, 39, 47
auto-orientation, 62
editing, 26
Graph Editor, 53
HPB vs. XYZ, 381
nudging, 40
Rotate tool, 3, 26
shortcut, 38
RotoBezier masks, 116–17
Roto Brush
Base Frame, 318, 320–22
basics of, 306, 317–19
common mistakes with, 327
corrections, 324–25
propagation, 318, 322–23
Refine Edge tool, 328–29
Refine Matte, 319, 326–27
Span, 318, 319
strokes, 321, 322, 324, 325
workflow for, 320
rotoscoping, 295–97, 317
Roughen Edges effect, 313
Rounded Rectangle tool, 102, 103
rulers, 31, 180
S
safe areas, 153
sample rate, 170
scale
3D layer, 231
above 100%, 66, 141, 179, 201, 231
animating, 38, 47
continuous rasterization and, 66, 141,  
201, 231
nudging, 40, 49
parenting and, 179
scrubbing, 38
shortcut, 38
Screen mode, 82
Scribble effect, 113, 117
scrubbing
controlling amounts, 39
defined, 26
Search Radius, 322–23
search regions, 282
Segmentation Boundary, 318–28
Selection tool, 3, 26
Select View Layout menu, 8
Separate Dimensions, 45, 56–59
Sequence Layers assistant, 75–76
shadow catcher, 302–3, 392–4
Shadow Darkness, 253
Shadow Diffusion, 253, 255
Shadow/Highlight effect, 121
projects (continued)
rotation (continued)

INDEX
417
Shadow Only option, 253
shadows
3D lights and, 252–55
in CINEMA 4D, 392–94
colors projected by, 254–55
Drop Shadow effect, 33, 96–97, 105, 106, 
129, 139, 183, 209, 341
Inner Shadow style, 129
shape layers
animation presets for, 346
creating, 102, 336–37
editing, 337–38
extruding, 358–59
Fill and Stroke settings, 336–37, 339
Gradient Editor, 350–51
masks vs., 103, 336
multiple paths, 338–39
pen-based, 342–43
reshaping, while drawing, 337
shape effects (operators), 340–41
stroked paths, 354–56
from text layers, 345
transforming, 342, 343
from vector layers, 357
Shape tools, 3, 102, 336–37
Share View Options, 262
Shininess. See Specular Shininess
shortcut keys. See keyboard shortcuts
Show Channel and Color Management 
Settings, 5, 8, 10
Show Last Snapshot, 5, 8, 10
Show Planar Grid, 293
Show Reference Graph, 50
Shutter Angle, 62, 63
Silhouette Alpha mode, 133
Silhouette Luma mode, 132
Skew, 341
“slam down” technique, 66–67
Slider Control effect, 217
slip editing, 74
slow motion, 225
Small Tabs, 15
Smoother keyframe assistant, 61
SMPTE timecode, 68
Snapping, 25, 31
Solid Color dialog, 84
solids
applying effects to, 84–86
black, uses of, 84
changing size of, 86
creating, 32, 40
defined, 32
reusing, 40
Solo Panel in Group, 15
Solo switch, 76
sound. See audio
Sound Keys, 97
Source Text, 168
speaker icon, 170
Specular Intensity, 250, 251
Specular Shininess, 250–51
Speed Graphs, 52, 54, 64–65
Spot lights, 248, 249
stabilization
point-based (legacy), 275, 281, 284–85
reverse and reversible, 279–81
Warp Stabilizer VFX, 275, 276–81
Stacked Panel Groups, 15
Star tool, 102
Stencil Alpha mode, 133
Stencil Luma mode, 132
stencils
alpha, 133
alpha channel and, 126
backgrounds and, 133, 138
creating, 132–33
defined, 101
effects and, 132–33, 139
luma, 132
track mattes vs., 101, 132
Stereo Mixer effect, 172, 173
still images
bending layers, 263
sequences of, 78–79, 400
stop motion tricks, 223–24
stopwatch. See animation stopwatch
Stretch Factor, 365
Stroke effect, 117
strokes. See also Paint; Roto Brush
animating, 311, 356
duration of, 310
erasing, 309
naming, 311
paths, 354–56
replacing, 316
transforming, 316
subpixel positioning, 283, 403–4
Subtract mask mode, 114
Switches/Modes columns, 82
Synthesize Edges, 278, 279
system requirements, xii–xiii
T
tablet settings, 314
Take Snapshot, 5, 8, 10
templates. See rendering
text
3D, 260–61, 302–3, 377–88
animating, 140–41, 145, 156–61, 377–88 
(see also text animators)
bars, 341
baseline shift, 141
basics of, 141–42
beveling, 261
blurred, 147, 154
cascading, 149–51
creating, 141–42
on a curve, 155
deforming, 334–35
editing mode, 142, 143
extruding, 260–61
fading, 151
horizontal/vertical, 142
kerning, 141
layer mode, 142–43
leading, 141
overlapping, 167
paragraph, 141
on a path, 155
Per-character 3D, 156–61
Photoshop integration, 43, 169
point, 141, 142
selecting, 140–41, 146
shape layers from, 345
title safe area, 153
tracking, 141, 154
transparent, 264–65
typesetting tips, 145
wiggling, 161–62
text animation presets, 161, 166–68
text animators
adding more properties, 147–48
Anchor Points and, 151
based on words, 152–53
creating, 147
motion blur for, 147
multiple, 165
overview, 145
Randomize Order, 149
Range Selectors, 146, 164
renaming, 164
setting text for, 145
Wiggly Selector, 161–62
solids (continued)

INDEX
418
time
current, 9
display modes, 68
panning and zooming, in Graph Editor, 52
preview, 8, 10
Time Display, 9
Timeline panel
adding layers in, 34
basics of, 9
frame count in, 363
layers in, 71
Quality and Sampling switch in, 98
reordering columns in, 9, 25
trimming layers in, 72, 76
time remapping, 225–28
Time-Reverse Keyframes assistant, 65
Time Stretch, 79, 220
Timewarp effect, 221
Tint effect, 88, 89, 110, 139
titles. See text
title safe area, 153
Toggle Alpha Boundary, 326
Toggle Hold Keyframes, 66, 67
Toggle Mask and Shape Path Visibility, 8, 354
Toggle Pixel Aspect Ratio Correction, 5, 8, 
10, 402, 405
Toggle Transparency Grid, 5, 6, 8, 10, 162
Toggle Viewer Lock, 5, 8, 10, 12
Toggle View icon, 367
Tools panel (toolbar), 3
Track Camera tools, 239
Tracker panel, 275, 276, 282
Track Fields, 288
tracking (motion). See also stabilization
3D Camera Tracker, 275, 298–303, 305
basics of, 274–75
channels for, 289
for effects, 288–90
Face Tracking, 120–21
fixing bad, 285
interlaced footage, 288
mocha AE CC, 291–7
multiple features, 275
multiple tracks, 290
planar, with mocha AE CC, 291–97
point-based (legacy), 275, 281–85,  
286–87
Rigid Mask Tracker, 118–19
tracking (text), 141, 143, 154
track mattes
alpha, 101, 126–27
animating, 131
combining masks and, 126
creating, 126–27, 130
defined, 101
effects and, 129, 139
hicon (high contrast), 130
luminance (luma), 101, 130, 139
nesting with, 128–29
stencils vs., 101, 132
uses for, 126
track points
creating, 282
positioning, 286
size, 299
Transform effect, 98, 388
Transform properties
editing, 26
resetting, 45
shortcuts, 38
transparency, 6, 264–65. See also alpha 
channels; keying; masks; opacity;  
stencils; track mattes
Transparency Grid. See Toggle  
Transparency Grid
Trapcode Sound Keys, 219
Trapcode Suite, 97
Trapcode Tao, 408
Trim Comp to Work Area, 17
trimming layers, 72–73, 76
Trim Paths, 340
Tritone effect, 83, 95
Turbulent Displace effect, 131, 133, 138
“twirling down/up,” 9, 26
Twist, 340, 341
Twixtor, 97, 221
Typekit, xii, 141, 169
Type tool, 3, 140, 142, 143, 144
U
upsampling, 98
upscaling, 98
Use Alternate Color Estimation, 323
Use Contrasting Color for Mask, 101
user interface, 2–5, 8–12
V
Value Graphs, 51, 52, 57, 58
variable mask feathering, 122–25
vector layers, creating shapes from, 357
Vegas effect, 117
Venetian Blinds effect, 138
Vertical Type tool, 142
video. See also footage
bending layers, 263
frame rates, 68
interlaced, 288, 406
pixel aspect ratio, 405
safe areas, 153
Video Copilot 3D software, 360–1
Video switch, 81, 90, 98
videowall, creating, 366–76
View Axis Mode, 3
Viewer dropdown menu, 10, 12
View popup, 10
vignettes, 107, 249, 371
volume controls, 11, 172–73
W
Wacom tablet, 314
Warp effect, 191, 205
Warp Stabilizer VFX, 275, 276–81
waveforms, 171
wiggle expression, 216, 229
Wiggle Paths, 341
Wigglerama behavior, 91
Wiggle Transform, 341, 347, 352–53
Wiggly Selector, 161–62
Work Area Bar, 17
workspaces
currently active, 13
defined, 2
managing, 13–14
resetting, 13, 22
Standard, 15
World Axis Mode, 3
X
X-Splines, 292
Z
Zaxwerks 3D Software, 97
Zig Zag, 340, 341
zooming
cameras and, 238, 240, 246
in Comp panel, 8, 28
in the Graph Editor, 52
shortcuts, 28, 279
in Timeline Panel, 9
Zoom tool, 3

