www.allitebooks.com

AfterShot Pro: Non-destructive 
photo editing and management
This book will show you how to edit, develop, and 
manage your photos with AfterShot Pro
Joachim Ziebs
 
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
www.allitebooks.com

Aftershot Pro: Non-destructive photo editing  
and management
Copyright © 2012 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: December 2012
Production Reference: 1191212
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-84969-466-7
www.packtpub.com
Cover Image by Avishek Roy (roy007avishek88@gmail.com)
www.allitebooks.com

Credits
Author
Joachim Ziebs
Reviewers
Anutosh Ghosh
Jacek Ksiazek
Acquisition Editor
Robin de Jongh
Commissioning Editor
Harsha Bharwani
Technical Editors
Ankita Meshram
Kaustubh S. Mayekar
Project Coordinator
Esha Thakker
Proofreader
Lesley Harrison
Indexer
Rekha Nair
Production Coordinator
Prachali Bhiwandkar
Cover Work
Prachali Bhiwandkar
www.allitebooks.com

About the Author
Joachim Ziebs teaches Computer Science, English, and History at a German 
abendrealschule (a night school). When he was fifteen, he was given an old  
camera. He was hooked on photography immediately and was seldom seen 
without his camera. Later he bought his first computer, a Commodore C64,  
and another passion ensued.
Strangely, however, the author decided to study English, History, and Philosophy 
after he finished school. After graduating with an MA, he found work as a Computer 
and Network Administrator and Software Trainer with a small start-up software 
company, where his passion for teaching awakened.
Following this calling, he quit his job to become a teacher.
This is his first book.
I would like to thank my family: Lisa, Marie, and Nina. I'd also like 
to thank all the fine folks at Packt for putting up with my chaotic 
style of working, for believing in me, and for their dedication in 
nudging me to turn my scribbling into a fine book.
www.allitebooks.com

About the Reviewers
Anutosh Ghosh loves coding, but has worked extensively only in the world of 
PHP and its associated stuff, for over 5 years now. He has some good knowledge on 
Magento, and has worked upon the integration of Magento Web Services with SAP 
for more than 2.5 years. He is trying hard to figure out the jargon of Java, as well, 
among other stuffs. However, he likes to venture out into other technologies as and 
when he gets time.
He enjoys spending his free time by watching cool movies and singing regional 
songs. However, he loves to poke his blunt nose in some forums and Stack Overflow, 
from time-to-time.
I would like to thank my family, especially my mom. Today 
whatever I am is only because of them. Their perseverance and 
experience has always been my base.
Jacek Ksiazek is an amateur photographer, constantly exploring the secrets of the 
traditional black and white photography.
He is a homegrown guitarist, industrial, and a prog rock fan.
He works as an advertising specialist and graphic designer.
You can follow him online at http://jaxxx.info/.
www.allitebooks.com

www.PacktPub.com
Support files, eBooks, discount offers and more
You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support files and downloads related 
to your book. 
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF 
and ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.
com and as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. 
Get in touch with us at service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign 
up for a range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt 
books and eBooks.
TM
http://PacktLib.PacktPub.com
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online  
digital book library. Here, you can access, read and search across Packt's entire 
library of books. 
Why Subscribe?
•	
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
•	
Copy and paste, print and bookmark content
•	
On demand and accessible via web browser
Free Access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access 
PacktLib today and view nine entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials 
for immediate access.
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
Preface	
1
Chapter 1: Installing AfterShot Pro	
5
Obtaining AfterShot Pro	
5
Installing on Windows	
5
Installing on GNU/Linux	
6
Installing on OS X	
6
First start of AfterShot Pro	
7
Summary	
8
Chapter 2: A Quick Tour of the Main Controls	
9
Default window layout	
9
The top tool bar	
10
The left panel – library/file system/output	
15
The right panel – where all the tools live	
18
The thumbnail strip toolbar	
22
The main toolbar	
23
The status bar	
23
Summary	
24
Chapter 3: Basic Editing	
25
Basic adjustments	
27
Sharpening	
28
Cropping	
30
Colors	
31
Black and white	
35
Straightening	
37
Summary	
39
Chapter 4: Advanced Editing	
41
Layers and regions	
41
Heal/Clone Layers	
43
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
Adjust Layers	
48
Plugins	
54
Wavelet Sharpen	
54
Nostalgia	
57
GradFilter	
60
Working with versions of images	
63
Summary	
64
Chapter 5: Digital Asset Management	
65
Creating and working with catalogs	
65
Getting your images into catalogs	
67
Importing images	
68
Downloading images from a memory card	
70
Organizing your images within a catalog	
72
Writing XML files	
74
Summary	
75
Chapter 6: Exporting Pictures	
77
Using the default batches	
77
Adapting and creating batches	
79
Creating a personal gallery batch	
79
Summary	
85
Chapter 7: Making Yourself at Home	
87
Key bindings	
87
Raw and camera defaults	
90
Customizing the tool tabs layout	
93
Summary	
96
Appendix	
97
Important websites	
97
AfterShot Pro Plugin Repository	
97
Reporting Bugs and Feature Requests	
97
Access to Beta Versions	
97
Social networks	
98
Support forums	
98
Official Support Forums	
98
Bibble5 Forums	
98
My customToolsUI.txt	
98
Summary	
100
Index	
101
www.allitebooks.com

Preface
With more and more people buying digital cameras, interest in photography seems 
to be at an all-time high. But taking that picture with your camera is only the first 
part of the process. To get the best out of your equipment you have to post-process 
your images. That is you need to edit or develop your images. How you can 
elegantly and efficiently do this with AfterShot Pro is what you are going to  
learn in this book.
What this book covers
Chapter 1, Installing AfterShot Pro, will tell us how to install this RAW development 
tool. It is a software to create images out of the RAW sensor data that modern DSLR 
cameras can save for best image results. But this is not all, AfterShot Pro also has 
powerful image manipulation features. In short, AfterShot Pro can be a perfect 
addition to your photographic workflow. This chapter will serve as a step-by-step 
installation guide for users new to AfterShot Pro.
Chapter 2, Quick Tour of the Main Controls, offers a quick tour of the main controls 
to make sure that you don't get lost in the later chapters. The user interface of 
AfterShot Pro is quite different from those you are probably accustomed to from 
other applications, especially if you mostly use Windows programs. It is therefore 
necessary to look at the interface very carefully.
Chapter 3, Basic Editing, will start with basic editing, such as basic adjustments, 
sharpening, cropping, tonal adjustments, and converting to black and white.  
All these will be covered here.
Chapter 4, Advanced Editing, will unleash the advanced editing functions of AfterShot 
Pro. We will use layers, regions, and plugins; and we will work with versions of our 
images to get the most out of them.
www.allitebooks.com

Preface
[ 2 ]
Chapter 5, Digital Asset Management, will start to work with the Digital Asset 
Management (DAM) part of AfterShot Pro. We will be covering the topics such 
as creating and working with catalogs, importing images into them, and moving 
catalogs, in this chapter.
Chapter 6, Exporting Pictures, will help us turn our edited images into actual pictures. 
We will use the default output batches at first and then modify them to our needs. 
You'll learn to create new batches, too.
Chapter 7, Making Yourself at Home, will help us make ourselves at home in AfterShot 
Pro. We will have a look at the key bindings, set up RAW and camera defaults, and 
customize AfterShot Pro's tool tabs layout.
Appendix, will give us a look at the websites and support forums, where you 
can find help and information about AfterShot Pro. Also, you get a copy of the 
customToolsUI.txt file.
What you need for this book
If you have a digital camera and a computer, you have everything you need for this 
book. Since this is a beginner's book, you don't need to have experience with other 
image editing or RAW-development software. If you know your way around your 
camera and how to get it connected to your computer, you will be fine.
Who this book is for
This book is great for photographers, who want to start working with AfterShot Pro. 
It is assumed that you have a digital camera that can save RAW files to make use 
of the application. Readers are expected to have one or more RAW files available, 
which can be used for practice alongside this book. Experience with other image 
editing software is a plus, but not mandatory for this book.
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text are shown as follows: "We can include other contexts through  
the use of the include directive."

Preface
[ 3 ]
A block of code is set as follows:
# the standard tab ----- 
Standard, Std, Histogram.ui 
Standard, Std, BasicTools.ui 
# ----- the next two are plugins 
Standard, Std, com.roland65.AutoLevels 
Standard, Std, au.com.mindsocket.GradFilter 
# ----- the next one is an ASP tool again 
Standard, Std, Presets.ui 
Any command-line input or output is written as follows:
rpm -iUh AfterShotPro_i386.rpm
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the 
screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: "Basic 
editing starts with the Basic Adjustments tool on the Standard tab".
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for us 
to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, 
and mention the book title via the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.

Preface
[ 4 ]
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to 
help you to get the most from your purchase.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or 
the code—we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you can 
save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this 
book. If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
com/support, selecting your book, clicking on the errata submission form link, and 
entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your submission 
will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded on our website, or added to any list 
of existing errata, under the Errata section of that title. Any existing errata can be 
viewed by selecting your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support.
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. 
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you 
come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected 
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem with 
any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.

Installing AfterShot Pro
AfterShot Pro is first and foremost a RAW development tool. That is, it is a software 
to create images out of the RAW sensor data that modern DSLR cameras can save 
for best image results. But this is not all, AfterShot Pro also has powerful image 
manipulation features. In short, AfterShot Pro can be a perfect addition to your 
photographic workflow. This chapter will serve as a step-by-step installation guide 
for users new to AfterShot Pro.
Obtaining AfterShot Pro
AfterShot Pro is available for computers running Microsoft Windows, Apple OS 
X, or GNU/Linux. It is available as a boxed software from your preferred software 
retailer or you can directly download it from the Corel website at http://apps.
corel.com/lp/aftershot/download/index.html. The version offered for 
download is a 30 day trial version that you can unlock with a key later on.
Installing on Windows
In Windows, a double-click on the setup program that you downloaded will launch 
the installation process. First, select the language of your choice. After this the 
standard Windows wizard will guide you through the setup. First accept the license, 
and then set the required path for the software. If in doubt, just leave the path as it is.
Be careful when you review the file associations. It is best to only check the common 
RAW file types and AfterShot Pro files. This makes sure that a double-click on a 
RAW file or AfterShot Pro file will launch the application to develop the selected file. 
It is generally a bad idea to associate JPEG and TIFF files with AfterShot Pro. Both of 
these file types already contain processed images, which AfterShot can display and 
work with, but it is usually slower than a dedicated image viewer. Therefore, unless 
you don't have an image viewer installed on your system, don't tick that box. Finally, 
clicking on Install will install AfterShot Pro on your system.

Installing AfterShot Pro
[ 6 ]
Installing on GNU/Linux
When you install AfterShot Pro on your GNU/Linux system, make sure to download 
the appropriate installation archive for your distribution. Users of RPM-based 
distributions should download the RPM, while Debian and Ubuntu users should use 
either the 32-bit or 64-bit DEB depending on the present environment.
This is the right place to point out that even the available 64-bit DEB does not imply 
that AfterShot Pro is compiled for 64-bit systems. Rather, this archive contains all the 
necessary libraries to make the 32-bit executable work on 64-bit systems. Needless to 
say, the RPM is suitable for 32-bit and 64-bit systems.
The installation itself is straightforward. As the root user install AfterShot Pro via 
one of the following commands:
•	
rpm -iUh AfterShotPro_i386.rpm (openSUSE, Fedora)
•	
dpkg -i AfterShotPro_i386 (Debian, Ubuntu 32bit)
•	
dpkg -i AfterShotPro_amd64.deb (Debian, Ubuntu 64bit)
That's it! A shortcut to the application will be placed in your favorite desktop 
environment and you can start working immediately.
Installing on OS X
Installing AfterShot Pro on your Mac is as simple as double-clicking on the 
AfterShotPro.dmg file. Next, accept the license terms and copy the application to 
your applications folder. That's it!

Chapter 1
[ 7 ]
First start of AfterShot Pro
When you first start AfterShot Pro, you'll be presented with a short dialog box 
concerning the location of your application settings and the location of your catalogs. 
The paths presented to you are based on your operating system, so don't worry if 
they differ from the ones included in the following screenshot:
The settings folder not only contains your settings but also the image cache and can 
therefore become very large when you work with a lot of photos. You should place 
this folder on a hard disk with lots of free space, where it can be quickly accessed, 
because you will need to use it quite often. If you have only one hard disk in your 
system there is no need to change the folder.
You can change the location of this folder later from within the settings dialog box. 
However, as the image cache would need to be recreated, it is a better idea to get it 
right the first time. Recreating the image cache takes place when you browse your 
catalogs or your filesystem. This would slow down your workflow, because you will 
have to wait for the cache to be filled before you can start selecting files to process.

Installing AfterShot Pro
[ 8 ]
The second folder will be the default folder for your catalogs. You can place it 
anywhere on your system. Having said that the default folder is a wise option,  
so let's keep it there for now. We will see more on catalogs and how to work  
with them in Chapter 5, Digital Asset Management.
When you click on OK, you will get the Try Corel AfterShot Pro, Buy now!, or 
Enter your serial number options. In any case, you'll have a working AfterShot 
Pro application on your computer.
Summary
In this chapter we installed AfterShot Pro on our computer. Also, we have completed 
the first and most important configuration steps before launching the application.
In the next chapter, we will explore the main controls of AfterShot Pro so that you 
know your way around the program. You can expect to learn a lot about the user 
interface of AfterShot Pro and where to find each tool or function.

A Quick Tour of  
the Main Controls
This chapter offers a quick tour of the main controls of AfterShot Pro to make sure 
that you don't get lost in the later chapters. The user interface of AfterShot Pro is 
quite different from those you are probably accustomed to in other applications, 
especially if you mostly use Windows programs. It is therefore necessary to look  
at the interface very carefully.
Default window layout
AfterShot Pro looks like the following screenshot when you open it to work on an 
image. You can clearly see the window layout with a top toolbar, a left panel, a right 
panel, a thumbnail strip, a main tool bar and a status bar.
If you are not familiar with image editors or RAW converters, this sight can be 
intimidating. But don't worry, we'll have a close look at everything so that you  
can be sure to find your way, and even like the user interface of AfterShot Pro. 
Let's have a close look at it together. Up on the top there is a menu bar with the 
standard items that you have used in other software products. There is nothing 
new here with this bar.

A Quick Tour of the Main Controls
[ 10 ]
The bar below it is the top tool bar, which is another matter completely. On the  
left-hand side, you can clearly see the left panel with the Library, File System and 
Output tabs. Right next to it is the thumbnail strip. On the right-hand side you can 
see the right panel. This is where all the tools that we need to edit images are kept. 
All tools are organized into the various tabs. At the bottom we have the main toolbar 
as well as the status bar.
All of this looks overwhelming, but don't worry. We're going to make sense of it 
in the following scetions. Let's open AfterShot Pro and we'll walk through the user 
interface together.
The top tool bar
The following screenshot shows the top tool bar. It provides us with access to most 
of the view, sort, and filter options.

Chapter 2
[ 11 ]
The drop-down box on the left-hand side of the tool bar lets you select the sort criterion 
for your photos. You can sort your photos according to the following criteria:
•	
Name
•	
Date
•	
Rating
•	
Label
•	
Flag
•	
Custom
•	
Focal Length
•	
Shutter Speed
•	
F-Number
•	
ISO
•	
Flash
•	
Metering Mode
•	
White Balance Mode
The arrow lets you switch between descending and ascending sort order. The last 
icon in this section opens the filter menu, where you can select the criteria that your 
photos have to match in order to be displayed.
As you can easily see, it is possible to filter as per the following criteria:
•	
Rating (More than or equals, Less than or equals, and Equals).
•	
Label (Equals, Doesn't equal)
•	
Flag (Equals, Doesn't equal)
www.allitebooks.com

A Quick Tour of the Main Controls
[ 12 ]
You can decide whether you want to display already selected images, too. If you 
uncheck this option, which is the default behavior, images that don't match your 
criteria won't be displayed even if they were previously selected.
Additionally, you have the Require all of the conditions above (uncheck for 
'any') checkbox. If this option is selected, only images that meet all conditions 
will be displayed.
The next section of the top tool bar is the rating section as shown in the  
following screenshot:
Each and every image can be awarded zero, represented by the small dot, to up 
to five stars. This needs no further clarification as most people are familiar with 
selecting hotel accommodation according to stars awarded.
The next section lets you put a color label on your images by using a combobox.
Simply select the color you wish to associate with the selected image. You can use 
color labels to simply mark certain images or versions of images. Think of it like this: 
you award stars to separate great shots from average shots. Then you put colored 
labels to the great shots according to the intended use. For example, you can use 
labels to mark images. You can also use them to indicate whether you want to work 
on them some more. A red label can signify that you've started editing the image, but 
didn't have time to finish it. Once you've done that, you can clear the label again.
Now that you have seen the first two filter criteria, here is the third and last one. You 
can add flags to your images as shown in the following screenshot:
I have to admit that this is my most used tool of distinction when working with my 
photos. The flag on the left-hand side in the preceding screenshot will mark an image 
or a version of an image as a pick. (We will discuss versions in more detail later in 
this book.) If you select this flag, it will turn green. The flag in the center will mark 
any selected image as a reject. If you select this flag, it will turn red. The flag on the 
right-hand side is used to clear a flag, turning it gray again.

Chapter 2
[ 13 ]
The following screenshot shows what all of these configurations will look like when 
used for marking photos:
The preceding screenshot shows two versions of one of my recent holiday photos. 
They are flagged as picks (green flag). The color version also has been awarded three 
stars and a yellow label while the black and white version has been awarded four 
stars and a blue label.
Now you know enough to tag your images and make sure that you can find them 
later on. Let's go on to the next section of the top tool bar. This brings us to the 
rotation section.

A Quick Tour of the Main Controls
[ 14 ]
In case AfterShot Pro was unable to set the correct orientation for your images you can 
rotate them yourself with these two buttons. The left-hand side icon rotates the image 
counter-clockwise while the right-hand side icon will rotate the image clockwise.
The next section is the layers section of the tool bar.
This section will give you access to the powerful layer engine included in AfterShot 
Pro. It will be discussed in detail in Chapter 4, Advanced Editing.
The last section of the toolbar is concerned with the view options.
AfterShot Pro offers three different views represented by the first three buttons from 
the left-hand side to the right-hand side as shown in the preceding screenshot:
•	
Thumbnail view: In this view the central image area will only show 
thumbnails of the selected library or filesystem folder.
•	
Standard view: In this view the central image area will show the selected 
image as well as a thumbnail strip showing the images of the selected library 
or filesystem folder.
•	
Image view: In this view just the selected image will be shown in the central 
image area of AfterShot Pro.
You can quickly change to the image view by double-clicking on an 
image in thumbnail view or on an image in the thumbnail strip in 
the standard view.
The magnifier button will open a round or square magnifier window that will show 
a 100% view of the area around the mouse pointer.
Instead of using the magnifier, you can simply double-click on your 
image to zoom it to 100%. A second double-click will zoom out to 
full view of the image again.
The last button will switch to the full screen mode thus eliminating the title bar. This 
might give you some valuable screen estate on smaller notebooks or laptops.

Chapter 2
[ 15 ]
The left panel – library/file system/output
The left panel is the one we need to select the images we want to work on and to 
export the finished versions of our endeavors.
The left panel consists of the following three tabs:
•	
Library: This tab contains the Catalogs and Metadata Browser tools. The 
Catalogs tool lets you work with the images you imported into AfterShot 
Pro catalogs. The Metadata Browser tool allows you to browse through the 
images in your catalogs, not via a folder-like structure, but with a structure 
according to the selected metadata. A click on the Refine button will lock the 
currently selected metadata as a filter. You can use it, for example, to display 
all images taken at F2.8 with a Nikon camera in August, in a catalog. This is 
different from the filter dialog box because the filter dialog box only works 
on the selected folder/catalog folder, while the Metadata Browser tool takes 
the whole catalog into consideration.

A Quick Tour of the Main Controls
[ 16 ]
•	
File system: The File System tab is just like your Windows Explorer or 
Gnome Navigator or any other tool you have used for browsing your file 
system. It simply offers a directory view to your file system. Don't worry 
if your folder system looks different from the one shown in the following 
screenshot. Simply select the folder containing your images. Depending on 
the view you are using, AfterShot Pro will show thumbnails of the contained 
images (Thumbnail view) or a thumbnail strip of the images (Standard view).

Chapter 2
[ 17 ]
•	
Output: The Output tab offers the Batch Output and Printing tools. We will 
talk about them in detail when we learn about exporting finished images.
Whenever you see the little push-pin in the top right-hand corner of 
a tool, you can click on it to make that tool sticky. I normally have the 
histogram sticky, so I can still see it when I work with other tools.

A Quick Tour of the Main Controls
[ 18 ]
The right panel – where all the tools live
The right panel of AfterShot Pro contains all the tools that we need to manipulate 
photos. They are organized in tabs like shown in the following screenshot. Don't 
worry if you have only one tab labeled Plugins 1. AfterShot Pro comes with only a few 
plugins by default and as you can see we have installed quite a lot of them by now. 
Also, don't worry about the confusing iteration of the plugin tabs. It is quite easy to 
configure these tabs, which we will see later in Chapter 7, Making Yourself at Home.

Chapter 2
[ 19 ]
The Standard tab contains the tools we need the most when we work with photos. 
First there is the Histogram tool showing us the distribution of dark and light parts 
of our photo. We can set the White Balance, Exposure, Sharpening, and other 
options for developing raw images with the Basic Adjustments tool. Underneath is 
the Presets tool with which you can apply saved presets to your photos.
A click on any tool's title bar will open or close that tool. This can be a 
great relief when there are many huge tools in a tab because it makes 
it easy to navigate from one tool to the other, and avoids an overdose 
of options by having too many tools open in a tab.
The Color tab contains the most necessary tools to work with color in our photos.
•	
Curves: We use the Curves tool for tonal value adjustments.

A Quick Tour of the Main Controls
[ 20 ]
•	
Color correction: The Color Correction tool is used for selective 
color correction.
•	
Color balance: The Color Balance tool is used for determining the 
color balance.
•	
White balance: The White Balance tool is the advanced tool of the slider 
featured in the Basic Adjustments tool.
•	
Color management: The Color Management tool offers the AfterShot Pro 
color management options.
The only tool on the Tone tab is the Exposure tool, which we use to fine tune 
the exposure.
Like the White Balance tool, the Exposure tool is an advanced version of the 
exposure slider in the Basic Adjustments tool.
Good starting points for AutoLevel in the Exposure tool as well as in the 
Basic Adjustments tool are values of 0,010 and 0,010 (subtle influence) 
or 0,010 and 0,200 (stronger influence) respectively. Check the histogram 
carefully because AutoLevel is known to blow Highlights.
The Detail tab features all the tools necessary to work out the details of our images. 
There are the Sharpening, RAW Noise, Noise Ninja Registered (if you have a valid 
license; standard if not), Lens Correction, and Mirror and Invert tools.

Chapter 2
[ 21 ]
Please note that the Sharpening tool is turned off, that is not ticked. This is the best 
option we currently have because the default sharpening in AfterShot Pro leaves 
much to be desired. For best results you should use a plugin like Wavelet Sharpen 
for sharpening your images. The results are far superior.
www.allitebooks.com

A Quick Tour of the Main Controls
[ 22 ]
The Metadata tab offers three tools to work with the images' metadata as follows:
•	
Metadata: The Metadata tool displays the metadata included with your 
images. We can also use it to enter the IPTC metadata by selecting Basic 
IPTC, Photographer, or Location in the combobox.
•	
Keywords and Keyword Sets: The Keywords and Keyword Sets tools 
are the advanced versions of the Keywords entry field in the Basic 
Adjustment tool.
The thumbnail strip toolbar
The small toolbar below or next to the thumbnail strip, according to the orientation 
you have selected for it, allows you to adjust the size of the thumbnails. Drag the slider 
to the right-hand side for larger and to the left-hand side for smaller thumbnails.

Chapter 2
[ 23 ]
The main toolbar
The main toolbar consists of two parts.
The first part comprises of the five main tools of AfterShot Pro (from the left-hand 
side to the right-hand side). They are explained as follows:
•	
Pan (the hand icon): We use this tool to drag around/move in an image. This 
is especially useful when we have zoomed into an image.
•	
Click white (the pipette icon): We use this to determine the white point in an 
image with a simple click.
•	
Crop: This button opens the crop tool.
•	
Straighten: This button opens the straighten tool with which we can correct 
all the tilting horizons.
•	
Region cursors: These are the tools we need when we work with layers and 
regions later on.
The second section deals with zooming the image. The tools are explained as follows:
•	
Toggle 1:1: The button does exactly what it claims to do. Click on it once to 
zoom to a 100% view of your image. Click on it again to zoom out.
•	
Toggle fit: A click on this button will always zoom you out of your picture 
till it is again completely viewable in the image area.
•	
Image zoom: This slider lets you select an arbitrary zoom factor for your 
image. You can get as close as 800% magnification when you need to work 
with extreme details.
The status bar
The status bar gives us vital information while we work.
First, it tells us that there is one image out of 104 images selected in the current 
working folder. Then it displays the name of the working folder (05 in this example) 
and finally the name of the image, Urlaub_Nordsee_1_2012_0028.NEF. I'm all for 
using verbose names. Nothing is worse than cryptic names when you need to hunt 
down a certain image in your assets.

A Quick Tour of the Main Controls
[ 24 ]
The X and Y coordinates pinpoint the current cursor position on the image. The 
following four values represent the color value of that pixel: red (239), green (239), 
blue (238), and luminance (239).
The last section of the status bar offers more tools. The first button lets you select 
the ICM profile for soft proofing. The next button next is used to toggle the multiple 
image view. Once we click on this button, all images selected in the thumbnail strip 
will be displayed in the image area. The lock button toggles the lock position and 
zoom feature of AfterShot Pro. The last button of the status bar toggles the clipping 
warning. If you click on it, you can see which parts of the image get too dark or 
blown out.
Summary
In this chapter we toured the user interface of AfterShot Pro. You have also learned 
how to display, sort, and filter images.
In the next chapter we will begin to use the basic image editing tools to edit images. 
Additionally, we'll learn how AfterShot Pro offers us a workflow that is both highly 
effective and creative because it adjusts to the way we want to work.

Basic Editing
In this chapter we will perform some basic editing:
•	
Basic adjustments
•	
Sharpening
•	
Cropping
•	
Tonal adjustments
•	
Conversion to black and white
•	
Straightening
While we are doing this, you will notice that the workflow presented in this book is 
radically different from what you expect and what you probably know from other 
software products. Don't worry about this because AfterShot Pro has an internal 
queue of tools that will be used once we are ready to develop the photos. The order 
in which we use the tools to manipulate the RAW image files does not interfere with 
this queue. Nor does it make a difference with which tool you start your work. You 
are free to use the workflow explained in this book for your photos or create and use 
a workflow that works for you.

Basic Editing
[ 26 ]
Just click on the File System tab in AfterShot Pro and navigate to one of your image 
folders. The thumbnail panel will then display all the images contained in the 
selected folder. Double-click on one of your photos and start working on your image.
To start with editing I've selected a photo of one of my older models of trusty 
cameras. Here is the photo without any post processing.
Pretty boring, right? So let's work on it.

Chapter 3
[ 27 ]
Basic adjustments
Basic editing starts with the Basic Adjustments tool on the Standard tab. Here we 
will find all the controls for a quick edit. In case we are not satisfied with the results, 
we can always use the more detailed tools on the other tabs. However, for most 
images the Basic Adjustments tools will work nicely.
The following two tools can make editing images a lot easier:
•	
AutoLevel: The AutoLevel tool will automatically adjust the black and 
white points of your image in a way that a fixed percent of the image will 
be pure black and pure white. You can control the tool with the two edit 
fields as shown in the preceding screenshot. The left-hand side field sets the 
percentage of the image to be pure black and the right-hand side field sets 
the percentage of the image to be pure white.

Basic Editing
[ 28 ]
Using 0,010 for both fields is a sensible starting point for editing. 
Using a higher percentage for the pure white will usually create 
unnecessary blown highlights and I can hardly imagine that anyone 
would want that.
•	
Perfectly Clear: The Perfectly Clear tool claims to automatically lighten 
your images optimally while at the same time maintaining true color and not 
introducing any clipping. With the Tint Max and Tint Min settings, it will 
also remove tints and improve contrast and sharpness. The Tint Off setting 
will lighten the image optimally while keeping the original colors.
I've never been a fan of these tools because I like to have the colors as 
natural as possible, but perhaps it is just the right tool for your images.
A word of warning, though. A lot of plugins for AfterShot Pro 
require you to turn off both of these tools to work properly. So if you 
experience strange behavior while using a plugin, check if the Perfectly 
Clear and AutoLevel tools are turned on. If they are, turn them off and 
see if the plugins now work correctly.
White Balance is the next tool in our basic editing workflow. We have the choice 
of As Shot, Custom Kelvin, Click White, and several other presets. Whatever 
we select, we can fine tune the image by either using the Temp slider by simply 
dragging it towards the right-hand side or the left-hand side or by entering a value 
directly into the input field. Having said that, make sure that when you use the 
Click White tool you click on an area of the image that has a neutral gray tone. Do 
not click on pure blacks or pure whites because that would set off the white balance 
totally. In the case of our example photo, the white balance looks good as it is.
Let's continue editing the photo. We will discuss the other tools when need arises.
Sharpening
As already mentioned in Chapter 2, A Quick Tour of the Main Controls, the Sharpening 
tool of AfterShot Pro is below standard. Nevertheless, you should know how it works. 

Chapter 3
[ 29 ]
To turn on the Sharpening tool, simply tick the checkbox. You can change the amount 
of sharpening with the Amount slider and the sensitivity with the Sensitivity slider. 
Make sure that you use this tool with a 100% magnification view.
Of course, you can also use the Sharpening slider of the Basic Adjustments tool. It 
corresponds directly to the Amount slider of the Sharpening tool.
The Amount slider adjusts the overall sharpness of your image while the Sensitivity 
slider limits the portions of the image that are sharpened. The higher the amount, the 
sharper the image becomes. Take care though, because you can over-sharpen your 
image easily if you drag the slider too far. Sensitivity is just the opposite. The higher 
the sensitivity, the less of your image is affected by the unsharp mask filter that 
AfterShot Pro internally uses. So, you might need to raise the sensitivity when too 
much noise or other distractions become visible by raising the amount.
The following screenshot shows a 100% crop after setting the Amount property to 
120 and the Sensitivity property to 10. For comparison, only the right-hand side of 
the image is sharpened. The left-hand side of the image is straight out of the camera 
without any adjustments. We can use Layers for selective sharpening like this. We 
will learn about this tool in detail in Chapter 4, Advanced Editing. As you can clearly 
see, it is easy to oversharpen if you are not careful. Also, artifacts appear quite 
quickly by using this tool.

Basic Editing
[ 30 ]
Cropping
If you moved from slides to digital, like me, there might be good news for you. 
Remember with those 35 mm slides, when you didn't get the exact frame you 
wanted, you were in for a fiddling session with small masks or tape later. With 
digital images, correction of the frame is so much easier. Simply open the Cropping 
tool in AfterShot Pro.
You have several choices to get the crop you want. For a quick crop, simply select 
one of the presets in the combobox, like 1.50 | 2:3 | 4x6 | 35mm as shown in the 
preceding screenshot. Then adjust the crop box by dragging the corners or the sides 
of the box. Both corners and sides will light up in red upon being dragged.

Chapter 3
[ 31 ]
As you can see, the Cropping tool features the Rule of Thirds indicators that makes 
cropping a breeze.
In case there is no preset to your liking, simply select Custom. You can then draw 
your own selection box by clicking on the image and dragging the cursor over it.
Also, you can enter a fixed Aspect or fixed Pixels in the dialog box. The arrow icon 
will change the box from portrait to landscape and vice versa. The lock icon is a bit 
tricky. As long as you choose Aspect, it is closed, thus giving you a locked aspect 
ratio for cropping. When you click on the icon, it changes to an open lock and at the 
same time the Aspect property switches to the Pixels property. Now you can crop to 
any size you like without having to care about a fixed aspect ratio. You can, however 
click on the lock again, thus closing it, and fix the selected pixel ratio. If you have 
entered your own settings, click on the plus icon to save these settings for later image 
edits. Once you are happy with your frame simply click on Done to close the dialog 
box and to complete the cropping.
Colors
Let's face it, the colors of any RAW image needs postprocessing to make the image 
really shine. Luckily AfterShot Pro gives us great tools to accomplish this.
Let's open the Color tab to use the Curves tool to enhance the colors of our photo:

Basic Editing
[ 32 ]
The controls are simple. Their functions are as follows:
•	
On the left-hand side of the tool are black and white arrows. These set the 
input black and white point of your image. If you drag these arrows down, it 
will darken the image. Dragging them up will lighten the image.
•	
At the bottom of the tool are the two arrows for the output white and black 
points. Dragging the black arrow towards the right-hand side will deepen the 
shadows. Dragging the white arrow towards the left-hand side will brighten 
the image. Be careful when you use these arrows as you might lose details 
in the shadows or in the highlights when you drag too far. The gray arrow 
specifies the gray point of the image. Drag it to the left-hand side to darken 
the image and to the right-hand side to lighten it.
What we want to do now is simply to darken the dark parts of the image and lighten 
the light parts of the image. This will give us good colors and contrast. Simply click on 
the Curves tool to set and drag points to adjust the curves. We can set any number of 
points, but we are going for the classic S-curve as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 33 ]
As you can see, the histogram shows the changes we've applied. If you prefer to 
see the histogram of the original image without the application of the tool, simply 
change the combobox on the right-hand side from After to Before.
Right now we edited all RGB channels together. In case you want to edit only a 
single channel with the Curves tool, select the RGB (Red, Green, or Blue) channel 
from the combobox at the top of the tool. 
Sometimes one can get carried away when using the Curves tool. You can use the 
two backwards pointing arrows to reset the curves back to their original values if that 
happens to you. The right-hand side arrow will only revert the current channel (for 
example, the red one) and will keep changes you've made to the others, while the  
left-hand side arrow will set back all channels giving you a chance for a fresh start.
Let's consider an example. The following screenshot shows a Curve tool where I was 
a bit carried away:

Basic Editing
[ 34 ]
You can clearly see the curve for RGB (in white), Red (in red), Green (in green) and 
Blue (in blue). I could of course use the left-hand side arrow icon for a complete fresh 
start on all curves. However, I only dislike the RGB curve, so I only want to reset this 
one and keep the others. To achieve this, we select the RGB curve in the selection 
box on top of the tool and then click on the arrow icon on the right-hand side. Voila! 
Three curves kept, one reset as shown in the following screenshot:
You can clearly see that only the RGB curve is now a straight line again while the rest 
of the curves are as curvy as before.
The following screenshot shows our image so far: sharpened, cropped, and curves 
adjusted. As before, the left-hand side is the unadjusted straight out of camera side 
while the right-hand side is the one with all the editing done. It is needless to say that 
the curves from the last example were not used to achieve this result. You can clearly 
see the difference between the two sides. The right-hand side has much crisper 
contrast and colors.

Chapter 3
[ 35 ]
Black and white
The Agfa box looks pretty battered. I'm sure that it will never shoot another photo. 
I'm also sure that the image I took of it would look even better in black and white.  
So let's open the Black and White Plugin tool and go ahead:

Basic Editing
[ 36 ]
As you can see, this tool is rather simple. You enable it with a tick and select a 
channel mixer preset from the combobox. While you hover over the different  
presets with your mouse pointer, the image area will show a preview so that you  
can compare different results easily. Here we have used the Luminance preset.
For best results you might wish to turn off the Curves tool before 
converting to black and white. Then after the conversion turn it 
on again and make adjustments if necessary.
As you have probably already noticed, you can create black and white images that 
retain one or two colors with the Black and White Plugin tool. In AfterShot Pro this 
is as easy as enabling First Spot Color and/or Second Spot Color. You can then use 
the Hue slider or the color picker to select the color to retain for either one/both of 
the spot colors. The Fuzziness slider adjusts how exact the color you selected and the 
colors of your image have to match to be kept. 

Chapter 3
[ 37 ]
Straightening
If you've ever photographed the horizon, you'll have come across something similar 
to the following photograph. In the image with just the right exposure, just the right 
clouds, and so on, you'll notice that either your main subject or the horizon is not 
straight. Here is one of my photos where this has happened:
I took care of the horizon and therefore tilted the subject, the lonely bank at the sea. 
Luckily, we can straighten that out with AfterShot Pro.
There are actually two ways to do this. First, there is the Straighten slider in the 
Basic Adjustments tool. This is nice and works quite well when you have either a 
very good eye or a very precise hand. In most cases it is better to use the second tool, 
the Straightening tool. 

Basic Editing
[ 38 ]
Just activate it and hover your mouse pointer on the image to see that the mouse 
pointer changes. Now click on the image and drag the pointer along. You'll notice 
that you'll draw a line. Keep this straight on the horizon or your subject. As seen in 
the following screenshot, the pointer has been placed right at the top of the bench:
The second you release the mouse button, the image will be rotated according to the 
drawn line. 
You can see the angle used for rotation next to the Straighten slider of the Basic 
Adjustments tool. Now all that is left to do is cropping the image, because no one 
wants to see the gray areas introduced by the rotation.
The following photograph shows the desired result. The bench is now straight:

Chapter 3
[ 39 ]
Summary
In this chapter you learned how to sharpen, crop, and straighten your images. Also 
you now know how to apply tonal corrections as well as turn images to black and 
white. This is all nice, but so far we haven't even touched AfterShot Pro's most 
important features: Layers and Regions!
These features together with the use of plugins give us the means for selective 
lossless editing of our images. Imagine to be able to heal image defects in one part, 
remove some obstruction in another, adjust the contrast only in certain parts of the 
image, but sharpen the whole image. Then imagine creating another version of the 
image to convert to black and white with all the other adjustments already being in 
place. All of this of course without any change to your precious RAW files. Sounds 
good? Well, read on!


Advanced Editing
In this chapter, we will unleash the advanced editing functions of AfterShot Pro.  
We will use layers, regions, and plugins to work with versions of our images in  
an effort to get the most out of them. In detail, we will work with:
•	
Heal and clone layers
•	
Adjust layers
•	
Versions of images
•	
The following plugins:
°°
Wavelet Sharpen
°°
Nostalgia
°°
GradFilter
So, grab an image via the File System tab in AfterShot Pro and join me.
Layers and regions
The layers and regions tool of AfterShot Pro is, at the same time, very easy to use, 
flexible, and powerful.
www.allitebooks.com

Advanced Editing
[ 42 ]
You can access it by clicking on the Open Layer Manager button.
Let us get one thing straight right at the beginning; we cannot add any regions to 
Main Layer as you can see. All regions have to reside on either Adjust Layer or 
Heal/Clone Layers. There can only be one Heal/Clone Layer, by the way. We can 
add layers with the respective buttons in our tool. Here, there is a single Heal/Clone 
Layer with one polygon (Polygon Cone 1) and curve (Curve Clone 1), as well as one 
of ten possible Adjust Layers (Adjust Layer 1) containing two circles (Circle 1, Circle 
2) and one curve (Curve 3). Notice that you can turn off individual layers or regions 
by ticking them on or off. Also remember that each layer can only contain 11 regions. 
This might not sound much, but when you have reached this maximum level, you 
have in fact edited quite a lot of your image and might wish to consider reshooting it 
anyway. There is only so much you can do with post-processing.
Regions and layers can be deleted and inverted. Layers can be duplicated as well. 
You use the three icons on the right-hand side for these actions.

Chapter 4
[ 43 ]
The Layers tool sports four tools to create regions next to the pan icon:
•	
Circle
•	
Polygon
•	
Curve
•	
Brush
While we will learn how to use the circle, the polygon, and the curve 
tool to create regions, we will not have a look at the brush tool. This is 
for a very important reason, that is, AfterShot Pro was created to offer 
loss-less editing. Using a brush for this seems out of place to me and 
brings tools that are normally used in other image editors to AfterShot 
Pro. If you already know other image editors, you probably already 
know how to use a brush. If you don't, I'd suggest you use the other  
tools to create regions. They offer better control and more flexibility.
Heal/Clone Layers
Let's start with the circle. You probably already know that digital SLRs tend to get 
dust on their sensors after a while. Combine this with small apertures and you have 
visible dust on your images, most likely in brightly lit areas such as a blue sky. 
Frequently, the piece of dust is round, so we'll use the circle to get rid of it.

Advanced Editing
[ 44 ]
Add a Heal/Clone Layer and select the circle tool (Circle Clone 1). The mouse 
pointer turns to a crosshair to help you aim. Simply click in the center of the spot. 
Don't worry if the circle is too large or too small. We deal with that soon. The 
moment you click on your image, a circle region is created. This has two areas, the 
main area and the feather area. Because you are using it on a Heal/Clone Layer, a 
second circle region is created, from which image information is copied. This circle  
is colored red and can be dragged around with the mouse. Now find a nice spot of 
blue sky to cover up the spot of dust. Refer to the following screenshot:
In case the circle is too small or too large, use the Size slider to adjust it. Feather is 
the area around the region and can be large or small. A large feather lets the regions 
blend in with their surroundings smoothly because it creates a smooth fade between 
region and image. A small feather creates a sharp and distinct boundary. We control 
the size of the feather with the Feather slider. Results vary with the image you are 
editing, so make sure to try out different values when covering image flaws. If you 
feel like experimenting, try Swap Source. This will clone the contents of the original 
circle to the red circle, thus effectively duplicating the spot of dust.

Chapter 4
[ 45 ]
In case you don't like dragging sliders, you can control the Size and 
Feather slider with the scroll wheel of your mouse, too. Simply put the 
mouse pointer right into the region to increase or decrease the size by 
turning the wheel. Put the mouse pointer into the feather area of the 
region to increase or decrease the feather.
Let us look at one more case to show the power of the Heal/Clone Layer. Sometimes, 
especially if you are photographing concerts, you have no control over what happens 
in the background. You might be able to crop the image to cut out distractions, but 
sometimes this isn't enough. As shown in the following screenshot, have a look  
at the bottom-left:
The back of the other musician rather ruins the portrait, don't you agree? Let's create 
a heal/clone region to get rid of it. This time, though, a circle won't do. As the shape 
is edgy and not round, we can use a polygon region.

Advanced Editing
[ 46 ]
Activate the polygon tool with the click of a button and then create the outline of the 
region with single clicks.
     
     
     
For specifying the last point of the region, you have to double-click on that final 
point. Don't worry if your region is too small or too large. Once it is complete (after 
the final point), you can move the points by clicking on them and dragging them 
where they should be. By the way, the curve tool works just the same; it just sports 
round lines between each point instead of straight ones with the polygon tool. Also, 
the feather works just the same as with the circle tool.

Chapter 4
[ 47 ]
As you can see, the two parts of the clone region can overlap without problem. 
Now that the distraction is gone, the portrait is saved.

Advanced Editing
[ 48 ]
You may notice that the circle region has two mode settings: Clone and Heal. Heal 
can be used to heal differently colored spots in bigger colored areas. For example, 
a black spot in a blue sky. In principle, the tool should be able to find out the major 
color present in the region (blue sky) and change the minor color (black spot), thus 
healing it. However, I have frequently noticed that simply cloning a part of the sky to 
get rid of dust spots works better. The Heal setting often did no more than smudging 
the offending image area. Your mileage may vary, though.
Adjust Layers
Spots and distractions are no longer troubling us. Now let's use AfterShot Pro's 
adjust layers to enhance parts of the image. We'll work with this portrait.
Cool guy, but the colors could use some tonal adjustment. Unfortunately, this would 
blow the sky even more. So we will use one region to correct the sky with highlight 
recovery and another region for tonal adjustment.

Chapter 4
[ 49 ]
Here is the first region:
As you can see I've tried to get as much sky into the region without getting too many 
branches or leaves into it. Still there is some sky left that I would like to be influenced 
by this region. To do this, let us increase the feather size from the Default to 250.
The large feather will make sure that all our editing on the region will blend in nicely 
without harsh borders. Also, it will adjust the sky between the branches without 
forcing us to create regions between the twigs.
After a bit of highlight recovery (10) and a tonal adjustment, the sky looks like the 
following screenshot:

Advanced Editing
[ 50 ]
Now that the sky is no longer blown, let's turn our editing to the "cool man". He 
definitely needs a tonal adjustment to make the colors pop. Additionally, we will 
have to take care of his skin tone, to keep him looking healthy.
Because we only want to adjust him, we create a new Adjust Layer and a curve 
region with just him.

Chapter 4
[ 51 ]
He is a bit dark, so we add 0.50 of Fill Light from the Basic Adjustments. Now let's 
go for the tonal correction and pop the colors with a traditional S-curve. To take care 
of his skin we now set the Saturation to -10 and the Vibrance to 10 (both in Basic 
Adjustments). This gives us nice natural skin tones. Remember that all these changes 
only affect the layer we are working on. Neither the layer we used for the sky nor the 
main layer is affected by these changes.
Now let's copy the layer we used to edit our tough guy.

Advanced Editing
[ 52 ]
With so many layers, it's better to give them individual names to make sure we find 
the right one when we want to edit something. To change the name of a layer, just 
double-click on it and enter a new name. It may not be necessary with three layers, 
but once you're using ten layers or more with several curves and circles, you will 
start to modify the wrong one if you haven't given them useful names. Trust me,  
I've done it.
What we now do is invert the curve in the Background layer. There is no use in 
creating a new curve that only comprises the background and at the same time  
does not include our tough guy. Simply inverting the copied curve of the boy will  
do the same.
Now let's put Saturation and Vibrance of Curve 1 of the Background layer both 
back to 0. There is no skin in this selection, so we want the full colors as they are 
rendered by the Curves tool, which we leave activated. Here is what we started 
out with:

Chapter 4
[ 53 ]
And this here is the final result:

Advanced Editing
[ 54 ]
Plugins
AfterShot Pro can be extended with plugins. A selection of them can be found at the 
AfterShot Pro Plugin repository at www.aftershotpro.com/plugins. That said, it 
would be impossible to present all available plugins due to space constraints. So, we 
have to limit ourselves to three very interesting ones:
•	
Wavelet Sharpen
•	
Nostalgia
•	
GradFilter Plugin
Wavelet Sharpen
You might remember that I've already written about the default sharpening of 
AfterShot Pro and that it is highly deficient and should not be used. The plugin 
Wavelet Sharpen, which is free software, is a much better way of sharpening 
your images.
As you can see, you have three ways to sharpen your image with this plugin.  
You can activate two wavelet filters which can be used in conjunction, or can use  
a standard unsharp mask filter that is still better than what AfterShot Pro uses, or  
use a gradient filter. Needless to say that you should not activate USM together 
with Gradient or wavelet filters and vice versa.

Chapter 4
[ 55 ]
For the simple reason to save screen estate, the controls for the filters have been 
arranged in two tabs: Wavelet 1/USM and Wavelet 2/Grad. The controls for the 
wavelet filters are the same on both tabs.
Wavelet Sharpen uses a sharpening algorithm that decomposes the image into 
multiple images with different frequency content. The high frequency parts are 
then amplified and the images are then recomposed again. The resulting image 
appears to be sharper than the original one. You can control the amount with the 
Amount slider and the radius with the Radius one. The Edge slider controls the 
edge detection algorithm. You can use it to make sure that the filter is applied to 
edges in your images, thus avoiding sharpening artifacts. Setting the Edge to 0 
turns off edge detection, while setting it to 100 will only sharpen edges. Turning on 
S+P will remove salt and pepper noise that sometimes gets introduced by the filter.
You can use two different Wavelet Sharpen filters at the same time and have each 
one be controlled by different settings.
The USM filter is the filter for enhancing sharpness that is found in nearly any image 
editing software. You control the amount of sharpening with the Amount slider 
and the radius with the Radius one. Turning on Clarity Mode will sharpen the 
image with a luminance based mask. According to the author, a radius of 50 with an 
amount between 0 and 100 and enabled Clarity Mode will give the best results.
Gradient sharpen can be used to counter unsharpness introduced by the AA filter 
of modern DSLRs. It's effect and usefulness vary from camera to camera, so you will 
have to try it out with your gear to see if it is useful for your images. The default 
settings are said to be good.

Advanced Editing
[ 56 ]
Example of unsharpened 100% crop image is as follows:
Example of wavelet sharpen with amount (100), radius (0.50) and edge (100) is 
as follows:
Example of unsharp mask with amount (100), radius (50), and threshold (0) is 
as follows:
Example of gradiant with strength (30), width/Iter (3), and microcontrast (0) is 
as follows:

Chapter 4
[ 57 ]
While I definitely don't want to split hairs here, in my personal opinion, the crop 
sharpened by the wavelet filter looks best.
Nostalgia
If you used film before switching to digital or simply love the look of old film images 
and would like to add it to your digital workflow, Nostalgia is the plugin you need 
to get. In short, it modifies your image to look like well-known film emulsions.

Advanced Editing
[ 58 ]
As you can see the tool consists of several sections. On the top, you can select the film 
emulsion and the paper you wish to emulate. The codes in front of the names signify 
black and white negative (BN), black and white positive (BP), color negative (CN), 
and color positive (CP).
There is also a paid version of Nostalgia available which offers even more 
film simulations.
The checkboxes below control how the simulation operates. The Colour checkbox 
will force the output to color even if you have selected a black and white film. 
The Print checkbox will simulate printing the image on paper like in a darkroom 
when it is checked. This is of course normal for negative films. Checking Auto 
will automatically check Colour when you select a color film emulsion and will 
automatically check Print when you select a negative emulsion. Clip will show 
clipping in the image.
The Camera and Enlarger sliders control the exposure of the film simulation. 
Drag them to the right-hand side to brighten the image and to the left-hand side  
to darken it.
The Density and RAW Stops sliders control how your image is converted for the 
simulation. Density sets the contrast level between black and white in the final 
output. RAW Stops specifies the stops between black and white of the original 
image and depends on your camera sensor. If you are using a DSLR, seven to 10 
stops are fine. For a point and shoot camera, five to seven stops should be used.  
To effectively use more than 10 stops on this slider, your source material should 
come from a digital back or film scanner. Generally, it is better to underestimate  
the capabilities of your hardware than to overestimate them here.
The Film and Paper sliders give us the chance to increase or decrease the 
development time of the simulated film or paper by sliding to the right-hand 
(increasing) or the left-hand side (decreasing). Try to do that with a film!
The final section of the plugin gives us the ability to add filters to the film simulation. 
You can use the sliders Red, Green, and Blue for an individual mix or select a 
traditional one from the selection box and click the Stack button to have it applied. 
You can, by the way, stack as many filters as you like. In case you get carried away 
with them, a click on the bottom Reset button will revert all your filter choices. A 
click on the top Reset button will revert all changes you have made to the complete 
plugin, giving you a completely fresh start.
Now let's see what we can do with this plugin. This is a photo of a happy girl riding, 
completely unprocessed.

Chapter 4
[ 59 ]
I've always liked the colors of the Fuji Velvia 100T, so here is the simulation of it. I 
did not make any changes to the exposure or colors but simply used the entry CP: 
Fuji Velvia 100T.

Advanced Editing
[ 60 ]
When it comes to black and white, I've always been fond of the ILford FP4 together 
with Agfa Multicontrast Premium paper. I've used gradation 1 paper for the 
simulation. All other settings remained untouched.
In case you get unwanted results, make sure that both AutoLevel and 
Perfectly Clear are turned off. Both of these settings cause problems with 
the Nostalgia plugin.
GradFilter
GradFilter is not a free plugin. However, it deserves to be mentioned here simply 
because it can save you a great deal of work. I'd still like to point out that everything 
that this plugin does can be achieved by using Adjust Layers and regions. It just 
takes longer.
Photography can be tricky, especially when we leave home without a graduated 
neutral density filter with all the burden we carry in our bags, because we've not 
used it in the current millennium. Murphy's law has been waiting for this and 
presents us with the perfect scene where we would require the filter. Luckily, all  
is not lost as we can try to rectify the situation with the GradFilter Plugin.

Chapter 4
[ 61 ]
As you can see, we can enable three graduated filters with different settings for our 
image. For each filter, the following settings apply: 
The Strength slider adjusts the strength of the filter.
The Edge slider adjusts the size of the edge between affected and unaffected image 
areas. It is comparable to the feather size of the region tools. Take care, though, 
because a large edge gives harder transitions. The Offset slider controls the location 
of the boundary (called Center line) between affected and unaffected image parts. 
The Rotation slider lets us rotate the Center line to our needs. We can change the 
color of the filter with the Color box. To make working with this filter easier, it is best 
to enable the checkbox Center line. This makes positioning the filter a snap. In case 
you want to brighten and not darken your image, check the Brighten checkbox.
Here I have a beach shot where the sky is a bit too light for my taste. As you can see, 
I already enabled the GradFilter plugin.

Advanced Editing
[ 62 ]
The upper half is already darker than the lower half. However, I only want to darken 
the sky, so I adjust the Center line until it is right between sky and beach. There is 
no need to rotate the line as the horizon is pretty much flat. After moving the Center 
line to 18 and adjusting Strength and Edge to 50 each, the image looks like the 
following screenshot:
Only the sky is darker now, much like it was when I took the photo.
Don't forget to turn off the Center line after you have finished editing 
with the GradFilter plugin. If you don't, it will be visible in your exported 
images! I can't think of any reason why you would want this.
Always remember that you can use plugins together with layers and regions, too.
However, don't forget to turn off AutoLevel or Perfectly Clear before using plugins. 
If you don't, you will get strange results. Most of the time, these settings will 
compensate for the changes that the plugin introduced, leaving you wondering  
if the plugin works. It does, but you are not seeing the results.

Chapter 4
[ 63 ]
Working with versions of images
Let's go back to the images I used to show you how the Nostalgia plugin works.
What do you think, how many images are there in this folder on my hard disk? 
Actually, there is none. Right now, before we export our images, only the RAW file 
resides on our disks. All changes we make to it be it sharpening, filters, conversions, 
crops, or anything else are stored in AfterShot Pro XML files (when you edit in file 
system mode) or in the AfterShot Pro image library (when you edit in library mode). 
This makes it easy to work with versions.
As you can see, there are three versions of the image. On the left-hand side of  
the group is the master version, in the center we have the Fuji version, and on the 
right-hand side is the ILford version. Notice that AfterShot Pro simply adds _v2 or 
_v3 to the name.
To create a new version, right-click on an image in the thumbnail strip and select 
Version in the menu.

Advanced Editing
[ 64 ]
In the menu, you can select between:
•	
New Version from Current: This creates a new version of an image that 
inherits all the settings of the currently selected image.
•	
New Version from Master: This creates a new version of an image that 
inherits all the settings of the master version of the image.
•	
New Version from Import: This creates a new version of an image that 
inherits the same settings the selected version had when it was imported.
•	
New Version from Defaults: This creates a new version with the default 
image settings for this type of image (we will cover that later).
•	
Remove Version: This will remove the selected image version. If you 
selected a master version, this operation will delete your RAW file on the 
disk. Be careful what you have selected before you remove versions.
•	
Rename Version: This lets you rename the selected version.
•	
Show Master File Location: This will open your default file system browser 
in the folder that contains your master file.
Now you may still ask what versions are good for, so I'd like to explain my workflow 
a bit. I usually use the master version for removing distractions like dust spots, 
unwanted objects, and so on. Most of the time, I also sharpen the image at this point 
and also remove noise if necessary.
Then I create new versions for every crop I like to have of an image. This is the point 
where I also apply tonal correction and finer detail work, too, but only for the first 
crop because I want to have the same corrections in the different crops. I use New 
Version from Current and simply adjust the crop.
When I think about converting images to black and white, I create further versions. 
The mantra is to edit once, use often, because the settings are inherited by creating 
new versions from current ones. If I really need to start over, I simply create a New 
Version from Import, as this will give me a completely untouched version.
This might seem complicated, but try it once to see if it works for you. It will save 
your time in the end, because you don't need to redo edits that you have already 
done before.
Summary
In this chapter, you learned to work with regions and layers, use plugins and work 
with versions. So go ahead and try out some of this.
In the next chapter, we will take care of digital asset management. This means 
creating and working with AfterShot Pro catalogs. We will import images into them, 
work with files, and move the catalogs, too.

Digital Asset Management
In this chapter we will start working with the Digital Asset Management (DAM) 
part of AfterShot Pro. We will be covering the following topics in this chapter:
•	
Creating and working with catalogs
•	
Importing images into catalogs
•	
Moving images
•	
Moving catalogs
Creating and working with catalogs
Before we can use catalogs, we first have to create them. Let's create a simple 
catalog called AfterShot Pro Book to learn about the concept. You can create a 
catalog in several ways. For example, you can click on the File menu and select 
New Catalog..., right-click on the Library tab and select Catalog | New Catalog, 
or use the keyboard shortcut, Ctrl + N.

Digital Asset Management
[ 66 ]
You will be presented with a window asking you to select a folder or directory 
where AfterShot Pro should place the catalog. Don't worry if your file/directory 
picker looks different to the one pictured in the following screenshot. Here we are 
using the Gnome desktop environment on the openSUSE operating system. On other 
operating systems the dialog box will look different but offer the same functionality. 
We use the dialog box as shown in the preceding screenshot to create a folder named 
AfterShot Pro Book as this is the name we want the new catalog to have. We 
then select this new folder and click on the Choose button. This will create the new 
catalog and add it to the list of open catalogs in the Catalogs tool on the Library tab.
Please take care where you put your catalog. Catalogs should not be put 
into the folders that contain your images. Keep those two strictly divided. 
I keep my catalogs in a folder called AfterShot Pro Catalogs. You 
can keep your catalogs next to your image folders, but putting them 
within them is just asking for trouble. Have a look at the setup to clarify.

Chapter 5
[ 67 ]
All the images reside in a folder called Bilder (that's German 
for images). This is also the place where we keep the AfterShot 
Pro catalogs. However, the catalogs are in the folder AfterShot 
Pro Catalogs while the images are in the Photos-2005 to 
Photos-2012 folders. This way we can backup just one folder 
(Bilder) while images and catalogs stay separate.
As you can see, we have a lot of catalogs in the File System (photos from 2005 to 
2012 to be precise), but only three are opened for use by AfterShot Pro at this time: 
AfterShot Pro Photos 2011, AfterShot Pro Photos 2012, and the freshly created 
Aftershot Pro Book catalog. 
AfterShot Pro can be quite resource hungry when you have too many 
catalogs open at the same time. Therefore it is best to have only those 
catalogs open that you need to work with right now. You can open 
catalogs by right-clicking on the Catalogs tool and selecting Open 
Catalog. Similarly you can close catalogs by choosing Close Catalog.
Getting your images into catalogs
Before we can import images into the catalog you need to understand one very 
important concept of AfterShot Pro. Your images are not stored in the catalog. 
They are not copied into the catalog when you import them. What is imported, 
however, are the locations of these images. That is, the catalog comprises the 
images' data (EXIF, IPTC, AfterShot Pro edits, and so on), the path to the images, 
and the filename of the images.
Having said that, operations in the catalog can still result in moving around images 
on your hard disk as well as deleting images from it. We will address this when we 
come to it. First, let us get some images into the catalog.

Digital Asset Management
[ 68 ]
Importing images
We can import images very quickly via the File System tab. Navigate to the folder 
with the images that you wish to import and right-click on it or, if you only want to 
import some of the images of this folder, display its contents, select the images you'd 
like to import, and right-click on the selection.
In the pop-up menu click on the Import Selected Files... entry. You'll get an import 
dialog box like the one shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 69 ]
Depending on what your source for import is, the Source Folder field will either 
display a location or (Selected files). More important for us is the selection of the 
catalog where we want to import the images. Have a look at the Import into Catalog 
field. If the catalog is not the one you want, click on the field and select the correct one.
In the selection dialog box, select the correct catalog. In case the right catalog is not 
already open, you can open it by clicking on the Open Catalog... button. If you need 
to create a new catalog, click on the New Catalog... button.
You can click on the Apply Import Settings checkbox too at this point. Any keywords 
you enter in the Keywords field will be applied to all imported images, as well as any 
presets that you add in the Presets field.
A click on the Begin Import button in the import dialog box will then import the 
images into the selected catalog.

Digital Asset Management
[ 70 ]
As you can see, the image is referenced by its location on the hard disk. The path to 
it is /home/.../2012_08_23.... If we move the image to another location outside 
of AfterShot Pro, then AfterShot Pro would no longer be able to find it. On the other 
hand, if we move it within AfterShot Pro, for example via a drag-and-drop action, 
these changes would be duplicated in the filesystem thus making sure that AfterShot 
Pro references to the right file.
Downloading images from a memory card
If you are like me, you probably won't copy your photos to your hard disk to import 
them. Luckily, AfterShot Pro can download and import in one single step. Connect 
your camera or make your memory card available to your operating system and 
navigate to the corresponding folder. Then select the images you want to download 
and import. Now, instead of right-clicking on the image to import them, use the 
keyboard shortcut D to start the Download batch. If you prefer to use drag-and-drop, 
you can also drag the folder or the images onto the Download batch, which is located 
in the Output tab.
When you use the drag-and-drop option, the number of images is displayed together 
with a preview of one of the images.

Chapter 5
[ 71 ]
Whichever method you use to start the Download batch, renaming the images is the 
first step. Give the images good names, you want to be able to find them again later. 
The next dialog box lets you select or create a new folder or directory on your hard 
disk to actually store the images. Remember, AfterShot Pro only references to them. 
The images don't reside within the catalog, so they need to have a home of their own. 
When you have found or created a place for them, you again select the catalog that 
you want the images to import into.
It's the same dialog box you get when you import from a folder on your hard disk, 
so you shouldn't be too surprised by it. Make your selection and the images are 
downloaded, saved, renamed, and imported into AfterShot Pro.
Don't worry if you are not completely satisfied with the way the Download batch 
works. We'll adapt it to your needs in a later chapter when we deal with input and 
output batches.
The Download batch of AfterShot Pro lets you select a folder/directory 
for your images only once per session. So if you download images from 
several memory cards in the same AfterShot Pro session, they will all 
end up in the first selected folder. Don't worry about this, though. You 
can easily create a new folder in the catalogs by right-clicking on it and 
select New Library Folder.... Then simply drag-and-drop your images 
to the right folders. They will be moved on the hard disk as well.

Digital Asset Management
[ 72 ]
Organizing your images within a catalog
Now that you have your images in a catalog you might find yourself looking at the 
hierarchy of folders that is displayed within them. Consider an example as shown in 
the following screenshot:
We have three catalogs opened. Two catalogs contain images shot in the years 2011 
and 2012. One contains some of the images that have been used for this book. As 
you can see, AfterShot Pro references them by their original path. Some are in a 
folder called ...AfterShot Pro Catalogs/AfterShot Pro Book/Repelen. This 
nomenclature doesn't look proper.

Chapter 5
[ 73 ]
The photos were taken in 2009, so let's create a folder reflecting that in our catalog. 
A simple right-click on AfterShot Pro Book (that is, the last folder in the catalog 
hierarchy) and selecting New Library Folder... will give us a dialog box where we 
can put in the name for the folder. The new folder is created immediately. 
Now just select the images in the folder called Repelen and drag-and-drop them into 
the Photos-2009 folder. These files will be moved on your hard disk as well. If you 
hold down the Ctrl key during a drag-and-drop operation, AfterShot Pro copies the 
images instead of moving them. Needless to say, this procedure is replicated on the 
hard disk, too.
All that is left to do is to remove the now empty folder via the Remove Empty Folder 
option. You can, by the way, easily see which folder contains images and which one 
does not. Folders containing images have names in bold type, folders not containing 
images have names in normal type.

Digital Asset Management
[ 74 ]
AfterShot Pro lets you create folders in catalogs into which you can't 
move any images. In the example we have just seen, we could have 
created the folder Photos-2009 directly in the ...Bilder folder. 
In fact, AfterShot Pro lets us create it quite nicely. However, if you 
want to move images into it, AfterShot Pro presents an error that 
the folder does not exist. This must be some glitch in the program, 
because as you have seen AfterShot Pro can and does create folders 
on disk. It simply must be very peculiar about their location. You 
can safely create folders at the end of the hierarchy and move 
images there. Better stay away from the top folders, though. 
Writing XML files
If you use catalogs, you may eventually need to move either them or your images, 
but most of the time both, to different drives, to an NAS or other storage. You can 
easily do that manually by moving the images and catalogs with the file manager 
of your choice. However I strongly advise against this because AfterShot Pro will 
no longer be able to find your images once their location changes. The only solution 
would be to reimport the files into the catalog once they are moved to a different 
drive. You would however lose all your edits, because these are saved in the catalog. 
There are two ways to counter that problem, so let's find out how to move your 
images and catalogs in a safe way.
Before moving any image or version on your hard disk, make sure to let AfterShot 
Pro write AfterShot XMP files for the catalog you want to move. You can do this 
by right-clicking on a catalog and then selecting Write AfterShot XMP for entire 
catalog. Now the application exports all your edits and versions that are stored in the 
catalog as XML files into the folders where the images are located. Each XML file will 
have the same name as the corresponding RAW file, just with the .xml extension.

Chapter 5
[ 75 ]
You can now close AfterShot Pro, move your images together with the XML files, 
and create a new catalog once the images are at their place. If you now import the 
images into the freshly created catalog, AfterShot Pro will also import the settings 
that it stored in the XML files before, thus keeping all your edits.
This way works perfectly when you keep your old images on an NAS and only have 
the images of the current year on your PC. Simply create the catalog in a folder on 
your NAS, move and import the images like shown here, and then open and close 
the catalog as needed. You should make sure that the catalog is closed before you 
disconnect the network drive. AfterShot Pro can become unpredictable when it can't 
connect to catalogs it remembers to be open and ready for use.
If you think that having these XML files in any case is a good 
idea, simply enable XML file creation for images in catalogs in 
the preferences. It makes good sense to do so.
Summary
Now you know how to work with AfterShot Pro's catalogs. Just keep in mind that, 
unfortunately, the DAM functionality is currently AfterShot Pro's weakest part 
(speaking of Version 1.0.1.10 of the application). I'm sure that the DAM performance 
will improve, however it does make sense to use the XML file creation for images in 
catalogs. It will make working with AfterShot Pro a lot easier.
In the next chapter we will export the edited images. You'll not only learn how to 
do this with the default batches, but also to modify these given batches and to create 
new ones based on your needs.


Exporting Pictures
In this chapter we will turn our edited images into actual pictures. We will use the 
default output batches at first and then modify them to our needs.
We will be covering the following topics:
•	
Using the default batches
•	
Adapting and creating new batches
•	
Creating a personal gallery batch
Using the default batches
It's now time to distill our edits of RAW image files into nice pictures. AfterShot Pro 
comes with several readymade batches for this.

Exporting Pictures
[ 78 ]
There are batches for 16-bit TIFF, 8-bit TIFF, JPEG Full Size, and JPEG Proof as 
shown in the preceding screenshot. These batches will take your RAW image files, 
apply the edits contained in the catalog or AfterShot Pro XML files, and save the 
resulting pictures according to their settings. You can simply select your images  
and press the default key: 
•	
T for 16-bit TIFF
•	
8 for 8-bit TIFF
•	
F for JPEG Full Size
•	
J for JPEG Proof
You can also drag-and-drop the selected images. AfterShot Pro will start  
working immediately. 
AfterShot Pro can use a lot of resources on your machine. It is 
good practice to first edit all images and then output the results. 
Outputting images while editing other RAW image files can be 
counterproductive because the background processes might slow 
down your editing workflow. Having said that, watching AfterShot 
Pro work can be a relaxing experience: all of your work is done, now 
let the machine take over.
You can also right-click on a batch and select Process a folder (include subfolders).... 
A file picker will then let you choose the folder you would like AfterShot Pro  
to process.

Chapter 6
[ 79 ]
When you start the output batch, a small indicator in the main AfterShot Pro 
window will show you the progress. Additionally, you can pause the batch  
with a click on the pause symbol or cancel it with the stop button.
Note that pausing or canceling a batch will not immediately stop it's operation. 
Rather, the element AfterShot Pro is working on at the moment will be finished  
first. Then the batch will be stopped or canceled.
As you already know, the Download batch is not an export, but an import batch. So 
don't drag-and-drop images to be exported on it. The results might be undesirable.
The Gallery batch, however, is a different batch altogether. This batch allows you 
to easily create a gallery from your images. It creates thumbnails, small preview, 
web-sized versions of your photos as well as all the HTML and CSS pages to make  
a gallery. The only thing left for you to do is uploading the files to a web server. 
Adapting and creating batches
You're probably not 100% happy with the way the batches are set up. Don't worry, 
we are going to adapt the batches to our needs right now. Let's start with the Gallery 
batch. After you've worked through that, you can easily create or modify any batch 
to suit your workflow.
Creating a personal gallery batch
To adapt a batch, you can simply change it's settings by right-clicking on it and 
selecting Settings.... However, most of the time it is good to keep the original batch 
as a reference point, even if you don't use it any longer. Misconfigurations do happen 
and it is always good if we can start fresh.

Exporting Pictures
[ 80 ]
So, let's duplicate the Gallery batch with a click on Duplicate instead. (To create 
your own batch from scratch, simply select  New....) The new batch is blatantly 
called Gallery copy.
Some of the settings are the same for all batches, while some only apply to certain 
output formats (gallery, pictures, and so on). Needless to say that all batches have  
a Batch Name field. We'll change this one to something useful, like My Gallery.
The Output button is very important. With it, you have the following four choices:
•	
Add File Output: This will add a file output to the batch. With AfterShot 
Pro batches, you can have more than one file output per batch. So, you could 
create a One-Batch_Fits-All batch that creates full resolution JPEG images, 
web resolution JPEG images, and a gallery at the same time. I strongly advise 
against this, though. As has already been pointed out, exporting images uses 
a lot of processing power of your machine and a batch like this would surely 
bring it to a screeching stop. Your mileage may vary, though.
•	
Add Copy Output: This will add a copy output to the batch. AfterShot Pro 
will rename and copy the created files to a given location.

Chapter 6
[ 81 ]
•	
Add Gallery Output: This will add a gallery output to the batch. This is 
quite useful, but as we are creating a gallery batch right now, it is better left 
alone. Adding this output to a batch that creates preview images for clients 
however, has its uses.
•	
Remove Current Output: This will remove the currently selected output. 
The Destination section of the dialog box takes the settings where the gallery, or any 
other output we create with a batch, will be saved in the filesystem: 
•	
Ask will let AfterShot Pro ask you to enter a location. In case the Only 
prompt once checkbox is ticked, this location is remembered throughout the 
session and will be used for all similar questions. 
•	
Fixed will save the output to the folder specified. You can change this with 
the Browse button. 
•	
Finally Relative will export the gallery to a folder relative to the original 
folder of the images. This is what you should usually choose. It keeps your 
RAW image files in one folder and then full-size JPEG images, thumbnail 
JPEG images, and a gallery in folders below them. 
For now, tick Relative and enter my_gallery into the field. This will let AfterShot 
Pro create the gallery in the given subfolder. Note that these folders don't need to 
exist prior to running the batch. AfterShot Pro will create them automatically.
www.allitebooks.com

Exporting Pictures
[ 82 ]
The Gallery (80%) tab now controls how the gallery is created. The first thing to 
set up is the JPEG Quality field. The default is 80% which is usable for the Web. 
For full-size images I still recommend 100% if you use JPEG images. Notice that the 
section name always reflects the quality in its name.
You can also set the Output Name and Location field for the created images. 
Simply choose the one you'd like from the combobox or create your own custom 
format. As the renaming variables of AfterShot Pro are plenty, it is best if you refer 
to the corresponding section of the online help for a list of them: http://product.
corel.com/help/AfterShot/540111115/Main/EN/Doc/index.html?rename_
formats.html
I personally prefer to use the format of [jobname]_[onum][oext] in my Download 
batch. This prompts for a job name and uses the original file number and original 
extension. So a RAW file called DSC0067.NEF would be saved as Repelen_0067.
NEF on my hard disk. Because of this, I keep [vname][ext] in the Output Name field. 
This gives me files with the names of the AfterShot Pro versions and the extension 
corresponding to the file type.
Save in subfolder comes in handy when you have several output tabs defined in a 
batch. Just enter a name here and the files created by this Output tab will be saved 
in a subfolder of the folder you have specified in the Destination section. Let's name 
the subfolder gallery.
If you tick Overwrite existing output files, AfterShot Pro will do exactly that. 
Otherwise, it will append a counter to the filenames of the newly exported images 
to preserve any files already on your hard disk. Ticking Ask for job name each time 
makes AfterShot Pro ask you for a job name each time the batch is run. This is only 
useful if you actually use it in your naming format. If you don't use the job name to 
rename the images, there is no need to enable this option.
In the Image Sizing section we control the dimensions of the exported images. 
Any size change can be done with the Width and Height controls. Simply enter 
the dimensions you'd like the images to have.
We have five options of resizing: 
•	
Normal: This lets AfterShot Pro use the normal, or high quality, process 
for resizing.
•	
Proof: This lets AfterShotPro use the quicker, but not as good, process 
for resizing.
•	
Do Not Resize: This option will not resize your images. This option is best 
used for batches in which you export full size images for your work. It is not 
really useful for a gallery on the Web.

Chapter 6
[ 83 ]
•	
Resize Width/Height: This option will resize your images to make them fit 
into the specified dimensions.
•	
Resize Long/Short: This option will resize your images to make sure 
that the long and short edges of the exported images are smaller than  
the dimensions specified.
If you let your images resize, it is sometimes viable to enable the Do not enlarge 
option. Otherwise AfterShot Pro might enlarge a source image that has a smaller 
resolution than the dimensions given to fit the batch. Also, this section ends the  
batch settings that are the same for all export types.
The special settings for the gallery are in the Gallery tab:
You can choose Gallery Type and enter the Gallery Heading as well as Gallery 
Title here. If you want the gallery to Display MetaData, you can enable it here. You 
can also select the metadata you want to be shown in the corresponding combobox. 
The option Show thumbnail name lets you decide if you want the names of the 
thumbnails visible or not. The sensible default is off. Finally, you can enter the 
dimensions of Thumbnail image size and Preview image size. We have already 
selected the full screen size with the resize options before.
You have probably seen the Additional Image Settings tab. This tab is present for 
all outputs and will be discussed momentarily. To do that, imagine that you need 
high resolution TIFFs for all the images in your gallery. These are of course not for  
a publication on the Web, but for other purposes.

Exporting Pictures
[ 84 ]
So let's add another file output and change the image type from JPEG which is the 
default to TIFF (16 bit).
As you can see, most fields of the new tab are already known to you. We'll set the 
Save in subfolder field to TIFFs, to make sure those images don't end up in our 
gallery. Now let's have a look at the Additional Image Settings section.

Chapter 6
[ 85 ]
You can use the Apply Presets field when exporting your images. Add them with 
the plus sign or remove them by selecting them and then clicking on the minus sign. 
Take good care when you select the Output Color Space checkbox. Make sure that 
the hardware you want to use the exported images on can display images in your 
selected color space. If in doubt, stick to the sRGB default.
The Metadata section lets you select which metadata is saved in the exported files. 
You can also choose to embed the color profile and the DPI of the resulting images. 
Embedding the color profile is usually a good idea. Embedding the other metadata  
is a matter of personal choice, I always embed EXIF and IPTC metadata.
Finally, in the Post Processing section you can add Output sharpening to your 
images. The default is None, and I prefer to stick to that because I already sharpen 
my images while editing them. Adding output sharpening has a tendency to 
oversharpen and we don't want that. Your mileage may vary, though.
In case you want to open the exported image with another program, you can do that 
by enabling Open with and selecting the desired program. This is useful if you need 
to finalize images with a pixel editor like the Gimp.
If we now test our new batch, we'll get the desired output:
The batch exports a gallery to a my_gallery/gallery folder and at the same time 
exports TIFFs to my_gallery/Tiffs.
Summary
In this chapter we have explored the AfterShot Pro batch system. You can now adapt 
batches to your needs or create new ones that do exactly what you want them to do. 
Batches are the great strength of AfterShot Pro, so don't be afraid to invest your time 
to get them right. A good batch can save you hours in your workflow.
In the next chapter we will configure AfterShot Pro according to our needs. We will 
adjust the key bindings, set up defaults for settings as well as customize AfterShot 
Pro's user interface.


Making Yourself at Home
In this chapter, we will make ourselves at home in AfterShot Pro. We will have a 
look at the key bindings, set up RAW and camera defaults, and customize AfterShot 
Pro's tool tabs layout.
Key bindings
There are some users who prefer to use the mouse, whereas others prefer to use 
the keyboard. AfterShot Pro can be used with either the mouse or keyboard, but is 
best used with both together. Having said that, you might want to adjust the key 
bindings for the various tools and functions to your liking. To do this, simply open 
the preferences dialog (via File | Preferences) and select the section Keyboard. 
You'll get an overview of the keys that are assigned to a particular tool or function.
It looks quite overwhelming, but that is simply because the developers mapped 
nearly every available function to a key. All the tools, dialogs and functions not 
mapped to a key are marked with the (none) shortcut.

Making Yourself at Home
[ 88 ]
As you can see, AfterShot Pro lets you Save... and Load... your key bindings. This 
is a good idea, especially when you have personalized your settings here. Not only 
can you share them with others, but you can store a copy at a secure backup location 
in case things go wrong. Speaking of things going wrong, if you end up with totally 
unusable key bindings, a click on Default will reset your key bindings so that you 
can start again from scratch.
If you scroll down the long list, you will see that Show Master File Location is not 
mapped to a key. Because you often need to find the master versions of your edited 
files, we're going to change that. Click on (none) to enter a new key binding.

Chapter 7
[ 89 ]
Simply think of a suitable key and press it. Then approve it with a click on the tick.  
In this example let's chose the letter M. If this keyboard shortcut is still free, it will 
be registered with the tool immediately.
If the key is already assigned to another function, a window informing us what this 
letter is assigned to will pop up and give us the option to either replace the existing 
mapping or cancel our operation. In our example, M is already used to toggle 
Multi-Image View. You probably use this more often than finding master versions, 
so let's cancel and not replace.
The combination of Ctrl + Alt + M is not assigned to anything yet, so let's try it. As 
you can see, this assignment worked quite nicely.
You can also delete key mappings for tools and functions that you never use or 
happen to accidentally hit. Just select them and instead of ticking them off, click  
the small x to delete them.
Please don't forget to close the preferences window by clicking on OK. 
If you cancel or simply close the window, your changed key mappings 
will not be used or saved. Additionally, it is good practice to first save 
your keyboard setup and then close this window.

Making Yourself at Home
[ 90 ]
Raw and camera defaults
You will probably have a certain custom look that you want to have in your pictures. 
Even if not, there are settings you want to apply to every RAW image that you edit. 
For example, you might not want to use the default sharpening but would prefer 
to use the Wavelet Sharpen plugin. Also, you will definitely want to have all your 
images marked with your name and contact details in the IPTC tags.
IPTC tags are, by the way, pretty nifty things. They were originally 
created by the International Press Telecommunications Council 
(hence the acronym) to be added to texts, images, and other 
media. They really took flight with photographers because with 
them you can add information about the photographer, copyright 
information, contact details as well as detailed descriptions and 
captions to every image.
AfterShot Pro offers to save every tool setting in either a RAW or camera default. These 
defaults are loaded and applied to every new RAW file that you edit with AfterShot 
Pro (in the case of RAW defaults) or every new RAW file of a certain camera model  
(in the case of a camera default). We'll now have a look at creating them.
The first thing to do is to open an image you have not edited before. This way the 
default settings are loaded and we can be sure that we have a fresh start. Now 
change the settings you would like to add to your RAW or camera default.
As you can see, we have deselected AfterShot Pro's Sharpening tool.
Instead, we prefer to use the Wavelet Sharpen plugin, which we have turned on 
as you can easily see. Additionally we've increased Amount to 70. Together with 
Clarity Mode and S+P, this gives us a good start when sharpening our images.

Chapter 7
[ 91 ]
Now it is time to add IPTC information to the image. We use the Metadata tab for 
this. In the Metadata tool, switch the view to Basic IPTC and enter your name and 
a copyright tag. You should leave the other fields blank at this time, because we are 
going to save these values as default values.
Now, change the view to Photographer and enter your full details. AfterShot Pro 
will put all of this data into the exported images. And because we will save the 
information in a RAW or camera default, we only need to enter them once. That is, 
unless you move or change your contact details. In that case, it would be a smart  
idea to change the RAW or camera defaults accordingly.
To save these settings, right-click on the edited image's thumbnail. In the context 
menu, choose Settings. A second menu will pop up where you have the choice 
between Save as RAW default... and Save as camera default....
As I explained earlier, if you use different cameras and they need different 
adjustments you probably want to create a camera default for each of them.  
If you only use one camera or all your cameras have the same sensor and  
therefore need the same adjustments, create a RAW default instead.

Making Yourself at Home
[ 92 ]
Pick the one you need and a settings window will open.
Here, especially in the Main Layer: Advanced tab, you can select which settings 
will end up in your RAW or camera default. The settings you changed while 
editing are already ticked. As you can see, Sharpening has the value of false and 
WaveletSharpen2 is clearly enabled. The button All selects all settings, the button 
None clears them. A click on Reset will reset the values to the ones the dialog 
opened with. Leave the dialog by clicking on OK to save.
Your new defaults will be applied to all images that are imported from now on. If 
you want to use the defaults on images that are already in the database, you can do 
so by right-clicking on the corresponding thumbnail, selecting Settings, and then 
selecting Apply Default Settings. Be warned that this will remove all edits you 
have made to the image so far (which is, as you will agree, rather logical and easily 
derived from the phrase Apply Default Settings).

Chapter 7
[ 93 ]
You might wish to know that you can also save defaults for JPEG 
images and TIFF images when you work with cameras that only 
offer these rendered formats. Simply apply all the edits you want 
and then, when you choose which kind of default to save, choose 
Save as rendered default....
Customizing the tool tabs layout
If you work with lots of plugins, you'll notice that the user interface will sort them 
into tabs called Plugins 1, Plugins 2, Plugins 3, and so on. This doesn't look nice 
and can be a nuisance because it hinders your workflow.

Making Yourself at Home
[ 94 ]
Luckily you can completely adjust the tools and the tabs they are placed on 
according to your liking. This means that you can add plugins to the default tabs as 
well, placing, for example, everything that works on image details on the Details 
tab. Unfortunately, this can not be done from within AfterShot Pro, but must be 
done manually by creating a special file called customToolsUI.txt in the settings 
folder of AfterShot Pro.

Chapter 7
[ 95 ]
The syntax of the file is straightforward. Have a look at a small section of the one I 
use. It creates the Details tab, as shown in the preceding screenshot:
Detail, Dtl, Advanced/Sharpen.ui
Detail, Dtl, sph.waveletsharpen
Detail, Dtl, com.roland65.USM
Detail, Dtl, com.roland65.SContrast
Detail, Dtl, Advanced/RAWNoise.ui
Detail, Dtl, Advanced/NoiseNinjaRegistered.ui
Detail, Dtl, NoiseNinjaStandard.ui
Detail, Dtl, sph.waveletdenoise
Detail, Dtl, Advanced/LensCorrection.ui
Detail, Dtl, name.deindl.mdRedEyes
Detail, Dtl, MirrorInvert.ui
The first part in each line is the long or normal name of the tab in which the tool will 
be added. After this follows the short name of the tab, which will be used when there 
is not enough screen estate left to display the long name. The last part of each line 
is the tool or plugin identifier. Advanced/Sharpen.ui is AfterShot Pro's sharpening 
tool. It has to be mentioned, because if a customToolsUI.txt file is present when 
AfterShot Pro starts, only the items mentioned in it will be loaded into the user 
interface. This way, you can also make sure that tools you never need don't bother 
you anymore. Simply don't include them in your customToolsUI.txt.
You can find the necessary identifiers in the logfile that AfterShot Pro creates when 
it starts. It is called AfterShotPro.log and resides in your AfterShot Pro settings 
folder. Open it with a text editor and you will find a section that shows the plugins:
Name: Wavelet Sharpen3
Identifier: sph.waveletsharpen
   Version: 1.34.0
      Path: <User Home>/Plugins/Wavelet Sharpen3.afplugin
There it is. The identifier of the Wavelet Sharpen plugin is sph.waveletsharpen.
Now all that is left to do is open a text editor and start adjusting the interface to your 
workflow. You can use my customToolsUI.txt file as a starting point. It includes all 
the tools AfterShot Pro comes with and my installed plugins organized in a way that 
makes sense to me and is reproduced in the appendix.

Making Yourself at Home
[ 96 ]
Don't forget that you have to close AfterShot Pro before creating or 
updating your customToolsUI.txt. Otherwise, there might be 
unwanted side effects.
Also, if you are wondering how to install plugins in first place, simply 
select File and Import Plugin.... Then navigate to the downloaded file 
and select it. AfterShot Pro will either ask you about installing it or, 
in case of the plugin being an updated version of one that is already 
installed, it will ask you about updating it. Confirm with OK and the 
plugin will be installed.
Summary
After tweaking every possible bit of AfterShot Pro via key bindings, RAW and 
camera defaults as well as customizing the user interface, you should be able to  
edit your images without thinking about the software anymore. Now you can  
create some stunning images.

Appendix
In this appendix, we will have a look at the websites and support forums where you 
can find help and information about AfterShot Pro.
Important websites
Like every other software, AfterShot Pro has a number of websites that are important 
to you as a user. For us that includes sites to get plugins, to report bugs, and to get 
access to beta versions.
AfterShot Pro Plugin Repository
The AfterShot Pro Plugin repository is the definite place to visit to get your 
application loaded up with plugins. It also is the best place to check for updates  
for your already installed plugins.
You can find it here: http://www.aftershotpro.com/plugins/.
Reporting Bugs and Feature Requests
If you encounter bugs or have feature request, the best way to contact Corel is to 
use the SurveyMonkey page at this URL: https://www.surveymonkey.com/s/
ASPFeedback.
Access to Beta Versions
In case you want to know if your reported bug is going to be fixed in the next 
version, you can check by downloading the latest testing or beta release from 
http://www.aftershotpro.com/testbuilds/. But be warned, these versions 
aren't intended for production use and may have unwanted side effects. If you  
don't know what you are doing, stick to the official releases.

Appendix
[ 98 ]
Social networks
As you have probably guessed, AfterShot Pro is also connected to modern social 
networks. The Twitter account is @AfterShotPro and can be found at https://
twitter.com/AfterShotPro. The Facebook page can be found at https://www.
facebook.com/CorelAfterShotPro. For users of Google +, the following address is 
the important one: https://plus.google.com/118220561983405570745/posts.
While all of this is nice, please keep in mind that the general state of communication 
at Corel has not changed with times. So, the accounts are not updated very often and 
the response time for posts or tweets can be long.
Support forums
Sometimes we can get stuck. Therefore, it is good to know that you can get help from 
others using the same software. AfterShot Pro has a small but dedicated community, 
that can offer assistance.
Official Support Forums
Corel maintains official support forums for all their products. It is needless to say 
that AfterShot Pro has a section on these forums, too. There are always many experts 
willing to give advice if you ask nicely. Notice, however, that no Corel developers or 
other employees visit these forums. They are strictly limited to user-to-user support.
You can find it here: http://forum.corel.com/EN/viewforum.php?f=93.
Bibble5 Forums
Bibble5 by Bibble Labs was AfterShot Pro's predecessor. The old support forums 
at http://support.bibblelabs.com/forums/index.php still hold valuable 
information that can be used for AfterShot Pro, but you'll have to wade through  
the filth left by spambots as the forums have been abandoned for quite sometime.
My customToolsUI.txt
This is my customToolsUI.txt file. I'm greatly indebted to the help given in various 
threads on the support forum for nudging me in the right way while creating it. 
Thank you!
# ----- this part rebuilds the default tabs
Standard, Std, Histogram.ui
Standard, Std, BasicTools.ui

Appendix
[ 99 ]
Standard, Std, com.roland65.AutoLevels
Standard, Std, au.com.mindsocket.GradFilter
Standard, Std, Presets.ui
Color, Color, Advanced/Curves.ui
Color, Color, ColorBalance.ui
Color, Color, Advanced/WhiteBalance.ui
Color, Color, Advanced/ColorManagement.ui
Color, Color, com.roland65.LabCurves
Color, Color, com.roland65.LabTools
Tone, Tone, Advanced/Exposure.ui
#---- Additions to standard tabs
Tone, Tone, tin.tin.zchannelmixer
Tone, Tone, com.ferdinand-paris.bez
Tone, Tone, MB_Asp_Lightroom
Tone, Tone, com.ferdinand-paris.mix3
Tone, Tone, com.SMP.Nuance
#----
Tone_2, Tone_2, com.corel.BlackAndWhite
Tone_2, Tone_2, com.SMP.Nostalgia
Tone_2, Tone_2, com.kbarni.equalizer
Tone_2, Tone_2, sph.FatToni
Tone_2, Tone_2, net.sadman.aftershot.splittoni
Tone_2, Tone_2, sph.SiliconBonk
Detail, Dtl, Advanced/Sharpen.ui
Detail, Dtl, sph.waveletsharpen
Detail, Dtl, com.roland65.USM
Detail, Dtl, com.roland65.SContrast
Detail, Dtl, Advanced/RAWNoise.ui
Detail, Dtl, Advanced/NoiseNinjaRegistered.ui
Detail, Dtl, NoiseNinjaStandard.ui
Detail, Dtl, sph.waveletdenoise
Detail, Dtl, Advanced/LensCorrection.ui
Detail, Dtl, name.deindl.mdRedEyes
Detail, Dtl, MirrorInvert.ui
Metadata, Meta, Metadata.ui
Metadata, Meta, Keywords.ui
#---- Additions to standard tabs
Metadata, Md, Keywords/KeywordSets.ui
#----

Appendix
[ 100 ]
#plugins
Effects, Eff., sph.grain
Effects, Eff., com.kbarni.vigne
Effects, Eff., com.corel.vigne
Effects, Eff., net.sadman.aftershot.typewriter
Effects, Eff., tin.tin.zFrame
Effects, Eff., tin.tin.zText
Effects, Eff., tin.tin.zPerspector
Effects, Eff., tin.tin.zShadow
Effects, Eff., com.kbarni.grid
Summary
As you can see, AfterShot Pro has an active community dedicated to it.

Index
A
Additional Image Settings tab  83
Adjust Layers
about  48
using  48-53
AfterShot Pro
adjust layers  48
advanced editing functions  41
DAM  65
Image view  14
installing, on GNU/Linux  6
installing, on OS X  6
installing, on Windows  5
main controls  9
obtaining  5
Standard view  14
starting with  7, 8
Thumbnail view  14
Heal/Clone Layers  43
layers and regions tool  41
plugins  54
AfterShotPro.dmg file  6
AfterShot Pro Plugin Repository  54, 97
Amount slider  29
Apply Default Settings  92
Apply Presets field  85
B
Basic Adjustments tool  27
basic editing
about  26
basic adjustment tool  27
Cropping tool  30
Sharpening tool  28
Straightening tool  37
batches
about  79
personal gallery batch, creating  79-85
resizing, options  82
Begin Import button  69
Bibble5 Forums  98
Black and White Plugin tool  35, 36
C
camera defaults  90-92
catalogs
creating  65-67
images, placing  67
images, organizing  72-74
working with  65-67
Catalogs tool  15, 66
Color balance tool  20
Color correction tool  20
color management tool  20
Colors tab
about  31
controls  32-34
Corel  97
Cropping tool  30, 31
crop tool  23
Curves tool  52
D
DAM  65
default batches
images, selecting  78
using  77-79
Digital Asset Management. See  DAM
Download batch  71, 79

[ 102 ]
E
Exposure tool  20
F
Facebook page  98
File System tab  16, 26
G
Gallery batch  79
Gallery tab  83
Gallery Title option  83
GNU/Linux
AfterShot Pro, installing on  6
Google +  98
GradFilter plugin
about  60, 62
Edge slider  61
Strength slider  61
H
Heal/Clone Layers
about  43
adding  44-48
Histogram tool  19
I
images
downloading, from memory card  70, 71
importing  68, 69
organizing, within catalog  72-74
menu, selecting  64
working  63
Image Sizing section  82
K
key bindings  87, 89
Keywords and Keyword Sets tool  22
L
Layers and regions
about  41, 42
tools  43
left panel
File System tab  16
library tab  15
Output tab  17
library tab  15
M
Main Layer
Advanced tab  92
main toolbar
about  23
Click white (the pipette icon)  23
crop tool  23
Image zoom  23
Pan (the hand icon)  23
region cursors  23
straighten tool  23
Toggle 1.1  23
Toggle fit  23
Metadata Browser tool  15
Metadata tool  91
Multi-Image View  89
My customToolsUI.txt  98
N
Nostalgia plugin
about  57-60
Camera sliders  58
Density and RAW Stops sliders  58
Film and Paper sliders  58
O
official support forums  98
Open Catalog... button  69
OS X
AfterShot Pro, installing on  6
Output button
Add Copy Output  80
Add File Output  80
Add Gallery Output  81
Remove Current Output  81
Output Name and Location field  82
Output tab  17

[ 103 ]
P
plugins, AfterShot Pro
GradFilter  60, 62
Nostalgia  57-60
Wavelet Sharpen  54-57
R
RAW image  90, 91
region cursor tool  23
Remove Empty Folder option
writing  73
right panel
about  18
Color Balance tool  20
Color Correction tool  20
Color Management tool  20
Color tab  19
Curves tool  19
Detail tab  20
Exposure tool  20
Keywords and Keyword Sets tools  22
Metadata tab  22
Metadata tool  22
Standard tab  19
White Balance tool  20
S
Save in subfolder field  84
Sharpening tool  21, 28, 90
social network  98
Straightening tool  37, 38
Straighten slider  38
straighten tool  23
support forums
about  98
Bibble5 forums  98
My customToolsUI.txt  98, 100
official support forums  98
T
thumbnail strip toolbar  22
tool tabs layout
about  93
customizing  94, 95
top tool bar  10-14
Twitter account  98
W
Wavelet Sharpen plugin
about  54-56
example  56
USM filter  55
websites
AfterShot Pro Plugin Repository  97
Beta version access  97
Corel  97
White balance tool  20
window layout
about  9, 10
left panel  15
right panel  18
status bar  23
top tool bar  10-14
Windows
AfterShot Pro, installing on  5
X
XML files
writing  74


Thank you for buying 
AfterShot Pro: Non-destructive 
photo editing and management
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books 
give you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using 
to get the job done. Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have 
seen in the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, 
giving you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality,  
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike.  
For more information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals 
should be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you 
would like to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our 
commissioning editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

Final Cut Pro X Cookbook
ISBN:  978-1-84969-296-0            Paperback: 452 pages
Edit with style and ease using the latest editing 
technologies in Final Cut Pro X!
1.	
Edit slick, professional videos of all kinds – 
music videos, promos, documentaries, even 
feature films 
2.	
Add hundreds of built-in animated titles, 
transitions, and effects without complicated 
keyframing 
3.	
Learn tons of time-saving workflows to tricky, 
yet common editing scenarios 
Sony Vegas Pro 11  
Beginner's Guide
ISBN: 978-1-84969-170-3            Paperback: 264 pages
Edit videos with style and ease using Vegas Pro
1.	
Edit slick, professional videos of all kinds with 
Sony Vegas Pro 
2.	
Learn audio and video editing from scratch 
3.	
Speed up your editing workflow 
4.	
A practical beginner's guide with a fast-paced 
but friendly and engaging approach towards 
video editing 
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

GIMP 2.6 cookbook
ISBN: 978-1-84951-202-2             Paperback: 408 pages
Over 50 recipes to produce amazing graphics with 
the GIMP
1.	
Recipes for working with the GIMP, the most 
powerful open source graphics package in the 
world 
2.	
Straightforward instructions guide you through 
the tasks to unleash your true creativity 
without being hindered by the system 
3.	
Part of Packt's cookbook series – practical  
and efficient 
Articulate Studio Cookbook
ISBN: 978-1-84969-308-0            Paperback: 292 pages
Create training courses with Articulate Studio's 
strong interactivity and rich content capabilities, all 
within the familiarity of Microsoft PowerPoint
1.	
Complete your courses by creating Flash-ready 
presentations through familiar PowerPoint 
2.	
Employ Articulate Engage, Quizmaker and 
Encoder to make dazzling interaction, asses 
learners and add full-motion videos 
3.	
Practical recipes to get you moving on a specific 
activity without the extra fluff 
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles
www.allitebooks.com

