
John McCaskill
University of Texas at Dallas, USA
Agent-Based Modeling 
in Humanitarian 
Interventions:
Emerging Research and 
Opportunities
A volume in the Advances 
in Electronic Government, 
Digital Divide, and Regional 
Development (AEGDDRD) 
Book Series 

Published in the United States of America by
IGI Global
Information Science Reference (an imprint of IGI Global)
701 E. Chocolate Avenue
Hershey PA 17033
Tel: 717-533-8845
Fax:  717-533-8661 
E-mail: cust@igi-global.com
Web site: http://www.igi-global.com
Copyright © 2017 by IGI Global.  All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be 
reproduced, stored or distributed in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying, without written permission from the publisher.
Product or company names used in this set are for identification purposes only. Inclusion of the 
names of the products or companies does not indicate a claim of ownership by IGI Global of the 
trademark or registered trademark.
	
	
	
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
British Cataloguing in Publication Data
A Cataloguing in Publication record for this book is available from the British Library.
All work contributed to this book is new, previously-unpublished material. The views expressed in 
this book are those of the authors, but not necessarily of the publisher.
CIP Data Pending
ISBN: 978-1-5225-1782-5 
eISBN: 978-1-5225-1783-2
 
This book is published in the IGI Global book series Advances in Electronic Government, Digital 
Divide, and Regional Development (AEGDDRD) (ISSN: 2326-9103; eISSN: 2326-9111)

Advances in Electronic 
Government, Digital 
Divide, and Regional 
Development (AEGDDRD) 
Book Series
IGI Global is currently accepting 
manuscripts for publication within 
this series. To submit a proposal for a 
volume in this series, please contact 
our Acquisition Editors at Acquisi-
tions@igi-global.com or visit: http://
www.igi-global.com/publish/.
Coverage
The Advances in Electronic Government, Digital Divide, and Regional Development  (AEGDDRD) Book Series (ISSN 
2326-9103) is published by IGI Global, 701 E. Chocolate Avenue, Hershey, PA 17033-1240, USA, www.igi-global.com. This 
series is composed of titles available for purchase individually; each title is edited to be contextually exclusive from any other title 
within the series. For pricing and ordering information please visit http://www.igi-global.com/book-series/advances-electronic-
government-digital-divide/37153. Postmaster: Send all address changes to above address. Copyright © 2017 IGI Global. All rights, 
including translation in other languages reserved by the publisher. No part of this series may be reproduced or used in any form 
or by any means – graphics, electronic, or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, taping, or information and retrieval 
systems – without written permission from the publisher, except for non commercial, educational use, including classroom teaching 
purposes. The views expressed in this series are those of the authors, but not necessarily of IGI Global.
Mission
ISSN:2326-9103 
 EISSN:2326-9111
The successful use of digital technologies (including social media and mobile technolo-
gies) to provide public services and foster economic development has become an objective 
for governments around the world. The development towards electronic government (or 
e-government) not only affects the efficiency and effectiveness of public services, but also 
has the potential to transform the nature of government interactions with its citizens. Current 
research and practice on the adoption of electronic/digital government and the implementation 
in organizations around the world aims to emphasize the extensiveness of this growing field.
The Advances in Electronic Government, Digital Divide & Regional Development 
(AEGDDRD) book series aims to publish authored, edited and case books encompassing 
the current and innovative research and practice discussing all aspects of electronic govern-
ment development, implementation and adoption as well the effective use of the emerging 
technologies (including social media and mobile technologies) for a more effective electronic 
governance (or e-governance). 
•	 Issues and Challenges in E-Government Adoption
•	 Adoption of Innovation with Respect to E-Government
•	 Case Studies and Practical Approaches to E-Government 	
	
and E-Governance
•	 E-Government in Developing Countries and Technology 	
	
Adoption
•	 Public Information Management, Regional Planning, 	
	
Rural Development
•	 Citizens Participation and Adoption of E-Government 	
	
Provision
•	 Social Media, Web 2.0, and Mobile Technologies in 		
	
E-Government
•	 Frameworks and Methodologies for E-Government 	 	
	
Development
•	 Current Research and Emerging Trends in E-Government 
Development
•	 E-Governance and Use of Technology for Effective 	 	
	
Government
Edtior-in-Chief: Zaigham Mahmood, University of Derby, UK & 
North West University, South Africa

Population Growth and Rapid Urbanization in the Developing World
Umar G. Benna (Ahmadu Bello Univ., Nigeria) and Shaibu Bala Garba (Qatar Univ., Qatar) 
Information Science Reference • ©2016 • 358pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781522501879) • US $205.00
Political Discourse in Emergent, Fragile, and Failed Democracies
Daniel Ochieng Orwenjo (Technical Univ. of Kenya, Kenya) Omondi Oketch (Technical 
Univ. of Kenya, Kenya) and Asiru Hameed Tunde (Umaru Musa Yar’adua Univ., Nigeria)
Information Science Reference • ©2016 • 412pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781522500810) • US $185.00
International Perspectives on Socio-Economic Development in the Era of Globalization
Saurabh Sen (Sunbeam College for Women, India) Anshuman Bhattacharya (Sunbeam 
College for Women, India) and Ruchi Sen (Sunbeam College for Women, India) 
Business Science Reference • ©2016 • 288pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781466699083) • US $175.00
Comparative Political and Economic Perspectives on the MENA Region
M. Mustafa Erdoğdu (Marmara Univ., Turkey) and Bryan Christiansen (PryMarke, LLC, USA) 
Information Science Reference • ©2016 • 386pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781466696013) • US $205.00
Handbook of Research on Entrepreneurial Success and its Impact on Regional Development
Luísa Carvalho (Universidade Aberta, Portugal & CEFAGE, Universidade de Évora, Portugal) 
Information Science Reference • ©2016 • 878pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781466695672) • US $430.00
Trends, Prospects, and Challenges in Asian E-Governance
Inderjeet Singh Sodhi (St. Wilfred’s P.G. College, India) 
Information Science Reference • ©2016 • 410pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781466695368) • US $190.00
Handbook of Research on Comparative Approaches to the Digital Age Revolution....
Brasilina Passarelli (School of Communications and Arts, University of São Paulo, Brazil) 
Joseph Straubhaar (The University of Texas at Austin, USA) and Aurora Cuevas-Cerveró 
(Complutense University of Madrid, Spain) 
Information Science Reference • ©2016 • 530pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781466687400) • US $325.00
701 East Chocolate Avenue, Hershey, PA 17033, USA
Tel: 717-533-8845 x100 • Fax: 717-533-8661
E-Mail: cust@igi-global.com • www.igi-global.com
Titles in this Series
For a list of additional titles in this series, please visit:
http://www.igi-global.com/book-series/advances-educational-technologies-instructional-design/73678

Preface;...................................................................................................................vi;
Acknowledgment;................................................................................................xiv;
Chapter 1;
Introduction;.............................................................................................................1;
Chapter 2;
Literature Review;..................................................................................................17;
Chapter 3;
Agent-Based Modeling;.........................................................................................36;
Chapter 4;
The Simulation Presented in the ODD Protocol;...................................................52;
Chapter 5;
Findings and Conclusion;.......................................................................................68;
Related Readings;.................................................................................................78;
About the Author;................................................................................................97;
Index;.....................................................................................................................98;
Table of Contents

vi  
Preface
Troubled nations pose a complex dilemma for policy makers in interna-
tional organizations. The humanitarian urge to intervene to relieve suffering 
is strong but it also has a dark side. The delivery of aid to a distressed popu-
lation in a troubled nation is never neutral: there are always winners and 
losers. The difficulty in formulating policy lies in the complexity of these 
types of scenarios. The cause and effect are frequently widely separated in 
either time or space. Compounding the complexity are the multiple feedback 
loops surrounding the problem. It is frequently impossible to determine which 
feedback loop provided the correct linkage between cause and effect until 
the scenario has played itself out.
The purpose of this study is to identify behavior patterns for the various 
entities operating among the population where there are varying degrees of 
stability operations being conducted and utilize these patterns in creation of 
behavioral models. Agent-based modeling is derived from complexity science. 
If complexity cannot be readily defined, some of the behavioral elements 
can be defined. The behavioral elements derived from the literature review 
are utilized to create the behavioral rules that the agents, or adaptive actors 
utilize in the simulations. Agent based modeling utilizes five principles that 
guide development: 
1. 	 Simple rules guide agent behavior and can generate complex behaviors; 
2. 	 There is no single agent that directs the other agents – there is no agent 
hierarchy; 
3. 	 Each agent has bounded rationality in that each can only respond to 
local situations in the environment and other agents in close proximity; 
4. 	 There is no global rule for agent behavior; and, 
5. 	 Emergent behavior is demonstrated by any behaviors that occur above 
the level of the individual (Kiel, 2005; Langton, 1989). 

  vii
From these principles, agent-based modeling builds a macro social inter-
active structure from the interaction of individual units from the bottom-up 
versus the top-down approach typically taken in typical social science studies 
(Epstein & Axtell, 1996).
These types of simulations could provide a viable method for assessing 
risk of various strategic and operational strategies as well as reducing the 
level of uncertainty associated with counterinsurgency and stability opera-
tions. The promise of allowing analysis of patterns of structural emergence 
and destruction is real and provides an improved adaptive response to the 
environment (Kiel, 2005). These agent behavioral models are utilized in agent 
based modeling simulations to help identify emergent behavioral outcomes 
of the agents in the population. By varying the level of coordination between 
the NGOs and the Governmental agents (United Nations Development Pro-
gram, USAID, military), different strategies can be identified to increase the 
effectiveness of those agents and the utilization of resources in the execution 
of rebuilding a war torn society. This dissertation uses agent based model-
ing to run simulations involving NGO / government coordination policies 
and their effects during stability / counterinsurgency operations. The goal 
is to develop a better understanding of whether a high level of coordination 
between military and NGO activities have a force multiplying effect. Further 
conditions examined are: Does the level of violence present in the area of 
operations or the levels of legitimacy for both the indigenous government 
and/or the insurgency movement, have an impact on the levels of effective-
ness – if any – derived from this military-NGO coordination? 
Within this study, a generalized and abstract theory of the interaction of 
the military and civilian NGOs is derived from the views of the participants 
through the literature on this interaction process. The goal is to maximize 
the similarities and differences of the information within the emerging cat-
egories, and from those differences, revise and present parameter estimates 
for dealing with the vague, uncertain, confusing, and ambiguous interface 
between the military and the civilian NGO stratum (Creswell, 2009). The 
simulation is conducted in conditions described in Roberts (2010) quadrant 
IV diagram: low domain consensus between agents and a high level of martial 
threat to all the agents involved. The simulation resource in the landscape 
for this study is the support of the indigenous population. The following are 
the agent types and their rules for the simulation. There are be two levels of 
violence set - low and high – for each set of agent rule parameters.

viii  
•	
International governmental agents whose rules vary with different pol-
icy initiatives: high levels of coordination, no coordination, and subju-
gation of either the civilian or military agencies by the other.
•	
International governmental, local government and insurgent agent 
numbers vary (low, medium, and high) for each policy initiative.
•	
Local governmental agents have three rules regarding the legitimacy 
interaction with the population: low, medium, and high levels of le-
gitimacy defined by the governmental agents’ likelihood to reproduce 
(recruit additional members from the population).
•	
Insurgent agents have three rules regarding the legitimacy interaction 
with the population: low, medium, and high levels of legitimacy de-
fined by the insurgent agents’ likelihood to reproduce (recruit addi-
tional members from the population).
The landscape (local population) initial conditions of being are in one of 
three states: loyal to the local government, neutral, or loyal to the insurgency. 
The three states of the population are randomly distributed in roughly equal 
proportion. 
This study focuses on two concepts: the characteristics of the policies 
available to United Nations agencies in conducting stability and / or coun-
terinsurgency operations and the delivery of development aid and the char-
acteristics of the NGOs engaged in the delivery of development aid in the 
same operating areas. The categories of case studies of policy that have been 
examined for this study are:
•	
Police in the lead with military support or vice versa (Sepp, 2004).
•	
The timing of development aid delivery vis-à-vis the stage of the coun-
terinsurgency campaign – either early or late (Barlow, 2010).
•	
The integration of local population into security forces – either high or 
low (Barton, 2010; Megahan, 2010; Sepp, 2004).
•	
The level of local population inclusion in development aid delivery – 
either high or low (Brinkerhoff, 2010; Guttieri, 2010; Pimbo, 2010).
•	
The level of local institutional development - either high or low 
(Brinkerhoff, 2010; Pandya, 2010; Sepp, 2004; von Hippel, 2010).
•	
The level of security from violence – either high or low (Guttieri, 2010; 
Sepp, 2004).
•	
The level of local population cooperation with counterinsurgency forc-
es vis-à-vis the insurgents - either high or low (Galula, 1964).

  ix
The categories for the characteristics of NGOs that have been identified 
at this point are:
•	
The level of coordination with government agencies – either high or 
low (Curry, 2010; Szanyna et al., 2009).
•	
The propensity to operate independently from other organizations 
either NGO or governmental – either high or low (de Haan, 2009; 
Flanigan, 2010).
•	
The religious affiliation of the NGO – either affiliated. 
These characteristics are utilized in building agent based modeling 
simulations. Their relative impact in describing the initial conditions of the 
simulation (to establish the mathematical relationships for programming) is 
determined and inserted in the agent based model equations to control the 
magnitude of the relationship between variables. 
The agent based modeling simulations utilize parameter estimates de-
rived in the method described above as a general starting point. The current 
Afghan counterinsurgency scenario is used to set the initial conditions for 
the simulation. With this baseline established, additional simulations are run 
that vary the policy parameters in accordance with the options available to 
policy makers as described in the previous paragraphs. The outcomes of the 
simulations are captured with particular emphasis placed upon the interface 
dynamics between the groups and the effects of those dynamics on the out-
comes observed. 
The modeling software to be used for the simulations is NetLogo. NetLogo 
was developed by Uri Wilensky in 1999 at the Center for Connected Learning 
and Computer-Based Modeling. It is the agent based modeling software that 
is used to run the simulations. This software is designed to simulate social 
phenomena in a programmable modeling environment. The software should 
be well suited to this research because it allows instructions to be given to 
hundreds or even thousands of agents which can all operate independently 
making it possible to explore the linkages between macro-level patterns of 
emergent behavior and the micro-level behavior of individuals. NetLogo also 
allows for simulations to be opened and the conditions varied which are criti-
cal to exploring agent behavior and scenario outcomes when policy changes 
are made and introduced. The software also allows for a multitude of graphic 
representations of the outputs which are extremely useful in presenting the 
findings of this research (Wilensky, 1999). There have been some fascinat-
ing studies on how foreign aid, NGOs, and diplomacy work together (or at 
odds) in foreign development and national security (Lacquement, 2010). 

x  
Flanigan (2010) has conducted a study of how NGOs can frequently be very 
partisan in strife ridden areas causing them to be problematic for cooperative 
associations with United Nations agencies. Roberts (2010) has conducted a 
review of where the current state of affairs has progressed. While providing 
a framework to understand the depth and breadth of the issues involved, the 
thrust of her work calls for additional research into the appropriate method-
ologies for dealing with “The Civilian-Military Conundrum in the Post-Cold 
War Era” (Roberts, 2010, p. 213).
While in some cases, these studies have provided a great depth of infor-
mation on how NGOs function along with their interaction with the popu-
lations they are providing assistance. In other cases there have been very 
broad surveys of why population centric counterinsurgency operations are a 
critical capability that should be resident within the Department of Defense 
(DOD). Sara Lischer has been examining the challenges being faced when 
integration of NGOs into the planning process in nation building does not 
take place. Nancy Roberts, a professor of defense analysis at the Naval Post-
graduate School in Monterey, has recently published an article lamenting 
this very issue (Roberts, 2010). Roberts suggest that one of the main issues 
is the “bleeding boundary” between the military and civilian NGO roles in 
providing services to distressed populations. From her article, the crux of the 
issue is the new field manual on COIN that has the military displacing the 
NGOs in the domain of providing humanitarian relief and thereby causing 
domain consensus to disappear and friction between the groups to escalate. 
The problem unfortunately is not as simple as establishing domain con-
sensus. The varieties of NGOs that can be operating in any given area form 
their own mosaic of goals and intentions. Some of these goals align with 
those of the interests of the United States – and therefore with the U. S. mili-
tary – while others may be diametrically opposed. The problem then, for the 
military commander and other governmental organizations, becomes multi-
faceted yet the objective remains singular; the population. Even the basic and 
critical activity of identifying friend from foe, for all organizations involved, 
becomes complex and constantly shifting. There is a lack of synergy across 
disciplines in the study of how to establish where the common goals lie and 
how they can be effectively integrated (Franke & Guttieri, 2009). Addition-
ally, this integration needs to occur without adversely affecting the ability of 
each of the organizations involved to operate effectively in accomplishing its 
goals (Mann, 2008; United States Institute of Peace and Peacekeeping, 2009; 
United States Africa Command 2009 Posture Statement).

  xi
ORGANIZATION OF THE BOOK 
The study described in this book utilizes the recent international coalition 
efforts to stabilize Afghanistan as the backdrop for the simulation experiment. 
While there are some very Afghan specific data used to build the landscape 
for this research simulation, they serve to inform more broadly applicable 
latent variables that can be found in many “troubled state” scenarios. Several 
components of background and theory are covered to address the research 
question with the literature review being the first element. The introductory 
literature review in Chapter 1 contains a brief examination of the ethical 
choices facing policy makers in stability and nation building operations. 
From there a review of the change capacity of Afghan society and how it 
limits the policy goals of international intervention is conducted (the current 
policy environment chosen to provide the baseline for the model’s landscape). 
Chapter 2 contains a more in depth literature review that includes the roles 
that the military, NGOs, and complexity theory play in the study.
Chapter 3 reviews the methodology used in the study including a discus-
sion of origin of the parameters and rule sets used to conduct the simulation. 
Chapter 4 fully presents the model itself in the ODD protocol (Overview, 
Design concepts, and Details), which contains the data analysis of the model 
runs and the outcomes of the statistical tests on the parameter sets. The final 
chapter contains policy implications, conclusions, and suggestions for further 
research.
REFERENCES
Barlow, D. (2010). The Kuwait task force: Post conflict planning and in-
teragency coordination. Washington, DC: NDU Center for Complex Op-
erations. Retrieved February 4, 2011, from http://www.nps.edu/Academics/
AcademicGroups/GPPAG/Documents/PDF/Education%20and%20Research/
Research%20Outputs/Case_4_Kuwait_Task_Force.pdf
Barton, F. D. (2010). Setting rule of law priorities in the early days of an 
intervention. In F. D. Kramer, T. Dempsey, J. Gregoire & S. Merrill (Eds.), 
Civil power in irregular conflict (pp. 149-158). Washington, DC: Center for 
Naval Analyses, US Army Peacekeeping and Stability Operations Institute 
and Association of the US Army. Retrieved February 4, 2011, from http://
www.cna.org/research/2010/civil-power-irregular-conflict

xii  
Creswell, J. W. (2009). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed 
methods approaches. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Curry, P. (2010). Dynamic tension: Security, stability and the opium trade. 
Washington, DC: NDU Center for Complex Operations. Retrieved February 
4, 2011, from http://www.nps.edu/Academics/AcademicGroups/GPPAG/
Documents/PDF/Education%20and%20Research/Research%20Outputs/2_
Dynamic_Tension.pdf
de Haan, A. (2009). How the aid industry works: An introduction to inter-
national development. Sterling, VA: Kumarian Press.
Epstein, J. M., & Axtell, R. (1996). Growing artificial societies: Social sci-
ence from the bottom up. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Flanigan, S. (2010). For the love of god: NGOS and religious identity in a 
violent world. Sterling, VA: Kumarian Press.
Franke, V. C., & Guttieri, K. (2009). Picking up the pieces: Are United 
States officers ready for nation building? Journal of Political and Military 
Sociology, 37(1), 1–25.
Galula, D. (1964). Counterinsurgency warfare: Theory and Practice. West-
port, CT: Praeger Security International.
Guttieri, K. (2010). Interim governments in theory and practice after pro-
tracted conflict. In F. D. Kramer, T. Dempsey, J. Gregoire & S. Merrill (Eds.), 
Civil power in irregular conflict (pp. 51 - 56). Washington, DC: Center for 
Naval Analyses, US Army Peacekeeping and Stability Operations Institute 
and Association of the US Army. Retrieved February 4, 2011, from http://
www.cna.org/research/2010/civil-power-irregular-conflict
Kiel, L. D. (2005). A primer for agent-based modeling in public adminis-
tration: Exploring complexity in “would-be” administrative worlds. Public 
Administration Quarterly, 29(3), 268–296.
Lacquement, R. A. (2010). Integrating civilian and military activities. Pa-
rameters, 1(Spring), 20–33.
Langton, C. (1989). Artificial life. In Artificial Life, the Proceedings of an 
Interdisciplinary Workshop on the Synthesis and Simulation of Living Sys-
tems. Redwood City, CA: Addison Wesley.
Lischer, S. K. (2005). Dangerous sanctuaries: Refugee camps, civil war, and 
the dilemmas of humanitarian aid. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

  xiii
Lischer, S. K. (2007). Military intervention and the “force multiplier”. Global 
Governance, 13, 99–118.
Megahan, R. (2010). Achieving immediate developmental change in host-
nation police. In F. D. Kramer, T. Dempsey, J. Gregoire & S. Merrill (Eds.), 
Civil power in irregular conflict (pp. 97 - 112). Washington, DC: Center for 
Naval Analyses, US Army Peacekeeping and Stability Operations Institute 
and Association of the US Army. Retrieved February 4, 2011, from http://
www.cna.org/research/2010/civil-power-irregular-conflict
Pimbo, J. (2010). Military provision of humanitarian and civic assistance: 
A day in the life of a civil affairs team in the Horn of Africa. Washington, 
DC: NDU Center for Complex Operations. Retrieved February 4, 2011, from 
http://www.nps.edu/Academics/AcademicGroups/GPPAG/Documents/PDF/
Education%20and%20Research/Research%20Outputs/Case_5_Humanitar-
ian_Assistance.pdf
Roberts, N. C. (2010). Spanning bleeding boundaries: Humanitarianism, NGOs, 
and the civilian-military nexus in the post-cold war era. Public Administra-
tion Review, 70(March), 212–222. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6210.2010.02135_2.x
Sepp, K. I. (2005, October). Best practices in counterinsurgency. Military 
Review, 8-12.
Szayna, T. S., Eaton, D., Barnett, J. E., II, Lawson, B. S., Kelly, T. K., & 
Haldeman, Z. (2009). Integrating civilian agencies in stability operations. 
Santa Monica, CA: Rand. Retrieved June 19, 2010, from http://www.rand.
org/pubs/monographs/2009/RAND_MG801.pdf
United States Institute of Peace and Peacekeeping. (2009). Guiding principles 
for stabilization and reconstruction. Washington, DC: Author.
Wilensky, U. (1999). NetLogo. Center for Connected Learning and Computer-
Based Modeling, Northwestern University. Retrieved February 4, 2011, from 
http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/

Acknowledgment
  xiv
The author would like to acknowledge the help of all the people involved in this 
project and, more specifically, to the colleagues at The University of Texas at Dal-
las and the anonymous reviewers that took part in the review process. Without their 
support, this book would not have become a reality.
John McCaskill
The University of Texas at Dallas, USA

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1782-5.ch001
Chapter 1
1 
Introduction
INTRODUCTION
Conflict within a nation state is frequently accompanied by a humanitarian 
crisis. Internally displaced persons, hunger, disease, and other maladies 
conspire to tear the fabric of a society apart. While the first instinct of many 
in the international community is to help, that help can lead to trouble. Hu-
man interaction is highly complex yet our capacity to make sense of it all is 
limited. This state of affairs frequently causes the world community to stand 
by and let the upheaval take its course, and only then attempt to pick up the 
pieces of a broken society if things work out poorly. Even in the best case, the 
provision of aid has the potential to prolong the conflict. We cannot readily 
forecast the outcomes of intervention because our top-down models have 
difficulties dealing with the complex interactions associated with these types 
of events. Bottom-up approaches are not necessarily any better at prediction, 
but they do have the capacity to provide insights into the interaction of the 
variables involved in complex humanitarian interventions; much like a flight 
simulator allows a pilot to try various procedural options when presented 
with a system failure.
BACKGROUND
The international community has become more attuned to the number of 
complex humanitarian issues developing throughout the world (United Na-

Introduction
2
tions General Assembly Resolution 52/167, 1998). This is particularly true 
in parts of the developing world where civil war or some other driver of 
civil strife overwhelms the region’s capacity for emergency response. When 
this occurs, the international community feels obligated to act as stated in 
a series of Guiding Principles contained within the United Nations General 
Assembly resolution 46/182 (1992):
The magnitude and duration of many emergencies may be beyond the response 
capacity of many affected countries. International cooperation to address 
emergency situations and to strengthen the response capacity of affected coun-
tries is thus of great importance. … Intergovernmental and non-governmental 
organizations working impartially and with strictly humanitarian motives 
should continue to make a significant contribution in supplementing national 
efforts. … There is a clear relationship between emergency, rehabilitation and 
development. In order to ensure a smooth transition from relief to rehabilita-
tion and development, emergency assistance should be provided in ways that 
will be supportive of recovery and long-term development. (Annex, p. 50)
MAIN FOCUS OF THE CHAPTER
For this study, the statement above is the operationalized definition of stabil-
ity: the effort to address complex humanitarian emergencies in a way that 
supplements and rebuilds the receiving nation’s capacity to take care of its 
citizens. This international effort can include, but is not limited to providing 
security and development aid, assisting with the establishment or reestablish-
ment of the rule of law and governance, as well as humanitarian assistance.
Policy makers face a conundrum in failed or failing nation states: how 
to provide humanitarian relief while weaving the torn fabric of a society 
back together. Humanitarian action alone is rarely neutral. The advance of 
humanitarian care and supplies frequently frees belligerents to militarize the 
refugees and continue the conflict on a wider scale. Other times it takes on 
a “placebo effect” and nullifies the impetus to provide the military or politi-
cal engagement necessary to address the cause of the strife (Lischer, 2007). 
Policy makers that lead with military forces acting as humanitarian workers 
(such as the Provisional Reconstruction Teams operating in Afghanistan) 
often find they cannot create the stability they hope for due to inadequate 
security. Lischer describes the military planners’ goal as gaining a “force 
multiplier effect” from engaging in humanitarian operations. This force 
multiplier effect is quite simply an increase in efficiency; an ability to do 

Introduction
3
more with fewer resources. They are perhaps limited in their view by current 
counterinsurgency theory which suggests that by winning the “hearts and 
minds” of the population, the security concerns will begin to take care of 
themselves (FM 3-24, 2007; Galula, 1964). The basis of the theory is that 
if the population can be turned against the insurgents, then the insurgents’ 
base of power is eliminated and the foot soldiers of the movement will be 
either melded back into the population or be apprehended. Either way, the 
insurgency is defeated. The difficulty arises when the question of legitimacy 
comes to bare. Are the insurgents a group of extremists or do they repre-
sent unaddressed grievances with the current governing factions? A deeper 
question then becomes, “How can international agencies help to establish a 
system of governance in a war torn society without exacerbating the issues 
that caused the strife to begin with?”
If policy makers wish to effectively influence the decisions of others, is 
coercion through the threat of direct military force the only method available? 
Alternatively, is there hope of using “libertarian paternalism” to effectively 
frame choices that cause worrisome groups to make the right decisions (Tha-
ler & Sunstein, 2008)? The fundamental principle is that development plans 
formulated in one culture can have unexpected outcomes when implemented 
in another because the beneficiaries view reality from a very different cultural 
paradigm (Portes, 2010). Multiple parties become involved with varying 
degrees of conflicting interests and objectives: military forces are looking 
to win hearts and minds in an effort to enhance security (Galula, 1964); 
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) strive to maintain their core values 
of neutrality, impartiality, and independence (Lischer, 2007); the degree of 
“Domain Conflict” between the military forces and the civilian aid NGOs 
providing humanitarian assistance within the same operating area (Roberts, 
2010). This latter issue is represented in Figure 1. Humanitarian Relief as 
shown in Figure 1 is the mode of international intervention where military 
forces provide logistics assets to NGOs and the NGOs in turn, utilize their 
institutional capacity to deliver the aid to those determined to have the great-
est need (Roberts, 2010). Peacekeeping becomes more conflicted because 
the level of violence (or the threat of violence) is increased.
Peacekeeping is defined as the “monitoring and enforcing a cease-fire 
agreed to by two or more former combatants. It proceeds in an atmosphere 
where peace exists and where the former combatants minimally prefer peace 
to continued war” (Snow, 1993, p. 7). As the level of violence increases 
further, international forces are inserted into a situation where a cease fire 
does not exist and may not be desired by one or both sides of the conflict. 
This increases the level of domain conflict between NGOs and international 

Introduction
4
forces because the appearance of neutrality begins to fray: “they [interna-
tional forces] are active fighters who must impose a cease-fire that is opposed 
by one or both combatants; in the process, the neutrality that distinguishes 
peacekeepers will most likely be lost” (Snow, 1993, p. 7). Counterinsur-
gency has no pretense of neutrality and has the international community 
taking sides. This is the down side of the slope policy makers can find them-
selves on when participating in complex humanitarian interventions.
Then the question of change capacity within the targeted society must 
be addressed: “How much change is tolerable and how fast can it be intro-
duced into the fractured society before the change effort itself becomes the 
cause of the instability and strife within the culture?” If pushed too far, too 
quickly, the legitimacy of the internationally backed indigenous government 
rapidly decreases as resistance to change increases. The stakes for these types 
of interventions are extremely high for all parties involved. Proponents of 
intervention frequently sight the moral responsibility of the community of 
nations. Unfortunately the moral clarity these voices have in the concept of 
intervention to save innocent life frequently run into the ethical vagaries of 
reality (Valentino, 2011). The difficulties lie in answering the question of how 
to intervene in these types of arenas. In most cases, as Lischer emphasizes, 
it is almost impossible to make a completely neutral intervention. When at-
tempting to help victims of human rights abuses, the intervention frequently 
empowers armed factions representing (or claiming to represent) these same 
victims. Unfortunately, these factions are often implicated in human rights 
abuses of their own (Valentino, 2011). This unfortunate reality causes one 
of the first casualties of intervention: moral clarity.
Figure 1. Humanitarian relief

Introduction
5
The NATO bombing campaign in Kosovo provides an example of the 
problems encountered. In 1999, NATO air power helped push Serbian forces 
from Kosovo. Unfortunately, the former victims turned on the remaining 
Serbian civilians and killed hundreds while forcing thousands to run for 
their lives (Valentino, 2011, p. 63). There have been repeated calls for the 
investigation of the leaders of the Kosovo Liberation Army for crimes against 
humanity. Another type of problem was exemplified when United Nations 
forces intervened in Somalia in 1993. It is widely remembered in the West 
that eighteen American soldiers were killed during the “Black Hawk Down” 
incident but the other uncomfortable fact is that at least 500 Somalis were 
killed with over half of them being women and children (Valentino, 2011, p. 
64). What seem like simple solutions to humanitarian crises often have com-
plex and counter intuitive outcomes. When one side is suddenly empowered 
by outside intervention, it frequently turns its pent up wrath on the other. In 
other instances, the outside intervention becomes an additional cause of death 
and destruction of innocents instead of being their saviors.
Another issue to be considered in interventions is the monetary costs. 
For the United States alone, the cost for the military mission was more than 
seven billion dollars and resulted in saving between 10,000 and 25,000 lives 
(Valentino, 2011, p. 67). Those expenditures equated to spending between 
280,000 and 700,000 dollars for each life saved. Currently in Afghanistan, the 
United States has budgeted 555 billion dollars for operations in 2012 alone. 
The United States is spending almost 18,500 dollars for every man, woman, 
and child living in Afghanistan which has a total population of just under thirty 
million (CIA World Factbook, 2012). Stremlau (1998) contends, in a report 
commissioned by the Carnegie Corporation, that early and robust efforts at 
intervention would be more cost effective. The problem is identifying complex 
humanitarian emergencies that will respond positively to action by the world 
community and then only intervene in those cases. Again, the track record 
on this type of undertaking is poor. Valentino provides a graphic example.
One of the most tragic aspects of the genocides in Bosnia, Rwanda, and 
Darfur was that international peacekeepers were present during some of the 
worst episodes of violence, such as the slaughter of some 8,000 Bosnian 
Muslims in Srebrenica in 1995, which was witnessed by 400 UN peace-
keepers. The problem in these cases was not that no one was sent to prevent 
the violence; it was that the forces that were deployed were not given the 
resources or mandates to stop the violence breaking out around them. (Val-
entino, 2011, p. 68)
Many analysts including Lischer, Roberts, and Stremlau have suggested 
that better coordination between military forces and the NGO community 

Introduction
6
would bring about better outcomes in these types of interventions. Such 
coordination would reduce the domain conflicts Roberts warns of as well 
as reducing the placebo effect the Lischer describes. By each organization 
somehow coordinating with each other, each would become more efficient 
and effective, providing that force multiplier effect implementation planners 
are always searching for. This is the policy area this study investigates.
The question then becomes one of integration. The understanding and 
integration of military force with NGOs in the area of operations are critical 
to reestablishing stability within a fractured society. Will the United Nations’ 
agencies be met with a handshake or a fist by the populations they are attempt-
ing to help? Understanding the military-NGO interaction is a crucial item of 
policy framework that will determine feasible courses of action to international 
governmental agencies. Further, what level and type of integration should 
be attempted? At present, United Nations agencies have no clear structure or 
formal process for determining how to either integrate the efforts of NGOs 
with coincident military interests or neutralize NGOs with counter interests. 
This lack of structure is thought to reduce the effectiveness of stability and 
development efforts both in terms of direct and indirect mission success. Ad-
ditionally, these issues exhibit non-linear behavior. Unexpected events – such 
as the Sunni awakening in Iraq - may change the course of history. It seems 
that small differences in inputs can become enormous differences in output. 
This phenomenon is referred to by James Gleick (1988, p. 8) as a “sensitive 
dependence on initial conditions.” These are the type of problems that defy 
explanation by traditional top-down theories of social reality. This disserta-
tion tests the theory that a high level of coordination between military and 
NGO operations can be a force multiplier in the effort to bring stability to a 
strife torn region. The research question is: “Does a high level of coordination 
between military and NGO activities have a force multiplying effect?” Further 
conditions examined are: “Does the level of violence present in the area of 
operations or the levels of legitimacy for both the indigenous government and 
the insurgency movement, have an impact on the levels of effectiveness – if 
any – derived from this military-NGO coordination.”
ISSUES DESCRIBED IN THE LITERATURE
Military
International efforts to enforce peace and reassemble the fabric of a conflict 
torn society are complex by their very nature. There are multiple parties in-

Introduction
7
volved with varying degrees of conflicting interests and objectives. Military 
forces are looking to win hearts and minds (Galula, 1964) while NGOs are 
steadfast in their desire to hold on to their core values of neutrality, impartiality, 
and independence. All of these issues are further complicated when overlaid 
upon the question of change capacity within the targeted society. Given these 
interdependencies and conflicting objectives, distilling out a clear picture of 
the interaction of all the variables presents a challenge.
Motivations across actors are heterogeneous. The actors in strife ridden 
areas have motivations that form a mosaic from the bottom up, not top down. 
Again, the complexity of the interactions of various actors in these areas can 
lead to unforeseen outcomes and the outcomes are extremely sensitive to 
variations in initial conditions. The Comprehensive Strategy for Malakand, 
also known as the Malakand Pilot Project, is an important example of how 
external actors can support locally owned and operated reconstruction and 
stabilization (United States Institute of Peace and Peacekeeping, 2009). The 
Guiding Principles for Stabilization and Reconstruction is the first strategic 
doctrine ever produced for civilian planners and practitioners involved in 
peace-building missions. This document provides useful background infor-
mation from the U.S. Department of State’s perspective (Civilian Response 
2010). The point of view that these initiatives must be locally owned and 
operated to be successful is a critical shift in paradigm for a governmental 
agency. Many governmental agencies, especially the U.S. Department of 
Defense, are still in the mode of winning hearts and minds through the use 
of military led actions units such as the Provincial Reconstruction Teams 
that are currently in use in Afghanistan (Roberts, 2010; FM 3-24, 2006).
The use of PRTs is an offshoot of the writings of David Galula (1964). 
Galula was a French Infantry officer involved in counterinsurgency opera-
tions in China, French Indo China, and Algeria (Nagl, 2006). At the time of 
his writing, he was posted as a Visiting Fellow at Harvard University. His 
work on counterinsurgency warfare is one of the prime references cited in 
the Army / Marine Corps field manual on counterinsurgency operations, FM 
3-24. Galula writes from a mechanistic and ethically neutral perspective in 
that he describes in very calculating terms how to turn a population against 
an insurgent, thereby destroying the insurgents’ source of power. He identi-
fies the center of gravity (the origin of the belligerents’ source of power) for 
both the insurgent and the counterinsurgent as the population itself. From his 
perspective, protecting the population from harm is not an act of humanity; it 
is an act of expediency. The battle is joined literally to win over the goodwill 
of the population. The amount and quality of intelligence, or information, 
about the insurgents’ activities that is forthcoming from the population, is 

Introduction
8
the scorecard of measure. His capstone argument is that if the population 
feels more secure by cooperating with the counterinsurgent forces, then the 
insurgent has lost and can be relatively quickly eradicated from the scene. 
On the other hand, if the population lives in fear of the insurgents’ reprisal 
for cooperating with the counterinsurgent forces (or the established local 
government agencies), then the counterinsurgent forces are condemned to 
chasing shadows in a self-defeating effort to counter idealism with lethal force.
Gian Gentile (2009) takes a completely different view as he rails against 
the adaptation of FM 3-24 by the U. S. Army. He is adamant in his opposi-
tion to the military involvement in nation building. The main points of his 
thesis are that the military does not have the resident expertise to perform 
nation building effectively and that the effort to gain such expertise will be 
paid for by a loss of combat readiness. This position sets him in direct op-
position to Galula and Nagl (2005) which helps to frame the issue of military 
involvement in the provision of social services in reconstruction operations. 
His seemingly lone voice of opposition from the position of the West Point 
Historian is uniquely powerful and useful.
Goode (2009) provides a fascinating look at the force requirements to 
execute a counterinsurgency strategy. He derives a formula that basically 
shows that if enough manpower (boots on the ground) is not deployed, the 
insurgents will eventually win a major military victory. Just as important 
though, is the need for a meaningful portion of the counterinsurgency forces 
to come from the local population. If it does not, the counterinsurgency efforts 
are doomed to failure as well. The use of individuals with local knowledge 
is just as critical to the military as it is to NGOs as is stated in Brinkerhoff’s 
(2008) work. The insights between these two authors provide a bridge into 
the domain conflicts discussed by Roberts.
Gregg (2009) ties together many of the concepts in FM 3-24 with those 
of Galula as well as Max Weber. She points out that the long term goal of 
counterinsurgency is the building of a functioning state. One of the founda-
tions that must be present is social capital or trust. The use of nonlocal NGOs 
to rebuild infrastructure is counterproductive. To rebuild social capital, it is 
more useful to have local Community Development Councils conduct the 
reconstruction efforts and reach out across ethnic and religious divides to 
get the projects built. By doing so, the trust that was destroyed by the insur-
gency and civil strife is rebuilt, allowing governance to begin functioning in 
a self-sustaining way. This article demonstrates from a different perspective, 
the domain issues present in the area of international development and some 
additional pitfalls faced by NGOs attempting to help populations in need.

Introduction
9
Nongovernmental Organizations
Brinkerhoff (2008) describes the new actors that have engaged in international 
development and the boundary conflicts that become evident in practice. This 
is caused by increasingly aggressive agendas that put these institutions into 
direct conflict with each other. While the barriers to communications are 
being overcome in some areas, much more needs to be done to allow these 
various institutions – the military, civilian government, and NGOs – to work 
effectively together to achieve the desired goals.
While intervention templates can be helpful to mobilize multi actor re-
sponses to crisis, implementation will succeed only if those plans are modified 
to include local knowledge and to mobilize the commitment of local actors. 
There are tendencies that need to be avoided: reverting to a view of develop-
ment management as largely amenable to technical solutions and idealizing 
and oversimplifying complex societal behaviors and state performance under 
the good governance rubric. (Brinkerhoff 2008, 987)
This article helps frame the discussion around domain conflicts.
Domain conflict however, does not reside solely between governmental 
agencies and NGOs. The primary point de Haan (2009) asserts is that donor 
motives matter - the idea that how much aid is given matters less than how 
it is given. This ongoing battle between donor motives and the mission of 
the NGO both within and outside of the organization – and between orga-
nizations - creates enormous friction even in benign environments, much 
less the confused and contested environment of counterinsurgency and 
stability operations. The motives of the donors as well as the motives of the 
aid organizations themselves have a stratifying effect on strategies used and 
how the organizations are perceived both by the target population and other 
organizations operating in the same domain. The divergent interests of help-
ing the poorest nations versus helping nations that can provide support to the 
donors’ global interests can cause immediate tensions before the aid projects 
are even out of committee. This is a very insightful text for framing some of 
the internal issues NGOs face and how it affects their interaction with other 
agencies. Continuing the further conflicts within the NGO stratum are those 
that have confounded humanity for eons; religion and ethnicity. Flanigan 
contends that “FBOs may mirror, reinforce, and reproduce societal divisions 
that are present in the cultures in which they operate” (2010, p. 3).
Flanigan examines how the same religious identity that provides the im-
petus for charity and altruism also provides the motivation for violence and 
hatred. In her study, Flanigan provides critical insights into the behavior pat-
terns of NGOs – particularly the impact religion has on the way NGOs view 

Introduction
10
those they are helping as well as how the NGOs themselves are viewed by 
the populations they serve. These insights are extremely helpful in building 
the mosaic of a behavioral template for use in this study. The problem is that 
not all behaviors exhibited by NGOs and other aid providers are intrinsic to 
the organizations themselves.
Change Capacity
Layered into this complex and conflicted problem is the backdrop of limited 
change capacity within the culture these operations are attempting to affect. 
In the example used for this study, Afghanistan has what is best described as 
a punctuated equilibrium model for change capacity. The commonality across 
all disciplines utilizing the punctuated equilibrium model is the concept that 
deep structure is the key determinant of how a system or organization reacts 
(Gersick, 1991). The deep structure is the set of choices or initial conditions 
that determine how the system is organized and what the relationships are 
between the basic activities that maintain its existence. The deep structure is 
the force that limits change and maintains equilibrium. Afghan history was 
reviewed with emphasis placed upon inflection points of cultural change 
that occurred within the Afghan culture and the drivers of that deep change. 
Cultural change has occurred primarily in the major cities where the occu-
pying forces established their garrisons. The population in the rural country 
side have been periodically terrorized and / or raised in revolt but its cultural 
deep structures have remained unchanged for millennia. The social structure 
that is at the center of the deep structures is the Afghan Qawm (Miakhel, 
2009; Slaughter, 2010). The change capacity of the Qawm is lacking due to 
the constant tension between the three bases of power from which it derives 
its identity. When the motors of the punctuated equilibrium change theory 
entities (Van De Ven & Poole, 1995) are juxtaposed with the power bases, 
which are the drivers of change within the Qawm, to verify the theory of 
change at work within the cultural organization, the results are dishearten-
ing. The alignment of the change motors with the drivers of change leads to 
a grounded basis from which to predict a rather limited capacity for change 
in the Afghan culture. Change initiatives will need to proceed slowly and 
unfortunately, with the scarcity of resources of the land, they will be very 
costly to whoever initiates the change effort.
Afghan society is resistant to change by virtue of its long history of 
conquest, occupation, and paucity of resources (Kakar, 1997; Ewans, 2002; 
Rasanayagam, 2003; Loyn, 2009). The Afghan culture has evolved to deal 
with the inability of a central government to provide basic services or even the 

Introduction
11
rule of law. Most rural Afghans think of the central government as a source 
of interference and corruption (Miakhel, 2009). Police presence in the rural 
areas is slight if it exists at all. After thirty plus years of occupation and civil 
war, great portions of the infrastructure were left in ruins. The vast majority 
of Afghans do not have access to the state-run justice system. Those who do 
have access typically choose not to use it. Instead, they rely on a mixture of 
traditional systems (the Jirga), Islamic law, and current power relations to 
resolve disputes. The outcomes produced by the informal justice system are 
far from ideal in terms of human rights, but they remain more available, more 
rapid, and frequently more legitimate, than that of the state system (Miakhel, 
2009; Slaughter, 2010).
Throughout its history, Afghanistan has always had a weak central gov-
ernment which caused the development of a strong local level structure. 
Historically, successful central rulers have worked with clan and religious 
leaders to achieve balance through compromise (Kakar, 1997; Ewans, 2002; 
Rasanayagam, 2003; Loyn, 2009). To institute change in Afghan society, the 
change must be made from the bottom up utilizing the local structures and 
building consensus. The capacity for radical change is extremely low. Due 
to the constant state of warfare, the development of both institutions and 
infrastructure has been stunted and the rural population has been left to fend 
for itself. This power vacuum was filled by war lords, religious leaders, and 
clan chieftains that served to keep modernization to a minimum. Change 
initiatives that are top down in nature and attempt to bypass or ignore tradi-
tion and the three power bases will provoke violent rejection. The rejection 
in the past has meant open rebellion and civil war that has only served to 
drive the development of the culture and its institution backward in time. 
The historical record has demonstrated the applicability of the punctuated 
equilibrium model of change theory. Unfortunately, the record also demon-
strates a marked tendency for the constructive motor to drive the society to 
reorganize around new deep structures that more resemble Hobbes’s “state 
of nature” than a modern contemporary society (Hobbes & Lamprecht, 
1949). As Gersick (1991) observes, “This is consistent with the punctuated 
equilibrium paradigm’s implication that systems do not inevitably evolve 
toward improvement” (p. 31). The Afghan capacity for change is perhaps 
best described as a thixotropic change capacity model: only slow, deliber-
ate change can be tolerated without causing the fragile bonds that hold the 
society together to fracture and atomize the organizations and institutions 
into their component parts. The only way for change to gain ground is to use 
the libertarian paternalism philosophy of Thaler and Sunstein (2008); always 
offer choice while trying to positively influence the choice.

Introduction
12
CONCLUSION
There have been some fascinating studies on how foreign aid, NGOs, and 
diplomacy work together (or at odds) in foreign development and national 
security (Lacquement, 2010). Flanigan (2010) has conducted a study of how 
NGOs can frequently be very partisan in strife ridden areas causing them to 
be problematic for cooperative associations with United Nations agencies. 
Roberts (2010) has conducted a review of where the current state of affairs 
has progressed. While providing a framework to understand the depth and 
breadth of the issues involved, the thrust of her work calls for additional 
research into the appropriate methodologies for dealing with “The Civilian-
Military Conundrum in the Post-Cold War Era” (Roberts, 2010, p. 213).
While in some cases, these studies have provided a great depth of infor-
mation on how NGOs function along with their interaction with the popu-
lations they are providing assistance. In other cases there have been very 
broad surveys of why population centric counterinsurgency operations are a 
critical capability that should be resident within the Department of Defense 
(DOD). Sara Lischer has been examining the challenges being faced when 
integration of NGOs into the planning process in nation building does not 
take place. Nancy Roberts, a professor of defense analysis at the Naval Post-
graduate School in Monterey, has recently published an article lamenting 
this very issue (Roberts, 2010). Roberts suggest that one of the main issues 
is the “bleeding boundary” between the military and civilian NGO roles in 
providing services to distressed populations. From her article, the crux of the 
issue is the new field manual on Counterinsurgency Operations that has the 
military displacing the NGOs in the domain of providing humanitarian relief 
and thereby causing domain consensus to disappear and friction between the 
groups to escalate.
The problem unfortunately is not as simple as establishing domain con-
sensus. The varieties of NGOs that can be operating in any given area form 
their own mosaic of goals and intentions. Some of these goals align with those 
of the interests of the United States – and therefore with the U. S. military – 
while others may be diametrically opposed. The problem then, for the military 
commander and other governmental organizations, becomes multifaceted yet 
the objective remains singular; the population. Even the basic and critical 
activity of identifying friend from foe, for all organizations involved, becomes 
complex and constantly shifting. There is a lack of synergy across disciplines 
in the study of how to establish where the common goals lie and how they 
can be effectively integrated (Frankie & Guttieri, 2009). Additionally, this 
integration needs to occur without adversely affecting the ability of each of 

Introduction
13
the organizations involved to operate effectively in accomplishing its goals 
(Mann, 2008; United States Institute of Peace, (2009); United States Africa 
Command 2009 Posture Statement).
The scarcity of information available for government policy makers at all 
levels on the effectiveness of coordinating their missions with those of NGOs 
present in their area of operations, coupled with a lack of internal expertise, 
leads to a reduced level of effectiveness in the execution of international 
intervention. By exploring various options and methods for policy makers to 
effectively understand how NGOs operate and integrate into the populations 
they serve, a basic understanding can be established. From this understanding, 
a robust discussion of integrating both governmental and NGO aid agencies 
into the planning process can proceed and from there, establish the baseline 
resource requirements to effectively do so. Additionally, by building simula-
tions for trying different strategies, stability and counterinsurgency operations 
can be more effectively ‘war-gamed’ and emergent ‘what-ifs’ identified. In 
the complex and crowded space of providing aid to failed or failing nation 
states, the ability to recognize and experiment with various methods for deal-
ing with domain conflict between the organizations (agents) involved will 
provide a valuable tool for policy makers and implementers alike.
REFERENCES
Brinkerhoff, D. W. (2008). The state and international development man-
agement: Shifting tides, changing boundaries, and future directions. Public 
Administration Review, 68(November), 985–1001. doi:10.1111/j.1540-
6210.2008.00948.x
de Haan, A. (2009). How the aid industry works: An introduction to inter-
national development. Sterling, VA: Kumarian Press.
Ewans, M. (2002). Afghanistan. New York: HarperCollins Publishers, Inc.
Flanigan, S. (2010). For the love of god: NGOS and religious identity in a 
violent world. Sterling, VA: Kumarian Press.
FM 3-24 The Army / Marine Corps Field Manual on Counterinsurgency. 
(2006). Retrieved February 4, 2011, from www.fas.org/irp/doddir/army/
fm3-24.pdf
Franke, V. C., & Guttieri, K. (2009). Picking up the pieces: Are United 
States officers ready for nation building? Journal of Political and Military 
Sociology, 37(1), 1–25.

Introduction
14
Galula, D. (1964). Counterinsurgency warfare: Theory and Practice. For-
ward by John A. Nagl. 2006. Westport, CT: Praeger Security International.
Gentile, G. P. (2009). A strategy of tactics: Population-centric COIN and the 
Army. Parameters, 3(Autumn), 5–17.
Gersick, C. J. (1991). Revolutionary change theories: A multilevel exploration 
of the punctuated equilibrium paradigm. Academy of Management Review, 
16(1), 10–36. doi:10.5465/AMR.1991.4278988
Gleick, J. (1988). Chaos: The making of a new science. New York: Penguin 
Books.
Goode, S. M. (2009). A historical basis for force requirements in counterin-
surgency. Parameters, 4(Winter), 45–57.
Gregg, H. S. (2009). Beyond population engagement: Understanding coun-
terinsurgency. Parameters, 3(Autumn), 18–30.
Hobbes, T., & Lamprecht, S. P. (1949). De Cive: Or, the Citizen. New York: 
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Kakar, M. H. (1997). Afghanistan: The Soviet invasion and the Afghan re-
sponse, 1979-1982. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Lacquement, R. A. (2010). Integrating civilian and military activities. Pa-
rameters, 1(Spring), 20–33.
Lischer, S. K. (2007). Military intervention and the “force multiplier.”. Global 
Governance, 13, 99–118.
Loyn, D. (2009). In Afghanistan. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Mann, S. (2008). Taking Interagency Stability Operations to a New Level: 
The Integration of Special Operation Forces and USAID in Afghanistan. 
Small Wars Journal. Retrieved June 19, 2010, from http://smallwarsjournal.
com/documents/79-mann.pdf
Miakhel, S. (2009). Understanding Afghanistan: The importance of tribal 
culture and structure in security and governance. Pashtoonkhwa. Retrieved 
July 2, 2011, from http://www.pashtoonkhwa.com/files/books/Miakhel-
ImportanceOfTribalStructuresInAfghanistan.pdf
Nagl, J. A. (2005). Counterinsurgency Lessons from Malaya and Vietnam. 
Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.

Introduction
15
Nagl, J. A. (2006). Forward to Counterinsurgency warfare: Theory and 
Practice, by David Galula. Westport, CT: Praeger Security International.
Portes, A. (2010). Economic sociology: A systematic Inquiry. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press. doi:10.1515/9781400835171
Rasanayagam, A. (2003). Afghanistan: A modern history. London: I. B. 
Tauris and Company, LTD.
Roberts, N. C. (2010). Spanning bleeding boundaries: Humanitarianism, NGOs, 
and the civilian-military nexus in the post-cold war era. Public Administra-
tion Review, 70(March), 212–222. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6210.2010.02135_2.x
Slaughter, S. R. (2010). Expanding the Qawm: Culturally savvy counterin-
surgency and nation-building in Afghanistan. Monograph. Fort Leavenworth, 
KS: School of Advanced Military Studies, United States Army Command 
and General Staff College.
Snow, D. M. (1993). Peacekeeping, peacemaking and peace-enforcement: 
The U.S. role in the new international order. Carlisle Barracks, PA: Strategic 
Studies Institute, U.S. Army War College.
Stremlau, J. (1998). People in Peril: Human Rights, Humanitarian Action, 
and Preventing Deadly Conflict. Washington, DC: Carnegie Corporation of 
New York.
Thaler, R. H., & Sunstein, C. R. (2008). Nudge: Improving decisions about 
health, wealth, and happiness. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
United Nations General Assembly Resolution 46/182. (1992). Strengthen-
ing of the coordination of humanitarian emergency assistance of the United 
Nations: Guiding principles. New York: United Nations.
United Nations General Assembly Resolution 52/167. (1998). Safety and 
security of humanitarian personnel. New York: United Nations.
United States Africa Command 2009 Posture Statement. (n.d.). Retrieved 
February 4, 2011, from www.africom.mil/pdfFiles/USAFRICOM2009Pos-
tureStatement.pdf
United States Central Intelligence Agency. (2012). The World Factbook. 
Retrieved February 9, 2012, from https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/
resources/the-world-factbook/

Introduction
16
United States Institute of Peace and Peacekeeping. (2009). Guiding principles 
for stabilization and reconstruction. Washington, DC: Author.
Valentino, B. A. (2011). The true cost of humanitarian intervention: The hard 
truth about a noble notion. Foreign Affairs, 90(6), 60–73.
Van de Ven, A. H., & Poole, M. S. (1995). Explaining development and 
change in organizations. Academy of Management Review, 20(3), 510–540. 
doi:10.2307/258786
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Complex Humanitarian Interventions: These operations run the gambit 
from humanitarian relief such as food delivery, to full scale warfare conducted 
on the behalf of one of the belligerents.
Counterinsurgency Operations: Military and civil operations conducted 
to win the support of the population to stop or nullify the efforts of a counter-
government movement.
Humanitarian Relief: Operations that typically follow natural disasters 
such as food and medical aid deliveries.
Nongovernmental Organizations: These organizations operate inde-
pendently of governments and conduct operations in accordance with their 
‘mission.’ These organizations can be religious (faith based) or nonsectarian, 
and they may or may not be willing to coordinate their actions with those of 
government entities (particularly the military).
Peace Enforcement: The separation of belligerents and enforcement 
of a ceasefire through the use of armed military forces. The key difference 
between peace enforcement and peace keeping is that one or more of the 
belligerents has not agreed to the terms and will return to open hostilities 
given the opportunity.
Peace Keeping: The monitoring of the separation and ceasefire agreed 
to by the belligerents in a conflict.
Warfare: Open and unrestricted conflict.

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1782-5.ch002
Chapter 2
17 
Literature Review
INTRODUCTION
Pacification, nation building, stability operations, counterinsurgency opera-
tions – these are all various names for the activities a victorious military force 
finds itself undertaking at the cessation of hostilities. This is especially true 
of the belligerents in a civil war. The international community steps in in an 
effort to contain the hostilities and deliver humanitarian aid to the refugee 
population that is inevitably created by the hostilities. Frequently the outcome 
of a war cannot truly be known for several years after the guns have fallen 
silent. Does the defeated state rebuild its capacity for governance and join 
with its former antagonist in peaceful and mutually prosperous relations or 
does it descend into the Hobbesian hell of a failed nation state; a pariah to 
the world community? There have been examples of errors made by victors, 
such as the Treaty of Versailles, that have set the stage for future conflicts 
that have lessons applicable to humanitarian interventions initiated by the 
international community.
BACKGROUND
A lack of empathy, driven by greed, hubris, or lack of cultural understanding 
can lead to Tuchman’s (1969) definition of folly. The different approaches, 
one approach showing empathy and a respect for the change capacity of a 
vanquished foe, the other showing the opposite, can be found in the handling 

Literature Review
18
of Germany in the twentieth century. The vengeful stance that the Allies 
took with Germany after World War I is frequently cited as the casus belli 
for World War II by setting the conditions that allowed Hitler’s rise to power 
(Van Meter, 1979). But then after World War II, Germany (at least West 
Germany) had a completely different outcome.
The historic postwar transition effects on societies have been almost as 
traumatic as the lethal portion of the battles themselves. At the end of World 
War I, the victorious Allies came together at Versailles Palace in Paris to 
hammer out a peace treaty, the Treaty of Versailles. The treaty has historically 
been seen as a disaster as far as actually making peace. Given the costs paid 
by the Allies, both in blood and treasure and the mood of their respective 
electorates, the ability of the ‘Big Three’ democracies, Britain, France, and 
the United States, to make peace based upon reciprocity, was very low. The 
United States had the additional difficulty that isolationism was a very strong 
sentiment during that time. So much of an isolationist sentiment was pres-
ent that the United States never ratified the Treaty of Versailles or became a 
member of the League of Nations (Dockrill & Fisher, 2001).
The case of Germany after World War II was quite different than that ex-
isting after World War I. The main difference in the situation on the ground 
was that the Allies had invaded and were occupying Germany. Much of the 
German infrastructure had been destroyed and resources were scarce. Many 
members of the disarmed German army were attempting to be captured by 
the Allied forces because prisoners of war were allotted the same rations as 
Allied soldiers, which was much better than the civilian population were able 
to attain. There were also a great number of displaced persons and disbanded 
German army personnel (still under arms) walking around the countryside 
making for an uncomfortable security situation. The positive aspect of the 
security situation was that none of these worrisome groups were organizing 
into an insurgency. The main problem faced by the Allied occupation forces 
was crime and reestablishing civil order. Unfortunately, one of the situations 
that remained the same between the wars was the propensity of the United 
States to rapidly withdraw manpower assets from the theater due to the rapid 
demobilization of its military. This made the security circumstances then, as 
it has in the recent past, problematic for commanders attempting to conduct 
stability operations (United States Army History Archives, 1947).
Fortunately for many of the German people, the strife between the Soviet 
Union and the other Allies became an overriding consideration in the admin-
istration of postwar Germany. The fear of communism spreading coupled 
with the insistence of building a buffer zone by the Soviet Union at the end 
of the war begat the Marshall Plan for rebuilding postwar Europe. As the 

Literature Review
19
perceived threat from the Soviet Union grew, the punishment of Germany took 
a backseat to the need to rebuild the Allied areas of control to keep Germany 
from falling completely under the control of the Soviet Union. The military 
occupation administration of government, wanting to turn over governance in 
the Allied occupied areas as rapidly as possible, took on an increasing level 
of reciprocity in its outlook. This desired outcome was not a grand reach 
for German society. The battle that was taking place was one over the type 
of governance that would replace fascism. Rule of law, property rights, and 
an industrial economic base already existed. This helps to demonstrate the 
success that can follow from maintaining end state goals within the change 
capacity of the targeted society.
MAIN FOCUS OF THE CHAPTER
The previous outcomes were brought about by nation states exerting their 
influence in a purely governmental fashion. Nongovernmental organizations 
played only a minor role in the overall outcome of transition operations. The 
emergence of nongovernmental organizations as actors in the delivery of 
humanitarian goods and services in the aftermath of combat brings an ad-
ditional variable into policy consideration. The public-private dichotomy of 
relief aid for displaced non-combatants causes friction to develop between the 
two sectors. This leads to what Roberts (2010) describes as what happened 
when the United States military began forming Provincial Reconstruction 
Teams (PRTs). When these PRTs, consisting of military and civilian per-
sonnel from various U.S. Government agencies, specialists in the social and 
economic sciences as well as developmental specialists, began interacting 
with the local and regional political leaders by sponsoring civil engagement 
and reconstruction activities, a series of domain questions arose. Roberts also 
contends that the hierarchical methods of working top down have not proven 
effective in the field. Further complicating transitions from war to peace are 
the motives and efforts that humanitarian nongovernmental organizations 
play when they enter the area to provide relief for the beleaguered civilian 
populace that has been exposed to the ravages of war.
The aid process is fraught with challenges and problems that are as resistant 
to solution as the conditions they hope to ameliorate. Humanitarian aid is 
rarely neutral or is it perceived as neutral even when it is delivered with that 
intention. When aid is delivered to refugees in a conflict, it can be perceived 
as a hostile act by the opposing belligerents. This is because the delivery of 
aid can enable the continuation or even broadening of hostilities. Lischer 

Literature Review
20
(2007) points to the delivery of aid to Afghan refugees in Pakistan during the 
Soviet occupation of the country as a case in point. In her view, the same has 
held true in other humanitarian operations throughout the past thirty years of 
international activism: “Relying on a purely humanitarian response to civil 
war and genocide is an ineffective and potentially harmful placebo” (Lischer, 
2007, p. 114). In A Fragile Balance, Picard and Buss (2009) provide a his-
tory of foreign aid through the lens that current foreign aid practices have 
lost their alignment and focus. They hold that foreign aid can best be used to 
provide social services and develop human resources but it is not an effec-
tive tool to promote economic growth - which is the lack of alignment and 
focus they see in current situations. When aid is provided injudiciously for 
the development of democracy and governance, the exact opposite can occur 
by fostering political instability through the monetary support of opposition 
political parties. Unfortunately, there has been an ever increasing appetite 
for such aid in the United States since the end of the cold war.
Dennis Young asks if the relationship between non-profit organizations 
and the United States government is “complementary, supplementary, or 
adversarial?” (Young, 2006, p. 37). He answers the question in the affirma-
tive with the caveat that the relationship will vary among the three depending 
on the circumstances. The relationship becomes even more dynamic where 
foreign assistance is involved. There has been an historic tendency for the 
United States to utilize foreign aid as an instrument of national policy. From 
the ‘cold war’ to the ‘war on terror’ after 9/11, the money from USAID 
does not necessarily go to the neediest countries, it goes to strategic allies. 
As an example, in 2004 Egypt and Israel received $13 and $121 per capita 
respectively in assistance where Bangladesh and Ghana each received only 
$3 per capita (Kerlin, 2006).
There are several tools available to various coalition policy makers for 
achieving policy goals. In addition to foreign aid the tools include:
•	
Threat and use of force
•	
Covert operations and proxy interventions
•	
Intelligence gathering and information dissemination
•	
Diplomacy
•	
Propaganda
•	
Cultural exchanges (visits and exchanges)
•	
Economic threats and promises and trade policies (sanctions and tar-
iffs). (Picard & Buss, 2009, p. 6)

Literature Review
21
Each of these tools provides for varying degrees of cooperation between 
NGOs and the United Nations. In the supplemental role, NGOs and interna-
tional government agencies perform separate but parallel roles in helping a 
population. In the complementary role, the NGOs and international govern-
mental agencies coordinate closely with each other in the provision of goods 
and services to the targeted population; each providing strength where the 
other may struggle (Young, 2006).
Policy makers need an understanding of various aid organizations’ strategies 
and likely behaviors to enable accurate assessments of potential interactions 
and their outcomes in the execution of transition and stability operations. 
Crutchfield and Grant (2008) describe the six successful practices of non-
profit organizations. The practices they describe that make these organiza-
tions successful also make them formidable to deal with in the delivery of 
development aid in failed and failing nation states. Those six practices are:
1. 	 They Advocate and Serve: They work to deliver services as well as 
advocate for policy initiatives.
2. 	 They Make Markets Work: They tap into the economic self-interests 
of the parties in populations they work in.
3. 	 They Inspire Evangelists: From both within and without of the popula-
tions they serve to cement their advocacy within society.
4. 	 They Nurture Nonprofit Networks: Which is in keeping with the 
axiom that a rising tide lifts all ships.
5. 	 They Master the Art of Adaptation: They learn to innovate to keep 
themselves relevant.
6. 	 They Share Leadership: By power sharing, these organizations empower 
their succession plans and provide a gateway for individuals to advance 
within the organization. (Crutchfield & Grant, 2008, pp. 21-22)
These practices and skills can become an inherent source of tension when 
these types of organizations attempt to deliver services in a counterinsurgency 
environment. The advocacy piece of their mission can, and frequently does, 
lead to conflict in the delivery of development aid in a contested environment 
and has a ripple effect on policy implementation (Leed & Taylor, 2010).
The idea of the population’s trust being the prize is not limited to opera-
tions involving the use of military security forces. Much of the develop-
ment aid taking place in the developing world fights to gain the trust of the 
indigenous societies where the aid is being expended (Mosse, 2005). This 
ongoing battle creates enormous friction even in benign environments, much 
less the confused and contested environment of counterinsurgency and sta-

Literature Review
22
bility operations. The motives of the donors as well as the motives of the 
aid organizations themselves have a stratifying effect on strategies used and 
how the organizations are perceived both by the target population and other 
organizations operating in the same domain (de Haan, 2009).
The domain conflicts become even more pronounced when military forces 
are introduced (Roberts, 2010). There is a definite tension about which orga-
nization has the right to operate in a particular domain space in the area. As 
the threat level increases and domain consensus decreases, the strife between 
the various aid agencies and the military reach their greatest. Figure 1 depicts 
the various military activities that have interaction with NGOs and various 
aid organizations and the relative degree of domain consensus associated 
with each (Roberts, 2010). The upper quadrants represent high levels of 
domain consensus. Each of the agents is operating within their traditional 
space and the friction between the groups is greatly reduced. In fact, there 
has been a traditionally high level of trust and cooperation in disaster relief 
operations when the military is providing logistics support to NGOs and 
other government sponsored aid agencies. The threat level is high for disaster 
relief because the situation will have typically overwhelmed the NGO’s and 
receiving government’s ability to effectively respond. This cooperation is 
reversed when counterinsurgency operations are begun by the military and / 
or complex humanitarian missions are begun such as those in Darfur.
The phrase “winning hearts and minds” is usually credited to the writing 
of Galula (1964). His work on counterinsurgency warfare is one of the prime 
references cited in the Army / Marine Corps field manual on Counterinsur-
gency Opreations, FM 3-24. Galula writes from a mechanistic and ethically 
neutral perspective in that he describes in very calculating terms how to turn 
a population against an insurgent, thereby destroying the insurgents’ source 
of power. He identifies the center of gravity (the origin of the belligerents’ 
source of power) for both the insurgent and the counterinsurgent as the 
population itself. From his perspective, protecting the population from harm 
is not an act of humanity; it is an act of expediency. The battle is joined liter-
ally to win over the goodwill of the population. The degree of intelligence, 
or information, about the insurgents’ activities that is forthcoming from the 
population, is the scorecard of measure. His capstone argument is that if the 
population feels more secure by cooperating with the counterinsurgent 
forces, then the insurgent has lost and can be relatively quickly eradicated 
from the scene. On the other hand, if the population lives in fear of the in-
surgents’ reprisal for cooperating with the counterinsurgent forces (or the 
established local government agencies), then the counterinsurgent forces are 
condemned to chasing shadows in a self-defeating effort to counter idealism 

Literature Review
23
with kinetic force (Galula, 1964). The lesson that has been taken from this 
by many military planners is that humanitarian operations can act as a force 
multiplier; a way to increase security without the use of force. Lischer (2007) 
adamantly refutes this position and contends that it has precisely the opposite 
effect.
FM 3-24 is basically a synthesis of these two concepts represented by the 
previously discussed texts. The field manual discusses at length the need to 
provide security for the population and to insulate the population from the 
insurgents. Additionally, FM 7-0 discusses the various levels of conventional 
force versus facilitation in the full spectrum of possible military operations. 
There is a great deal of emphasis put on the importance of constant learning 
and studying the ‘lessons learned’ from predecessors operating in the area. 
Centralized command and decentralized execution is the watch phrase for 
counterinsurgent operations with the protection of the population the fore-
most mission. The introduction of political officials and social workers down 
Figure 1. Domain concensus

Literature Review
24
to the company level is a drastic departure from previous military doctrine 
(Gentile, 2009). (While this structure is advocated in doctrine, current force 
structure levels do not accommodate such experts below the level of the 
division – fully four levels above where doctrine says they are needed.) The 
field manual has adopted tactics that Mao would have felt very comfortable 
with in the Chinese ‘Long March.’ Unfortunately, in this new perspective 
that U.S. forces now see aid provision sets the views of NGOs in direct op-
position. The one organization that has the influence and moral authority to 
intervene and coordinate the activities of each is the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Unfortunately, this office is a reluc-
tant intermediary (Lischer, 2005).
Change Capacity
As discussed earlier, the change capacity of a society has a clear and direct 
bearing on what end states are feasible when planning for and executing 
stability operations and humanitarian interventions. Van De Ven and Poole 
(1995) identify four families of ideal-type theories of social change. Those 
families are life cycle, evolution, dialectic, and teleology. The authors identify 
a great number of traits in the ideal-types of theories of social change. In the 
ideal-type of evolution, they identify the key metaphor being competitive 
survival and the generating force being population scarcity, competition, 
and commensalism (Van De Ven & Poole, 1995). Of the four ideal-types, 
evolution is the one that has traits that are the most similar to those that also 
occur in the circumstances surrounding Afghan culture.
Gersick (1991) also makes the comparison of the traditional paradigm 
of gradual blending of small changes to make a different form, to that of 
punctuated equilibrium, which has long periods of stability punctuated by 
radical change. Gersick asserts that the “Darwinian gradualism” type models 
that apply drivers such as efficiency, constantly moving a system forward, 
are frequently fallacious (Gersick, 1991, p. 10). Punctuated equilibria do not 
have a smooth or constant path toward pre-set ends; the very definition of 
the system can be modified by its evolution. The article describes “the three 
main components of the punctuated equilibrium paradigm: deep structure, 
equilibrium periods, and revolutionary periods” (Gersick, 1991, p. 13).
Common across all disciplines utilizing the punctuated equilibrium model 
is the concept that deep structure is the key determinant of how a system or 
organization reacts. The deep structure is the set of choices or initial condi-
tions that determine how the system is organized and what the relationships 
are between the basic activities that maintain its existence. The deep structure 

Literature Review
25
is the force that limits change and maintains equilibrium. It is only “when a 
system’s deep structure comes apart” that revolutionary change occurs, which 
“may not leave a system better off” (Gersick, 1991, p. 20). Gersick (1991) 
suggests that there can be numerous triggers for revolutionary periods; both 
internal and external. An example of an external trigger would be the need 
to obtain resources from the environment and using inappropriate tools to 
do so. An internal trigger could be temporal milestones such as the half way 
point of a project (Gersick, 1991, p. 24). Individuals in their forties, hav-
ing reached the half way point in their lives, frequently will make dramatic 
changes in their lifestyle in an effort to optimize the remaining period of 
productive time they have left to them (Gersick, 1991, p. 24). In all of these 
examples however, turbulence in the system can mask the inertia present in 
the deep structures.
Afghan Geography and History
The geography and history of Afghanistan has done more to influence the 
culture of the people than any other single influence (Kakar, 1997; Ewans, 
2002; Rasanayagam, 2003; Loyn, 2009). Afghanistan is a landlocked country 
covering approximately 250,000 square miles, which is an area roughly the 
size of the state of Texas (Ewans, 2002). The country’s location on the east-
ern end of the Iranian Plateau has given it a central place in trade between 
East and West for several millennia. As far back 1336 BC, a ship carrying 
lapis lazuli and tin mined in Afghanistan was wrecked off the Turkish coast 
(Ewans, 2002, p. 10). The location of Afghanistan has also given it a reputa-
tion as a highway of conquest.
The climate of the country can be extreme. Over two-thirds of the country 
lies over 5,000 feet in elevation and it harbors several of the highest mountain 
peaks in the world (Ewans, 2002, p. 1). Because of its landlocked location, 
rainfall is light and water is scarce. Large diurnal and seasonal swings in 
temperature make agriculture difficult. The majority of the land is unculti-
vable but the snowmelt fed rivers lend themselves to irrigation. Small land 
holdings are the norm which has prevented many of the extremes of hunger 
and malnutrition seen in many other parts of Asia (Ewans, 2002). The ma-
jority of the almost 30 million people (The CIA World Fact Book estimate) 
subsist on agriculture and pastoralism. Most of the arable land is used in the 
production of food grains, but there are some important cash crops such as 
cotton, fruit, and ever present opium (Ewans, 2002, p. 3).
The location of Afghanistan also holds the key to the diversity of its people. 
Afghanistan borders Iran, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, China, and 

Literature Review
26
Pakistan. The majority of the population is ethnic Pashtun, which are of 
Indo-Aryan decent, and refer to themselves as collectively as Afghans and 
their language as Afghani (Ewans, 2002, pp. 4 -5). The Pashtun language is 
one of the Indo-Iranian groups and is related to Persian. The ethnic makeup 
of the Afghan population is as follows from the CIA World Fact Book 2011: 
Pashtun forty-two percent, Tajik twenty-seven percent, Hazara nine percent, 
Uzbek nine percent, Aimak four percent, Turkmen three percent, Baloch two 
percent, and other four percent. Most all of these ethnic groups have emigrated 
from neighboring countries primarily as a result of conquest.
Conquest has been a way of life in the modern history of Afghanistan. 
During the Seventh Century the Arab Caliphates extended into Afghanistan. 
This advancement of Islam into previously held Hindu lands established what 
would be the battleground between Western and Eastern influences (Ewans, 
2002). One of the most devastating events in Afghan history is the invasion 
of the Mongol hordes commanded by Genghis Khan in 1221 (Ewans, 2002). 
The result of the Mongol occupation of Afghanistan was devastating on the 
population. Entire city populations were shattered. Visitors were informed 
that the entirety of the “citizens had been removed” (Ewans, 2002, p. 24).
In the late 1830’s the one invasion route that was certain in British eyes 
was that of Russia and Persia crossing through Afghanistan to invade India. 
The British’ fear that Afghanistan would be used as an invasion route of India 
was not without historic precedence and led them to invade Afghanistan to 
utilize it as a buffer. There were two Anglo-Afghan wars or more accurately 
British interventions. From 1838 to 1842, the British supported Shah Shuja, 
who they installed as the ruler of Afghanistan, with an army of 20,000 soldiers 
(Ewans, 2002; Rasanayagam, 2003; Loyn, 2009). The first intervention came 
to an end when, after a series of military and political mistakes and missteps, 
the remaining British army retreated to Jalalabad. The retreat was conducted 
through narrow mountain passes during harsh winter conditions while suf-
fering continuous ambushes from local tribesmen in the surrounding hills. 
The result was a death march in which nearly all of the 9,500 British-Indian 
troops and 12,000 Indian camp followers died (Ewans, 2002; Rasanayagam, 
2003; Loyn, 2009).
The second foray by the British into Afghanistan in 1879 went little better 
than the first. After a hasty declaration of war, the British invaded Afghanistan 
and quickly dispersed the defenders. Unfortunately, they soon discovered a 
glaring problem; they had no popular figure to rule Afghanistan. The cost 
of keeping an occupying army garrisoned was not planned for and would 
be a serious drain on the Exchequer in India. The current Amir was the 
“less-than-favorite son” (Ewans, 2002, p. 88) of a man that had successfully 

Literature Review
27
ruled Afghanistan in the preceding 10 years. This set of circumstances left 
the British with little choice but to make terms with the new Amir, but the 
peace was short lived. The Amir was not powerful enough to control all of 
the tribes and a mere six weeks after the terms were agreed to, the British 
envoy and his small contingent of cavalry were killed by a mob. The British 
response was brutal and prompted the Afghans to come together to fight a 
jihad. Although the British prevailed militarily, they were again faced with a 
long occupation which the government in London had no stomach for. A new 
Amir was allowed to come to power and the British retired from Afghanistan 
again within a year (Ewans, 2002; Rasanayagam, 2003; Loyn, 2009).
Just as the Afghans were caught in the struggles of the imperialist pow-
ers of the nineteenth century, they were caught in the Cold War rivalries in 
the twentieth century. As the United States lost Iran, its ally and partner in 
the region, to Islamic revolution, the Soviet Union began to have concerns 
about American interests in Afghanistan (Ewans, 2002; Rasanayagam, 2003; 
Loyn, 2009). In 1978, a coup took place that installed a decisively left leaning 
government. The People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) took 
power and began to try to bring Afghanistan from a feudal state to a socialist 
one (Kakar, 1997). With revolutionary zeal, the PDPA faithful spread out 
into the countryside to attempt land reform. Through a combination of poor 
planning and poor knowledge of local traditions in the countryside, land 
reform was a failure and provoked opposition to the new government and 
sowed the seeds of unrest that would eventually spark the Soviet invasion of 
the country in 1979.
The Soviet invasion and installation of puppet government was no more 
successful than the British efforts a century earlier. The Soviets left Afghani-
stan with a relatively small number of almost 15,000 dead but an astounding 
469,685 casualties, out of a force of 642,000 personnel that served during 
their ten year occupation (Grau, 1996, p. xvi). After these ten years of oc-
cupation, Afghanistan had once again shed the yoke of occupation only to 
bear the new one of civil war. In 1996 the Taliban began to consolidate power 
and extend its influence over the majority of the country. Initially supported 
by Pakistan, the Taliban proved to be an unreliable ally. They set up what for 
all practical purposes was a theocracy based on ultra conservative Islamic 
beliefs (Fuller, 1991). Unfortunately, they did not address rebuilding of the 
country’s infrastructure and effectively dismantled the administrative bureau-
cracy. During their five years in power, Afghanistan further disintegrated into 
a failed state with a paucity of resources and a devastated infrastructure. It 
has become a rentier state dependent upon development aid (Rasanayagam, 
2003). The story of how the International Community will fair in attempting 

Literature Review
28
to modernize Afghanistan is still being written but historic precedent does 
not suggest a successful outcome.
The culture of the Pashtuns has been shaped by the history of conquest of 
the region (Rasanayagam, 2003; Loyn, 2009). They are a proud people that 
are aggressively individualistic in the context of a tribal and familial culture 
(Ewans, 2002). The Pashtun have predatory habits blended with a mix of 
democratic and feudal ethos which is vetted through a relatively simple code 
of conduct reinforced by their Muslim faith. Concepts of revenge (badal), 
hospitality (melmastia) sanctuary, and honor (namus) have meant that vendet-
tas have gone on for generations and the lack of any firm rules of succession 
only add to internal factionalism (Ewans, 2002; Miakhel, 2009).
The recent past is littered with the dashed agendas of those that attempted 
deep change in Afghanistan. During the reign of King Amanullah Khan (1919-
1929), he attempted to implement reform agendas to modernize Afghanistan 
but met resistance from both religious leaders and the clans. He could not 
find the proper balance between the three bases of power and was forced 
to abdicate his throne and leave the country. When Afghan President Daud 
(1973-1978), focused on implementing a progressive nationalistic agenda he 
was overthrown by a Communist coup supported by Islamic fundamentalists 
that feared he was becoming too close to the West (Kakar, 1997). Jihad started 
against the communist regimes (1978-1992) when their policies began to 
target religious and Khel leaders, and they failed to implement their agenda. 
The Taliban lost power when they began bypassing Khel leaders with their 
agenda and plunged the country into civil war (Ewans, 2002; Rasanayagam, 
2003; Loyn, 2009; Miakhel, 2009).
The Qawm
Up until 2002, Afghanistan continued to be a feudal type of government in 
which the tribes held a critical role in installing and removing their rulers. 
They were also critical in keeping order and providing governance in the 
rural countryside where central government power was low if even present 
at all (Miakhel, 2009). With the marginalization of the central government 
throughout a history of conquest, rebellion, and civil war, the Afghans have 
adapted their traditional system of governance to exercise the rule of law at 
the local level within their fragmented society. Their traditional system of an 
almost ubiquitous code of conduct called pashtunwali provides a system of 
rules and expectations to govern life for Afghans. This system is reinforced 
by the egalitarian nature of Afghan society (for male heads of households) 
which gives adult males a vote in local decision making (Slaughter, 2010).

Literature Review
29
This discussion of tribes however, should not be construed as having 
described the cultural source of identity for Afghans. In fact, Dupree (1973) 
points out that tribe “has, in general, degenerated into a term of identifica-
tion when away from one’s own village or area” (p. 183). Slaughter (2010) 
points out that the “The Pashtun tribe is not hierarchical and there is no chief, 
single man, or office that speaks for the Pashtun tribe or some sub-division 
thereof” (p. 7). The other ethno-linguistic groups frequently identified as 
tribes in Afghanistan are not tribes at all. This makes the notion of tribe al-
most useless in terms of analytical value (Tapper, 1983). The true source of 
identity for Afghans comes from the notion of the Qawm (Miakhel, 2009).
The term Qawm can be roughly interpreted to mean “social network” (Mi-
akhel, 2009, p. 2). It is from this social network that Afghans have drawn their 
social capital to be able to bounce back from the repeated insults of occupation, 
civil war, famine, and failed governance. This concept of social capital is in 
line with the forms of capital described by Pierre Bourdieu (2010): social 
capital, made up of social obligations (‘connections’), which is convertible, 
in certain conditions, into economic capital” (p. 281). This point is a regular 
feature expected of Afghan leaders. The Qawm chooses leaders or Khans 
based upon the expectation that they will be good providers (Slaughter, 2010). 
So the Qawm may best be described to the Western way of thinking as an 
über political party, replete with expectations of patronage and the sense of 
loyalty to the Qawm derived from that patronage. In Afghanistan, the Qawm 
has provided security and order during times of chaos but has also been the 
culprit of preventing the modernization of the nation (Miakhel, 2009). The 
Qawm derives its authority based upon the three bases of identity and power 
in Afghanistan: the Khel, Islam, and the central government. The Khel is a 
combination of three attributes: the location where a man lives, his method 
of livelihood, and his clan or extended family.
Islam is of fundamental importance in Afghan culture and has a dominant 
influence on the way individuals view the world. Madrassas are the religious 
schools that produce clerics. There are official Madrassas, supported by the 
government and non-official Madrassas, supported by contributions from 
individuals and organizations. The non-official Madrassas are usually located 
in mosques and therefore closer to the community. Leaders from the non-
official Madrassas can mobilize the community very easily because they live 
among the people and are supported by the community. Lessening the status 
of graduates of official Madrassas is that many of them are appointed as 
judges and prosecutors and because of the rampant corruption in the judicial 
system, viewed by the people as corrupt officials. The central government 

Literature Review
30
is frequently looked at as an outside interference that is inherently corrupt 
(Miakhel, 2009).
Figure 2 illustrates the relationships that make up the Qawm. The interests 
for the individual, based in the Qawm, are the meeting or balance point of the 
tensions between these three power bases. As one power base gains power, 
it begins to shift the relationship of the Qawm with the other two. However, 
this shifting of relationships has a thixotropic quality. This is because the 
bonds within the Afghan society are tenuous at best. Independence and in-
dividualism, as well as a very inflated value placed on honor can cause what 
appear to be solid organizations to atomize (Ewans, 2002; Rasanayagam, 
2003; Loyn, 2009; Miakhel, 2009).
If the changes of relationship between the power bases occur with enough 
temporal space, the transitions take place with little resistance. If change is 
too rapid or too much force is used, the capacity for change becomes brittle 
and shatters the power base from which the change effort was launched, 
devastating the effort. The Khel and Islam act as the prescriptive motors that 
drive the adaptive change process. The central government acts as the con-
structive motor that attempts to drive transformative change in the society 
Figure 2. The Nexus of Power is the Qawm

Literature Review
31
and get it to re-coalesce around new modern deep structures (Tushman & 
Romanelli, 1985; Van De Ven & Poole, 1995). Unfortunately, those attempts 
have generally led to revolt, civil war, and the degeneration of the country 
into a mid-evil society (Kakar, 1997).
With this in mind, there are two other concepts that are critical to the un-
derstanding of the Afghan way. In the preponderance of the countryside there 
are locally established structures to administer justice. The Jirga is a consensus 
building forum for making decisions. It is a “gathering of representatives 
of tribes or of different segments of the society” (Miakhel, 2009, p. 8). The 
Shura is a council that is elected to act for longer periods of time. In Afghan 
rural culture, unilateral decisions may not be implemented – either a Jirga or a 
Shura is convened to conduct the decision making process and their decisions 
have the weight of law (Miakhel, 2009; Slaughter, 2010). Interestingly, the 
Jirgas are assembled in an ad hoc fashion and only with the acquiescence of 
the disputing parties much like a jury is selected in the United States justice 
system – the members can and do change for each issue. If the belligerent 
sides cannot agree on the members of the Jirga, then the Jirga cannot be held. 
The Jirga bases its decisions on precedent which is called Narkh which is 
essentially common law in the Western sense (Miakhel, 2009).
Given the supremacy of the existing local cultural structures within Afghan 
society, the failure of both internal and external change imperatives should 
be expected. The fragmented nature of Afghan culture combined with its 
traditional and conservative leanings stand as a formidable barrier to mod-
ernization efforts. Change initiatives must proceed slowly and unfortunately, 
with the paucity of resources of the land, they will be very costly to whoever 
initiates the change effort.
CONCLUSION
The dynamics of these complex adaptive systems are rooted in their deep 
structure. The deep structure is the grouping of organizing choices or variables 
that determine the system’s basic activity patterns (Gersick, 1991). The broad 
nature of the literature reviewed was necessary to provide the background 
regarding the interrelationships between the various theories of inputs and 
outcomes and their sometimes-disjointed actual outcomes in reality. Lischer 
(2005) has pointed out that when NGOs or a military force attempt to deal 
with complex humanitarian problems independently, they frequently wind 
up making the problem worse. She cites multiple examples from Afghani-
stan to Darfur to the Balkans where NGOs operating independently actually 

Literature Review
32
facilitated the spread of a conflict. She also cites examples of military forces 
exacerbating problems in Iraq, Afghanistan, and the Balkans as well. Issues 
ranging from military-NGO coordination to change capacity of the society 
as well as the legitimacy of the belligerents within the society are captured 
within this simulation and provide the context for the interpretation of the 
results of the simulations.
REFERENCES
Berry, B. J. L., Kiel, L. D., & Elliott, E. (2002). Adaptive agents, intelligence, 
and emergent human organization: Capturing complexity through agent based 
modeling. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 99(S3), 7187-7316.
Bourdieu, P. (2010). The forms of capital. In N. W. Biggart (Ed.), Readings in 
economic sociology (pp. 280–291). Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers Inc.
Crutchfield, L. R., & Grant, H. M. (2008). Forces for good: The six practices 
of high-impact nonprofits. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
de Haan, A. (2009). How the aid industry works: An introduction to inter-
national development. Sterling, VA: Kumarian Press.
Dockrill, M. L., & Fisher, J. (2001). The Paris Peace Conference, 1919: 
Peace without victory? New York, NY: Palgrave.
Dupree, L. (1973). Afghanistan. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Epstein, J. M., & Axtell, R. (1996). Growing artificial societies: Social sci-
ence from the bottom up. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Ewans, M. (2002). Afghanistan. New York: HarperCollins Publishers, Inc.
FM 3-24 The Army / Marine Corps Field Manual on Counterinsurgency. 
(2006). Retrieved February 4, 2011, from www.fas.org/irp/doddir/army/
fm3-24.pdf
FM 7-0 The Army Field Manual on Training for Full Spectrum Operations. 
(2008). Retrieved June 19, 2010, from http://usacac.army.mil/cac2/Reposi-
tory/FM70/FM7-0.pdf
Fuller, G. E. (1991). Islamic fundamentalism in Afghanistan: Its character 
and prospects. Santa Monica, CA: Rand.

Literature Review
33
Galula, D. (1964). Counterinsurgency warfare: Theory and Practice. West-
port, CT: Praeger Security International.
Gentile, G. P. (2009). A strategy of tactics: Population-centric COIN and the 
Army. Parameters, 3(Autumn), 5–17.
Gersick, C. J. (1991). Revolutionary change theories: A multilevel exploration 
of the punctuated equilibrium paradigm. Academy of Management Review, 
16(1), 10–36. doi:10.5465/AMR.1991.4278988
Grau, L. W. (1996). The bear went over the mountain: Soviet combat tactics 
in Afghanistan. Washington, DC: National Defense University Press.
Kakar, M. H. (1997). Afghanistan: the Soviet invasion and the Afghan re-
sponse, 1979-1982. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Kerlin, J. (2006). U.S. based international NGOs and federal government 
foreign assistance: Out of Alignment? In E. T. Boris & C. E. Steuerle (Eds.), 
Nonprofits and government: Collaboration and conflict (pp. 385–386). 
Washington, DC: The Urban Institute Press.
Leed, M., & Taylor, J. (2010). Assessing impact across policy domains: A 
workshop at the center for strategic and international studies. Center for 
Strategic and International Studies. Retrieved February 12, 2011, from http://
csis.org/files/publication/110125_assessing_impact_ndap.pdf
Lischer, S. K. (2005). Dangerous sanctuaries: Refugee camps, civil war, and 
the dilemmas of humanitarian aid. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Lischer, S. K. (2007). Military intervention and the “force multiplier.”. Global 
Governance, 13, 99–118.
Loyn, D. (2009). In Afghanistan. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Miakhel, S. (2009). Understanding Afghanistan: The importance of tribal 
culture and structure in security and governance. Pashtoonkhwa. Retrieved 
July 2, 2011, from http://www.pashtoonkhwa.com/files/books/Miakhel-
ImportanceOfTribalStructuresInAfghanistan.pdf
Mosse, D. (2005). Cultivating development: An ethnography of aid policy 
and practice. Ann Arbor, MI: Pluto Press.
Picard, L. A., & Buss, T. F. (2009). A fragile balance: Re-examining the his-
tory of foreign aid, security, and diplomacy. Sterling, VA: Kumarian Press.

Literature Review
34
Rasanayagam, A. (2003). Afghanistan: A modern history. London: I. B. 
Tauris and Company, LTD.
Roberts, N. C. (2010). Spanning bleeding boundaries: Humanitarianism, NGOs, 
and the civilian-military nexus in the post-cold war era. Public Administra-
tion Review, 70(March), 212–222. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6210.2010.02135_2.x
Slaughter, S. R. (2010). Expanding the Qawm: Culturally savvy counterin-
surgency and nation-building in Afghanistan. Monograph. Fort Leavenworth, 
KS: School of Advanced Military Studies, United States Army Command 
and General Staff College.
Tapper, R. (1983). The Conflict of Tribe and State in Iran and Afghanistan. 
London: Croom Helm.
The Treaty of Versailles. (1919). Retrieved December 27, 2011, from http://
history.sandiego.edu/gen/text/versaillestreaty/all440.html
Tuchman, B. W. (1984). The march of folly. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.
Tushman, M., & Romanelli, E. (1985). Organizational evolution: A meta-
morphosis model of convergence and reorientation. In L. L. Cummings & B. 
M. Staw (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior (Vol. 7, pp. 171–222). 
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
United States Army History Archives. (1947). The First Year of the Occupa-
tion – Occupation Forces in Europe Series 1945-1946. Retrieved October 2, 
2011, from http://www.history.hqusareur.army.mil/Archives/First%20Year/
the%20first%20year%202.pdf
United States Central Intelligence Agency. (2012). The World Factbook. 
Retrieved February 9, 2012, from https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/
resources/the-world-factbook/
Van de Ven, A. H., & Poole, M. S. (1995). Explaining development and 
change in organizations. Academy of Management Review, 20(3), 510–540. 
doi:10.2307/258786
Van Meter, R. H. (1979). Herbert Hoover and the economic reconstruction 
of Europe. In L. E. Gelfand (Ed.), Herbert Hoover: The great war and its 
aftermath 1914-23 (pp. 143–181). Iowa City, IA: University of Iowa Press.

Literature Review
35
Young, D. R. (2006). Complementary, supplementary, or adversarial? 
Nonprofit-governmental relations. In E. T. Boris & C. E. Steuerle (Eds.), 
Nonprofits and government: Collaboration and conflict (pp. 37–79). Wash-
ington, DC: The Urban Institute Press.
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Change Capacity: The ability of a society to adapt to stresses and shocks, 
either endogenous or exogenous, in a cohesive and positive manner.
Counterinsurgency Operations: The use of both military and nonmilitary 
aspects designed to defeat an insurgency by both providing security for the 
target population and addressing the root causes of the insurgency.
Jirga: A consensus building forum for making decisions.
Madrassas: The religious schools that produce clerics.
Nation Building: The reconstruction of state infrastructure, to include 
the physical, political, and social aspects, which have been damaged through 
conflict.
Pacification: The attempt to create or maintain peace.
Pashtunwali: An almost ubiquitous code of conduct which provides a 
system of rules and expectations to govern life for Afghans.
Qawm: A social network most closely An über political party, replete with 
expectations of patronage and the sense of loyalty derived from that patronage.

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1782-5.ch003
Chapter 3
36 
Agent-Based Modeling
INTRODUCTION
In 1998 the United Nations General Assembly stated in Resolution 52/167 
on page one that they were:
Deeply concerned by the growing number of complex humanitarian emergen-
cies, in particular armed conflicts and post-conflict situations, in the last 
few years, which have dramatically increased the loss of human lives, suf-
fering of victims, flows of refugees and internally displaced persons, as well 
as material destruction, which disrupt the development efforts of countries 
affected, in particular those of developing countries.
Additionally in 1992, via resolution 46/182 the United Nations General 
Assembly adopted a series of Guiding Principles to strengthen the coordina-
tion of international humanitarian emergency assistance. Those principles 
state in part that:
The magnitude and duration of many emergencies may be beyond the response 
capacity of many affected countries. International cooperation to address 
emergency situations and to strengthen the response capacity of affected 
countries is thus of great importance. Such cooperation should be provided 
in accordance with international law and national laws. Intergovernmental 
and non-governmental organizations working impartially and with strictly 
humanitarian motives should continue to make a significant contribution 

Agent-Based Modeling
37
in supplementing national efforts. … There is a clear relationship between 
emergency, rehabilitation and development. In order to ensure a smooth 
transition from relief to rehabilitation and development, emergency assistance 
should be provided in ways that will be supportive of recovery and long-term 
development. Thus, emergency measures should be seen as a step towards 
long-term development. (Annex, page 50)
Complex adaptive systems are different in that each of their parts follows 
an individualized set of rules that can vary as they interact within the larger 
system. There is no overarching set of rules governing the outcome – complex 
adaptive systems are non-deterministic. The non-deterministic, or stochastic, 
non-linear behavior of these complex adaptive systems can be extremely 
difficult to predict. Small variations in initial conditions can cause dramatic 
changes in outcomes. These variations become problematic to predict because 
their outcomes vary as the product of the system variables versus the sum 
of those variables. The problem as Holland (1995) describes it is that “It is 
much easier to use mathematics when systems have linear properties that 
we often expend considerable effort to justify an assumption of linearity” 
(p.15). Linear models have great difficulties predicting emergent behaviors. 
The difficulty is so great that the term “black swan” came into vogue thanks 
to Taleb’s (2007) bestselling book, The black swan: The impact of the highly 
improbable. It is precisely these types of events – 9/11, the 2008 financial 
crisis, the success of the iPod – that causes dramatic change; what Gersick 
(1991) describes as punctuated equilibrium. These types of events dramati-
cally alter the systems in which they occur and they do not always change 
them for the better. None of the linear models would have predicted such 
events because they were caused by outlier variables. The point of agent 
based modeling and other similar tools for modeling non-linear behavior is 
to conduct thought experiments to gain insight into the possible; regardless 
of its probability.
BACKGROUND
Characteristics of Agent Based Modeling
As previously stated, agent based modeling is one of the tools available to 
researchers studying complex adaptive systems. One of the key differentiating 
factors of agent based modeling is that the model simulations are constructed 
from the bottom up versus the top down. Top down models are typically the 

Agent-Based Modeling
38
linear type that use deductive logic that start from a general theory and then 
develop hypotheses for testing to determine the model’s validity in specific 
instances. Inductive methods can also be utilized to build a theory that starts 
with specific observations and compiles them into a generalized theory. The 
trouble is that when these approaches are utilized to describe complex adap-
tive systems, there are problems with the fit of the model. Additionally, these 
types of models do not account for emergent behavior which is a hallmark 
of complex adaptive systems.
Agent based modeling differs from the linear based approach because it 
is non-deterministic. That means instead of having an end-state of affairs in 
mind when beginning to design the model, a few critical variables are identi-
fied and their key characteristics and relationships are described. This entails 
identifying the agents (actors) and their behavioral characteristics to include 
the characteristics of their interactions with each other and the environment. 
The response characteristics of the environmental variables to each of the 
agents is also captured and represented within the model. The simulation 
model algorithm is then allowed to run and the outcome of the simulation 
can be observed real-time. These simulation runs can be carefully controlled 
by altering the variables through an interface within the software to create 
alternative relationships within the simulation. The most important concept 
within the agent based modeling methodology is that these thought experi-
ments are non-deterministic and optimized to produce emergent behavior 
through an experimental methodology.
One of the early models used to describe non-linear behavior in systems 
was the famous Lotka-Volterra model (Holland, 1995). The equations for the 
model were first described by Alfred Lotka (1920) to represent undamped 
chemical reactions and then further refined by Vito Volterra (1926) to apply 
to predator-prey interactions (Evans & Findley, 1999). The equations are 
first-order ordinary differential equations. Suppose that N(t) is the number 
of prey at time t, and P(t) is the predator population. Then the two equations 
that describe the system are dN
dt
N a
bP and dP
dt
P cN
d
=
−
(
)
=
−
(
)
 
 
 where 
(a) is the birth rate of prey; (-b) is the reduction in the number of prey due 
to predation; (c) is the reproduction rate of predators as a result of consum-
ing prey; and (d) is the natural death rate of the predators. The graphs of the 
resultant solutions to these equations show an oscillation around a stationary 
point with the graph representing the prey population always leading the 
predator population. In Figure 1, the number of predators and prey will 
eventually reach a dynamic equilibrium at some point within this set of el-
liptical solutions. The system does not have to begin within one of these 

Agent-Based Modeling
39
solution sets but it will eventually settle within one. The analysis of this 
system is not overly complex and it demonstrates the zero equilibrium solu-
tion which is unstable, as well as a positive equilibrium, which is neutrally 
stable, thereby providing periodic solutions within the bounds of this equi-
librium. Unfortunately this model contains obvious limitations; primarily 
that in the absence of predators, the prey population grows unbounded. This 
basic model however has proven to be useful in many fields and become a 
classic in non-linear systems such as population biology,
chemical kinetics, and parasite-host epidemiology. Additional refinements 
and improvements have been proposed, making the Lotka-Volterra model 
one of the most studied systems in mathematical biology (Evans & Findley 
1999).
A very simplistic example of the utility of agent based modeling is Hol-
land’s predator / prey system described earlier utilizing the Lotka-Volterra 
model. Instead of solving a series of differential equations, a researcher can 
access an agent based modeling software library and select an appropriate 
Figure 1. Predator-prey dynamic equilibrium

Agent-Based Modeling
40
simulation such as the “Wolf Sheep Predation” model built by Wilensky 
(1997) in NetLogo. The simulation involves two agents, wolves and sheep, 
moving randomly through a simulated landscape environment in which the 
grass re-grows at a scalable rate. The other attributes that can be varied are 
the initial number of each agent type, the rate of reproduction of the agents 
and the amount of sustenance each agent gains from eating. The simulation 
has a non-deterministic quality because of the random number generator 
embedded in the NetLogo code that influences the placement of the agents 
on the landscape and relative to each other as well as their initial energy state 
and their propensity to breed. This stochastic quality is also present in the 
code used for the simulation in this research. Figure 2 is a screen shot of the 
simulation interface at time zero. As the simulation runs, the sheep consume 
grass which re-grows at a fixed rate, the sheep reproduce at the set rate, the 
wolves prey on the sheep, and the wolves reproduce at a fixed rate. The point 
to notice within the simulation is the relative populations show similar os-
cillations as predicted by the Lotka-Volterra equations (see circled interface 
graph in Figure 3). This simulation can then generate a series of experiments 
by changing the parameters of the simulation such as the reproduction rates 
of either the predators, prey or both. It can also examine the outcomes of 
Figure 2. Simulation interface at time zero

Agent-Based Modeling
41
environmental changes such as the rate of growth of the grass. All of these 
factors can have an outcome on the populations of each agent type as well 
as the environment. This illustrates one of the primary attributes of agent 
based modeling: the variables can be isolated to provide experimental data 
sets in ways that are not possible with other methods or in the ‘real world.’
The Use of Agent Based Modeling in Various Research 
Fields
A look through the calls for papers in various symposiums being held around 
the world helps to demonstrate the breadth and reach of complexity science 
and the versatility of agent based modeling as a useful tool in those studies. 
In a call for papers for a conference called “Human Complexity 2012, The 
First Annual Conference on Complexity and Human Experience, Modeling 
Complexity in the Humanities and Social Sciences” to be held at the Center 
for Advanced Research in the Humanities at the University of North Carolina, 
Charlotte, the list of topics was particularly broad based:
•	
The propagation of beliefs, ideas and ideologies
•	
The effect of individual action on global economies
•	
Social structure among pre-historic peoples
Figure 3. Interface graph

Agent-Based Modeling
42
•	
Discovery of early trends and indicators of social and economic change
•	
The relationship between organizational/societal structure and the flow 
of energy and information
•	
The relationship between healthcare providers, patients, Internet, and 
social media (http://www.complexity.uncc.edu)
In addition to the topics, there have been similar conferences to discuss 
agent based modeling advances in defense technology and tactics, home land 
security, epidemiology, as well as areas of the natural sciences. As agent based 
modeling techniques and software tools continue to mature, the fields of study 
will continue to expand and add to the understanding of complex systems.
Agent Based Modeling Software Selection
There is a robust list of different agent based modeling software platforms to 
choose from. Appendix (A) contains the inclusive list of fifty-four software 
platforms that were initially considered. Each of these platforms has attributes 
that make it popular in the diverse universe of fields that utilize agent based 
models to conduct experiments. Many platforms also contain attributes that 
made them inappropriate for either the researcher or the characteristics of this 
particular study. This list was reduced to a final four to review for consider-
ation: NetLogo, MASON, Repast, and Swarm. The primary considerations 
for selection revolved around finding a platform that was compatible with a 
limited degree of programming experience, compatibility with a Windows 
operating system, and a free or low cost license agreement. Those attributes 
are summarized in Table 1.
From this list of finalists, NetLogo was the software package selected. 
While all of the software packages have reasonably good documentation, 
NetLogo’s heritage as an educational software package made it superior for 
use by neophyte programmers. Additionally, it contains an effort checking 
function that enables rapid trouble shooting of the program. These were the 
primary considerations for this research effort. Other, more functionally 
complex modeling scenarios may find Swarm (which came in a close second 
in this selection process) to be a superior simulation platform. NetLogo does 
not require the same level of organizational programming discipline that the 
other programs do because it requires all of the code to reside in one file; 
there are not multiple program files to track and organize such as the layout 
of the environment, the attributes of the agents, the movements of the agents, 
etcetera (Railsback, Lytinen, and Jackson 2006). Otherwise, the execution 

Agent-Based Modeling
43
speed of NetLogo was in the midrange of the final software packages reviewed 
and the ease of use and extensive model library made the final choice straight-
forward.
DESCRIPTION OF THE MODEL USED FOR THIS STUDY
The model used in the experimental portion of this study is a derivative of 
the NetLogo Wolf Sheep Predation model (Wilensky, 1997). Table 3.2 illus-
trates the basic interface and provides a guide through the discussion of the 
model’s construction. The selection and setting of the variables used during 
the experiments is discussed in detail in the following chapter.
Table 1. Comparison of ABM software
Platform
Primary Domain
License
Program 
Language
Operating 
System
User Support
MASON
General purpose;
Academic 
Free License 
(open source)
Java
Any Java 
Platform (1.3 
or higher)
Mailing list; 
documentation; 
Tutorials; third 
party extensions; 
reference papers; 
API
NetLogo
Social & natural 
sciences; Help 
beginning users 
get started 
authoring models
Free, not open 
source
NetLogo
Any Java 
Virtual 
Machine, 
version 5 or 
later.
Documentation; 
FAQ; selected 
references; 
tutorials; third party 
extensions; defect 
list; mailing lists
Repast
Social sciences
BSD - 
Berkley 
Software 
Distribution
Java
Java version 
1.4, Windows 
(Repast.net)
Documentation; 
mailing list; defect 
list; reference 
papers; external 
tools; tutorials; 
FAQ; examples
Swarm
General purpose 
agent based
Free, Cougaar 
Open Source 
License 
(COSL)
Java; 
Objective-C
Windows; 
Mac OS X
Wiki; tutorials; 
examples; 
documentation; 
FAQ; selected 
publications; 
mailing lists
Adapted from Nikolai & Madey 2009

Agent-Based Modeling
44
Landscape
The landscape of this model includes the following variables and setting 
parameters. Variable one (see Table 2) is the “level of violence” that is pres-
ent in the simulation. This interface determines the amount of energy (or life 
force units) that each agent sacrifices to attack another. In a highly contested 
environment, there is a cost for one group to attack another. Western military 
forces may have an advantage in terms of pure fire power and destructive 
force but the insurgents have the advantage of local terrain knowledge. When 
all sides are prepared for attack, each will extract a toll from the other for 
an attack and this variable sets the level of overall preparedness for all the 
agents in the simulation.
Table 3. Agent energy changes
Agent
Action
Outcome
Insurgent
Moves across light patch 
Moves across dark patch
No Change 
Gains energy
International & NGO agent
Moves across light patch 
Moves across dark patch
Gains energy 
Losses energy
Incumbent Government agent
Moves across light patch 
Moves across dark patch
Gains energy 
No change
Table 2. Variables and setting parameters
Variable
Attribute
Range
Units
Level of violence
Energy cost to attack
10 - 100
1
Initial number of insurgents
Beginning number of insurgent combatants
0 - 250
1
Initial number of international 
combatant & NGO agents
Beginning number of international agent 
combatants, civilian staff & NGO personnel
0 - 250
1
Initial number of incumbent 
government agents
Beginning number of incumbent government 
agent combatants
0 - 250
1
Government legitimacy
Ability to recruit from the population
1 - 20
1
Insurgent legitimacy
Ability to recruit from the population
1 - 20
1
Government gain from indigenous 
population
Support given to the agents in the form of energy 
units
0 - 10
0.1
Insurgent gain from indigenous 
population
Support given to the agents in the form of energy 
units
0 - 10
0.1
Level of coordination between 
international governmental & NGO 
agents
Increased coordination causes individuals within 
the population to become more sympathetic 
toward indigenous government
0 - 2.0
0.1

Agent-Based Modeling
45
Agent Variables
The agent energy level is defined as the life force an individual agent has. 
This energy is expended through actions taken to include simple existence 
(which would be the agent’s base metabolism rate). Each agent type has a 
beginning energy level that must remain above zero or else the individual 
agent dies. For the international agent types, which include international 
development agents, nongovernmental organization agents, and military 
agents, their initial energy level is set at a random number between one and 
twenty. The governmental agent types have their initial energy set at a random 
number between one and five times the “government gain from the popula-
tion” interface control {set energy random (5 * govt-gain-from-pop)}. The 
insurgent agent type has a similar attribute with the formula for their initial 
energy level being set between one and five times the “insurgent gain from the 
population” interface control {set energy random (5 * ins-gain-from-pop)}.
Variables two, three, and four (see Table 2) are simply the number of agents 
of each type initially present in the landscape. These numbers are meant to 
be a representative ratio of the agents within the context of the simulation. 
The agents move about an environment that is represented by “patches” in 
NetLogo terms. Within this simulation space, there are 2,600 patches that 
represent the indigenous population. Those patches vary in color with regard 
to their affiliations or sympathies. White patches are loyal to the incumbent 
government and the black are loyal to the insurgency. The brown patches 
are neutral. Initially upon set up, each patch color is randomly assigned and 
randomly distributed throughout the simulation space with equal numbers 
of black, brown, and white patches.
The indigenous population (the patches) changes color as they interact 
with the various agents. Insurgents passing over the dark colored patches 
gather energy (or life force in the form of moral and material support) from 
them and cause them to darken at a preset rate. Government and international 
agents have a similar effect on light colored patches by causing them to lighten 
while gaining energy. International agents lose energy when they come in 
contact with a dark colored patch (insurgency sympathizer), but they are the 
exception. When a patch has reached white or black, its color change stops 
in that direction but it continues to give energy to those preferred agents that 
pass over it.
Variables five and six (see Table 2) account for the legitimacy of both the 
incumbent government and that of the insurgent agent cause, respectively. 
Legitimacy is a latent variable that is a combination of other more directly 
accessible and measurable variables. For the government, this roll up of 

Agent-Based Modeling
46
variables includes the relative degree of corruption, the degree of fit with 
local culture (are changes counter to societal norms being forced), security 
for the local population, and perceived efforts at good governance (economic 
development and support of infrastructure, civil law, and providing day to 
day needs such as potable water). For the insurgent side, the less successful 
the incumbent government is at governance, the greater the appeal of an 
alternative cause. The insurgency gains legitimacy by controlling unincor-
porated areas of the country where the government has little or no control. 
By establishing a shadow government and operating with lower levels of 
corruption and more effective governance, greater levels of legitimacy are 
established (Kilcullen, 2010). This can be seen in this scenario as establish-
ing pockets of theocratic rule (Sharia Law). This state of affairs however, can 
be a double edged sword for the insurgent. A repressive and oppressive rule 
can have a counterproductive effect on the attitudes of the ruled population.
There is a paradox that can occur when good governance is pursued by the 
incumbent government without regard for the change capacity of the society. 
Variable five is the simulation variable used to account for that situation within 
this simulation. The end result of the influence in this simulation is the effect 
on recruitment for both types of agents. This effect is very similar (in fact 
the coding is the same) to that of reproduction in the Wolf Sheep Predation 
model (Wilensky, 1997). The greater the legitimacy for either agent set, the 
greater the likelihood of increased numbers through recruitment from the 
general population.
Variables seven and eight (see Table 2) are the amount of support the 
competing agents receive from the patches. This correlates to and should 
move in conjunction with the legitimacy variable for each agent type. This 
attribute is separated in this model as a programming convenience because 
the support variable provides sustenance to the existing agents while the le-
gitimacy variable provides for new agents. There may be circumstances that 
would cause these two variables to move counter to each other. For Example, 
a radical school corrupting the young to join an insurgent movement that the 
general population finds abhorrent is not a case type that is investigated in 
this research. Each movement by an agent causes the agent to expend energy. 
The only way an agent can gain energy is by contacting (moving across) a 
patch representing a population segment (see Table 3)
Finally, variable nine (see Table 2) is the level of coordination of activi-
ties between the international governmental agents, the military arm of the 
international government agents, and the nongovernmental agents, within the 
scope of the operation attempting to bring stability to the society. In this study, 
the act of bringing stability is more specifically defined as: “… maintain or 

Agent-Based Modeling
47
reestablish a safe and secure environment, provide essential governmental 
services, emergency infrastructure reconstruction, and humanitarian relief” 
(Joint Publication 3-07, 2008, p. vi). The level of cooperation variable is 
operationalized in this model as an attribute of how much of a color change 
a patch will undergo when contacting international type agents. If the level 
of coordination among the international agencies is zero, the color change for 
the patch is zero. As the level of coordination becomes greater, the degree of 
positive color change for the patch increases. The opposite occurs when the 
international agencies are acting in a less coordinated (domain conflicted) 
manner. When domain conflicted partners attempt to provide stability, they 
frequently achieve suboptimal or even counterproductive outcomes (Roberts, 
2010; Lischer, 2007). Controlling this variable in relation to the other vari-
ables in the simulation allows for an examination of the relative importance 
of each of the variables in the final outcome.
The status of these variables is controlled through the interface with graphic 
type controls that allow the user to adjust the value by activation of the mouse. 
The resulting outcomes are tracked both graphically in the simulation space 
as well as through a series of pen plots and counters which show the relative 
success of each of the agent types as well as the degree of stability being 
brought to the simulation through the surrogate of the “loyalist” patches. The 
logic of this model is represented in figure 3.4. The relatively plain language 
of NetLogo instructions make them relatively intuitive to follow. The specif-
ics of why each of the variables is set to a specific parameter will be covered 
in detail in the next chapter.
RESEARCH QUESTION
The understanding and integration of military force with nongovernmental 
organizations in the area of operations are critical to reestablishing stability 
within a fractured society. Will the United Nations’ agencies be met with a 
handshake or a fist by the populations they are attempting to help? Under-
standing the military / nongovernmental organization interaction is a crucial 
item of the policy framework that determines feasible courses of action to 
international governmental agencies. Further, what level and type of inte-
gration should be attempted? At present, United Nations agencies have no 
clear structures or formal processes for determining how to either integrate 
the efforts of nongovernmental organizations (other than ad hoc) with coin-
cident military interests or neutralize nongovernmental organizations with 
counter interests.

Agent-Based Modeling
48
This lack of structure is thought to reduce the effectiveness of stability 
and development efforts both in terms of direct and indirect mission success. 
Additionally, these issues exhibit non-linear behavior. Unexpected events – 
such as a coup or assassination - may change the course of history. It seems 
that small differences in inputs can become enormous differences in output.
This phenomenon is referred to by James Gleick (1988, p. 8) as a “sensi-
tive dependence on initial conditions.” These are the type of problems that 
defy explanation by traditional top-down theories of social reality. This 
research tests the theory that a high level of coordination between military 
and nongovernmental organization operations can be a force multiplier in the 
effort to bring stability to a strife torn region. The concept of utilizing a force 
multiplier when put forward by military planners is the use of a technique or 
tactic that has the effect of reducing the number of personnel or equipment 
needed to accomplish a desired task. It is an attempt to achieve a step wise 
jump in efficiency. The primary research question is: “Does a high level of 
coordination between military and nongovernmental organization activities 
have a force multiplying effect?” Further conditions examined are: “Does the 
level of violence present in the area of operations or the levels of legitimacy 
for both the indigenous government and the insurgency movement, have an 
impact on the levels of effectiveness – if any – derived from this military 
/ nongovernmental organization coordination?” Finally, “Does a ‘surge’ or 
Figure 4. 

Agent-Based Modeling
49
rapid change in the number of international agents, primarily military, pro-
vide an outsized impact on the outcomes of the counterinsurgency efforts?”
The outcomes of the simulations of this model are straightforward. In each 
run, either the incumbent government or the insurgency dominates. If the 
incumbent government dominates a particular simulation run, that outcome 
is a surrogate for stability having been achieved and the policy combination 
utilized by the international governmental agencies being successful. The 
opposite is true if the insurgent agents dominate. For each set of combina-
tions for setting the policy variables, thirty simulations runs are performed 
and recorded. The crucial concept to keep in mind with agent based model-
ing simulations however is that they are not an end to themselves. These 
simulations are designed to generate data from the interaction of the agents 
within an environment that controls for exogenous variables. This is not to 
say that emergent behavior will not be observed; it frequently is. The goal is 
to generate a data set of outcomes that enables statistical hypotheses testing 
to be conducted regarding the influence of the variables. The specifics of the 
statistical methodology are covered in the next chapter.
REFERENCES
DeCoster, J. (1998). Overview of Factor Analysis (Class notes). Retrieved 
October 22, 2011, from http://www.stat-help.com/notes.html
Evans, C. M., & Findley, G. L. (1999). Analytic solutions to a family of Lotka-
Volterra related differential equations. Journal of Mathematical Chemistry, 
25(2/3), 181–189. doi:10.1023/A:1019184417025
Gersick, C. J. (1991). Revolutionary change theories: A multilevel exploration 
of the punctuated equilibrium paradigm. Academy of Management Review, 
16(1), 10–36. doi:10.5465/AMR.1991.4278988
Gleick, J. (1988). Chaos: The making of a new science. New York: Penguin 
Books.
Holland, J. H. (1995). Hidden order: How adaptation builds complexity. 
Reading, MA: Helix Books.
Hox, J. J., & Bechger, T. M. (1998). An introduction to structural equation 
modeling. Family Science Review, 11, 354–373.

Agent-Based Modeling
50
Human Complexity 2012, The First Annual Conference on Complexity and 
Human Experience, Modeling Complexity in the Humanities and Social Sci-
ences to be held at the Center for Advanced Research in the Humanities at 
the University of North Carolina, Charlotte (Call for papers). (n.d.). Retrieved 
February 11, 2012, from http://www.complexity.uncc.edu
Joint Publication 3-07. (2008). Retrieved February 4, 2011, from http://www.
dtic.mil/doctrine/new_pubs/jp3_07.pdf
Kenny, D. A., & Judd, C. M. (1984). Estimating the nonlinear and inter-
active effects of latent variables. Psychological Bulletin, 96(I), 201–210. 
doi:10.1037/0033-2909.96.1.201
Kilcullen, D. (2010). Counterinsurgency redux. Retrieved December 27, 
2011, from http://smallwarsjournal.com/documents/kilcullen1.pdf
Lischer, S. K. (2007). Military intervention and the “force multiplier.”. Global 
Governance, 13, 99–118.
Nikolai, C., & Madey, G. (2009). Tools of the Trade: A survey of various 
agent based modeling platforms. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social 
Simulation, 12(2), 2. Retrieved from http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/12/2/2.html
Railsback, S. F., Lytinen, S. F., & Jackson, S. K. (2006). Agent-based simu-
lation platforms: Review and development recommendations. Simulations, 
82(9), 609–623. doi:10.1177/0037549706073695
Roberts, N. C. (2010). Spanning bleeding boundaries: Humanitarianism, NGOs, 
and the civilian-military nexus in the post-cold war era. Public Administra-
tion Review, 70(March), 212–222. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6210.2010.02135_2.x
Taleb, N. N. (2007). The black swan: The impact of the highly improbable. 
New York: Random House Publishing Group.
United Nations General Assembly Resolution 46/182. (1992). Strengthen-
ing of the coordination of humanitarian emergency assistance of the United 
Nations: Guiding principles. New York: United Nations.
United Nations General Assembly Resolution 52/167. (1998). Safety and 
security of humanitarian personnel. New York: United Nations.
Wilensky, U. (1999). NetLogo. Center for Connected Learning and Computer-
Based Modeling, Northwestern University. Retrieved February 4, 2011, from 
http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/

Agent-Based Modeling
51
Zimmerman, B., Lindberg, C., & Plsek, P. (1998). A complexity science 
primer: what is complexity science and why should I learn about it?. Irving, 
TX: VHA Publishing.
Zyphur, M. J., Barsky, A. P., & Zhang, Z. (2012). Advances in leadership 
research. In D. V. Day & J. Antonakis (Eds.), The theory and nature of lead-
ership (pp. 66–95). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Complex Adaptive Systems (CAS): Dynamic, interacting networks of 
individuals that generate collective behavior that mutates to adapt to chang-
ing conditions.
Emergence: The formation of larger systems or patterns that develop 
through the interactions among smaller or simpler entities that do not resemble 
the properties of the larger systems they form.
Factor Analysis: A statistical tool in which observed data are expressed 
as functions of a number of possible causes in order to find which are the 
most important.
Linear Structural Relations (LISREL): A statistical modeling technique 
that combines factor analyses with the simultaneous estimation of structural 
relationships between a set of extracted latent factors.
Lotka-Volterra Model: A mathematical model of the competitive inter-
actions of species pursuing some limiting resource.
Non-Deterministic: Stochastic or random.
Non-Linear Behavior: The outputs of a system is not proportional to 
the inputs which causes the behavior of the system to appear chaotic and 
unpredictable.

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1782-5.ch004
Chapter 4
52 
The Simulation Presented 
in the ODD Protocol
INTRODUCTION
It seems that small differences in inputs can become enormous differences 
in output. This phenomenon is referred to by James Gleick (1988, p. 8) as 
a “sensitive dependence on initial conditions.” These are problems that 
defy explanation by traditional top-down theories of social reality because 
the top-down theories tend to operate in a linear paradigm. The difficulty 
in utilizing statistical tools, even those as advanced as structural equation 
modeling, which subsumes path analysis, OLS regression, ANOVA, and 
others is that it is extremely difficult to test the interaction among latent 
variables. The results from agent based models allow for addressing system 
aspects that these other models have not; such as transient, nonequilibrium 
conditions and dependence on initial conditions, which is the intent of this 
study (North & Macal, 2007).
THE ODD PROTOCOL
Verification testing of this model was conducted by observing the outputs of 
the model at the extremes of the simulation to ensure that the results moved 
in predicted directions. Validation of the model involved comparisons of the 
model outcomes to a series of case studies involving counterinsurgency opera-
tions and the delivery of development aid. The case studies utilized included:

The Simulation Presented in the ODD Protocol
53
•	
Police in the lead with military support or vice versa (Sepp, 2004).
•	
The timing of development aid delivery vis-à-vis the stage of the coun-
terinsurgency campaign – either early or late (Barlow, 2010).
•	
The integration of local population into security forces – either high or 
low (Barton, 2010; Megahan, 2010; Sepp, 2004).
•	
The level of local population inclusion in development aid delivery – 
either high or low (Brinkerhoff, 2010; Guttieri, 2010; Pimbo, 2010).
•	
The level of local institutional development - either high or low 
(Brinkerhoff 2010; Pandya, 2010; Sepp, 2004; von Hippel, 2010).
•	
The level of security from violence - either high or low (Guttieri, 2010; 
Sepp, 2004).
•	
The level of local population cooperation with counterinsurgency forc-
es vis-à-vis the insurgents - either high or low (Galula, 1964).
•	
The level of coordination with government agencies – either high or 
low (Curry, 2010; Szayna, et al., 2009).
•	
The propensity to operate independently from other organizations ei-
ther NGO or governmental - either high or low (Curry 2010).
•	
The religious affiliation of the NGO – either affiliated with the local re-
ligious majority, minority, or secular (de Haan, 2009; Flanigan, 2010).
The case studies also informed the initial settings and ranges of the model 
variables in the simulation.
Purpose
This study tests two hypotheses. First, that a high level of coordination between 
military and NGO operations, and the subsequent positive affect engendered 
in the population, can be a force multiplier in the effort to bring stability to 
a strife torn region. The second hypothesis being that a “surge” of Western 
personnel, either military or a combination of military and support personnel, 
will have a positive impact on security and therefore increase the positive af-
fect engendered in the population by the Western intervention. The research 
question is: “Does the positive affect generated by a high level of coordination 
between military and NGO activities have a force multiplying (nonlinear) 
effect?” and “What is the impact of a surge in the numbers of international 
forces in the region?” Further conditions examined are: “Does the level of 
violence present in the area of operations, or the levels of legitimacy of the 
indigenous government have an impact on the levels of effectiveness – if 
any – derived from this military-NGO coordination?”

The Simulation Presented in the ODD Protocol
54
Entities, State Variables, and Scales
The landscape of this model includes the following variables and setting 
parameters. The landscape the mobile agent types traverse is a square grid of 
51 X 51 patches. The length of one time step is 3 months: 4 time steps equal 
one year. Table 1 contains the remaining variables and scales.
Process Overview and Scheduling
There are several processes that occur within each time step of this model. 
Each mobile agent is asked to move (which uses energy); to attack an oppos-
ing agent if contacted (again expending energy); and to die if energy reserves 
are depleted. Two agent types, insurgent agents and incumbent government 
agents, reproduce during each tick. The patches (which are stationary agents) 
interact with each of the mobile agents. Each of the patches changes color 
to represent their loyalties to the respective mobile agents. As the mobile 
agents traverse a patch, they have an influence on the color (loyalty) of the 
Table 1. Variables and setting parameters
Variable
Attribute
Range
Settings
Level of violence
Energy cost to attack
10 - 100
40, 95
Initial number of insurgents
Beginning number of insurgent combatants
0 - 250
30
Initial number of international 
combatant & NGO agents
Beginning number of international agent 
combatants & civilian staff
0 - 250
20
Secondary number of 
international combatant & 
NGO agents
Beginning number of international agent 
combatants & NGO staff if no surge
0 - 250
10
Initial number of incumbent 
government agents
Beginning number of incumbent government 
agent combatants
0 - 250
30
Government legitimacy
Ability to recruit from the population
1 - 20
3.5, 3.92
Insurgent legitimacy
Ability to recruit from the population
1 - 20
4.0
Government gain from 
indigenous population
Support given to the agents in the form of energy 
units
0 - 10
3.0
Insurgent gain from 
indigenous population
Support given to the agents in the form of energy 
units
0 - 10
3.0
International gain from 
indigenous population
Support given to the agents in the form of energy 
units
0 – 10
2.0
Level of coordination between 
international governmental & 
NGO agents
Increased coordination causes individuals within 
the population to become more sympathetic 
toward indigenous government
0 - 2.0
0.0, 2.0

The Simulation Presented in the ODD Protocol
55
patch. Patches loyal to a mobile agent provide that agent with energy thereby 
assisting the mobile agent’s cause. The patch’s color can change over time 
based upon the varying amount of contact it has with various mobile agents.
DESIGN CONCEPTS
Basic Principles
The basic principle addressed by this model is the attempt by the mobile 
agents, representing the combatants, to win favor of the stationary agents, the 
population. This concept is addressed by setting up feedback loops between the 
mobile and stationary agents; as the mobile agents have success influencing 
the stationary agents, the stationary agents in turn provide support to those 
same mobile agent types. This adaptive behavior reflects the simple empirical 
rule that control (or at least acquiescence) of the population is necessary to 
prevail in counterinsurgency warfare which is therefore the objective of the 
mobile agents (Galula, 1964). The model itself is based upon a predator / 
prey interaction with a twist: each subtype of the mobile agents acts as both 
predator and prey in their interactions with other mobile agent subtypes. In 
other words they fight each other when they interact. The violence of the 
interaction is an adjustable variable in the model. The more successful an 
agent subtype is in survival and replication both enabled by utilizing energy 
gained through contact with “friendly” segments of the population, the more 
successful that subtype will be in driving out the opposing subtype.
Learning, Prediction
In this model, the behavior of the agents is held constant so the agents are 
not given the capacity to ‘learn’ and alter their behavior. There are several 
reasons for doing so. First, the main purpose of the model is to simulate the 
response from the indigenous population to differing strategies used with 
regard to the mobile agents – the international combatants and NGO staff, 
and the insurgent combatants and their sympathizers. Second, one of the 
assumptions used in building the model is that the near term behavior of the 
agents is fixed until the outcomes of their behavior become apparent. For the 
span of time involved in the counterinsurgency scenario, the agent behaviors 
tend to be ridged with learning taking place upon reflection when hostilities 
have ended. This limitation was apparent in the after action reports and case 
studies reviewed during the model design. Finally, to include learning in the 

The Simulation Presented in the ODD Protocol
56
model, a much higher level of agent complexity would be involved due to 
the mitigating influences of the deep structures of the society, which were 
not the target of this investigation, so there is no ‘prediction’ element built 
into this model. The sensing, interaction and stochastic processes used in the 
model are described in the following narrative, which includes a discussion 
of the variable settings, initialization, and sub-models used.
Sensing, Interaction, and Stochastic Processes
Variable one (see table 4.1) is the “level of violence” that is present in the 
simulation. This interface determines the amount of energy (or life force 
units) that each agent sacrifices to attack another. In a highly contested en-
vironment, there is a cost for one group to attack another. Western military 
forces may have an advantage in terms of pure fire power and destructive 
force but the insurgents have the advantage of local terrain knowledge. When 
all sides are prepared for attack, each will extract a toll from the other for 
an attack and this variable sets the level of overall preparedness for all the 
agents in the simulation.
The agent energy level is defined as the life force an individual agent 
has. Another metaphor for the energy level used in the model is the will to 
preserver in the mission. The energy levels for agents are set relative to each 
other based upon agent type. This energy is expended through actions taken 
to include simple existence (which would be the agent’s base metabolism 
rate). Each agent type has a beginning energy level that must remain above 
zero or else the individual agent dies. The energy level for each agent type 
has a stochastic element because individual agents within each type are 
heterogeneous in their motivations and abilities to reflect the reality of the 
populations they are modeling. For the international agent types, which include 
international development agents, nongovernmental organization agents, and 
military agents, their initial energy level is set at a random number between 
one and twenty. This level was chosen because it is within the range of the 
other agent types but it is not influenced by the indigenous population but 
rather by the myriad of influences ranging from donor motives to home na-
tion public support. The governmental agent types have their initial energy 
set at a random number between one and five times the “government gain 
from the population” interface control. The insurgent agent type has a similar 
attribute with the formula for their initial energy level being set between one 
and five times the “insurgent gain from the population” interface control. All 
of the agents are moving at random within the simulation.

The Simulation Presented in the ODD Protocol
57
Variables two, three, and four (see table 1) are simply the number of sta-
tionary agents (patches) of each type initially present in the landscape. Within 
this simulation space, there are 2,601 patches that represent the indigenous 
population. Those patches vary in color with regard to their affiliations or 
sympathies. White patches are loyal to the incumbent government and the 
black are loyal to the insurgency. The brown patches are neutral. Initially 
upon set up, each patch color is randomly assigned and randomly distributed 
throughout the simulation space with equal numbers of black, brown, and 
white patches.
DETAILS
Initialization, Input Data, Sub-Models
The indigenous population (the patches) change color as they interact with 
the various agents. Insurgents passing over the dark colored patches gather 
energy (or life force in the form of moral and material support) from them and 
cause them to darken at a preset rate. Government and international agents 
have a similar effect on light colored patches by causing them to lighten 
while gaining energy. International agents lose energy when they come in 
contact with a dark colored patch (insurgency sympathizer), but they are the 
exception. When a patch has reached white or black, its color change stops 
in that direction but it continues to give energy to those preferred agents that 
pass over it.
Variables five and six (see table 4.1) account for the legitimacy of both 
the incumbent government and that of the insurgent agent cause, respectively. 
Legitimacy is a latent variable that is a combination of other more directly 
accessible and measurable variables. For the government, this roll up of 
variables includes the relative degree of corruption, the degree of fit with 
local culture (are changes counter to societal norms being forced), security 
for the local population, and perceived efforts at good governance (economic 
development and support of infrastructure, civil law, and providing day to 
day needs such as potable water). For the insurgent side, the less successful 
the incumbent government is at governance, the greater the appeal of an 
alternative cause. The insurgency gains legitimacy by controlling unincor-
porated areas of the country where the government has little or no control. 
By establishing a shadow government and operating with lower levels of 
corruption and more effective governance, greater levels of legitimacy are 
established (Kilcullen, 2010). This can be seen in this scenario as establish-

The Simulation Presented in the ODD Protocol
58
ing pockets of theocratic rule (Sharia Law). This state of affairs however, can 
be a double edged sword for the insurgent. A repressive and oppressive rule 
can have a counterproductive effect on the attitudes of the ruled population.
Variables seven and eight (see table 4.1) are the amount of support the 
competing agents receive from the patches. This correlates to and should 
move in conjunction with the legitimacy variable for each agent type. This 
attribute is separated in this model as a programming convenience because 
the support variable provides sustenance to the existing agents while the le-
gitimacy variable provides for new agents. There may be circumstances that 
would cause these two variables to move counter to each other. For example, 
a radical school corrupting the young to join an insurgent movement, that the 
general population finds abhorrent, is not a case type that is investigated in 
this research. Each movement by an agent causes the agent to expend energy. 
The only way an agent can gain energy is by contacting (moving across) a 
patch representing a population segment (see Table 2).
Finally, variable nine (see Table 1) is the level of coordination of activities 
between the international governmental agents, the military arm of the in-
ternational government agents, and the nongovernmental agents, within the 
scope of the operation attempting to bring stability to the society. In this 
study, the act of bringing stability is more specifically defined as: “… main-
tain or reestablish a safe and secure environment, provide essential govern-
mental services, emergency infrastructure reconstruction, and humanitarian 
relief” (Joint Publication 3-07, 2008, p. vi). The level of cooperation variable 
is operationalized in this model as an attribute of how much of a color change 
a patch will undergo when contacting international type agents. If the level 
of coordination among the international agencies is zero, the color change 
for the patch is zero. As the level of coordination becomes greater, the degree 
of positive color change for the patch increases. The opposite occurs when 
the international agencies are acting in a less coordinated (domain con-
flicted) manner. When domain conflicted partners attempt to provide stabil-
Table 2. Agent energy changes
Agent
Action
Outcome
Insurgent
Moves across light patch 
Moves across dark patch
No Change 
Gains energy
International & NGO agent
Moves across light patch 
Moves across dark patch
Gains energy 
Loses energy
Incumbent Government agent
Moves across light patch 
Moves across dark patch
Gains energy 
No change

The Simulation Presented in the ODD Protocol
59
ity, they frequently achieve suboptimal or even counterproductive outcomes 
(Roberts, 2010; Lischer, 2007). Controlling this variable in relation to the 
other variables in the simulation allows for an examination of the relative 
importance of each of the variables in the final outcome.
There were 16,000 simulation runs conducted varying the primary research 
variables against the secondary research variables (see Table 3). There were 
three variables adjusted within the simulation runs; the level of cooperation 
between international agents, the level of violence within the simulation 
scenario, and the level of legitimacy of the incumbent government. When 
each of these variables was adjusted, the others were held constant yielding 
the matrix shown in Table 3. In this type of scenario, agent based modeling 
allows for the isolation of variables in a dynamic environment.
Earlier in this discussion, we considered the nine variables that are adjust-
able within the framework of this agent based model. There are four variables 
that remain static during all of the simulation runs. These variables were the 
initial number of insurgent agents, the initial number of incumbent govern-
ment agents, and the initial number of international agents (these agent 
numbers were reduced by fifty percent in the last four simulation run sets), 
and are shown in Table 1. The ratio represented in the model of thirty, 
twenty, and thirty respectively is an equal number of government and insur-
gent agents (thirty) versus twenty international agents. There were multiple 
reasons for the selection of this ratio. According to the Brookings Afghani-
stan Index (Livingston & O’Hanlon, 2011) there were just over 200,000 
Table 3. Simulation execution matrix
Initial runs
Level of 
coordination 
low
Level of 
coordination 
medium
Level of 
coordination 
high
Level of violence low / Level of legitimacy low
1000 Runs
1000 Runs
1000 Runs
Level of violence low / Level of legitimacy high
1000 Runs
1000 Runs
1000 Runs
Level of violence high / Level of legitimacy low
1000 Runs
1000 Runs
1000 Runs
Level of violence high / Level of legitimacy high
1000 Runs
1000 Runs
1000 Runs
Secondary runs 
Level of 
coordination 
low 
Level of 
coordination 
high 
Level of violence low / Level of legitimacy low
1000 Runs
Level of violence low / Level of legitimacy high
1000 Runs
Level of violence high / Level of legitimacy low
1000 Runs
Level of violence high / Level of legitimacy high
1000 Runs

The Simulation Presented in the ODD Protocol
60
international agents in Afghanistan at the end of 2011. Of those, roughly 
120,000 are combat troops and the remainders are civilian contractors, non-
military governmental employees, and nongovernmental organizational 
personnel. The Afghan government is fielding a security force of just over 
300,000 including both the Afghan National Army and the Afghan Na-
tional Police force. The insurgency in Afghanistan is a bit more difficult to 
pin down. According to the same Brookings document, there is a core of 
30,000 insurgents operating at any giving time within Afghanistan. With 
these types of force ratios, the insurgency should have been stopped with 
relative ease; but instead, insurgent attacks have increased fourfold and se-
curity of the population is hardly guaranteed (Livingston & O’Hanlon 2011).
The question becomes, how does a small cadre of determined insurgents 
have an effect as though they have ten times that number? One of the domi-
nant factors within this scenario is that as late as November of 2010, up to 
ten percent of the Afghan people had a favorable view of the Taliban and 
nine percent would rather have the Taliban ruling the country (ABC News/
BBC/ARD Poll, “Afghanistan: Where Things Stand”, released December 6, 
2010). In a country of almost thirty-three million, having over three million 
desiring to have the primary component of the insurgency regain control 
of the country is significant. The other critical issue is the size of the illicit 
economy within Afghanistan. The opium trade approaches $1.6 billion with 
the legitimate economic GDP standing at $17 billion (United Nations Office 
on Drugs and Crime, 2011). The opium trade is almost twenty percent greater 
than the general revenue intake of the Afghan government (Livingston & 
O’Hanlon, 2011).
Researchers at the World Bank argued that areas of Afghanistan became 
a fragmented narco-state in which local drug lords took control of district- 
and provincial-level state institutions of government with the assistance of 
insurgent groups. Compounding these issues are the relative differences 
in pay scales for insurgent fighters versus those employed by the Afghan 
government. (Jones, 2008, p. 48). The average daily pay for Afghan soldiers 
and police is under three dollars while the insurgents are paid between five 
and ten dollars per day (Ackerman, 2009; O’Hanlon & Livingston, 2011; 
Livingston & O’Hanlon, 2011). Additionally, the recruiting ground for in-
surgent fighters is rich with over 352,000 internally displaced persons, most 
of whom live below the poverty line (forty-two percent of the total Afghan 
population lives below the poverty line) of fourteen dollars per month of 
income (Livingston & O’Hanlon 2011).
Given the level of poverty, the corrupting influence of a robust opium 
trade, and significant insurgent sympathies across the population, a multiplier 

The Simulation Presented in the ODD Protocol
61
of ten is a conservative estimate for the relative force fielded by the insur-
gent groups. This puts the number of insurgents operating in the simulation 
at an equivalent strength to that of the government. It is important to note 
that during the runs of this simulation, both the insurgent agent population 
numbers as well as the incumbent government agent population numbers 
can increase in keeping with the concept of each side recruiting from within 
the indigenous population. The international agents cannot increase their 
numbers as the simulation moves forward in time. This stipulation is in place 
to keep the perspective of the unstable state maintaining sovereignty during 
the course of the simulation.
The other ratios that remain fixed for all of the simulation runs are the 
government and insurgent energy gains from contact with the population (see 
table 1). These variables (insurgent gains from the population and govern-
ment gains from the population) are set at three (3) which is a relative setting, 
not an absolute indication of a physical transfer of energy as discussed in 
the preceding chapter. Once again, this measure is a latent variable that is 
a combination of several factors such as respect within society, the feeling 
on the part of the belligerents that they are making a positive impact on the 
everyday lives of their fellow citizens, and the reflection of the citizenry’s 
view of the role the groups are playing within the greater context of society. 
These attributes are difficult to quantify in an absolute sense but are relevant 
in relation to the morale of the individuals within the group and their will to 
continue with their cause. These have been set at parity because when the 
Afghan statistical variables published by the Brookings Institute are viewed 
in the aggregate, there is no clear reason to give one group an advantage over 
the other in this measure (Livingston & O’Hanlon, 2011).
At this point, with the context of the static variables set, the measures of 
interest in the research questions can be addressed. The level of coordination 
for this simulation is the measure represented by the variable of the level of 
coordination between international governmental agents (see Table 1). The 
effect this attribute has on the simulation is the higher the number the greater 
the positive impact the international agents have on creating loyalists to the 
incumbent government when they interact with the population. This in turn 
increases the number of “patches” that give energy to the government forces 
and withhold it from the insurgents. The secondary runs were conducted at 
the extremes of the primary run parameters. These runs were conducted to 
determine the relative effects of a fifty percent reduction in the initial number 
of international agents involved in the simulation.

The Simulation Presented in the ODD Protocol
62
CONCLUSION
The primary runs did not support the null hypothesis; all of the interven-
tion strategies from increasing the level of coordination between military 
and NGO activities and increasing levels of legitimacy for the indigenous 
government have a positive effect on the outcomes. Increased levels of vio-
lence present in the area of operations, decreased government legitimacy, 
and lower interagency coordination have a negative impact across the board 
on the success of the counterinsurgency efforts (see Figure 1). The model 
successfully emulated the empirical trends on all of these counts and did so 
in a linear manner with reasonable fidelity as to the scale and proportion 
described in the case studies.
This particular abstraction was chosen to experiment with concepts such 
as Provincial Reconstruction Teams in an attempt to determine their effect 
on the outcomes of counterinsurgency efforts; which were shown to be 
positive. The second hypothesis, that a “surge” of Western personnel, either 
military or a combination of military and support personnel, will have a 
positive impact on security and therefore increase the positive affect engen-
dered in the population by the Western intervention, was however, one area 
that generated a surprising result that initially appeared counterintuitive.
When the number of international agents was reduced by fifty percent in 
the simulation, there was a corresponding drop in the probability of a suc-
cessful counterinsurgency effort; however, the drop was relatively minor in 
comparison (on average less than ten percent – see Figure 2). This outcome 
is of interest because the modeled mechanism reflects that of real policy, 
namely the relatively short period of time the
international forces are present. The average length of time the interna-
tional agents were active in the simulations was slightly less than one fourth 
of the time the scenarios took to complete (8.1 out of 32.5 years). In each 
Figure 1. Legitimacy and violence level effect on government win probability

The Simulation Presented in the ODD Protocol
63
case the international agents set the conditions in which the indigenous agents 
finished out the simulation.
The concept of a surge can be argued at this point. One of the counter 
arguments for the manner in which the surge is simulated is that for it to truly 
reflect the real world effect of a rapid increase in the numbers of Western 
personnel in the operations area, the model should have those numbers start 
low and then rapidly build. The answer for this model’s design perspective 
is that each of the model runs begins with all forces in place numerically 
but at a time that is relative only from the start of the simulation; i.e., the 
events transpiring up to the point of the simulation beginning are not the 
focus of the study. Having a scripted start would increase the complexity of 
the model without changing the parameters of the starting point. The way 
that such a scripted start would impact the model is if the agents we learning 
(adapting) as they progressed through the scenario, but as discussed earlier, 
the timeframes involved and the agent behaviors tending to be ridged with 
learning taking place upon reflection when hostilities have ended. With the 
outcomes of the current model, a follow on model including those attributes 
may be a worthwhile endeavor.
The simulation certainly should not be viewed as supporting the halving 
of aid delivery or security support. It does however raise the question of 
priorities of aid delivery and stability assistance. The general observation 
of de Haan’s (2009) that “how much aid is given matters less than how it is 
given” holds in this particular simulation. A troop surge would not seem to 
be as impactful as other policy options in the model which raises the issue 
within real policy applications; notwithstanding the steady parade of senior 
Figure 2. Effects of 50% reduction of international force size

The Simulation Presented in the ODD Protocol
64
officials making sweeping statements regarding the success enjoyed due to 
the surge (yet being rather vague on the specifics causation versus correlation 
of the successes) (Clinton, 2011).
REFERENCES
ABC News/BBC/ARD. (2010, December 6). Poll, Afghanistan: Where Things 
Stand. Retrieved December 27, 2011, from http://www.langerresearch.com/
uploads/1116a1Afghanistan.pdf
Ackerman, S. (2009). We pay Afghan soldiers less than the Taliban does. 
Retrieved December 27, 2011, from http://washingtonindependent.com/70114/
we-pay-afghan-soldiers-less-than-the-taliban-does
Barlow, D. (2010). The Kuwait task force: Post conflict planning and in-
teragency coordination. Washington, DC: NDU Center for Complex Op-
erations. Retrieved February 4, 2011, from http://www.nps.edu/Academics/
AcademicGroups/GPPAG/Documents/PDF/Education%20and%20Research/
Research%20Outputs/Case_4_Kuwait_Task_Force.pdf
Barton, F. D. (2010). Setting rule of law priorities in the early days of an 
intervention. In F. D. Kramer, T. Dempsey, J. Gregoire & S. Merrill (Eds.), 
Civil power in irregular conflict (pp. 149-158). Washington, DC: Center for 
Naval Analyses, US Army Peacekeeping and Stability Operations Institute 
and Association of the US Army. Retrieved February 4, 2011, from http://
www.cna.org/research/2010/civil-power-irregular-conflict
Brinkerhoff, D. W. (2010). Building resilience in fragile states: The role of 
governance. In F. D. Kramer, T. Dempsey, J. Gregoire & S. Merrill (Ed.), 
Civil power in irregular conflict (pp. 41 - 49). Washington, DC: Center for 
Naval Analyses, US Army Peacekeeping and Stability Operations Institute 
and Association of the US Army. Retrieved February 4, 2011, from http://
www.cna.org/research/2010/civil-power-irregular-conflict
Clinton, H. R. (2011). Testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations 
Committee. Retrieved June 28, 2013, from http://www.state.gov/secretary/
rm/2011/06/166807.htm

The Simulation Presented in the ODD Protocol
65
Curry, P. (2010). Dynamic tension: Security, stability and the opium trade. 
Washington, DC: NDU Center for Complex Operations. Retrieved February 
4, 2011, from http://www.nps.edu/Academics/AcademicGroups/GPPAG/
Documents/PDF/Education%20and%20Research/Research%20Outputs/2_
Dynamic_Tension.pdf
de Haan, A. (2009). How the aid industry works: An introduction to inter-
national development. Sterling, VA: Kumarian Press.
Flanigan, S. (2010). For the love of god: NGOS and religious identity in a 
violent world. Sterling, VA: Kumarian Press.
Galula, D. (1964). Counterinsurgency warfare: Theory and Practice. West-
port, CT: Praeger Security International.
Gleick, J. (1988). Chaos: The making of a new science. New York: Penguin 
Books.
Guttieri, K. (2010). Interim governments in theory and practice after pro-
tracted conflict. In F. D. Kramer, T. Dempsey, J. Gregoire & S. Merrill (Ed.), 
Civil power in irregular conflict (pp. 51 - 56). Washington, DC: Center for 
Naval Analyses, US Army Peacekeeping and Stability Operations Institute 
and Association of the US Army. Retrieved February 4, 2011, from http://
www.cna.org/research/2010/civil-power-irregular-conflict
Joint Publication 3-07. (2008). Retrieved February 4, 2011, from http://www.
dtic.mil/doctrine/new_pubs/jp3_07.pdf
Jones, S. G. (2008). Counterinsurgency in Afghanistan. Santa Monica, CA: 
RAND Corporation.
Kilcullen, D. (2010). Counterinsurgency redux. Retrieved December 27, 
2011, from http://smallwarsjournal.com/documents/kilcullen1.pdf
Lischer, S. K. (2007). Military intervention and the “force multiplier”. Global 
Governance, 13, 99–118.
Livingston, I. S., & O’Hanlon, M. (2011). Afghanistan index: Tracking 
variables of reconstruction & security in post-9/11 Afghanistan. Brookings 
Institute. Retrieved December 27, 2011, from http://www.brookings.edu/
afghanistanindex

The Simulation Presented in the ODD Protocol
66
Megahan, R. (2010). Achieving immediate developmental change in host-
nation police. In F. D. Kramer, T. Dempsey, J. Gregoire & S. Merrill (Ed.), 
Civil power in irregular conflict (pp. 97 - 112). Washington, DC: Center for 
Naval Analyses, US Army Peacekeeping and Stability Operations Institute 
and Association of the US Army. Retrieved February 4, 2011, from http://
www.cna.org/research/2010/civil-power-irregular-conflict
North, M. J., & Macal, C. M. (2007). Managing Business Complexity: Dis-
covering Strategic Solutions with Agent-Based Modeling. New York: Oxford 
University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195172119.001.0001
O’Hanlon, M., & Livingston, I. (2011). Prime numbers: A tale of two armies. 
Foreign Policy, (185), 67–73.
Pandya, A. A. (2010). Local and donor obstacles to restoring public adminis-
tration capacity in the post-conflict societies. In F. D. Kramer, T. Dempsey, J. 
Gregoire & S. Merrill (Ed.), Civil power in irregular conflict (pp. 209-216). 
Washington, DC: Center for Naval Analyses, US Army Peacekeeping and 
Stability Operations Institute. Retrieved February 4, 2011, from http://www.
cna.org/research/2010/civil-power-irregular-conflict
Pimbo, J. (2010). Military provision of humanitarian and civic assistance: 
A day in the life of a civil affairs team in the Horn of Africa. Washington, 
DC: NDU Center for Complex Operations. Retrieved February 4, 2011, from 
http://www.nps.edu/Academics/AcademicGroups/GPPAG/Documents/PDF/
Education%20and%20Research/Research%20Outputs/Case_5_Humanitar-
ian_Assistance.pdf
Roberts, N. C. (2010). Spanning bleeding boundaries: Humanitarianism, NGOs, 
and the civilian-military nexus in the post-cold war era. Public Administra-
tion Review, 70(March), 212–222. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6210.2010.02135_2.x
Sepp, K. I. (2005, October). Best practices in counterinsurgency. Military 
Review, 8-12.
Szayna, T. S., Eaton, D., Barnett, J. E., II, Lawson, B. S., Kelly, T. K., & 
Haldeman, Z. (2009). Integrating civilian agencies in stability operations. 
Santa Monica, CA: Rand. Retrieved June 19, 2010, from http://www.rand.
org/pubs/monographs/2009/RAND_MG801.pdf
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. (2011). Afghanistan opium survey 
2011. Retrieved December 27, 2011, from http://www.unodc.org/documents/
cropmonitoring/afghanistan/Executive_Summary_2011_web.pdf

The Simulation Presented in the ODD Protocol
67
von Hippel, K. (2010). Centralized and decentralized governance options 
after protracted conflict. In F. D. Kramer, T. Dempsey, J. Gregoire & S. Mer-
rill (Eds.), Civil power in irregular conflict (pp. 57-66). Washington, DC: 
Center for Naval Analyses, US Army Peacekeeping and Stability Operations 
Institute. Retrieved February 4, 2011, from http://www.cna.org/research/2010/
civil-power-irregular-conflict
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Design Concepts: A standardized way to review the characteristics of an 
agent-based model.
Initialization: How the model simulation appears at set up; the initial 
state of the model.
Input: The input data that describe the environmental variables.
Interagency Coordination: The coordination of various governmental 
and nongovernmental agencies to achieve a desired outcome.
Policy Simulation: The simulation of policy outcomes as it is worked 
through a series of ‘what if’ scenarios.
Validation: Addressed whether the model accurately represents the system 
it is modeling. It answers the question is this the correct model?
Verification: Addresses whether the model programming functions cor-
rectly.

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1782-5.ch005
Chapter 5
68 
Findings and Conclusion
INTRODUCTION
Many of the findings within the data have generated more questions than 
answers; but in doing so, illuminated several paths of further investigation 
that may provide greater insights into the complexities of stabilizing troubled 
states. This study then, is a starting point on a journey to discover more ef-
fective means to deliver humanitarian and development aid to conflicted 
societies without doing greater harm in the process. Holland (1995) discusses 
the utility of flight simulators in helping commercial airline pilots experience 
a variety of scenarios that would be unthinkable to expose passengers to in 
the real world. The value of the pilot’s experience in the simulator, “hinges 
on the simulator’s faithfulness to the aircraft it models” (Holland, 1995, p. 
157). With even greater numbers of lives and resources at stake, utilizing 
agent based modeling as a policy simulator would allow leaders to experiment 
with numerous response and intervention strategies in a very short period of 
time. While these simulations may not yield an optimum result, as long as 
the simulator has strong fidelity to the situation it is modeled for, the simula-
tion outcomes may help prevent an emotional response that only exacerbates 
versus ameliorating issues in troubled nations. The issue confronting policy 
makers is, in the words of H. L. Mencken (1880-1956): “For every complex 
problem, there is a solution that is simple, neat, and wrong” (http://www.
watchfuleye.com/mencken.html).

Findings and Conclusion
69
PRIMARY RESEACH QUESTION
The research question for this study asked whether increasing coordination 
among international agents operating in strife ridden societies has a consis-
tent, predictable and positive influence on the success of stability operations. 
Specifically, does coordination between military forces, international gov-
ernmental development agencies, and nongovernmental humanitarian relief 
agencies lead to improved outcomes with regard to the alleviation of human 
suffering with fewer unintended consequences? The data from the model 
would seem to indicate otherwise. While there was a generally positive trend 
to the resultant data, there was not a high degree of consistency presented 
nor was there sufficient evidence to reject the null hypothesis. While this 
outcome would appear to lead to a dead end, the qualitative interpretation 
of the graphical data leads to a new question.
The international agents in the model were generally out of the scenario 
prior to the conclusion. The new question becomes “are there indicators 
present within the other indices, such as the relative change in strength of the 
insurgent versus incumbent government forces or the change in the number 
of loyalists, which would predict the ultimate outcome of the scenario when 
the international forces are about to exit?” The current model can readily 
accommodate such a question by running the simulation one tick at a time. 
The secondary question that would follow is “what, if any, changes in the 
international agent contingent has a positive effect on the ultimate outcome of 
the scenario?” To answer the latter question, a minor degree of modification 
to the current model would be necessary but within the scope of maintaining 
a relatively simple model.
The secondary research question concerned the level of violence and the 
effect that it has on the other variables in the model: namely, does increased 
incumbent government legitimacy or increased international agent coordina-
tion help to offset the deleterious effects of increased violence? Put another 
way; is it in the best interest of either the incumbent government or the inter-
national agents to increase the level of violence (which can be accomplished 
by simply increasing the number of those respective forces thereby providing 
additional targets for insurgent activities)? The data suggested a resounding 
no to that hypothesis. The reverse is actually the case. It is in the best interest 
of the insurgent to increase the level of violence within the scenario. While 
a surge of operational international forces intuitively makes sense, it is also 
intuitive that an escalation of violence serves to undermine the legitimacy of 
the incumbent government. The less legitimacy the incumbent government 
has, the less it has to lose by increasing violence relative to a more legitimate 

Findings and Conclusion
70
incumbent government. However, in both cases, the probability of a success-
ful outcome is dramatically reduced.
On the other hand, if the level of violence can be kept low, increases 
in legitimacy for the incumbent government has a favorable impact on the 
prospects of a win for the incumbent government. The difficulty with this 
reality is that if the insurgents are not interested in making peace, they also 
have a say in how violent the struggle becomes. The insurgent leaders would 
not require a sophisticated intelligence gathering apparatus to determine 
that as they increase attacks and the level of violence, the legitimacy of the 
incumbent government suffers. The trick for the insurgent leadership is to 
avoid having public opinion turn on them which is why their selection of 
targets for violence is critical (Galula, 1964).
The level of violence did have a surprisingly consistent effect on the amount 
of time the simulation took to run to completion. As the level of violence 
increased, the amount of time it took to determine a winner dropped signifi-
cantly. Once again, when determining a course of action, the amount of time 
relative to how long international forces can expect to be deployed can be 
predicted based upon the level of violence of the insurgency. Unfortunately, 
while the outcomes may be determined sooner rather than later, the type of 
outcome becomes less stable and frequently less favorable. These findings 
lead to the following observations on future research.
FUTURE RESEARCH
One of the most pressing questions generated from this research is “are there 
indicators present within the other indices, such as the relative change in 
strength of the insurgent versus incumbent government forces or the change 
in the number of loyalists, which would predict the ultimate outcome of the 
scenario when the international forces are about to exit?” By continuing with 
this model and running it one tick at a time it may be possible to identify 
the critical elements within the latent variables that predict the outcome of 
a given scenario. By examining the graphic interface and observing and re-
cording the status of the interface with regard to the trending of the number 
of loyalists, incumbent government agents, and insurgent agents, there may 
be identifiable patterns that emerge and provide insight into the critical ele-
ments determining the outcome.
Some of the critical areas for observation are the relative distribution of 
loyalists versus insurgent sympathizers (which are referred to in NetLogo as 
patches) within the graphic. Qualitatively, the distribution of these patches 

Findings and Conclusion
71
within the scenario environment is related to the eventual outcome. Generally, 
if the insurgent sympathizers are relatively evenly distributed throughout the 
environment, the insurgent agents have defeated the incumbent government 
agents. If the insurgent sympathizers are lumped together (concentrated in 
one area), the incumbent government has carried the day. The critical ques-
tion becomes “are these distributions of patches related to the outcomes in 
a statistically significant manner?” Also, if the distribution of the patches is 
in fact positively associated with the outcome, then does the outcome cause 
the shape of the distribution or does the distribution influence the outcome? 
This cause and effect would be most readily determined by timing. If the 
distribution of the various types of patches begins to take its final form early 
in the scenario, then the hypothesis would be that the distribution is driving 
the outcome. If the distribution does not take its final shape until late in the 
scenario, or if it changes late in the scenario, then the cause and effect is 
reversed.
This initial step significantly helps to drive the remaining branches and 
sequels of the research. If the shape of the distribution of the patches influ-
ences the scenario outcome, then what factors affect that distribution? If 
the international agents and incumbent government agents allow for a safe 
haven within a given area, will that shape the distribution of the insurgent 
sympathizers within the scenario? Is it possible to influence the outcome of 
an insurgency with a tactic as simple as allowing an escape for the insurgent 
agents? If this is not the case, then what factors help determine the distribu-
tion of the insurgent sympathizers? Are there any activities conducted by the 
international agents that influence the shape of the distribution? All of these 
questions are relevant to the policy decisions made with regard to how best 
to conduct the stability operations in the troubled state.
Once those critical elements have been identified, it is then much more 
straightforward to redesign the model to identify the interrelationships of 
these elements. Again, the ability to run scenarios and observe a graphic 
interface in agent based modeling provides an optimal tool for this type of 
research. It is also very helpful to be able to isolate changes within the scenario 
to identify the variable(s) that are driving the observed emergent behavior. 
Finally, having a graphic interface is helpful in presenting data to audiences 
that may not be expert in the field of agent based modeling or working with 
latent variables. The ability to observe a phenomenon as it unfolds reinforces 
the narrative of the research presentation and helps the audience make intui-
tive sense of the outcome.

Findings and Conclusion
72
POLICY IMPLICATIONS
For policy makers, the outcomes of this research are cautionary. To paraphrase 
Benjamin Valentino (2011), the question for the international community 
boils down to whether humanitarian intervention can work. The answer to that 
question is representative of most issues within international relations. The 
available options fall along a continuum of poor choices. The one extreme is 
the use of heavy handed military intervention by international forces. Coali-
tions of allies, utilizing brute force to stop humanitarian outrages perpetrated 
by incumbent regime despots, rarely obtain optimal outcomes. Using the 
primarily military intervention in Somalia, a country with a population of 
roughly eight and one half million people, the United States alone spent over 
seven billion dollars. The calculus for the number of lives saved was between 
ten thousand and twenty-five thousand which means the United States spent 
between two hundred and eighty to seven hundred thousand dollars for each 
life saved (Valentino 2011, p. 67). The military heavy option for humanitar-
ian interventions is notoriously high in terms of monetary costs as well as 
the risk of friction with allies and the possible loss of life on the part of the 
intercessors. But even the seemingly benign action of providing development 
aid has caused major problems. The June 2011 Senate Foreign Relations 
Committee report contained the following admission:
Foreign aid, when misspent, can fuel corruption, distort labor and goods mar-
kets, undermine the host government’s ability to exert control over resources, 
and contribute to insecurity. According to the World Bank, an estimated 
97 percent of Afghanistan’s gross domestic product (GDP) is derived from 
spending related to the international military and donor community presence. 
Afghanistan could suffer a severe economic depression when foreign troops 
leave in 2014 unless the proper planning begins now. (p. 2)
Sara Lischer (2007) has put forward solid arguments that caution policy 
makers on the use of humanitarian soldiers as a force multiplier. Accord-
ing to Lischer, many military planners now include providing humanitarian 
assistance as part of their strategic plan to win the hearts and minds of the 
target population. The problem is that such uses of military forces do not 
substitute for the provision of traditional security forces to stabilize an area. 
In fact the opposite can be true, which was borne out in the outcomes of the 
simulations with the coordinating of international agent forces. Utilizing 
military forces for the provision of humanitarian aid, particularly as part of 
a plan for the achievement of strategic objectives, can endanger the civil-

Findings and Conclusion
73
ian nongovernmental organization personnel that are attempting to provide 
humanitarian assistance within the same operational space (Lischer, 2007). 
Nancy Roberts (2010) provides amplifying support to Lischer’s position in 
what she describes as domain conflict.
Roberts describes “bleeding boundaries” in the roles and domains between 
civilian nongovernmental organizations and military forces in the delivery 
of humanitarian aid. Both Roberts and Lischer concur that when military 
forces are used in a logistical capacity such as providing airlift support for 
the movement of supplies and refugees following a natural disaster, there is 
little to no domain conflict. The nongovernmental organizations do not feel 
pressure on their core values, or guiding principles of neutrality, impartial-
ity, and independence. This circumstance is confirmed by the outcomes of 
the model runs conducted within this research project. With high levels of 
international coordination and cooperation, and low levels of violence, the 
probability of the incumbent government recovering and maintaining or 
regaining control of governance within its borders is very high; greater than 
eighty-six percent. The problem becomes that the success of the international 
community intervention comes at the expense of undermining the legitimacy 
of the incumbent government. If the beginning level of legitimacy of the 
incumbent government is high, the probability of a successful outcome for 
that government is reduced by up to ten percent. This is one of the more un-
expected and confounding issues that emerged from this research that makes 
the options for policy makers even less clear.
The situation becomes even more vexing as the level of violence begins 
to increase. Lischer (2005) also points out the difficulties in attempting a 
civilian only humanitarian response in dealing with despotism. Her treatise 
in this circumstance is that the provision of aid is never neutral. There are 
consequences to attempting to provide aid to either internally or externally 
displaced populations. Attempting to provide aid to internally displaced refu-
gees can fall into the trap of aiding the corrupt government that is causing the 
dislocation in the first place. An example is the problems the international 
efforts ran into attempting to help the victims of Cyclone Nargis in Myanmar. 
The Myanmar government insisted that all aid was seen by the people to be 
delivered through the government. This insistence caused critical supplies 
to languish in warehouses awaiting government approved transportation. 
The problems became severe enough that there were voices in the interna-
tional community calling for the use of military force to get relief supplies 
to victims of the cyclone (Roman & Thein, 2010). But these issues pale in 
comparison to the problems encountered in delivering humanitarian aid to 
externally displaced refugees.

Findings and Conclusion
74
Lischer (2005) lists numerous examples of humanitarian efforts that ex-
acerbate an unstable and volatile situation. One she lists that was the most 
relevant to this research is the case of Afghanistan. The provision of aid by 
the international community during the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan 
enabled the emergence and solidification of the Taliban as an insurgent force 
fighting against the occupation. The humanitarian aid was controlled by the 
leaders of the Afghan refugees and enabled them to gain power and author-
ity within the camps in Pakistan. From this base of authority, the leaders 
were able to form an insurgent force that could leave the safe haven of the 
camps to fight, knowing their families were safe, and then return for rest and 
recuperation (Lischer, 2005). This situation was exacerbated by the United 
States funneling of arms to the refugees which militarized the camps to an 
even greater extent and ultimately led to the insurgent success against the 
Soviets. The question then is where upon this continuum does the correct 
policy balance lie? While this research in no way provides a road map of 
what precise policy steps to take, it does point to some items for consider-
ation when contemplating humanitarian and / or stability operations within 
an unstable nation or population.
POLICY CONSIDERATION RECOMMENDATIONS
One of the primary outputs generated from this research is the uncertainty 
of a positive outcome resulting from international intervention in the affairs 
of a troubled nation. This result is not unexpected given the complexity of 
the issues that swirl around international relations. The surprising result 
was the increase in complexity highlighted by such a simple agent based 
model. The overarching question for policy makers is what items should 
be considered when weighing the risks of intervention anywhere along the 
continuum of options previously outlined? This concluding section suggests 
a few additions to the numerous considerations for policy makers involved 
in such deliberations.
CONCLUSION
In Barbara Tuchman’s seminal work, The March of Folly (1984), she lists three 
attributes of folly that are defined as the pursuit of policy by governments 
that are counter to their self-interests. The first is that “it must be perceived 
as counter-productive in its own time, not merely by hindsight” (Tuchman, 

Findings and Conclusion
75
1984, p. 5). Since the scope of her writing covered vast periods of history, 
this rule is critical to avoid the curse of hindsight. The second attribute of 
folly is “a feasible alternative course of action must have been available” and 
third, “the policy in question should be that of a group, not an individual 
ruler, and should persist beyond any one political lifetime” (Tuchman, 1984, 
p. 5). In an effort to provide the questions to help avoid meeting these three 
interlocks, the first and obvious question is whether the proposed action is 
in the collective best interest. This consideration makes the list only because 
it is so obvious; an attempt to carry on a discussion without mentioning it is 
pointless. For the most part, this question is probably the most thoroughly 
debated. The problem usually does not stem from the initial decision, the 
issue comes from the reluctance to change course when events are not 
aligning with expectations. The impulse to throw good money after bad, 
and continue down a path counter to self-interest is known in accounting as 
confusing sunk costs with future costs. Resources that have been expended 
cannot be recovered. The decision of whether to continue the current course 
of action should be based upon future costs; the sunk costs, no matter how 
large, should not enter into the decision matrix. The need to continuously 
reevaluate circumstances and events should be treated as an imperative, not 
a sign of weakness or indecision.
The next item is the examination of what the end state looks like when 
the intervention is complete. If there is an effort to establish a western style 
democracy in a country that has only known feudal or autocratic rule through-
out its history, there is a high probability of a mismatch between the change 
capacity of the society and the desired end state of the intervening agency. 
This circumstance sets up a very difficult path with an uncertain outcome 
due to the probable need for a large number of resources to effect the desired 
change and the level of resistance generated. Such a scenario falls into the 
outcome domain of this research as high violence, low incumbent govern-
ment legitimacy, and high levels of coordination (the best possible set up for 
this scenario). This yields only a seventy-three percent favorable outcome 
percentage and that is if the international agents involved do everything in 
a coordinated and cooperative fashion. Otherwise the percentage drops to 
thirty-three. Once again, is there an alternative outcome that the international 
community can accept that will be more aligned with the change capacity 
of the society in question? Tuchman sounds prescient when discussing such 
miscalculations throughout history when she states, “This curious vacuum of 
understanding came from what may be called cultural ignorance, a frequent 
component of folly” (Tuchman, 1984, p. 31).

Findings and Conclusion
76
But do world leaders periodically wake up one morning and suddenly 
decide to ignore their own best interests and those of their countrymen and 
knowingly engage in counterproductive interventions in sovereign nations? 
The operative word in such a question is “knowingly.” As we have previously 
discussed, complex systems contain multiple feedback loops and cause and 
effect relationships that can be widely displaced either temporally, spatially, 
or both. An action that seems intuitive upon the first examination of a situ-
ation can turn out to be the antithesis of what the correct course of action 
should have been. Given the complexity of these issues, coupled with the 
multiple feedback loops and widely separate cause and effect relationships, 
the probability of downside outcomes may be beyond the capacity of humans 
to calculate. Considering this in advance may be the key to avoid joining 
Tuchman’s march of folly.
REFERENCES
Galula, D. (1964). Counterinsurgency warfare: Theory and Practice. West-
port, CT: Praeger Security International.
Holland, J. H. (1995). Hidden order: How adaptation builds complexity. 
Reading, MA: Helix Books.
Lischer, S. K. (2005). Dangerous sanctuaries: Refugee camps, civil war, and 
the dilemmas of humanitarian aid. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Lischer, S. K. (2007). Military intervention and the “force multiplier.”. Global 
Governance, 13, 99–118.
Mencken, H. L. (1880 – 1956). Quotes From H. L. Mencken (B. MacLeod, 
Ed.). Retrieved February 26, 2012, from http://www.watchfuleye.com/
mencken.html
Roman, O., & Thein, Y. E. (2010). Getting help to victims of 2008 cyclone 
Nargis: AmeriCares engages with Myanmar’s military government sequel. 
The Kennedy School Case Program, case number 1931.1. Cambridge, MA: 
John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University.
Tuchman, B. W. (1984). The march of folly. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.
United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations. (2011). Evaluating 
U.S. Foreign Assistance to Afghanistan. Washington, DC: Author.

Findings and Conclusion
77
Valentino, B. A. (2011). The true cost of humanitarian intervention: The hard 
truth about a noble notion. Foreign Affairs, 90(6), 60–73.
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Branches: Or branch plans; the planning options that become active when 
strategic decision points have been reached in an operation.
Complexity: The environment or human interaction. Cause and effect 
can be widely separated temporally, spatially, or both. Human agents behave 
unpredictably because their motivations are typically not clear to decision 
makers.
Folly: The pursuit of policy by governments that are counter to their 
self-interests.
Future Costs: The long-term, ongoing costs that are incurred from a 
course of action.
Sequels: The sub-plans that that follow branch plans, usually general in 
nature.
Sunk Costs: Costs that have occurred in the past and are unrecoverable. 
These costs should not be considered in future courses of action, but fre-
quently are.
Uncertainty: The opacity that clouds decision making in complex envi-
ronments. Cause and effect are unclear.

78
Related Readings
To continue IGI Global’s long-standing tradition of advancing innovation through emerging 
research, please find below a compiled list of recommended IGI Global book chapters and jour-
nal articles in the areas of natural disasters, emergency management, and crisis response. These 
related readings will provide additional information and guidance to further enrich your knowl-
edge and assist you with your own research.
Adams, T. (2014). An Examination of Challenges Faced by First Responders in the 
Midst of Disaster. In C. Brown, K. Peters, & K. Nyarko (Eds.), Cases on Research 
and Knowledge Discovery: Homeland Security Centers of Excellence (pp. 198–216). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-5946-9.ch009
Adler, M. (2015). Floods Monitoring. In C. Maftei (Ed.), Extreme Weather and Im-
pacts of Climate Change on Water Resources in the Dobrogea Region (pp. 312–344). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8438-6.ch011
Akaichi, J., & Mhadhbi, L. (2016). A Clinical Decision Support System: Ontology-
Driven Approach for Effective Emergency Management. In J. Moon & M. Galea 
(Eds.), Improving Health Management through Clinical Decision Support Systems 
(pp. 270–294). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-9432-3.ch013
Almagrabi, A., Loke, S. W., & Torabi, T. (2014). Spatial Relations in Contextual 
Information for Mobile Emergency Messaging. In B. Guo, D. Riboni, & P. Hu (Eds.), 
Creating Personal, Social, and Urban Awareness through Pervasive Computing 
(pp. 274–298). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4695-7.ch012

Related Readings
79
Anderson, L. R. (2017). Assessing the Interactions between Native American Tribes 
and the U.S. Government in Homeland Security and Emergency Management 
Policy. In M. Dawson, D. Kisku, P. Gupta, J. Sing, & W. Li (Eds.), Developing 
Next-Generation Countermeasures for Homeland Security Threat Prevention (pp. 
51–71). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0703-1.ch003
Andersson, D. (2014). An Externalizable Model of Tactical Mission Control for 
Knowledge Transfer. International Journal of Information Systems for Crisis Re-
sponse and Management, 6(3), 16–37. doi:10.4018/IJISCRAM.2014070102
Annunziato, A., Doherty, B., & Khanh, H. (2014). A Modular Collaborative Web-
Based Framework for Humanitarian Crisis Management. In Z. Mahmood (Ed.), IT in 
the Public Sphere: Applications in Administration, Government, Politics, and Plan-
ning (pp. 18–46). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4719-0.ch002
Anwar, J. (2015). Reproductive and Mental Health during Natural Disaster: Im-
plications and Issues for Women in Developing Nations – A Case Example. In 
M. Sheikh, A. Mahamoud, & M. Househ (Eds.), Transforming Public Health in 
Developing Nations (pp. 265–291). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-8702-8.ch012
Arbanas, S. M., & Arbanas, Ž. (2015). Landslides: A Guide to Researching Landslide 
Phenomena and Processes. In N. Gaurina-Medjimurec (Ed.), Handbook of Research 
on Advancements in Environmental Engineering (pp. 474–510). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-7336-6.ch017
Arias-Hernandez, R., & Fisher, B. (2014). Designing Visual Analytic Tools for 
Emergency Operation Centers: A Qualitative Approach. International Journal of 
Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management, 6(3), 1–15. doi:10.4018/
IJISCRAM.2014070101
Arlikatti, S., Kendra, J., & Jennings, E. (2015). Corporate Social Responsibility in 
Enhancing Disaster Education. In M. Hamner, S. Stovall, D. Taha, & S. Brahimi 
(Eds.), Emergency Management and Disaster Response Utilizing Public-Private 
Partnerships (pp. 183–194). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
8159-0.ch010
Attia, S., Boubetra, A., & Saoud, M. S. (2016). Development of an Emergency 
Response Management using Mobile Devices for Hospital Infrastructures Affected 
by Power Grid Failures. International Journal of Healthcare Information Systems 
and Informatics, 11(1), 36–57. doi:10.4018/IJHISI.2016010103

Related Readings
80
Bahinipati, C. S., Patnaik, U., & Viswanathan, P. K. (2016). What Causes Economic 
Losses from Natural Disasters in India? In S. Dinda (Ed.), Handbook of Research on 
Climate Change Impact on Health and Environmental Sustainability (pp. 157–175). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8814-8.ch008
Bahir, E., & Peled, A. (2015). Keyword Selection Methodology for Identification of 
Major Events using Social Networks. International Journal of Information Systems for 
Crisis Response and Management, 7(1), 42–60. doi:10.4018/IJISCRAM.2015010103
Baker, W. (2016). Responding to High-Volume Water Disasters in the Research 
Library Context. In E. Decker & J. Townes (Eds.), Handbook of Research on Di-
saster Management and Contingency Planning in Modern Libraries (pp. 282–310). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8624-3.ch013
Balogun, O., & Tetteh, E. G. (2015). Data Fusion Aiding Tool (DAFAT) Design 
for Emergency Command and Control Using Lean Principles. In E. Tetteh & B. 
Uzochukwu (Eds.), Lean Six Sigma Approaches in Manufacturing, Services, and 
Production (pp. 202–230). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
7320-5.ch008
Baroni, P., Fogli, D., Giacomin, M., Guida, G., Provenza, L. P., Rossi, M., & Žnidaršič, 
M. et al. (2014). A Participatory Approach to Designing Decision Support Systems 
in Emergency Management. International Journal of Decision Support System 
Technology, 6(1), 60–80. doi:10.4018/ijdsst.2014010104
Barthe-Delanoë, A., Carbonnel, S., Bénaben, F., & Pingaud, H. (2014). An Event-
Driven Platform for Agility Management of Crisis Response. International Jour-
nal of Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management, 6(2), 54–70. 
doi:10.4018/ijiscram.2014040104
Basu, J. P. (2016). Coastal Poverty, Resource-Dependent Livelihood, Climate Change, 
and Adaptation: An Empirical Study in Indian Coastal Sunderbans. In S. Dinda (Ed.), 
Handbook of Research on Climate Change Impact on Health and Environmental 
Sustainability (pp. 441–454). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
8814-8.ch022
Behnam, B. (2017). Simulating Post-Earthquake Fire Loading in Conventional RC 
Structures. In P. Samui, S. Chakraborty, & D. Kim (Eds.), Modeling and Simula-
tion Techniques in Structural Engineering (pp. 425–444). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0588-4.ch015

Related Readings
81
Behnassi, M., Kahime, K., Boussaa, S., Boumezzough, A., & Messouli, M. (2017). 
Infectious Diseases and Climate Vulnerability in Morocco: Governance and Adap-
tation Options. In M. Bouzid (Ed.), Examining the Role of Environmental Change 
on Emerging Infectious Diseases and Pandemics (pp. 138–162). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0553-2.ch006
Bender, S. R. (2016). Floodplain Infrastructure and the Toxic Tide. In A. McKeown 
& G. Bugyi (Eds.), Impact of Water Pollution on Human Health and Environmental 
Sustainability (pp. 150–173). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
9559-7.ch007
Berndt, H., Mentler, T., & Herczeg, M. (2015). Optical Head-Mounted Displays 
in Mass Casualty Incidents: Keeping an Eye on Patients and Hazardous Materials. 
International Journal of Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management, 
7(3), 1–15. doi:10.4018/IJISCRAM.2015070101
Bimonte, S., Boucelma, O., Machabert, O., & Sellami, S. (2014). A Generic Spatial 
OLAP Model for Evaluating Natural Hazards in a Volunteered Geographic Informa-
tion Context. International Journal of Agricultural and Environmental Information 
Systems, 5(4), 40–55. doi:10.4018/ijaeis.2014100102
Boersma, K., Diks, D., Ferguson, J., & Wolbers, J. (2016). From Reactive to Proactive 
Use of Social Media in Emergency Response: A Critical Discussion of the Twitci-
dent Project. In G. Silvius (Ed.), Strategic Integration of Social Media into Project 
Management Practice (pp. 236–252). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-9867-3.ch014
Bouzid, M. (2017). Waterborne Diseases and Climate Change: Impact and Implica-
tions. In M. Bouzid (Ed.), Examining the Role of Environmental Change on Emerg-
ing Infectious Diseases and Pandemics (pp. 89–108). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0553-2.ch004
Bowers, M., & Cherne, G. (2015). A Lessons Framework for Civil-Military-Police 
Conflict and Disaster Management: An Australian Perspective. In S. McIntyre, K. 
Dalkir, P. Paul, & I. Kitimbo (Eds.), Utilizing Evidence-Based Lessons Learned for 
Enhanced Organizational Innovation and Change (pp. 152–171). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-6453-1.ch008
Bowles, D. C. (2017). Climate Change-Associated Conflict and Infectious Disease. 
In M. Bouzid (Ed.), Examining the Role of Environmental Change on Emerg-
ing Infectious Diseases and Pandemics (pp. 68–88). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0553-2.ch003

Related Readings
82
Brengarth, L. B., Mujkic, E., & Millar, M. A. (2015). Social Media in Crisis: How 
Social Media Created a NPO and Relief during a Wildfire Crisis. In H. Asencio & 
R. Sun (Eds.), Cases on Strategic Social Media Utilization in the Nonprofit Sector 
(pp. 1–23). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8188-0.ch001
Cai, T. (2014). Geospatial Technology-Based E-Government Design for Environ-
mental Protection and Emergency Response. In K. Bwalya (Ed.), Technology Devel-
opment and Platform Enhancements for Successful Global E-Government Design 
(pp. 157–184). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4900-2.ch009
Carmicheal, D. W. (2016). The Incident Command System: Applying Emergency 
Response Best Practice to Your Disaster. In E. Decker & J. Townes (Eds.), Handbook 
of Research on Disaster Management and Contingency Planning in Modern Librar-
ies (pp. 25–48). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8624-3.ch002
Carvalho, T., Santos, L. B., Luz, E. F., Ishibashi, R., Jorge, A. A., & Londe, L. R. 
(2016). An Open Source Approach for Watersheds Delimitation to Support Flood 
Monitoring. International Journal of Distributed Systems and Technologies, 7(4), 
77–88. doi:10.4018/IJDST.2016100105
Chandler, T., & Beedasy, J. (2015). mLearning to Enhance Disaster Preparedness 
Education in K-12 Schools. In H. An, S. Alon, & D. Fuentes (Eds.) Tablets in K-12 
Education: Integrated Experiences and Implications (pp. 75-89). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-6300-8.ch006
Chandler, T., Crocco, M., & Marri, A. R. (2014). Systems Thinking about Severe 
Storms in Social Studies Education. In K. Thomas & H. Muga (Eds.), Handbook of 
Research on Pedagogical Innovations for Sustainable Development (pp. 348–367). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-5856-1.ch016
Chapman, J., Davis, L. B., Samanlioglu, F., & Qu, X. (2014). Evaluating the Effec-
tiveness of Pre-Positioning Policies in Response to Natural Disasters. International 
Journal of Operations Research and Information Systems, 5(2), 86–100. doi:10.4018/
ijoris.2014040105
Chatterjee, T., & Dinda, S. (2016). Climate Change, Human Health and Some Eco-
nomic Issues. In S. Dinda (Ed.), Handbook of Research on Climate Change Impact 
on Health and Environmental Sustainability (pp. 26–41). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8814-8.ch002
Chaudron, G. (2016). After the Flood: Lessons Learned from Small-Scale Disasters. 
In E. Decker & J. Townes (Eds.), Handbook of Research on Disaster Management 
and Contingency Planning in Modern Libraries (pp. 389–411). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8624-3.ch017

Related Readings
83
Chin, S. (2016). Surviving Sandy: Recovering Collections after a Natural Disaster. 
In E. Decker & J. Townes (Eds.), Handbook of Research on Disaster Management 
and Contingency Planning in Modern Libraries (pp. 366–388). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8624-3.ch016
Chtourou, W., & Bouzguenda, L. (2015). Interaction Protocols Adaptation Based 
Coordination for Crisis Management Processes. International Journal of Infor-
mation Systems for Crisis Response and Management, 7(4), 67–87. doi:10.4018/
IJISCRAM.2015100104
Chun, S. A., & Artigas, F. (2015). Participatory Environmental Planning Platform. In 
C. Silva (Ed.), Emerging Issues, Challenges, and Opportunities in Urban E-Planning 
(pp. 46–68). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8150-7.ch003
Çinal, H., Taşkan, Ş., & Baybaş, F. (2015). Dynamic Disaster Coordination System 
with Web based Html5 API. International Journal of 3-D Information Modeling 
(IJ3DIM), 4(2), 1-15. doi:10.4018/IJ3DIM.2015040101
Confalonieri, U., Menezes, J. A., & Margonari, C. (2017). Environmental Change 
and the Emergence of Infectious Diseases: A Regional Perspective from South 
America. In M. Bouzid (Ed.), Examining the Role of Environmental Change on 
Emerging Infectious Diseases and Pandemics (pp. 109–137). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0553-2.ch005
Corbett, J. M., Brennan, S., & Whitely, A. (2016). Harnessing the Chaotic: Using 
the Participatory Geoweb to Make Sense of Forest Fires. International Journal of 
E-Planning Research, 5(3), 27–41. doi:10.4018/IJEPR.2016070103
Cowick, C., & Cowick, J. (2016). Planning for a Disaster: Effective Emergency 
Management in the 21st Century. In E. Decker & J. Townes (Eds.), Handbook of 
Research on Disaster Management and Contingency Planning in Modern Librar-
ies (pp. 49–69). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8624-3.ch003
Cruz-Cantillo, Y. (2014). A System Dynamics Approach to Humanitarian Logistics 
and the Transportation of Relief Supplies. International Journal of System Dynam-
ics Applications, 3(3), 96–126. doi:10.4018/ijsda.2014070105
Curran, S. J. (2015). Application of Cellular Communications Models and De-
signs for Use in Disaster-Aftermath Related Scenarios. International Journal of 
Interdisciplinary Telecommunications and Networking, 7(3), 46–56. doi:10.4018/
IJITN.2015070104

Related Readings
84
Das, S. (2016). Health Impact of Water-Related Diseases in Developing Countries 
on Account of Climate Change – A Systematic Review: A Study in Regard to South 
Asian Countries. In S. Dinda (Ed.), Handbook of Research on Climate Change 
Impact on Health and Environmental Sustainability (pp. 42–60). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8814-8.ch003
Deenapanray, P. N., & Ramma, I. (2015). Adaptations to Climate Change and Cli-
mate Variability in the Agriculture Sector in Mauritius: Lessons from a Technical 
Needs Assessment. In W. Ganpat & W. Isaac (Eds.), Impacts of Climate Change 
on Food Security in Small Island Developing States (pp. 130–165). Hershey, PA: 
IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-6501-9.ch005
Dervisevic, S. (2017). Emergence of the Ebola Virus Disease in West Africa. In M. 
Bouzid (Ed.), Examining the Role of Environmental Change on Emerging Infectious 
Diseases and Pandemics (pp. 163–177). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-5225-0553-2.ch007
Detjen, H., Hoffmann, S., Rösner, L., Winter, S., Geisler, S., Krämer, N., & Bumiller, 
G. (2015). Integrating Volunteers into Rescue Processes: Analysis of User Require-
ments and Mobile App Conception. International Journal of Information Systems for 
Crisis Response and Management, 7(2), 1–18. doi:10.4018/IJISCRAM.2015040101
Dixon, J., & Abashian, N. (2016). Beyond the Collection: Emergency Planning for 
Public and Staff Safety. In E. Decker & J. Townes (Eds.), Handbook of Research on 
Disaster Management and Contingency Planning in Modern Libraries (pp. 120–140). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8624-3.ch006
Egan, J., & Anderson, T. (2015). Considerations for a Model of Public-Private 
Sector Collaboration in the Provision of Disaster Relief: Incentives and Limits. In 
M. Hamner, S. Stovall, D. Taha, & S. Brahimi (Eds.), Emergency Management and 
Disaster Response Utilizing Public-Private Partnerships (pp. 1–15). Hershey, PA: 
IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8159-0.ch001
Ekker, K. (2015). Emergency Management Training and Social Network Analysis: 
Providing Experiential Data for Virtual Responders. In T. Issa & P. Isaías (Eds.), 
Artificial Intelligence Technologies and the Evolution of Web 3.0 (pp. 273–289). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8147-7.ch013
Ellebrecht, N., & Kaufmann, S. (2014). Boosting Efficiency Through the Use Of 
IT?: Reconfiguring the Management of Mass Casualty Incidents in Germany. In-
ternational Journal of Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management, 
6(4), 1–18. doi:10.4018/IJISCRAM.2014100101

Related Readings
85
Erskine, M. A., & Pepper, W. (2015). Enhancing Emergency Response Management 
using Emergency Description Information Technology (EDIT): A Design Science 
Approach. International Journal of Electronic Government Research, 11(2), 51–65. 
doi:10.4018/IJEGR.2015040104
Eudoxie, G. D., & Wuddivira, M. (2015). Soil, Water, and Agricultural Adapta-
tions. In W. Ganpat & W. Isaac (Eds.), Impacts of Climate Change on Food Se-
curity in Small Island Developing States (pp. 255–279). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-6501-9.ch009
Ford, J. L., Stephens, K. K., & Ford, J. S. (2014). Digital Restrictions at Work: 
Exploring How Selectively Exclusive Policies Affect Crisis Communication. In-
ternational Journal of Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management, 
6(4), 19–28. doi:10.4018/IJISCRAM.2014100102
Galloup, A. (2016). One Plan, Four Libraries: A Case Study in Disaster Planning for 
a Four-Campus Academic Institution. In E. Decker & J. Townes (Eds.), Handbook of 
Research on Disaster Management and Contingency Planning in Modern Libraries 
(pp. 166–183). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8624-3.ch008
Gao, T., & Rong, L. (2014). Study on Management of the Life Cycle of Emergency 
Plan System Based on Effectiveness. International Journal of Knowledge and Sys-
tems Science, 5(1), 49–64. doi:10.4018/ijkss.2014010105
Garrido, S., & Nicoletti, J. (2017). First Responder Psychological Recovery Follow-
ing a Mass Casualty Event. In C. Mitchell & E. Dorian (Eds.), Police Psychology 
and Its Growing Impact on Modern Law Enforcement (pp. 143–157). Hershey, PA: 
IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0813-7.ch007
Gasmelseid, T. M. (2014). Improving Emergency Response Systems Through the 
Use of Intelligent Information Systems. International Journal of Intelligent Infor-
mation Technologies, 10(2), 37–55. doi:10.4018/ijiit.2014040103
Hallberg, N., Hallberg, J., Granlund, H., & Woltjer, R. (2014). Exploring the Ra-
tionale for Emergency Management Information Systems for Local Communities. 
International Journal of Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management, 
6(2), 16–37. doi:10.4018/ijiscram.2014040102
Halliru, S. L. (2017). Climate Change Effects on Human Health with a Particular 
Focus on Vector-Borne Diseases and Malaria in Africa: A Case Study from Kano 
State, Nigeria Investigating Perceptions about Links between Malaria Epidemics, 
Weather Variables, and Climate Change. In M. Bouzid (Ed.), Examining the Role 
of Environmental Change on Emerging Infectious Diseases and Pandemics (pp. 
205–229). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0553-2.ch009

Related Readings
86
Hamilton, R., & Brown, D. (2016). Disaster Management and Continuity Planning in 
Libraries: Changes since the Year 2000. In E. Decker & J. Townes (Eds.), Handbook 
of Research on Disaster Management and Contingency Planning in Modern Librar-
ies (pp. 1–24). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8624-3.ch001
Hamner, M. (2015). Closing the Gaps in Public Private Partnerships in Emergency 
Management: A Gap Analysis. In M. Hamner, S. Stovall, D. Taha, & S. Brahimi 
(Eds.), Emergency Management and Disaster Response Utilizing Public-Private 
Partnerships (pp. 64–97). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8159-
0.ch005
Harris, E. N. (2015). A Public Sector Practitioner’s Perspective on Public Private 
Partnerships. In M. Hamner, S. Stovall, D. Taha, & S. Brahimi (Eds.), Emergency 
Management and Disaster Response Utilizing Public-Private Partnerships (pp. 
54–63). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8159-0.ch004
Hassanzadeh, R., & Nedovic-Budic, Z. (2014). Assessment of the Contribution of 
Crowd Sourced Data to Post-Earthquake Building Damage Detection. International 
Journal of Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management, 6(1), 1–37. 
doi:10.4018/ijiscram.2014010101
Hawe, G. I., Coates, G., Wilson, D. T., & Crouch, R. S. (2015). Improving Agent-
Based Simulation of Major Incident Response in the United Kingdom through Con-
ceptual and Operational Validation. International Journal of Information Systems for 
Crisis Response and Management, 7(4), 1–25. doi:10.4018/IJISCRAM.2015100101
Hernandez, M. W. (2014). A Multiple Natural Hazards Assessment Model Based on 
Geomorphic Terrain Units. International Journal of Applied Geospatial Research, 
5(1), 16–37. doi:10.4018/ijagr.2014010102
Hewitt, A. M., Wagner, S. L., Twal, R., & Gourley, D. (2015). Aligning Commu-
nity Hospitals with Local Public Health Departments: Collaborative Emergency 
Management. In M. Hamner, S. Stovall, D. Taha, & S. Brahimi (Eds.), Emergency 
Management and Disaster Response Utilizing Public-Private Partnerships (pp. 
218–239). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8159-0.ch012
Howard-Baptiste, S., & Baptiste, M. (2015). Piti, Piti, Wazo fe Nich Li (Little by 
Little, the Bird Builds its Nest): Promoting Change and Health Education in Post-
Earthquake Haiti. In J. Bird (Ed.), Innovative Collaborative Practice and Reflection 
in Patient Education (pp. 129–151). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-7524-7.ch009

Related Readings
87
Jones, A. (2016). Shortcomings and Successes: A Small-Scale Disaster Case Study. 
In E. Decker & J. Townes (Eds.), Handbook of Research on Disaster Management 
and Contingency Planning in Modern Libraries (pp. 412–435). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8624-3.ch018
Joshi, S., Gupta, I. D., Pattanur, L. R., & Murnal, P. B. (2014). Investigating the 
Effect of Depth and Impedance of Foundation Rock in Seismic Analysis of Gravity 
Dams. International Journal of Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering, 5(2), 1–18. 
doi:10.4018/ijgee.2014070101
Karl, I., Rother, K., & Nestler, S. (2015). Crisis-Related Apps: Assistance for Critical 
and Emergency Situations. International Journal of Information Systems for Crisis 
Response and Management, 7(2), 19–35. doi:10.4018/IJISCRAM.2015040102
Kumar, A., Mukherjee, A. B., & Krishna, A. P. (2017). Application of Conven-
tional Data Mining Techniques and Web Mining to Aid Disaster Management. In 
A. Kumar (Ed.), Web Usage Mining Techniques and Applications Across Industries 
(pp. 138–167). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0613-3.ch006
Kumar, C. P. (2016). Impact of Climate Change on Groundwater Resources. In S. 
Dinda (Ed.), Handbook of Research on Climate Change Impact on Health and Envi-
ronmental Sustainability (pp. 196–221). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-8814-8.ch010
Kurata, N., Ohashi, M., & Hori, M. (2015). Local Communities Platform for Resto-
ration of “Kizuna”: Reconstruction of Human Bonds in Communities Damaged by 
Nuclear Disaster. In J. Varajão, M. Cruz-Cunha, & R. Martinho (Eds.), Improving 
Organizational Effectiveness with Enterprise Information Systems (pp. 123–136). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8368-6.ch008
Kurki, T., & Sihvonen, H. (2014). Operative Role Management in Information 
Systems. In Z. Mahmood (Ed.), IT in the Public Sphere: Applications in Adminis-
tration, Government, Politics, and Planning (pp. 1–17). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4719-0.ch001
Kurki, T., & Sihvonen, H. (2014). Operative Role Management in Information 
Systems. In Z. Mahmood (Ed.), IT in the Public Sphere: Applications in Adminis-
tration, Government, Politics, and Planning (pp. 1–17). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4719-0.ch001
Kushwaha, D., Janagam, S., & Trivedi, N. (2014). Compute-Efficient Geo-Local-
ization of Targets from UAV Videos: Real-Time Processing in Unknown Territory. 
International Journal of Applied Geospatial Research, 5(3), 36–48. doi:10.4018/
ijagr.2014070103

Related Readings
88
Lee, C., & Wu, C. (2015). Extracting Entities of Emergent Events from Social 
Streams Based on a Data-Cluster Slicing Approach for Ontology Engineering. 
International Journal of Information Retrieval Research, 5(3), 1–18. doi:10.4018/
IJIRR.2015070101
Leh, J. M. (2016). The RSVP Model: Lifting the Veil on School Violence. In G. Crews 
(Ed.), Critical Examinations of School Violence and Disturbance in K-12 Education 
(pp. 234–256). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-9935-9.ch014
Leung, L., & Law, N. (2016). Exploring the Effectiveness of Online Role Play 
Simulations in Tackling Groupthink in Crisis Management Training. International 
Journal of Gaming and Computer-Mediated Simulations, 8(3), 1–18. doi:10.4018/
IJGCMS.2016070101 PMID:27134698
Lindahl, J., Bett, B., Robinson, T., & Grace, D. (2017). Rift Valley Fever and the 
Changing Environment: A Case Study in East Africa. In M. Bouzid (Ed.), Examining 
the Role of Environmental Change on Emerging Infectious Diseases and Pandemics 
(pp. 178–204). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0553-2.ch008
Lock, M. B., Fansler, C., & Webb, M. (2016). Emergency Planning (R)Evolution: 
Making a Comprehensive Emergency Plan for the Present and the Future. In E. 
Decker & J. Townes (Eds.), Handbook of Research on Disaster Management and 
Contingency Planning in Modern Libraries (pp. 70–95). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8624-3.ch004
Lorenzi, D., Chun, S. A., Vaidya, J., Shafiq, B., Atluri, V., & Adam, N. R. (2015). 
PEER: A Framework for Public Engagement in Emergency Response. International 
Journal of E-Planning Research, 4(3), 29–46. doi:10.4018/IJEPR.2015070102
Lowe, M., Matthews, M., Reno, L. M., & Sartori, M. A. (2016). The LOUIS Con-
sortium and Catastrophe. In B. Doherty (Ed.), Technology-Centered Academic 
Library Partnerships and Collaborations (pp. 126–166). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0323-1.ch005
Mabe, M. R. (2016). Libraries to the Rescue. International Journal of Risk and 
Contingency Management, 5(1), 62–81. doi:10.4018/IJRCM.2016010105
Mabe, M. R. (2016). The Library as Lifeboat. In E. Decker & J. Townes (Eds.), 
Handbook of Research on Disaster Management and Contingency Planning in 
Modern Libraries (pp. 494–515). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-8624-3.ch021

Related Readings
89
Machalaba, C., Romanelli, C., & Stoett, P. (2017). Global Environmental Change 
and Emerging Infectious Diseases: Macrolevel Drivers and Policy Responses. In M. 
Bouzid (Ed.), Examining the Role of Environmental Change on Emerging Infectious 
Diseases and Pandemics (pp. 24–67). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-5225-0553-2.ch002
Maftei, C., & Papatheodorou, K. (2015). Mathematical Models Used for Hydrological 
Floodplain Modeling. In C. Maftei (Ed.), Extreme Weather and Impacts of Climate 
Change on Water Resources in the Dobrogea Region (pp. 240–283). Hershey, PA: 
IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8438-6.ch009
Magda, B. (2015). Communications and Information Sharing in Public-Private 
Partnerships: Networking for Emergency Management. In M. Hamner, S. Stovall, 
D. Taha, & S. Brahimi (Eds.), Emergency Management and Disaster Response 
Utilizing Public-Private Partnerships (pp. 162–182). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8159-0.ch009
Maharaj, R., Singh-Ackbarali, D., & Sankat, C. K. (2015). Postharvest Management 
Strategies. In W. Ganpat & W. Isaac (Eds.), Impacts of Climate Change on Food 
Security in Small Island Developing States (pp. 221–254). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-6501-9.ch008
Mahdi, T. (2015). Seismic Vulnerability of Arches, Vaults and Domes in Histori-
cal Buildings. In P. Asteris & V. Plevris (Eds.), Handbook of Research on Seismic 
Assessment and Rehabilitation of Historic Structures (pp. 401–447). Hershey, PA: 
IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8286-3.ch014
Matsumura, N., Miura, A., Komori, M., & Hiraishi, K. (2016). Media Mediate 
Sentiments: Exploratory Analysis of Tweets Posted Before, During, and After the 
Great East Japan Earthquake. International Journal of Knowledge Society Research, 
7(2), 57–71. doi:10.4018/IJKSR.2016040104
Maximay, S. (2015). The Caribbean’s Response to Climate Change Impacts. In W. 
Ganpat & W. Isaac (Eds.), Impacts of Climate Change on Food Security in Small 
Island Developing States (pp. 33–66). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-6501-9.ch002
Meesters, K., & Van de Walle, B. (2014). Serious Gaming for User Centered In-
novation and Adoption of Disaster Response Information Systems. International 
Journal of Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management, 6(2), 1–15. 
doi:10.4018/ijiscram.2014040101

Related Readings
90
Mohan Babu, K. N., Murthy, K. B., Pavithra, G., & Mamatha, K. (2014). Efficient 
Channel Utilization and Prioritization Scheme for Emergency Calls in Cellular 
Network. International Journal of Wireless Networks and Broadband Technologies, 
3(3), 56–69. doi:10.4018/ijwnbt.2014070104
Mondlane, A., Hasson, K., & Popov, O. (2015). E-Governance and Natural Hazards in 
Mozambique: A Challenge for Backasting Method Used for Flood Risk Management 
Strategies. In I. Sodhi (Ed.), Emerging Issues and Prospects in African E-Government 
(pp. 253–268). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-6296-4.ch016
Moon, T., & Ko, S. (2015). Compassion Organizing for Public-Private Collaboration 
in Disaster Management. In M. Hamner, S. Stovall, D. Taha, & S. Brahimi (Eds.), 
Emergency Management and Disaster Response Utilizing Public-Private Partner-
ships (pp. 99–120). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8159-0.ch006
Mukherjee, A., Dey, N., Kausar, N., Ashour, A. S., Taiar, R., & Hassanien, A. E. 
(2016). A Disaster Management Specific Mobility Model for Flying Ad-hoc Network. 
International Journal of Rough Sets and Data Analysis, 3(3), 72–103. doi:10.4018/
IJRSDA.2016070106
Murayama, Y., Nishioka, D., & Abdullah, N. A. (2016). Information Processing for 
Disaster Communications. In A. Aggarwal (Ed.), Managing Big Data Integration 
in the Public Sector (pp. 207–230). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-9649-5.ch012
Negron, M. (2015). Use Team Building to Make the Most of Your Public-Private 
Partnerships. In M. Hamner, S. Stovall, D. Taha, & S. Brahimi (Eds.), Emergency 
Management and Disaster Response Utilizing Public-Private Partnerships (pp. 
121–135). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8159-0.ch007
Negrón, M. A., & Taha, D. (2015). Public-Private Partnerships in Support of Critical 
Infrastructure and Key Resources. In M. Hamner, S. Stovall, D. Taha, & S. Brahimi 
(Eds.), Emergency Management and Disaster Response Utilizing Public-Private 
Partnerships (pp. 256–269). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
8159-0.ch014
Ngamassi, L., Ramakrishnan, T., & Rahman, S. (2016). Use of Social Media for 
Disaster Management: A Prescriptive Framework. Journal of Organizational and 
End User Computing, 28(3), 122–140. doi:10.4018/JOEUC.2016070108
Nikolai, C., Johnson, T., Prietula, M., Becerra-Fernandez, I., & Madey, G. (2015). 
SimEOC: A Distributed Web-Based Virtual Emergency Operations Center Simu-
lator for Training and Research. International Journal of Information Systems for 
Crisis Response and Management, 7(1), 1–21. doi:10.4018/IJISCRAM.2015010101

Related Readings
91
Nikolai, C. M., Johnson, T., Prietula, M., Becerra-Fernandez, I., & Madey, G. 
R. (2015). Design Principles for Crisis Information Management Systems: From 
Closed Local Systems to the Web and Beyond. International Journal of Informa-
tion Systems for Crisis Response and Management, 7(4), 26–45. doi:10.4018/
IJISCRAM.2015100102
Nixon, M. L. (2016). Safety Doesn’t Happen by Accident: Disaster Planning at the 
University of Pittsburgh. In E. Decker & J. Townes (Eds.), Handbook of Research 
on Disaster Management and Contingency Planning in Modern Libraries (pp. 
184–206). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8624-3.ch009
Noble, K. T., White, C., & Turoff, M. (2014). Emergency Management Information 
System Support Rectifying First Responder Role Abandonment During Extreme 
Events. International Journal of Information Systems for Crisis Response and 
Management, 6(1), 65–78. doi:10.4018/ijiscram.2014010103
Noblin, A. M., Cortelyou-Ward, K., & Rutherford, A. (2016). Weathering the Storm: 
Disaster Preparedness and the Florida Health Information Exchange. International 
Journal of Privacy and Health Information Management, 4(2), 53–61. doi:10.4018/
IJPHIM.2016070104
Okada, A., Ishida, Y., & Yamauchi, N. (2017). Effectiveness of Social Media in 
Disaster Fundraising: Mobilizing the Public towards Voluntary Actions. Interna-
tional Journal of Public Administration in the Digital Age, 4(1), 49–68. doi:10.4018/
IJPADA.2017010104
Panwar, N., Uniyal, D., & Rautela, K. S. (2016). Mapping Sustainable Tourism into 
Emergency Management Structure to Enhance Humanitarian Networks and Disaster 
Risk Reduction using Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) Initiatives in Himalayan 
States: The Global Supply Chain Issues and Strategies. In S. Joshi & R. Joshi (Eds.), 
Designing and Implementing Global Supply Chain Management (pp. 129–151). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-9720-1.ch007
Patkin, T. T. (2017). Social Media and Knowledge Management in a Crisis Context: 
Barriers and Opportunities. In R. Chugh (Ed.), Harnessing Social Media as a Knowl-
edge Management Tool (pp. 125–142). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-5225-0495-5.ch007
Piper, J., & Müller, B. (2016). Modular Technical Concepts for Ambulatory Monitoring 
of Risk Patients Based on Multiple Parameters and an Automatic Alarm Function. 
International Journal of Monitoring and Surveillance Technologies Research, 4(1), 
1–9. doi:10.4018/IJMSTR.2016010101

Related Readings
92
Purohit, H., Dalal, M., Singh, P., Nissima, B., Moorthy, V., Vemuri, A., & Rajgaria, 
A. et al. (2016). Empowering Crisis Response-Led Citizen Communities: Lessons 
Learned from JKFloodRelief.org Initiative. In C. Graham (Ed.), Strategic Manage-
ment and Leadership for Systems Development in Virtual Spaces (pp. 270–292). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-9688-4.ch015
Radianti, J., Granmo, O., Bouhmala, N., Sarshar, P., & Gonzalez, J. J. (2014). Com-
paring Different Crowd Emergency Evacuation Models Based on Human Centered 
Sensing Criteria. International Journal of Information Systems for Crisis Response 
and Management, 6(3), 53–70. doi:10.4018/IJISCRAM.2014070104
Rastrick, K., Stahl, F., Vossen, G., & Dillon, S. (2015). WiPo for SAR: Taking the 
Web in Your Pocket when Doing Search and Rescue in New Zealand. International 
Journal of Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management, 7(4), 46–66. 
doi:10.4018/IJISCRAM.2015100103
Reginaldi, J. (2015). Leadership Challenges in Public Private Partnerships in 
Emergency Management: A Real-World Perspective. In M. Hamner, S. Stovall, 
D. Taha, & S. Brahimi (Eds.), Emergency Management and Disaster Response 
Utilizing Public-Private Partnerships (pp. 136–161). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8159-0.ch008
Reuter, C. (2014). Communication between Power Blackout and Mobile Network 
Overload. International Journal of Information Systems for Crisis Response and 
Management, 6(2), 38–53. doi:10.4018/ijiscram.2014040103
Reuter, C., Ludwig, T., Friberg, T., Pratzler-Wanczura, S., & Gizikis, A. (2015). 
Social Media and Emergency Services?: Interview Study on Current and Potential 
Use in 7 European Countries. International Journal of Information Systems for Cri-
sis Response and Management, 7(2), 36–58. doi:10.4018/IJISCRAM.2015040103
Reuter, C., & Schröter, J. (2015). Microblogging during the European Floods 2013: 
What Twitter May Contribute in German Emergencies. International Journal of 
Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management, 7(1), 22–41. doi:10.4018/
IJISCRAM.2015010102
Rich, E., Hernantes, J., Laugé, A., Labaka, L., Sarriegi, J. M., & Gonzalez, J. J. 
(2014). Improving the Crisis to Crisis Learning Process. International Journal of 
Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management, 6(3), 38–52. doi:10.4018/
ijiscram.2014070103

Related Readings
93
Rizza, C., Pereira, Â. G., & Curvelo, P. (2014). Do-it-Yourself Justice: Considerations 
of Social Media use in a Crisis Situation: The Case of the 2011 Vancouver Riots. 
International Journal of Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management, 
6(4), 42–59. doi:10.4018/IJISCRAM.2014100104
Roberts, T. G., & Rodriguez, M. T. (2015). An Overview of Climate Change and 
Impacts on Food Security in Small Island Developing States. In W. Ganpat & W. 
Isaac (Eds.), Impacts of Climate Change on Food Security in Small Island Developing 
States (pp. 1–31). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-6501-9.ch001
Roşu, L., & Zăgan, R. (2015). Management of Drought and Floods in Romania. In C. 
Maftei (Ed.), Extreme Weather and Impacts of Climate Change on Water Resources 
in the Dobrogea Region (pp. 345–402). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-8438-6.ch012
Rother, K., Karl, I., & Nestler, S. (2015). Towards Virtual Reality Crisis Simulation 
as a Tool for Usability Testing of Crisis Related Interactive Systems. International 
Journal of Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management, 7(3), 40–54. 
doi:10.4018/IJISCRAM.2015070103
Russo, M. R., Bryan, V., & Penney, G. (2014). The Learning Curve in Emergency 
Preparedness: Are We Getting Better? In M. Khosrow-Pour (Ed.), Inventive Ap-
proaches for Technology Integration and Information Resources Management (pp. 
278–293). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-6256-8.ch012
Sarhosis, V., Lignola, G. P., & Asteris, P. G. (2015). Seismic Vulnerability of An-
cient Colonnade: Two Story Colonnade of the Forum in Pompeii. In P. Asteris & 
V. Plevris (Eds.), Handbook of Research on Seismic Assessment and Rehabilitation 
of Historic Structures (pp. 331–358). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-8286-3.ch011
Sautter, J., Havlik, D., Böspflug, L., Max, M., Rannat, K., Erlich, M., & Engelbach, 
W. (2015). Simulation and Analysis of Mass Casualty Mission Tactics: Context 
of Use, Interaction Concept, Agent-Based Model and Evaluation. International 
Journal of Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management, 7(3), 16–39. 
doi:10.4018/IJISCRAM.2015070102
Scholl, H. J., & Chatfield, A. T. (2014). The Role of Resilient Information Infra-
structures: The Case of Radio Fukushima During and After the 2011 Eastern Japan 
Catastrophe. International Journal of Public Administration in the Digital Age, 1(2), 
1–24. doi:10.4018/ijpada.2014040101

Related Readings
94
Schryen, G., & Wex, F. (2014). Risk Reduction in Natural Disaster Management 
Through Information Systems: A Literature Review and an IS Design Science Re-
search Agenda. International Journal of Information Systems for Crisis Response 
and Management, 6(1), 38–64. doi:10.4018/ijiscram.2014010102
Senapati, S., & Gupta, V. (2016). Impacts of Climate Change on Fish Productivity: 
A Quantitative Measurement. In S. Dinda (Ed.), Handbook of Research on Climate 
Change Impact on Health and Environmental Sustainability (pp. 243–260). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8814-8.ch012
Shaw, M. D. (2016). Navigating Campus Disasters from Within the Library: Les-
sons and Implications from Gulf Coast Institutions. In E. Decker & J. Townes 
(Eds.), Handbook of Research on Disaster Management and Contingency Planning 
in Modern Libraries (pp. 340–365). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-8624-3.ch015
Shiuly, A., Sahu, R. B., & Mandal, S. (2014). Effect of Soil on Ground Motion 
Amplification of Kolkata City. International Journal of Geotechnical Earthquake 
Engineering, 5(1), 1–20. doi:10.4018/ijgee.2014010101
Sönmez, R. (2017). Value Creation through Social Alliances: Theoretical Consider-
ations in Partnership Relationships. In V. Potocan, M. Ünğan, & Z. Nedelko (Eds.), 
Handbook of Research on Managerial Solutions in Non-Profit Organizations (pp. 
205–231). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0731-4.ch010
Steinbuch, R. (2015). Optimization of Tuned Mass Dampers to Improve the Earth-
quake Resistance of High Buildings. In N. Gaurina-Medjimurec (Ed.), Handbook of 
Research on Advancements in Environmental Engineering (pp. 511–548). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-7336-6.ch018
Swain, M. (2016). Vulnerability to Local Climate Change: Farmers’ Perceptions 
on Trends in Western Odisha, India. In S. Dinda (Ed.), Handbook of Research on 
Climate Change Impact on Health and Environmental Sustainability (pp. 139–155). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8814-8.ch007
Taha, D. (2015). Mitigating the Impact of Extreme Events: A Private Sector Per-
spective on the Value of Public Private Partnerships. In M. Hamner, S. Stovall, D. 
Taha, & S. Brahimi (Eds.), Emergency Management and Disaster Response Utilizing 
Public-Private Partnerships (pp. 32–53). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-8159-0.ch003

Related Readings
95
Takayama, Y., & Miwa, H. (2015). Delay Tolerant Navigation Method for Fast 
Evacuation in Poor Communication Environment at the Time of Disaster. Interna-
tional Journal of Distributed Systems and Technologies, 6(3), 29–50. doi:10.4018/
IJDST.2015070103
Tapia, A. H., Giacobe, N. A., Soule, P. J., & LaLone, N. J. (2016). Scaling 911 
Texting for Large-Scale Disasters: Developing Practical Technical Innovations for 
Emergency Management at Public Universities. International Journal of Public 
Administration in the Digital Age, 3(3), 73–85. doi:10.4018/IJPADA.2016070105
Treurniet, W. (2014). Shaping Comprehensive Emergency Response Networks. In 
T. Grant, R. Janssen, & H. Monsuur (Eds.), Network Topology in Command and 
Control: Organization, Operation, and Evolution (pp. 26–48). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-6058-8.ch002
Trnka, J., & Johansson, B. J. (2014). Resilient Emergency Response: Supporting 
Flexibility and Improvisation in Collaborative Command and Control. In Crisis 
Management: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and Applications (pp. 813–838). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4707-7.ch040
Vandevoordt, R. (2016). Humanitarian Media Events: On the Symbolic Conditions 
of Moral Integration. In A. Fox (Ed.), Global Perspectives on Media Events in 
Contemporary Society (pp. 90–105). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-9967-0.ch007
Venkatesan, S., Rajabifard, A., Lam, N., Gad, E., Goldsworthy, H., & Griffin, G. 
(2014). A Syncretic Approach Towards a Meta-Integrative Platform for Effective 
Disaster Management. International Journal of Geotechnical Earthquake Engineer-
ing, 5(1), 58–74. doi:10.4018/ijgee.2014010104
Verplaetse, A., Mascareñas, P., & O’Neill, K. (2016). Zen and the Art of Disaster 
Planning: Collaboration Challenges in Library Disaster Plan Design and Execution. 
In E. Decker & J. Townes (Eds.), Handbook of Research on Disaster Management 
and Contingency Planning in Modern Libraries (pp. 96–119). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8624-3.ch005
Vezyridis, P., Timmons, S., & Wharrad, H. (2016). Lessons Learned from the 
Implementation of an Emergency Department Information System. In T. Iyamu 
& A. Tatnall (Eds.), Maximizing Healthcare Delivery and Management through 
Technology Integration (pp. 237–256). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-9446-0.ch014

Related Readings
96
Vorraber, W., Lichtenegger, G., Brugger, J., Gojmerac, I., Egly, M., Panzenböck, 
K., & Voessner, S. et al. (2016). Designing Information Systems to Facilitate Civil-
Military Cooperation in Disaster Management. International Journal of Distributed 
Systems and Technologies, 7(4), 22–40. doi:10.4018/IJDST.2016100102
Wridt, P., Seley, J. E., Fisher, S., & DuBois, B. (2014). Participatory Mapping 
Approaches to Coordinate the Emergency Response of Spontaneous Volunteers 
After Hurricane Sandy. International Journal of E-Planning Research, 3(3), 1–19. 
doi:10.4018/ijepr.2014070101
Yildiz, M., & Demirhan, K. (2016). Analysis and Comparison of the Role of Local 
Governments with Other Policy Actors in Disaster Relief via Social Media: The 
Case of Turkey. In U. Sadioglu & K. Dede (Eds.), Theoretical Foundations and 
Discussions on the Reformation Process in Local Governments (pp. 462–483). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0317-0.ch019
Young-McLear, K., Mazzuchi, T. A., & Sarkani, S. (2015). Large-Scale Disaster 
Response Management: Social Media and Homeland Security. In J. Sahlin (Ed.), 
Social Media and the Transformation of Interaction in Society (pp. 93–131). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8556-7.ch006

  97
About the Author
John McCaskill completed his PhD in 2012 from the University of Texas at 
Dallas where he serves as a Clinical Professor in the department of Public and 
Nonprofit Management. He is an honor graduate of the United States Army War 
College. John’s current research interests and publications focus on sustainability 
and the resilience of public and nonprofit organizations under stress. John’s previ-
ous publications examine U.S. national security with regard to energy policy. His 
professional background includes over 20 years of military service as well as 17 
years in the building products industry specializing in sustainable building products. 
John’s design work in the building products industry has resulted in the award of 
five patents.

98
Index
A
Army Field Manual (FM) 32
C
Change Capacity 1, 4, 7, 10-11, 17, 19, 24, 
32, 35, 46, 75
Complex Adaptive Systems (CAS) 31, 
36-38, 51
Complex Humanitarian Interventions 1, 
4, 16
Counterinsurgency Operations 1, 7, 12-13, 
16-17, 22, 35, 52
D
Design Concepts 52, 55, 67
Domain Conflict 3, 9, 13, 73
F
Factor Analysis 49, 51
Folly 17, 34, 68, 74-77
Force Multiplier Effect 2, 6
Future Costs 68, 75, 77
H
Humanitarian Relief 2-4, 12, 16, 47, 58, 69
Human Rights 4, 11, 15
I
Interagency Coordination 52, 62, 64, 67
J
Jirga 11, 17, 31, 35
L
Latent Variables 50, 52, 68, 70-71
Linear Structural Relations (LISREL) 51
Lotka-Volterra Model 36, 38-39, 51
M
Madrassas 29, 35
Military-NGO Coordination 6, 32, 53
N
Nation Building 8, 12-13, 17, 35
NetLogo 36, 40, 43, 45, 47, 50, 70
Non-Deterministic 37-38, 40, 51
Nongovernmental Organizations 3, 9, 16, 
19, 47, 73
Non-Linear Behavior 6, 37-38, 48, 51
P
Pacification 17, 35
Pashtun 26, 28-29
Pashtunwali 28, 35
Peace Enforcement 16
Peacekeeping 3, 7, 15-16, 64-67
Peace Keeping 16
Policy Simulation 67
Process Overview and Scheduling 54

99
Index
Q
Qawm 10, 15, 28-30, 34-35
S
Sunk Costs 68, 75, 77
U
United Nations 1-2, 5-6, 12, 15, 21, 24, 36, 
47, 50, 60, 66
W
Warfare 7, 11, 14-16, 22, 33, 55, 65, 76

