
D4267
theaiconf.com
Early adopters of applied AI have a unique opportunity to invent new 
business models, reshape industries, and build the impossible.
Put AI to work — right now.
AI is moving fast.  
Don’t fall behind.

Mike Barlow
AI and Medicine
Data-Driven Strategies for 
Improving Healthcare 
and Saving Lives
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing

978-1-491-96145-2
AI and Medicine
by Mike Barlow
Copyright © 2016 O’Reilly Media Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Nicole Tache
Production Editor: Colleen Cole
Copyeditor: Rachel Monaghan
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Karen Montgomery
July 2016:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2016-07-08: First Release
2016-08-25: Second Release
See http://oreilly.com/catalog/errata.csp?isbn=9781491961452 for release details.
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. AI and Medicine,
the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the author disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without limi‐
tation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this work.
Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own risk. If
any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is subject to
open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsi‐
bility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights. This
book is not intended as medical advice. Please consult a qualified professional if you
require medical advice.

Table of Contents
AI and Medicine:
Data-Driven Strategies for Improving Healthcare and Saving Lives. . . . .  1
A Wealth of Benefits for Millions of Patients                                        3
Strength in Numbers                                                                                4
Barriers to Entry                                                                                        6
Amplifying Intelligence with Patient Data                                            7
Pursuing the Quest for Personalized Medicine                                    9
Wearables and Other Helpful Gadgets                                                10
Predicting Adverse Drug Interactions                                                 10
Machine Learning Is Key to Better, Faster Medical Research          11
Insight from Yeast                                                                                   12
AI Is “Like a Small Child”                                                                      13
It’s All About Sharing the Data                                                              14
Looking Ahead                                                                                        15
iii


AI and Medicine:
Data-Driven Strategies for
Improving Healthcare and Saving
Lives
For centuries, physicians and healers focused primarily on treating
acute problems such as broken bones, wounds, and infections. “If
you had an infectious disease, you went to the doctor, the doctor
treated you, and then you went home,” says Balaji Krishnapuram,
director and distinguished engineer at IBM Watson Health.
Today, the majority of healthcare revolves around treating chronic
conditions such as heart disease, diabetes, and asthma. Treating
chronic ailments often requires multiple visits to healthcare provid‐
ers, over extended periods of time. In modern societies, “the old
ways of delivering care will not work,” says Krishnapuram. “We need
to enable patients to take care of themselves to a far greater degree
than before, and we need to move more treatment from the doctor’s
office or hospital to an outpatient setting or to the patient’s home.”
Unlike traditional healthcare, which tends to be labor-intensive,
emerging models of healthcare are knowledge-driven and data-
intensive. Many of the newer healthcare delivery models will depend
on a new generation of user-friendly, real-time big data analytics
and artificial intelligence/machine learning (AI/ML) tools.
1

Krishnapuram sees five related areas in which the application of
AI/ML tools and techniques will spur a beneficial revolution in
healthcare:
Population management
Identifying risks, determining who is at risk, and identifying
interventions that will reduce risk.
Care management
Designing care plans for individual patients and closing gaps in
care.
Patient self-management
Supporting and enabling customized self-care treatment plans
for individual patients, monitoring patient health in real time,
adjusting doses of medication, and providing incentives for
behavioral changes leading to improved health.
System design
Optimizing healthcare processes (everything from medical
treatment itself to the various ways insurers reimburse provid‐
ers) through rigorous data analysis to improve outcomes and
quality of care while reducing costs.
Decision support
Helping doctors and patients choose proper dosage levels of
medication based on most recent tests or monitoring, assisting
radiologists in identifying tumors and other diseases, analyzing
medical literature, and showing which surgical options are
likely to yield the best outcomes.
Applying AI/ML strategies in each of those five areas will be essen‐
tial for creating large-scale practical systems for providing personal‐
ized and patient-centric healthcare at reasonable costs. In this
report, I explore these areas and more through interviews conduc‐
ted with leading experts in the field of AI and medicine.
2 
| 
AI and Medicine: Data-Driven Strategies for Improving Healthcare and Saving Lives

A Wealth of Benefits for Millions of Patients
The potential benefits of applying AI/ML to medicine and health‐
care are enormous. In addition to improving treatment and diagno‐
sis of various cancers, AI/ML can be used in a wide range of
important healthcare scenarios, including fetal monitoring, early
detection of sepsis, identifying risky combinations of drugs, and
predicting hospital readmissions.
“Medicine and biology are very complicated and require humans to
be trained for a long time to be highly functional,” says Dr. Russ Alt‐
man, director of Stanford University’s biomedical informatics train‐
ing program. “It is intriguing that computers may be able to reach
levels of sophistication where they rival humans in the ability to rec‐
ognize new knowledge and use it for discovery.”
ML and neural networks are especially useful, says Altman, for find‐
ing patterns in large sets of biological data. Some of the most prom‐
ising applications of ML in medical research are in the areas of
“omics data” (e.g., genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, metabo‐
lomics); electronic medical records; and real-time personal health‐
care monitoring via devices such as wearables and smartphones.
Real-time or near-real-time testing and analysis are particularly crit‐
ical in self-management scenarios. For example, it’s essential for
people with diabetes to monitor their blood sugar levels accurately.
But waiting for a doctor or nurse to perform tests can impair the
accuracy of results and defeat attempts to manage the disease prop‐
erly. “Let’s say a test shows your blood sugar is high,” says Krishna‐
puram. “Maybe it was high because you ate too many carbs before
the test, or didn’t sleep well the night before, or you were stressed
out or didn’t get enough exercise that week. Each of those can
impact your blood sugar level.”
If your doctor relies on tests performed once every couple of
months at his or her office to set the proper dosage of your medica‐
tion, it may be difficult to optimize your dosage and manage your
condition effectively over time.
AI and ML tools can play a valuable role not only in analyzing test
results rapidly and optimizing dosages of medications, but also in
prompting behavioral changes by communicating timely reminders
to exercise, eat healthier foods, and get more sleep.
A Wealth of Benefits for Millions of Patients 
| 
3

“People also need to change their behaviors,” says Krishnapuram. AI
and ML can motivate and reinforce behavioral changes by “orches‐
trating” multiple channels of communication between healthcare
providers and patients.
Strength in Numbers
The organized practice of medicine can be traced back to 3,000 BC.
Although early physicians relied on supernatural phenomena to
explain the origin of many diseases, the idea of developing practical
therapies for common ailments is not new. Even when the causes of
disease were grossly misunderstood, physicians were expected to
find remedies or provide effective treatments for patients who were
sick or injured.
Today, medicine is widely regarded as a science. New therapies are
invented. If they seem promising, they are scientifically tested. The
tests are carefully analyzed with rigorous statistical processes. If a
therapy is shown to be safe and effective in a large enough number
of cases, it is approved and used to treat patients.
But in reality, that’s where the science often grinds to a halt. The
overwhelming majority of healthcare practitioners aren’t scientists.
The term medical arts isn’t merely romantic—it’s an accurate
description of how medicine is practiced in most of the world.
The application of AI, ML, and other statistical processes to medical
practice—as opposed to just medical research—would be a leap for‐
ward on the scale of the Industrial Revolution.
If the revolution fails, however, “we’ll look back at this century with
the same sense of horror we feel when we look at previous centu‐
ries,” says Nate Sauder, chief scientist at Enlitic, a company that
develops ML technology for medicine. “Our feeling is that medicine
—and in particular, medical diagnostics—is very much a data analy‐
sis problem,” Sauder says. “Patients generate lots of data, everything
from genomic sequences to images from CT scans. It’s a natural fit
for machine learning techniques.”
For example, Sauder and his colleagues at Enlitic are helping medi‐
cal radiologists improve the accuracy of their diagnoses. “We chose
radiology because most of the reports and images are already in dig‐
ital form, which makes it easier to manage the data. There’s also
4 
| 
AI and Medicine: Data-Driven Strategies for Improving Healthcare and Saving Lives

been an explosion in the improvement of computer vision technol‐
ogy.”
The combination of accessible data, high-quality computer vision,
and ML techniques has the potential for improving the quality of
care for millions of patients worldwide. “We started with a couple of
the harder problems in radiology to validate our approach,” says
Sauder. “For example, early discovery of lung nodules in a chest x-
ray is incredibly important because there’s a huge difference in the
survival rate between Stage 1 and Stage 4 cancer. We were able to
identify lung nodules 40–50 percent more accurately than a radiol‐
ogist.”
One reason AI/ML processes can outperform humans is that
humans get tired after staring at screens for long periods of time.
Another reason is that even in ideal conditions, it’s often difficult for
humans to spot small cancers on a lung scan. “What makes this
really challenging is that your lungs have a bunch of tiny veins run‐
ning through them. In a cross-sectional slice, a small mound of can‐
cer and a tiny vein look very similar,” Sauder says.
It’s “easier” to see the difference between tumors and veins in three-
dimensional scans, but human radiologists often find it difficult to
read 3D images. Software, on the other hand, can be trained to read
3D images as easily as 2D images. “As a result, a computer can look
at a three-dimensional scan and can spot tumors more accurately
than a human,” says Sauder. “Additionally, a machine learning sys‐
tem can look at 50,000 cases in the time it takes for a human to look
at one case. Those advantages can be translated into saving lives.”
Workflow integration, however, is a key ingredient in determining
the success of an AI/ML product or service. “We really need to
appreciate that many radiologists will view machine learning as a
replacement for them or as a challenge to their established work‐
flow,” says Sauder.
Like many of the experts interviewed for this report, Sauder sees AI
and ML tools and techniques as aids, not replacements, for health‐
care providers. He predicts AI and ML will become accepted com‐
ponents of the medical diagnostic toolkit when their benefits are
more widely understood throughout the medical community.
“Machine learning can improve diagnostics in two fundamental
ways. First, it can help doctors perform diagnoses more quickly and
more accurately. Second, and perhaps more important in the long
Strength in Numbers 
| 
5

term, is applying machine learning to screening. Screening is expen‐
sive and churns out many false positives. But with machine learning,
the computer can look at several hundred million screens and find
the smaller, weirder things that we humans tend to miss,” he says.
The long-range promise of machine learning is its ability to sort
through very large numbers of screens and discover subtle or hid‐
den patterns linking diseases with hundreds of variables, including
behavior, geography, age, gender, nutrition, and genomics. “Those
hundreds of millions of screens create very rich data sets that can be
culled by machine learning systems for medical insight,” says Sauder.
Barriers to Entry
Despite the promise and potential of AI and ML to revolutionize
medicine, the majority of healthcare providers stick with traditional
processes to diagnose and treat patients. Part of the problem is
semantics. For many people, “artificial intelligence” still evokes
images of sentient computers taking over the world, and very few
people understand the basic concept of “machine learning.”
As a result, discussions about applying AI/ML techniques in health‐
care scenarios tend to be one-sided and uncomfortable. On the
other hand, most people agree that healthcare is expensive, incon‐
venient, and often ineffective. There is a genuine hunger for afforda‐
ble solutions to modern healthcare problems, but it’s difficult for
most people to understand how AI and ML can help.
Another roadblock to more widespread usage of AI and ML in med‐
icine is extensive government regulation, which often puts a damper
on innovation and creativity. “You can’t just drop new software into
a medical monitor device,” says Josh Patterson, director of field engi‐
neering at Skymind, an open source, enterprise deep-learning pro‐
vider. “There are many regulations that create barriers to entry,
making it difficult for smaller companies to compete.”
Long integration cycles also slow the adoption of new approaches
based on AI, ML, deep learning, and neural networks. “Hospitals are
notoriously hard to sell into unless you are an already established
vendor, and established vendors are less inclined to aggressively
offer new features once they have the contract,” says Patterson. “If
the established vendor does want to offer a new ML or AI feature,
then they have to figure out how to integrate it into their product.”
6 
| 
AI and Medicine: Data-Driven Strategies for Improving Healthcare and Saving Lives

There are four broad obstacles to wider adoption of AI/ML techni‐
ques in healthcare, according to Krishnapuram:
• Confusion around data ownership and privacy. AI/ML pro‐
cesses are fueled by data. But which set of stakeholders owns
medical data? Is the data owned by patients, doctors, hospitals,
research centers, or technology vendors? Can medical data be
mined for clinical insights without compromising privacy or
violating existing regulations?
• Dysfunctional incentives. In its current form, the healthcare
payment system revolves around volume of care. Shifting to a
system that rewards quality of care and improved outcomes will
require a fundamental overhaul of most healthcare models.
• Liability and responsibility. It’s not clear which parties would
be held accountable when something goes wrong with an AI or
ML system. Who bears the risk? Who is responsible and who
pays for damages? Can an AI system be sued for malpractice?
• The traditional research paradigm doesn’t support personal‐
ized medicine. How do you conduct statistically meaningful
clinical trials when each patient is treated individually and every
care plan is customized for an individual patient? How do you
establish baselines, set standards, and develop common proce‐
dures when each patient is a “market of one”?
“Those aren’t trivial questions,” says Krishnapuram. Resolving them
will require study, public debate, legal reform, and the emergence of
a new social consensus around the value of data analytics.
Amplifying Intelligence with Patient Data
Given the obstacles, it’s easy to see why healthcare organizations
have been slow to adopt big data and AI/ML solutions. That said, it
is imperative for society to find practical ways for solving wide‐
spread healthcare issues. AI/ML techniques offer the best and fastest
path to achieving the goals of personalized, outcome-based medi‐
cine.
“Compared to other domains, such as retail and finance, healthcare
is the least developed field in terms of AI and ML,” says Eric Xing, a
professor in the School of Computer Science at Carnegie Mellon
University. Xing has two PhD degrees, one in molecular biology
Amplifying Intelligence with Patient Data 
| 
7

from Rutgers University and another in computer science from UC
Berkeley.
Lack of medical data isn’t a problem, he says. “There’s a lot of data…
from patients, from doctors, and from scientific studies. But the data
is underused. It just sits in databases.”
For example, healthcare providers collect clinical data from patients
every day. But most of that information is seldom used. “It is first‐
hand information, collected directly from patients. It’s incredibly
valuable, but it’s rarely looked at again unless the same patient
comes back for a visit,” says Xing. “So we’re not making effective use
of the data.”
Xing’s team at Carnegie Mellon is developing an AI program to inte‐
grate patient data from multiple sources such as x-rays, blood tests,
tissue samples, demographics, and freehand notes from caregivers.
“Once we have highly integrated data from patients, we can deploy it
in a machine learning algorithm and generate predictive models,” he
says.
For instance, the data can be used in analytics that would help a doc‐
tor assess the risks of subdiseases associated with a patient’s primary
ailment or help the doctor predict the symptoms a patient is likely to
experience before a follow-up examination.
AI programs can also help doctors devise safe, effective, and practi‐
cal treatment plans for individual patients. “It’s usually very difficult
for a doctor to come up with a treatment plan unless the doctor has
lots of experience treating similar patients,” says Xing. “With an AI
system, you can look at all the potential dangers and get a better idea
of what can go wrong. The system’s knowledge base includes mil‐
lions of patients, and an algorithm would allow the doctor to search
for similar patients in a matter of seconds.”
In a very real sense, AI and ML systems enable individual doctors to
expand their medical knowledge and experience far beyond what
would be possible under traditional circumstances. “You can con‐
nect one patient with a database of patients, making it easier to gain
deeper insights into disease mechanisms,” says Xing. From the
patient’s perspective, “it’s like assembling a large team of doctors
with vast experience.”
8 
| 
AI and Medicine: Data-Driven Strategies for Improving Healthcare and Saving Lives

Like Sauder, Xing does not envision AI as a replacement for doctors
and other healthcare providers. “The goal of an AI system is not
replacing the doctor in a clinical setting. The doctor is still center
stage, making decisions and delivering care.”
Xing used the analogy of autopilot systems designed for airplanes.
“They aren’t a substitute for human pilots. The humans in the cock‐
pit still make the important decisions when they see a problem. The
autopilot just helps them by making it easier to fly the plane,” he
says.
Pursuing the Quest for Personalized Medicine
The idea of personalized precision medicine has been around for
more than two decades, but AI and ML have the potential for bring‐
ing it closer to reality. “Personalized medicine is built on the unique
genetic characteristics of a patient,” Xing explains. “But it’s very dif‐
ficult to practice because we don’t really understand the entire
mechanisms and genetic underpinnings of many diseases. Also, the
data is hard to understand. You have a million polymorphic sites,
and you don’t know which one of them is actually causing the dis‐
ease or just along for the ride.”
Typically, doctors check a handful of key mutations that are gener‐
ally believed to be associated with a particular patient’s disease—but
taking that shortcut effectively circumvents the value of personal‐
ized medicine. “When you look at a mutation that is common to
many patients with a specific disease, you lose the power of person‐
alization because everyone will be treated the same way,” Xing says.
Xing and his colleagues are building machine learning programs
that analyze an individual patient’s genomic, proteomic, and meta‐
bolic data—including incremental risk factors—to generate a highly
personalized profile for the patient. “You can use machine learning
models for deriving the unique patterns underlying specific diseases
and symptoms, as well as for identifying potential targets for drugs,”
he says.
Pursuing the Quest for Personalized Medicine 
| 
9

Wearables and Other Helpful Gadgets
AI will also be integral to the development of genuinely useful wear‐
able and mobile devices for improving health. In addition to moni‐
toring vital signs such as pulse, blood pressure, and respiration, the
next generation of mobile health tech would also provide personal‐
ized real-time alerts and recommendations for modifying behavior
to achieve specific health goals.
“The mobile health domain will increasingly become part of every‐
day life,” says Xing, who is working with his team on a mobile app to
help patients with Parkinson’s disease. “It’s not just a passive timer
reminding you when to take your medications. It will actually moni‐
tor your past, present, and future activity. It will monitor your envi‐
ronment and your risk levels. Then it will provide active suggestions
for dosage, timing, and frequency of medication, and offer precau‐
tions and advice for lowering your risk.”
Xing says mobile platforms are the best way to provide patients with
real-time feedback and advice. “But generating those services
requires AI, because the platform must learn from the patient’s data
and from existing medical data. It must be able to detect patterns in
behavior and then make helpful recommendations based on those
patterns,” he says.
Predicting Adverse Drug Interactions
Bartenders will tell you, “Never mix, never worry.” But many
patients take more than one medication, and not everyone reacts the
same way to various combinations of drugs.
“Humans aren’t very good at predicting when two drugs will interact
and cause problems,” says Nicholas Tatonetti, an assistant professor
of biomedical informatics at Columbia University and a member of
the Data Science Institute. Two drugs that are harmless when used
separately might cause adverse reactions when used together by the
same patient. Predicting “drug/drug interactions,” however, is noto‐
riously difficult.
In one of their recent projects, Tatonetti and his lab colleagues
looked for pairs of drugs that might cause cardiac arrhythmia. “We
gathered 20 years of medical record data from Columbia and
10 
| 
AI and Medicine: Data-Driven Strategies for Improving Healthcare and Saving Lives

trained a machine learning algorithm to look for drug interactions
with a high probability of causing a heart arrhythmia,” Tatonetti
explains. “The algorithm initially came up with about 1,000 drug/
drug interaction hypotheses. Then we investigated those interactions
and evaluated them for causality. We narrowed the field down to
about 20 interactions—using data analysis only. There was no
human intuition involved at all.”
Eventually, the machine learning algorithm identified a combination
of two drugs, ceftriaxone and lansopravole, which can generate the
conditions leading to heart arrhythmia. “That is a hypothesis that
nobody would have ever explored before, since those two drugs are
not suspected of causing this problem,” says Tatonetti. “Because the
algorithm we trained to look for arrhythmia found a pattern, it was
able to identify this new and potentially dangerous drug interac‐
tion.”
Machine Learning Is Key to Better, Faster
Medical Research
Human beings are great at seeing “the big picture.” We assemble a
universe around ourselves by sampling bits and scraps of informa‐
tion, and then creating stories and narratives on the fly. We’re always
taking mental shortcuts—the “fast thinking” heuristics described so
well by Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky.
But when it comes to understanding and managing complex phe‐
nomena—like cancer and Alzheimer’s disease—our innate human
ability to rapidly leap from a handful of facts to a sweeping conclu‐
sion is our Achilles heel.
Machine learning is a potential antidote to our highly evolved, but
not always useful, talent for manufacturing reality from information
gathered by our senses. Machine learning excels at identifying latent
patterns and connections that we are too highly evolved to perceive.
We create myths by ignoring or skipping over details. Machine
learning, on the other hand, happily feeds on minutia.
Most diseases, it turns out, are made up of smaller subdiseases,
which themselves are caused by even smaller subdiseases. Multiple
layers of interrelated biological processes are involved, making it
highly difficult to apply simplistic “rule of thumb” approaches.
Machine Learning Is Key to Better, Faster Medical Research 
| 
11

Machine learning’s ability to find patterns and to uncover hidden
relationships among subdiseases is what makes it especially attrac‐
tive to medical researchers. For example, one of the harder problems
in medical research is bridging the gap between genetics and disease
phenotypes. Here’s a quick and useful definition of the genotype/
phenotype distinction from the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy:
The genotype is the descriptor of the genome which is the set of
physical DNA molecules inherited from the organism’s parents. The
phenotype is the descriptor of the phenome, the manifest physical
properties of the organism, its physiology, morphology, and behav‐
ior.
Despite an abundance of genomic and phenotype data, bridging the
gap between the genome and disease phenotypes requires a shift to
computational models that incorporate the causal complexity inher‐
ent in our biology, says David Beyer, a principal at Amplify Partners
and author of The Future of Machine Intelligence: Perspectives from
Leading Practitioners.
“In the last decade, researchers have transitioned from the applica‐
tion of shallower machine learning techniques (primarily linear in
nature) to a new class of approaches, including deep learning, a sub‐
class of ML broadly defined around the idea of multilayered neural
networks,” says Beyer. “And just as deep learning has shown break‐
through performance in categories such as vision, the hope is to
extend that success to biology and medicine.”
Insight from Yeast
The genotype-phenotype divide has limited the practical value of
genomic science in treating disease, since people with the same
genetic mutations can experience different symptoms of the same
disease, or in some instances, experience no symptoms at all.
Genomic medicine is also an area in which machine learning tech‐
niques can generate highly valuable insights. At Tatonetti’s lab,
researchers studied yeast genetics to understand why some human
gene mutations are harmless by themselves, but deadly when com‐
bined with other mutations. The phenomenon is called synthetic
lethality, and it’s a hurdle that makes it difficult to use genetic infor‐
mation for curing human diseases.
Understanding synthetic lethality in humans is critical to developing
targeted and personalized cancer therapies that spare healthy cells
12 
| 
AI and Medicine: Data-Driven Strategies for Improving Healthcare and Saving Lives

while killing cancer cells. “We know a lot about synthetic lethality in
yeast, but it’s hard translating that knowledge from yeast to
humans,” Tatonetti explains. “Humans have 5 to 10 times more pro‐
teins than yeast. So the number of potential interactions is exponen‐
tially higher in humans than in yeast.”
Many of the previous attempts to use yeast for understanding more
about human disease had been unsuccessful because they focused
on the mechanism of the proteins themselves. “We took a different
approach,” says Tatonetti. “We set up a supervised machine learning
algorithm and told it which pairs of genes were synthetic lethal to
yeast. Then we applied the algorithm we had trained on the yeast to
making predictions for human genes. The algorithm didn’t know it
was looking at human genes; it just ran. And it predicted about a
million lethal pairs of human genes.”
The team then compared the algorithm’s output to a previous highly
detailed investigation of lethality in human cancer cells. “We valida‐
ted our findings against the smaller ‘gold standard’ set and found
that we had achieved practically the same performance.”
Tatonetti and his colleagues successfully deployed a machine learn‐
ing algorithm for translating knowledge from unicellular organisms
to multicellular organisms. “Instead of trying to understand the
functions of every protein in the human body, we let the machine
identify the important patterns for us,” he says.
AI Is “Like a Small Child”
If there’s a rock star of AI in medicine, it’s Dr. Lynda Chin, associate
vice chancellor and chief innovation officer at the University of
Texas System. “The human brains are limited in their capacity,” she
says. “Medicine is becoming more and more complex, as more and
more data are collected about the patients and the medical knowl‐
edge base grows exponentially. No single human being can possibly
keep up, especially if their job is taking care of patients. We need
help.”
Chin sees AI as a helpful tool for augmenting human cognitive capa‐
bilities. AI would serve doctors in much the same way that para‐
legals or law clerks serve trial lawyers and judges. Paralegals and
clerks aren’t substitutes for lawyers and judges, yet they are neces‐
sary for an effective legal system. For example, AI can help doctors
AI Is “Like a Small Child” 
| 
13

organize and synthesize the ever-increasing amount of data—about
the patients, the disease, and the treatment options—into intelli‐
gence that is actionable.
“Imagine if a doctor can get all the information she needs about a
patient in 2 minutes and then spend the next 13 minutes of a 15-
minute office visit talking with the patient, instead of spending 13
minutes looking for information and 2 minutes talking with the
patient,” says Chin.
However, she describes AI in medicine as maturing, still a small
child who is growing up fast. “Training AI systems to be useful in
medicine is like parenting—no easy task! Not only does the underly‐
ing AI analytics need to mature, application of AI in medicine itself
is a brand new challenge that requires an iterative learning process.”
It’s All About Sharing the Data
From Chin’s perspective, one of the biggest barriers to developing
and applying AI in medicine is access to longitudinal medical and
other health-related data that truly represent the diversity of the
patient population and the heterogeneity of the diseases. “These data
are all over the place, not shared, and worse yet, not standardized,
with each silo being too small and too narrow...which means they’re
not good for training an AI system,” she says.
Learning from her earlier work in partnership with IBM Watson to
develop MD Anderson Oncology Expert Advisor©, a virtual cogni‐
tive expert system designed to democratize cancer care knowledge
and expertise, Chin believes that the promise of AI in medicine will
remain elusive until the barrier to data is removed. “The sharing
needs to go beyond individual hospitals or hospital systems,” she
says, “because no single entity has enough data.”
In her effort to remedy the data challenge, Chin began working with
PricewaterhouseCoopers to develop a “super-compliant” cloud plat‐
form for sharing medical data and analytic insights safely and
securely across disparate institutions and organizations.
A necessary component of the platform is a governance framework
to assure all stakeholders that the data will be used only for the spe‐
cific purpose, with no unspecified secondary uses. “Rarely anyone
objects to the stated use of data,” she says. “It’s the unintended or
unexpected use of private data that worries most people. We need to
14 
| 
AI and Medicine: Data-Driven Strategies for Improving Healthcare and Saving Lives

acknowledge the importance of keeping data private, even when it is
shared.”
To achieve that goal, her group is also partnering with AT&T to
develop secure dedicated networks for transmitting healthcare data.
“We need security and privacy when data is transmitted, not just
when it’s at rest,” she says.
In addition to a cloud-based infrastructure that can securely connect
to disparate data sources across health and other related industries,
she hopes to see “more data from more patients and more institu‐
tions, more networking and more aggregating of data from more
sources.”
Chin also envisions application of these novel technologies and
capabilities in the battle against access and affordability of health‐
care for the disadvantaged in medical desert areas. “We need to
think about providing care for the people who can’t afford or don’t
have access to healthcare,” she says. “AI, along with wearables and
mobile devices, can potentially extend more affordable and quality
care to these people.”
Looking Ahead
As a sexagenarian Baby Boomer, I now interact with the healthcare
system more often than ever before. From my perspective as some‐
one who writes frequently about data science, I am regularly aston‐
ished and dismayed at how poorly my medical information is
collected, stored, analyzed, and shared. No retailer would ever coun‐
tenance the indifference to data that is routinely demonstrated by
healthcare workers at practically every level.
As a child, I was taught that medicine is both a science and an art. I
have seen the art part in action. Watching skilled medical practition‐
ers set broken bones or slice away diseased tissue is like watching
miracles being performed.
Like many people, I’m still waiting for the scientific part of medicine
to really kick into high gear. Clearly, AI and its various components
have the potential to play enormous roles in improving many
aspects of healthcare. But the full potential of AI in medicine won’t
be realized until there’s a new social consensus on healthcare data.
Looking Ahead 
| 
15

It’s time to begin a national dialogue about how we treat healthcare
data. Will we treat it as private property that is owned and sold, or
will we treat it as common property that is shared freely? The
answer to that question will largely determine the eventual impact of
AI on medicine.
16 
| 
AI and Medicine: Data-Driven Strategies for Improving Healthcare and Saving Lives

About the Author
Mike Barlow is an award-winning journalist, author, and communi‐
cations strategy consultant. Since launching his own firm, Cumulus
Partners, he has worked with various organizations in numerous
industries.
Barlow is the author of Learning to Love Data Science (O’Reilly,
2015). He is the coauthor of The Executive’s Guide to Enterprise
Social Media Strategy (Wiley, 2011), and Partnering with the CIO:
The Future of IT Sales Seen Through the Eyes of Key Decision Makers
(Wiley, 2007). He is also the writer of many articles, reports, and
white papers on numerous topics such as smart cities, ambient com‐
puting, IT infrastructure, predictive maintenance, data analytics,
and data visualization.
Over the course of a long career, Barlow was a reporter and editor at
several respected suburban daily newspapers, including the Journal
News and the Stamford Advocate. His feature stories and columns
appeared regularly in the Los Angeles Times, Chicago Tribune, Miami
Herald, Newsday, and other major US dailies. He has also written
extensively for O’Reilly Media.
A graduate of Hamilton College, he is a licensed private pilot, avid
reader, and enthusiastic ice hockey fan.

