Allen Hatcher
Copyright  c  2000 by Allen Hatcher
Paper or electronic copies for noncommercial use may be made freely without explicit permission from the author.
All other rights reserved.

Table of Contents
Chapter 0. Some Underlying Geometric Notions
. . . . .
1
Homotopy and Homotopy Type 1. Cell Complexes 5.
Operations on Spaces 8. Two Criteria for Homotopy Equivalence 11.
The Homotopy Extension Property 14.
Chapter 1. The Fundamental Group
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
1. Basic Constructions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
Paths and Homotopy 25. The Fundamental Group of the Circle 28.
Induced Homomorphisms 34.
2. Van Kampen’s Theorem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
Free Products of Groups 39. The van Kampen Theorem 41.
Applications to Cell Complexes 49.
3. Covering Spaces
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
Lifting Properties 59. The Classiﬁcation of Covering Spaces 62.
Deck Transformations and Group Actions 69.
Additional Topics
A. Graphs and Free Groups 81.
B. K(G,1) Spaces and Graphs of Groups 86.

Chapter 2. Homology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
1. Simplicial and Singular Homology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
∆Complexes 102. Simplicial Homology 104. Singular Homology 108.
Homotopy Invariance 110. Exact Sequences and Excision 113.
The Equivalence of Simplicial and Singular Homology 128.
2. Computations and Applications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
Degree 134. Cellular Homology 137. Mayer-Vietoris Sequences 149.
Homology with Coefﬁcients 153.
3. The Formal Viewpoint
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 160
Axioms for Homology 160. Categories and Functors 162.
Additional Topics
A. Homology and Fundamental Group 166.
B. Classical Applications 168.
C. Simplicial Approximation 175.
Chapter 3. Cohomology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183
1. Cohomology Groups
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 188
The Universal Coefﬁcient Theorem 188. Cohomology of Spaces 195.
2. Cup Product
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 204
The Cohomology Ring 209. A K¨unneth Formula 215.
Spaces with Polynomial Cohomology 221.
3. Poincar´e Duality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 228
Orientations and Homology 231. The Duality Theorem 237.
Connection with Cup Product 247. Other Forms of Duality 250.
Additional Topics
A. The Universal Coefﬁcient Theorem for Homology 259.
B. The General K¨unneth Formula 266.
C. H–Spaces and Hopf Algebras 279.
D. The Cohomology of SO(n) 291.
E. Bockstein Homomorphisms 301.
F. Limits 309.
G. More About Ext 316.
H. Transfer Homomorphisms 320.
I. Local Coefﬁcients 327.

Chapter 4. Homotopy Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 337
1. Homotopy Groups
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 339
Deﬁnitions and Basic Constructions 340. Whitehead’s Theorem 346.
Cellular Approximation 348. CW Approximation 351.
2. Elementary Methods of Calculation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 359
Excision for Homotopy Groups 359. The Hurewicz Theorem 366.
Fiber Bundles 374. Stable Homotopy Groups 383.
3. Connections with Cohomology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 392
The Homotopy Construction of Cohomology 393. Fibrations 404.
Postnikov Towers 409. Obstruction Theory 415.
Additional Topics
A. Basepoints and Homotopy 421.
B. The Hopf Invariant 427.
C. Minimal Cell Structures 429.
D. Cohomology of Fiber Bundles 432.
E. The Brown Representability Theorem 448.
F. Spectra and Homology Theories 453.
G. Gluing Constructions 456.
H. Eckmann-Hilton Duality 461.
I. Stable Splittings of Spaces 468.
J. The Loopspace of a Suspension 471.
K. Symmetric Products and the Dold-Thom Theorem 477.
L. Steenrod Squares and Powers 489.
Appendix
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 521
Topology of Cell Complexes 521. The Compact-Open Topology 531.
Bibliography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 535
Index
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 540

Preface
This book was written to be a readable introduction to Algebraic Topology with
rather broad coverage of the subject. Our viewpoint is quite classical in spirit, and
stays largely within the conﬁnes of pure Algebraic Topology. In a sense, the book
could have been written thirty years ago since virtually all its content is at least that
old. However, the passage of the intervening years has helped clarify what the most
important results and techniques are. For example, CW complexes have proved over
time to be the most natural class of spaces for Algebraic Topology, so they are em-
phasized here much more than in the books of an earlier generation. This emphasis
also illustrates the book’s general slant towards geometric, rather than algebraic, as-
pects of the subject. The geometry of Algebraic Topology is so pretty, it would seem
a pity to slight it and to miss all the intuition that it provides. At deeper levels, alge-
bra becomes increasingly important, so for the sake of balance it seems only fair to
emphasize geometry at the beginning.
Let us say something about the organization of the book. At the elementary level,
Algebraic Topology divides naturally into two channels, with the broad topic of Ho-
motopy on the one side and Homology on the other. We have divided this material
into four chapters, roughly according to increasing sophistication, with Homotopy
split between Chapters 1 and 4, and Homology and its mirror variant Cohomology
in Chapters 2 and 3. These four chapters do not have to be read in this order, how-
ever. One could begin with Homology and perhaps continue on with Cohomology
before turning to Homotopy. In the other direction, one could postpone Homology
and Cohomology until after parts of Chapter 4. However, we have not pushed this
latter approach to its natural limit, in which Homology and Cohomology arise just as
branches of Homotopy Theory. Appealing as this approach is from a strictly logical
point of view, it places more demands on the reader, and since readability is one of
our ﬁrst priorities, we have delayed introducing this unifying viewpoint until later in
the book.
There is also a preliminary Chapter 0 introducing some of the basic geometric
concepts and constructions that play a central role in both the homological and ho-
motopical sides of the subject.
Each of the four main chapters concludes with a selection of Additional Topics
that the reader can sample at will, independent of the basic core of the book contained
in the earlier parts of the chapters.
Many of these extra topics are in fact rather

important in the overall scheme of Algebraic Topology, though they might not ﬁt into
the time constraints of a ﬁrst course. Altogether, these Additional Topics amount
to nearly half the book, and we have included them both to make the book more
comprehensive and to give the reader who takes the time to delve into them a more
substantial sample of the true richness and beauty of the subject.
Not included in this book is the important but somewhat more sophisticated
topic of spectral sequences. It was very tempting to include something about this
marvelous tool here, but spectral sequences are such a big topic that it seemed best
to start with them afresh in a new volume. This is tentatively titled ‘Spectral Sequences
in Algebraic Topology’ and referred to herein as [SSAT]. There is also a third book in
progress, on vector bundles, characteristic classes, and K–theory, which will be largely
independent of [SSAT] and also of much of the present book. This is referred to as
[VBKT], its provisional title being ‘Vector Bundles and K–Theory.’
In terms of prerequisites, the present book assumes the reader has some famil-
iarity with the content of the standard undergraduate courses in algebra and point-set
topology. One topic that is not always a part of a ﬁrst point-set topology course but
which is quite important for Algebraic Topology is quotient spaces, or identiﬁcation
spaces as they are sometimes called. Good sources for this are the textbooks by Arm-
strong and J¨anich listed in the Bibliography.
A book such as this one, whose aim is to present classical material from a fairly
classical viewpoint, is not the place to indulge in wild innovation. Nevertheless there is
one new feature of the exposition that may be worth commenting upon, even though
in the book as a whole it plays a relatively minor role. This is a modest extension
of the classical notion of simplicial complexes, which we call ∆complexes. These
have made brief appearances in the literature previously, without a standard name
emerging. The idea is to weaken the condition that each simplex be embedded, to
require only that the interiors of simplices are embedded. (In addition, an ordering
of the vertices of each simplex is also part of the structure of a ∆complex.)
For
example, if one takes the standard picture of the torus as a square with opposite
edges identiﬁed and divides the square into two triangles by cutting along a diagonal,
then the result is a ∆complex structure on the torus having 2 triangles, 3 edges, and
1 vertex. By contrast, it is known that a simplicial complex structure on the torus
must have at least 14 triangles, 21 edges, and 7 vertices. So ∆complexes provide
a signiﬁcant improvement in efﬁciency, which is nice from a pedagogical viewpoint
since it cuts down on tedious calculations in examples. A more fundamental reason
for considering ∆complexes is that they just seem to be very natural objects from
the viewpoint of Algebraic Topology. They are the natural domain of deﬁnition for
simplicial homology, and a number of standard constructions produce ∆complexes
rather than simplicial complexes, for instance the singular complex of a space, or the
classifying space of a discrete group or category.

It is the author’s intention to keep this book available online permanently, as well
as publish it in the traditional manner for those who want the convenience of a bound
copy. With the electronic version it will be possible to continue making revisions and
additions, so comments and suggestions from readers will always be welcome. The
web address is:
http://www.math.cornell.edu/˜hatcher
One can also ﬁnd here the parts of the other two books that are currently available.

Standard Notations
Rn : n dimensional Euclidean space, with real coordinates
Cn : complex n space
I = [0, 1]: the unit interval
Sn : the unit sphere in Rn+1 , all vectors of length 1
Dn : the unit disk or ball in Rn , all vectors of length ≤1
∂Dn = Sn−1 : the boundary of the n disk
11: the identity function from a set to itself
⨿: disjoint union
≈: isomorphism
Zn : the integers modn
A ⊂B or B ⊃A: set-theoretic containment, not necessarily proper

The aim of this short preliminary chapter is to introduce a few of the most com-
mon geometric concepts and constructions in algebraic topology. The exposition is
somewhat informal, with no theorems or proofs until the last couple pages, and it
should be read in this informal spirit, skipping bits here and there. In fact, this whole
chapter could be skipped now, to be referred back to later for basic deﬁnitions.
To avoid overusing the word ‘continuous’ we adopt the convention that maps be-
tween spaces are always assumed to be continuous unless otherwise stated.
Homotopy and Homotopy Type
One of the main ideas of algebraic topology is to consider two spaces to be equiv-
alent if they have ‘the same shape’ in a sense that is much broader than homeo-
morphism. To take an everyday example, the letters of the alphabet can be written
either as unions of ﬁnitely many straight and curved line segments, or in thickened
forms that are compact subsurfaces of the plane bounded by simple closed curves.
In each case the thin letter is a subspace of the thick letter, and we can continuously
shrink the thick letter to the thin one. A nice way to do this is to decompose a thick
letter, call it X, into line segments connecting each point on the outer boundary of X
to a unique point of the thin subletter X, as indicated in the ﬁgure. Then we can shrink

2
Chapter 0.
Some Underlying Geometric Notions
X to X by sliding each point of X −X into X along the line segment that contains it.
Points that are already in X do not move.
We can think of this shrinking process as taking place during a time interval
0 ≤t ≤1, and then it deﬁnes a family of functions ft : X→X parametrized by t ∈I =
[0, 1], where ft(x) is the point to which a given point x ∈X has moved at time t .
Naturally we would like ft(x) to depend continuously on both t and x , and this will
be true if we have each x ∈X −X move along its line segment at constant speed so
as to reach its image point in X at time t = 1, while points x ∈X are stationary, as
remarked earlier.
These examples lead to the following general deﬁnition. A deformation retrac-
tion of a space X onto a subspace A is a family of maps ft : X→X , t ∈I , such
that f0 = 11 (the identity map), f1(X) = A, and ft ||A = 11 for all t . The family ft
should be continuous in the sense that the associated map X×I→X , (x, t), ft(x),
is continuous.
It is easy to produce many more examples similar to the letter examples, with the
deformation retraction ft obtained by sliding along line segments. The ﬁrst ﬁgure
below shows such a deformation retraction of a M¨obius band onto its core circle. The
other three ﬁgures show deformation retractions in which a disk with two smaller
open subdisks removed shrinks to three different subspaces.
In all these examples the structure that gives rise to the deformation retraction
can be described by means of the following deﬁnition. For a map f : X→Y , the map-
ping cylinder Mf is the quotient space of the disjoint union (X×I) ⨿Y obtained by
identifying each (x, 1) ∈X×I with f (x) ∈Y .
X × I
X
Y
Y
Mf
f X
(
)
In the letter examples, the space X is the outer boundary of the thick letter, Y is the
thin letter, and the map f : X→Y sends the outer endpoint of each line segment to
its inner endpoint. A similar description applies to the other examples. Then it is a
general fact that a mapping cylinder Mf deformation retracts to the subspace Y by
sliding each point (x, t) along the segment {x}×I ⊂Mf to the endpoint f (x) ∈Y .
Not all deformation retractions arise in this way from mapping cylinders, how-
ever.
For example, the thick X deformation retracts to the thin X, which in turn

Homotopy and Homotopy Type
3
deformation retracts to the point of intersection of its two crossbars. The net result
is a deformation retraction of X onto a point, during which certain pairs of points
follow paths that merge before reaching their ﬁnal destination. Later in this section
we will describe a considerably more complicated example, the so-called ‘house with
two rooms,’ where a deformation retraction to a point can be constructed abstractly,
but seeing the deformation with the naked eye is a real challenge.
A deformation retraction ft : X→X is a special case of the general notion of a
homotopy, which is simply any family of maps ft : X→Y , t ∈I , such that the asso-
ciated map F : X×I→Y given by F(x, t) = ft(x) is continuous. One says that two
maps f0, f1 : X→Y are homotopic if there exists a homotopy ft connecting them,
and one writes f0 ≃f1 .
In these terms, a deformation retraction of X onto a subspace A is a homotopy
from the identity map of X to a retraction of X onto A, a map r : X→X such that
r(X) = A and r ||A = 11. One could equally well regard a retraction as a map X→A
restricting to the identity on the subspace A ⊂X . From a more formal viewpoint a
retraction is a map r : X→X with r 2 = r , since this equation says exactly that r is the
identity on its image. Retractions are the topological analogs of projection operators
in other parts of mathematics.
Not all retractions come from deformation retractions. For example, every space
X retracts onto any point x0 ∈X via the map sending all of X to x0 . But a space that
deformation retracts onto a point must certainly be path-connected, since a deforma-
tion retraction of X to a point x0 gives a path joining each x ∈X to x0 . It is less
trivial to show that there are path-connected spaces that do not deformation retract
onto a point. One would expect this to be the case for the letters ‘with holes,’ A, B,
D, O, P, Q, R. In Chapter 1 we will develop techniques to prove this.
A homotopy ft : X→X that gives a deformation retraction of X onto a subspace
A has the property that ft ||A = 11 for all t . In general, a homotopy ft : X→Y whose
restriction to a subspace A ⊂X is independent of t is called a homotopy relative
to A, or more concisely, a homotopy rel A. Thus, a deformation retraction of X onto
A is a homotopy rel A from the identity map of X to a retraction of X onto A.
If a space X deformation retracts onto a subspace A via ft : X→X , then if
r : X→A denotes the resulting retraction and i : A→X the inclusion, we have ri = 11
and ir ≃11, the latter homotopy being given by ft . Generalizing this situation, a
map f : X→Y is called a homotopy equivalence if there is a map g : Y→X such that
fg ≃11 and gf ≃11. The spaces X and Y are said to be homotopy equivalent or to
have the same homotopy type. The notation is X ≃Y . It is an easy exercise to check
that this is an equivalence relation, in contrast with the nonsymmetric notion of de-
formation retraction. For example, the three graphs
are all homotopy
equivalent since they are deformation retracts of the same space, as we saw earlier,
but none of the three is a deformation retract of any other.

4
Chapter 0.
Some Underlying Geometric Notions
It is true in general that two spaces X and Y are homotopy equivalent if and only
if there exists a third space Z containing both X and Y as deformation retracts. For
the less trivial implication one can in fact take Z to be the mapping cylinder Mf of
any homotopy equivalence f : X→Y . We observed previously that Mf deformation
retracts to Y , so what needs to be proved is that Mf also deformation retracts to its
other end X if f is a homotopy equivalence. This is shown in Corollary 0.21 near the
end of this chapter.
A space having the homotopy type of a point is called contractible. This amounts
to requiring that the identity map of the space be nullhomotopic, that is, homotopic
to a constant map. In general, this is slightly weaker than saying the space deforma-
tion retracts to a point; see the exercises at the end of the chapter for an example
distinguishing these two notions.
Let us describe now an example of a 2 dimensional subspace of R3 , known as
the house with two rooms, which is contractible but not in any obvious way.
R
To build this space, start with a box divided into two chambers by a horizontal rect-
angle R, where by a ‘rectangle’ we mean not just the four edges of a rectangle but
also its interior. Access to the two chambers from outside the box is provided by two
vertical tunnels. The upper tunnel is made by punching out a square from the top
of the box and another square directly below it from R, then inserting four vertical
rectangles, the walls of the tunnel. This tunnel allows entry to the lower chamber
from outside the box. The lower tunnel is formed in similar fashion, providing entry
to the upper chamber. Finally, two vertical rectangles are inserted to form ‘support
walls’ for the two tunnels. The resulting space X thus consists of three horizontal
pieces homeomorphic to annuli S1×I , plus all the vertical rectangles that form the
walls of the two chambers: the exterior walls, the walls of the tunnels, and the two
support walls.
To see that X is contractible, consider a closed ε neighborhood N(X) of X .
This clearly deformation retracts onto X if ε is sufﬁciently small.
In fact, N(X)
is the mapping cylinder of a map from the boundary surface of N(X) to X . Less
obvious is the fact that N(X) is homeomorphic to D3 , the unit ball in R3 . To see
this, imagine forming N(X) from a ball of clay by pushing a ﬁnger into the ball to

Cell Complexes
5
create the upper tunnel, then gradually hollowing out the lower chamber, and similarly
pushing a ﬁnger in to create the lower tunnel and hollowing out the upper chamber.
Mathematically, this process gives a family of embeddings ht : D3→R3 starting with
the usual inclusion D3 > R3 and ending with a homeomorphism onto N(X).
Thus we have X ≃N(X) = D3 ≃point , so X is contractible since homotopy
equivalence is an equivalence relation.
In fact, X deformation retracts to a point. For if ft is a deformation retraction
of the ball N(X) to a point x0 ∈X and if r : N(X)→X is a retraction, for example
the end result of a deformation retraction of N(X) to X , then the restriction of the
composition rft to X is a deformation retraction of X to x0 . However, it is not
easy to see exactly what this deformation retraction looks like! A slightly easier test
of geometric visualization is to ﬁnd a nullhomotopy in X of the loop formed by a
horizontal cross section of one of the tunnels.
We leave this as a puzzle for the
reader.
Cell Complexes
A familiar way of constructing the torus S1×S1 is by identifying opposite sides
of a square. More generally, an orientable surface Mg of genus g can be constructed
from a 4g sided polygon by identifying pairs of edges, as shown in the ﬁgure for the
cases g = 1, 2, 3.
a
b
a
a
b
b
b
b
b
b
c
a
a
a
d
a
c
c
c
c
b
d
d
d
d
e
e
f
f
a
e
f
d
c
b
a
The 4g edges of the polygon become a union of 2g circles in the surface, all inter-
secting in a single point. One can think of the interior of the polygon as an open
disk, or 2 cell, attached to the union of these circles. One can also regard the union
of the circles as being obtained from a point, their common point of intersection, by

6
Chapter 0.
Some Underlying Geometric Notions
attaching 2g open arcs, or 1 cells. Thus the surface can be built up in stages: Start
with a point, attach 1 cells to this point, then attach a 2 cell.
A natural generalization of this is to construct a space by the following procedure:
(1) Start with a discrete set X0 , whose points are regarded as 0 cells.
(2) Inductively, form the n skeleton Xn from Xn−1 by attaching n cells en
α via
maps ϕα : Sn−1→Xn−1 . That is, Xn is the quotient space of the disjoint union
Xn−1`
α Dn
α of Xn−1 with a collection of n disks Dn
α under the identiﬁcations
x ∼ϕα(x) for x ∈∂Dn
α . Thus as a set, Xn = Xn−1`
α en
α where each en
α is an
open n disk.
(3) One can either stop this inductive process at a ﬁnite stage, setting X = Xn for
some n < ∞, or one can continue indeﬁnitely, setting X =
S
n Xn . In the latter
case X is given the weak topology: A set A ⊂X is open (or closed) iff A ∩Xn is
open (or closed) in Xn for each n.
A space X constructed in this way is called a cell complex, or more classically, a
CW complex. The explanation of the letters ‘CW’ is given in the Appendix, where a
number of basic topological properties of cell complexes are proved. The reader who
wonders about various point-set topological questions that lurk in the background of
the following discussion should consult the Appendix for details.
Example 0.1. A 1 dimensional cell complex X = X1 is what is called a graph in
algebraic topology. It consists of vertices (the 0 cells) to which edges (the 1 cells) are
attached. The two ends of an edge can be attached to the same vertex.
Example 0.2.
The house with two rooms, pictured earlier, has a visually obvious
2 dimensional cell complex structure. The 0 cells are the vertices where three or more
of the depicted edges meet, and the 1 cells are the interiors of the edges connecting
these vertices. This gives the 1 skeleton X1 , and the 2 cells are the components of
the remainder of the space, X −X1 . If one counts up, one ﬁnds there are 29 0 cells,
51 1 cells, and 23 2 cells, with the alternating sum 29 −51 + 23 equal to 1. This is
the Euler characteristic, which for a cell complex with ﬁnitely many cells is deﬁned
to be the number of even-dimensional cells minus the number of odd-dimensional
cells. As we shall show in Theorem 2.44, the Euler characteristic of a cell complex
depends only on its homotopy type, so the fact that the house with two rooms has the
homotopy type of a point implies that its Euler characteristic must be 1, no matter
how it is represented as a cell complex.
Example 0.3. The sphere Sn has the structure of a cell complex with just two cells, e0
and en , the n cell being attached by the constant map Sn−1→e0 . This is equivalent
to regarding Sn as the quotient space Dn/∂Dn .
Example 0.4. Real projective n space RPn is deﬁned to be the space of all lines
through the origin in Rn+1 . Each such line is determined by a nonzero vector in Rn+1 ,

Cell Complexes
7
unique up to scalar multiplication, and RPn is topologized as the quotient space of
Rn+1 −{0} under the equivalence relation v ∼λv for scalars λ ≠0. We can restrict
to vectors of length 1, so RPn is also the quotient space Sn/(v ∼−v), the sphere
with antipodal points identiﬁed. This is equivalent to saying that RPn is the quotient
space of a hemisphere Dn with antipodal points of ∂Dn identiﬁed. Since ∂Dn with
antipodal points identiﬁed is just RPn−1 , we see that RPn is obtained from RPn−1 by
attaching an n cell, with the quotient projection Sn−1→RPn−1 as the attaching map.
It follows by induction on n that RPn has a cell complex structure e0 ∪e1 ∪··· ∪en
with one cell ei in each dimension i ≤n.
Example 0.5. Since RPn is obtained from RPn−1 by attaching an n cell, the inﬁnite
union RP∞=
S
n RPn becomes a cell complex with one cell in each dimension. We
can view RP∞as the space of lines through the origin in R∞=
S
n Rn .
Example 0.6. Complex projective n space CPn is the space of complex lines through
the origin in Cn+1 , that is, 1 dimensional vector subspaces of Cn+1 . As in the case
of RPn , each line is determined by a nonzero vector in Cn+1 , unique up to scalar
multiplication, and CPn is topologized as the quotient space of Cn+1 −{0} under the
equivalence relation v ∼λv for λ ≠0. Equivalently, this is the quotient of the unit
sphere S2n+1 ⊂Cn+1 with v ∼λv for |λ| = 1. It is also possible to obtain CPn as a
quotient space of the disk D2n under the identiﬁcations v ∼λv for v ∈∂D2n , in the
following way. The vectors in S2n+1 ⊂Cn+1 with last coordinate real and nonnegative
are precisely the vectors of the form (w,
p
1 −|w|2 ) ∈Cn×C with |w| ≤1. Such
vectors form the graph of the function w ,
p
1 −|w|2 . This is a disk D2n
+
bounded
by the sphere S2n−1 ⊂S2n+1 consisting of vectors (w, 0) ∈Cn×C with |w| = 1. Each
vector in S2n+1 is equivalent under the identiﬁcations v ∼λv to a vector in D2n
+ , and
the latter vector is unique if its last coordinate is nonzero. If the last coordinate is
zero, we have just the identiﬁcations v ∼λv for v ∈S2n−1 .
From this description of CPn as the quotient of D2n
+
under the identiﬁcations
v ∼λv for v ∈S2n−1 it follows that CPn is obtained from CPn−1 by attaching a
cell e2n via the quotient map S2n−1→CPn−1 . So by induction on n we obtain a cell
structure CPn = e0 ∪e2 ∪··· ∪e2n with cells only in even dimensions. Similarly, CP∞
has a cell structure with one cell in each even dimension.
Each cell en
α in a cell complex X has a characteristic map Φα : Dn
α→X that
extends the attaching map ϕα and is a homeomorphism from the interior of Dn
α
onto en
α . Namely, we can take Φα to be the composition Dn
α>Xn−1`
α Dn
α→Xn>X
where the middle map is the quotient map deﬁning Xn . For example, in the canonical
cell structure on Sn described in Example 0.3, a characteristic map for the n cell is
the quotient map Dn→Sn collapsing ∂Dn to a point. For RPn a characteristic map
for the cell ei is the quotient map Di→RPi ⊂RPn identifying antipodal points of
∂Di , and similarly for CPn .

8
Chapter 0.
Some Underlying Geometric Notions
A subcomplex of a cell complex X is a closed subspace A ⊂X that is a union
of cells of X . Since A is closed, the characteristic map of each cell in A has image
contained in A, and in particular the image of the attaching map of each cell in A is
contained in A, so A is a cell complex in its own right. A pair (X, A) consisting of a
cell complex X and a subcomplex A we call a CW pair.
For example, each skeleton Xn of a cell complex X is a subcomplex. Particular
cases of this are the subcomplexes RPk ⊂RPn and CPk ⊂CPn for k ≤n. These are
in fact the only subcomplexes of RPn and CPn .
There are natural inclusions S0 ⊂S1 ⊂··· ⊂Sn , but these subspheres are not
subcomplexes of Sn in its usual cell structure with just two cells. However, we can give
Sn a different cell structure in which each of the subspheres Sk is a subcomplex, by
regarding each Sk as being obtained inductively from the equatorial Sk−1 by attaching
two k cells, the components of Sk−Sk−1 . The inﬁnite-dimensional sphere S∞=
S
n Sn
then becomes a cell complex as well. Note that the two-to-one quotient map S∞→RP∞
that identiﬁes antipodal points of S∞identiﬁes the two n cells of S∞to the single
n cell of RP∞.
In the examples of cell complexes given so far, the closure of each cell is a sub-
complex, and more generally the closure of any collection of cells is a subcomplex.
Most naturally arising cell structures have this property, but it need not hold in gen-
eral. For example, if we start with S1 with its minimal cell structure and attach to this
a 2 cell by a map S1→S1 whose image is a nontrivial subarc of S1 , then the closure
of the 2 cell is not a subcomplex since it contains only a part of the 1 cell.
Operations on Spaces
Cell complexes have a very nice mixture of rigidity and ﬂexibility, with enough
rigidity to allow many arguments to proceed in a combinatorial cell-by-cell fashion,
and enough ﬂexibility to allow many natural constructions to be performed on them.
Here are some of those constructions.
Products. If X and Y are cell complexes, then X×Y has the structure of a cell complex
with cells the products em
α ×en
β where em
α ranges over the cells of X and en
β ranges
over the cells of Y . For example, the cell structure on the torus S1×S1 described at
the beginning of this section is obtained in this way from the standard cell structure
on S1 . In the general case there is one small complication, however: The topology on
X×Y as a cell complex is sometimes slightly weaker than the product topology, with
more open sets than the product topology has, though the two topologies coincide if
either X or Y has only ﬁnitely many cells, or if both X and Y have countably many
cells. This is explained in the Appendix. In practice this subtle point of point-set
topology rarely causes problems.

Operations on Spaces
9
Quotients. If (X, A) is a CW pair consisting of a cell complex X and a subcomplex A,
then the quotient space X/A inherits a natural cell complex structure from X . The
cells of X/A are the cells of X−A plus one new 0 cell, the image of A in X/A. For a cell
en
α of X −A attached by ϕα : Sn−1→Xn−1 , the attaching map for the corresponding
cell in X/A is the composition Sn−1→Xn−1→Xn−1/An−1 .
For example, if we give Sn−1 any cell structure and build Dn from Sn−1 by attach-
ing an n cell, then the quotient Dn/Sn−1 is Sn with its usual cell structure. As another
example, take X to be a closed orientable surface with the cell structure described at
the beginning of this section, with a single 2 cell, and let A be the complement of this
2 cell, the 1 skeleton of X . Then X/A has a cell structure consisting of a 0 cell with
a 2 cell attached, and there is only one way to attach a cell to a 0 cell, by the constant
map, so X/A is S2 .
Suspension. For a space X , the suspension SX is the quotient of X×I obtained
by collapsing X×{0} to one point and X×{1} to another point.
The motivating
example is X = Sn , when SX = Sn+1 with the two ‘suspension points’ at
the north and south poles of Sn+1 , the points (0, ··· , 0, ±1). One can
regard SX as a double cone on X , the union of two copies of the cone
CX = (X×I)/(X×{0}). If X is a CW complex, so are SX and CX
as quotients of X×I with its product cell structure, I being given the
standard cell structure of two 0 cells joined by a 1 cell.
Suspension becomes increasingly important the farther one goes into algebraic
topology, though why this should be so is certainly not evident in advance.
One
especially useful property of suspension is that not only spaces but also maps can be
suspended. Namely, a map f : X→Y suspends to Sf : SX→SY , the quotient map of
f ×11 : X×I→Y ×I .
Join. The cone CX is the union of all line segments joining points of X to an external
vertex, and similarly the suspension SX is the union of all line segments joining points
of X to two external vertices. More generally, given X and a second space Y , one can
deﬁne the space of all lines segments joining points in X to points in Y . This is
the join X ∗Y , the quotient space of X×Y ×I under the identiﬁcations (x, y1, 0) ∼
(x, y2, 0) and (x1, y, 1) ∼(x2, y, 1). Thus we are collapsing the subspace X×Y ×{0}
to X and X×Y ×{1} to Y . For example,
if X and Y are both closed intervals, then
we are collapsing two opposite faces of a
cube onto line segments so that it becomes
a tetrahedron.
In the general case, X ∗Y
X
I
Y
contains copies of X and Y at its two ‘ends,’ and every other point (x, y, t) in X∗Y is
on a unique line segment joining the point x ∈X ⊂X ∗Y to the point y ∈Y ⊂X ∗Y ,
the segment obtained by ﬁxing x and y and letting the coordinate t in (x, y, t) vary.

10
Chapter 0.
Some Underlying Geometric Notions
A nice way to write points of X∗Y is as formal linear combinations t1x+t2y with
0 ≤ti ≤1 and t1 + t2 = 1, subject to the rules 0x + 1y = y and 1x + 0y = x which
correspond exactly to the identiﬁcations that deﬁne X ∗Y . In much the same way, an
iterated join X1 ∗···∗Xn can be regarded as the space of formal linear combinations
t1x1 + ··· + tnxn with 0 ≤ti ≤1 and t1 + ··· + tn = 1, with the convention that
terms 0ti can be omitted. This viewpoint makes it easy to see that the join operation
is associative. A very special case that plays a central role in algebraic topology is
when each Xi is just a point. For example, the join of two points is a line segment, the
join of three points is a triangle, and the join of four points is a tetrahedron. The join
of n points is a convex polyhedron of dimension n −1 called a simplex. Concretely,
if the n points are the n standard basis vectors for Rn , then their join is the space
∆n−1 = { (t1, ··· , tn) ∈Rn || t1 + ··· + tn = 1 and ti ≥0 }.
Another interesting example is when each Xi is S0 , two points. If we take the two
points of Xi to be the two unit vectors along the ith coordinate axis in Rn , then the
join X1 ∗···∗Xn is the union of 2n copies of the simplex ∆n−1 , and radial projection
from the origin gives a homeomorphism between X1 ∗··· ∗Xn and Sn−1 .
If X and Y are CW complexes, then there is a natural CW structure on X ∗Y
having the subspaces X and Y as subcomplexes, with the remaining cells being the
product cells of X×Y ×(0, 1). As usual with products, the CW topology on X ∗Y may
be weaker than the quotient of the product topology on X×Y ×I .
Wedge Sum. This is a rather trivial but still quite useful operation. Given spaces X and
Y with chosen points x0 ∈X and y0 ∈Y , then the wedge sum X ∨Y is the quotient
of the disjoint union X ⨿Y obtained by identifying x0 and y0 to a single point. For
example, S1 ∨S1 is homeomorphic to the ﬁgure ‘8,’ two circles touching at a point.
More generally one could form the wedge sum
W
α Xα of an arbitrary collection of
spaces Xα by starting with the disjoint union
`
α Xα and identifying points xα ∈Xα
to a single point. In case the spaces Xα are cell complexes and the points xα are
0 cells, then
W
α Xα is a cell complex since it is obtained from the cell complex
`
α Xα
by collapsing a subcomplex to a point.
For any cell complex X , the quotient Xn/Xn−1 is a wedge sum of n spheres
W
α Sn
α ,
with one sphere for each n cell of X .
Smash Product. Like suspension, this is another construction whose importance be-
comes evident only later. Inside a product space X×Y there are copies of X and Y ,
namely X×{y0} and {x0}×Y for points x0 ∈X and y0 ∈Y . These two copies of X
and Y in X×Y intersect only at the point (x0, y0), so their union can be identiﬁed
with the wedge sum X ∨Y . The smash product X ∧Y is then deﬁned to be the quo-
tient X×Y/X ∨Y . One can think of X ∧Y as a reduced version of X×Y obtained
by collapsing away the parts that are not genuinely a product, the separate factors X
and Y .

Two Criteria for Homotopy Equivalence
11
The smash product X ∧Y is a cell complex if X and Y are cell complexes with x0
and y0 0 cells, assuming that we give X×Y the cell-complex topology rather than the
product topology in cases when these two topologies differ. For example, Sm∧Sn has
a cell structure with just two cells, of dimensions 0 and m+n, hence Sm∧Sn = Sm+n .
In particular, when m = n = 1 we see that collapsing longitude and meridian circles
of a torus to a point produces a 2 sphere.
Two Criteria for Homotopy Equivalence
Earlier in this chapter the main tool we used for constructing homotopy equiva-
lences was the fact that a mapping cylinder deformation retracts onto its ‘target’ end.
By repeated application of this fact one can often produce homotopy equivalences
between rather different-looking spaces. However, this process can be a bit cumber-
some in practice, so it is useful to have other techniques available as well. Here is one
that can be quite helpful:
(1)
If (X, A) is a CW pair consisting of a CW complex X and a contractible subcom-
plex A, then the quotient map X→X/A is a homotopy equivalence.
A proof of this will be given later in Proposition 0.17, but let us look at some examples
now.
Example 0.7: Graphs.
The three graphs
are homotopy equivalent
since each is a deformation retract of a disk with two holes, but we can also deduce
this from statement (1) above since collapsing the middle edge of the ﬁrst and third
graphs produces the second graph.
More generally, suppose X is any graph with ﬁnitely many vertices and edges. If
the two endpoints of any edge of X are distinct, we can collapse this edge to a point,
producing a homotopy equivalent graph with one fewer edge. This simpliﬁcation can
be repeated until all edges of X are loops, hence each component of X is either an
isolated vertex or a wedge sum of circles.
This raises the question of whether two such graphs, having only one vertex in
each component, can be homotopy equivalent if they are not in fact just isomorphic
graphs. Exercise 12 at the end of the chapter reduces the question to the case of
connected graphs. Then the task is to prove that a wedge sum
W
m S1 of m circles is not
homotopy equivalent to
W
n S1 if m ≠n. This sort of thing is hard to do directly. What
one would like is some sort of algebraic object associated to spaces, depending only
on their homotopy type, and taking different values for
W
m S1 and
W
n S1 if m ≠n. In
fact the Euler characteristic does this since
W
m S1 has Euler characteristic 1−m. But it
is a rather nontrivial theorem that the Euler characteristic of a space depends only on
its homotopy type. A different algebraic invariant that works equally well for graphs,
and whose rigorous development requires less effort than the Euler characteristic, is
the fundamental group of a space, the subject of Chapter 1.

12
Chapter 0.
Some Underlying Geometric Notions
Example 0.8. Consider the space X obtained from S2 by attaching the two ends of
an arc A to two distinct points on the sphere, say the north and south poles. Let B
be an arc in S2 joining the two points where A attaches. Then X can be given a CW
complex structure with the two endpoints of A and B as 0 cells, the interiors of A
and B as 1 cells, and the rest of S2 as a 2 cell. Since A and B are contractible, X/A
and X/B are homotopy equivalent to X . The space X/A is the quotient S2/S0 , the
sphere with two points identiﬁed, and X/B is S1 ∨S2 . Hence S2/S0 and S1 ∨S2 are
homotopy equivalent, which might not have been entirely obvious a priori.
A
B
X
X/
X/
B
A
Example 0.9. Let X be the union of a torus with n meridional disks. To obtain a CW
structure on X , choose a longitudinal circle in X , intersecting each of the meridional
disks in one point. These intersection points are then the 0 cells, the 1 cells are the
rest of the longitudinal circle and the boundary circles of the meridional disks, and
the 2 cells are the remaining regions of the torus and the interiors of the meridional
disks.
X
Y
Z
W 
Collapsing each meridional disk to a point yields a homotopy equivalent space Y
consisting of n 2 spheres, each tangent to its two neighbors, a ‘necklace with n
beads.’ The third space Z in the ﬁgure, a strand of n beads with a string joining
its two ends, collapses to Y by collapsing the string to a point, so this collapse is a
homotopy equivalence. Finally, by collapsing the arc in Z formed by the front halves
of the equators of the n beads, we obtain the fourth space W , a wedge sum of S1
with n 2 spheres. (One can see why a wedge sum is sometimes called a ‘bouquet’ in
the older literature.)
Example 0.10: Reduced Suspension. Let X be a CW complex and x0 ∈X a 0 cell.
Inside the suspension SX we have the line segment {x0}×I , and collapsing this to a
point yields a space ΣX homotopy equivalent to SX , called the reduced suspension
of X . For example, if we take X to be S1 ∨S1 with x0 the intersection point of the
two circles, then the ordinary suspension SX is the union of two spheres intersecting
along the arc {x0}×I , so the reduced suspension ΣX is S2 ∨S2 , a slightly simpler

Two Criteria for Homotopy Equivalence
13
space. More generally we have Σ(X ∨Y) = ΣX ∨ΣY for arbitrary CW complexes X
and Y . Another way in which the reduced suspension ΣX is slightly simpler than SX
is in its CW structure. In SX there are two 0 cells (the two suspension points) and an
(n + 1) cell en×(0, 1) for each n cell en of X , whereas in ΣX there is a single 0 cell
and an (n + 1) cell for each n cell of X other than the 0 cell x0 .
The reduced suspension ΣX is actually the same as the smash product X ∧S1
since both spaces are the quotient of X×I with X×∂I ∪{x0}×I collapsed to a point.
Another common way to change a space without changing its homotopy type in-
volves the idea of continuously varying how its parts are attached together. A general
deﬁnition of ‘attaching one space to another’ that includes the case of attaching cells
is the following. We start with a space X0 and another space X1 that we wish to
attach to X0 by identifying the points in a subspace A ⊂X1 with points of X0 . The
data needed to do this is a map f : A→X0 , for then we can form a quotient space
of X0 ⨿X1 by identifying each point a ∈A with its image f (a) ∈X0 . Let us de-
note this quotient space by X0 ⊔f X1 , the space X0 with X1 attached along A via f .
When (X1, A) = (Dn, Sn−1) we have the case of attaching an n cell to X0 via a map
f : Sn−1→X0 .
Mapping cylinders are examples of this construction, since the mapping cylinder
Mf of a map f : X→Y is the space obtained from Y by attaching X×I along X×{1}
via f . Closely related to the mapping cylinder Mf is the mapping cone Cf = Y ⊔f CX
where CX is the cone (X×I)/(X×{0}) and we attach this to Y along
X×{1} via the identiﬁcations (x, 1) ∼f (x). For example, when X
is a sphere Sn−1 the mapping cone Cf is the space obtained from
Y by attaching an n cell via f : Sn−1→Y . A mapping cone Cf can
also be viewed as the quotient Mf /X of the mapping cylinder Mf with the subspace
X = X×{0} collapsed to a point.
CX
Y
Here is our second criterion for homotopy equivalence:
(2)
If (X1, A) is a CW pair and we have two attaching maps f , g : A→X0 that are
homotopic, then X0 ⊔f X1 ≃X0 ⊔g X1 .
Again let us defer the proof and look at some examples.
Example 0.11. Let us rederive the result in Example 0.8 that a sphere with two points
A
S
1
S
2
identiﬁed is homotopy equivalent to S1 ∨S2 . The sphere with
two points identiﬁed can be obtained by attaching S2 to S1
by a map that wraps a closed arc A in S2 around S1 , as
shown in the ﬁgure. Since A is contractible, this attaching
map is homotopic to a constant map, and attaching S2 to S1
via a constant map of A yields S1 ∨S2 . The result then follows from (2) since (S2, A)
is a CW pair, S2 being obtained from A by attaching a 2 cell.

14
Chapter 0.
Some Underlying Geometric Notions
Example 0.12.
In similar fashion we can see that the necklace in Example 0.9 is
homotopy equivalent to the wedge sum of a circle with n 2 spheres. The necklace
can be obtained from a circle by attaching n 2 spheres along arcs, so the necklace
is homotopy equivalent to the space obtained by attaching n 2 spheres to a circle
at points. Then we can slide these attaching points around the circle until they all
coincide, producing the wedge sum.
Example 0.13. Here is an application of the earlier fact that collapsing a contractible
subcomplex is a homotopy equivalence: If (X, A) is a CW pair, consisting of a cell
complex X and a subcomplex A, then X/A ≃X ∪CA, the mapping cone of the
inclusion A>X . For we have X/A = (X∪CA)/CA ≃X∪CA since CA is a contractible
subcomplex of X ∪CA.
Example 0.14. If (X, A) is a CW pair and A is contractible in X , i.e., the inclusion
A>X is homotopic to a constant map, then X/A ≃X ∨SA. Namely, by the previous
example we have X/A ≃X ∪CA, and then since A is contractible in X , the mapping
cone X ∪CA of the inclusion A> X is homotopy equivalent to the mapping cone of
a constant map, which is X ∨SA. For example, Sn/Si ≃Sn ∨Si+1 for i < n, since
Si is contractible in Sn if i < n. In particular this gives S2/S0 ≃S2 ∨S1 , which is
Example 0.8 again.
The Homotopy Extension Property
In this ﬁnal section of the chapter we shall actually prove a few things, in particular
the two criteria for homotopy equivalence described above and the fact that any two
homotopy equivalent spaces can be embedded as deformation retracts of the same
space.
The proofs depend upon a technical property that arises in many other contexts
as well. Consider the following problem. Suppose one is given a map f0 : X→Y , and
on a subspace A ⊂X one is also given a homotopy ft : A→Y of f0 ||A that one would
like to extend to a homotopy ft : X→Y of the given f0 . If the pair (X, A) is such that
this extension problem can always be solved, one says that (X, A) has the homotopy
extension property. Thus (X, A) has the homotopy extension property if every map
X×{0} ∪A×I→Y can be extended to a map X×I→Y .
In particular, the homotopy extension property for (X, A) implies that the iden-
tity map X×{0} ∪A×I→X×{0} ∪A×I extends to a map X×I→X×{0} ∪A×I , so
X×{0} ∪A×I is a retract of X×I . The converse is also true: If there is a retraction
X×I→X×{0} ∪A×I , then by composing with this retraction we can extend every
map X×{0} ∪A×I→Y to a map X×I→Y . Thus the homotopy extension property
for (X, A) is equivalent to X×{0} ∪A×I being a retract of X×I . This implies for ex-
ample that if (X, A) has the homotopy extension property, then so does (X×Z, A×Z)
for any space Z , a fact that would not be so easy to prove directly from the deﬁnition.

The Homotopy Extension Property
15
If (X, A) has the homotopy extension property, then A must be a closed subspace
of X , at least when X is Hausdorff. For if r : X×I→X×I is a retraction onto the
subspace X×{0} ∪A×I , then the image of r is the set of points z ∈X×I with
r(z) = z, a closed set if X is Hausdorff, so X×{0}∪A×I is closed in X×I and hence
A is closed in X .
A simple example of a pair (X, A) with A closed for which the homotopy exten-
sion property fails is the pair (I, A) where A = {0, 1,1/2,1/3,1/4, ···}. It is not hard to
show that there is no continuous retraction I×I→I×{0} ∪A×I . The breakdown of
homotopy extension here can be attributed to the bad structure of (X, A) near 0.
With nicer local structure the homotopy extension property does hold, as the next
example shows.
Example 0.15. A pair (X, A) has the homotopy extension property if A has a map-
ping cylinder neighborhood, in the following sense: There is a map f : Z→A and a
homeomorphism h from Mf onto a closed neighborhood N of A in X , with h||A = 11
and with h(Mf −Z) an open neighborhood of A. Mapping cylinder neighborhoods
like this occur more frequently than one might think.
For example, the thick let-
ters discussed at the beginning of the chapter provide such neighborhoods of the
thin letters, regarded as subspaces of the plane. To verify the homotopy extension
property, notice ﬁrst that I×I retracts onto I×{0} ∪∂I×I , hence Z×I×I retracts
onto Z×I×{0} ∪Z×∂I×I , and this retraction induces a retraction of Mf ×I onto
Mf ×{0}∪(Z ⨿A)×I . Thus (Mf , Z ⨿A) has the homotopy extension property, which
implies that (X, A) does also since given a map X→Y and a homotopy of its restric-
tion to A, we can take the constant homotopy on the closure of X −N and then apply
the homotopy extension property for (Mf , Z ⨿A) to extend the homotopy over N .
Most applications of the homotopy extension property in this book will stem from
the following general result:
Proposition 0.16. If (X, A) is a CW pair, then X×{0}∪A×I is a deformation retract
of X×I , hence (X, A) has the homotopy extension property.
Proof: There is a retraction r : Dn×I→Dn×{0} ∪∂Dn×I , for example
the radial projection from the point (0, 2) ∈Dn×R. Then setting
rt = tr + (1 −t)11 gives a deformation retraction of Dn×I onto
Dn×{0} ∪∂Dn×I .
This deformation retraction gives rise to a
deformation retraction of Xn×I onto Xn×{0} ∪(Xn−1 ∪An)×I
since Xn×I is obtained from Xn×{0} ∪(Xn−1 ∪An)×I by attach-
ing copies of Dn×I along Dn×{0} ∪∂Dn×I . If we perform the deformation retrac-
tion of Xn×I onto Xn×{0} ∪(Xn−1 ∪An)×I during the t interval [1/2n+1, 1/2n],
this inﬁnite concatenation of homotopies is a deformation retraction of X×I onto
X×{0} ∪A×I . (There is no problem with continuity of this deformation retraction
at t = 0 since it is continuous on Xn×I , being stationary there during the t interval

16
Chapter 0.
Some Underlying Geometric Notions
[0, 1/2n+1], and CW complexes have the weak topology with respect to their skeleta
so a map is continuous iff its restriction to each skeleton is continuous.)
⊔⊓
Now we can prove the following generalization of the earlier criterion (1) for ho-
motopy equivalence:
Proposition 0.17. If the pair (X, A) satisﬁes the homotopy extension property and
A is contractible, then the quotient map q : X→X/A is a homotopy equivalence.
Proof: Let ft : X→X be a homotopy extending a contraction of A, with f0 = 11. Since
ft(A) ⊂A for all t , the composition qft sends A to a point and hence factors as a
composition X
q-----→X/A
f t-----→X/A. Thus we have qft = f tq in the ﬁrst of the following
two diagrams:
X
X/
X
A
X/A
q
q
ft
ft
X
X/
X
A
X/A
q
g
q
f1
f1
−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−
−
When t = 1 we have f1(A) equal to a point, the point to which A contracts, so f1
induces a map g : X/A→X with gq = f1 . It follows that qg = f 1 since qg(x) =
qgq(x) = qf1(x) = f 1q(x) = f 1(x). The maps g and q are inverse homotopy
equivalences since gq = f1 ≃f0 = 11 via ft and qg = f 1 ≃f 0 = 11 via f t .
⊔⊓
Another application of the homotopy extension property, giving a slightly more
reﬁned version of the criterion (2) for homotopy equivalence, is the following:
Proposition 0.18. If (X1, A) is a CW pair and we have attaching maps f , g : A→X0
that are homotopic, then X0 ⊔f X1 ≃X0 ⊔g X1 rel X0 .
Here the deﬁnition of W ≃Z rel Y for pairs (W, Y) and (Z, Y) is that there are
maps ϕ : W→Z and ψ : Z→W restricting to the identity on Y , such that ψϕ ≃11
and ϕψ ≃11 via homotopies that restrict to the identity on Y at all times.
Proof: If F : A×I→X0 is a homotopy from f to g, consider the space X0 ⊔F (X1×I).
This contains both X0 ⊔f X1 and X0 ⊔g X1 as subspaces. A deformation retraction
of X1×I onto X1×{0}∪A×I as in Proposition 0.16 induces a deformation retraction
of X0 ⊔F (X1×I) onto X0 ⊔f X1 . Similarly X0 ⊔F (X1×I) deformation retracts onto
X0⊔gX1 . Both these deformation retractions restrict to the identity on X0 , so together
they give a homotopy equivalence X0 ⊔f X1 ≃X0 ⊔g X1 rel X0 .
⊔⊓
We ﬁnish this chapter with a technical result whose proof will involve several
applications of the homotopy extension property:

The Homotopy Extension Property
17
Proposition 0.19. Suppose (X, A) and (Y, A) satisfy the homotopy extension prop-
erty, and f : X→Y is a homotopy equivalence with f ||A = 11. Then f is a homotopy
equivalence rel A.
Corollary 0.20. If (X, A) satisﬁes the homotopy extension property and the inclusion
A > X is a homotopy equivalence, then A is a deformation retract of X .
Proof: Apply the proposition to the inclusion A > X .
⊔⊓
Corollary 0.21. A map f : X→Y is a homotopy equivalence iff X is a deformation
retract of the mapping cylinder Mf .
Hence, two spaces X and Y are homotopy
equivalent iff there is a third space containing both X and Y as deformation retracts.
Proof: The inclusion i : X > Mf is homotopic to the composition jf where j is the
inclusion Y > Mf , a homotopy equivalence. It then follows from Exercise 3 at the
end of the chapter that i is a homotopy equivalence iff f is a homotopy equivalence.
This gives the ‘if’ half of the ﬁrst statement of the corollary. For the converse, the pair
(Mf , X) satisﬁes the homotopy extension property by Example 0.15, so the ‘only if’
implication follows from the preceding corollary.
⊔⊓
Proof of 0.19: Let g : Y→X be a homotopy inverse for f , and let ht : X→X be a
homotopy from gf = h0 to 11 = h1 . We will use ht to deform g to a map g1 with
g1 ||A = 11. Since f ||A = 11, we can view ht ||A as a homotopy from g||A to 11. Then
since we assume (X, A) has the homotopy extension property, we can extend this
homotopy to a homotopy gt : Y→X from g = g0 to a map g1 with g1 ||A = 11.
Our next task is to construct a homotopy g1f ≃11 rel A. Since g ≃g1 via gt
we have gf ≃g1f via gtf . We also have gf ≃11 via ht , so since homotopy is an
equivalence relation by Exercise 3 at the end of the Chapter, we have g1f ≃11. An
explicit homotopy that shows this is
kt =
(
g1−2tf ,
0 ≤t ≤1/2
h2t−1,
1/2 ≤t ≤1
Note that the two deﬁnitions agree when t = 1/2 since f ||A = 11 and gt = ht on A.
The homotopy kt ||A starts and ends with the identity, and its second half simply
retraces its ﬁrst half, that is, kt = k1−t on A. In this situation we deﬁne a ‘homotopy
of homotopies’ ktu : A→A by means of the ﬁgure to the right showing the parameter
domain I×I for the pairs (t, u), with the t axis horizontal and the
u axis vertical. On the bottom edge of the square we deﬁne kt0 = kt ||A.
Below the ‘V’ we deﬁne ktu to be independent of u, and above the ‘V’ we
deﬁne ktu to be independent of t . This is unambiguous since kt = k1−t
on A. Since k0 = 11, we have ktu = 11 for (t, u) in the left, right, and top edges of the
square. Since (X, A) has the homotopy extension property, so does (X×I, A×I) by
the initial remarks on the homotopy extension property. Viewing ktu as a homotopy

18
Chapter 0.
Some Underlying Geometric Notions
of kt , we can therefore extend ktu : A→A to ktu : X→X with kt0 = kt : X→X . Now
if we restrict this ktu to the left, top, and right edges of the (t, u) square we get a
homotopy g1f ≃11 rel A.
Since g1 ≃g, we have f g1 ≃f g ≃11, so the preceding argument can be repeated
with the pair f , g replaced by g1, f . The result is a map f1 : X→X with f1 ||A = 11
and f1g1 ≃11 rel A. Hence f1 ≃f1(g1f ) = (f1g1)f ≃f rel A and so f g1 ≃f1g1 ≃
11 rel A. Thus g1 is a homotopy inverse to f rel A.
⊔⊓
Exercises
1. Construct an explicit deformation retraction of the torus with one point deleted
onto a graph consisting of two circles intersecting in a point, namely, longitude and
meridian circles of the torus.
2. Construct an explicit deformation retraction of Rn −{0} onto Sn−1 .
3. (a) Show that the composition of homotopy equivalences X→Y and Y→Z is a
homotopy equivalence X→Z . Deduce that homotopy equivalence is an equivalence
relation.
(b) Show that the relation of homotopy among maps X→Y is an equivalence relation.
(c) Show that a map homotopic to a homotopy equivalence is a homotopy equivalence.
4. A deformation retraction in the weak sense of a space X to a subspace A is a
homotopy ft : X→X such that f0 = 11, f1(X) ⊂A, and ft(A) ⊂A for all t . Show
that if X deformation retracts to A in this weak sense, then the inclusion A > X is
a homotopy equivalence.
5.
Show that if a space X deformation retracts to a point x ∈X , then for each
neighborhood U of x in X there exists a neighborhood V ⊂U of x such that the
inclusion V > U is nullhomotopic.
6. (a) Let X be the subspace of R2 consisting of the horizontal seg-
ment [0, 1]×{0} together with all the vertical segments {r}×[0, 1−r]
for r a rational number in [0, 1]. Show that X deformation retracts
to any point in the segment [0, 1]×{0}, but not to any other point.
[See the preceding problem.]
(b) Let Y be the subspace of R2 that is the union of an inﬁnite number of copies of X
arranged as in the ﬁgure below. Show that Y is contractible but does not deformation
retract onto any point.

Chapter 0.
Some Underlying Geometric Notions
19
(c) Let Z be the zigzag subspace of Y homeomorphic to R indicated by the heavier
line. Show there is a deformation retraction in the weak sense (see Exercise 4) of Y
onto Z , but no true deformation retraction.
7. Fill in the details in the following construction from [Edwards] of a compact space
Y ⊂R3 with the same properties as the space Y in Exercise 6, that is, Y is contractible
but does not deformation retract to any point. To begin, let X be the union of an in-
ﬁnite sequence of cones on the Cantor set arranged end-to-end, as in the ﬁgure. Next,
form the one-point compactiﬁcation of X×R. This
embeds i0.8 n R3 as a closed disk with curved ‘ﬁns’
attached along circular arcs, and with the one-point
compactiﬁcation of X as a cross-sectional slice. Fi-
nally, Y is obtained from this by wrapping one more
cone on the Cantor set around the boundary of the
disk.
X
Y
8. For n > 2, construct an n room analog of the house with two rooms.
9. Show that a retract of a contractible space is contractible.
10. Show that a space X is contractible iff every map f : X→Y , for arbitrary Y , is
nullhomotopic. Similarly, show X is contractible iff every map f : Y→X is nullho-
motopic.
11. Show that f : X→Y is a homotopy equivalence if there exist maps g, h : Y→X
such that f g ≃11 and hf ≃11. More generally, show that f is a homotopy equiva-
lence if f g and hf are homotopy equivalences.
12. Show that a homotopy equivalence f : X→Y induces a bijection between the set
of path-components of X and the set of path-components of Y , and that f restricts
to a homotopy equivalence from each path-component of X to the corresponding
path-component of Y .
13.
Show that any two deformation retractions r 0
t
and r 1
t
of a space X onto a
subspace A can be joined by a continuous family of deformation retractions r s
t ,
0 ≤s ≤1, of X onto A, where continuity means that the map X×I×I→X , (x, s, t),
r s
t (x), is continuous.
14. Given positive integers v , e, and f satisfying v −e + f = 2, construct a cell
structure on S2 having v 0 cells, e 1 cells, and f 2 cells.
15. Enumerate all the subcomplexes of S∞, with the cell structure described in this
section, having two cells in each dimension.
16. Show that S∞is contractible.
17. Construct a 2 dimensional cell complex that contains both an annulus S1×I and
a M¨obius band as deformation retracts.
18. Show that S1 ∗S1 = S3 , and more generally Sm ∗Sn = Sm+n+1 .

20
Chapter 0.
Some Underlying Geometric Notions
19. Show that the space obtained from S2 by attaching n 2 cells along any collection
of n circles in S2 is homotopy equivalent to the wedge sum of n + 1 2 spheres.
20. Show that the subspace X ⊂R3 formed by a Klein bottle in-
tersecting itself in a circle, as shown in the ﬁgure, is homotopy
equivalent to S1 ∨S1 ∨S2 .
21. If X is a connected space that is a union of a ﬁnite number of 2 spheres, any
two of which intersect in at most one point, show that X is homotopy equivalent to a
wedge sum of S1 ’s and S2 ’s.
22. Let X be a ﬁnite graph lying in a half-plane P ⊂R3 and intersecting the edge
of P in a subset of the vertices of X . Describe the homotopy type of the ‘surface of
revolution’ obtained by rotating X about the edge line of P .
23.
Show that a CW complex is contractible if it is the union of two contractible
subcomplexes whose intersection is also contractible.
24. Let X and Y be CW complexes with 0 cells x0 and y0 . Show that the quotient
spaces X ∗Y/(X ∗{y0}∪{x0}∗Y) and S(X ∧Y)/S({x0}∧{y0}) are homeomorphic,
and deduce that X ∗Y ≃S(X ∧Y).
25.
Show that for a CW complex X with components Xα , the suspension SX is
homotopy equivalent to Y
W
α SXα where Y is a graph. In the case that X is a ﬁnite
graph, show that SX is homotopy equivalent to a wedge sum of circles and 2 spheres.
26. Use Corollary 0.20 to show that if (X, A) has the homotopy extension property,
then X×I deformation retracts to X×{0} ∪A×I . Deduce from this that Proposi-
tion 0.18 holds more generally when (X, A) satisﬁes the homotopy extension prop-
erty.
27. Given a pair (X, A) and a map f : A→B , deﬁne X/f to be the quotient space
of X obtained by identifying points in A having the same image in B . Show that the
quotient map X→X/f is a homotopy equivalence if f is a surjective homotopy equiv-
alence and (X, A) has the homotopy extension property. [Hint: Consider X ∪Mf and
use the preceding problem.] When B is a point this gives another proof of Proposi-
tion 0.17. Another interesting special case is when f is the projection A×I→A.
28. Show that if (X1, A) satisﬁes the homotopy extension property, then so does every
pair (X0 ⊔f X1, X0) obtained by attaching X1 to a space X0 via a map f : A→X0 .
29. In case the CW complex X is obtained from a subcomplex A by attaching a single
cell en , describe exactly what the extension of a homotopy ft : A→Y to X given by
the proof of Proposition 0.16 looks like. That is, for a point x ∈en describe the path
ft(x) for the extended ft .

One of the main techniques of algebraic topology is to study topological spaces
by forming algebraic images of them. Most often these algebraic images are groups,
but more elaborate structures such as rings, modules, and algebras also arise. The
mechanisms which create these images — the ‘lanterns’ of algebraic topology, one
might say — are known formally as functors and have the characteristic feature that
they form images not only of spaces but also of maps. Thus, continuous maps be-
tween spaces are projected onto homomorphisms between their algebraic images, so
topologically related spaces have algebraically related images.
With suitably constructed lanterns one might hope to be able to form images with
enough detail to reconstruct accurately the shapes of all spaces, or at least of large
and interesting classes of spaces. This is one of the main goals of algebraic topology,
and to a surprising extent this goal is achieved. Of course, the lanterns necessary to
do this are somewhat complicated pieces of machinery. But this machinery also has
a certain intrinsic beauty.
This ﬁrst chapter introduces one of the simplest and most important of the func-
tors of algebraic topology, the fundamental group, which creates an algebraic image
of a space from the loops in the space, that is, paths starting and ending at the same
point.
The Idea of the Fundamental Group
To get a feeling for what the fundamental group is about, let us look at a few
preliminary examples before giving the formal deﬁnitions.

22
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
A
B
Consider two linked circles A and B in R3 , as shown in
the ﬁgure. The fact that the circles are linked means, intu-
itively, that B cannot be separated from A by any continuous
motion of B , such as pushing, pulling, twisting, etc. We could
even take B to be made of rubber or stretchable string and allow completely general
continuous deformations of B , staying in the complement of A at all times, and it
would still be impossible to pull B off A. At least that is what intuition suggests,
and the fundamental group will give a way of making this intuition mathematically
rigorous.
A
A
B−3
B 2
Instead of having B link with A just once, we could make
it link A two or more times.
As a further variation, by as-
signing an orientation to B we can speak of B linking A a
positive or a negative number of times, say positive when B
comes forward through A and negative for the reverse direc-
tion. Thus for each nonzero integer n we have an oriented
circle Bn linking A n times, where by ‘circle’ we mean a curve
homeomorphic to a circle. To complete the scheme, we could
let B0 be a circle which doesn’t link A at all.
Now, integers not only measure quantity, but they form a group under addition.
Can the group operation be mimicked geometrically with some sort of addition op-
eration on the oriented circles B linking A? An oriented circle B can be thought of
as a path traversed in time, starting and ending at the same point x0 , which we can
choose to be any point on the circle. Such a path starting and ending at the same point
is called a loop. Two different loops B and B′ both starting and ending at the same
point x0 can be ‘added’ to form a new loop B + B′ which travels ﬁrst around B , then
around B′ . For example, if B1 and B′
1 are loops each linking A once in the positive
direction, then their sum B1 + B′
1 is deformable to B2 , linking A twice:
A
B1
B1
x0
A
B2
x0
´
In a similar way B1 + B−1 can be deformed to the loop B0 , unlinked from A:
A
B1
x0
A
B0
x0
B−1
More generally, Bm + Bn is deformable to Bm+n for arbitrary integers m and n, as
one can easily convince oneself of by drawing a few pictures like those above.

The Idea of the Fundamental Group
23
Note that in forming sums of loops we produce loops which pass through the
basepoint more than once. This is one reason why loops are deﬁned merely as contin-
uous paths, which are allowed to pass through the same point many times. So if one is
thinking of a loop as something made of stretchable string, one has to give the string
the magical power of being able to pass through itself unharmed. However, we must
be sure not to allow our loops to intersect the ﬁxed circle A at any time, otherwise we
could always unlink them from A.
Next we consider a slightly more complicated sort of linking, involving three cir-
cles forming a conﬁguration known as the Borromean rings, shown in the ﬁgure on
the left below. The interesting feature here is that if any one of the three circles is
removed, the other two are not linked.
A
A
B
B
C
C
In the same spirit as before, let us regard the third circle C as forming a loop in the
complement of the other two, A and B , and we ask whether C can be continuously
deformed to unlink it completely from A and B , always staying in the complement
of A and B during the deformation. We can redraw the picture by pulling A and B
apart, dragging C along, and then we see C winding back and forth between A and
B as shown in the second ﬁgure above. In this new position, if we start at the point of
C indicated by the dot and proceed in the direction given by the arrow, then we pass
in sequence: (1) forward through A, (2) forward through B , (3) backward through A,
and (4) backward through B . If we measure the linking of C with A and B by two
integers, then the ‘forwards’ and ‘backwards’ cancel and both integers are zero. This
reﬂects the fact that C is not linked with A or B individually.
To get a more accurate measure of how C links with A and B together, we regard
the four parts (1)-(4) of C as an ordered sequence. Taking into account the directions
in which these segments of C pass through A and B , we may deform C to the sum
a + b −a −b of four loops as in the next ﬁgure. We write the third and fourth loops
as the negatives of the ﬁrst two since they can be deformed to the ﬁrst two, but with
the opposite orientations, and as we saw in the preceding example, the sum of two
oppositely-oriented loops is deformable to a trivial loop, not linked with anything.
A
B
a
b
−b
−a
A
B
a
b
−b
−a

24
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
We would like to view the expression a + b −a −b as lying in a nonabelian group, so
that it is not automatically zero. Changing to the more usual multiplicative notation
for nonabelian groups, it would be written aba−1b−1 , the commutator of a and b.
To shed further light on this example, suppose we modify it slightly so that the
circles A and B are now linked, as in the next ﬁgure.
A
B
C
A
B
C
The circle C can then be deformed into the position shown at the right, where it again
represents the composite loop aba−1b−1 , where a and b are loops linking A and
B . But it is apparent from the picture on the left that C can actually be unlinked
completely from A and B . So in this case the product aba−1b−1 should be trivial,
i.e., a and b should commute.
The fundamental group of a space X will be deﬁned so that its elements are
loops in X starting and ending at a ﬁxed basepoint x0 ∈X , but two such loops are
regarded as determining the same element of the fundamental group if one loop can
be continuously deformed to the other within the space X . (All loops which occur
during deformations must also start and end at x0 .) In the ﬁrst example above, X is
the complement of the circle A, while in the other two examples X is the complement
of the two circles A and B . In the second section in this chapter we will show:
— The fundamental group of the complement of the circle A in the ﬁrst example
is Z, with the loop B as a generator of this group. This amounts to saying that
every loop in the complement of A can be deformed to one of the loops Bn , and
that Bn cannot be deformed to Bm if n ≠m.
— The fundamental group of the complement of the two unlinked circles A and B in
the second example is the nonabelian free group on two generators, represented
by the loops a and b linking A and B . In particular, the commutator aba−1b−1
is a nontrivial element of this group.
— The fundamental group of the complement of the two linked circles A and B in
the third example is the free abelian group Z×Z on two generators, represented
by the loops a and b linking A and B .
As a result of these calculations, we have two ways to tell when a pair of circles A
and B is linked. The direct approach is given by the ﬁrst example, where one circle
is regarded as an element of the fundamental group of the complement of the other
circle. An alternative and somewhat more subtle method is given by the second and
third examples, where one distinguishes a pair of linked circles from a pair of unlinked

Section 1.1.
Basic Constructions
25
circles by the fundamental group of their complement, which is abelian in one case and
nonabelian in the other. This method is much more general: One can often show that
two spaces are not homeomorphic by showing that their fundamental groups are not
isomorphic, since it will be an easy consequence of the deﬁnition of the fundamental
group that homeomorphic spaces have isomorphic fundamental groups.
This ﬁrst section begins with the basic deﬁnitions and constructions, and then
proceeds quickly to an important calculation, the fundamental group of the circle,
using notions developed more fully in §1.3. More systematic methods of calculation
are given in §1.2, sufﬁcient to show for example that every group is realized as the
fundamental group of some space. This idea is exploited in the Additional Topics
at the end of the chapter, which give some illustrations of how algebraic facts about
groups can be derived topologically.
Paths and Homotopy
There are two basic ingredients in the deﬁnition of the fundamental group: the
idea of continuous deformation of paths, and an operation for composing paths to
form new paths. We begin with the ﬁrst of these.
Let X be a space and let I denote the unit interval [0, 1] in R. By a path in X
we mean a continuous map f : I→X . The idea of continuously deforming a path,
keeping its endpoints ﬁxed, is made precise by the following deﬁnition. A homotopy
of paths in X is a family ft : I→X , 0 ≤t ≤1, such that
(1) The endpoints ft(0) = x0 and ft(1) = x1 are independent of t .
(2) The associated map F : I×I→X deﬁned by F(s, t) = ft(s) is continuous.
When two paths f0 and f1 are connected in this way by a homotopy ft , we will say
they are homotopic and write f0 ≃f1 .
x1
1
x0
0
f
f
Example 1.1: Linear homotopies. Any two paths
f0 and f1 in Rn having the same two endpoints x0
and x1 are homotopic via the homotopy ft(s) =
(1 −t)f0(s) + tf1(s). During this homotopy each
point f0(s) travels along the line segment to f1(s) at constant speed. This is because
the line through f0(s) and f1(s) is linearly parametrized as f0(s)+t[f1(s)−f0(s)] =
(1−t)f0(s)+tf1(s), so as t goes from 0 to 1, ft(s) traces out the segment from f0(s)

26
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
to f1(s). If f1(s) = f0(s) then this segment degenerates to a point, so ft(s) = f0(s)
for all t . This happens in particular for s = 0 and s = 1, so ft is a path from x0 to x1
for all t . Continuity of the homotopy ft as a map I×I→Rn follows from continuity
of f0 and f1 since the algebraic operations in the deﬁnition of ft are continuous.
This construction shows more generally that for a convex subspace X ⊂Rn , all
paths in X with given endpoints x0 and x1 are homotopic.
Before proceeding further we need to verify a technical property:
Proposition 1.2. The relation of homotopy on paths with ﬁxed endpoints in any space
is an equivalence relation.
Proof: The constant homotopy ft = f shows that f ≃f . If f0 ≃f1 via ft , then
f1 ≃f0 via the homotopy f1−t . For transitivity, if f0 ≃f1 via ft and f1 = g0 ≃g1
via gt , then f0 ≃g1 via the homotopy ht which equals f2t for 0 ≤t ≤1/2 and
g2t−1 for 1/2 ≤t ≤1. Continuity of the associated map H(s, t) = ht(s) comes from
the elementary fact, which will be used frequently without explicit mention, that a
function deﬁned on the union of two closed sets is continuous if its restriction to
each of the closed sets is continuous. In the case at hand, H is clearly continuous on
each of I×[0, 1/2] and I×[1/2, 1], and on I×{1/2} the two deﬁnitions of H agree since
f1 = g0 , so H is continuous on I×I .
⊔⊓
The equivalence class of a path f under the equivalence relation of homotopy is
denoted by [f ] and called the homotopy class of f .
Given two paths f , g : I→X such that f (1) = g(0), we can deﬁne a ‘composition’
or ‘product’ path f g which traverses ﬁrst f then g, by the formula
f g(s) =
(
f (2s),
0 ≤s ≤1/2
g(2s −1),
1/2 ≤s ≤1
Thus the speed of traversal of f and g is doubled in order for f g to be traversed
in unit time. This product operation respects homotopy classes since if f0 ≃f1 and
g0 ≃g1 via homotopies ft and gt , and if f0(1) = g0(0) so that f0 g0 is deﬁned,
then ft gt is deﬁned and provides a homotopy f0 g0 ≃f1 g1 .
In particular, suppose we restrict attention to paths f : I→X with the same start-
ing and ending point f (0) = f (1) = x0 ∈X . Such paths are called loops, and the
common starting and ending point x0 is referred to as the basepoint. The set of
homotopy classes of loops in X at the basepoint x0 is denoted π1(X, x0).
Proposition 1.3. π1(X, x0) is a group with respect to the product [f ][g] = [f g].
This group π1(X, x0) is called the fundamental group of X at the basepoint x0 .
Proof: By restricting attention to loops with a ﬁxed basepoint x0 ∈X we guarantee
that the product f
g of any two such loops is deﬁned. We have already observed

Section 1.1.
Basic Constructions
27
that the homotopy class of f g depends only on the homotopy classes of f and g,
so the product [f ][g] = [f g] is well-deﬁned. It remains to verify the three axioms
for a group.
As a preliminary step, deﬁne a reparametrization of a path f to be a composi-
tion f ϕ where ϕ : I→I is any continuous map such that ϕ(0) = 0 and ϕ(1) = 1.
Reparametrizing a path preserves its homotopy class since f ϕ ≃f via the homotopy
fϕt where ϕt(s) = (1 −t)ϕ(s) + ts so that ϕ0 = ϕ and ϕ1(s) = s . Note that
(1 −t)ϕ(s) + ts lies between ϕ(s) and s , hence is in I so f ϕt is deﬁned.
Given paths f , g, h with f (1) = g(0) and g(1) = h(0), then the composed paths
(f g) h and f (g h) are reparametrizations of each other, differing only in the speeds
at which f and h are traversed. Hence (f g) h ≃f (g h). Restricting attention to
loops at the basepoint x0 , this says the product in π1(X, x0) is associative.
Given a path f : I→X , let c be the constant path at f (1), deﬁned by c(s) = f (1)
for all s ∈I . Then f
c is a reparametrization of f via the function ϕ(s) which
equals 2s on [0, 1/2] and 1 on [1/2, 1], so f c ≃f . Similarly, c f ≃f where c is now
the constant path at f (0). Taking f to be a loop, we deduce that the homotopy class
of the constant path at x0 is a two-sided identity in π1(X, x0).
For a path f from x0 to x1 , the inverse path f from x1 back to x0 is deﬁned
by f (s) = f (1 −s). Consider the homotopy ht = ft gt where ft is the path which
equals f on the interval [0, t] and which is stationary at f (t) on the interval [t, 1],
and gt is the inverse path of ft . Since f0 is the constant path c at x0 and f1 = f ,
we see that ht is a homotopy from c c = c to f f . Now specialize to the case that
f is a loop at the basepoint x0 . We have shown that f f ≃c , and replacing f by f
gives f f ≃c . So [f ] is a two-sided inverse for [f ] in π1(X, x0).
⊔⊓
In Chapter 4 we will see that π1(X, x0) is just the ﬁrst in a sequence of groups
πn(X, x0), called homotopy groups, which are deﬁned in an entirely analogous fash-
ion using the n dimensional cube In in place of I .
Example 1.4. A convex set X in Rn has π1(X, x0) = 0, the trivial group, for every
basepoint x0 ∈X , since any two loops f0 and f1 based at x0 are homotopic via the
linear homotopy ft(s) = (1 −t)f0(s) + tf1(s).
It is not so easy to show that a space has a nontrivial fundamental group since one
must somehow demonstrate the nonexistence of homotopies between certain loops.
We will tackle the simplest example shortly, showing that this is the case for the circle.
But ﬁrst let us address a theoretical issue which the reader may be wondering about.
How does π1(X, x0) depend on the choice of the basepoint x0 ? Since π1(X, x0)
involves only the path component of X containing x0 , it is clear that we can hope to
ﬁnd a relation between π1(X, x0) and π1(X, x1) for two basepoints x0, x1 ∈X only
if x0 and x1 lie in the same path component of X . So let h : I→X be a path from
x0 to x1 , with the inverse path h(s) = h(1 −s) from x1 back to x0 . We can then

28
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
associate to each loop f based at x1 the loop h f h based at x0 . Strictly speaking,
we should choose an order of forming the product h f h, either (h f ) h or h (f h),
but the two choices are homotopic and we are only interested in homotopy classes
here. Alternatively, to avoid any ambiguity we could deﬁne a general n fold product
f1
··· fn so that the path fi is traversed in the time interval
 i−1
n , i
n

.
Proposition 1.5. The map βh : π1(X, x1)→π1(X, x0) deﬁned by βh[f ] = [h f h]
is an isomorphism.
Proof: If ft is a homotopy of loops based at x1 then h ft
h is a homotopy of
loops based at x0 , so βh is well-deﬁned.
Further, βh is a homomorphism since
βh[f g] = [h f g h] = [h f h h g h] = βh[f ]βh[g]. Finally, βh is an isomorphism
with inverse βh since βhβh[f ] = βh[h f h] = [h h f h h] = [f ], and similarly
βhβh[f ] = [f ].
⊔⊓
Thus if X is path-connected, the group π1(X, x0) is, up to isomorphism, inde-
pendent of the choice of basepoint x0 . In this case the notation π1(X, x0) is often
abbreviated to π1(X), or one could go further and write just π1X .
In general, a space is called simply-connected if it is path-connected and has
trivial fundamental group. The following result is probably the reason for this term.
Proposition 1.6. A space X is simply-connected iff there is a unique homotopy class
of paths connecting any two points in X .
Proof: Path-connectedness is the existence of paths connecting every pair of points,
so we need be concerned only with the uniqueness of connecting paths.
Suppose
π1(X) = 0. If γ and η are two paths from x0 to x1 , then γ ≃γ
η η ≃η, the
latter homotopy since the loop γ η is nullhomotopic if π1(X, x0) = 0. Conversely,
if there is only one homotopy class of paths connecting a basepoint x0 to itself, then
π1(X, x0) = 0.
⊔⊓
The Fundamental Group of the Circle
Our ﬁrst real theorem will be the calculation π1(S1) ≈Z. Besides its intrinsic
interest, this basic result will have several immediate applications of some substance,
and it will be the starting point for many more calculations in the next section. In view
of the importance of this result, we can expect the proof to involve some genuine work,
which it does. To maximize the payoff for this work, the proof is written so that its
main technical steps apply in a more general setting. This setting, covering spaces, is
the topic of §1.3.
Here is the theorem:

Section 1.1.
Basic Constructions
29
Theorem 1.7. The map ψ : Z→π1(S1) sending an integer n to the homotopy class
of the loop ωn(s) = (cos 2πns, sin 2πns) based at (1, 0) is an isomorphism.
Proof: The idea is to compare paths in S1 with paths in R via the map p : R→S1
given by p(s) = (cos 2πs, sin 2πs). This map can be visualized geo-
metrically by embedding R in R3 as the helix parametrized by s ,
(cos 2πs, sin 2πs, s), and then p is the restriction to the helix of the
projection of R3 onto R2 , (x, y, z) , (x, y), as in the ﬁgure. Ob-
serve that the loop ωn is the composition pf
ωn where f
ωn : I→R is
the path f
ωn(s) = ns , starting at 0 and ending at n, winding around
the helix |n| times, upward if n > 0 and downward if n < 0. The
relation ωn = pf
ωn is expressed by saying that f
ωn is a lift of ωn .
p
The deﬁnition of ψ can be restated by setting ψ(n) equal to the homotopy class
of the loop p ef where ef is any path in R from 0 to n. Such an ef is homotopic to
f
ωn via the linear homotopy (1 −t) ef + tωn , hence p ef is homotopic to pf
ωn = ωn
and the new deﬁnition of ψ(n) agrees with the old one.
To verify that ψ is a homomorphism, let τm : R→R be the translation τm(x) =
x + m. Then f
ωm (τmf
ωn) is a path in R from 0 to m + n, so ψ(m + n) is the
homotopy class of the loop in S1 which is the image of this path under p. This image
is just ωm ωn , so ψ(m + n) = ψ(m) ψ(n).
To show that ψ is an isomorphism we shall use two facts:
(a) For each path f : I→S1 starting at a point x0 ∈S1 and each ex0 ∈p−1(x0) there
is a unique lift ef : I→R starting at ex0 .
(b) For each homotopy ft : I→S1 of paths starting at x0 and each ex0 ∈p−1(x0)
there is a unique lifted homotopy eft : I→R of paths starting at ex0 .
Before proving these facts, let us see how they imply the theorem. To show that ψ is
surjective, let f : I→S1 be a loop at the basepoint (1, 0), representing a given element
of π1(S1). By (a) there is a lift ef starting at 0. This path ef ends at some integer n
since p ef (1) = f (1) = (1, 0) and p−1(1, 0) = Z ⊂R. By the extended deﬁnition of ψ
we then have ψ(n) = [p ef ] = [f ]. Hence ψ is surjective.
To show that ψ is injective, suppose ψ(m) = ψ(n), i.e., ωm ≃ωn . Let ft be a
homotopy from ωm = f0 to ωn = f1 . By (b) this homotopy lifts to a homotopy eft of
paths starting at 0. The uniqueness part of (a) implies that ef0 = f
ωm and ef1 = f
ωn .
Since eft is a homotopy of paths, the endpoint eft(1) is independent of t . For t = 0
this endpoint is m and for t = 1 it is n, so m = n.
It remains to prove (a) and (b). These can both be deduced from a third statement:
(c) Given a map F : Y ×I→S1 and a map eF : Y ×{0}→R lifting F|Y ×{0}, then there
is a unique map eF : Y ×I→R lifting F and restricting to the given eF on Y ×{0}.
Statement (a) is the special case that Y is a point, and (b) is obtained by applying (c)
with Y = I in the following way. The homotopy ft in (b) gives F : I×I→S1 by setting

30
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
F(s, t) = ft(s) as usual. A unique lift eF : I×{0}→R is obtained by an application
of (a). Then (c) gives a unique eF : I×I→R. The restrictions eF|{0}×I and eF|{1}×I
are paths lifting the constant path at x0 , hence they must also be constant by the
uniqueness part of (a). So eft(s) = eF(s, t) is a homotopy of paths lifting ft .
We shall prove (c) using just one special property of the projection p : R→S1 ,
namely:
(∗)
There is an open cover {Uα} of S1 such that for each α, p−1(Uα) can be
decomposed as a disjoint union of open sets each of which is mapped homeo-
morphically onto Uα by p.
For example, we could take the cover {Uα} to consist of any two open arcs in S1
whose union is S1 .
To prove (c) we will ﬁrst construct eF : N×I→R where N is some neighborhood
in Y of a given point y0 ∈Y . Since F is continuous, every point (y0, t) has a product
neighborhood Nt×(at, bt) such that F
 Nt×(at, bt)

⊂Uα for some α. By compact-
ness of {y0}×I , ﬁnitely many such products Nt×(at, bt) cover {y0}×I , so we can
choose a single neighborhood N of y0 and a partition 0 = t0 < t1 < ··· < tm = 1 of
I so that for each i, F(N×[ti, ti+1]) is contained in some Uαi . Assume inductively
that eF has been constructed on N×[0, ti]. We have F(N×[ti, ti+1]) ⊂Uαi , so by
(∗) there is an open set eUαi ⊂R projecting homeomorphically onto Uαi by p and
containing the point eF(y0, ti). After replacing N by a smaller neighborhood of y0 we
may assume that eF(N×{ti}) ⊂eUαi , namely, replace N×{ti} by its intersection with
( eF ||N×{ti})−1( eUαi). Now we can deﬁne eF on N×[ti, ti+1] to be the composition of
F with the homeomorphism p−1 : Uαi→eUαi . After ﬁnitely many repetitions of this
induction step we eventually get a lift eF : N×I→R, for some neighborhood N of y0 .
Next we show the uniqueness part of (c) in the special case that Y is a point. In this
case we can omit Y from the notation. So suppose eF and eF
′ are two lifts of F : I→S1
such that eF(0) = eF
′(0). As before, choose a partition 0 = t0 < t1 < ··· < tm = 1 of
I so that for each i, F([ti, ti+1]) is contained in some Uαi . Assume inductively that
eF = eF
′ on [0, ti]. Since [ti, ti+1] is connected, so is eF([ti, ti+1]), which must therefore
lie in a single one of the disjoint open sets eUαi lying over Uαi , whose existence is given
by (∗). By the same token, eF
′([ti, ti+1]) lies in a single eUαi , in fact in the same one
that contains eF([ti, ti+1]) since eF
′(ti) = eF(ti). Because p is injective on each eUαi and
p eF = eF
′, it follows that eF = eF
′ on [ti, ti+1], and the induction step is ﬁnished.
The last step in the proof of (c) is to observe that since the eF ’s constructed above
on sets of the form N×I are unique when restricted to each segment {y}×I , they
must agree whenever two such sets N×I overlap. So we obtain a well-deﬁned lift eF
on all of Y ×I . This eF is continuous since it is continuous on each N×I , and it is
unique since it is unique on each segment {y}×I .
⊔⊓
Now we turn to some applications of this theorem. Although algebraic topology

Section 1.1.
Basic Constructions
31
is usually ‘algebra serving topology,’ the roles are reversed in the following proof of
the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra.
Theorem 1.8. Every nonconstant polynomial with coefﬁcients in C has a root in C.
Proof: We may assume the polynomial is of the form p(z) = zn + a1zn−1 + ··· + an .
If p(z) has no roots in C, then for each real number r ≥0, the formula
fr (s) = p(re2πis)/p(r)
|p(re2πis)/p(r)|
deﬁnes a loop in the unit circle S1 ⊂C based at 1. As r varies, fr is a homotopy of
loops based at 1. Since f0 is the trivial loop, we deduce that the class [fr] ∈π1(S1)
is zero for all r . Now ﬁx a large value of r , bigger than 1 + |a1| + ··· + |an|. Then
for |z| = r we have
|zn| = r n = r · r n−1 > (|a1| + ··· + |an|)|zn−1| ≥|a1zn−1 + ··· + an|
so for 0 ≤t ≤1 the polynomial pt(z) = zn + t(a1zn−1 + ··· + an) has no roots on
the circle |z| = r . Replacing p by pt in the formula for fr above and letting t go
from 1 to 0, we obtain a homotopy from the loop fr to the loop ωn(s) = e2πins . By
Theorem 1.7, ωn represents n times a generator of the inﬁnite cyclic group π1(S1).
Since we have shown that [ωn] = [fr] = 0, we conclude that n = 0. Thus the only
polynomials without roots in C are constants.
⊔⊓
For the next result we use the standard notation Dn for the closed unit disk in
Rn , all vectors x of length |x| ≤1. Thus the boundary of Dn is the unit sphere Sn−1 .
Theorem 1.9. Every continuous map h : D2→D2 has a ﬁxed point, i.e., a point x
with h(x) = x .
x
r(x)
h(x)
Proof: Suppose on the contrary h(x) ≠x for all x ∈D2 .
Then we can deﬁne a map r : D2→S1 by letting r(x) be the
point of S1 where the ray in R2 starting at h(x) and passing
through x leaves D2 . Continuity of r is clear since small per-
turbations of x produce small perturbations of h(x), hence
small perturbations of the ray through these two points. The
crucial property of r , besides continuity, is that r(x) = x if x ∈S1 . Thus r is a
retraction of D2 onto S1 . We will show that no such retraction can exist.
Let f0 be any loop in S1 . In D2 there is a homotopy of f0 to a constant loop, for
example the linear homotopy ft(s) = (1 −t)f0(s) + tx0 where x0 is the basepoint
of f0 . Since the retraction r is the identity on S1 , the composition rft is then a
homotopy in S1 from rf0 = f0 to the constant loop at x0 . But this contradicts the
fact that π1(S1) is nonzero.
⊔⊓

32
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
This theorem was ﬁrst proved by Brouwer around 1910, one of the early triumphs
of algebraic topology. Brouwer in fact proved the corresponding result for Dn , and
we shall obtain this generalization in Corollary 2.11 using homology groups in place
of π1 . One could also use the higher homotopy group πn . Brouwer’s original proof
used neither homology nor homotopy groups, which had not been invented at the
time. Instead it used the notion of degree for maps Sn→Sn , which we shall deﬁne in
§2.2 using homology but which Brouwer deﬁned directly in more geometric terms.
All these versions of the proof of the ﬁxed point theorem are arguments by con-
tradiction, and so they show just the existence of a ﬁxed point without giving any clue
as to how to ﬁnd it in explicit cases. Our proof of the fundamental theorem of algebra
was similar in this regard. There exist other proofs of the Brouwer ﬁxed point theorem
which are somewhat more constructive, for example the elegant and quite elementary
proof by Sperner in 1928, which is explained very nicely in [Aigner-Ziegler].
The techniques used to calculate π1(S1) can be applied to prove the Borsuk-Ulam
theorem in dimension two:
Theorem 1.10. For every continuous map f : S2→R2 there exists a pair of antipodal
points x and −x in S2 with f (x) = f (−x).
It may be that there is only one such pair of antipodal points x , −x , for example
if f is simply orthogonal projection of the standard sphere S2 ⊂R3 onto a plane.
The Borsuk-Ulam theorem holds also for maps Sn→Rn , as we show in Proposi-
tion 2B.5. The proof for n = 1 is easy since the difference f (x) −f (−x) changes
sign as x goes halfway around the circle, hence must be zero for some x . For n ≥2
the theorem is certainly less obvious. Is it apparent, for example, that at every instant
there must be a pair of antipodal points on the surface of the earth having the same
temperature and the same barometric pressure?
The theorem says in particular that there is no one-to-one continuous map from
S2 to R2 , so S2 is not homeomorphic to a subspace of R2 , an intuitively obvious fact
which is not easy to prove directly.
Proof: If the conclusion is false for f : S2→R2 , we can deﬁne g : S2→S1 by
g(x) = f (x) −f (−x)
|f (x) −f (−x)|
Then g(−x) = −g(x). Deﬁne a loop η : I→S2 ⊂R3 by η(s) = (cos 2πs, sin 2πs, 0),
and let h : I→S1 be the composed loop gη.
Since g(−x) = −g(x), we have the
relation h(s + 1/2) = −h(s) for all s in the interval [0, 1/2].
As we showed in the
calculation of π1(S1), the loop h can be lifted to a path eh : I→R.
The equation
h(s + 1/2) = −h(s) implies that eh(s + 1/2) = eh(s) + q/2 for some odd integer q. The
integer q is independent of s ∈[0, 1/2] since by solving the equation eh(s + 1/2) =
eh(s) + q/2 for q we see that q depends continuously on s , so must be constant, being
constrained to integer values. In particular, we have eh(1) = eh(1/2) + q/2 = eh(0) + q.

Section 1.1.
Basic Constructions
33
This means that h represents q times a generator of π1(S1). Since q is odd, we
conclude that h is not nullhomotopic. But h was the composition gη : I→S2→S1 ,
and η is obviously nullhomotopic in S2 , so gη is nullhomotopic in S1 by composing
a nullhomotopy of η with g. Thus we have arrived at a contradiction.
⊔⊓
Corollary 1.11. Whenever S2 is expressed as the union of three closed sets A1 , A2 ,
and A3 , then one of these sets must contain a pair of antipodal points x and −x .
Proof: Let di : S2→R measure distance to Ai , that is, di(x) = infy∈Ai|x−y|. This is a
continuous function, so we may apply the Borsuk-Ulam theorem to the map S2→R2 ,
x ,
 d1(x), d2(x)

, obtaining a pair of antipodal points x and −x with d1(x) =
d1(−x) and d2(x) = d2(−x). If either of these two distances is zero, then x and −x
both lie in the same set A1 or A2 since these are closed sets. On the other hand, if
the distances from x and −x to A1 and A2 are both strictly positive, then x and −x
lie in neither A1 nor A2 so they must lie in A3 .
⊔⊓
The number ‘three’ in this result is best possible. For consider a sphere inscribed
in a tetrahedron. Projecting the four faces of the tetrahedron radially onto the sphere,
we obtain a cover of S2 by four closed sets, none of which contains a pair of antipodal
points.
Assuming the higher-dimensional version of the Borsuk-Ulam theorem, the same
arguments show that Sn cannot be covered by n + 1 closed sets without antipodal
pairs of points, though it can be covered by n + 2 such sets. Even the case n = 1 is
somewhat interesting: If the circle is covered by two closed sets, one of them must
contain a pair of antipodal points.
The following simple fact will allow us to compute the fundamental groups of a
few more spaces.
Proposition 1.12. π1(X×Y) is isomorphic to π1(X)×π1(Y) if X and Y are path-
connected.
Proof: A basic property of the product topology is that a map f : Z→X×Y is con-
tinuous iff the maps g : Z→X and h : Z→Y deﬁned by f (z) = (g(z), h(z)) are both
continuous. Hence a loop in X×Y based at (x0, y0) is equivalent to a pair of loops in
X and Y based at x0 and y0 respectively. Similarly, a homotopy of a loop in X×Y is
equivalent to a pair of homotopies of the corresponding loops in X and Y . Thus we
obtain a bijection π1
 X×Y, (x0, y0)

≈π1(X, x0)×π1(Y, y0), and this is obviously a
group isomorphism.
⊔⊓
Example 1.13: The Torus. By the proposition we have an isomorphism π1(S1×S1) ≈
Z×Z. Under this isomorphism a pair (p, q) ∈Z×Z corresponds to a loop which winds
p times around one S1 factor of the torus and q times around the other S1 factor,

34
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
for example the loop ωpq(s) = (ωp(s), ωq(s)). More generally, the n dimensional
torus, which is the product of n circles, has fundamental group the product of n
copies of Z. This follows by induction on n.
Induced Homomorphisms
Suppose ϕ : X→Y is a map taking the basepoint x0 ∈X to the basepoint y0 ∈Y .
For brevity we write ϕ : (X, x0)→(Y, y0) in this situation. Then ϕ induces a homo-
morphism ϕ∗: π1(X, x0)→π1(Y, y0), deﬁned by composing loops f : I→X based at
x0 with ϕ, that is, ϕ∗[f ] = [ϕf ]. This induced map ϕ∗is well-deﬁned since a
homotopy ft of loops based at x0 yields a composed homotopy ϕft of loops based
at y0 , so ϕ∗[f0] = [ϕf0] = [ϕf1] = ϕ∗[f1]. Furthermore, ϕ∗is a homomorphism
since ϕ(f g) = (ϕf ) (ϕg).
Two basic properties of induced homomorphisms are:
(i) (ϕψ)∗= ϕ∗ψ∗for a composition (X, x0)
ψ-----→(Y, y0)
ϕ-----→(Z, z0).
(ii) 11∗= 11, in other words, the identity map 11 : X→X induces the identity map
11 : π1(X, x0)→π1(X, x0).
The ﬁrst of these follows since composition of maps is associative, (ϕψ)f = ϕ(ψf ),
and the second is obvious.
Properties (i) and (ii) of induced homomorphisms are
what makes the fundamental group into a functor. The formal deﬁnition of func-
tors requires the introduction of certain other preliminary concepts, however, so we
postpone this until it is needed in §2.3.
From (i) and (ii) it follows formally that if ϕ is a homeomorphism with inverse
ψ, then ϕ∗is an isomorphism with inverse ψ∗since ϕ∗ψ∗= (ϕψ)∗= 11∗= 11
and similarly ψ∗ϕ∗= 11. We will use this fact to compute the fundamental groups
of higher-dimensional spheres:
Proposition 1.14. π1(Sn) = 0 if n ≥2.
Proof: Let f be a loop in Sn at a chosen basepoint x0 . If the image of f is disjoint
from some point x ∈Sn then f is nullhomotopic since Sn −{x} is homeomorphic
to Rn which is simply-connected. So it will sufﬁce to homotope f to make it nonsur-
jective. To do this we will look closely at a small open ball B about any point x ≠x0
in Sn and see that f crosses B in such a way as to meet x only ﬁnitely many times,
and each time this happens the relevant portion of f can simply be pushed off x .
The set f −1(B) is open in (0, 1), hence is a disjoint union of at most countably
many open intervals (ai, bi). The compact set f −1(x) is contained in the union of
these intervals and can meet only ﬁnitely many of them, otherwise it would contain
points arbitrarily close to the set f −1(Sn −B) which is compact and disjoint from
f −1(x), hence of strictly positive distance from f −1(x). Consider one of the intervals
(ai, bi) meeting f −1(x). The path fi obtained by restricting f to [ai, bi] lies in the

Section 1.1.
Basic Constructions
35
closure of B , and its endpoints f (ai) and f (bi) lie in the boundary of B . If n ≥2
we can choose a path gi from f (ai) to f (bi) in the closure of B but disjoint from
x . For example, we could choose gi to lie in the boundary of B , which is a sphere of
dimension n −1, hence path-connected if n ≥2. Since the closure of B is simply-
connected, being homeomorphic to a convex set in Rn , the path fi is homotopic to
gi by Proposition 1.6, so we may homotope f by deforming fi to gi . Repeating this
process for each of the intervals (ai, bi) which meet f −1(x), we obtain eventually a
new loop homotopic to the given f and having image disjoint from x .
⊔⊓
Example 1.15. For x ∈Rn we have Rn −{x} homeomorphic to Sn−1×R, so by
Proposition 1.12, π1(Rn −{x}) is isomorphic to π1(Sn−1)×π1(R), hence is Z for
n = 2 and trivial for n > 2.
Corollary 1.16. R2 is not homeomorphic to Rn for n ≠2.
Proof: Suppose f : R2→Rn is a homeomorphism. The case n = 1 is easily disposed
of since R2 −{0} is path-connected but the homeomorphic space Rn −{f (0)} is not
path-connected when n = 1.
When n > 2 we cannot distinguish R2 −{0} from
Rn −{f (0)} by the number of path-components, but by Example 1.15 we can distin-
guish them by their fundamental groups instead.
⊔⊓
The more general statement that Rm is not homeomorphic to Rn if m ≠n can
be proved in the same way using either higher homotopy groups or homology groups.
In fact, nonempty open sets in Rm and Rn can be homeomorphic only if m = n, as
will be shown in Theorem 2.19 using homology.
Induced homomorphisms allow certain relations between spaces to be trans-
formed into relations between their fundamental groups. For example:
Proposition 1.17. If a space X retracts onto a subspace A, then the homomorphism
i∗: π1(A, x0)→π1(X, x0) induced by the inclusion i : A > X is injective. If A is a
deformation retract of X , then i∗is an isomorphism.
Proof: If r : X→A is a retraction, then ri = 11, hence r∗i∗= 11, which implies that i∗
is injective. If rt : X→X is a deformation retraction of X onto A, so r0 = 11, rt|A = 11,
and r1(X) ⊂A, then for any loop f : I→X based at x0 ∈A the composition rtf gives
a homotopy of f to a loop in A, so i∗is also surjective.
⊔⊓
In particular, this gives another way of seeing that S1 is not a retract of D2 , a
fact we showed earlier in the proof of the Brouwer ﬁxed point theorem, since the
inclusion-induced map π1(S1)→π1(D2) is a homomorphism Z→0, which cannot be
injective.
The exact group-theoretic analog of a retraction is a homomorphism ρ of a group
G onto a subgroup H such that ρ restricts to the identity on H . In the notation

36
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
above, if we identify π1(A) with its image under i∗, then r∗is such a homomorphism
from π1(X) onto the subgroup π1(A). The existence of a retracting homomorphism
ρ : G→H is quite a strong condition on H . If H is a normal subgroup, it implies that
G is the direct product of H and the kernel of ρ. If H is not normal, then G is what
is called in group theory the semi-direct product of H and the kernel of ρ.
Recall from Chapter 0 the general deﬁnition of a homotopy: a family ϕt : X→Y ,
t ∈I , such that the associated map Φ : X×I→Y, Φ(x, t) = ϕt(x), is continuous. If ϕt
takes a subspace A ⊂X to a subspace B ⊂Y for all t , then we speak of a homotopy of
maps of pairs, ϕt : (X, A)→(Y, B). In particular, a basepoint-preserving homotopy
ϕt : (X, x0)→(Y, y0) is the case that ϕt(x0) = y0 for all t . A third basic property of
induced homomorphisms is their invariance under such homotopies:
(iii) If ϕt : (X, x0)→(Y, y0) is a basepoint-preserving homotopy, then ϕ0∗= ϕ1∗.
This holds since ϕ0∗[f ] = [ϕ0f ] = [ϕ1f ] = ϕ1∗[f ], the middle equality coming
from the homotopy ϕtf .
There is a notion of homotopy equivalence for spaces with basepoints: (X, x0) ≃
(Y, y0) if there are maps ϕ : (X, x0)→(Y, y0) and ψ : (Y, y0)→(X, x0) with homo-
topies ϕψ ≃11 and ψϕ ≃11 through maps ﬁxing the basepoints. In this case the
induced maps on π1 satisfy ϕ∗ψ∗= (ϕψ)∗= 11∗= 11 and likewise ψ∗ϕ∗= 11, so
ϕ∗and ψ∗are inverse isomorphisms π1(X, x0) ≈π1(Y, y0). This somewhat formal
argument gives another proof that a deformation retraction induces an isomorphism
on fundamental groups, since if X deformation retracts onto A then (X, x0) ≃(A, x0)
for any choice of basepoint x0 ∈A.
Having to pay so much attention to basepoints when dealing with the fundamental
group is something of a nuisance. For homotopy equivalences one does not have to
be quite so careful, as the conditions on basepoints can actually be dropped:
Proposition 1.18. If ϕ : X→Y is a homotopy equivalence, then the induced homo-
morphism ϕ∗: π1(X, x0)→π1
 Y, ϕ(x0)

is an isomorphism for all x0 ∈X .
The proof will use a simple fact about homotopies which do not preserve base-
point:
Lemma 1.19. If ϕt : X→Y is a homotopy and h is the path ϕt(x0) traced out by a
basepoint x0 ∈X , then ϕ0∗= βhϕ1∗.
Proof: Let ht be the restriction of h to
X,
π1
0
(
)
x
Y,
π1
0
1
(
(
))
x
ϕ
1
ϕ
Y,
π1
0
0
(
(
))
x
ϕ
0
ϕ
βh
∗
∗
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−→
the interval [0, t], with a reparametriza-
tion so that the domain of ht is still [0, 1]. Explicitly, we can take ht(s) = h(ts).
Then if f is a loop in X at the basepoint x0 , the formula ht
(ϕtf ) ht deﬁnes a
homotopy of loops at ϕ0(x0). Restricting this homotopy to t = 0 and t = 1, we see
that ϕ0∗([f ]) = βh
 ϕ1∗([f ])

.
⊔⊓

Section 1.1.
Basic Constructions
37
Proof of 1.18: Let ψ : Y→X be a homotopy-inverse for ϕ, so that ϕψ ≃11 and
ψϕ ≃11. Consider the maps
π1(X, x0)
ϕ∗-----→π1
 Y, ϕ(x0)
 ψ∗-----→π1
 X, ψϕ(x0)
 ϕ∗-----→π1
 Y, ϕψϕ(x0)

The composition of the ﬁrst two maps is an isomorphism since ψϕ ≃11 implies that
ψ∗ϕ∗= βh for some h, by the lemma. In particular, since ψ∗ϕ∗is an isomorphism,
ϕ∗is injective. The same reasoning with the second and third maps shows that ψ∗
is injective. Thus the ﬁrst two of the three maps are injections and their composition
is an isomorphism, so the ﬁrst map ϕ∗must be surjective as well as injective.
⊔⊓
Exercises
1. Show that composition of paths satisﬁes the following cancellation property: If
f0 g0 ≃f1 g1 and g0 ≃g1 then f0 ≃f1 .
2. For the change-of-basepoint homomorphisms βh , show that h ≃h′ implies βh =
βh′ .
3. For a path-connected space X , show that π1(X) is abelian iff all basepoint-change
homomorphisms βh depend only on the endpoints of the path h.
4. A subspace X ⊂Rn is said to be star-shaped if there is a point x0 ∈X such that for
all x ∈X , the line segment from x0 to x lies in X . Show that if a subspace X ⊂Rn is
locally star-shaped, i.e., every point of X has a star-shaped neighborhood in X , then
every path in X is homotopic in X to a piecewise linear path, that is, a path consisting
of a ﬁnite number of straight line segments traversed at constant speed. Show this
applies in particular when X is open or when X is a union of ﬁnitely many closed
convex sets.
5. Show that every homomorphism π1(S1)→π1(S1) can be realized as the induced
homomorphism ϕ∗of a map ϕ : S1→S1 .
6. Given a space X and a path-connected subspace A containing the basepoint x0 ,
show that the map π1(A, x0)→π1(X, x0) induced by the inclusion A>X is surjective
iff every path in X with endpoints in A is homotopic to a path in A.
7. Show that for a space X , the following three conditions are equivalent:
(i) Every map S1→X is homotopic to a constant map, with image a point.
(ii) Every map S1→X extends to a map D2→X .
(iii) π1(X, x0) = 0 for all x0 ∈X .
Deduce that a space X is simply-connected iff all maps S1→X are homotopic. [In
this problem, ‘homotopic’ means ‘homotopic without regard to basepoints.’]
8. We can regard π1(X, x0) as the set of basepoint-preserving homotopy classes of
maps (S1, s0)→(X, x0). Let [S1, X] be the set of homotopy classes of maps S1→X ,
with no conditions on basepoints. Thus there is a natural map Φ : π1(X, x0)→[S1, X]

38
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
obtained by ignoring basepoints. Show that Φ is onto if X is path-connected, and that
Φ([f ]) = Φ([g]) iff [f ] and [g] are conjugate in π1(X, x0). Hence Φ induces a one-
to-one correspondence between [S1, X] and the set of conjugacy classes in π1(X),
when X is path-connected.
9. Deﬁne f : S1×I→S1×I by f (θ, s) = (θ + 2πs, s), so f restricts to the identity
on the two boundary circles of S1×I . Show that f is homotopic to the identity by
a homotopy ft which is stationary on one of the boundary circles, but not by any
homotopy ft which is stationary on both boundary circles. [Consider what f does to
the path s , (θ0, s) for ﬁxed θ0 ∈S1 .]
10. Does the Borsuk-Ulam theorem hold for the torus? In other words, for every map
f : S1×S1→R2 must there exist (x, y) ∈S1×S1 such that f (x, y) = f (−x, −y)?
11. Let A1 , A2 , A3 be compact sets in R3 . Use the Borsuk-Ulam theorem to show
that there is one plane P ⊂R3 which simultaneously divides each Ai into two pieces
of equal measure.
X,
π1
1
(
)
x
X,
π1
0
(
)
x
f
Y,
π1
0
(
(
))
x
f
Y,
π1
1
(
(
))
x
f
βh
βfh
∗
f∗
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−→
12. Given a map f : X→Y and a path h : I→X
from x0 to x1 , show that f∗βh = βfhf∗in the
diagram to the right.
13. Show, using fundamental groups and induced homomorphisms, that there is no
retraction of the M¨obius band onto its boundary circle.
14. Construct inﬁnitely many nonhomotopic retractions S1 ∨S1→S1 .
15. If X0 is the path-component of a space X containing the basepoint x0 , show that
the inclusion X0 > X induces an isomorphism π1(X0, x0)→π1(X, x0).
16. Using the technique in the proof of Proposition 1.14, show that if a space X is
obtained from a path-connected subspace A by attaching a cell en with n ≥2, then
the inclusion A > X induces a surjection on π1 .
17. Suppose ft : X→X is a homotopy such that f0 and f1 are each the identity map.
For a basepoint x0 ∈X , show that the loop ft(x0) represents an element of the
center of π1(X, x0). [See Lemma 1.19. One can interpret the result as saying that a
loop represents an element of the center of π1(X) if it extends to a ‘loop of maps
X→X .’]

Section 1.2.
Van Kampen’s Theorem
39
The van Kampen theorem gives a method for computing the fundamental groups
of spaces which can be decomposed into simpler spaces whose fundamental groups
are already known. By systematic use of this theorem one can compute the funda-
mental groups of a very large number of spaces. We shall see for example that for
every group G there is a space XG whose fundamental group is isomorphic to G.
To give some idea of how one might hope to compute fundamental groups by
decomposing spaces into simpler pieces, let us look at an example. Consider the space
X formed by two circles A and B intersecting in a single point, which we choose as
the basepoint x0 . By our preceding calculations we know that π1(A) is inﬁnite cyclic,
generated by a loop a which goes once around A. Similarly, π1(B) is a copy of Z
generated by a loop b going once around B . Each product of powers of a and b then
gives an element of π1(X). For example, the product a5b2a−3ba2 is the loop which
goes ﬁve times around A, then twice around B , then three times around A in the
opposite direction, then once around B , then twice around A. The set of all words like
a5b2a−3ba2 , consisting of powers of a alternating with powers of b, forms a group
usually denoted Z∗Z. Multiplication in this group is deﬁned just as one would expect,
e.g., (b4a5b2a−3)(a4b−1ab3) = b4a5b2ab−1ab3 . The identity element is the empty
word, and inverses are what they have to be, e.g., (a2b−3aba−2)−1 = a2b−1a−1b3a−2 .
It would be very nice if such words in a and b corresponded exactly to elements of
π1(X), so that π1(X) was isomorphic to the group Z ∗Z. The van Kampen theorem
will imply that this is indeed the case. Similarly, if X is the union of three circles
touching at a single point, the van Kampen theorem will imply that π1(X) is Z∗Z∗Z,
the group consisting of words in powers of three letters a, b, c . The generalization
to a union of any number of circles touching at one point will also follow as a special
case of the van Kampen theorem.
The group Z ∗Z is an example of a general construction called the free product
of groups. The statement of van Kampen’s theorem will be in terms of free products,
so before stating the theorem we should describe exactly what free products are, in
case the reader has not seen this algebraic construction previously.
Free Products of Groups
Suppose one is given a collection of groups Gα and one wishes to construct a
single group containing all these groups as subgroups. One way to do this would be
to take the product group
Q
αGα , whose elements can be regarded as the functions
α , gα ∈Gα . Or one could restrict to functions taking on nonidentity values at
most ﬁnitely often, forming the direct sum
L
α Gα . Both these constructions produce
groups containing all the Gα ’s as subgroups, but with the property that elements of

40
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
different subgroups Gα commute with each other. In the realm of nonabelian groups
this commutativity is unnatural, and so one would like a ‘nonabelian’ version of
Q
αGα
or
L
α Gα . Since the sum
L
α Gα is smaller and presumably simpler than
Q
αGα , it
should be easier to construct a nonabelian version of
L
α Gα , and this is what the free
product ∗α Gα achieves.
Here is the precise deﬁnition. As a set, the free product ∗α Gα consists of all
words g1g2 ··· gm of arbitrary ﬁnite length m ≥0, where each letter gi belongs to
a group Gαi and is not the identity element of Gαi , and adjacent letters gi and gi+1
belong to different groups Gα , that is, αi ≠αi+1 . Words satisfying these conditions
are called reduced, the idea being that nonreduced words can always be simpliﬁed
until they are reduced by writing adjacent letters which lie in the same Gαi as a
single letter and by cancelling trivial letters. The empty word is allowed, and will
be the identity element of ∗α Gα .
The group operation in ∗α Gα is juxtaposition,
(g1 ··· gm)(h1 ··· hn) = g1 ··· gmh1 ··· hn . This product may not be reduced, how-
ever: If gm and h1 belong to the same Gα they should be combined into a single letter
(gmh1) according to the multiplication in Gα , and if this new letter gmh1 happens to
be the identity of Gα , it should be cancelled from the product. This may allow gm−1
and h2 to be combined, and possibly cancelled too, etc. For example, in the product
(g1 ··· gm)(g−1
m ··· g−1
1 ) everything cancels and we get the identity element of ∗α Gα ,
the empty word.
Verifying directly that this multiplication is associative would be rather tedious,
but there is an indirect approach which avoids most of the work. Let W be the set
of reduced words g1 ··· gm as above, including the empty word. To each g ∈Gα we
associate the function Lg : W→W given by multiplication on the left, Lg(g1 ··· gm) =
gg1 ··· gm where we combine g with g1 if g1 ∈Gα to make gg1 ··· gm a reduced
word. A key property of the association g , Lg is the formula Lgg′ = LgLg′ for
g, g′ ∈Gα , i.e., g(g′(g1 ··· gm)) = (gg′)(g1 ··· gm). This special case of associativ-
ity follows rather trivially from associativity in Gα . The formula Lgg′ = LgLg′ implies
that Lg is invertible with inverse Lg−1 . Therefore the association g , Lg deﬁnes a
homomorphism from Gα to the group P(W) of all permutations of W . More gener-
ally, we can deﬁne L : W→P(W) by L(g1 ··· gm) = Lg1 ··· Lgm for each reduced word
g1 ··· gm . This function L is injective since the permutation L(g1 ··· gm) sends the
empty word to g1 ··· gm . The product operation in W corresponds under L to com-
position in P(W); this follows from the relation Lgg′ = LgLg′ . Since composition in
P(W) is associative, we conclude that the product in W is associative.
In particular, we have the free product Z ∗Z as described earlier.
This is an
example of a free group, which is the free product of any number of copies of Z,
ﬁnite or inﬁnite. The elements of a free group are uniquely representable as reduced
words in powers of generators for the various copies of Z, with one generator for each
Z, just as in the case of Z ∗Z. These generators are called a basis for the free group,

Section 1.2.
Van Kampen’s Theorem
41
and the number of basis elements is the rank of the free group. The abelianization
of a free group is a free abelian group with basis the same set of generators, so since
the rank of a free abelian group is well-deﬁned, independent of the choice of basis,
the same is true for the rank of a free group.
An interesting example of a free product which is not a free group is Z2 ∗Z2 . This
is like Z∗Z but simpler since a2 = e = b2 , so one doesn’t need powers of a and b, and
Z2 ∗Z2 consists of just the alternating words in a and b: a, b, ab, ba, aba, bab,
abab, baba, ababa, ···, together with the empty word. The structure of Z2 ∗Z2
can be elucidated by looking at the homomorphism ϕ : Z2 ∗Z2→Z2 associating to
each word its length mod 2. Obviously ϕ is surjective, and its kernel consists of the
words of even length. These form an inﬁnite cyclic subgroup generated by ab since
ba = (ab)−1 in Z2 ∗Z2 . In fact, Z2 ∗Z2 is the semi-direct product of the subgroups
Z and Z2 generated by ab and a, with the conjugation relation a(ab)a−1 = (ab)−1 .
This group is sometimes called the inﬁnite dihedral group.
For a general free product ∗α Gα , each group Gα is naturally identiﬁed with a
subgroup of ∗α Gα , the subgroup consisting of the empty word and the nonidentity
one-letter words g ∈Gα . From this viewpoint, the empty word is the common iden-
tity element of all the subgroups Gα , which are otherwise disjoint. A consequence
of associativity is that any product g1 ··· gm of elements gi in the groups Gα has
a unique reduced form, the element of ∗α Gα obtained by performing the multipli-
cations in any order. In fact, any sequence of reduction operations on an unreduced
product g1 ··· gm , combining adjacent letters gi and gi+1 which lie in the same Gα
or cancelling a gi which is the identity, can be viewed as a way of inserting paren-
theses into g1 ··· gm and performing the resulting sequence of multiplications. Thus
associativity implies the nonobvious fact that any two sequences of reduction opera-
tions performed on the same unreduced word always yield the same reduced word in
the end.
A basic property of the free product ∗α Gα is that any collection of homomor-
phisms ϕα : Gα→H extends uniquely to a homomorphism ϕ : ∗α Gα→H . Namely,
the value of ϕ on a word g1 ··· gn with gi ∈Gαi must be ϕα1(g1) ··· ϕαn(gn), and
using this formula to deﬁne ϕ gives a well-deﬁned homomorphism since the process
of reducing an unreduced product in ∗α Gα does not affect its image under ϕ. For
example, for a free product G ∗H the inclusions G > G×H and H > G×H induce
a surjective homomorphism G ∗H→G×H .
The van Kampen Theorem
Suppose a space X is decomposed as the union of a collection of path-connected
open subsets Aα , each containing the basepoint x0 ∈X . By the remarks made in the
preceding paragraph, the homomorphisms jα : π1(Aα)→π1(X) induced by the inclu-
sions Aα > X extend to a homomorphism Φ : ∗α π1(Aα)→π1(X). The van Kampen

42
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
theorem will say that Φ is very often surjective, but we can expect Φ to have a nontriv-
ial kernel in general. For if iαβ : π1(Aα ∩Aβ)→π1(Aα) is the homomorphism induced
by the inclusion Aα ∩Aβ > Aα then jαiαβ = jβiβα , both these compositions being
induced by the inclusion Aα ∩Aβ > X , so the kernel of Φ contains all the elements
of the form iαβ(ω)iβα(ω)−1 for ω ∈π1(Aα ∩Aβ). Van Kampen’s theorem asserts
that under fairly broad hypotheses this gives a full description of Φ:
Theorem 1.20. If X is the union of path-connected open sets Aα each containing
the basepoint x0 ∈X and if each intersection Aα ∩Aβ is path-connected, then
Φ : ∗α π1(Aα)→π1(X) is surjective. If in addition each intersection Aα ∩Aβ ∩Aγ
is path-connected, then the kernel of Φ is the normal subgroup N generated by all
elements of the form iαβ(ω)iβα(ω)−1 , and so Φ induces an isomorphism π1(X) ≈
∗α π1(Aα)/N .
Example 1.21: Wedge sums. In Chapter 0 we deﬁned the wedge sum
W
α Xα of a col-
lection of spaces Xα with basepoints xα ∈Xα to be the quotient space of the disjoint
union
`
α Xα in which all the basepoints xα are identiﬁed to a single point. If each xα
is a deformation retract of an open neighborhood Uα in Xα , then Xα is a deformation
retract of its open neighborhood Xα
W
β≠α Uβ . Letting Aα be this neighborhood, then
the intersection of two or more distinct Aα ’s is
W
α Uα which deformation retracts to
a point. Hence van Kampen’s theorem implies that Φ : ∗α π1(Xα)→π1(
W
α Xα) is an
isomorphism.
In particular, for a wedge sum
W
α S1
α of circles, π1(
W
α S1
α) is a free group, the free
product of copies of Z, one for each circle S1
α . For instance, π1(S1 ∨S1) ≈Z ∗Z, as
in the example at the beginning of this section.
It is true more generally that the fundamental group of any connected graph is
free, as we show in §1A. Here is an example illustrating the general technique.
Example 1.22. Let X be the graph shown in the ﬁgure, consist-
ing of the twelve edges of a cube. The seven heavily shaded edges
form a maximal tree T ⊂X , a contractible subgraph containing all
the vertices of X . We claim that π1(X) is the free product of ﬁve
copies of Z, one for each edge not in T . To deduce this from van
Kampen’s theorem, choose for each edge eα of X −T an open neighborhood Aα of
T ∪eα in X which deformation retracts onto T ∪eα . The intersection of two or more
Aα ’s deformation retracts onto T , hence is contractible. The Aα ’s form a cover of
X satisfying the hypotheses of van Kampen’s theorem, and since the intersection of
any two of them is simply-connected we obtain an isomorphism π1(X) ≈∗α π1(Aα).
Each Aα deformation retracts onto a circle, so π1(X) is free on ﬁve generators, as
claimed. As explicit generators we can choose for each edge eα of X −T a loop fα
which starts at a basepoint in T , travels in T to one end of eα , then across eα , then
back to the basepoint along a path in T .

Section 1.2.
Van Kampen’s Theorem
43
Notice in this example that the graph is embedded in the plane with ﬁve bounded
complementary regions. The ﬁve boundary loops of these regions, when connected
to a common basepoint by paths, also form free generators for π1(X). This can be
shown by an inductive argument using van Kampen’s theorem.
Van Kampen’s theorem is often applied when there are just two sets Aα and Aβ
in the cover of X , so the condition on triple intersections Aα ∩Aβ ∩Aγ is vacuous and
one obtains the isomorphism π1(X) ≈π1(Aα) ∗π1(Aβ)/N , under the assumption
that Aα ∩Aβ is path-connected. The proof in this special case is virtually identical
with the proof in the general case, however.
One can see that the intersections Aα ∩Aβ need to be path-connected by con-
sidering the example of S1 decomposed as the union of two open arcs. In this case
Φ is not surjective. For an example showing that triple intersections Aα ∩Aβ ∩Aγ
need to be path-connected, let X be the suspension of three points
a, b, c , and let Aα, Aβ , and Aγ be the complements of these three
a
b
c
points. The theorem does apply to the covering {Aα, Aβ}, so π1(X) ≈
π1(Aα)∗π1(Aβ) ≈Z∗Z since Aα ∩Aβ is contractible. If we tried to use the covering
{Aα, Aβ, Aγ} which has each of the two-fold intersections path-connected but not the
triple intersection, then we would get π1(X) ≈Z ∗Z ∗Z, but this is not isomorphic
to Z ∗Z since it has a different abelianization.
Proof of van Kampen’s theorem: First we show Φ is surjective. Given a loop f : I→X
at the basepoint x0 , we claim there is a partition 0 = s0 < s1 < ··· < sm = 1 of I
such that each subinterval [si−1, si] is mapped by f to a single Aα . Namely, since f
is continuous, each s ∈I has an open neighborhood Vs in I mapped by f to some
Aα . We may in fact take Vs to be an interval whose closure is mapped to a single
Aα . Compactness of I implies that a ﬁnite number of these intervals cover I . The
endpoints of this ﬁnite set of intervals then deﬁne the desired partition of I .
Denote the Aα containing f ([si−1, si]) by Ai , and let fi be the path obtained
by restricting f to [si−1, si]. Then f is the composition f1
··· fm with fi a path
in Ai .
Since Ai ∩Ai+1 is path-connected, we may
choose a path gi in Ai ∩Ai+1 from x0 to the point
f(si) ∈Ai ∩Ai+1 . Consider the loop
g1
g2
2
f
1f
3
f
Aα
Aβ
x0
(f1 g1) (g1 f2 g2) (g2 f3 g3) ··· (gm−1 fm)
which is homotopic to f . This loop is a composition
of loops each lying in a single Ai , the loops indicated
by the parentheses. Hence [f ] is in the image of Φ, and Φ is surjective.
The harder part of the proof is to show that the kernel of Φ is N . It may clarify
matters to introduce some terminology. By a factorization of an element [f ] ∈π1(X)
we shall mean a formal product [f1] ··· [fk] where:

44
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
— Each fi is a loop in some Aαi at the basepoint x0 , and [fi] ∈π1(Aαi) is the
homotopy class of fi .
— The loop f is homotopic to f1
··· fk in X .
Thus a factorization can be regarded as a word in ∗α π1(Aα), possibly unreduced,
which is mapped by Φ onto the given [f ] ∈π1(X). The proof of surjectivity of Φ
showed that every [f ] ∈π1(X) has a factorization.
We will be concerned now with the uniqueness of factorizations. Call two factor-
izations of [f ] equivalent if they are related by a sequence of the following two sorts
of moves or their inverses:
— Combine adjacent terms [fi][fi+1] into a single term [fi fi+1] if [fi] and [fi+1]
lie in the same group π1(Aα), or in other words, if αi = αi+1 .
— Regard the term [fi] as lying in the group π1(Aα′
i) rather than π1(Aαi) if fi is
a loop in Aαi ∩Aα′
i .
The ﬁrst move does not change the element of ∗α π1(Aα) deﬁned by the factorization.
The second move does not change the image of this element in the quotient group
Q = ∗α π1(Aα)/N , by the deﬁnition of N . So equivalent factorizations give the same
element of Q.
If we can show that any two factorizations of [f ] are equivalent, this will say that
the map Q→π1(X) induced by Φ is injective, hence the kernel of Φ is exactly N and
the proof will be complete.
Let [f1] ··· [fk] and [f ′
1] ··· [f ′
ℓ] be two factorizations of [f ]. The composed
paths f1
··· fk and f ′
1
··· f ′
ℓare then homotopic, so let F : I×I→X be a homo-
topy from f1
··· fk to f ′
1
··· f ′
ℓ. There exist partitions 0 = s0 < s1 < ··· < sm = 1
and 0 = t0 < t1 < ··· < tn = 1 such that each rectangle Rij = [si−1, si]×[tj−1, tj] is
mapped by F into a single Aα , which we label Aij . These partitions may be obtained
by covering I×I by ﬁnitely many rectangles [a, b]×[c, d] each mapping to a single
Aα , using a compactness argument, then partitioning I×I by the union of all the
horizontal and vertical lines containing edges of these rectangles. We may assume
the si partition subdivides the partitions giving the prod-
ucts f1
··· fk and f ′
1
··· f ′
ℓ.
Since F maps a neigh-
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
borhood of Rij to Aij , we may perturb the vertical sides of
the rectangles Rij so that each point of I×I lies in at most
three Rij ’s. We may assume there are at least three rows of
rectangles, so we can do this perturbation just on the rect-
angles in the intermediate rows, leaving the top and bottom rows unchanged. Let us
relabel the new rectangles R1, R2, ··· , Rmn as in the ﬁgure.
If γ is a path in I×I from the left edge to the right edge, then the restriction F ||γ
is a loop at the basepoint x0 since F maps both the left and right edges of I×I to x0 .
Let γr be the path separating the ﬁrst r rectangles R1, ··· , Rr from the remaining

Section 1.2.
Van Kampen’s Theorem
45
rectangles. Thus γ0 is the bottom edge of I×I and γmn is the top edge. We pass
from γr to γr+1 by pushing across the rectangle Rr+1 .
Let us call the corners of the Rr ’s vertices. For each vertex v with F(v) ≠x0 , let
gv be a path from x0 to F(v). We can choose gv to lie in the intersection of the two or
three Aij ’s corresponding to the Rr ’s containing v since we assume the intersection
of any two or three Aij ’s is path-connected. If we insert into F ||γr the appropriate
paths gvgv at successive vertices, as in the proof of surjectivity of Φ, then we obtain a
factorization of [F ||γr ] by regarding the loop corresponding to a horizontal or vertical
segment between adjacent vertices as lying in the Aij for either of the Rs ’s containing
the segment. Different choices of these containing Rs ’s change the factorization of
[F ||γr ] to an equivalent factorization. Furthermore, the factorizations associated to
successive paths γr and γr+1 are equivalent since pushing γr across Rr+1 to γr+1
changes F ||γr to F ||γr+1 by a homotopy within the Aij corresponding to Rr+1 , and
we can choose this Aij for all the segments of γr and γr+1 in Rr+1 .
We can arrange that the factorization associated to γ0 is equivalent to the factor-
ization [f1] ··· [fk] by choosing the path gv for each vertex v along the lower edge
of I×I to lie not just in the two Aij ’s corresponding to the Rs ’s containing v , but also
to lie in the Aα for the fi containing v in its domain. In case v is the common end-
point of the domains of two consecutive fi ’s we have F(v) = x0 , so there is no need
to choose a gv . In similar fashion we may assume that the factorization associated
to the ﬁnal γmn is equivalent to [f ′
1] ··· [f ′
ℓ].
Since the factorizations associated
to all the γr ’s are equivalent, we conclude that the factorizations [f1] ··· [fk] and
[f ′
1] ··· [f ′
ℓ] are equivalent.
⊔⊓
Example 1.23: Linking of Circles. We can apply van Kampen’s theorem to calculate
the fundamental groups of three spaces discussed in the introduction to this chapter,
the complements in R3 of a single circle, two unlinked circles, and two linked circles.
The complement R3 −A of a single circle A
deformation retracts onto a wedge sum S1 ∨S2
embedded in R3 −A as shown in the ﬁrst of
the two ﬁgures. It may be easier to see that
A
A
R3 −A deformation retracts onto the the union
of S2 with a diameter, as in the second ﬁgure,
where points outside S2 deformation retract onto S2 , and then points inside S2 and
not in A can be pushed away from A toward S2 or the diameter. Having this deforma-
tion retraction in mind, one can then see how it must be modiﬁed if the two endpoints
of the diameter are gradually moved towards each other along the equator until they
coincide, forming the S1 summand of S1 ∨S2 . Another way of seeing the deforma-
tion retraction of R3 −A onto S1 ∨S2 is to note ﬁrst that an open ε neighborhood of
S1∨S2 obviously deformation retracts onto S1∨S2 if ε is sufﬁciently small. Then one

46
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
observes that this neighborhood is homeomorphic to R3 −A by a homeomorphism
which is the identity on S1 ∨S2 . In fact, the neighborhood can be gradually enlarged
by homeomorphisms until it becomes all of R3 −A.
In any event, once we see that R3 −A deformation retracts to S1 ∨S2 , then we
immediately obtain isomorphisms π1(R3 −A) ≈π1(S1 ∨S2) ≈Z since π1(S2) = 0.
In similar fashion, the complement R3 −(A ∪B)
of two unlinked circles A and B deformation retracts
onto S1∨S1∨S2∨S2 , as in the ﬁgure to the right. From
A
B
this we get π1
 R3 −(A ∪B)

≈Z ∗Z.
On the other hand, if A and B are
linked, then R3 −(A ∪B) deformation retracts onto the wedge
sum of S2 and a torus S1×S1 separating A and B , as shown in
the ﬁgure to the left, and from this we get π1
 R3 −(A ∪B)

≈
π1(S1×S1) ≈Z×Z.
Example 1.24: Torus Knots. For relatively prime positive integers m and n consider
the torus knot K = Km,n ⊂R3 which is the image of the embedding f : S1→S1×S1 ⊂
R3 , f (z) = (zm, zn), where the torus S1×S1 is embedded in R3 in the standard way.
The knot K then winds around the torus a total of m
times in the longitudinal direction and n times in
the meridional direction, as shown in the ﬁgure for
the cases (m, n) = (2, 3) and (3, 4). One needs to
assume that m and n are relatively prime in order
for the map f to be injective. Without this assumption f would be d to 1 where
d is the greatest common divisor of m and n, and the image of f would be the
knot Km/d,n/d . One could also allow negative values for m or n, but this would only
change K to a mirror-image knot.
Let us compute π1(R3 −K). It is slightly easier to do the calculation with R3
replaced by its one-point compactiﬁcation S3 . An application of van Kampen’s theo-
rem shows that this does not affect π1 . Namely, write S3 −K as the union of R3 −K
and an open ball B formed by the compactiﬁcation point together with the comple-
ment of a large closed ball in R3 containing K . Then B and B ∩(R3 −K) are both
simply-connected, the latter space being homeomorphic to S2×R. Hence van Kam-
pen’s theorem implies that the inclusion R3 −K > S3 −K induces an isomorphism
on π1 .
We compute π1(S3 −K) by showing that it deformation retracts onto a 2 dimen-
sional complex X = Xm,n homeomorphic to the quotient space of a cylinder S1×I
under the identiﬁcations (z, 0) ∼(e2πi/mz, 0) and (z, 1) ∼(e2πi/nz, 1). If we let Xm
and Xn be the two halves of X formed by the quotients of S1×[0, 1/2] and S1×[1/2, 1],
then Xm and Xn are the mapping cylinders of z,zm and z,zn . The intersection

Section 1.2.
Van Kampen’s Theorem
47
Xm ∩Xn is the circle S1×{1/2}, the domain end of each mapping cylinder.
To obtain an embedding of X in S3 −K as a deformation retract we will use
the standard decomposition of S3 into two solid tori S1×D2 and D2×S1 , the result
of writing S3 = ∂D4 = ∂(D2×D2) = ∂D2×D2 ∪D2×∂D2 . Geometrically, the ﬁrst
solid torus S1×D2 can be identiﬁed with the compact region in R3 bounded by the
standard torus S1×S1 containing K , and the second solid torus D2×S1 is then the
closure of the complement of the ﬁrst solid torus, together with the compactiﬁcation
point at inﬁnity. Notice that meridional circles in S1×S1 bound disks in the ﬁrst solid
torus, while it is longitudinal circles that bound disks in the second solid torus.
In the ﬁrst solid torus, K intersects each of the meridian circles
{x}×∂D2 in m equally-spaced points, as indicated in the ﬁgure,
which shows a meridian disk {x}×D2 . These m points can be
K
K
K
separated by a union of m radial line segments. Letting x vary,
these radial segments then trace out a copy of the mapping
cylinder Xm in the ﬁrst solid torus.
Symmetrically, there is a
copy of the other mapping cylinder Xn in the second solid torus. The complement
of K in the ﬁrst solid torus deformation retracts onto Xm by ﬂowing within each
meridian disk as shown. In similar fashion the complement of K in the second solid
torus deformation retracts onto Xn . These two deformation retractions do not agree
on their common domain of deﬁnition S1×S1 −K , but this is easy to correct by
distorting the ﬂows in the two solid tori so that in S1×S1−K both ﬂows are orthogonal
to K . After this modiﬁcation we now have a well-deﬁned deformation retraction of
S3 −K onto X . Another way of describing the situation would be to say that a small
ε neighborhood N of K has frontier a torus T , and S3 −N is the mapping cylinder
of a map T→X .
To compute π1(X) we apply van Kampen’s theorem to the decomposition of X
as the union of Xm and Xn , or more properly, open neighborhoods of these two
sets which deformation retract onto them. Both Xm and Xn are mapping cylinders
which deformation retract onto circles, and Xm ∩Xn is a circle, so all three of these
spaces have fundamental group Z. A loop in Xm˚∩Xn representing a generator of
π1(Xm ∩Xn) is homotopic in Xm to a loop representing m times a generator, and
in Xn to a loop representing n times a generator. Van Kampen’s theorem then says
that π1(X) is the quotient of the free group on generators a and b obtained by
factoring out the normal subgroup generated by the element amb−n . Let us denote
this quotient group by Gm,n .
A basic question in knot theory is whether two given knots are equivalent in the
sense that one can be continuously deformed, without intersecting itself at any time,
until it coincides with the other. It is not hard to see for example that all the knots K1,n
and Km,1 are equivalent to the trivial knot K1,1 , and also that Km,n is equivalent to
Kn,m . There are some subtleties in deﬁning precisely which continuous deformations

48
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
of knots are allowed, but after these have been sorted out one ﬁnds that if K and K′
are equivalent knots, then S3−K and S3−K′ are homeomorphic. Thus if one can show
that the two fundamental groups π1(S3 −K) and π1(S3 −K′) are not isomorphic,
then K and K′ are not equivalent.
Deciding whether two given groups are isomorphic is a very difﬁcult problem
in general, and it is hard even for the fundamental groups π1(S3 −K). However,
in the special case of torus knots there is a rather simple answer: The group Gm,n
uniquely determines m and n if m, n > 1. In other words, if there is an isomorphism
Gm,n ≈Gr,s with m, n, r, s > 1, then {m, n} = {r, s}. To show this the ﬁrst step is to
compute the center of Gm,n , the subgroup consisting of elements which commute with
all elements of Gm,n . The element am = bn commutes with a and b, so the cyclic
subgroup C generated by this element lies in the center. In particular, C is a normal
subgroup, so we can pass to the quotient group Gm,n/C , which is the free product
Zm∗Zn . According to Exercise 1 at the end of this section, a free product of nontrivial
groups has trivial center, and from this it follows that C is exactly the center of Gm,n .
As we will see in Example 1.44, the elements a and b have inﬁnite order in Gm,n , so
C is inﬁnite cyclic, but we do not need this fact for the present argument. Since the
center of a group is intrinsically deﬁned, it remains to show that the integers m and
n are uniquely determined by the group Zm ∗Zn . The abelianization of this group
is Zm×Zn , of order mn, so the product mn is uniquely determined by Zm ∗Zn .
To determine m and n individually, we use another assertion from Exercise 1 at the
end of the section, which says that all torsion elements of Zm ∗Zn are conjugate to
elements of the subgroups Zm and Zn , hence have order dividing m or n. Thus the
maximum order of torsion elements of Zm ∗Zn is the larger of m and n. The larger
of these two numbers is therefore uniquely determined by the group Zm ∗Zn , hence
also the smaller since the product is uniquely determined.
Note that Gm,n is nonabelian if m, n > 1, while G1,n = Gm,1 = Z. Thus no torus
knot Km,n with m, n > 1 is equivalent to the trivial knot K1,1 .
This method for distinguishing the groups π1(S3 −K) for different knots K by
factoring out the center only works for torus knots since it is known that for all other
knots the center of π1(S3 −K) is trivial. An obvious thing to consider in trying to
distinguish these groups would be the abelianization of π1(S3 −K), but this is always
Z as we show in §2B. What does provide much useful information, however, is the
abelianization of the commutator subgroup of π1(S3 −K); see [Rolfsen] for more on
this.
The preceding analysis of π1(Xm,n) does not use the hypothesis that m and n
are relatively prime, which was used only to relate Xm,n to torus knots. An interesting
fact is that Xm,n can be embedded in R3 only when m and n are relatively prime. This
follows from Corollary 3.44 since the abelianization of π1(Xm,n) is easily computed
to be Z×Zd where d is the greatest common divisor of m and n, so if d > 1 this

Section 1.2.
Van Kampen’s Theorem
49
abelianization contains torsion, and this prevents Xm,n from being embeddable in R3 .
For example, X2,2 is the Klein bottle since it is the union of two copies of the M¨obius
band X2 with their boundary circles identiﬁed, so this nonembeddability statement
generalizes the fact that the Klein bottle cannot be embedded in R3 .
Example 1.25: The Shrinking Wedge of Circles. Consider the sub-
space X ⊂R2 which is the union of the circles Cn of radius 1/n and
center (1/n, 0) for n = 1, 2, ···. With the subspace topology from
R2 , an open neighborhood of the origin in X must contain all but
ﬁnitely many of the circles Cn , so the subspace topology on X has
fewer open sets than the usual wedge sum
W
∞S1 of an inﬁnite sequence of circles,
which is a quotient space of
`
∞S1 .
This difference in topologies has a big effect on π1(X), making it much larger
than π1(
W
∞S1). To see this, consider the retractions rn : X→Cn collapsing all Ci ’s
except Cn to the origin. Each rn induces a surjection ρn : π1(X)→π1(Cn) ≈Z, where
we take the origin as the basepoint. The product of the ρn ’s is a homomorphism
ρ : π1(X)→
Q
∞Z to the direct product (not the direct sum) of inﬁnitely many copies
of Z, and ρ is surjective since for every sequence of integers kn we can construct a
loop f : I→X which wraps kn times around Cn in the time interval [1−1/n, 1−1/n+1].
This inﬁnite composition of loops is continuous since X has the subspace topology
from R2 . Since
Q
∞Z is uncountable, so is π1(X). On the other hand, π1(
W
∞S1) is
free on countably many generators, hence is countable. Loops in
W
∞S1 can go around
only ﬁnitely many of the circles since these circles are not shrinking to a point as they
are in X .
The group π1(X) is actually far more complicated than
Q
∞Z. For one thing, it
is nonabelian, since the retraction X→C1 ∪··· ∪Cn which collapses all the circles
smaller than Cn to the basepoint induces a surjection from π1(X) to a free group on
n generators. For a complete description of π1(X) see [Cannon-Conner].
A theorem in [Shelah] asserts that for a compact metric space which is path-
connected and locally path-connected, the fundamental group is either ﬁnitely gener-
ated or uncountable.
Applications to Cell Complexes
For the remainder of this section we shall be interested in 2 dimensional cell
complexes, analyzing how the fundamental group is affected by attaching 2 cells.
According to an exercise at the end of this section, attaching cells of higher dimension
has no effect on π1 , so all the interest lies in how the 2 cells are attached.
Suppose we attach a collection of 2 cells e2
α to a path-connected space X via maps
ϕα : S1→X , producing a space Y . If s0 is a basepoint of S1 then ϕα determines a
loop at ϕα(s0) which we shall call ϕα , even though technically loops are maps I→X
rather than S1→X . For different α’s the basepoints ϕα(s0) of these loops ϕα may

50
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
not all coincide. To remedy this, choose a basepoint x0 ∈X and a path γα in X
from x0 to ϕα(s0) for each α. Then γαϕαγα is a loop at x0 . This loop may not
be nullhomotopic in X , but it will certainly be nullhomotopic in Y after the cell e2
α
is attached. Thus the normal subgroup N ⊂π1(X, x0) generated by all the loops
γαϕαγα for varying α lies in the kernel of the map π1(X, x0)→π1(Y, x0) induced
by the inclusion X > Y .
Proposition 1.26. The inclusion X > Y induces a surjection π1(X, x0)→π1(Y, x0)
whose kernel is N . Thus π1(Y) ≈π1(X)/N .
It follows that N is independent of the choice of the paths γα , but this can also be
seen directly: If we replace γα by another path ηα having the same endpoints, then
γαϕαγα changes to ηαϕαηα = (ηαγα)γαϕαγα(γαηα), so γαϕαγα and ηαϕαηα
deﬁne conjugate elements of π1(X, x0).
Proof: Let us expand Y to a slightly larger space Z which deformation retracts onto Y
and is more convenient for applying van Kampen’s theorem. The space Z is obtained
from Y by attaching rectangular strips Sα = I×I , with the lower edge I×{0} attached
along γα , the right edge {1}×I attached along an arc in e2
α , and all the left edges
{0}×I of the different strips identiﬁed together. The top edges of the strips are not
attached to anything, and this allows us to deformation retract Z onto Y .
S
X
e
x
y
2
0
α
α
α 
α
γ
In each cell e2
α choose a point yα not in the arc along which Sα is attached. Let
A = Z −
S
α{yα} and let B = Z −X . Then A deformation retracts onto X , and B is
contractible. Since π1(B) = 0, van Kampen’s theorem applied to the cover {A, B} says
that π1(Z) is isomorphic to the quotient of π1(A) by the normal subgroup generated
by the image of the map π1(A ∩B)→π1(A). So it remains only to see that π1(A ∩B)
is generated by the loops γαϕαγα , or rather by loops in A ∩B homotopic to these
loops. This can be shown by another application of van Kampen’s theorem, this time
to the cover of A ∩B by the open sets Aα = A ∩B −
S
β≠α e2
β . Since Aα deformation
retracts onto a circle in e2
α−{yα}, we have π1(Aα) ≈Z generated by a loop homotopic
to γαϕαγα , and the result follows.
⊔⊓
As a ﬁrst application we compute the fundamental group of the orientable surface
Mg of genus g. This has a cell structure with one 0 cell, 2g 1 cells, and one 2 cell, as
we saw in Chapter 0. The 1 skeleton is a wedge sum of 2g circles, with fundamental

Section 1.2.
Van Kampen’s Theorem
51
group free on 2g generators, and the 2 cell is attached along the loop given by the
product of the commutators of these generators, say [a1, b1] ··· [ag, bg]. Therefore
π1(Mg) ≈⟨a1, b1, ··· , ag, bg | [a1, b1] ··· [ag, bg] ⟩
where ⟨gα | rβ ⟩denotes the group with generators gα and relators rβ , in other words
the free group on the generators gα modulo the normal subgroup generated by the
words rβ in these generators.
Corollary 1.27. The surface Mg is not homeomorphic, or even homotopy equivalent,
to Mh if g ≠h.
Proof: The abelianization of π1(Mg) is the direct sum of 2g copies of Z.
So if
Mg ≃Mh then π1(Mg) ≈π1(Mh), hence the abelianizations of these groups are iso-
morphic, which implies g = h.
⊔⊓
Non-orientable surfaces can be treated in the same way. If we attach a 2 cell to the
wedge sum of g circles by the word a2
1 ··· a2
g we obtain a nonorientable surface Ng .
For example, N1 is the projective plane RP2 , the quotient of D2 with antipodal points
of ∂D2 identiﬁed. And N2 is the Klein bottle, though the more usual representation
a
a
1
2
N
2
N
=
a
b
a
b
c
a
a
c
c
b
RP :
−−−−−−−
:
−−−−
of the Klein bottle is as a square with opposite sides identiﬁed via the word aba−1b.
If one cuts the square along a diagonal and reassembles the resulting two triangles
as shown in the ﬁgure, one obtains the other representation as a square with sides
identiﬁed via the word a2c2 . By the proposition, π1(Ng) ≈⟨a1, ··· , ag | a2
1 ··· a2
g ⟩.
This abelianizes to the direct sum of Z2 with g −1 copies of Z since in the abelian-
ization we can rechoose the generators to be a1, ··· , ag−1 and a1 + ··· + ag , with
2(a1 + ··· + ag) = 0. Hence Ng is not homotopy equivalent to Nh if g ≠h, nor is
Ng homotopy equivalent to any orientable surface Mh .
Another consequence of the preceding proposition is:
Corollary 1.28. For every group G there is a 2 dimensional cell complex XG with
π1(XG) ≈G.
Proof: Choose a presentation G = ⟨gα | rβ ⟩.
This exists since every group is a
quotient of a free group, so the gα ’s can be taken to be the generators of this free
group with the rβ ’s generators of the kernel of the map from the free group to G.
Now construct XG from
W
α S1
α by attaching 2 cells e2
β by the loops speciﬁed by the
words rβ .
⊔⊓

52
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
Example 1.29. If G = ⟨a | an ⟩= Zn then XG is S1 with a cell e2 attached by the map
z , zn , thinking of S1 as the unit circle in C. When n = 2 we get XG = RP2 , but
for n > 2 the space XG is not a surface since there
are n ‘sheets’ of e2 attached at each point of the
circle S1 ⊂XG . For example, when n = 3 one can
construct a neighborhood N of S1 in XG by taking
the product of the letter ‘Y ’ with the interval I , then
identifying the two ends of this product via a one-third twist as shown in the ﬁgure.
The boundary of N consists of a single circle, formed by the three endpoints of each
‘Y ’ cross section of N . To complete the construction of XG from N one attaches
a disk along the boundary circle of N . This cannot be done in R3 , though it can in
R4 . For n = 4 one would use the letter ‘X ’ instead of ‘Y ,’ with a one-quarter twist
instead of a one-third twist. For larger n one would use an n pointed ‘asterisk’ and
a 1/n twist.
Exercises
1. Show that the free product G ∗H of nontrivial groups G and H has trivial center,
and that the only elements of G ∗H of ﬁnite order are the conjugates of ﬁnite-order
elements of G and H .
2. Let X ⊂Rm be the union of convex open sets X1, ··· , Xn such that Xi∩Xj ∩Xk ≠∅
for all i, j, k. Show that X is simply-connected.
3. Show that the complement of a ﬁnite set of points in Rn is simply-connected if
n ≥3.
4. Let X ⊂R3 be the union of n lines through the origin. Compute π1(R3 −X).
5. Let X ⊂R2 be a ﬁnite graph which is the union of the edges of a convex polygon
and a ﬁnite number of line segments having endpoints on these edges.
(a) Show that π1(X) is free with a basis consisting of loops formed by the boundaries
of the bounded complementary regions of X , joined to a basepoint by paths in X .
(b) Show this is true for all choices of paths to the basepoint.
6. Suppose a space Y is obtained from a path-connected subspace X by attaching
n cells for a ﬁxed n ≥3. Show that the inclusion X > Y induces an isomorphism
on π1 . [See the proof of Proposition 1.26.] Apply this to show that the complement
of a discrete subspace of Rn is simply-connected if n ≥3.
7. Let X be the quotient space of S2 obtained by identifying the north and south
poles to a single point. Put a cell complex structure on X and use this to compute
π1(X).

Section 1.2.
Van Kampen’s Theorem
53
8. Compute the fundamental group of the space obtained from two tori S1×S1 by
identifying a circle S1×{x0} in one torus with the corresponding circle S1×{x0} in
the other torus.
9. Let C be a circle in the surface Mg
of genus g which separates Mg into
two compact subsurfaces M′
h and M′
k
obtained from the closed surfaces Mh
′
M
C
C
h
′
′
Mk
and Mk by deleting an open disk from each. Show that M′
h does not retract onto
its boundary circle C , and hence Mg does not retract onto C . [Hint: abelianize π1 .]
But show that Mg does retract onto the nonseparating circle C′ in the ﬁgure.
α
β
γ
10. Consider two arcs α and β embedded in D2×I as
shown in the ﬁgure. The loop γ is obviously nullhomo-
topic in D2×I , but show that there is no nullhomotopy of
γ in the complement of α ∪β.
11.
The mapping torus Tf of a map f : X→X is the quotient of X×I obtained
by identifying each point (x, 0) with (f (x), 1).
In the case X = S1 ∨S1 with f
basepoint-preserving, compute a presentation for π1(Tf ) in terms of the induced
map f∗: π1(X)→π1(X). Do the same when X = S1×S1 . [One way to do this is to
regard Tf as built from X ∨S1 by attaching cells.]
12. The Klein bottle is usually pictured as a subspace of R3 like the subspace X ⊂R3
shown in the ﬁrst ﬁgure below. If one wanted a model which could actually function
as a bottle, one would delete the open disk bounded by the circle of self-intersection
of X , producing a subspace Y ⊂X . Show that π1(X) ≈Z ∗Z and that π1(Y) has
the presentation ⟨a, b, c | aba−1b−1cbεc−1 ⟩for ε = ±1. (Changing the sign of ε
gives an isomorphic group, as it happens.) Show also that π1(Y) is isomorphic to
π1(R3 −Z) for Z the graph shown in the second ﬁgure. [The group π1(Y) is not free;
see the discussion in Example 1B.13.]
13. The space Y in the preceding exercise can be obtained from a disk with two holes
by identifying its three boundary circles. There are only two essentially different ways
of identifying the three boundary circles. Show that the other way yields a space Z
with π1(Z) not isomorphic to π1(Y). [Abelianize the fundamental groups to show
they are not isomorphic.]
14. Consider the quotient space of a cube I3 obtained by identifying each square
face with the opposite square face via the right-handed screw motion consisting of

54
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
a translation by one unit in the direction perpendicular to the face combined with a
one-quarter twist of the face about its center point. Show this quotient space X is a
cell complex with two 0 cells, four 1 cells, three 2 cells, and one 3 cell. Using this
structure, show that π1(X) is the quaternion group {±1, ±i, ±j, ±k}, of order eight.
15. Given a space X with basepoint x0 ∈X , we may construct a CW complex L(X)
having a single 0 cell, a 1 cell for each loop in X based at x0 , and a 2 cell for each
map of a standard triangle T into X taking the three vertices to the basepoint. Such
a 2 cell is attached to the three 1 cells which are the loops obtained by restricting the
map to the three edges of T . Show that π1
 L(X)

is isomorphic to π1(X, x0) via an
isomorphism induced by a natural map L(X)→X .
16. Show that the fundamental group of the surface of inﬁnite genus shown below is
free on an inﬁnite number of generators.
17. Show that π1(R2 −Q2) is uncountable.
18. If X is the subspace of R2 consisting of the four sides of the square [0, 1]×[0, 1]
together with the portions of the vertical lines x = 1/2, 1/3, 1/4, ··· inside the square,
show that π1(X) is free on a countable set of generators.
19. Show that the subspace of R3 which is the union of the spheres of radius 1/n and
center (1/n, 0, 0) for n = 1, 2, ··· is simply-connected.
20. Let X be the subspace of R2 which is the union of the circles Cn of radius n and
center (n, 0) for n = 1, 2, ···. Show that π1(X) is the free group ∗n π1(Cn), the same
as for the inﬁnite wedge sum
W
∞S1 . Show that X and
W
∞S1 are in fact homotopy
equivalent, but not homeomorphic.
21. Show that the join X ∗Y of two nonempty spaces X and Y is simply-connected
if X is path-connected.

Section 1.3.
Covering Spaces
55
We come now to the second main topic of this chapter, covering spaces. We have
in fact already encountered one example of a covering space in our calculation of
π1(S1). This was the map R→S1 which we pictured as the projection of a helix onto
a circle. One thinks of the helix as lying above, or ‘covering,’ the circle. A number
of things we proved for this helix example hold true for all covering spaces, and this
allows covering spaces to serve as a useful tool for calculating fundamental groups in
general. But there is much more to the story than this, and the connection between
fundamental group and covering spaces is so close that in many ways they can be
regarded as two viewpoints toward the same thing. This means that algebraic features
of the fundamental group can often be translated into the geometric language of
covering spaces. This is exempliﬁed in one of the main results in this section, giving
an exact correspondence between the various connected covering spaces of a given
space X and subgroups of π1(X). This is strikingly reminiscent of Galois theory, with
its correspondence between ﬁeld extensions and subgroups of the Galois group.
Let us begin with the deﬁnition. A covering space of a space X is a space eX
together with a map p : eX→X satisfying the following condition: There exists an
open cover {Uα} of X such that for each α, p−1(Uα) is a disjoint union of open sets
in eX , each of which is mapped by p homeomorphically onto Uα . We do not require
that p−1(Uα) be nonempty, so p need not be surjective.
In the helix example one has p : R→S1 given by p(t) = (cos 2πt, sin 2πt), and
the cover {Uα} can be taken to consist of any two open arcs whose union is S1 .
A related example is the helicoid surface S ⊂R3 consisting of points of the form
(s cos 2πt, s sin 2πt, t) for (s, t) ∈(0, ∞)×R. This projects onto R2 −{0} via the
map (x, y, z), (x, y), and this projection deﬁnes a covering space p : S→R2 −{0}
since for each open disk U in R2 −{0}, p−1(U) consists of countably many disjoint
open disks in S each mapped homeomorphically onto U by p.
p
Another example is the map p : S1→S1 , p(z) = zn where we
view z as a complex number with |z| = 1 and n is any positive
integer. The closest one can come to realizing this covering space
as a linear projection in 3 space analogous to the projection of the
helix is to draw a circle wrapping around a cylinder n times and
intersecting itself in n −1 points which one has to imagine are not
really intersections.
For an alternative picture without this ﬂaw,
embed S1 in the boundary torus of a solid torus S1×D2 so that it winds n times
monotonically around the S1 factor without self-intersections, then restrict the pro-
jection S1×D2→S1×{0} to this embedded circle. The ﬁgure for Example 1.29 in the

56
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
preceding section illustrates the case n = 3.
As our general theory will show, these examples for n ≥1 together with the
helix example exhaust all the connected coverings spaces of S1 .
There are many
other disconnected covering spaces of S1 , such as n disjoint circles each mapped
homeomorphically onto S1 , but these disconnected covering spaces are just disjoint
unions of connected ones. We will usually restrict our attention to connected covering
spaces as these contain most of the interesting features of covering spaces.
The covering spaces of S1 ∨S1 form a remarkably rich family illustrating most of
the general theory very concretely, so let us look at a small sample of these covering
spaces to get an idea of what is going on.
To abbreviate notation, set X = S1 ∨S1 . We view this as a
graph with one vertex and two edges. We label the edges a
b
a
and b and we choose orientations for a and b. Now let eX be
any other graph with four edges meeting at each vertex, and suppose the edges of eX
have been assigned labels a and b and orientations in such a way that the local picture
near each vertex is the same as in X , so there is an a edge oriented toward the vertex,
an a edge oriented away from the vertex, a b edge oriented toward the vertex, and a
b edge oriented away from the vertex. To give a name to this structure, let us call eX
a 2 oriented graph. The table on the next page shows a number of examples. (What
the pictures in (12)-(14) mean will become clear a couple paragraphs below when we
describe a similar example in more detail.)
Given a 2 oriented graph eX we can construct a map p : eX→X sending all vertices
of eX to the vertex of X and sending each edge of eX to the edge of X with the same
label by a map which is a homeomorphism on the interior of the edge and preserves
orientation. It is clear that the covering space condition is satisﬁed for p. The con-
verse is also true: Every covering space of X is a graph which inherits a 2 orientation
from X .
As the reader will discover by experimentation, it seems that every graph having
four edges incident at each vertex can be 2 oriented. This can be proved for ﬁnite
graphs as follows. A very classical and easily shown fact is that every ﬁnite connected
graph with an even number of edges incident at each vertex has an Eulerian circuit,
a loop traversing each edge exactly once. If there are four edges at each vertex, then
labelling the edges of an Eulerian circuit alternately a and b produces a labelling with
two a and two b edges at each vertex. The union of the a edges is then a collection of
disjoint circles, as is the union of the b edges, and choosing orientations for all these
circles gives a 2 orientation. It is a theorem in graph theory that inﬁnite graphs with
four edges incident at each vertex can also be 2 oriented; see Chapter 13 of [Koenig]
for a proof. There is also a generalization to n oriented graphs, which are covering
spaces of the wedge sum of n circles.

Section 1.3.
Covering Spaces
57
a
b
b
a
⟩
bab
⟨a, b ,
2
-1
a
a
a
b
b
b
⟨ab⟩
a
a
a
b
b
b
a
a
b
b
a
a
a
b
b
b
a
a
a
b
b
b
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
b
b
b b
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a b
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
a
a
a
1
2
4
3
( )
( )
( )
( )
5
( )
6
( )
7
( )
8
( )
9
( )
10
(
)
11
(
)
12
(
)
13
(
)
14
(
)
⟨a⟩
bab
⟨a
-1⟩
-1
-1
⟨a ,
,
,
aba
bab
b
⟩
2
2
⟨a ,
,
,
,
ab
a
ab
b
⟩
2
2
2
-1
-1
-1
⟨a,
,
,
ba b
baba
b
b ⟩
2
2
-1
-1
⟨a ,
,
,
ab
a
b
b
⟩
3
3
⟨a ,
,
,
ab ba
b
⟩
3
3
⟨a ,
, ab
b
⟩
2
2
⟨a ,
,
,
,
ab
a b
ba
b
⟩
4
4
2
2
⟨a ,
,
,
,
,
,
ab
bab
b
ba
b
⟩
2
2
4
(
)
ba 2
2
(
)
-1
-2
+1
-2n
-2n
-1
ab
b
⟨
-n
n
|
⟩
Z
∈
n
ab
b
⟨
2n
ab
b 2n
|
⟩
Z
∈
n

58
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
The ﬁgure to the right shows a rather special 2 oriented graph
which can be constructed concretely as a subspace of R2 by the
following procedure. Start with the open intervals (−1, 1) in
the x and y axes. Next, for a ﬁxed number λ, 0 < λ < 1/2,
for example λ = 1/3, adjoin four open segments of length
2λ, at distance λ from the ends of the previous segments
and perpendicular to them, the new shorter segments being bi-
sected by the older ones. For the third stage, add perpendicular
open segments of length 2λ2 at distance λ2 from the endpoints of all the previous
segments and bisected by them. The process is now repeated indeﬁnitely, at the nth
stage adding open segments of length 2λn−1 at distance λn−1 from all the previous
endpoints. The union of all these open segments is a graph, with vertices the intersec-
tion points of horizontal and vertical segments, and edges the subsegments between
adjacent vertices. We label all the horizontal edges a, oriented to the right, and all
the vertical edges b, oriented upward.
The special feature of this covering space is that it is simply-connected. It is called
the universal cover of X because, as our general theory will show, it is a covering space
of every other connected covering space of X .
The covering spaces (1)-(14) in the table are all nonsimply-connected. Their fun-
damental groups are free, namely, free products of Z’s with generators the loops
given by the listed words in a and b, starting at the basepoint ex0 indicated by the
heavily shaded vertex. This can be proved in each case by applying van Kampen’s the-
orem. One can also interpret the list of words as generators of the image subgroup
p∗
 π1( eX, ex0)

in π1(X, x0) = ⟨a, b⟩. A general fact we shall prove about covering
spaces is that the induced map p∗: π1( eX, ex0)→π1(X, x0) is always injective. Thus
we have the at-ﬁrst-glance-paradoxical fact that the free group on two generators can
contain as a subgroup a free group on any ﬁnite number of generators, or even on a
countably inﬁnite set of generators as in examples (10) and (11).
Changing the basepoint vertex changes the subgroup p∗
 π1( eX, ex0)

to a conju-
gate subgroup in π1(X, x0), in fact conjugate by the element of π1(X, x0) deﬁned by
a path joining one basepoint to the other. For example, the covering spaces (3) and
(4) differ only in the choice of basepoints, and the corresponding subgroups of Z ∗Z
differ by conjugation by b.
The main classiﬁcation theorem for covering spaces says that by associating the
subgroup p∗
 π1( eX, ex0)

to the covering space p : eX→X , we obtain a one-to-one cor-
respondence between all the different connected covering spaces of X and the conju-
gacy classes of subgroups of π1(X). If one keeps track of the basepoint vertex ex0 ∈eX ,
then this is a one-to-one correspondence between covering spaces p : ( eX, ex0)→(X, x0)
and actual subgroups of π1(X, x0), not just conjugacy classes. Of course, for these
statements to make sense one has to have a precise notion of when two covering

Section 1.3.
Covering Spaces
59
spaces are the same, or ‘isomorphic.’ In the case at hand, two covering spaces of
X are isomorphic iff there is a homeomorphism between them which preserves the
labeling and orientations of edges. Thus the covering spaces in (3) and (4) are isomor-
phic, but not by an isomorphism preserving basepoints, so the two corresponding
subgroups of Z ∗Z are distinct but conjugate. On the other hand, the two covering
spaces in (5) and (6) are not isomorphic, though the graphs are homeomorphic, so the
two corresponding subgroups of index 3 are isomorphic but not conjugate.
Another feature which might be observed is that some of the covering spaces
are more symmetric than others, where by a ‘symmetry’ we mean a homeomorphism
from the graph to itself which preserves the labelings and orientations. Speciﬁcally,
one can ask in each case whether there are symmetries taking any one vertex onto any
other. The examples (1), (2), (5)-(8), and (11) are the ones with this symmetry property.
We shall see that having this symmetry property is equivalent to the corresponding
subgroup of Z ∗Z being a normal subgroup. And if the covering space does have
this symmetry property, then its symmetries form a group isomorphic to the quotient
group of Z∗Z by the normal subgroup. Since every group generated by two elements is
a quotient group of Z∗Z, this implies that every two-generator group is the symmetry
group of some covering space of X .
Lifting Properties
Covering spaces are deﬁned in fairly geometric terms, as maps p : eX→X which
are local homeomorphisms in a rather strong sense. But from the viewpoint of alge-
braic topology, the distinctive feature of covering spaces is their behavior with respect
to lifting of maps. Recall the terminology from the proof of Theorem 1.7: a lift of a
map f : Y→X is a map ef : Y→eX such that p ef = f . We will describe three special
lifting properties of covering spaces, and derive a few applications of these.
First we have the homotopy lifting property, or covering homotopy property
as it is sometimes called:
Proposition 1.30. Given a covering space p : eX→X , a homotopy ft : Y→X , and a
map ef0 : Y→eX lifting f0 , then there exists a unique homotopy eft : Y→eX of ef0 which
lifts ft .
Proof: For the covering space p : R→S1 this is property (c) in the proof of Theo-
rem 1.7, and the proof there applies to any covering space.
⊔⊓
Taking Y to be a point gives the following path lifting property for a covering
space p : eX→X : For each path f : I→X starting at a point x0 ∈X and each ex0 ∈
p−1(x0) there is a unique path ef : I→eX lifting f starting at ex0 . In particular, the
uniqueness of lifts implies that every lift of a constant path is constant, but this could
be deduced more simply from the fact that p−1(x0) has the discrete topology, by the
deﬁnition of a covering space.

60
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
Taking Y to be I , we see that every homotopy ft of a path f0 in X lifts to a
homotopy eft of each lift ef0 of f0 . The lifted homotopy eft is a homotopy of paths,
ﬁxing the endpoints, since as t varies, each endpoint of eft traces out a path lifting a
constant path, which must therefore be constant.
Here is a simple application:
Proposition 1.31. The map p∗: π1( eX, ex0)→π1(X, x0) induced by a covering space
p : ( eX, ex0)→(X, x0) is injective. The image subgroup p∗
 π1( eX, ex0)

in π1(X, x0)
consists of the homotopy classes of loops in X based at x0 whose lifts to eX starting
at ex0 are loops.
Proof: An element of the kernel of p∗is represented by a loop ef0 : I→eX with a
homotopy ft : I→X of f0 = p ef0 to the trivial loop f1 . By the remarks preceding the
proposition, there is a lifted homotopy of loops eft starting with ef0 and ending with
a constant loop. Hence [ ef0] = 0 in π1( eX, ex0) and p∗is injective.
For the other statement of the proposition, certainly loops at x0 lifting to loops
at ex0 represent elements of the image of p∗: π1( eX, ex0)→π1(X, x0). Conversely, a
loop representing an element of the image of p∗is homotopic to a loop having such
a lift, hence, by homotopy lifting, the loop itself must have such a lift.
⊔⊓
If p : eX→X is a covering space, then the cardinality of the set p−1(x) is locally
constant over X , hence if X is connected, this cardinality is constant as x ranges
over all of X . It is called the number of sheets of the covering.
Proposition 1.32. The number of sheets of a covering space p : ( eX, ex0)→(X, x0)
with X and eX path-connected equals the index of p∗
 π1( eX, ex0)

in π1(X, x0).
Proof: For a loop g in X based at x0 , let eg be its lift to eX starting at ex0 . A product
h g with [h] ∈H = p∗
 π1( eX, ex0)

has the lift eh
eg ending at the same point as eg
since eh is a loop. Thus we may deﬁne a function Φ from cosets H[g] to p−1(x0)
by sending H[g] to eg(1). The path-connectedness of eX implies that Φ is surjective
since ex0 can be joined to any point in p−1(x0) by a path eg projecting to a loop g at
x0 . To see that Φ is injective, observe that Φ(H[g1]) = Φ(H[g2]) implies that g1g2
lifts to a loop in eX based at ex0 , so [g1][g2]−1 ∈H and hence H[g1] = H[g2].
⊔⊓
It is useful to know about the existence and uniqueness of lifts not just of homo-
topies, but of general maps. For the question of when lifts exist an answer is provided
by the following lifting criterion:
Proposition 1.33. Suppose given a covering space p : ( eX, ex0)→(X, x0) and a map
f : (Y, y0)→(X, x0) with Y path-connected and locally path-connected. Then a lift
ef : (Y, y0)→( eX, ex0) of f exists iff f∗
 π1(Y, y0)

⊂p∗
 π1( eX, ex0)

.

Section 1.3.
Covering Spaces
61
When we say a space has a certain property locally, such as being locally path-
connected, we shall mean that each point has arbitrarily small open neighborhoods
with this property. Thus for Y to be locally path-connected means that for each point
y ∈Y and each neighborhood U of y , there is an open neighborhood V ⊂U of
y which is path-connected. Some authors weaken the requirement that V be path-
connected to the condition that any two points in V be joinable by a path in U .
This broader deﬁnition would work just as well for our purposes, necessitating only
small adjustments in the proofs, but for simplicity we shall use the more restrictive
deﬁnition.
Proof: The ‘only if’ statement is obvious since f∗= p∗ef∗.
For the converse, let
y ∈Y and let γ be a path in Y from y0 to y . The path f γ in X starting at x0
has a unique lift g
f γ starting at ex0 . Deﬁne ef (y) = g
f γ(1). To show this is well-
deﬁned, independent of the choice of γ , let γ′ be another path from y0 to y . Then
(fγ′) (f γ) is a loop h0 at x0 with [h0] ∈f∗
 π1(Y, y0)

⊂p∗
 π1( eX, ex0)

. This
means there is a homotopy ht of h0 to a loop h1 which
lifts to a loop eh1 in eX based at ex0 . Apply the cover-
ing homotopy property to ht to get a lifting eht .
Since eh1 is a loop at ex0 , so is eh0 . By the
uniqueness of lifted paths, the ﬁrst half
of eh0 is g
f γ′ and the second half
is g
f γ traversed backwards,
with the common midpoint
g
fγ(1) = g
f γ′(1). This shows ef is well-deﬁned.
γ
γ
y
y
y
f
f
p
f
γ
f
x
0
0
(
)
′
γ ′
f
f
g
gγ
y
f
f
f
f
γ
f
x0
(
)
′
To see that ef is continuous, let U ⊂X be an open neighborhood of f (y) having
a lift eU ⊂eX containing ef (y) such that p : eU→U is a homeomorphism. Choose a
path-connected open neighborhood V of y with f (V) ⊂U . For paths from y0 to
points y′ ∈V we can take a ﬁxed path γ from y0 to y followed by paths η in
V from y to the points y′ . Then the paths (f γ) (f η) in X have lifts (g
f γ) (g
f η)
where g
f η = p−1f η and p−1 : U→eU is the inverse of p : eU→U . Thus ef (V) ⊂eU and
ef|V = p−1f , hence ef is continuous at y .
⊔⊓
An example showing the necessity of the local path-connectedness assumption
on Y is described in Exercise 7 at the end of the section.
Next we have the unique lifting property:
Proposition 1.34. Given a covering space p : eX→X and a map f : Y→X with two
lifts ef1, ef2 : Y→eX which agree at one point of Y , then if Y is connected, these two
lifts must agree on all of Y .
Proof: For a point y ∈Y , let U1 and U2 be neighborhoods of ef1(y) and ef2(y),
respectively, mapping homeomorphically to a neighborhood U of Y by p, as in the

62
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
deﬁnition of a covering space. By continuity there is a neighborhood N of y mapped
into U1 by ef1 and into U2 by ef2 . If ef1(y) ≠ef2(y) then U1 ≠U2 , hence U1 and
U2 are disjoint and ef1 ≠ef2 throughout the neighborhood N . On the other hand, if
ef1(y) = ef2(y) then U1 = U2 so ef1 = ef2 on N since p ef1 = p ef2 and p is injective on
U1 = U2 . Thus the set of points where ef1 and ef2 agree is both open and closed in Y .
So if Y is connected this set is either empty or all of Y .
⊔⊓
The Classiﬁcation of Covering Spaces
We consider next the problem of classifying all the different covering spaces of
a ﬁxed space X . Since the whole chapter is about paths, it should not be surprising
that we will restrict attention to spaces X which are at least locally path-connected.
Path-components of X are then the same as components, and for the purpose of
classifying the covering spaces of X there is no loss in assuming X is connected,
or equivalently path-connected. Local path-connectedness is inherited by covering
spaces, so these too are connected iff they are path-connected. The main thrust of the
classiﬁcation will be the Galois correspondence between connected covering spaces of
X and subgroups of π1(X), but when this is ﬁnished we will also describe a different
method of classiﬁcation which includes disconnected covering spaces as well.
The Galois correspondence will arise from the function which assigns to each cov-
ering space p : ( eX, ex0)→(X, x0) the subgroup p∗
 π1( eX, ex0)

of π1(X, x0). First we
consider whether this function is surjective. That is, we ask whether every subgroup of
π1(X, x0) is realized as p∗
 π1( eX, ex0)

for some covering space p : ( eX, ex0)→(X, x0).
In particular we can ask whether the trivial subgroup is realized. Since p∗is always
injective, this amounts to asking whether X has a simply-connnected covering space.
Answering this will take some work.
A necessary condition for X to have a simply-connected covering space is the
following: Each point x ∈X has a neighborhood U such that the inclusion-induced
map π1(U, x)→π1(X, x) is trivial; one says X is semilocally simply-connected if
this holds. To see the necessity of this condition, suppose p : eX→X is a covering
space with eX simply-connected. Every point x ∈X has a neighborhood U having a
lift eU ⊂eX projecting homeomorphically to U by p. Each loop in U lifts to a loop
in eU , and the lifted loop is nullhomotopic in eX since π1( eX) = 0. So, composing this
nullhomotopy with p, the original loop in U is nullhomotopic in X .
A locally simply-connected space is certainly semilocally simply-connected. For
example, CW complexes have the much stronger property of being locally contractible,
as we show in the Appendix. An example of a space which is not semilocally simply-
connected is the shrinking wedge of circles, the subspace X ⊂R2 consisting of the
circles of radius 1/n centered at the point (1/n, 0) for n = 1, 2, ···, introduced in Exam-
ple 1.25. On the other hand, the cone CX = (X×I)/(X×{0}) is semilocally simply-
connected since it is contractibe, but it is not locally simply-connected.

Section 1.3.
Covering Spaces
63
We shall now show how to construct a simply-connected covering space of X if
X is path-connected, locally path-connected, and semilocally simply-connected. To
motivate the construction, suppose p : ( eX, ex0)→(X, x0) is a simply-connected cover-
ing space. Each point ex ∈eX can then be joined to ex0 by a unique homotopy class of
paths, by Proposition 1.6, so we can view points of eX as homotopy classes of paths
starting at ex0 . The advantage of this is that, by the homotopy lifting property, homo-
topy classes of paths in eX starting at ex0 are the same as homotopy classes of paths
in X starting at x0 . This gives a way of describing eX purely in terms of X .
Given a path-connected, locally path-connected, semilocally simply-connected
space X with a basepoint x0 ∈X , we are therefore led to deﬁne
eX = { [γ] | γ is a path in X starting at x0 }
where, as usual, [γ] denotes the homotopy class of γ with respect to homotopies
which ﬁx the endpoints γ(0) and γ(1). The function p : eX→X sending [γ] to γ(1)
is then well-deﬁned. Since X is path-connected, the endpoint γ(1) can be any point
of X , so p is surjective.
Before we deﬁne a topology on eX we make a few preliminary observations. Let
U be the collection of path-connected open sets U ⊂X such that π1(U)→π1(X) is
trivial. Note that if the map π1(U)→π1(X) is trivial for one choice of basepoint in U ,
it is trivial for all choices of basepoint since U is path-connected. A path-connected
open subset V ⊂U ∈U is also in U since the composition π1(V)→π1(U)→π1(X)
will also be trivial. It follows that U is a basis for the topology on X if X is locally
path-connected and semilocally simply-connected.
Given a set U ∈U and a path γ in X from x0 to a point in U , let
U[γ] = { [γ η] | η is a path in U with η(0) = γ(1) }.
As the notation indicates, U[γ] depends only on the homotopy class [γ]. Observe
that p : U[γ]→U is surjective since U is path-connected and injective since differ-
ent choices of η joining γ(1) to a ﬁxed x ∈U are all homotopic in X , the map
π1(U)→π1(X) being trivial. Another property is:
(∗)
U[γ] = U[γ′] if [γ′] ∈U[γ] . For if γ′ = γ η then elements of U[γ′] have the
form [γ η µ] and hence lie in U[γ] , while elements of U[γ] have the form
[γ µ] = [γ η η µ] = [γ′ η µ] and hence lie in U[γ′] .
This can be used to show that the sets U[γ] form a basis for a topology on eX . For if
we are given two such sets U[γ] , V[γ′] and an element [γ′′] ∈U[γ] ∩V[γ′] , we have
U[γ] = U[γ′′] and V[γ′] = V[γ′′] by (∗). So if W ∈U is contained in U ∩V and contains
γ′′(1) then W[γ′′] ⊂U[γ′′] ∩V[γ′′] and [γ′′] ∈W[γ′′] .
The bijection p : U[γ]→U is a homeomorphism since it gives a bijection between
the subsets V[γ′] ⊂U[γ] and the V ∈U contained in U . Namely, in one direction
we have p(V[γ′]) = V , and in the other we have p−1(V) ∩U[γ] = V[γ′] for any [γ′] ∈

64
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
U[γ] with endpoint in V , since V[γ′] ⊂U[γ′] = U[γ] and V[γ′] maps onto V by the
bijection p.
The preceding paragraph implies that p : eX→X is continuous. We can also de-
duce that this is a covering space since for ﬁxed U ∈U, the sets U[γ] for varying [γ]
partition p−1(U) because if [γ′′] ∈U[γ] ∩U[γ′] then U[γ] = U[γ′′] = U[γ′] by (∗).
A natural basepoint for eX is [x0], the homotopy class of the constant path at x0 .
Any [γ] ∈eX can be joined to [x0] by a path in eX by restricting γ to progressively
shorter segments [0, t] ⊂[0, 1], so eX is path-connected. To see that π1( eX) = 0, let
f : I→eX be a loop based at [x0]. The composition pf is then a loop γ in X based
at x0 . Let γt be the path in X obtained by restricting the loop γ to [0, t]. Then [γt]
for t varying from 0 to 1 forms a path in eX lifting the loop γ . This lift [γt] starts
at [γ0] = [x0] = f (0), so by the unique lifting property of the cover space eX→X we
must have [γt] = f (t) for all t . In particular, [γ1] = f (1) = [x0]. Since γ1 = γ , this
says the loop γ = pf is nullhomotopic. Thus p∗([f ]) = 0 in π1(X). Since p∗is
injective, [f ] = 0 and hence π1( eX) = 0. This completes the construction.
In concrete cases one usually constructs a simply-connected covering space by
more direct methods. For example, suppose X is the union of subspaces A and B for
which simply-connected covering spaces eA→A and eB→B are already known. Then
one can attempt to build a simply-connected covering space eX→X by assembling
copies of eA and eB . For example, for X = S1 ∨S1 , if we take A and B to be the two
circles, then eA and eB are each R, and we can build the simply-connected cover eX
described earlier in this section by glueing together inﬁnitely many copies of eA and
eB , namely the horizontal and vertical lines in eX . Here is another illustration of this
method:
Example 1.35. For integers m, n ≥2, let Xm,n be the quotient space of a cylinder
S1×I under the identiﬁcations (z, 0) ∼(e2πi/mz, 0) and (z, 1) ∼(e2πi/nz, 1). Let
A ⊂X and B ⊂X be the quotients of S1×[0, 1/2] and S1×[1/2, 1], so A and B are
the mapping cylinders of z , zm and z , zn , with A ∩B = S1 . The simplest case
is m = n = 2, when A and B are M¨obius bands so X2,2 is the Klein bottle.
We
encountered the complexes Xm,n previously in analyzing torus knot complements in
Example 1.24.
The ﬁgure for Example 1.29 at the end of the preceding section
shows what A looks like in the typical case m = 3. We have π1(A) ≈Z,
and the universal cover eA is homeomorphic to a product Cm×R where
Cm is the graph which is a cone on m points, as shown in the ﬁgure
to the right. The situation for B is similar, and eB is homeomorphic to
Cn×R. Now we attempt to build the universal cover eXm,n from copies
of eA and eB . Start with a copy of eA. Its boundary, the outer edges of its
ﬁns, consists of m copies of R. Along each of these m boundary lines we attach a

Section 1.3.
Covering Spaces
65
copy of eB . Each of these copies of eB has one of its boundary lines attached to the
initial copy of eA, leaving n −1 boundary lines free, and we attach a new copy of eA
to each of these free boundary lines. Thus we now have m(n −1) + 1 copies of eA.
Each of the newly attached copies of eA has m −1 free boundary lines, and to each
of these lines we attach a new copy of eB . The process is now repeated ad inﬁnitim in
the evident way. Let eXm,n be the resulting space.
The product structures eA = Cm×R and eB = Cn×R give
eXm,n the structure of a product Tm,n×R where Tm,n is an
inﬁnite graph constructed by an inductive scheme just
like the construction of eXm,n . Thus Tm,n is the union of
a sequence of ﬁnite subgraphs, each obtained from the
preceding by attaching new copies of Cm or Cn . Each of
these ﬁnite subgraphs deformation retracts onto the pre-
ceding one. The inﬁnite concatenation of these deformation
retractions, with the kth graph deformation retracting to the previous one during the
time interval [1/2k, 1/2k−1], gives a deformation retraction of Tm,n onto the initial
stage Cm . Since Cm is contractible, this means Tm,n is contractible, hence also eXm,n
which is the product Tm,n×R. In particular, eXm,n is simply-connected.
The map which projects each copy of eA in eXm,n to A and
each copy of eB to B is a covering space. To deﬁne this map
precisely, choose a point x0 ∈S1 , and then the image of the
line segment {x0}×I in Xm,n meets A in a line segment whose
preimage in eA consists of an inﬁnite number of line segments,
appearing in the earlier ﬁgure as the horizontal segments spi-
ralling around the central vertical axis. The picture in eB is
similar, and when we glue together all the copies of eA and eB
to form eXm,n , we do so in such a way that these horizontal segments always line up
exactly. This decomposes eXm,n into inﬁnitely many rectangles, each formed from a
rectangle in an eA and a rectangle in a eB . The covering projection eXm,n→Xm,n is the
quotient map which identiﬁes all these rectangles.
Now we return to the general theory. The hypotheses for constructing a simply-
connected covering space of X in fact sufﬁce for constructing covering spaces realiz-
ing arbitrary subgroups of π1(X):
Proposition 1.36. Suppose X is path-connected, locally path-connected, and semilo-
cally simply-connected. Then for every subgroup H ⊂π1(X, x0) there is a covering
space p : XH→X such that p∗
 π1(XH, ex0)

= H for a suitably chosen basepoint
ex0 ∈XH .
Proof: For points [γ], [γ′] in the simply-connected covering space eX constructed
above, deﬁne [γ] ∼[γ′] to mean γ(1) = γ′(1) and [γγ′] ∈H . It is easy to see

66
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
that this is an equivalence relation since H is a subgroup; namely, it is reﬂexive since
H contains the identity element, symmetric since H is closed under inverses, and
transitive since H is closed under multiplication. Let XH be the quotient space of eX
obtained by identifying [γ] with [γ′] if [γ] ∼[γ′]. Note that if γ(1) = γ′(1), then
[γ] ∼[γ′] iff [γη] ∼[γ′η]. This means that if any two points in basic neighborhoods
U[γ] and U[γ′] are identiﬁed in XH then the whole neighborhoods are identiﬁed. Hence
the natural projection XH→X induced by [γ] , γ(1) is a covering space.
If we choose for the basepoint ex0 ∈XH the equivalence class of the constant path
c at x0 , then the image of p∗: π1(XH, ex0)→π1(X, x0) is exactly H . This is because
for a loop γ in X based at x0 , its lift to eX starting at [c] ends at [γ], so the image
of this lifted path in XH is a loop iff [γ] ∼[c], i.e., [γ] ∈H .
⊔⊓
Having taken care of the existence of covering spaces of X corresponding to all
subgroups of π1(X), we turn now to uniqueness up to isomorphism, where an iso-
morphism between covering spaces p1 : eX1→X and p2 : eX2→X is a homeomorphism
f : eX1→eX2 such that p1 = p2f . This condition means exactly that f preserves the
covering space structures, taking p−1
1 (x) to p−1
2 (x) for each x ∈X . The inverse
f −1 is then also an isomorphism, and the composition of two isomorphisms is an
isomorphism, so we have an equivalence relation.
Proposition 1.37. If X is path-connected and locally path-connected, then two path-
connected covering spaces p1 : eX1→X and p2 : eX2→X are isomorphic via an isomor-
phism f : eX1→eX2 taking a basepoint ex1 ∈p−1
1 (x0) to a basepoint ex2 ∈p−1
2 (x0) iff
p1∗
 π1( eX1, ex1)

= p2∗
 π1( eX2, ex2)

.
Proof: If there is an isomorphism f : ( eX1, ex1)→( eX2, ex2), then the relations p1 =
p2f and p2 = p1f −1 imply that p1∗
 π1( eX1, ex1)

= p2∗
 π1( eX2, ex2)

. Conversely,
suppose that p1∗
 π1( eX1, ex1)

= p2∗
 π1( eX2, ex2)

. By the lifting criterion, we may
lift p1 to a map ep1 : ( eX1, ex1)→( eX2, ex2) with p2 ep1 = p1 . Symmetrically, we obtain
ep2 : ( eX2, ex2)→( eX1, ex1) with p1 ep2 = p2 . Then by the unique lifting property, ep1 ep2 = 11
and ep2 ep1 = 11 since these composed lifts ﬁx the basepoints. Thus ep1 and ep2 are
inverse isomorphisms.
⊔⊓
We have proved the ﬁrst half of the following classiﬁcation theorem:
Theorem 1.38. Let X be path-connected, locally path-connected, and semilocally
simply-connected. Then there is a bijection between the set of isomorphism classes
of path-connected covering spaces p : ( eX, ex0)→(X, x0) and the set of subgroups of
π1(X, x0), obtained by associating the subgroup p∗
 π1( eX, ex0)

to the covering space
( eX, ex0). If basepoints are ignored, this correspondence gives a bijection between iso-
morphism classes of path-connected covering spaces p : eX→X and conjugacy classes
of subgroups of π1(X, x0).

Section 1.3.
Covering Spaces
67
Proof: It remains only to prove the last statement. We show that for a covering space
p : ( eX, ex0)→(X, x0), changing the basepoint ex0 within p−1(x0) corresponds exactly
to changing p∗
 π1( eX, ex0)

to a conjugate subgroup of π1(X, x0). Suppose that ex1
is another basepoint in p−1(x0), and let eγ be a path from ex0 to ex1 . Then eγ projects
to a loop γ in X representing some element g ∈π1(X, x0). Set Hi = p∗
 π1( eX, exi)

for i = 0, 1. We have an inclusion g−1H0g ⊂H1 since for ef a loop at ex0 , eγ ef eγ is a
loop at ex1 . Similarly we have gH1g−1 ⊂H0 . Conjugating the latter relation by g−1
gives H1 ⊂g−1H0g, so g−1H0g = H1 . Thus changing the basepoint from ex0 to ex1
changes H0 to the conjugate subgroup H1 = g−1H0g. Conversely, to change H0 to
a conjugate subgroup H1 = g−1H0g, choose a loop γ representing g, lift this to a
path eγ starting at ex0 , and let ex1 = eγ(1). The preceding argument then shows that
we have the desired relation H1 = g−1H0g.
⊔⊓
A consequence of the lifting criterion is that a simply-connected covering space
of a path-connected, locally path-connected space X is a covering space of every other
path-connected covering space of X . A simply-connected covering space of X is there-
fore called a universal cover. Such a covering space is unique up to isomorphism, so
one is justiﬁed in saying the universal cover.
More generally, there is a partial ordering on the collection of covering spaces
of X , according to which ones cover which others. This corresponds to the partial
ordering by inclusion of the various subgroups of π1(X), or conjugacy classes of
subgroups if basepoints are ignored.
Representing Covering Spaces by Permutations
We wish to describe now another way of classifying the different covering spaces
of a connected, locally path-connected space X , without restricting just to connected
covering spaces. To give the idea, consider the 3 sheeted covering spaces of S1 . There
are three of these, eX1 , eX2 , and eX3 , with the subscript in-
dicating the number of components. For each of these
covering spaces p : eXi→S1 the three different lifts of a
loop in S1 generating π1(S1, x0) determine a permutation of p−1(x0) sending the
starting point of the lift to the ending point of the lift. For eX1 this is a cyclic per-
mutation, for eX2 it is a transposition of two points ﬁxing the third point, and for eX3
it is the identity permutation. These permutations obviously determine the covering
spaces uniquely, up to isomorphism. The same would be true of n sheeted coverings
for arbitrary n, even for n inﬁnite.
There is a way to generalize this to covering spaces p : eX→X of an arbitrary
connected, locally path-connected space X . Let γ be a path in X . Then γ can be
viewed as a homotopy of the composition p−1(γ(0)) > eX→X . The homotopy lift-
ing property yields a homotopy from the inclusion p−1(γ(0)) > eX to a bijection
Lγ : p−1(γ(0))→p−1(γ(1)). The inverse of this bijection is evidently Lγ . For a com-

68
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
position of paths γη we have Lγη = LηLγ , rather than LγLη , since composition of
paths is written from left to right while composition of functions is written from right
to left. To correct for this discrepancy let us modify the deﬁnition by replacing Lγ with
its inverse. Thus the new Lγ is a bijection p−1(γ(1))→p−1(γ(0)), and Lγη = LγLη .
Since Lγ depends only on the homotopy class of γ , this means that if we restrict
attention to loops at a basepoint x0 ∈X , then the association γ , Lγ gives a homo-
morphism from π1(X, x0) to the group of permutations of p−1(x0). This is called
the action of π1(X, x0) on the ﬁber p−1(x0). We shall give a general deﬁnition of an
action of a group on a space in the next subsection.
Let us see how the covering space p : eX→X can be reconstructed from the asso-
ciated action of π1(X, x0) on the ﬁber F = p−1(x0), assuming that X is semilocally
simply-connected, so it has a universal cover eX0→X . We can take the points of the
universal cover eX0 to be homotopy classes of paths in X starting at x0 , as in the
earlier construction of a universal cover. Deﬁne a map h : eX0×F→eX sending a pair
([γ], ex0) to eγ(1) where eγ is the lift of γ to eX starting at ex0 . Then h is continu-
ous, and in fact a local homeomorphism, since a neighborhood of ([γ], ex0) in eX0×F
consists of the pairs ([γη], ex0) with η a path in a neighborhood of γ(1) as in the con-
struction of eX0 . It is obvious that h is surjective since X is path-connected. If h were
injective as well, it would be a homeomorphism, which is unlikely since eX0×F is prob-
ably not homeomorphic to eX . But in any case, h will induce a homeomorphism from
some quotient space of eX0×F onto eX . To see what this quotient space is explicitly,
suppose h([γ], ex0) = h([γ′], ex′
0). Then γ and γ′ are both
paths from x0 to the same endpoint, and from the ﬁgure
we see that ex′
0 = Lγ′γ( ex0). Letting λ be the loop γ′γ , this
γ
γ
γ
γ
x0
f
f
fγ
x0
fx0
L
(
)
−
′
′
γ ′
means that h([γ], ex0) = h([λγ], Lλ( ex0)). Conversely, for
any loop λ we have h([γ], ex0) = h([λγ], Lλ( ex0)). Thus h
induces a well-deﬁned map to eX from the quotient space of
eX0×F obtained by identifying ([γ], ex0) with ([λγ], Lλ( ex0))
for each [λ] ∈π1(X, x0). Let this quotient space be denoted eXρ where ρ is the ho-
momorphism from π1(X, x0) to the permutation group of F speciﬁed by the action.
Notice that the deﬁnition of eXρ makes sense whenever we are given an action
ρ of π1(X, x0) on a set F . There is a natural projection eXρ→X sending ([γ], ex0)
to γ(1), and this is a covering space since if U ⊂X is an open set over which the
universal cover eX0 is a product U ×π1(X, x0), then the identiﬁcations deﬁning eXρ
simply collapse U ×π1(X, x0)×F to U ×F .
Returning to our given covering space eX→X with associated action ρ, the map
eXρ→eX induced by h is a bijection and in fact a homeomorphism since h was a local
homeomorphism. Since this homeomorphism eXρ→eX takes each ﬁber of eXρ to the
corresponding ﬁber of eX , it is an isomorphism of covering spaces.
If two covering spaces p1 : eX1→X and p2 : eX2→X are isomorphic, how are the

Section 1.3.
Covering Spaces
69
corresponding actions of π1(X, x0) on the ﬁbers F1 and F2 over x0 related?
An
isomorphism h : eX1→eX2 restricts to a bijection F1→F2 , and evidently Lγ(h( ex0)) =
h(Lγ( ex0)). Using the less cumbersome notation ex0 , γ ex0 for ex0 , Lγ( ex0), this
relation can be written more concisely as γh( ex0) = h(γ ex0). A bijection F1→F2 with
this property is what one would naturally call an isomorphism of sets with π1(X, x0)
action.
Thus isomorphic covering spaces have isomorphic actions on ﬁbers.
The
converse is also true, and easy to prove. One just observes that for isomorphic actions
ρ1 and ρ2 , an isomorphism h : F1→F2 induces a map eXρ1→eXρ2 , and h−1 induces a
similar map in the opposite direction, such that the compositions of these two maps,
in either order, are the identity.
Thus n sheeted covering spaces of X are classiﬁed by equivalence classes of
homomorphisms π1(X, x0)→Σn , where Σn is the symmetric group on n symbols
and the equivalence relation identiﬁes a homomorphism ρ with each of its conjugates
h−1ρh by elements h ∈Σn .
Deck Transformations and Group Actions
For a covering space p : eX→X the isomorphisms eX→eX are called deck transfor-
mations or covering transformations. These form a group G( eX) under composition.
For example, for the covering space p : R→S1 projecting a vertical helix onto a circle,
the deck transformations are the vertical translations taking the helix onto itself, so
G( eX) ≈Z in this case. For the n sheeted covering space S1→S1 , z , zn , the deck
transformations are the rotations of S1 through an angle which is a multiple of 2π/n,
so G( eX) = Zn .
By the unique lifting property, a deck transformation is completely determined
by where it sends a single point, assuming eX is path-connected. In particular only the
identity deck transformation can ﬁx a point of eX .
A normal covering space p : eX→X is one for which G( eX) acts transitively on
p−1(x) for all x ∈X , i.e., for any two lifts ex, ex′ of x there is a deck transformation
taking ex to ex′ . For example, the covering spaces R→S1 and S1→S1 whose deck
transformations we just described are normal. Intuitively, a normal covering space
is one with ‘maximal symmetry.’ This can be seen in the coverings of S1 ∨S1 shown
in the table earlier in this section, where the normal coverings are numbers (1), (2),
(5)-(8), and (11). Note that in (7) the group of deck transformations is Z4 while in (8)
it is Z2×Z2 .
Sometimes normal covering spaces are called regular covering spaces. The term
‘normal’ is motivated by the following result.

70
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
Proposition 1.39. Let p : ( eX, ex0)→(X, x0) be a path-connected covering space of
the path-connected, locally path-connected space X , and let H = p∗
 π1( eX, ex0)

⊂
π1(X, x0). Then:
(a) This covering space is normal iff H is a normal subgroup of π1(X, x0).
(b) G( eX) is isomorphic to the quotient N(H)/H where N(H) is the normalizer of
H in π1(X, x0).
In particular, G( eX) is isomorphic to π1(X, x0)/H if eX is a normal covering. Hence
for the universal cover eX→X we have G( eX) ≈π1(X).
Proof: We observed earlier in the proof of the classiﬁcation theorem that changing
the basepoint ex0 ∈p−1(x0) to ex1 ∈p−1(x0) corresponds precisely to conjugating
H by an element [γ] ∈π1(X, x0) where γ lifts to a path eγ from ex0 to ex1 . Thus [γ]
is in the normalizer N(H) iff p∗
 π1( eX, ex0)

= p∗
 π1( eX, ex1)

, which by the lifting
criterion is equivalent to the existence of a deck transformation taking ex0 to ex1 .
Hence the covering space is normal iff N(H) = π1(X, x0), i.e., H is a normal subgroup
of π1(X, x0).
Deﬁne ϕ : N(H)→G( eX) sending [γ] to the deck transformation τ taking ex0 to
ex1 , in the notation above. Then ϕ is a homomorphism, for if γ′ is another loop corre-
sponding to the deck transformation τ′ taking ex0 to ex′
1 then γ γ′ lifts to eγ (τ(eγ′)),
a path from ex0 to τ( ex′
1) = ττ′( ex0), so ττ′ is the deck transformation corresponding
to [γ][γ′]. By the preceding paragraph ϕ is surjective. Its kernel consists of classes
[γ] lifting to loops in eX . These are exactly the elements of p∗
 π1( eX, ex0)

= H .
⊔⊓
The group of deck transformations is a special case of the general notion of
‘groups acting on spaces.’ Given a group G and a space Y , then an action of G on
Y is a homomorphism ρ from G to the group Homeo(Y) of homeomorphisms of Y .
Thus to each g ∈G is associated a homeomorphism ρ(g) : Y→Y , which for nota-
tional simplicity we write simply as g : Y→Y . For ρ to be a homomorphism amounts
to requiring that g1(g2(y)) = (g1g2)(y) for all g1, g2 ∈G and y ∈Y . If ρ is in-
jective then it identiﬁes G with a subgroup of Homeo(Y), and in practice not much
is lost in assuming ρ is an inclusion G > Homeo(Y) since in any case the subgroup
ρ(G) ⊂Homeo(Y) contains all the topological information about the action.
We shall be interested in actions satisfying the following condition:
(∗)
Each point y ∈Y has a neighborhood U such that all the images g(U) for
varying g ∈G are disjoint, i.e., g1(U) ∩g2(U) ≠∅implies g1 = g2 .
For deck transformations, one can see the action of G( eX) on eX satisﬁes (∗) as fol-
lows. Suppose eU ⊂eX projects homeomorphically to U ⊂X . If g1( eU) ∩g2( eU) ≠∅
for g1, g2 ∈G( eX), then we have g1( ex1) = g2( ex2) for points ex1, ex2 ∈eU . Since ex1 and
ex2 must lie in the same set p−1(x), which intersects eU in only one point, we must
have ex1 = ex2 , and g−1
1 g2 ﬁxes this point so g−1
1 g2 = 11 and g1 = g2 .

Section 1.3.
Covering Spaces
71
Note that in (∗) it sufﬁces to take g1 to be the identity since g1(U) ∩g2(U) ≠∅
is equivalent to U ∩g−1
1 g2(U) ≠∅.
Thus we have the equivalent condition that
U ∩g(U) ≠∅only for g the identity.
Given an action of a group G on a space Y , we can form a space Y/G, the quotient
space of Y in which each point y is identiﬁed with all its images g(y) as g ranges
over G. The points of Y/G are thus the orbits Gy = { g(y) | g ∈G } ⊂Y , and
Y/G is called the orbit space of the action. For example, for a normal covering space
eX→X , the orbit space eX/G( eX) is just X .
Proposition 1.40. Suppose we are given an action of a group G on a space Y satis-
fying the condition (∗). Then:
(a) The quotient map p : Y→Y/G, p(y) = Gy , is a normal covering space.
(b) G is the group of deck transformations of this covering space Y→Y/G if Y is
path-connected.
(c) G is isomorphic to π1(Y/G)/p∗
 π1(Y)

if Y is path-connected and locally path-
connected.
Proof: Given an open set U ⊂Y as in condition (∗), the quotient map p simply
identiﬁes all the disjoint homeomorphic sets { g(U) | g ∈G } to a single open set
p(U) in Y/G. By the deﬁnition of the quotient topology on Y/G, p restricts to a
homeomorphism g(U) ≈p(U) for each g ∈G so we have a covering space. Each
element of G acts as a deck transformation, and the action is transitive by the deﬁ-
inition of Y/G, so the covering space is normal. The group of deck transformations
contains G as a subgroup, and equals this subgroup if Y is path-connected, since if
f is any deck transformation, then for any point y ∈Y , p(y) = pf (y) so y and
f(y) are in the same orbit and there is a g ∈G with g(y) = f (y), hence f = g since
deck transformations of a path-connected covering space are uniquely determined by
where they send a point. The ﬁnal statement of the proposition is immediate from
part (b) of Proposition 1.39.
⊔⊓
In view of the preceding proposition, we shall call an action satisfying (∗) a
covering space action. This is not standard terminology, but there does not seem to
be a universally accepted name for actions satisfying (∗). Sometimes these are called
‘properly discontinuous’ actions, but more often this rather unattractive term means
something weaker: Every point x ∈X has a neighborhood U such that U ∩g(U)
is nonempty for only ﬁnitely many g ∈G. Many symmetry groups have this proper
discontinuity property without satisfying (∗), for example the group of symmetries
of the familiar tiling of R2 by regular hexagons. The reason why the action of this
group on R2 fails to satisfy (∗) is that there are ﬁxed points: points y for which
there is a nontrivial element g ∈G with g(y) = y . For example, the vertices of the
hexagons are ﬁxed by the 120 degree rotations about these points, and the midpoints
of edges are ﬁxed by 180 degree rotations. An action without ﬁxed points is called

72
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
a free action. Thus for a free action of G on Y , only the identity element of G ﬁxes
any point of Y .
This is equivalent to requiring that all the images g(y) of each
y ∈Y are distinct, i.e., g1(y) = g2(y) implies g1 = g2 , since g1(y) = g2(y) is
equivalent to g−1
1 g2(y) = y . Though condition (∗) implies freeness, the converse is
not always true. An example is the action of Z on S1 in which a generator of Z acts by
rotation through an angle α which is an irrational multiple of 2π . In this case each
orbit Zy is dense in S1 , so condition (∗) cannot hold since it implies that orbits are
discrete subspaces. An exercise at the end of the section is to show that for actions
on Hausdorff spaces, freeness plus proper discontinuity implies condition (∗). Note
that proper discontinuity is automatic for actions by a ﬁnite group.
Example 1.41. Let Y be the closed orientable surface of genus 11, an ‘11 hole torus’
as shown in the ﬁgure. This has a 5 fold rotational symmetry,
generated by a rotation of angle 2π/5. Thus we have the
cyclic group Z5 acting on Y , and the condition (∗) is ob-
viously satisﬁed. The quotient space Y/Z5 is a surface
C 2
C1
C 3
C4
C5
C
p
of genus 3, obtained from one of the ﬁve subsurfaces
of Y cut off by the circles C1, ··· , C5 by identifying its
two boundary circles Ci and Ci+1 to form the circle C as
shown. Thus we have a covering space M11→M3 where
Mg denotes the closed orientable surface of genus g.
In
particular, we see that π1(M3) contains the ‘larger’ group
π1(M11) as a normal subgroup of index 5, with quotient
Z5 . This example obviously generalizes by replacing the two
holes in each ‘arm’ of M11 by m holes and the 5 fold symmetry by n fold symmetry.
This gives a covering space Mmn+1→Mm+1 . An exercise in §2.2 is to show by an Euler
characteristic argument that if there is a covering space Mg→Mh then g = mn + 1
and h = m + 1 for some m and n.
As a special case of the ﬁnal statement of the preceding proposition we see that
for a covering space action of a group G on a simply-connected locally path-connected
space Y , the orbit space Y/G has fundamental group isomorphic to G. Under this
isomorphism an element g ∈G corresponds to a loop in Y/G which is the projec-
tion of a path in Y from a chosen basepoint y0 to g(y0). Any two such paths are
homotopic since Y is simply-connected, so we get a well-deﬁned element of π1(Y/G)
associated to g.
This method for computing fundamental groups via group actions on simply-
connected spaces is essentially how we computed π1(S1) in §1.1, via the covering
space R→S1 arising from the action of Z on R by translations. This is a useful general
technique for computing fundamental groups, in fact. Here are some examples.

Section 1.3.
Covering Spaces
73
Example 1.42. Two covering space actions on R2
are given by the groups of symmetries of the pat-
terns shown in the ﬁgure, square grids decorated
with arrows that rule out rotational and reﬂectional
symmetries. The only difference between the two
cases is that in the second case the horizontal arrows in adjacent lines point in op-
position directions. For the ﬁrst grid the symmetry group G is isomorphic to Z×Z
since it consists of all translations (x, y) , (x + m, y + n) for m, n ∈Z, assuming
the vertices of the grid are the points (x, y) ∈Z2 . For the second grid, G contains
a subgroup of translations of the form (x, y) , (x + m, y + 2n) for m, n ∈Z, but
there are also ‘glide-reﬂection’ symmetries, consisting of vertical translation by an
odd integer distance followed by reﬂection across a vertical line, either a vertical line
of the grid or a vertical line halfway between two adjacent grid lines. For both grid
patterns there are elements of G taking any square to any other, but only the identity
element of G takes a square to itself. The minimum distance any point is moved by a
nontrivial element of G is 1, which easily implies the covering space condition (∗).
The orbit space R2/G is the quotient space of a square in the grid with opposite edges
identiﬁed according to the arrows. Thus we see that the fundamental groups of the
torus and the Klein bottle are the symmetry groups G in the two cases. In the second
case the subgroup of G formed by the translations has index two, and the orbit space
for this subgroup is a torus forming a two-sheeted covering space of the Klein bottle.
Example 1.43: RPn . The antipodal map of Sn , x , −x , generates an action of Z2
on Sn with orbit space RPn , real projective n space, as deﬁned in Example 0.4. The
action is a covering space action since each open hemisphere in Sn is disjoint from
its antipodal image. As we saw in Proposition 1.14, Sn is simply-connected if n ≥2,
so from the covering space Sn→RPn we deduce that π1(RPn) ≈Z2 for n ≥2. A
generator for π1(RPn) is any loop obtained by projecting a path in Sn connecting two
antipodal points. One can see explicitly that such a loop γ has order two in π1(RPn)
if n ≥2 since the composition γ γ lifts to a loop in Sn , and this can be homotoped to
the trivial loop since π1(Sn) = 0, so the projection of this homotopy into RPn gives
a nullhomotopy of γ γ .
Which other ﬁnite groups act freely on Sn , deﬁning covering spaces Sn→Sn/G?
We will show in Proposition 2.29 that Z2 is the only possibility when n is even, but
for odd n the question is much more difﬁcult. It is easy to construct a free action
of any cyclic group Zm on S2k−1 , generated by the rotation v , e2πi/mv of the unit
sphere S2k−1 in Ck = R2k . The action is free since an equation v = e2πiℓ/mv with
0 < ℓ< m implies v = 0, but 0 is not a point of S2k−1 . The orbit space S2k−1/Zm is
one of a family of lens spaces deﬁned in Example 2.43.
There are also noncyclic ﬁnite groups which act freely as rotations of Sn for

74
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
odd n > 1. These actions are classiﬁed quite explicitly in [Wolf]. Examples in the
simplest case n = 3 can be produced as follows. View R4 as the quaternion algebra
H. Multiplication of quaternions satisﬁes |ab| = |a||b| where |a| denotes the usual
Euclidean length of a vector a ∈R4 . Thus if a and b are unit vectors, so is ab,
so quaternion multiplication deﬁnes a map S3×S3→S3 . This in fact makes S3 into
a group, though associativity is all we need now since associativity implies that any
subgroup G of S3 acts on S3 by left-multiplication, g(x) = gx . This action is free
since an equation x = gx in the division algebra H implies g = 1 or x = 0. As a
concrete example, G could be the familiar quaternion group Q8 = {±1, ±i, ±j, ±k}
from group theory. More generally, for a positive integer m, let Q4m be the subgroup
of S3 generated by the two quaternions a = eπi/m ∈C ⊂H and b = j . Thus a
has order 2m and b has order 4. The easily-veriﬁed relations am = b2 = −1 and
bab−1 = a−1 imply that the subgroup Z2m generated by a is normal and of index
2 in Q4m . Hence Q4m is a group of order 4m, called the generalized quaternion
group. Another common name for this group is the binary dihedral group D∗
4m since
its quotient by the subgroup {±1} is the ordinary dihedral group D2m of order 2m.
Besides the groups Q4m = D∗
4m there are just three other noncyclic ﬁnite sub-
groups of S3 : the binary tetrahedral, octahedral, and icosahedral groups T ∗
24 , O∗
48,
and I∗
120, of orders indicated by the subscripts. These project two-to-one onto the
groups of rotational symmetries of a regular tetrahedron, octahedron (or cube), and
icosahedron (or dodecahedron). In fact, it is not hard to see that the homomorphism
S3→SO(3) sending u ∈S3 ⊂H to the isometry v→u−1vu of R3 , viewing R3 as the
‘pure imaginary’ quaternions v = ai + bj + ck, is surjective with kernel {±1}. Then
the groups D∗
4m , T ∗
24 , O∗
48 , I∗
120 are the preimages in S3 of the groups of rotational
symmetries of a regular polygon or polyhedron in R3 .
There are two conditions which a ﬁnite group G acting freely on Sn must satisfy:
(a) Every abelian subgroup of G is cyclic.
Equivalently, G contains no subgroup
Zp×Zp with p prime.
(b) G contains at most one element of order 2.
Statement (a) is an exercise for §4.1, and for a proof of (b) the original source [Milnor57]
is recommended reading. The groups satisfying (a) have been completely classiﬁed,
as explained for example in [K.Brown, section VI.9]. An example of a group satisfying
(a) but not (b) is the dihedral group D2m for odd m > 1.
There is also a much more difﬁcult converse: A ﬁnite group satisfying (a) and (b)
acts freely on Sn for some n. See [Madsen-Thomas-Wall] or [Davis-Milgram]. There
is also almost complete information about which n’s are possible for a given group.
Example 1.44.
In Example 1.35 we constructed a contractible 2 complex eXm,n =
Tm,n×R as the universal cover of a ﬁnite 2 complex Xm,n . The group of deck transfor-
mations of this covering space is therefore the fundamental group π1(Xm,n). Apply-

Section 1.3.
Covering Spaces
75
ing van Kampen’s theorem to the decomposition of Xm,n into the mapping cylinders of
the maps S1→S1 , z , zm and z , zn , we obtain the presentation ⟨a, b | amb−n ⟩
for this group Gm,n . It is interesting to look at the action of Gm,n on eXm,n more
closely. We described a decomposition of eXm,n into rectangles, with Xm,n the quo-
tient of one rectangle. These rectangles in fact deﬁne a cell structure on eXm,n lifting
a cell structure on Xm,n with two vertices, three edges, and one 2 cell. The group
Gm,n is thus a group of symmetries of this cell structure on eXm,n . If we orient the
three edges of Xm,n and lift these orientations to the edges of eXm,n , then Gm,n is
the group of all symmetries of eXm,n preserving the orientations of edges. For exam-
ple, the element a acts as a ‘screw motion,’ restricting to translation of a vertical line
{va}×R with va a vertex of Tm,n , and b acts similarly for a vertex vb .
Since the action of Gm,n on eXm,n preserves the cell structure, it also preserves
the product structure Tm,n×R. This means that there are actions of Gm,n on Tm,n
and R such that the action on the product Xm,n = Tm,n×R is the diagonal action
g(x, y) =
 g(x), g(y)

for g ∈Gm,n . If we make the rectangles of unit height in
the R coordinate, then the element am = bn acts on R as unit translation, while a
acts by 1/m translation, and b by 1/n translation. The translation actions of a and b
on R generate an inﬁnite cylic group of translations generated by translation by the
reciprocal of the least common multiple of m and n.
The action of Gm,n on Tm,n has kernel consisting of the powers of the element
am = bn . This inﬁnite cyclic subgroup is precisely the center of Gm,n as we saw in
Example 1.24. There is an induced action of the quotient group Zm ∗Zn on Tm,n ,
but this is not a free action since the elements a and b and all their conjugates ﬁx
vertices of Tm,n . On the other hand, if we restrict the action of Gm,n on Tm,n to
the kernel K of the map Gm,n→Z given by the action of Gm,n on the R factor of
Xm,n , then we do obtain a free action of K on Tm,n . Since this action takes vertices
to vertices and edges to edges, it is a covering space action, so K is a free group, the
fundamental group of the graph Tm,n/K . An exercise at the end of the section is to
determine Tm,n/K explicitly and compute the number of generators of K .
Cayley Complexes.
There is a very classical method for viewing groups geometrically as graphs, which
ﬁts very nicely into covering space theory. Recall from Corollary 1.28 how we asso-
ciated to each group presentation G = ⟨gα | rβ ⟩a 2 dimensional cell complex XG
with π1(XG) ≈G by taking a wedge-sum of circles, one for each generator gα , and
then attaching a 2 cell for each relator rβ . We can construct a cell complex eXG with a
covering space action of G such that eXG/G = XG in the following way. Let the vertices
of eXG be the elements of G themselves. Then, at each vertex g ∈G, insert an edge
joining g to ggα for each of the chosen generators gα . The resulting graph is known
as the Cayley graph of G with respect to the generators gα . This graph is connected
since every element of G is a product of gα ’s, so there is a path in the graph joining

76
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
each vertex to the identity vertex e. Each relation rβ determines a loop in the graph,
starting at any vertex g, and we attach a 2 cell for each such loop. The resulting cell
complex eXG is the Cayley complex of G. The group G acts on eXG by multiplication
on the left. Thus, an element g ∈G sends a vertex g′ ∈G to the vertex gg′ , and the
edge from g′ to g′gα is sent to the edge from gg′ to gg′gα . The action extends to
2 cells in the obvious way. This is clearly a covering space action, and the orbit space
is just XG .
In fact eXG is the universal cover of XG since it is simply-connected. This can be
seen by considering the homomorphism ϕ : π1(XG)→G deﬁned in the proof of Propo-
sition 1.39. For an edge eα in XG corresponding to a generator gα of G, it is clear
from the deﬁnition of ϕ that ϕ([eα]) = gα , so ϕ is an isomorphism. In particular
the kernel of ϕ, p∗
 π1( eXG)

, is zero, hence also π1( eXG) since p∗is injective.
Here are some examples.
Example 1.45. When G is the free group on
two generators a and b, XG is S1 ∨S1 and
eXG is the Cayley graph of Z∗Z pictured at the
right. The action of a on this graph is a right-
ward shift along the central horizontal axis,
while b acts by an upward shift along the cen-
tral vertical axis. The composition ab of these
two shifts then takes the vertex e to the ver-
tex ab. Similarly, the action of any w ∈Z ∗Z
takes e to the vertex w .
e
a
ab
ab
ba
ba
b
a
b
b
b
-1
a -1
a-1
a-2
-1
a-1
-1
b-2
-1
b
-1
b-1
a
b-1
a2
2
Example 1.46.
The group G = Z×Z with presentation ⟨x, y | xyx−1y−1 ⟩has
XG = S1×S1 , and eXG is R2 with vertices the integer lattice Z2 ⊂R2 and edges the
horizontal and vertical segments between these lattice points. The action of G is by
translations (x, y) , (x + m, y + n).
Example 1.47. For G = Z2 = ⟨x | x2 ⟩, XG is RP2 and eXG = S2 . More generally, for
Zn = ⟨x | xn ⟩, XG is S1 with a disk attached by the map z, zn and eXG consists of
n disks D1, ··· , Dn with their boundary circles identiﬁed. A generator of Zn acts on
this union of disks by sending Di to Di+1 via a 2π/n rotation, the subscript i being
taken mod n. The common boundary circle of the disks is rotated by 2π/n.
Example 1.48. If G = Z2 ∗Z2 = ⟨a, b | a2, b2 ⟩then the Cayley graph is a union of an
inﬁnite sequence of circles each tangent to its two neighbors.
e
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
ab
aba
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
ba
bab

Section 1.3.
Covering Spaces
77
We obtain eXG from this graph by making each circle the equator of a 2 sphere, yield-
ing an inﬁnite sequence of tangent 2 spheres.
Elements of the index-two normal
subgroup Z ⊂Z2 ∗Z2 generated by ab act on eXG as translations by an even number
of units, while each of the remaining elements of Z2 ∗Z2 acts as the antipodal map on
one of the spheres and ﬂips the whole chain of spheres end-for-end about this sphere.
The orbit space XG is RP2 ∨RP2 .
It is not hard to see the generalization of this example to Zm ∗Zn with the pre-
sentation ⟨a, b | am, bn ⟩, so that eXG consists of an inﬁnite union of copies of the
Cayley complexes for Zm and Zn constructed in Example 1.47, arranged in a tree-like
pattern. The case of Z2 ∗Z3 is pictured below.
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
ab
ab
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
ba
b
e
2
2
Exercises
1. For a covering space p : eX→X and a subspace A ⊂X , let eA = p−1(A). Show that
the restriction p : eA→A is a covering space.
2. Show that if p1 : eX1→X1 and p2 : eX2→X2 are covering spaces, so is their product
p1×p2 : eX1× eX2→X1×X2 .
3. Let p : eX→X be a covering space with p−1(x) ﬁnite for all x ∈X . Show that eX is
compact Hausdorff iff X is compact Hausdorff.
4. Construct a simply-connected covering space of the space X ⊂R3 which is the
union of a sphere and a diameter. Do the same when X is the union of a sphere and
a circle intersecting it in two points.
5. Let X be the subspace of R2 consisting of the four sides of the square [0, 1]×[0, 1]
together with the segments of the vertical lines x = 1/2, 1/3, 1/4, ··· inside the square.
Show that for every covering space eX→X there is some neighborhood of the left edge

78
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
of X which lifts homeomorphically to eX . Deduce that X has no simply-connected
covering space.
6. Let X be the shrinking wedge of circles in Example 1.25, and let eX be its cover-
ing space shown in the ﬁgure below. Construct a two-sheeted covering space Y→eX
such that the composition Y→eX→X of the two covering spaces is not a cover-
ing space. Note that a compo-
sition of two covering spaces
does have the unique path lift-
ing property, however.
7. Let Y be the ‘quasi-circle’ shown in the ﬁgure, a closed subspace of R2 consisting
of a portion of the graph of y = sin(1/x), the segment [−1, 1] in the y axis, and an
arc connecting these two pieces. Collapsing the segment of Y in
the y axis to a point gives a quotient map f : Y→S1 . Show that f
does not lift to the covering space R→S1 , even though π1(Y) = 0.
Thus local path-connectedness of Y is a necessary hypothesis in
the lifting criterion.
8. Let eX and eY be simply-connected covering spaces of the path-connected, locally
path-connected spaces X and Y . Show that if X ≃Y then eX ≃eY . [Hint: See exercise
10 in Chapter 0.]
9. Show that if a path-connected, locally path-connected space X has π1(X) ﬁnite,
then every map X→S1 is nullhomotopic. [Use the covering space R→S1 .]
10. Find all the connected 2 sheeted and 3 sheeted covering spaces of S1 ∨S1 , up to
isomorphism of covering spaces without basepoints.
11. Construct ﬁnite graphs X1 and X2 having a common ﬁnite-sheeted covering space
eX1 = eX2 , but such that there is no space having both X1 and X2 as covering spaces.
12.
Let a and b be the generators of π1(S1 ∨S1) corresponding to the two S1
summands. Draw a picture of the covering space of S1 ∨S1 corresponding to the
normal subgroup generated by a2 , b2 , and (ab)4 , and prove that this covering space
is indeed the correct one.
13.
Determine the covering space of S1 ∨S1 corresponding to the subgroup of
π1(S1 ∨S1) generated by the cubes of all elements. [The covering space is 27 sheeted
and can be drawn on a torus so that the complementary regions are 9 triangles with
edges labelled aaa, 9 triangles with edges labelled bbb, and 9 hexagons with edges
labelled ababab. If the problem were modiﬁed by replacing ‘cubes’ with ‘sixth pow-
ers,’ the resulting covering space would have 228325 sheets! And for kth powers with
k sufﬁciently large, the covering space would have inﬁnitely many sheets. The under-
lying group theory question here, whether the quotient of Z∗Z obtained by factoring
out all kth powers is ﬁnite, is known as Burnside’s problem. It can also be asked for
a free group on n generators.]

Section 1.3.
Covering Spaces
79
14. Find all the connected covering spaces of RP2 ∨RP2 .
15. Let p : eX→X be a simply-connected covering space of X and let A ⊂X be a
path-connected, locally path-connected subspace, with eA ⊂eX a path-component of
p−1(A). Show that p : eA→A is the covering space corresponding to the kernel of the
map π1(A)→π1(X).
16. Given maps X→Y→Z such that both Y→Z and the composition X→Z are
covering spaces, show that X→Y is a covering space if Z is locally path-connected,
and show that this covering space is normal if X→Z is a normal covering space.
17. Given a group G and a normal subgroup N , show that there exists a normal
covering space eX→X with π1(X) ≈G, π1( eX) ≈N , and deck transformation group
G( eX) ≈G/N .
18. For a path-connected, locally path-connected, and semilocally simply-connected
space X , call a path-connected covering space eX→X abelian if it is normal and has
abelian deck transformation group. Show that X has an abelian covering space which
is a covering space of every other abelian covering space of X , and that such a ‘uni-
versal’ abelian covering space is unique up to isomorphism. Describe this covering
space explicitly for X = S1 ∨S1 and X = S1 ∨S1 ∨S1 .
19. Use the preceding problem to show that a closed orientable surface Mg of genus
g has a connected normal covering space with group of deck transformations Zn (the
product of n copies of Z) iff n ≤2g. For g ≥3 and n = 3 describe such a covering
space explicitly as a subspace of R3 with translations of R3 as deck transformations.
Show that such a covering space in R3 exists iff there is an embedding of Mg in the
3 torus T 3 = S1×S1×S1 such that the induced map π1(Mg)→π1(T 3) is surjective.
20. Construct nonnormal covering spaces of the Klein bottle by a Klein bottle and by
a torus.
21. Let X be the space obtained from a torus S1×S1 by attaching a M¨obius band via a
homeomorphism from the boundary circle of the M¨obius band to the circle S1×{x0}
in the torus. Compute π1(X), describe the universal cover of X , and describe the
action of π1(X) on the universal cover. Do the same for the space Y obtained by
attaching a M¨obius band to RP2 via a homeomorphism of its boundary circle to RP1 ⊂
RP2 .
22. Given covering space actions of groups G1 on X1 and G2 on X2 , show that the ac-
tion of G1×G2 on X1×X2 deﬁned by (g1, g2)(x1, x2) = (g1(x1), g2(x2)) is a covering
space action, and that (X1×X2)/(G1×G2) is homeomorphic to X1/G1×X2/G2 .
23. Show that if a group G acts freely and properly discontinuously on a Hausdorff
space X , then the action is a covering space action. (Here ‘properly discontinuously’
means each x ∈X has a neighborhood U such that { g ∈G | U ∩g(U) ≠∅} is
ﬁnite.) In particular, a free action of a ﬁnite group on a Hausdorff space is a covering
space action.

80
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
24. Given a covering space action of a group G on a path-connected, locally path-
connected space X , then each subgroup H ⊂G determines a composition of covering
spaces X→X/H→X/G. Show:
(a) Every path-connected covering space between X and X/G is isomorphic to X/H
for some subgroup H ⊂G.
(b) Two such covering spaces X/H1 and X/H2 of X/G are isomorphic iff H1 and
H2 are conjugate subgroups of G.
(c) The covering space X/H→X/G is normal iff H is a normal subgroup of G, in
which case the group of deck transformations of this cover is G/H .
25. Let ϕ : R2→R2 be the linear transformation ϕ(x, y) = (2x, y/2). This generates
an action of Z on X = R2 −{0}. Show this action is a covering space action and
compute π1(X/Z). Show the orbit space X/Z is non-Hausdorff, and describe how it
is a union of subspaces homeomorphic to S1×R, coming from the complementary
components of the x and y axes.
26. For a covering space p : eX→X with X connected, locally path-connected, and
semilocally simply-connected, show:
(a) The components of eX are in one-to-one correspondence with the orbits of the
action of π1(X, x0) on the ﬁber p−1(x0).
(b) Under the Galois correspondence between connected covering spaces of X and
subgroups of π1(X, x0), the subgroup corresponding to the component of
eX
containing a given lift ex0 of x0 is the stabilizer of ex0 , the subgroup consisting
of elements whose action on the ﬁber leaves ex0 ﬁxed.
27. For a universal cover p : eX→X we have two actions of π1(X, x0) on the ﬁber
p−1(x0), namely the action given by lifting loops at x0 and the action given by re-
stricting deck transformations to the ﬁber.
Are these two actions the same when
X = S1 ∨S1 or X = S1×S1 ? Do the actions always agree when π1(X, x0) is abelian?
28. Generalize the proof of Theorem 1.7 to show that for a covering space action of a
group G on a simply-connected space Y , π1(Y/G) is isomorphic to G. [If Y is locally
path-connected, this is a special case of part (b) of Proposition 1.40.]
29. Let Y be path-connected, locally path-connected, and simply-connected, and let
G1 and G2 be subgroups of Homeo(Y) deﬁning covering space actions on Y . Show
that the orbit spaces Y/G1 and Y/G2 are homeomorphic iff G1 and G2 are conjugate
subgroups of Homeo(Y).
30. Draw the Cayley graph of the group Z ∗Z2 = ⟨a, b | b2 ⟩.
31. Show that the normal covering spaces of S1 ∨S1 are precisely the graphs which
are Cayley graphs of groups with two generators. More generally, the normal cov-
ering spaces of the wedge sum of n circles are the Cayley graphs of groups with n
generators.

Section 1.A.
Graphs and Free Groups
81
32.
Consider covering spaces p : eX→X with
eX and X connected CW complexes,
the cells of eX projecting homeomorphically onto cells of X . Restricting p to the
1 skeleton then gives a covering space eX1→X1 over the 1 skeleton of X . Show:
(a) Two such covering spaces eX1→X and eX2→X are isomorphic iff the restrictions
eX1
1→X1 and eX1
2→X1 are isomorphic.
(b)
eX→X is a normal covering space iff eX1→X1 is normal.
(c) The groups of deck transformations of the coverings eX→X and eX1→X1 are
isomorphic, via the restriction map.
33. In Example 1.44 let d be the greatest common divisor of m and n, and write m =
dm′ and n = dn′ . Show that the graph Tm,n/K consists of m′ vertices labelled a,
n′ vertices labelled b, together with d edges joining each a vertex to each b vertex.
Deduce that the subgroup K ⊂Gm,n is free on ℓm′n′ −m′ −n′ + 1 generators.
Since all groups can be realized as fundamental groups of spaces, this opens the
way for using topology to study algebraic properties of groups. The topics in this
section and the next give some illustrations of this principle, mainly using covering
space theory.
We remind the reader that the ‘Additional Topics’ which form the remainder of
this chapter are not an essential part of the basic core of the book. Readers who are
eager to move on to new topics in later chapters should feel free to skip ahead.
By deﬁnition, a graph is a 1 dimensional CW complex, in other words, a space X
obtained from a discrete set X0 by attaching a collection of 1 cells eα . Thus X is a
quotient space of the disjoint union X0 `
α Iα , where Iα is a copy of the interval I ,
obtained by identifying the two endpoints of each Iα with points of X0 . The points
of X0 are the vertices and the 1 cells the edges of X . Note that with this deﬁnition
an edge is an open subset of X , not containing its endpoints. The two endpoints of
an edge can be the same vertex, so the closure eα of an edge eα is homeomorphic
either to I or to S1 .
Since X has the quotient topology from X0 `
α Iα , a subset of X is open (or closed)
iff it intersects the closure eα of each edge eα in an open (or closed) set in eα . One
says X has the weak topology with respect to the subspaces eα . In this topology

82
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
a sequence of points in the interiors of distinct edges forms a closed subset, hence
never converges. This is true in particular if the edges containing the sequence all
have a common vertex and one tries to choose the sequence so that it gets ‘closer and
closer’ to the vertex. Thus if there is a vertex which is the endpoint of inﬁnitely many
edges, then the weak topology cannot be a metric topology. An exercise at the end
of this section is to show the converse, that the weak topology is a metric topology if
each vertex is an endpoint of only ﬁnitely many edges.
A basis for the topology of X consists of the open intervals in the edges together
with the path-connected neighborhoods of the vertices. A neighborhood of the latter
sort about a vertex v is the union of connected open neighborhoods Uα of v in eα
for all eα containing v . In particular, we see that X is locally path-connected. Hence
a graph is connected iff it is path-connected.
If X has only ﬁnitely many vertices and edges, then X is compact, being the
continuous image of the compact space X0 `
α Iα . The converse is also true, and more
generally, a compact subset C of a graph X can meet only ﬁnitely many vertices and
edges of X . To see this, let the subspace D ⊂C consist of the vertices in C together
with one point in each edge which C meets. Then D is a closed subset of X since it
meets each eα in a closed set. For the same reason, any subset of D is closed, so D
has the discrete topology. But D is compact, being a closed subset of the compact
space C , so D must be ﬁnite. By the deﬁnitio of D this means that C can meet only
ﬁnitely many vertices and edges.
A subgraph of a graph X is a subspace Y ⊂X which is a union of vertices and
edges of X , such that eα ⊂Y implies eα ⊂Y . The latter condition just says that Y
is a closed subspace of X . A tree is a contractible graph. By a tree in a graph X we
mean a subgraph which is a tree. We call a tree in X maximal if it contains all the
vertices of X . This is equivalent to the more obvious meaning of maximality, as we
will see below.
Proposition 1A.1. Every connected graph contains a maximal tree, and in fact any
tree in the graph is contained in a maximal tree.
Proof: Let X be a connected graph. We will describe a contruction which embeds
an arbitrary subgraph X0 ⊂X as a deformation retract of a subgraph Y ⊂X which
contains all the vertices of X . By choosing X0 to be any subtree of X , for example a
single vertex, this will prove the proposition.
As a preliminary step, we construct a sequence of subgraphs X0 ⊂X1 ⊂X2 ⊂···,
letting Xi+1 be obtained from Xi by adjoining the closures eα of all edges eα ⊂X −Xi
having at least one endpoint in Xi . The union
S
i Xi is open in X since a neighborhood
of a point in Xi is contained in Xi+1 . Also
S
i Xi is closed since it is a union of closed
edges and X has the weak topology. So X =
S
i Xi since X is connected.

Section 1.A.
Graphs and Free Groups
83
Now to construct Y we begin by setting Y0 = X0 . Then inductively, assuming
that Yi ⊂Xi has been constructed so as to contain all the vertices of Xi , let Yi+1 be
obtained from Yi by adjoining one edge connecting each vertex of Xi+1−Xi to Yi , and
let Y =
S
i Yi . It is evident that Yi+1 deformation retracts to Yi , and we may obtain
a deformation retraction of Y to Y0 = X0 by performing the deformation retraction
of Yi+1 to Yi during the time interval [1/2i+1, 1/2i]. Thus a point x ∈Yi+1 −Yi is
stationary until this interval, when it moves into Yi and thereafter continues mov-
ing until it reaches Y0 . The resulting homotopy ht : Y→Y is continuous since it is
continuous on the closure of each edge and Y has the weak topology.
⊔⊓
Given a maximal tree T ⊂X and a base vertex x0 ∈T , then each edge eα of
X −T determines a loop fα in X which goes ﬁrst from x0 to one endpoint of eα by
a path in T , then across eα , then back to x0 by a path in T . Strictly speaking, we
should ﬁrst orient the edge eα in order to specify which direction to cross it. Note
that the homotopy class of fα is independent of the choice of the paths in T since T
is simply-connected.
Proposition 1A.2. For a connected graph X with maximal tree T , π1(X) is a free
group with basis the classes [fα] corresponding to the edges eα of X −T .
In particular this implies that a maximal tree is maximal in the sense of not being
contained in any larger tree, since adjoining any edge to a maximal tree produces a
graph with nontrivial fundamental group. Another consequence is that a graph is a
tree iff it is simply-connected.
Proof: The quotient map X→X/T is a homotopy equivalence by Proposition 0.17.
The quotient X/T is a graph with only one vertex, hence is a wedge sum of circles,
whose fundamental group we showed in Example 1.21 to be free with basis the loops
given by the edges of X/T , which are the images of the loops fα in X .
⊔⊓
Here is a very useful fact about graphs:
Lemma 1A.3. Every covering space of a graph is also a graph, with vertices and
edges the lifts of the vertices and edges in the base graph.
Proof: Let p : eX→X be the covering space. For the vertices of eX we take the discrete
set eX0 = p−1(X0). Writing X as a quotient space of X0 `
α Iα as in the deﬁnition
of a graph and applying the path lifting property to the resulting maps Iα→X , we
get a unique lift Iα→eX passing through each point in p−1(x), for x ∈eα . These
lifts deﬁne the edges of a graph structure on eX . The resulting topology on eX is the
same as its original topology since both topologies have the same basic open sets, the
covering projection eX→X being a local homeomorphism.
⊔⊓
We can now apply what we have proved about graphs and their fundamental
groups to prove a basic fact of group theory:

84
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
Theorem 1A.4. Every subgroup of a free group is free.
Proof: Given a free group F , choose a graph X with π1(X) ≈F , for example a wedge
of circles corresponding to a basis for F .
For each subgroup G of F there is by
Proposition 1.36 a covering space p : eX→X with p∗
 π1( eX)

= G, hence π1( eX) ≈G
since p∗is injective by Proposition 1.31. Since eX is a graph by the preceding lemma,
the group G ≈π1( eX) is free by Proposition 1A.2.
⊔⊓
The structure of trees can be elucidated by looking more closely at the construc-
tions in the proof of Proposition 1A.1. If X is a tree and v0 is any vertex of X , then
the construction of a maximal tree Y ⊂X starting with Y0 = {v0} yields an increas-
ing sequence of subtrees Yn ⊂X whose union is all of X since
a tree has only one maximal subtree, namely itself. We can think
of the vertices in Yn −Yn−1 as being at ‘height’ n, with the edges
of Yn −Yn−1 connecting these vertices to vertices of height n −1.
In this way we get a ‘height function’ h : X→R assigning to each
vertex its height, and monotone on edges.
For each vertex v of X there is exactly one edge leading downward from v , so
by following these downward edges we obtain a path from v to the base vertex v0 .
This is an example of an edgepath, which is a composition of ﬁnitely many paths each
consisting of a single edge traversed monotonically. For any edgepath joining v to v0
other than the downward edgepath, the height function would not be monotone and
hence would have local maxima, occurring when the edgepath backtracked, retracing
some edge it had just crossed.
Thus in a tree there is a unique nonbacktracking
edgepath joining any two points. All the vertices and edges along this edgepath are
distinct.
A tree can contain no subgraph homeomorphic to a circle, since two vertices
in such a subgraph could be joined by more than one nonbacktracking edgepath.
Conversely, if a connected graph X contains no circle subgraph then it must be a tree.
For if T is a maximal tree in X which is not equal to X , then the union of an edge of
X −T with the nonbacktracking edgepath in T joining the endpoints of this edge is a
circle subgraph of X . So if there are no circle subgraphs of X we must have X = T ,
a tree.
For an arbitrary connected graph X and a pair of vertices v0 and v1 in X there is
a unique nonbacktracking edgepath in each homotopy class of paths from v0 to v1 .
This can be seen by lifting to the universal cover eX , which is a tree since it is simply-
connected. Choosing a lift ev0 of v0 , a homotopy class of paths from v0 to v1 lifts to
a homotopy class of paths starting at ev0 and ending at some lift ev1 of v1 . Since eX is
simply-connected, the homotopy class of paths from ev0 to ev1 is uniquely determined
by its endpoints. Nonbacktracking edgepaths in X lift to nonbacktracking edgepaths

Section 1.A.
Graphs and Free Groups
85
in eX , and there is only one such edgepath from ev0 to ev1 as we have seen, so we obtain
the result claimed.
Exercises
1. Let X be a graph in which each vertex is an endpoint of only ﬁnitely many edges.
Show the weak topology on X is a metric topology.
2. Show that a connected graph retracts onto any connected subgraph.
3.
For a ﬁnite graph X deﬁne the Euler characteristic χ(X) to be the number of
vertices minus the number of edges. Show that χ(X) = 1 if X is a tree, and that the
number of free generators of π1(X) is 1 −χ(X) if X is connected.
4. If X is a ﬁnite graph and Y is a subgraph homeomorphic to S1 and containing the
basepoint x0 , show that π1(X, x0) has a basis in which one element is represented
by the loop Y .
5. Construct a connected graph X and maps f , g : X→X such that f g = 11 but f
and g do not induce isomorphisms on π1 . [Note that f∗g∗= 11 implies that f∗is
surjective and g∗is injective.]
6. Let F be the free group on 2 generators, F′ its commutator subgroup. Find a
set of free generators for F′ by considering the covering space of the graph S1 ∨S1
corresponding to F′ .
7. If F is a ﬁnitely generated free group and N is a nontrivial normal subgroup of
inﬁnite index, show, using covering spaces, that N is not ﬁnitely generated.
8. Show that a ﬁnitely generated group has only a ﬁnite number of subgroups of a
given ﬁnite index. [First do the case of free groups, using covering spaces of graphs.
The general case then follows since every group is a quotient group of a free group.]
9. Using covering spaces, show that an index n subgroup H of a group G has at most
n conjugate subgroups gHg−1 in G. Apply this to show that there exists a normal
subgroup K ⊂G of ﬁnite index with K ⊂H .
[For the latter statement, consider
the intersection of all the conjugate subgroups gHg−1 . This is the maximal normal
subgroup of G contained in H .]
10. Let X be the wedge sum of n circles, with its natural graph structure, and let
eX→X be a covering space with Y ⊂eX a ﬁnite connected subgraph. Show there is
a ﬁnite graph Z ⊃Y having the same vertices as Y , such that the projection Y→X
extends to a covering space Z→X .
11. Apply the two preceding problems to show that if F is a ﬁnitely generated free
group and x ∈F is not the identity element, then there is a normal subgroup H ⊂F
of ﬁnite index such that x ∉H . Hence x has nontrivial image in a ﬁnite quotient
group of F . In this situation one says F is residually ﬁnite.

86
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
12. Let F be a ﬁnitely generated free group, H ⊂F a ﬁnitely generated subgroup, and
x ∈F −H . Show there is a subgroup K of ﬁnite index in F such that K ⊃H and
x ∉K . [Apply exercise 10.]
13. Let x be a nontrivial element of a ﬁnitely generated free group F . Show there is
a ﬁnite-index subgroup H ⊂F in which x is one element of a basis. [Exercises 4 and
10 may be helpful.]
14. Show that the existence of maximal trees is equivalent to the Axiom of Choice.
In this section we introduce a class of spaces whose homotopy type depends only
on their fundamental group. These spaces arise many places in topology, especially
where topology and group theory intermingle.
A path-connected space whose fundamental group is isomorphic to a given group
G and which has a contractible universal covering space is called a K(G,1) space. The
‘1’ here refers to π1 . More general K(G, n) spaces are studied in §4.1. All these spaces
are called Eilenberg-MacLane spaces, though in the case n = 1 they were studied by
Hurewicz before Eilenberg and MacLane took up the general case.
Here are some
examples:
Example 1B.1. S1 is a K(Z, 1). More generally, a connected graph is a K(G, 1) with G
a free group, since by the results of §1A its universal cover is a tree, hence contractible.
Example 1B.2. Closed surfaces with inﬁnite π1 , i.e., closed surfaces other than S2 and
RP2 , are K(G, 1)’s. This will be shown in Example 1B.14 below. It also follows from the
theorem in surface theory that the only simply-connected surfaces without boundary
are S2 and R2 , so the universal cover of a closed surface with inﬁnite fundamental
group must be noncompact, hence R2 . Non-closed surfaces deformation retract onto
graphs, so are K(G, 1)’s with G free.
Example 1B.3. The inﬁnite-dimensional projective space RP∞is a K(Z2, 1) since its
universal cover is S∞which is contractible. To show the latter fact, a homotopy from
the identity map of S∞to a constant map can be constructed in two stages as follows.
First, deﬁne ft : R∞→R∞by ft(x1, x2, ···) = (1 −t)(x1, x2, ···) + t(0, x1, x2, ···).
This takes nonzero vectors to nonzero vectors for all t ∈[0, 1], so ft/|ft| gives a ho-
motopy from the identity map of S∞to the map (x1, x2, ···),(0, x1, x2, ···). Then a
homotopy from this map to a constant map is given by gt/|gt| where gt(x1, x2, ···) =
(1 −t)(0, x1, x2, ···) + t(1, 0, 0, ···).

Section 1.B.
K(G,1) Spaces and Graphs of Groups
87
Example 1B.4. Generalizing the preceding example, we can construct a K(Zm, 1) as
an inﬁnite dimensional lens space S∞/Zm , where Zm acts on S∞, regarded as the
unit sphere in C∞, by scalar multiplication by mth roots of unity, a generator of this
action being the map (z1, z2, ···) , e2πi/m(z1, z2, ···). It is not hard to check that
this is a covering space action.
Example 1B.5. A product K(G, 1)×K(H, 1) is a K(G×H, 1) since its universal cover
is the product of the universal covers of K(G, 1) and K(H, 1). By taking products of
circles and inﬁnite dimensional lens spaces we therefore get K(G, 1)’s for arbitrary
ﬁnitely generated abelian groups G. For example the n dimensional torus T n , the
product of n circles, is a K(Zn, 1).
Example 1B.6. For a nonempty closed connected subspace K of S3 , the complement
S3 −K is a K(G, 1). This is a theorem in 3 manifold theory, but in the special case
that K is a torus knot the result follows from our study of torus knot complements
in Examples 1.24 and 1.35. Namely, we showed that for K the torus knot Km,n there
is a deformation retraction of S3 −K onto a certain 2 dimensional complex Xm,n
having contractible universal cover. The homotopy lifting property then implies that
the universal cover of S3 −K is homotopy equivalent to the universal cover of Xm,n ,
hence is also contractible.
Example 1B.7. It is not hard to construct a K(G, 1) for an arbitrary group G, us-
ing the notion of a ∆complex deﬁned in §2.1.
Let EG be the ∆complex whose
n simplices are the ordered (n + 1) tuples [g0, ··· , gn] of elements of G. Such an
n simplex attaches to the (n −1) simplices [g0, ··· , bgi, ··· , gn] in the obvious way,
just as a standard simplex attaches to its faces. (The notation bgi means that this ver-
tex is deleted.) The complex EG is contractible by the homotopy ht which deforms
each point in the simplex [g0, ··· , gn] linearly in the simplex [e, g0, ··· , gn] to the
vertex [e], where e is the identity element of G. This is well deﬁned in EG since
when we restrict to a face [g0, ··· , bgi, ··· , gn] we have the linear homotopy to [e] in
[e, g0, ··· , bgi, ··· , gn]. Note that ht carries [e] around the loop [e, e], so ht is not
actually a deformation retraction of EG onto [e].
The group G acts on EG by left multiplication, an element g ∈G taking the
simplex [g0, ··· , gn] linearly onto the simplex [gg0, ··· , ggn]. Only the identity e
takes any simplex to itself, so by an exercise at the end of this section, the action
of G on EG is a covering space action. Hence the quotient map EG→EG/G is the
universal cover of the orbit space BG = EG/G, and BG is a K(G, 1).
Since G acts on EG by freely permuting simplices, BG inherits a ∆complex
structure from EG. The action of G on EG identiﬁes all the vertices of EG, so BG
has just one vertex. To describe the ∆complex structure on BG explicitly, note ﬁrst
that every n simplex of EG can be written uniquely in the form
[g0, g0g1, g0g1g2, ··· , g0g1 ··· gn] = g0[e, g1, g1g2, ··· , g1 ··· gn].

88
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
The image of this simplex in BG may be denoted unambiguously by the symbol
[g1|g2| ··· |gn].
In this ‘bar’ notation the gi ’s and their ordered products can be
used to label edges, viewing an
edge label as the ratio between
the two labels on the ver-
tices at the endpoints of
the edge, as indicated in
the ﬁgure. With this no-
g
g
g
0
g0
g3
g3
g0
1
g1
g1
g0g1
g0g1
2
g
g0g1
2
g
g0g1
2
g3
g2
g3
g
g1
2
g
g1
2
g2
g2
g
g1
2
tation, the boundary of a
simplex [g1| ··· |gn] of BG consists of the simplices [g2| ··· |gn], [g1| ··· |gn−1],
and [g1| ··· |gigi+1| ··· |gn] for i = 1, ··· , n −1.
This construction of a K(G, 1) produces a rather large space, since BG is al-
ways inﬁnite-dimensional, and if G is inﬁnite, BG has an inﬁnite number of cells in
each positive dimension. For example, BZ is much bigger than S1 , the most efﬁcient
K(Z, 1). On the other hand, BG has the virtue of being functorial: A homomorphism
f : G→H induces a map Bf : BG→BH sending a simplex [g1| ··· |gn] to the simplex
[f(g1)| ··· |f (gn)]. A different construction of a K(G, 1) is given in §4.1. Here one
starts with any 2 dimensional complex having fundamental group G, for example the
complex XG associated to a presentation of G, and then one attaches cells of dimen-
sion 3 and higher to make the universal cover contractible without affecting π1 . In
general, it is hard to get any control on the number of higher-dimensional cells needed
in this construction, so it too can be rather inefﬁcient. Indeed, it is often a difﬁcult
problem to construct an efﬁcient K(G, 1) for a given group G. A curious and almost
paradoxical fact which is relevant to this efﬁciency question is that if G contains any
elements of ﬁnite order, then every K(G, 1) CW complex must be inﬁnite-dimensional.
This is shown in Proposition 2.45. In particular the inﬁnite-dimensional lens space
K(Zm, 1)’s in Example 1B.4 cannot be replaced by any ﬁnite-dimensional complex.
In spite of the great latitude possible in the construction of K(G, 1)’s, there is a
very nice uniqueness statement which accounts for much of the interest in K(G, 1)’s:
Theorem 1B.8. The homotopy type of a CW complex K(G, 1) is uniquely determined
by G.
Having a unique homotopy type of K(G, 1)’s associated to each group G means
that algebraic invariants of spaces which depend only on homotopy type, such as ho-
mology and cohomology groups, become invariants of groups. This has proved to be a
quite fruitful idea, and has been much studied both from the algebraic and topological
viewpoints. The discussion following Proposition 2.45 gives a few references.
The preceding theorem will follow easily from:

Section 1.B.
K(G,1) Spaces and Graphs of Groups
89
Proposition 1B.9. Let X be a connected CW complex and let Y be a K(G, 1). Then
any homomorphism π1(X, x0)→π1(Y, y0) is induced by a map (X, x0)→(Y, y0)
which is unique up to homotopy ﬁxing x0 .
To deduce the theorem from this, let X and Y be CW complex K(G, 1)’s with iso-
morphic fundamental groups. The proposition gives maps f : (X, x0)→(Y, y0) and
g : (Y, y0)→(X, x0) inducing inverse isomorphisms π1(X, x0) ≈π1(Y, y0). Then f g
and gf induce the identity on π1 hence are homotopic to the identity maps.
Proof of 1B.9: Let us ﬁrst consider the case that X has a single 0 cell, the base-
point x0 . Given a homomorphism ϕ : π1(X, x0)→π1(Y, y0), we begin the construc-
tion of a map f : (X, x0)→(Y, y0) with f∗= ϕ by setting f (x0) = y0 . Each 1 cell
e1
α of X has closure a circle determining an element
[e1
α] ∈π1(X, x0), and we let f on the closure of e1
α
X
π1
1
0
(
)
x
ϕ
∗
,
X
π1
0
(
)
x
,
Y
π1
0
(
)
y
,
f
∗
i
−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−→
be a map representing ϕ([e1
α]). If i : X1 > X denotes
the inclusion, then ϕi∗= f∗since π1(X1, x0) is generated
by the elements [e1
α].
To extend f over a cell e2
β with attaching map ψβ : S1→X1 , all we need is for the
composition f ψβ to be nullhomotopic. Choosing a basepoint s0 ∈S1 and a path in X1
from ψβ(s0) to x0 , ψβ determines an element [ψβ] ∈π1(X1, x0), and the existence
of a nullhomotopy of f ψβ is equivalent to f∗([ψβ]) being zero in π1(Y, y0). We
have i∗([ψβ]) = 0 since the cell e2
β provides a nullhomotopy of ψβ in X . Hence
f∗([ψβ]) = ϕi∗([ψβ]) = 0, and so f can be extended over e2
β .
Extending f inductively over cells en
γ with n > 2 is possible since the attaching
maps ψγ : Sn−1→Xn−1 have nullhomotopic compositions f ψγ : Sn−1→Y .
This is
because f ψγ lifts to the universal cover of Y if n > 2, and this cover is contractible
by hypothesis, so the lift of f ψγ is nullhomotopic, hence also f ψγ itself.
Turning to the uniqueness statement, if two maps f0, f1 : (X, x0)→(Y, y0) in-
duce the same homomorphism on π1 , then we see immediately that their restrictions
to X1 are homotopic, ﬁxing x0 .
To extend the resulting map X1×I ∪X×∂I→Y
over the remaining cells en×(0, 1) of X×I we can proceed just as in the previous
paragraph since these cells have dimension n + 1 > 2. Thus we obtain a homotopy
ft : (X, x0)→(Y, y0), ﬁnishing the proof in the case that X has a single 0 cell.
The case that X has more than one 0 cell can be treated by a small elaboration on
this argument. Choose a maximal tree T ⊂X . To construct a map f realizing a given
ϕ, begin by setting f (T) = y0 . Then each edge e1
α in X −T determines an element
[e1
α] ∈π1(X, x0), and we let f on the closure of e1
α be a map representing ϕ([e1
α]).
Extending f over higher-dimensional cells then proceeds just as before. Constructing
a homotopy ft joining two given maps f0 and f1 with f0∗= f1∗also has an extra
step.
Let ht : X1→X1 be a homotopy, starting with h0 = 11, which restricts to a
deformation retraction of T to x0 . (It is easy to extend such a deformation retraction

90
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
to a homotopy deﬁned on all of X1 .) To construct a homotopy f0|X1 ≃f1|X1 , one
ﬁrst deforms f0|X1 and f1|X1 to take T to y0 by composing with ht . Then the
earlier argument can be used to give a homotopy f0|X1 ≃f1|X1 and to extend this
homotopy over all of X .
⊔⊓
The ﬁrst part of the preceding proof also works for the 2 dimensional complexes
XG associated to presentations of groups. Thus every homomorphism G→H is re-
alized as the induced homomorphism of some map XG→XH . However, there is no
uniqueness statement for this map, and it can easily happen that different presenta-
tions of a group G give XG ’s which are not homotopy equivalent.
Graphs of Groups
As an illustration of how K(G, 1) spaces can be useful in group theory, we shall
describe a procedure for assembling a collection of K(G, 1)’s together into a K(G, 1)
for a larger group G. Group-theoretically, this gives a method for assembling smaller
groups together to form a larger group, generalizing the notion of free products.
Let Γ be a graph which is connected and oriented, that is, its edges are viewed as
arrows, each edge having a speciﬁed direction. Suppose that at each vertex v of Γ we
place a group Gv and along each edge e of Γ we put a homomorphism ϕe from the
group at the tail of the edge to the group at the head of the edge. We call this data a
graph of groups. Now build a space BΓ by putting the space BGv from Example 1B.7
at each vertex v of Γ and then ﬁlling in a mapping cylinder of the map Bϕe along
each edge e of Γ , identifying the two ends of the mapping cylinder with the two BGv ’s
at the ends of e. The resulting space BΓ is then a CW complex since the maps Bϕe
take n cells homeomorphically onto n cells. In fact, the cell structure on BΓ can be
canonically subdivided into a ∆complex structure using the prism construction from
the proof of Theorem 2.10, but we will not need to do this here.
More generally, instead of BGv one could take any CW complex K(Gv, 1) at the
vertex v , and then along edges put mapping cylinders of maps realizing the homo-
morphisms ϕe . We leave it for the reader to check that the resulting space KΓ is
homotopy equivalent to the BΓ constructed above.
Example 1B.10. Suppose Γ consists of one central vertex with a number of edges
radiating out from it, and the group Gv at this central vertex is trivial, hence also all
the edge homomorphisms. Then van Kampen’s theorem implies that π1(KΓ) is the
free product of the groups at all the outer vertices.
In view of this example, we shall call π1(KΓ) for a general graph of groups Γ the
graph product of the vertex groups Gv with respect to the edge homomorphisms ϕe .
The name for π1(KΓ) that is generally used in the literature is the rather awkward
phrase, ‘the fundamental group of the graph of groups.’

Section 1.B.
K(G,1) Spaces and Graphs of Groups
91
Here is the main result we shall prove about graphs of groups:
Theorem 1B.11. If all the edge homomorphisms ϕe are injective, then KΓ is a
K(G, 1) and the inclusions K(Gv, 1) > KΓ induce injective maps on π1 .
Before giving the proof, let us look at some interesting special cases:
Example 1B.12: Free Products with Amalgamation. Suppose the graph of groups is
A←C→B , with the two maps monomorphisms. One can regard this data as speci-
fying embeddings of C as subgroups of A and B . Applying van Kampen’s theorem
to the decomposition of KΓ into its two mapping cylinders, we see that π1(KΓ) is
the quotient of A ∗B obtained by identifying the subgroup C ⊂A with the subgroup
C ⊂B . The standard notation for this group is A ∗C B , the free product of A and
B amalgamated along the subgroup C . According to the theorem, A ∗C B contains
both A and B as subgroups.
For example, a free product with amalgamation Z∗ZZ can be realized by mapping
cylinders of the maps S1←S1→S1 which are m sheeted and n sheeted covering
spaces, respectively. We studied this case in Examples 1.24 and 1.35 where we showed
that the complex KΓ is a deformation retract of the complement of a torus knot in
S3 if m and n are relatively prime. It is a basic result in 3 manifold theory that the
complement of every smooth knot in S3 can be built up by iterated graph of groups
constructions with injective edge homomorphisms, starting with free groups, so the
theorem implies that these knot complements are K(G, 1)’s. Their universal covers
are all R3 , in fact.
Example 1B.13: HNN Extensions. This is the case that the graph of groups consists
of two monomorphisms ϕ, ψ : C→A. This is analogous to the previous case A ∗C B ,
but with the two groups A and B coalesced to a single group. Accordingly, π1(KΓ)
is denoted A∗C .
To see what this group looks like, regard KΓ as obtained from
K(A, 1) by attaching K(C, 1)×I along the two ends K(C, 1)×∂I via maps realizing
the monomorphisms ϕ and ψ. Using a K(C, 1) with a single 0 cell, we see that KΓ
can be obtained from K(A, 1) ∨S1 by attaching cells of dimension two and greater,
so π1(KΓ) is a quotient of A ∗Z, and it is not hard to ﬁgure out that the relations
deﬁning this quotient are of the form tϕ(c)t−1 = ψ(c) where t is a generator of the
Z factor and c ranges over C , or a set of generators for C . We leave the veriﬁcation
of this for the Exercises.
As a very special case, taking ϕ = ψ = 11 gives A∗A = A×Z since we can take
KΓ = K(A, 1)×S1 in this case. More generally, taking ϕ = 11 with ψ an arbitrary
automorphism of A, we realize any semi-direct product of A and Z as A∗A . For
example, the Klein bottle occurs this way, with ϕ realized by the identity map of S1
and ψ by a reﬂection. In these cases when ϕ = 11 we could realize the same group
π1(KΓ) using a slightly simpler graph of groups, with a single vertex labelled A and
a single edge labelled ψ.

92
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
Here is another special case. Suppose we take a torus, delete a small open disk,
then identify the resulting boundary circle with a longitudinal circle of the torus.
This produces a space X which happens to be homeomorphic to a subspace of the
standard picture of a Klein bottle in R3 ; see Exercise 12 of §1.2. The fundamental
group π1(X) has the form (Z∗Z)∗ZZ with the deﬁning relation tb±1t−1 = aba−1b−1
where a is a meridional loop and b is a longitudinal loop on the torus. (The sign
of the exponent in the term b±1 is immaterial since the two ways of glueing the
boundary circle to the longitude produce homeomorphic spaces.) The abelianization
of π1(X) = ⟨a, b, t | tbt−1aba−1b−1 ⟩is Z×Z, but it seems to be nontrivial to show
that π1(X) is not isomorphic to Z ∗Z. There is a surjection π1(X)→Z ∗Z obtained
by setting b = 1. This has nontrivial kernel since b is nontrivial in π1(X) by the
preceding theorem. If π1(X) were isomorphic to Z∗Z we would then have a surjective
homomorphism Z∗Z→Z∗Z which was not an isomorphism. However, it is a theorem
in group theory that a free group F is hopﬁan — every surjective homomorphism
F→F must be injective. Hence π1(X) is not free.
Example 1B.14: Closed Surfaces. A closed orientable surface M of genus two or
greater can be cut along a circle into two compact surfaces M1 and M2 such that the
closed surfaces obtained from M1 and M2 by ﬁlling in their boundary circle with a
disk have smaller genus than M . Each of M1 and M2 is the mapping cylinder of a
map from S1 to a ﬁnite graph. Namely, view Mi as obtained from a closed surface
by deleting an open disk in the interior of the 2 cell in the standard CW structure
described in Chapter 0, so that Mi becomes the mapping cylinder of the attaching
map of the 2 cell. This attaching map is not nullhomotopic, and therefore induces an
injection on π1 since free groups are torsionfree. Thus we have realized the original
surface M as KΓ for Γ a graph of groups of the form F1←------ Z -→F2 with F1 and F2
free and the two maps injective. The theorem then says that M is a K(G, 1).
A similar argument works for closed nonorientable surfaces other than RP2 . For
example, the Klein bottle is obtained from two M¨obius bands by identifying their
boundary circles, and a M¨obius band is the mapping cylinder of the two-sheeted cov-
ering space S1→S1 .
Proof of 1B.11: We shall construct a covering space eK→KΓ by gluing together copies
of the universal covering spaces of the various mapping cylinders in KΓ in such a way
that eK will be contractible. Hence eK will be the universal cover of KΓ , which will
therefore be a K(G, 1).
First a preliminary observation: Given a universal covering space p : eX→X and
a connected, locally path-connected subspace A ⊂X such that the inclusion A > X
induces an injection on π1 , then each component eA of p−1(A) is a universal cover
of A. For the restriction p : eA→A is certainly a covering space, so the induced map
π1( eA)→π1(A) is injective, and this map factors through π1( eX) = 0, hence π1( eA) =

Section 1.B.
K(G,1) Spaces and Graphs of Groups
93
0. For example if X is the torus S1×S1 and A is the circle S1×{x0}, then p−1(A)
consists of inﬁnitely many parallel lines in R2 , each of which is a universal cover of A.
In particular, consider the universal cover p : f
Mf→Mf of the mapping cylinder
of a map f : A→B between connected CW complexes. Then f
Mf is itself the mapping
cylinder of a map ef : p−1(A)→p−1(B) since the line segments in the mapping cylin-
der structure on Mf lift to line segments in f
Mf deﬁning a mapping cylinder structure.
Since f
Mf is a mapping cylinder, it deformation retracts onto p−1(B), so p−1(B) is also
simply-connected, hence is the universal cover of B . If f induces an injection on π1 ,
then the remarks in the preceding paragraph apply, and the components of p−1(A)
are universal covers of A. If we assume further that A and B are K(G, 1)’s, then f
Mf
and the components of p−1(A) are contractible, and we claim that f
Mf deformation
retracts onto each component eA of A. Namely, the inclusion eA > f
Mf is a homo-
topy equivalence since both spaces are contractible, and then Corollary 0.20 implies
that f
Mf deformation retracts onto eA since the pair (f
Mf , eA) satisﬁes the homotopy
extension property, as shown in Example 0.15.
Now we can describe the construction of the covering space eK of KΓ . It will be
the union of an increasing sequence of spaces eK1 ⊂eK2 ⊂···. For the ﬁrst stage,
let eK1 be the universal cover of one of the mapping cylinders Mf of KΓ .
By the
preceding remarks, this contains various disjoint copies of universal covers of the
two K(Gv, 1)’s at the ends of Mf .
We build eK2 from eK1 by attaching to each of
these universal covers of K(Gv, 1)’s a copy of the universal cover of each mapping
cylinder Mg of KΓ meeting Mf at the end of Mf in question. Now repeat the process
to construct eK3 by attaching universal covers of mapping cylinders at all the universal
covers of K(Gv, 1)’s created in the previous step. In the same way, we construct eKn+1
from eKn for all n, and then we set eK =
S
n eKn .
Note that eKn+1 deformation retracts onto eKn since it is formed by attaching
pieces to eKn which deformation retract onto the subspaces along which they attach,
by our earlier remarks. It follows that eK is contractible since we can deformation
retract eKn+1 onto eKn during the time interval [1/2n+1, 1/2n], and then ﬁnish with a
contraction of eK1 to a point during the time interval [1/2, 1].
The natural projection eK→KΓ is clearly a covering space, so this ﬁnishes the
proof that KΓ is a K(G, 1).
The remaining statement that each inclusion K(Gv, 1)>KΓ induces an injection
on π1 can easily be deduced from the preceding constructions. For suppose a loop
γ : S1→K(Gv, 1) is nullhomotopic in KΓ . By the lifting criterion for covering spaces,
there is a lift eγ : S1→eK . This has image contained in one of the copies of the universal
cover of K(Gv, 1), so eγ is nullhomotopic in this universal cover, and hence γ is
nullhomotopic in K(Gv, 1).
⊔⊓

94
Chapter 1.
The Fundamental Group
The various mapping cylinders which make up the universal cover of KΓ are
arranged in a tree-like pattern. The tree in question, call it TΓ , has one vertex for each
copy of a universal cover of a K(Gv, 1) in eK , and two vertices are joined by an edge
whenever the two universal covers of K(Gv, 1)’s corresponding to these vertices are
connected by a line segment lifting a line segment in the mapping cylinder structure of
a mapping cylinder of KΓ . The inductive construction of eK is reﬂected in an inductive
construction of TΓ as a union of an increasing sequence of subtrees T1 ⊂T2 ⊂···.
Corresponding to eK1 is a subtree T1 ⊂TΓ consisting of a central vertex with a number
of edges radiating out from it, an ‘asterisk’ with possibly an inﬁnite number of edges.
When we enlarge eK1 to eK2 , T1 is correspondingly enlarged to a tree T2 by attaching
a similar asterisk at the end of each outer vertex of T1 . And so on at each stage. The
action of π1(KΓ) on eK as deck transformations induces an action on TΓ , permuting
its vertices and edges, and the orbit space of TΓ under this action is just the original
graph Γ . The action on TΓ will not be a free action in general since the elements of
a subgroup Gv ⊂π1(KΓ) ﬁx a vertex corresponding to one of the universal covers of
K(Gv, 1). (Basepoints need to be chosen to make this precise.)
There is in fact an exact correspondence between graphs of groups and groups
acting on trees. See [Scott-Wall] for an exposition of this rather nice theory. From
the viewpoint of groups acting on trees, the deﬁnition of a graph of groups is usually
taken to be slightly more restrictive than the one we have given here, namely, one
considers only oriented graphs obtained from an unoriented graph by subdividing
each edge by adding a vertex at its midpoint, then orienting the two resulting edges
outward, away from the new vertex.
Exercises
1. Suppose a group G acts simplicially on a ∆complex X , i.e., each element of G
takes each n simplex of X onto another n simplex by a linear homeomorphism. If
the action is free, show it is a covering space action.
2. Let X be a connected CW complex and G a group such that every homomorphism
π1(X)→G is trivial. Show that every map X→K(G, 1) is nullhomotopic.
3. Show that every graph product of trivial groups is free.
4. Use van Kampen’s theorem to compute A∗C as a quotient of A ∗Z, as stated in
the text.
5. Consider the graph of groups Γ having one vertex, Z, and one edge, the map Z→Z
which is multiplication by 2, realized by the 2 sheeted covering space S1→S1 . Show
that π1(KΓ) has presentation ⟨a, b | bab−1a−2 ⟩and describe the universal cover
of KΓ explicitly as a product T ×R with T a tree. [The group π1(KΓ) is the ﬁrst in
a family of groups called Baumslag-Solitar groups, having presentations of the form
⟨a, b | bamb−1a−n ⟩. These are HNN extensions Z∗Z .]

Section 1.B.
K(G,1) Spaces and Graphs of Groups
95
6. Show that for a graph of groups all of whose edge homomorphisms are injective
maps Z→Z we can choose KΓ to have universal cover a product T ×R with T a
tree. Work out in detail the case that the graph of groups is the inﬁnite sequence
Z
2-----→Z
3-----→Z
4-----→Z -→··· where the map Z
n-----→Z is multiplication by n. Show
that π1(KΓ) is isomorphic to Q in this case. How would one modify this example
to get π1(KΓ) isomorphic to the subgroup of Q consisting of rational numbers with
denominator a power of 2?
7. Show that every graph product of groups can be realized by a graph whose vertices
are partitioned into two subsets, with every oriented edge going from a vertex in the
ﬁrst subset to a vertex in the second subset.
8. Show that a ﬁnite graph product of ﬁnitely generated groups is ﬁnitely generated,
and similarly for ﬁnitely presented groups.
9. Show that a ﬁnite graph product of ﬁnite groups has a free subgroup of ﬁnite
index, by constructing a ﬁnite-sheeted covering space of KΓ from universal covers of
the mapping cylinders of KΓ .) [The converse is also true for ﬁnitely generated groups;
see [Scott-Wall].]


After the fundamental group π1(X) it would be natural to continue with the
higher homotopy groups πn(X), but unfortunately these are much harder to com-
pute than π1(X). For this reason we shall change directions and begin to study the
homology groups Hn(X) instead. These measure higher-dimensional properties of
X as the higher homotopy groups do, but they have the advantage of being much
more computable, so they allow many low-dimensional results obtainable via the fun-
damental group to be extended to arbitrary dimensions.
There is however a certain price to be paid for the generality and computability
of homology groups: Their deﬁnition is decidedly less transparent than the deﬁnition
of the fundamental group, and once one gets beyond the deﬁnition there is a cer-
tain amount of technical machinery which must be set up before any real calculations
and applications can be given. In the exposition below we approach the deﬁnition of
Hn(X) by two preliminary stages, ﬁrst giving a few motivating examples nonrigor-
ously, then constructing a restricted model of homology theory called simplicial ho-
mology, before plunging into the general theory, known as singular homology. After
the deﬁnition of singular homology has been assimilated, the real work of establish-
ing its basic properties begins. This takes close to 20 pages, and there is no getting
around the fact that it is a substantial effort. This takes up most of the ﬁrst section
of the chapter, with small digressions only for two applications to classical theorems
of Brouwer: the ﬁxed point theorem and ‘invariance of dimension.’
The second section of the chapter gives more applications, including the ho-
mology deﬁnition of Euler characteristic and Brouwer’s notion of degree for maps
Sn→Sn . However, the main thrust of this section is toward developing techniques
for calculating homology groups efﬁciently. The maximally efﬁcient method is ‘cellu-
lar homology’ whose power comes perhaps from the fact that it is ‘homology squared’
— homology deﬁned in terms of homology. Another quite useful tool we develop is
Mayer-Vietoris sequences, the analog for homology of van Kampen’s theorem for the
fundamental group.

98
Chapter 2.
Homology
An interesting feature of homology which begins to emerge after one has worked
with it for a while is that it is the basic properties of homology which are used most
often, and not the actual deﬁnition itself. This suggests that an axiomatic approach
to homology might be possible. This is indeed the case, and in the third section of
the chapter we list axioms which completely characterize homology groups for CW
complexes. One could take the viewpoint that these rather algebraic axioms are all that
really matters about homology groups, that the geometry involved in the deﬁnition of
homology is secondary, needed only to show that the axiomatic theory is not vacuous.
The extent to which one adopts this viewpoint is a matter of taste, and the route taken
here of postponing the axioms until the theory is well-established is just one of several
possible approaches.
The chapter then concludes with three optional sections of ‘Additional Topics.’
The ﬁrst is rather brief, relating the homology group H1(X) to the fundamental group
π1(X), while the other two contain a selection of classical applications of homology.
These include Brouwer’s generalization of the Jordan curve theorem, the ‘invariance
of domain’ theorem also due to Brouwer, and the Lefschetz ﬁxed point theorem.
The Idea of Homology
The difﬁculty with the higher homotopy groups πn is that they are not directly
computable from a cell structure as π1 is. For example, the 2-sphere has no cells in
dimensions greater than 2, yet its n dimensional homotopy group πn(S2) is nonzero
for inﬁnitely many values of n.
Homology groups, by contrast, are quite directly
related to cell structures, and may indeed be regarded as simply an algebraization of
the ﬁrst layer of geometry in cell structures: how cells of dimension n attach to cells
of dimension n −1.
Let us look at some examples to see what this is about. Con-
sider the graph X1 shown in the ﬁgure, consisting of two ver-
tices joined by four edges.
When studying the fundamen-
d
a
x
y
c
b
tal group of X1 we consider loops formed by sequences of
edges, starting and ending at a ﬁxed basepoint. For example,
at the basepoint x , the loop ab−1 travels forward along the
edge a then backward along b, as indicated by the exponent −1.
A more complicated loop would be ac−1bd−1ca−1 . A salient feature of the funda-
mental group is that it is generally nonabelian, which both enriches and complicates
the theory. Suppose we simplify matters by abelianizing. Thus for example the two
loops ab−1 and b−1a are to be regarded as equal if we make a commute with b−1 .
These two loops ab−1 and b−1a are really the same circle, just with a different choice
of starting and ending point: x for ab−1 and y for b−1a. The same thing happens
for all loops: Rechoosing the basepoint in a loop just permutes its letters cyclically,
so a byproduct of abelianizing is that we no longer have to pin all our loops down to

The Idea of Homology
99
a ﬁxed basepoint. Thus loops become cycles, without a chosen basepoint.
Having abelianized, let us switch to additive notation, so cycles become linear
combinations of edges with integer coefﬁcients, e.g., a −b + c −d. Let us call these
linear combinations chains of edges. Some chains can be decomposed into cycles in
several different ways, for example (a −c) + (b −d) = (a −d) + (b −c), and if
we adopt an algebraic viewpoint then we do not want to distinguish between these
different decompositions. Thus we broaden the meaning of the term ‘cycle’ to be
simply any linear combination of edges for which at least one decomposition into
cycles in the previous more geometric sense exists.
What is the condition for a chain to be a cycle in this more algebraic sense? A
geometric cycle, thought of as a path traversed in time, is distinguished by the prop-
erty that it enters each vertex the same number of times that it leaves the vertex. For
an arbitrary chain ka + ℓb + mc + nd, the net number of times this chain enters y
is k + ℓ+ m + n since each of a, b, c , and d enters y once. Similarly, each of the
four edges leaves x once, so the net number of times the chain ka + ℓb + mc + nd
enters x is −k −ℓ−m −n. Thus the condition for ka + ℓb + mc + nd to be a cycle
is simply k + ℓ+ m + n = 0.
To describe this result in a way which would generalize to all graphs, let C1 be the
free abelian group with basis the edges a, b, c, d and let C0 be the free abelian group
with basis the vertices x, y . Elements of C1 are chains of edges, or 1 dimensional
chains, and elements of C0 are linear combinations of vertices, or 0 dimensional
chains. Deﬁne a homomorphism ∂: C1→C0 by sending each basis element a, b, c, d
to y −x , the vertex at the head of the edge minus the vertex at the tail. Thus we have
∂(ka + ℓb + mc + nd) = (k + ℓ+ m + n)y −(k + ℓ+ m + n)x , and the cycles are
precisely the kernel of ∂. It is a simple calculation to verify that a−b, b−c , and c −d
form a basis for this kernel. Thus every cycle in X1 is a unique linear combination of
these three most obvious cycles. By means of these three basic cycles we convey the
geometric information that the graph X1 has three visible ‘holes,’ the empty spaces
between the four edges.
Let us now enlarge the preceding graph X1 by attaching a
2 cell A along the cycle a −b, producing a 2 dimensional cell
complex X2 . If we think of the 2 cell A as being oriented
x
y
d
c
a
b
A
clockwise, then we can regard its boundary as the cycle a−b.
This cycle is now homotopically trivial since we can contract
it to a point by sliding over A. In other words, it no longer
encloses a hole in X2 . This suggests that we form a quotient of the
group of cycles in the preceding example by factoring out the subgroup generated by
a −b. In this quotient the cycles a −c and b −c , for example, become equivalent,
consistent with the fact that they are homotopic in X2 .

100
Chapter 2.
Homology
Algebraically, we can deﬁne now a pair of homomorphisms
C2
∂2
------------→C1
∂1
------------→C0
where C2 is the inﬁnite cyclic group generated by A and ∂2(A) = a −b. The map
∂1 is the boundary homomorphism in the previous example. The quotient group we
are interested in is Ker ∂1/ Im ∂2 , i.e., the 1 dimensional cycles modulo those which
are boundaries, the multiples of a −b. This quotient group is the homology group
H1(X2). The previous example can be ﬁt into this scheme too by taking C2 to be zero
since there are no 2 cells in X1 , so in this case H1(X1) = Ker ∂1/ Im ∂2 = Ker ∂1 , which
as we saw was free abelian on three generators. In the present example, H1(X2) is
free abelian on two generators, b −c and c −d, expressing the geometric fact that by
ﬁlling in the 2 cell A we have reduced the number of ‘holes’ in our space from three
to two.
Next, suppose we build a space X3 by enlarging X2 further
by attaching a second 2 cell B along the same cycle a −b.
This gives a 2 dimensional chain group C2 consisting of lin-
x
y
d
a
c
b
ear combinations of A and B , and the boundary homomor-
phism ∂2 : C2→C1 sends both A and B to a−b. The homol-
ogy group H1(X3) = Ker ∂1/ Im ∂2 is the same as for X2 , but
now ∂2 has a nontrivial kernel, the inﬁnite cyclic group generated
by A −B . We view A −B as a 2 dimensional cycle, generating the homology group
H2(X3) = Ker ∂2 ≈Z. Topologically, the cycle A −B is the sphere formed by the cells
A and B together with their common boundary circle. This spherical cycle detects
the presence of a ‘hole’ in X3 , the missing interior of the sphere. However, since this
hole is enclosed by a sphere rather than a circle, it is of a different sort from the holes
detected by H1(X3) ≈Z×Z, which are detected by the cycles b −c and c −d.
Let us continue one more step and construct a complex X4 from X3 by attaching
a 3 cell C along the 2 sphere formed by A and B . This creates a chain group C3
generated by this 3 cell C , and we deﬁne a boundary homomorphism ∂3 : C3→C2
sending C to A −B since the cycle A −B should be viewed as the boundary of C in
the same way that the 1 dimensional cycle a −b is the boundary of A. Now we have
a sequence of three boundary homomorphisms
C3
∂3
------------→C2
∂2
------------→C1
∂1
------------→C0
and the quotient H2(X4) = Ker ∂2/ Im ∂3 has become trivial. Also H3(X4) = Ker ∂3 = 0.
The group H1(X4) is the same as H1(X3), namely Z×Z, so this is the only nontrivial
homology group of X4 .
It is clear what the general pattern of the examples is. For a cell complex X one
has chain groups Cn(X) which are free abelian groups with basis the n cells of X ,
and there are boundary homomorphisms ∂n : Cn(X)→Cn−1(X), in terms of which

The Idea of Homology
101
one deﬁnes the homology group Hn(X) = Ker ∂n/ Im ∂n+1 . The major difﬁculty is
how to deﬁne ∂n in general. For n = 1 this is easy: the boundary of an oriented
edge is the vertex at its head minus the vertex at its tail. The next case n = 2 is also
not hard, at least for cells attached along cycles which are simply loops of edges, for
then the boundary of the cell is this cycle of edges, with the appropriate signs taking
orientations into account. But for larger n, matters become more complicated. Even
if one restricts attention to cell complexes formed from polyhedral cells with nice
attaching maps, there is still the matter of orientations to sort out.
The best solution to this problem seems to be to adopt an indirect approach.
Arbitrary polyhedra can always be subdivided into special polyhedra called simplices
(the triangle and the tetrahedron are the 2 dimensional and 3 dimensional instances)
so there is no loss of generality, though initially there is some loss of efﬁciency, in re-
stricting attention entirely to simplices. For simplices there is no difﬁculty in deﬁning
boundary maps or in handling orientations. So one obtains a homology theory, called
simplicial homology, for cell complexes built from simplices. Still, this is a rather
restricted class of spaces, and the theory itself has a certain rigidity which makes it
awkward to work with.
The way around these obstacles is to step back from the geometry of spaces
decomposed into simplices, and just to consider all possible continuous maps of sim-
plices into a given space X . This produces tremendously large chain groups Cn(X),
but the quotients Hn(X) = Ker ∂n/ Im ∂n+1 , called singular homology groups, turn out
to be much smaller, at least for reasonably nice spaces X . In particular, for spaces
like those in the four examples above, the singular homology groups coincide with
the homology groups we computed from the cellular chains. And as we shall see later
in this chapter, singular homology allows one to deﬁne these nice cellular homology
groups for all cell complexes, and in particular to solve the problem of deﬁning the
boundary maps for cellular chains.

102
Chapter 2.
Homology
The most important homology theory in algebraic topology, and the one we shall
be studying almost exclusively, is called singular homology. But before starting this
we will ﬁrst introduce a more primitive version, called simplicial homology, to give
some idea of how the technical apparatus works in a smaller-scale setting. The natural
domain of deﬁnition for simplicial homology is a class of spaces we call ∆complexes,
which are a modest generalization of the more classical notion of a simplicial complex.
∆-Complexes
We begin with three examples: the torus, the projective plane, and the Klein bottle.
Each of these surfaces can be obtained from a square by identifying opposite edges,
in the way indicated by the arrows in the ﬁgure below.
b
b
a
a
c
v
v
v
v
U
L
b
b
a
a
c
w
v
w
v
U
L
b
b
a
a
c
v
v
v
v
U
L
RP
2
T
:
:
−−
K :
−−
−−−
If we cut the square along a diagonal, we get two triangles, so each of these surfaces
can also be constructed from two triangles by identifying certain pairs of edges.
In similar fashion, a polygon with any number of sides can
be cut along diagonals into triangles, so in fact all closed
surfaces can be constructed from triangles by identifying
edges. Thus we have a single building block, the triangle,
b
b
a
a
c
c
d
d
from which all surfaces can be constructed. Using only tri-
angles we could also construct a large class of 2 dimensional
spaces which are not surfaces by identifying more than two edges
together at a time.
∆complexes are a generalization of this idea, using the n dimensional ana-
log of the triangle, the n simplex. This is the smallest convex set in Rm contain-
v
v0
v0
v0
1
v2
v1
v0
v1
v2
v3
ing n + 1 points v0, ··· , vn which do not lie in
a hyperplane of dimension less than n, where
by a ‘hyperplane’ we mean the set of solu-
tions of a system
of linear equations.
An equivalent condition would be that the vectors v1 −v0, ··· , vn −v0 are linearly
independent. The points vi are the vertices of the simplex, and the simplex itself

Section 2.1.
Simplicial and Singular Homology
103
will be denoted [v0, ··· , vn]. For example, there is the standard n simplex
∆n =

(t0, ··· , tn) ∈Rn+1  P
iti = 1 and ti ≥0 for all i
	
whose vertices are the unit vectors along the coordinate axes.
For purposes of homology it will be important to keep track of the order of the
vertices of a simplex, so ‘n simplex’ will really mean ‘n simplex with an ordering
of its vertices.’ A by-product of ordering the vertices of a simplex [v0, ··· , vn] is
that this determines orientations of the edges [vi, vj] according to increasing sub-
scripts, as shown in the previous ﬁgure.
Specifying the ordering of the vertices
also determines a canonical linear homeomorphism from the standard n simplex
∆n onto any other n simplex [v0, ··· , vn], preserving the order of vertices, namely,
(t0, ··· , tn),
P
i tivi . The coefﬁcients ti are the barycentric coordinates of the point
P
i tivi in [v0, ··· , vn].
A face of a simplex [v0, ··· , vn] is the subsimplex with vertices any nonempty
subset of the vi ’s. The subset need not be a proper subset, so [v0, ··· , vn] is regarded
as a face of itself. We adopt the convention that the vertices of a face will always be
ordered according to their order in the larger simplex.
The quick deﬁnition of a ∆complex is that it is a quotient space of a collection of
disjoint simplices obtained by identifying certain of their faces via the canonical linear
homeomorphisms which preserve the ordering of vertices. Somewhat more formally,
the data one starts with is a collection of disjoint simplices ∆n
α of various dimensions,
together with certain sets Fi of faces of the ∆n
α ’s, all the faces in each Fi having the
same dimension. Then one forms a quotient space of
`
α ∆n
α by identifying all the
faces in each Fi to a single simplex via the canonical linear homeomorphisms between
them. Notice that the data which determines a ∆complex is purely combinatorial,
with no topology involved. One can think of constructing a ∆complex as a Lego-like
game in which one starts with a set of interchangeable pieces and snaps them together
according to certain speciﬁed rules.
The previously-described representations of the torus, projective plane, and Klein
bottle as pairs of triangles with edges identiﬁed are in fact ∆complex structures,
because the indicated orientations of the three edges of each triangle are compatible
with a unique ordering of the vertices of the triangle, and the identiﬁcations of edges
preserve orientations, hence preserve orderings of vertices.
In general, the edges in any ∆complex X inherit well-deﬁned orientations from
the orderings of the vertices of the simplices from which X is built. These orientations
are not completely arbitrary, since the orientations of the various edges in the bound-
ary of each n simplex of X must be related just as they are in a simplex [v0, ··· , vn],
consistent with the ordering of the vertices. It is not hard to check that this com-
patibility condition on orientations amounts to requiring that no 2 simplex of X has
its three edges oriented cyclically, i.e., according to a clockwise or counterclockwise

104
Chapter 2.
Homology
traversal of the three edges. Note that when the edges of a simplex are compatibly
oriented, these orientations uniquely determine the ordering of the vertices.
In the case of one-dimensional ∆complexes the compatibility condition on ori-
entations of edges is vacuous, so a one-dimensional ∆complex is exactly the same
thing as an oriented graph, that is, a graph with orientations speciﬁed for all its edges.
In the torus and Klein bottle examples, all three vertices of each triangle end up
being identiﬁed to a single point, and in the projective plane example, two of the
three vertices of each triangle are identiﬁed. Thus, certain identiﬁcations of points
in the boundary of a single simplex are allowed in ∆complexes. As a more extreme
example, we could construct a ∆complex from a 2 simplex by identifying all three
of its edges together, preserving the orientations of these edges. It is an interesting
exercise to see that these identiﬁcations can actually be performed in R3 , with quite
a bit of stretching and bending of the 2 simplex. The resulting space is sometimes
called the ‘dunce cap.’ Like the house with two rooms in Chapter 0, it is contractible
but not in any obvious way.
Since the identiﬁcations of faces of simplices which produce a ∆complex X al-
ways preserve the orderings of vertices, these identiﬁcations never result in two dis-
tinct points in the interior of a face being identiﬁed in X . This means that X , as a
set, is the disjoint union of a collection of open simplices — simplices with all their
proper faces deleted. Each such open simplex en
α of dimension n comes equipped
with a canonical map σα : ∆n→X restricting to a homeomorphism from the interior
of ∆n onto en
α . Namely, the closure of en
α is the quotient of one of the simplices
from which X was constructed, or of a face of one of these simplices, and σα is the
quotient map from this simplex or face to X . In the Appendix we show that the open
simplices en
α are the cells of a CW structure with the σα ’s as characteristic maps.
Though we won’t need this fact in what follows, we will use the terminology that σα
is the characteristic map for the open simplex en
α .
A key property of each characteristic map σα : ∆n→X is that its restriction to
each (n −1) dimensional face of ∆n is the characteristic map σβ for some open
(n −1) simplex en−1
β
of X .
(Implicit here is the canonical identiﬁcation of each
(n −1) dimensional face of ∆n with the standard (n −1) simplex ∆n−1 , preserv-
ing the order of vertices.) This property can be used to give an equivalent deﬁnition
of a ∆complex as a CW complex X in which each n cell en
α has a distinguished char-
acteristic map σα : ∆n→X such that the restriction of σα to each (n−1) dimensional
face of ∆n is the distinguished characteristic map for an (n −1) cell of X .
Simplicial Homology
Our goal now is to deﬁne the simplicial homology groups of a ∆complex X . Let
∆n(X) be the free abelian group with basis the open n simplices en
α of X . Elements
of ∆n(X), called n chains, can be written as ﬁnite formal sums
P
α nαen
α with co-

Section 2.1.
Simplicial and Singular Homology
105
efﬁcients nα ∈Z. Equivalently, we could write
P
α nασα where σα : ∆n→X is the
characteristic map of en
α , with image the closure of en
α as described above. Such a
sum
P
α nασα can be thought of as a ﬁnite collection, or ‘chain,’ of n simplices in X
with integer multiplicities, the coefﬁcients nα .
As one can see in the next ﬁgure, the boundary of the n simplex [v0, ··· , vn] con-
sists of the various (n−1) dimensional simplices [v0, ··· , bvi, ··· , vn], where the ‘hat’
symbol b over vi indicates that this vertex is deleted from the sequence v0, ··· , vn .
In terms of chains, we might then wish to say that the boundary of [v0, ··· , vn] is the
(n −1) chain formed by the sum of the faces [v0, ··· , bvi, ··· , vn]. However, it turns
out to be better to insert certain signs and instead let the boundary of [v0, ··· , vn] be
P
i(−1)i[v0, ··· , bvi, ··· , vn]. Heuristically, the signs are inserted to take orientations
into account, so that all the faces of a simplex are coherently oriented, as indicated in
the ﬁgure.
v0
v1
v2
v3
v
v0
1
v2
v0
v1
+
-
∂[v0, v1] = [v1] −[v0]
∂[v0, v1, v2] = [v1, v2] −[v0, v2] + [v0, v1]
∂[v0, v1, v2, v3] = [v1, v2, v3] −[v0, v2, v3]
+ [v0, v1, v3] −[v0, v1, v2]
In the last case, the orientations of the two hidden faces are also counterclockwise
when viewed from outside the 3 simplex.
With this geometry in mind we deﬁne for a general ∆complex X a boundary
homomorphism ∂n : ∆n(X)→∆n−1(X) by specifying its values on basis elements:
∂n(σα) =
X
i
(−1)iσα ||[v0, ··· , bvi, ··· , vn]
Note that the right side of this equation does indeed lie in ∆n−1(X) since each restric-
tion σα ||[v0, ··· , bvi, ··· , vn] is the characteristic map of an (n −1) simplex of X .
Lemma 2.1. The composition ∆n(X)
∂n
------------→∆n−1(X)
∂n−1
------------------→∆n−2(X) is zero.
Proof: ∂n(σ) =
P
i(−1)iσ ||[v0, ··· , bvi, ··· , vn], hence
∂n−1∂n(σ) =
X
j<i
(−1)i(−1)jσ||[v0, ··· , bvj, ··· , bvi, ··· , vn]
+
X
j>i
(−1)i(−1)j−1σ||[v0, ··· , bvi, ··· , bvj, ··· , vn].

106
Chapter 2.
Homology
The latter two summations cancel since after switching i and j in the second sum, it
becomes the negative of the ﬁrst.
⊔⊓
The algebraic situation we have now is a sequence of homomorphisms of abelian
groups
··· -→Cn+1
∂n+1
-----------------→Cn
∂n
------------→Cn−1 -→··· -→C1
∂1
------------→C0
∂0
------------→0
with ∂n∂n+1 = 0 for all n. Such a sequence is called a chain complex. Note that we
have extended the sequence by a 0 at the right end, with ∂0 = 0. From ∂n∂n+1 = 0
it follows that Im ∂n+1 ⊂Ker ∂n , where Im and Ker denote image and kernel. So we
can deﬁne the nth homology group of the chain complex to be the quotient group
Hn = Ker ∂n/ Im ∂n+1 . Elements of Ker ∂n are called cycles and elements of Im ∂n+1
are boundaries. Elements of Hn are cosets of Im ∂n+1 , called homology classes. Two
cycles representing the same homology class are said to be homologous. This means
their difference is a boundary.
Returning to the case that Cn = ∆n(X), the homology group Ker ∂n/ Im ∂n+1 will
be denoted H∆
n(X) and called the nth simplicial homology group of X .
Example 2.2. X = S1 , with one vertex v and one edge e. Then ∆0(S1) and ∆1(S1)
are both Z and the boundary map ∂1 is zero since ∂e = v −v . The groups ∆n(S1)
are 0 for n ≥2 since there are no simplices in these dimensions. Hence
H∆
n(S1) ≈

Z
for n = 0, 1
0
for n ≥2.
This is an illustration of the general fact that if the boundary maps in a chain complex
are all zero, then the homology groups of the complex are isomorphic to the chain
groups themselves.
Example 2.3. X = T , the torus with the ∆complex structure pictured earlier, having
one vertex, three edges a, b, and c , and two 2 simplices U and L. As in the previous
example, ∂1 = 0 so H∆
0 (T) ≈Z. Since ∂2U = a + b −c = ∂2L and {a, b, a + b −c} is
a basis for ∆1(T), it follows that H∆
1 (T) ≈Z⊕Z with basis the homology classes [a]
and [b]. Since there are no 3 simplices, H∆
2 (T) is equal to Ker ∂2 , which is inﬁnite
cyclic generated by U −L since ∂(pU + qL) = (p + q)(a + b −c) = 0 only if p = −q.
Thus
H∆
n(T) ≈



Z ⊕Z
for n = 1
Z
for n = 0, 2
0
for n ≥3.
Example 2.4. X = RP2 , as pictured earlier, with two vertices v and w , three edges
a, b, and c , and two 2 simplices U and L. Then Im ∂1 is generated by w −v , so
H∆
0 (X) ≈Z with either vertex as a generator. Since ∂2U = −a+b+c and ∂2L = a−b+c ,
we see that ∂2 is injective, so H∆
2 (X) = 0. Further, Ker ∂1 ≈Z⊕Z with basis a−b and
c , and Im ∂2 is an index-two subgroup of Ker ∂1 since we can choose c and a −b + c
as a basis for Ker ∂1 and a −b + c and 2c = (a −b + c) + (−a + b + c) as a basis for
Im ∂2 . Thus H∆
1 (X) ≈Z2 .

Section 2.1.
Simplicial and Singular Homology
107
Example 2.5. We can obtain a ∆complex structure on Sn by taking two copies of ∆n
and identifying their boundaries via the identity map. Labeling these two n simplices
U and L, then it is obvious that Ker ∂n is inﬁnite cyclic generated by U −L. Thus
H∆
n(Sn) ≈Z for this ∆complex structure on Sn . Computing the other homology
groups would be more difﬁcult.
Many similar examples could be worked out without much trouble, such as the
other closed orientable and nonorientable surfaces. However, the calculations do tend
to increase in complexity before long, particularly for higher dimensional complexes.
Some obvious general questions arise: Are the groups H∆
n(X) independent of
the choice of ∆complex structure on X ? In other words, if two ∆complexes are
homeomorphic, do they have isomorphic homology groups? More generally, do they
have isomorphic homology groups if they are merely homotopy equivalent? To answer
such questions and to develop a general theory it is best to leave the rather rigid
simplicial realm and introduce the singular homology groups. These have the added
advantage that they are deﬁned for all spaces, not just ∆complexes. At the end of
this section, after some theory has been developed, we will show that simplicial and
singular homology groups coincide for ∆complexes.
Traditionally, simplicial homology is deﬁned for simplicial complexes, which are
the ∆complexes whose simplices are uniquely determined by their vertices. This
amounts to saying that each n simplex has n + 1 distinct vertices, and that no other
n simplex has this same set of vertices. Thus a simplicial complex can be described
combinatorially as a set X0 of vertices together with sets Xn of n simplices, which
are (n+1) element subsets of X0 . The only requirement is that each (k+1) element
subset of the vertices of an n simplex in Xn is a k simplex, in Xk . From this combi-
natorial data a ∆complex X can be constructed, once we choose a partial ordering
of the vertices X0 which restricts to a linear ordering on the vertices of each simplex
in Xn . For example, we could just choose a linear ordering of all the vertices. This
might perhaps involve invoking the Axiom of Choice for large vertex sets.
An exercise at the end of this section is to show that every ∆complex can be
subdivided to be a simplicial complex. In particular, every ∆complex is then homeo-
morphic to a simplicial complex.
Compared with simplicial complexes, ∆complexes have the advantage of simpler
computations since fewer simplices are required. For example, to put a simplicial
complex structure on the torus one needs at least 14 triangles, 21 edges, and 7 vertices,
and for RP2 one needs at least 10 triangles, 15 edges, and 6 vertices. This would slow
down calculations considerably!
Singular Homology
A singular n simplex in a space X is by deﬁnition just a map σ : ∆n→X . The
word ‘singular’ is used here to express the idea that σ need not be a nice embedding

108
Chapter 2.
Homology
but can have ‘singularities’ where its image does not look at all like a simplex. All that
is required is that σ be continuous. Let Cn(X) be the free abelian group with basis
the set of singular n simplices in X . Elements of Cn(X), called n chains, or more
precisely singularn chains, are ﬁnite formal sums
P
i niσi for ni ∈Z and σi : ∆n→X .
A boundary map ∂n : Cn(X)→Cn−1(X) is deﬁned by the same formula as before:
∂n(σ) =
X
i
(−1)iσ ||[v0, ··· , bvi, ··· , vn]
Implicit in this formula is the canonical identiﬁcation of [v0, ··· , bvi, ··· , vn] with
∆n−1 , preserving the ordering of vertices, so that σ ||[v0, ··· , bvi, ··· , vn] is regarded
as a map ∆n−1→X , that is, a singular (n −1) simplex.
Often we write the boundary map ∂n from Cn(X) to Cn−1(X) simply as ∂when
this doesn’t lead to serious ambiguities. The proof of Lemma 2.1 shows that ∂n∂n+1 =
0, or more concisely ∂2 = 0, so we can deﬁne the singular homology group Hn(X) =
Ker ∂n/ Im ∂n+1 .
It is evident from the deﬁnition that homeomorphic spaces have isomorphic sin-
gular homology groups Hn , in contrast with the situation for H∆
n . On the other hand,
since the groups Cn(X) are so large, the number of singular n simplices in X usually
being uncountable, it is not at all clear that for a ∆complex X with ﬁnitely many sim-
plices, Hn(X) should be ﬁnitely generated for all n, or that Hn(X) should be zero
for n larger than the dimension of X — two properties which are trivial for H∆
n(X).
Though singular homology looks so much more general than simplicial homology,
it can actually be regarded as a special case of simplicial homology by means of the
following construction. For an arbitrary space X , deﬁne the singular complex S(X)
to be the ∆complex with one n simplex ∆n
σ for each singular n simplex σ : ∆n→X ,
with ∆n
σ attached in the obvious way to the (n −1) simplices of S(X) which are
the restrictions of σ to the various (n −1) simplices in ∂∆n . It is clear from the
deﬁnitions that H∆
n
 S(X)

is identical with Hn(X) for all n, and in this sense the
singular homology group Hn(X) is a special case of a simplicial homology group. One
can regard S(X) as a ∆complex model for X , although it is usually an extremely large
object compared to X , often with uncountably many simplices in each dimension.
Cycles in singular homology are deﬁned algebraically, but they can be given a
somewhat more geometric interpretation in terms of maps from ﬁnite ∆complexes.
To see this, note ﬁrst that a singular n chain ξ can always be written in the form
P
i εiσi with εi = ±1, allowing repetitions of the singular n simplices σi , so we shall
assume this has been done. Given such an n chain ξ =
P
i εiσi , when we compute
∂ξ as a sum of singular (n −1) simplices with signs ±1, there may be some can-
celling pairs consisting of two identical singular (n−1) simplices with opposite signs.
Choosing a maximal collection of such cancelling pairs, construct an n dimensional
∆complex Kξ from a disjoint union of n simplices ∆n
i , one for each σi , by identi-
fying the pairs of (n −1) dimensional faces corresponding to the chosen cancelling

Section 2.1.
Simplicial and Singular Homology
109
pairs. The σi ’s then induce a map Kξ→X . If ξ is a cycle, all the (n −1) simplices of
Kξ come from cancelling pairs, hence are faces of exactly two n simplices of Kξ . Thus
Kξ is a manifold, locally homeomorphic to Rn , except at a subcomplex of dimension
at most n−2. All the n simplices of Kξ can be coherently oriented by taking the signs
of the σi ’s into account, so Kξ is actually an oriented manifold away from its non-
manifold points — though to make this statement rigorous would take a considerable
effort, using heavy machinery from §3.3. (Parenthetical remark: A closer inspection
shows that Kξ is also a manifold near points in the interiors of (n −2) simplices, so
the nonmanifold points of Kξ in fact have dimension at most n −3. However, near
the interiors of (n −3) simplices it can very well happen that Kξ is not a manifold.)
In particular, elements of H1(X) are represented by collections of oriented loops
in X , and elements of H2(X) are represented by maps of closed oriented surfaces
into X . With a bit more work it can be shown that an oriented 1 cycle
`
αS1
α→X is
zero in H1(X) iff it extends to a map of an oriented surface into X , and there is an
analogous statement for 2 cycles. In the early days of homology theory it may have
been believed, or at least hoped, that this close connection with manifolds continued
in all higher dimensions, but this has turned out not to be the case. There is a sort
of homology theory built from manifolds, called bordism, but it is quite a bit more
complicated than the homology theory we are studying here.
After these preliminary remarks let us begin to see what can be proved about
singular homology.
Proposition 2.6. If the path-components of X are denoted Xα , then Hn(X) splits as
the direct sum
L
α Hn(Xα).
Proof: Since a singular simplex always has path-connected image, Cn(X) splits as the
direct sum of its subgroups Cn(Xα). The boundary maps ∂n preserve this direct sum
decomposition, taking Cn(Xα) to Cn−1(Xα), so Ker ∂n and Im ∂n+1 split similarly as
direct sums, hence the homology groups also split, Hn(X) ≈
L
α Hn(Xα).
⊔⊓
Proposition 2.7. If X is nonempty and path-connected then H0(X) ≈Z. Hence for
any space X , H0(X) is a direct sum of Z’s, one for each path-component of X .
Proof: By deﬁnition, H0(X) = C0(X)/ Im ∂1 since ∂0 = 0. Deﬁne a homomorphism
ε : C0(X)→Z by ε
 P
i niσi

=
P
i ni . This is obviously surjective if X is nonempty.
The claim is that Ker ε = Im ∂1 if X is path-connected, and hence ε induces an iso-
morphism H0(X) ≈Z.
To verify the claim, observe ﬁrst that Im ∂1 ⊂Ker ε since for a singular 1 simplex
σ : ∆1→X we have ε∂1(σ) = ε(σ ||[v1] −σ ||[v0]) = 1 −1 = 0.
For the reverse
inclusion Ker ε ⊂Im ∂1 , suppose ε
 P
i niσi

= 0, i.e.,
P
i ni = 0. Here the σi ’s are
singular 0 simplices, i.e., points of X . Choose a path τi from a basepoint x0 to σi(v0)
and let σ0 be the singular 0 simplex with image x0 . Regarding the τi ’s as singular

110
Chapter 2.
Homology
1 simplices, we have ∂
 P
i niτi

=
P
i niσi−
P
i niσ0 =
P
i niσi since
P
i ni = 0. Thus
P
i niσi is a boundary, which shows that Ker ε ⊂Im ∂1 .
⊔⊓
Proposition 2.8. If X is a point, then Hn(X) = 0 for n > 0 and H0(X) ≈Z.
Proof: In this case there is a unique singular n simplex σn for each n, and ∂(σn) =
P
i(−1)iσn−1 , a sum of n + 1 terms, which is therefore 0 for n odd and σn−1 for n
even, n ≠0. Thus we have the chain complex
··· -→Z
≈------------→Z
0------------→Z
≈------------→Z
0------------→Z -→0
with boundary maps alternately isomorphisms and trivial maps, except at the last Z.
The homology groups of this complex are trivial except for H0 ≈Z.
⊔⊓
It is often very convenient to have a slightly modiﬁed version of homology for
which a point has trivial homology groups in all dimensions, including zero. This is
done by deﬁning the reduced homology groups eHn(X) to be the homology groups
of the augmented chain complex
··· -→C2(X)
∂2
------------→C1(X)
∂1
------------→C0(X)
ε------------→Z -→0
where ε
 P
i niσi

=
P
i ni as in the proof of Proposition 2.7. Here we had better
require X to be nonempty, to avoid having a nontrivial homology group in dimension
−1. Since ε∂1 = 0, ε vanishes on Im ∂1 and hence induces a map H0(X)→Z with
kernel eH0(X), so H0(X) ≈eH0(X)⊕Z. Obviously Hn(X) ≈eHn(X) for n > 0.
Formally, one can think of the extra Z in the augmented chain complex as gener-
ated by the unique map [∅]→X where [∅] is the empty simplex, with no vertices.
The augmentation map ε is then the usual boundary map since ∂[v0] = [ bv0] = [∅].
Readers who know about the fundamental group π1(X) may wish to digress here
to look at §2.A where it is shown that H1(X) is the abelianization of π1(X) for all
path-connected spaces X . This result will not be needed elsewhere in the chapter,
however.
Homotopy Invariance
The ﬁrst substantial result we will prove about singular homology is that ho-
motopy equivalent spaces have isomorphic homology groups. This will be done by
showing that a map f : X→Y induces a homomorphism f∗: Hn(X)→Hn(Y) for each
n, and that f∗is an isomorphism if f is a homotopy equivalence.
For a map f : X→Y , an induced homomorphism f♯: Cn(X)→Cn(Y) is deﬁned
by composing each singular n simplex σ : ∆n→X with f to get a singular n simplex
f♯(σ) = f σ : ∆n→Y , then extending f♯linearly via f♯
 P
i niσi

=
P
i nif♯(σi) =
P
i nif σi . The maps f♯: Cn(X)→Cn(Y) satisfy f♯∂= ∂f♯since
f♯∂(σ) = f♯
 P
i(−1)iσ||[v0, ··· , bvi, ··· , vn]

=
P
i(−1)if σ||[v0, ··· , bvi, ··· , vn] = ∂f♯(σ).

Section 2.1.
Simplicial and Singular Homology
111
Thus we have a diagram
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
♯
f
♯
f
♯
f
-
X
Cn 1(
)
+
−−−−−→
X
Cn 1(
)
X
Cn(
)
∂
∂
...
...
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
-
Y
Cn 1(
)
+
Y
Cn 1(
)
Y
Cn(
)
∂
∂
...
...
such that in each square the composition f♯∂equals the composition ∂f♯. A diagram
of maps with the property that any two compositions of maps starting at one point in
the diagram and ending at another are equal is called a commutative diagram. In the
present case commutativity of the diagram is equivalent to the commutativity relation
f♯∂= ∂f♯, but commutative diagrams can contain commutative triangles, pentagons,
etc., as well as commutative squares.
The fact that the maps f♯: Cn(X)→Cn(Y) satisfy f♯∂= ∂f♯is also expressed
by saying that the f♯’s deﬁne a chain map from the singular chain complex of X
to that of Y . The relation f♯∂= ∂f♯implies that f♯takes cycles to cycles since
∂α = 0 implies ∂(f♯α) = f♯(∂α) = 0.
Also, f♯takes boundaries to boundaries
since f♯(∂β) = ∂(f♯β). Hence f♯induces a homomorphism f∗: Hn(X)→Hn(Y). An
algebraic statement of what we have just proved is:
Proposition 2.9. A chain map between chain complexes induces homomorphisms
between the homology groups of the two complexes.
⊔⊓
Two basic properties of induced homomorphisms which are important in spite
of being rather trivial are:
(i) (f g)∗= f∗g∗for a composed mapping X
g-----→Y
f-----→Z .
This follows from
associativity of compositions ∆n
σ-----→X
g-----→Y
f-----→Z .
(ii) 11∗= 11 where 11 denotes the identity map of a space or a group.
Less trivially, we have:
Theorem 2.10. If two maps f , g : X→Y are homotopic, then they induce the same
homomorphism f∗= g∗: Hn(X)→Hn(Y).
In view of the formal properties (f g)∗= f∗g∗and 11∗= 11, this immediately
implies:
Corollary 2.11. The maps f∗: Hn(X)→Hn(Y) induced by a homotopy equivalence
f : X→Y are isomorphisms for all n.
⊔⊓
For example, if X is contractible then eHn(X) = 0 for all n.
Proof of 2.10: The essential ingredient is a procedure for subdividing the product
∆n×I into (n + 1) simplices, as illustrated below in the cases n = 1, 2.

112
Chapter 2.
Homology
v
w
w
v0
v0
1
v1
v2 
1
w1
w2
0
w0
In ∆n×I , let ∆n×{0} = [v0, ··· , vn] and ∆n×{1} = [w0, ··· , wn], where vi and
wi have the same image under the projection ∆n×I→∆n .
Then the n simplex
[v0, ··· , vi, wi+1, ··· , wn] is the graph of the linear function ϕi : ∆n→I deﬁned in
barycentric coordinates by ϕi(t0, ··· , tn) = ti+1 + ··· + tn since the vertices of this
simplex [v0, ··· , vi, wi+1, ··· , wn] are on the graph of ϕi and the simplex projects
homeomorphically onto ∆n under the projection ∆n×I→∆n . The graph of ϕi lies
below the graph of ϕi−1 since ϕi ≤ϕi−1 , and the region between these two graphs
is [v0, ··· , vi, wi, ··· , wn], which is a genuine (n + 1) simplex since wi is not on
the graph of ϕi , hence is not in the n simplex [v0, ··· , vi, wi+1, ··· , wn]. From the
string of inequalities 0 = ϕn ≤ϕn−1 ≤··· ≤ϕ0 ≤ϕ−1 = 1 we deduce that ∆n×I
is the union of the (n + 1) simplices [v0, ··· , vi, wi, ··· , wn], each intersecting the
next in an n simplex face.
Given a homotopy F : X×I→Y from f to g, we can deﬁne prism operators
P : Cn(X)→Cn+1(Y) by
P(σ) =
X
i
(−1)iF ◦(σ ×11)||[v0, ··· , vi, wi, ··· , wn]
for σ : ∆n→X , where F ◦(σ ×11) is the composition ∆n×I→X×I→Y . We will show
that these prism operators satisfy the basic relation
∂P = g♯−f♯−P∂
Geometrically, the left side of this equation represents the boundary of the prism, and
the three terms on the right side represent the top ∆n×{1}, the bottom ∆n×{0}, and
the sides ∂∆n×I of the prism. To prove the relation we calculate
∂P(σ) =
X
j≤i
(−1)i(−1)jF◦(σ ×11)||[v0, ··· , bvj, ··· , vi, wi, ··· , wn]
+
X
j≥i
(−1)i(−1)j+1F◦(σ ×11)||[v0, ··· , vi, wi, ··· , c
wj, ··· , wn]
The terms with i = j in the two sums cancel except for F ◦(σ ×11)||[ bv0, w0, ··· , wn]
which is g ◦σ = g♯(σ), and −F ◦(σ ×11)||[v0, ··· , vn, c
wn] which is −f ◦σ = −f♯(σ).
The terms with i ≠j are exactly −P∂(σ) since
P∂(σ) =
X
i<j
(−1)i(−1)jF◦(σ ×11)||[v0, ··· , vi, wi, ··· , c
wj, ··· , wn]
+
X
i>j
(−1)i−1(−1)jF◦(σ ×11)||[v0, ··· , bvj, ··· , vi, wi, ··· , wn]

Section 2.1.
Simplicial and Singular Homology
113
Now we can ﬁnish the proof of the theorem. If α ∈Cn(X) is a cycle, then g♯(α)−
f♯(α) = ∂P(α) + P∂(α) = ∂P(α) since ∂α = 0. Thus g♯(α) −f♯(α) is a boundary, so
g♯(α) and f♯(α) determine the same homology class, which means that g∗equals
f∗on the homology class of α.
⊔⊓
The relationship ∂P +P∂= g♯−f♯is expressed by saying P is a chain homotopy
between the chain maps f♯and g♯. We have just shown:
Proposition 2.12. Chain-homotopic chain maps induce the same homomorphism on
homology.
⊔⊓
There are also induced homomorphisms f∗: eHn(X)→eHn(Y) for reduced homol-
ogy groups since f♯ε = εf♯. The properties of induced homomorphisms we proved
above hold equally well in the setting of reduced homology, with the same proofs.
Exact Sequences, Relative Homology, and Excision
It would certainly be nice if there were a simple relationship between the homol-
ogy groups of a space and the homology groups of a subspace, for then one could
hope to understand the homology groups of spaces which can be built up from succe-
sively more complicated subspaces. Perhaps the nicest possible relationship between
the homology groups of a space X and a subspace A would be that Hn(X) con-
tains Hn(A) as a subgroup, with the quotient group Hn(X)/Hn(A) isomorphic to
Hn(X/A). While this does hold in some cases, it is much too simplistic a model to
hold in general. For example, every space X can be embedded as a subspace of a
space with trivial homology groups, namely the cone CX = (X×I)/(X×{0}), which
is contractible, so if this model were valid, all spaces would have trivial homology.
The surprising thing is that one doesn’t have to retreat too far from this simple model
to get a statement which holds in fair generality. Naturally a more complicated rela-
tionship between Hn(X) and Hn(A) is involved, and one aspect of this complication
is that different values of n are intertwined, but this is also an advantage in that it
sometimes allows higher-dimensional homology groups to be computed in terms of
lower-dimensional groups, which may be simpler.
In order to formulate the relationship we are looking for, we need an algebraic
deﬁnition which is central to algebraic topology. A sequence of homomorphisms
··· ---------→An+1
αn+1
-------------------------→An
αn
------------------→An−1 ---------→···
is said to be exact if Ker αn = Im αn+1 for each n. The inclusions Im αn+1 ⊂Ker αn
are equivalent to αnαn+1 = 0, so the sequence is a chain complex, and the opposite
inclusions Ker αn ⊂Im αn+1 say that the homology groups of this chain complex are
trivial.
A number of basic algebraic concepts can be expressed in terms of exact se-
quences, for example:

114
Chapter 2.
Homology
(i) 0 -→A
α-----→B is exact iff Ker α = 0 i.e., α is injective.
(ii) A
α-----→B -→0 is exact iff Im α = B i.e., α is surjective.
(iii) 0 -→A
α-----→B -→0 is exact iff α is an isomorphism, by (i) and (ii).
(iv) 0 -→A
α-----→B
β-----→C -→0 is exact iff α is injective, β is surjective, and Ker β =
Im α, so β induces an isomorphism C ≈B/ Im α. This can be written C ≈B/A if
we think of α as an inclusion of A as a subgroup of B .
An exact sequence 0→A→B→C→0 as in (iv) is called a short exact sequence.
Exact sequences provide the right tool to relate the homology groups of a space,
a subspace, and the associated quotient space:
Theorem 2.13. If X is a space and A is a nonempty closed subspace which is a
deformation retract of some neighborhood in X , then there is an exact sequence
··· -----→eHn(A)
i∗
------------→eHn(X)
j∗
------------→eHn(X/A)
∂-----→eHn−1(A)
i∗
------------→eHn−1(X) -----→···
··· -----→eH0(X/A) -----→0
where i is the inclusion A > X and j is the quotient map X→X/A.
The map ∂will be constructed in the course of the proof. The idea is that an
element x ∈eHn(X/A) can be represented by a chain α in X with ∂α a cycle in A
whose homology class is ∂x ∈eHn−1(A).
Pairs of spaces (X, A) satisfying the hypothesis of the theorem we will call good
pairs. For example, if X is a CW complex and A is a nonempty subcomplex, then
(X, A) is a good pair by Proposition A.5 in the Appendix.
Corollary 2.14.
eHn(Sn) ≈Z and eHi(Sn) = 0 for i ≠n.
Proof: Take (X, A) = (Dn, Sn−1) so X/A = Sn . The long exact sequence of homology
groups for the pair (X, A) has every third term eHi(Dn) zero since Dn is contractible.
Exactness of the sequence then implies that the maps
eHi(Sn)
∂-----→eHi−1(Sn−1) are
isomorphims for all i and n. The result now follows by induction on n, starting with
the case of S0 , where the result holds by Propositions 2.6 and 2.8.
⊔⊓
As a corollary of this calculation we have the following classical theorem of
Brouwer, the 2 dimensional case of which was proved in §1.1.
Corollary 2.15. ∂Dn is not a retract of Dn . Hence every map f : Dn→Dn has a
ﬁxed point.
Proof: If r : Dn→∂Dn were a retraction, we would have ri = 11 for i : ∂Dn→Dn the
inclusion map, hence the composition eHn−1(∂Dn)
i∗
------------→eHn−1(Dn)
r∗
------------→eHn−1(∂Dn)
would be the identity map on
eHn−1(∂Dn) ≈Z.
But r∗and i∗are both 0 since
eHn−1(Dn) = 0, and we have a contradiction.
The ﬁxed-point result follows as in
Theorem 1.9.
⊔⊓

Section 2.1.
Simplicial and Singular Homology
115
The derivation of the exact sequence in the preceding theorem will be rather a long
story. We will in fact derive a more general exact sequence which holds for arbitrary
pairs (X, A), but with the homology groups of the quotient space X/A replaced by
relative homology groups, denoted Hn(X, A). These turn out to be quite useful for
many other purposes as well.
Relative Homology Groups
It sometimes happens that by ignoring a certain amount of structure one obtains a
simpler, more ﬂexible theory which, almost paradoxically, can give results not readily
obtainable in the original setting. A familiar instance of this is arithmetic mod n,
where one ignores multiples of n. Relative homology is another example. In this case
what one ignores is all singular chains in a subspace of the given space.
Here are the deﬁnitions. Given a space X and a subspace A ⊂X , deﬁne Cn(X, A)
to be the quotient group Cn(X)/Cn(A). Thus chains in A are regarded as trivial.
Since the boundary map ∂: Cn(X)→Cn−1(X) takes Cn(A) to Cn−1(A), it induces a
quotient boundary map ∂: Cn(X, A)→Cn−1(X, A). The relation ∂2 = 0 holds for this
quotient map since it holds for the usual boundary map on Cn(X). So we have a chain
complex
··· -→Cn(X, A)
∂------------→Cn−1(X, A) -→···
whose homology groups Ker ∂/ Im ∂are by deﬁnition the relative homology groups
Hn(X, A).
By considering the deﬁnition of the relative boundary map we see:
— Elements of Hn(X, A) are represented by relative cycles: n chains α ∈Cn(X)
such that ∂α ∈Cn−1(A).
— A relative cycle α is trivial in Hn(X, A) iff it is a relative boundary: α = ∂β + γ
for some β ∈Cn+1(X) and γ ∈Cn(A).
These properties make precise the intuitive idea that Hn(X, A) is ‘homology of X
modulo A.’
The quotient Cn(X)/Cn(A) could also be viewed as the free abelian subgroup of
Cn(X) with basis the singular n simplices σ : ∆n→X whose image is not contained
in A.
However, the boundary map does not take this subgroup of Cn(X) to the
corresponding subgroup of Cn−1(X), so it is usually better to regard Cn(X, A) as a
quotient rather than a subgroup of Cn(X).
Our goal now is to show that the relative homology groups Hn(X, A) for any pair
(X, A) ﬁt into a long exact sequence
··· -→Hn(A) -→Hn(X) -→Hn(X, A) -→Hn−1(A) -→Hn−1(X) -→···
··· -→H0(X, A) -→0
This will be entirely a matter of algebra. To start the process, consider the diagram

116
Chapter 2.
Homology
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
i
j
i
j
A
A
C
0
(
)
−−−−−→
X
C
0
n
n
n
(
)
X
C (
)
∂
∂
∂
,
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
-
A
A
C
0
(
)
X
C
0
n 1
-
n 1
-
n 1
(
)
X
C
(
)
,
where i is inclusion and j is the quotient map. The diagram is commutative by the def-
inition of the boundary maps. Letting n vary, and drawing these short exact sequences
vertically rather than horizontally, we have a large commutative diagram of the form
shown at the right, where the columns are ex-
act and the rows are chain complexes
which we denote A, B , and C . Such
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
j
j
j
-
Bn 1
+
−−−−−→
Bn 1
Bn
∂
∂
...
...
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
-
Cn 1
+
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
Cn 1
Cn
∂
∂
...
...
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
i
i
i
-
An 1
+
−−−−−→
An 1
A
0
0
0
0
0
0
n
∂
∂
...
...
a diagram is called a short exact se-
quence of chain complexes. We will
show that when we pass to homology
groups, this short exact sequence of
chain complexes stretches out into a
long exact sequence of homology groups
··· -→Hn(A)
i∗
------------→Hn(B)
j∗
------------→Hn(C)
∂-----→Hn−1(A)
i∗
------------→Hn−1(B) -→···
where Hn(A) denotes the homology group Ker ∂/ Im ∂at An in the chain complex A,
and Hn(B) and Hn(C) are deﬁned similarly.
The commutativity of the squares in the short exact sequence of chain complexes
means that i and j are chain maps.
These therefore induce maps i∗and j∗on
homology. To deﬁne the boundary map ∂: Hn(C)→Hn−1(A), let c ∈Cn be a cycle.
Since j is onto, c = j(b) for some b ∈Bn . The element ∂b ∈Bn−1
is in Ker j since j(∂b) = ∂j(b) = ∂c = 0. So ∂b = i(a) for some
a ∈An−1 since Ker j = Im i. Note that ∂a = 0 since i(∂a) =
∂i(a) = ∂∂b = 0 and i is injective. We deﬁne ∂: Hn(C)→Hn−1(A)
by sending the homology class of c to the homology class of a,
∂[c] = [a]. This is well-deﬁned since:
Cn
B
B
n
A
-
n 1
-
n 1
−−→
−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
a
b
b
c
∂
∂
- −−−→
-
−−−→
-
i
j
— The element a is uniquely determined by ∂b since i is injective.
— A different choice b′ for b would have j(b′) = j(b), so b′ −b is in Ker j = Im i,
b′ −b = i(a′) for some a′ , and b′ = b + i(a′). The effect of replacing b by
b + i(a′) is to change a to the homologous element a + ∂a′ since i(a + ∂a′) =
i(a) + i(∂a′) = ∂b + ∂i(a′) = ∂(b + i(a′)).
— A different choice of c within its homology class would have the form c + ∂c′ .
Since c′ = j(b′) for some b′ , we then have c + ∂c′ = c + ∂j(b′) = c + j(∂b′) =
j(b + ∂b′), so b is replaced by b + ∂b′ , which leaves ∂b and therefore also a
unchanged.
The map ∂: Hn(C)→Hn−1(A) is a homomorphism since if ∂[c1] = [a1] and ∂[c2] =

Section 2.1.
Simplicial and Singular Homology
117
[a2] via elements b1 and b2 as above, then j(b1 + b2) = j(b1) + j(b2) = c1 + c2 and
i(a1 + a2) = i(a1) + i(a2) = ∂b1 + ∂b2 = ∂(b1 + b2) so ∂([c1] + [c2]) = [a1] + [a2].
Theorem 2.16. The sequence of homology groups
··· -→Hn(A)
i∗
------------→Hn(B)
j∗
------------→Hn(C)
∂-----→Hn−1(A)
i∗
------------→Hn−1(B) -→···
is exact.
Proof: There are six things to verify:
Im i∗⊂Ker j∗. This is immediate since ji = 0 implies j∗i∗= 0.
Im j∗⊂Ker ∂. We have ∂j∗= 0 since in this case ∂b = 0 in the deﬁnition of ∂.
Im ∂⊂Ker i∗. Here i∗∂= 0 since i∗∂takes [c] to [∂b] = 0.
Ker j∗⊂Im i∗. A homology class in Ker j∗is represented by a cycle b ∈Bn with
j(b) a boundary, so j(b) = ∂c′ for some c′ ∈Cn+1 . Since j is surjective, c′ = j(b′)
for some b′ ∈Bn+1 . We have j(b −∂b′) = j(b) −j(∂b′) = j(b) −∂j(b′) = 0 since
∂j(b′) = ∂c′ = j(b). So b −∂b′ = i(a) for some a ∈An . This a is a cycle since
i(∂a) = ∂i(a) = ∂(b −∂b′) = ∂b = 0 and i is injective. Thus i∗[a] = [b −∂b′] = [b],
showing that i∗maps onto Ker j∗.
Ker ∂⊂Im j∗. In the notation used in the deﬁnition of ∂, if c represents a homology
class in Ker ∂, then a = ∂a′ for some a′ ∈An . The element b −i(a′) is a cycle
since ∂(b −i(a′)) = ∂b −∂i(a′) = ∂b −i(∂a′) = ∂b −i(a) = 0. And j(b −i(a′)) =
j(b) −ji(a′) = j(b) = c , so j∗maps [b −i(a′)] to [c].
Ker i∗⊂Im ∂. Given a cycle a ∈An−1 such that i(a) = ∂b for some b ∈Bn , then
j(b) is a cycle since ∂j(b) = j(∂b) = ji(a) = 0, and ∂takes [j(b)] to [a].
⊔⊓
This theorem represents the beginnings of the subject of homological algebra.
The method of proof is sometimes called diagram chasing.
Returning to topology, the preceding algebraic theorem yields a long exact se-
quence of homology groups:
··· -→Hn(A)
i∗
------------→Hn(X)
j∗
------------→Hn(X, A)
∂-----→Hn−1(A)
i∗
------------→Hn−1(X) -→···
··· -→H0(X, A) -→0
The boundary map ∂: Hn(X, A)→Hn−1(A) has a very simple description: If a class
[α] ∈Hn(X, A) is represented by a relative cycle α, then ∂[α] is the class of the
cycle ∂α in Hn−1(A). This is immediate from the algebraic deﬁnition of the boundary
homomorphism in the long exact sequence of homology groups associated to a short
exact sequence of chain complexes.
This long exact sequence makes precise the idea that the groups Hn(X, A) mea-
sure the difference between the groups Hn(X) and Hn(A). In particular, exactness

118
Chapter 2.
Homology
implies that if Hn(X, A) = 0 for all n, then the inclusion A>X induces isomorphisms
Hn(A) ≈Hn(X) for all n, by the remark (iii) following the deﬁnition of exactness. The
converse is also true according to an exercise at the end of this section.
There is a completely analogous long exact sequence of reduced homology groups
for a pair (X, A) with A ≠∅. This comes from applying the preceding algebraic ma-
chinery to the short exact sequence of chain complexes formed by the short exact se-
quences 0→Cn(A)→Cn(X)→Cn(X, A)→0 in nonnegative dimensions, augmented
by the short exact sequence 0 -→Z
11-----→Z -→0 -→0 in dimension −1. In particular
this means that eHn(X, A) is the same as Hn(X, A) for all n, when A ≠∅.
Example 2.17. When (X, A) = (Dn, ∂Dn) the long exact sequence of reduced homol-
ogy groups implies that Hk(Dn, ∂Dn) ≈eHk−1(Sn−1) for all k since eHk(Dn) = 0 for
all k. Thus
Hk(Dn, ∂Dn) ≈

Z
for k = n
0
otherwise.
Example 2.18. Applying the long exact sequence of reduced homology groups to a
pair (X, x0) with x0 ∈X yields isomorphisms Hn(X, x0) ≈eHn(X) for all n since
eHn(x0) = 0 for all n.
There are induced homomorphisms for relative homology just as there are in the
nonrelative, or ‘absolute,’ case. A map f : X→Y with f (A) ⊂B , or more concisely
f : (X, A)→(Y, B), induces homomorphisms f♯: Cn(X, A)→Cn(Y, B) since the chain
map f♯: Cn(X)→Cn(Y) takes Cn(A) to Cn(B), so we get a well-deﬁned map on quo-
tients, f♯: Cn(X, A)→Cn(Y, B). The relation f♯∂= ∂f♯holds for relative chains since
it holds for absolute chains. By Proposition 2.9 we then have induced homomorphisms
f∗: Hn(X, A)→Hn(Y, B).
Proposition 2.19. If two maps f , g : (X, A)→(Y, B) are homotopic through maps of
pairs (X, A)→(Y, B), then f∗= g∗: Hn(X, A)→Hn(Y, B).
Proof: The prism operator P from the proof of Theorem 2.10 takes Cn(A) to Cn+1(B),
hence induces a relative prism operator P : Cn(X, A)→Cn+1(Y, B). Since we are just
passing to quotient groups, the formula ∂P + P∂= g♯−f♯remains valid. Thus the
maps f♯and g♯on relative chain groups are chain homotopic, and hence they induce
the same homomorphism on relative homology groups.
⊔⊓
An easy generalization of the long exact sequence of a pair (X, A) is the long
exact sequence of a triple (X, A, B), where B ⊂A ⊂X :
··· -→Hn(A, B) -→Hn(X, B) -→Hn(X, A) -→Hn−1(A, B) -→···
This is the long exact sequence of homology groups associated to the short exact
sequence of chain complexes which in dimension n is the short exact sequence
0 -→Cn(A, B) -→Cn(X, B) -→Cn(X, A) -→0

Section 2.1.
Simplicial and Singular Homology
119
For example, taking B to be a point, the long exact sequence of the triple (X, A, B)
becomes the long exact sequence of reduced homology for the pair (X, A).
Excision
A fundamental property of relative homology groups is given by the following
Excision Theorem, describing when the relative groups Hn(X, A) are unaffected by
deleting, or excising, a subset Z ⊂A.
Theorem 2.20. Given subspaces Z ⊂A ⊂X such that the closure of Z is contained
in the interior of A, then the inclusion (X −Z, A −Z) > (X, A) induces isomor-
phisms Hn(X −Z, A−Z)→Hn(X, A) for all n. Equivalently, for subspaces A, B ⊂X
whose interiors cover X , the inclusion (B, A ∩B) > (X, A) induces isomorphisms
Hn(B, A ∩B)→Hn(X, A) for all n.
A
Z
X
The translation between the two versions is obtained by tak-
ing Z and B to be complementary subspaces of X , so Z = X −B
and B = X −Z , hence A ∩B = A −Z . The condition cl Z ⊂int A
is equivalent to X = int A ∪int B since X −int B = cl Z .
The proof of the excision theorem will involve a rather lengthy technical detour
involving a construction known as barycentric subdivision, which allows homology
groups to be computed using small singular simplices. In a metric space ‘smallness’
can be deﬁned in terms of diameters, but for general spaces it will be deﬁned in terms
of covers.
For a space X , let U = {Uj} be a collection of subspaces of X whose interiors
form an open cover of X , and let CU
n (X) be the subgroup of Cn(X) consisting of
chains
P
i niσi such that each σi has image contained in some set in the cover U. The
boundary map ∂: Cn(X)→Cn−1(X) takes CU
n (X) to CU
n−1(X), so the groups CU
n (X)
form a chain complex.
We denote the homology groups of this chain complex by
HU
n (X).
Proposition 2.21. The inclusion ι : CU
n (X)>Cn(X) is a chain homotopy equivalence,
i.e., there is a chain map ρ : Cn(X)→CU
n (X) such that ιρ and ρι are chain homotopic
to the identity. Hence ι induces isomorphisms HU
n (X) ≈Hn(X) for all n.
Proof: The barycentric subdivision process will be performed at four levels, beginning
with the most geometric and becoming increasingly algebraic.
1. Barycentric Subdivision of Simplices. The points of a simplex [v0, ··· , vn] are the
linear combinations
P
i tivi with
P
i ti = 1 and ti ≥0 for each i. The barycenter or
‘center of gravity’ of the simplex [v0, ··· , vn] is the point b =
P
i tivi whose barycen-
tric coordinates ti are all equal, namely ti = 1/(n + 1) for each i. The barycentric
subdivision of [v0, ··· , vn] is the decomposition of [v0, ··· , vn] into the n simplices
[b, w0, ··· , wn−1] where, inductively, [w0, ··· , wn−1] is an (n −1) simplex in the

120
Chapter 2.
Homology
barycentric subdivision of a face [v0, ··· , bvi, ··· , vn]. The induction starts with n = 0
when the barycentric subdivision of [v0] is deﬁned to be just
[v0] itself. The ﬁgure shows the
next two cases n = 1, 2 and
v
v0
v
b
b
b
0
1
v2
v1
v0
v1
v2
v3
part of the case n = 3.
It follows from the inductive deﬁnition that the vertices of simplices in the barycen-
tric subdivision of [v0, ··· , vn] are the barycenters of all the k dimensional faces
[vi0, ··· , vik] of [v0, ··· , vn] for 0 ≤k ≤n. When k = 0 this gives the original ver-
tices vi since the barycenter of a 0 simplex is itself. The barycenter of [vi0, ··· , vik]
has barycentric coordinates ti = 1/(k + 1) for i = i0, ··· , ik and ti = 0 otherwise.
The n simplices of the barycentric subdivision of ∆n , together with all their faces,
do in fact form a ∆complex structure on ∆n , indeed a simplicial complex structure,
though we shall not need to know this in what follows.
A fact we will need is that the diameter of each simplex of the barycentric subdivi-
sion of [v0, ··· , vn] is at most n/(n+1) times the diameter of [v0, ··· , vn]. Here the
diameter of a simplex is by deﬁnition the maximum distance between any two of its
points, and we are using the metric from the ambient Euclidean space Rm containing
[v0, ··· , vn]. The diameter of a simplex equals the maximum distance between any
of its vertices because the distance between two points v and
P
i tivi of [v0, ··· , vn]
satisﬁes the inequality
(∗)
v −
P
itivi
 =
P
iti(v −vi)
 ≤
P
iti|v −vi| ≤
P
iti max |v −vi| = max |v −vi|
To obtain the bound n/(n + 1) on the ratio of diameters, we therefore need to verify
that the distance between any two vertices wj and wk of a simplex [w0, ··· , wn] of
the barycentric subdivision of [v0, ··· , vn] is at most n/(n + 1) times the diameter
of [v0, ··· , vn]. If neither wi nor wj is the barycenter b of [v0, ··· , vn], then these
two points lie in a proper face of [v0, ··· , vn] and we are done by induction on n. So
we may suppose wj , say, is the barycenter b, and then by (∗) we may take wk to
be a vertex vi . Let bi be the barycenter of [v0, ··· , bvi, ··· , vn], with all barycentric
coordinates equal to 1/n except for ti = 0.
Then we have
b =
1
n+1 vi +
n
n+1 bi . The sum of the two coefﬁcients is
b
b
vi
i
1, so b lies on the line segment [vi, bi] from vi to bi ,
and the distance from b to vi is n/(n + 1) times the length of [vi, bi]. Hence the
distance from b to vi is bounded by n/(n + 1) times the diameter of [v0, ··· , vn].
The signiﬁcance of the factor n/(n+1) is that by repeated barycentric subdivision
we can produce simplices of arbitrarily small diameter since
 n/(n+1)
r approaches
0 as r goes to inﬁnity. It is important that the bound n/(n + 1) does not depend on

Section 2.1.
Simplicial and Singular Homology
121
the shape of the simplex since repeated barycentric subdivision produces simplices
of many different shapes.
2. Barycentric Subdivision of Linear Chains. The main part of the proof will be to
construct a subdivision operator S : Cn(X)→Cn(X) and show this is chain homotopic
to the identity map. First we will construct S and the chain homotopy in a more
restricted linear setting.
For a convex set Y in some Euclidean space, the linear maps ∆n→Y generate
a subgroup LCn(Y) of Cn(Y) consisting of the ‘linear chains.’ The boundary map
∂: Cn(Y)→Cn−1(Y) restricts to a boundary map LCn(Y)→LCn−1(Y), so we have a
subcomplex of the singular chain complex of Y . We can uniquely designate a linear
map λ : ∆n→Y by [w0, ··· , wn] where wi is the image under λ of the ith vertex of
∆n .
To avoid having to make exceptions for 0 simplices it will be convenient to aug-
ment the complex LC(Y) by setting LC−1(Y) = Z generated by the empty simplex
[∅], with ∂[w0] = [∅] for all 0 simplices [w0].
For a point b ∈Y , deﬁne a homomorphism b : LCn(Y)→LCn+1(Y) by setting
b([w0, ··· , wn]) = [b, w0, ··· , wn]. Applying the usual formula for ∂, we obtain the
relation ∂b([w0, ··· , wn]) = [w0, ··· , wn]−b(∂[w0, ··· , wn]). So ∂b(α) = α−b(∂α)
for all α ∈LCn(Y). Thus ∂b + b∂= 11, so b can be viewed as a chain homotopy
between the identity map and the zero map on the augmented chain complex LC(Y).
This implies that this complex has trivial homology, which is perhaps not surprising
since Y is convex. In what follows we will only need the formula ∂b+b∂= 11, however.
Now we deﬁne a subdivision homomorphism S : LCn(Y)→LCn(Y) by induction
on n. Let λ : ∆n→Y be a generator of LCn(Y). We also write λ as [w0, ··· , wn], as
described above. Let bλ be the image of the barycenter of ∆n under λ. Then the induc-
tive formula for S is S(λ) = bλ(S∂λ) where bλ : LCn−1(Y)→LCn(Y) is the homomor-
phism deﬁned in the preceding paragraph. The induction starts with S([∅]) = [∅],
so S is the identity on LC−1(Y). It is also the identity on LC0(Y) since when n = 0
the formula for S becomes S([w0]) = w0(∂[w0]) = w0([∅]) = [w0]. Note also that
when λ is an embedding, with image a genuine n simplex [w0, ··· , wn], then S(λ)
is a linear combination of the various n simplices in the barycentric subdivision of
[w0, ··· , wn]. This is apparent by comparing the inductive deﬁnition of S with the
inductive deﬁnition of barycentric subdivision of a simplex.
Let us check that the maps S satisfy ∂S = S∂, and hence give a chain map from
the chain complex LC(Y) to itself. Since S = 11 on LC0(Y) and LC−1(Y) we certainly
have ∂S = S∂on LC0(Y). The result for larger n is given by the following calculation,

122
Chapter 2.
Homology
in which we omit some parentheses to unclutter the formulas:
∂Sλ = ∂
 bλ(S∂λ)

= S∂λ −bλ(∂S∂λ)
since ∂bλ + bλ∂= 11
= S∂λ −bλ(S∂∂λ)
by induction on n
= S∂λ
since ∂∂= 0
We next build a chain homotopy T : LCn(Y)→LCn+1(Y) between S and the iden-
tity, ﬁtting into a diagram
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
S
T
−−−−−−−→
T
−−−−−−−→
T
0
S
S
-
Y
LC 2(
)
Y
LC 1(
)
Y
LC 0(
)
Y
LC
0
1(
)
−−−−−→
S
−−−−−→
...
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
-
Y
LC 2(
)
Y
LC 1(
)
Y
LC 0(
)
Y
LC
0
1(
)
...
1
1
1
1
We deﬁne T on LCn(Y) inductively by setting T = 0 for n = −1 and letting Tλ =
bλ(λ −T∂λ) for n ≥0. The geometric motivation for this formula is an inductively
deﬁned subdivision of ∆n×I obtained by joining all simplices in ∆n×{0} ∪∂∆n×I
to the barycenter of ∆n×{1}, as indicated in the
ﬁgure in the case n = 2. What T actually does
is take the image of this subdivision under
the projection ∆n×I→∆n .
The chain homotopy formula ∂T + T∂= 11 −S is trivial on LC−1(Y) where T = 0
and S = 11. Verifying the formula on LCn(Y) with n ≥0 is done by the calculation
∂Tλ = ∂
 bλ(λ −T∂λ)

= λ −T∂λ −bλ
 ∂(λ −T∂λ)

since ∂bλ = 11 −bλ∂
= λ −T∂λ −bλ(S∂λ + T∂∂λ)
by induction on n
= λ −T∂λ −Sλ
since ∂∂= 0 and Sλ = bλ(S∂λ)
Now we are done with inductive arguments, and we can discard the group LC−1(Y)
which was used only as a convenience. The relation ∂T +T∂= 11−S still holds without
LC−1(Y) since T was zero on LC−1(Y).
3.
Barycentric Subdivision of General Chains.
Deﬁne S : Cn(X)→Cn(X) by Sσ =
σ♯S∆n for a singular n simplex σ : ∆n→X . Since S∆n is the sum of the n simplices
in the barycentric subdivision of ∆n , with certain signs, Sσ is the corresponding
signed sum of the restrictions of σ to the n simplices of the barycentric subdivision
of ∆n . The operator S is a chain map since
∂Sσ = ∂σ♯S∆n = σ♯∂S∆n = σ♯S∂∆n
= σ♯S
 P
i(−1)i∆n
i

where ∆n
i is the ith face of ∆n
=
P
i(−1)iσ♯S∆n
i
=
P
i(−1)iS(σ||∆n
i )
= S
 P
i(−1)iσ||∆n
i

= S(∂σ)

Section 2.1.
Simplicial and Singular Homology
123
In similar fashion we deﬁne T : Cn(X)→Cn+1(X) by Tσ = σ♯T∆n , and this gives a
chain homotopy between S and the identity, since the formula ∂T +T∂= 11−S holds
by the calculation
∂Tσ = ∂σ♯T∆n = σ♯∂T∆n = σ♯(∆n −S∆n −T∂∆n) = σ −Sσ −σ♯T∂∆n
= σ −Sσ −T(∂σ)
where the last equality follows just as in the previous displayed calculation, with S
replaced by T .
4. Iterated Barycentric Subdivision. A chain homotopy between 11 and the iterate Sm
is given by the operator Dm =
P
0≤i<m TSi since
∂Dm + Dm∂=
X
0≤i<m
 ∂TSi + TSi∂

=
X
0≤i<m
 ∂TSi + T∂Si
=
X
0≤i<m
 ∂T + T∂

Si =
X
0≤i<m
 11 −S

Si =
X
0≤i<m
 Si −Si+1
= 11 −Sm
For each singular n simplex σ : ∆n→X there exists an m such that Sm(σ) lies in
CU
n (X) since the diameter of the simplices of Sm(∆n) will be less than a Lebesgue
number of the cover of ∆n by the open sets σ −1(int Uj) if m is large enough. (A
Lebesgue number for an open cover of a compact metric space is a number ε such
that every set of diameter less than ε lies in some set of the cover. The existence of
such a number is shown by an elementary compactness argument.) We cannot expect
the same number m to work for all σ ’s, so let us deﬁne m(σ) to be the smallest m
such that Smσ is in CU
n (X).
Suppose we deﬁne D : Cn(X)→Cn+1(X) by Dσ = Dm(σ)σ . To see whether D is
a chain homotopy, we manipulate the chain homotopy equation
∂Dm(σ)σ + Dm(σ)∂σ = σ −Sm(σ)σ
into an equation whose left side is ∂Dσ +D∂σ by moving the second term on the left
side to the other side of the equation and adding D∂σ to both sides:
∂Dσ + D∂σ = σ −

Sm(σ)σ + Dm(σ)(∂σ) −D(∂σ)

If we deﬁne ρ(σ) to be the expression in brackets in this last equation, then this
equation has the form
(∗)
∂Dσ + D∂σ = σ −ρ(σ)
We claim that ρ(σ) ∈CU
n (X). This is obvious for the term Sm(σ)σ . For the remaining
part Dm(σ)(∂σ) −D(∂σ), note ﬁrst that if σj denotes the restriction of σ to the jth
face of ∆n , then m(σj) ≤m(σ), so every term TSi(σj) in D(∂σ) will be a term in
Dm(σ)(∂σ). Thus Dm(σ)(∂σ) −D(∂σ) is a sum of terms TSi(σj) with i ≥m(σj),
and these terms lie in CU
n (X) since T takes CU
n−1(X) to CU
n (X)
We can thus regard the equation (∗) as deﬁning ρ : Cn(X)→CU
n (X). For varying
n these ρ’s form a chain map since (∗) implies ∂ρ(σ) = ∂σ −∂D∂(σ) = ρ(∂σ).

124
Chapter 2.
Homology
The equation (∗) says that ∂D + D∂= 11 −ιρ for ι : CU
n (X) > Cn(X) the inclusion.
Furthermore, ρι = 11 since D is identically zero on CU
n (X), as m(σ) = 0 for σ ∈
CU
n (X), hence the summation deﬁning Dσ is empty. Thus we have shown that ρ is
a chain homotopy inverse for ι.
⊔⊓
Proof of the Excision Theorem: We prove the second version. For the cover U =
{A, B} we introduce the suggestive notation Cn(A + B) for CU
n (X), the sums of
chains in A and chains in B .
At the end of the preceding proof we had formu-
las ∂D + D∂= 11 −ιρ and ρι = 11.
All the maps appearing in these formulas
take chains in A to chains in A, hence induce quotient maps when we factor out
chains in A. These quotient maps automatically satisfy the same two formulas, so
the inclusion Cn(A + B)/Cn(A)> Cn(X)/Cn(A) induces an isomorphism on homol-
ogy. The map Cn(B)/Cn(A ∩B)→Cn(A + B)/Cn(A) induced by inclusion is obvi-
ously an isomorphism since both quotient groups are free with basis the singular
n simplices in B which do not lie in A. Hence we obtain the desired isomorphism
Hn(B, A ∩B) ≈Hn(X, A), induced by inclusion.
⊔⊓
All that remains in the proof of Theorem 2.13 is to replace relative homology
groups with absolute homology groups. This is achieved by the following result.
Proposition 2.22. For good pairs (X, A), the quotient map q : (X, A)→(X/A, A/A)
induces isomorphisms q∗: Hn(X, A)→Hn(X/A, A/A) ≈eHn(X/A) for all n.
Proof: Let V be a neighborhood of A in X which deformation retracts onto A. We
have a commutative diagram
A
−−−−−→
X
Hn(
)
,
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
q∗
V
−−−−−→
X
Hn(
)
,
q∗
V
−−−−−→
X A
Hn(
)
,
q∗
-
A
-
A
X/
A
A/
Hn(
)
,
A
X/
A
X/
A
A/
A
A/
A
V/
A
V/
Hn(
)
,
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
Hn(
)
,
-
-
The upper left horizontal map is an isomorphism since in the long exact sequence of
the triple (X, V, A) the groups Hn(V, A) are zero for all n, because a deformation
retraction of V onto A gives a homotopy equivalence of pairs (V, A) ≃(A, A) and
Hn(A, A) = 0. The deformation retraction of V onto A induces a deformation retrac-
tion of V/A onto A/A, so the same argument shows the lower left horizontal map is
an isomorphism as well. The other two horizontal maps are isomorphisms directly
from excision. The right-hand vertical map q∗is an isomorphism since q restricts to
a homeomorphism on the complement of A. From the commutativity of the diagram
it follows that the left-hand q∗is an isomorphism.
⊔⊓
This proposition shows that relative homology can be expressed as reduced abso-
lute homology in the case of good pairs (X, A), but in fact there is a way of doing this
for arbitrary pairs. Consider the space X ∪CA where CA is the cone (A×I)/(A×{0})

Section 2.1.
Simplicial and Singular Homology
125
whose base A×{1} we identify with A ⊂X . Using terminology intro-
p
CA
X
A
duced in Chapter 0, X ∪CA can also be described as the mapping
cone of the inclusion A > X . The assertion is that Hn(X, A) is
isomorphic to eHn(X ∪CA) for all n via the sequence of isomor-
phisms
eHn(X ∪CA) ≈Hn(X ∪CA, CA) ≈Hn(X ∪CA −{p}, CA −{p}) ≈Hn(X, A)
where p ∈CA is the tip of the cone. The ﬁrst isomorphism comes from the exact
sequence of the pair, using the fact that CA is contractible. The second isomorphism
is excision, and the third isomorphism comes from the deformation retraction of
CA −{p} onto A.
Here is an application of the preceding proposition:
Example 2.23. Let us ﬁnd explicit cycles representing generators of the inﬁnite cyclic
groups Hn(Dn, ∂Dn) and Hn(Sn). Instead of (Dn, ∂Dn) we can just as well consider
(∆n, ∂∆n), and we will show by induction on n that the identity map in : ∆n→∆n ,
viewed as a singular n-simplex, is a cycle generating Hn(∆n, ∂∆n). That it is a cycle is
clear since we are considering relative homology. When n = 0 it certainly represents
a generator. For the induction step, let Λ ⊂∆n be the union of all but one of the
(n −1) dimensional faces of ∆n . Then we claim there are isomorphisms
Hn(∆n, ∂∆n)
≈------------→Hn−1(∂∆n, Λ)
≈
←------------- Hn−1(∆n−1, ∂∆n−1)
The ﬁrst isomorphism is a boundary map in the long exact sequence of the triple
(∆n, ∂∆n, Λ), whose third terms Hi(∆n, Λ) are zero since ∆n deformation retracts
onto Λ, hence (∆n, Λ) ≃(Λ, Λ). The second isomorphism comes from the preceding
proposition since we are dealing with good pairs and the inclusion ∆n−1 > ∂∆n as
the face not contained in Λ induces a homeomorphism of quotients ∆n−1/∂∆n−1 ≈
∂∆n/Λ. The induction step then follows since the cycle in is sent under the ﬁrst
isomorphism to the cycle ∂in which equals ±in−1 in Cn−1(∂∆n, Λ).
To ﬁnd a cycle generating Hn(Sn) let us regard Sn as two n simplices ∆n
1 and
∆n
2 with their boundaries identiﬁed in the obvious way, preserving the ordering of
vertices. The difference ∆n
1 −∆n
2 , viewed as a singular n chain, is then a cycle, and we
claim it represents a generator of Hn(Sn), assuming n > 0 so that the latter group is
inﬁnite cyclic. To see this, consider the isomorphisms
eHn(Sn)
≈------------→Hn(Sn, ∆n
2 )
≈
←------------- Hn(∆n
1 , ∂∆n
1 )
where the ﬁrst isomorphism comes from the long exact sequence of the pair (Sn, ∆n
2 )
and the second isomorphism is justiﬁed by passing to quotients as before. Under
these isomorphisms the cycle ∆n
1 −∆n
2 in the ﬁrst group corresponds to the cycle ∆n
1
in the third group, which represents a generator of this group as we have seen, so
∆n
1 −∆n
2 represents a generator of Hn(Sn).

126
Chapter 2.
Homology
The preceding proposition implies that the excision property holds also for sub-
complexes of CW complexes:
Corollary 2.24. If the CW complex X is the union of subcomplexes A and B , then
the inclusion (B, A∩B)>(X, A) induces isomorphisms Hn(B, A∩B)→Hn(X, A) for
all n.
Proof: Since CW pairs are good, the proposition allows us to pass to the quotient
spaces B/(A ∩B) and X/A which are homeomorphic, assuming we are not in the
trivial case A ∩B = ∅.
⊔⊓
Another application of the preceding proposition is:
Corollary 2.25. For a wedge sum
W
α Xα , the inclusions iα : Xα>
W
α Xα induce an iso-
morphism
L
α iα∗:
L
α eHn(Xα)→eHn(
W
α Xα), provided that the wedge sum is formed
at basepoints xα ∈Xα such that the pairs (Xα, xα) are good.
Proof: Since reduced homology is the same as homology relative to a basepoint, this
follows from the proposition by taking (X, A) = (
`
αXα,
`
α{xα}).
⊔⊓
Here is an application of the machinery we have developed, a classical result of
Brouwer from around 1910 known as ‘invariance of dimension,’ which says in partic-
ular that Rm is not homeomorphic to Rn if m ≠n.
Theorem 2.26. If nonempty open sets U ⊂Rm and V ⊂Rn are homeomorphic,
then m = n.
Proof: For x ∈U we have Hk(U, U −{x}) ≈Hk(Rm, Rm −{x}) by excision. From
the long exact sequence for the pair (Rm, Rm −{x}) we get Hk(Rm, Rm −{x}) ≈
eHk−1(Rm −{x}). Since Rm −{x} deformation retracts onto a sphere Sm−1 , we con-
clude that Hk(U, U −{x}) is Z for k = m and 0 otherwise. By the same reasoning
Hk(V, V −{y}) is Z for k = n and 0 otherwise. Since a homeomorphism h : U→V
induces isomorphisms Hk(U, U −{x})→Hk(V, V −{h(x)}) for all k, we must have
m = n.
⊔⊓
Generalizing the idea of this proof, the local homology groups of a space X at
a point x ∈X are deﬁned to be the groups Hn(X, X −{x}). For any open neigh-
borhood U of x , excision gives isomorphisms Hn(X, X −{x}) ≈Hn(U, U −{x}),
so these groups depend only on the local topology of X near x . A homeomorphism
f : X→Y must induce isomorphisms Hn(X, X −{x}) ≈Hn(Y, Y −{f (x)}) for all x
and n, so these local homology groups can be used to tell when spaces are not locally
homeomorphic at certain points, as in the preceding proof. The exercises give some
further examples of this.

Section 2.1.
Simplicial and Singular Homology
127
Naturality
The exact sequences we have been constructing have an extra property which will
later become important at key points in many arguments, though at ﬁrst glance this
property may seem just an idle technicality, not very interesting. We shall discuss this
property now rather than interrupting later arguments to check it when it is needed,
but the reader may well want to postpone a careful reading of what follows.
The property is called naturality. For example, to say that the long exact sequence
of a pair is natural means that whenever one has a map f : (X, A)→(Y, B), then the
diagram
f
-
n 1
-
n 1
∂
∂
...
...
...
...
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
i
j
A
A
H (
)
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
X
Hn
n
n
(
)
X
H (
)
,
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
i
j
B
B
H (
)
Y
Hn
n
n
A
H
(
)
B
H
(
)
(
)
Y
H (
)
,
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
f∗
f∗
f∗
is commutative. Commutativity of the squares involving i∗and j∗follows from the
obvious commutativity of
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
i
j
A
A
C
0
(
)
−−−−−→
X
C
0
n
n
n
(
)
X
C (
)
∂
∂
∂
,
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
i
j
B
B
C
0
(
)
Y
C
0
n
n
n
(
)
Y
C (
)
,
Commutativity of the square containing ∂: Hn(X, A)→Hn−1(A) can be deduced from
the relation f♯∂= ∂f♯on chains, which we noted when we deﬁned induced homo-
morphisms. Namely, for a class [α] ∈Hn(X, A) represented by a relative cycle α, we
have f∗∂[α] = f∗[∂α] = [f♯∂α] = [∂f♯α] = ∂[f♯α] = ∂f∗[α].
Alternatively, we could appeal to the general algebraic fact that the long exact
sequence of homology groups associated to a short exact sequence of chain complexes
is natural: Given two short exact sequences of chain complexes and a map between
them, producing commutative diagrams
0
A
α
β
γ
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
B
−−−−−−−→
C
−−−−−−−→
0
−−−−−−−→
0
A
−−−−−−−→
B
−−−−−−−→
C
−−−−−−−→
0
−−−−−−−→
i
i
j
j
n
n
n
n
n
n
′
′
′
′
′
for all n, then the diagram
-
n 1
-
n 1
∂
∂
...
...
...
...
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
i
j
A
H (
)
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
C
Hn
n
n
(
)
B
H (
)
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
i
j
A
H (
)
C
Hn
n
n
A
H
(
)
A
H
(
)
(
)
B
H (
)
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
′
′
′
′
′
′
α
∗
α
β
γ
is commutative. Commutativity of the ﬁrst two squares is obvious since βi = i′α
implies β∗i∗= i′
∗α∗and γj = j′β implies γ∗j∗= j′
∗β∗. For the third square, recall
that the map ∂: Hn(C)→Hn−1(A) was deﬁned by ∂[c] = [a] where c = j(b) and

128
Chapter 2.
Homology
i(a) = ∂b. Then ∂[γ(c)] = [α(a)] since γ(c) = γj(b) = j′(β(b)) and i′(α(a)) =
βi(a) = β∂(b) = ∂β(b). Hence ∂γ∗[c] = α∗[a] = α∗∂[c].
This algebraic fact also implies naturality of the long exact sequence of a triple
and the long exact sequence of reduced homology of a pair.
Finally, there is the naturality of the long exact sequence in Theorem 2.13, i.e.,
commutativity of the diagram
Y/
X/
f
-
n 1
-
n 1
∂
∂
...
...
...
...
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
i
q
A
A
H (
)
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
Hn
n
n
(
)
X
H (
)
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
i
q
B
B
H (
)
Hn
n
n
A
H
(
)
B
H
(
)
(
)
Y
H (
)
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
f∗
f∗
f∗
∼
∼
∼
∼
∼
∼
∼
∼
−
where i and q denote inclusions and quotient maps, and f : X/A→Y/B is induced
by f . The ﬁrst two squares commute since f i = if and f q = qf . The third square
expands into
-
n 1
-
n 1
∂
∂
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
j
q
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
j
q
A
H
(
)
B
H
(
)
∗
∗
∗
∗
f∗
f∗
f∗
∼
∼
Y/
X/A
−−−−−→
Hn(
)
B
Hn(
)
f∗
∼
∼
−
−
A
X
Hn(
)
,
B
Y
Hn(
)
,
A
X/
A
A/
Hn(
)
,
B
Y/
B
B/
Hn(
)
,
≈
≈
≈
≈
We have already shown commutativity of the ﬁrst and third squares, and the second
square commutes since f q = qf .
The Equivalence of Simplicial and Singular Homology
We can use the preceding results to show that the simplicial and singular homol-
ogy groups of ∆complexes are always isomorphic. For the proof it will be convenient
to consider the relative case as well, so let X be a ∆complex with A ⊂X a subcom-
plex, i.e., a union of simplices of X , where ‘simplex’ means ‘closed simplex.’ Thus A
is a ∆complex itself. Relative groups H∆
n(X, A) can be deﬁned in the same way as
for singular homology, via relative chains ∆n(X, A) = ∆n(X)/∆n(A), and this yields
a long exact sequence of simplicial homology groups for the pair (X, A) by the same
algebraic argument as for singular homology. There is a canonical homomorphism
H∆
n(X, A)→Hn(X, A) induced by the chain map ∆n(X, A)→Cn(X, A) sending each
n simplex of X to its characteristic map σ : ∆n→X . The possibility A = ∅is not
excluded, in which case the relative groups reduce to absolute groups.
Theorem 2.27. The homomorphisms H∆
n(X, A)→Hn(X, A) are isomorphisms for
all n and all ∆complex pairs (X, A).
Proof: First we do the case that X is ﬁnite-dimensional and A is empty. For Xk
the k-skeleton of X , consisting of all simplices of dimension k or less, we have a
commutative diagram of exact sequences:

Section 2.1.
Simplicial and Singular Homology
129
H (
)
n
−−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−→
X
H (
)
n
k
-
X X
H (
)
,
n
k 1
k
-
X
k 1
H
(
)
-
X
k 1
H
(
)
n 1
+
-
X
X
,
k 1
k
-
n 1
H (
)
n
−−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−→
X
H (
)
n
k
-
X
X
H (
)
,
n
k 1
k
-
X
k 1
H
(
)
-
X
k 1
H
(
)
n 1
+
-
X
X
,
k 1
k
-
n 1
−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
∆
∆
∆
∆
∆
Let us ﬁrst show that the ﬁrst and fourth vertical maps are isomorphisms for all n.
The simplicial chain group ∆n(Xk, Xk−1) is zero for n ≠k, and is free abelian with
basis the k simplices of X when n = k. Hence H∆
n(Xk, Xk−1) has exactly the same
description. The corresponding singular homology groups Hn(Xk, Xk−1) can be com-
puted by considering the map Φ :
`
α(∆k
α, ∂∆k
α)→(Xk, Xk−1) formed by the character-
istic maps ∆k→X for all the k simplices of X . Since Φ induces a homeomorphism
of quotient spaces
`
α∆k
α/
`
α∂∆k
α ≈Xk/Xk−1 , it induces isomorphisms on all singu-
lar homology groups. Thus Hn(Xk, Xk−1) is zero for n ≠k, while for n = k this
group is free abelian with basis represented by the relative cycles given by the char-
acteristic maps of all the k simplices of X , in view of the fact that Hk(∆k, ∂∆k) is
generated by the identity map ∆k→∆k , as we showed in Example 2.23. Therefore the
map H∆
k (Xk, Xk−1)→Hk(Xk, Xk−1) is an isomorphism.
By induction on k we may assume the second and ﬁfth vertical maps in the pre-
ceding diagram are isomorphisms as well. The following frequently-quoted basic alge-
braic lemma will then imply that the middle vertical map is an isomorphism, ﬁnishing
the proof when X is ﬁnite-dimensional and A = ∅.
The Five-Lemma. Suppose one has a commutative diagram of abelian groups
A
α
β
γ
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
B
−−−−−−−→
C
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
A
B
−−−−−−−→
C
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
i
i
j
j
′
′
′
′
′
δ
ε
−−−−−→
D
E
−−−−−−−→
D
E
−−−−−−−→
ℓ
ℓ′
k
k′
′
′
in which the two rows are exact and α, β, δ, and ε are isomorphisms. Then γ is an
isomorphism also.
Proof: It sufﬁces to show:
(a) γ is surjective if β and δ are surjective and ε is injective.
(b) γ is injective if β and δ are injective and α is surjective.
These are proved by straightforward diagram chasing. There is really no choice
about how the argument can proceed, and it would be a good exercise for the reader
to close the book now and reconstruct the proof without looking.
To prove (a), suppose c′ ∈C′ . Then k′(c) = δ(d) for some d ∈D since δ is
surjective. Since ε is injective and εℓ(d) = ℓ′δ(d) = ℓ′k′(c) = 0 we deduce that
ℓ(d) = 0, hence d = k(c) for some c ∈C by exactness of the upper row.
The
difference c′ −γ(c) maps to 0 under k′ since k′(c′) −k′γ(c) = k′(c) −δk(c) =
k′(c′) −δ(d) = 0. Therefore c′ −γ(c) = j′(b′) for some b′ ∈B′ by exactness. Since
β is surjective, b′ = β(b) for some b ∈B , and then γ(c + j(b)) = γ(c) + γj(b) =
γ(c) + j′β(b) = γ(c) + j′(b′) = c′ , showing that γ is surjective.

130
Chapter 2.
Homology
To prove (b), suppose γ(c) = 0. Since δ is injective, δk(c) = k′γ(c) = 0 implies
k(c) = 0, so c = j(b) for some b ∈B . The element β(b) satisﬁes j′β(b) = γj(b) =
γ(c) = 0, so β(b) = i′(a′) for some a′ ∈A′ .
Since α is surjective, a′ = α(a)
for some a ∈A. Since β is injective, β(i(a) −b) = βi(a) −β(b) = i′α(a) −β(b) =
i′(a′)−β(b) = 0 implies i(a)−b = 0. Thus b = i(a), and hence c = j(b) = ji(a) = 0
since ji = 0. This shows γ has trivial kernel.
⊔⊓
Returning to the proof of the theorem, we next consider the case that X is inﬁnite-
dimensional, where we will use the following fact: A compact set in X can meet only
ﬁnitely many open simplices of X , i.e., simplices with their proper faces deleted. This
is a general fact about CW complexes proved in the Appendix, but here is a direct proof
for ∆complexes. If a compact set C intersected inﬁnitely many open simplices, it
would contain an inﬁnite sequence of points xi each lying in a different open simplex.
Then the sets Ui = X −
S
j≠i{xj}, which are open since their pre-images under the
characteristic maps of all the simplices are clearly open, form an open cover of C with
no ﬁnite subcover.
This can be applied to show the map H∆
n(X)→Hn(X) is surjective. Represent a
given element of Hn(X) by a singular n cycle z. This is a linear combination of ﬁnitely
many singular simplices with compact images, meeting only ﬁnitely many open sim-
plices of X , hence contained in Xk for some k. We have shown that H∆
n(Xk)→Hn(Xk)
is an isomorphism, in particular surjective, so z is homologous in Xk (hence in X ) to
a simplicial cycle. This gives surjectivity. Injectivity is similar: If a simplicial n cycle
z is the boundary of a singular chain in X , this chain has compact image and hence
must lie in some Xk , so z represents an element of the kernel of H∆
n(Xk)→Hn(Xk).
But we know this map is injective, so z is a simplicial boundary in Xk , and therefore
in X .
It remains to do the case of arbitrary X with A ≠∅, but this follows from the
absolute case by applying the ﬁve-lemma to the canonical map from the long exact
sequence of simplicial homology groups for the pair (X, A) to the corresponding long
exact sequence of singular homology groups.
⊔⊓
We can deduce from this theorem that Hn(X) is ﬁnitely generated whenever X
is a ∆complex with ﬁnitely many n simplices, since in this case the simplicial chain
group ∆n(X) is ﬁnitely generated, hence also its subgroup of cycles and therefore
also the latter group’s quotient H∆
n(X). If we write Hn(X) as the direct sum of cyclic
groups, then the number of Z summands is known traditionally as the nth Betti
number of X , and integers specifying the orders of the ﬁnite cyclic summands are
called torsion coefﬁcients.
It is a curious historical fact that homology was not thought of originally as a
sequence of groups, but rather as Betti numbers and torsion coefﬁcients. One can after
all compute Betti numbers and torsion coefﬁcients from the simplicial boundary maps

Section 2.1.
Simplicial and Singular Homology
131
without actually mentioning the homology groups.
This computational viewpoint,
with homology being numbers rather than groups, prevailed from when Poincar´e ﬁrst
started serious work on homology around 1900, up until the 1920’s when the more
abstract viewpoint of groups entered the picture. During this period ‘homology’ meant
primarily ‘simplicial homology,’ and it was another 20 years before the shift to singular
homology was complete, with the ﬁnal deﬁnition of singular homology emerging only
in a 1944 paper of Eilenberg, after contributions from quite a few others, particularly
Alexander and Lefschetz. Within the next few years the rest of the basic structure
of homology theory as we have presented it fell into place, and the ﬁrst deﬁnitive
treatment appeared in the classic book [Eilenberg-Steenrod] of 1952.
Exercises
1. What familiar space is the quotient ∆complex of a 2 simplex [v0, v1, v2] obtained
by identifying the edges [v0, v1] and [v1, v2], preserving the ordering of vertices?
2. Show that the ∆complex obtained from ∆3 by performing the edge identiﬁcations
[v0, v1] ∼[v1, v3] and [v0, v2] ∼[v2, v3] deformation retracts onto a Klein bottle.
Find other pairs of identiﬁcations of edges which produce ∆complexes deformation
retracting onto a torus, a 2 sphere, and RP2 .
3. Construct a ∆complex structure on RPn as a quotient of a ∆complex structure
on Sn having vertices the two vectors of length 1 along each coordinate axis in Rn+1 .
4. Compute the simplicial homology groups of the triangular parachute obtained from
∆2 by identifying its three vertices to a single point.
5. Compute the simplicial homology groups of the Klein bottle using the ∆complex
structure described at the beginning of this section.
6. Compute the simplicial homology groups of the ∆complex obtained from n + 1
2 simplices ∆2
0, ··· , ∆2
n by identifying all three edges of ∆2
0 to a single edge, and for
i > 0 identifying the edges [v0, v1] and [v1, v2] of ∆2
i to a single edge and the edge
[v0, v2] to the edge [v0, v1] of ∆2
i−1 .
7. Find a way of identifying pairs of faces of ∆3 to produce a ∆complex structure
on S3 having a single 3 simplex, and compute the simplicial homology groups of this
∆complex.
8. Construct a 3 dimensional ∆complex X from n tetrahe-
dra T1, ··· , Tn by the following two steps. First arrange the
tetrahedra in a cyclic pattern as in the ﬁgure, so that each Ti
shares a common vertical face with its two neighbors Ti−1 and
Ti+1 , subscripts being taken mod n. Then identify the bottom face of Ti with the top
face of Ti+1 for each i. Show the simplicial homology groups of X in dimensions 0,
1, 2, 3 are Z, Zn , 0, Z respectively. [The space X is an example of a lens space; see
Example 2.43 for the general case.]

132
Chapter 2.
Homology
9. Compute the homology groups of the ∆complex X obtained from ∆n by identify-
ing all pairs of faces having the same dimension. Thus X has a single k simplex for
each k ≤n.
10.
Show that the quotient space of a ﬁnite collection of disjoint 2 simplices ob-
tained by identifying pairs of edges is always a surface, i.e., locally homeomorphic to
R2 . [Optional reﬁnement: show the edges can always be oriented so as to deﬁne a
∆complex structure on the surface.]
11. Show that if A is a retract of X then the map Hn(A)→Hn(X) induced by the
inclusion A ⊂X is injective.
12. Show that chain homotopy of chain maps is an equivalence relation.
13. Verify that f ≃g implies f∗= g∗for induced homomorphisms of reduced
homology groups.
14. Determine whether there exists a short exact sequence 0→Z4→Z8⊕Z2→Z4→0.
More generally, determine which abelian groups A ﬁt into a short exact sequence
0→Zpm→A→Zpn→0 with p prime. What about the case of short exact sequences
0→Z→A→Zn→0?
15. For an exact sequence A→B→C→D→E show that C = 0 iff the map A→B
is surjective and D→E is injective. Thus a map A→X induces isomorphisms on all
homology groups iff Hn(X, A) = 0 for all n.
16. Show: (a) H0(X, A) = 0 iff A contains at least one point in each path-component
of X . (b) H1(X, A) = 0 iff H1(A)→H1(X) is surjective and each path-component of
X contains at most one path-component of A.
17. (a) Compute the homology groups Hn(X, A) when X is S2 or S1×S1 and A is a
ﬁnite set of points in X .
(b) Compute the homology groups Hn(X, A) and
Hn(X, B) where X is a closed orientable surface
of genus two and A and B are the circles shown in
A
B
the ﬁgure.
18. Show that for the subspace Q ⊂R, the relative homology group H1(R, Q) is free
abelian and ﬁnd a basis.
19. Compute the homology groups of the subspace of I×I consisting of the four
boundary edges plus all points in the interior whose ﬁrst coordinate is rational.
20. Show that eHn(X) ≈eHn+1(SX) for all n, where SX is the suspension of X .
21.
Making the preceding problem more concrete, construct explicit chain maps
s : Cn(X)→Cn+1(SX) which induce isomorphisms eHn(X)→eHn+1(SX).
22. Prove by induction on dimension the following facts about the homology of a
ﬁnite-dimensional CW complex X , using the observation that Xn/Xn−1 is a wedge
sum of n-spheres:

Section 2.2.
Computations and Applications
133
(a) If X has dimension n then Hi(X) = 0 for i > n and Hn(X) is free.
(b) Hn(X) is free with basis in bijective correspondence with the n-cells if there are
no cells of dimension n −1 or n + 1.
(c) If X has k n cells, then Hn(X) is generated by at most k elements.
23.
Show that the second barycentric subdivision of a ∆complex is a simplicial
complex. Namely, show that the ﬁrst barycentric subdivision produces a ∆complex
with the property that each simplex has all its vertices distinct, then show that for a
∆complex with this property, barycentric subdivision produces a simplicial complex.
24. Show that each n simplex in the barycentric subdivision of ∆n is deﬁned by n
inequalities ti0 ≤ti1 ≤··· ≤tin in its barycentric coordinates, where (i0, ··· , in) is a
permutation of (0, ··· , n).
25. Find an explicit, noninductive formula for the barycentric subdivision operator
S : Cn(X)→Cn(X).
26. Show that H1(X, A) is not isomorphic to eH1(X/A) if X = [0, 1] and A is the
sequence 1, 1/2, 1/3, ··· together with its limit 0. [See Example 1.25.]
27.
Let f : (X, A)→(Y, B) be a map such that both f : X→Y and the restriction
f : A→B are homotopy equivalences.
(a) Show that f∗: Hn(X, A)→Hn(Y, B) is an isomorphism for all n.
(b) For the case of the inclusion f : (Dn, Sn−1)> (Dn, Dn −{0}), show that f is not
a homotopy equivalence of pairs, i.e., there is no g : (Dn, Dn −{0})→(Dn, Sn−1)
such that f g and gf are homotopic to the identity through maps of pairs.
28. Let X be the cone on the 1 skeleton of ∆3 , i.e., the union of all line segments
joining points in the six edges of ∆3 to the barycenter of ∆3 . Compute the local
homology groups Hn(X, X −{x}) for all x ∈X . Deﬁne ∂X to be the subspace of
points x such that Hn(X, X −{x}) = 0 for all n, and compute the local homology
groups Hn(∂X, ∂X −{x}). Use these calculations to determine which subsets A ⊂X
have the property that f (A) ⊂A for all homeomorphisms f : X→X .
29.
Show that S1×S1 and S1 ∨S1 ∨S2 have isomorphic homology groups in all
dimensions, but their universal covering spaces do not.
30. In each of the following commutative diagrams assume that all maps but one are
isomorphisms. Show that the remaining map must be an isomorphism as well.
A
B
−−−−−→
C
D
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
A
B
−−−−−→
C
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
A
B
−−−−−→
C
D
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
31. Using the notation of the ﬁve-lemma, give an example where the maps α, β, δ,
and ε are zero but γ is nonzero. This can be done with short exact sequences in
which all the groups are either Z or 0.

134
Chapter 2.
Homology
Now that the basic properties of homology have been established, we can begin
to move a little more freely. Our ﬁrst topic, exploiting the calculation of Hn(Sn), is
Brouwer’s notion of degree for maps Sn→Sn . Historically, Brouwer’s introduction
of this concept about 1910 preceded the rigorous development of homology, so his
deﬁnition was rather different, using the technique of simplicial approximation which
we explain in §2.C. The later deﬁnition in terms of homology is certainly more elegant,
though perhaps with some loss of geometric intuition. More in the spirit of Brouwer’s
deﬁnition is a third approach using differential topology, presented very lucidly in
[Milnor 65].
Degree
For a map f : Sn→Sn , the induced f∗: eHn(Sn)→eHn(Sn) is a homomorphism
from an inﬁnite cyclic group to itself and so must be of the form f∗(α) = dα for
some integer d depending only on f . This integer is called the degree of f , deg f .
Here are some basic properties of degree.
(a) deg 11 = 1, since 11∗= 11.
(b) deg f = 0 if f is not surjective. For if we choose a point x0 ∈Sn −f (Sn) then f
can be factored as a composition Sn→Sn −{x0} > Sn and Hn(Sn −{x0}) = 0
since Sn −{x0} is contractible. Hence f∗= 0.
(c) If f ≃g then deg f = deg g since f∗= g∗. The converse statement, that f ≃g
if deg f = deg g, is a fundamental theorem of Hopf from around 1925 which we
will prove in §4.2.
(d) deg f g = deg f deg g, since (f g)∗= f∗g∗. A consequence of this is that deg f =
±1 if f is a homotopy equivalence since f g ≃11 implies deg f deg g = deg 11 = 1.
(e) deg f = −1 if f is a reﬂection of Sn , ﬁxing the points in a subsphere Sn−1
and interchanging the two complementary hemispheres. For we can give Sn a
∆complex structure with these two hemispheres as its two n simplices ∆n
1 and
∆n
2 , and the n chain ∆n
1 −∆n
2 represents a generator of Hn(Sn) as we saw in
Example 2.23, so the reﬂection interchanging ∆n
1 and ∆n
2 sends this generator to
its negative.
(f) The antipodal map −11 : Sn→Sn , x , −x , has degree (−1)n+1 since it is the
composition of n + 1 reﬂections, each changing the sign of one coordinate in
Rn+1 .
(g) If f : Sn→Sn has no ﬁxed points then deg f = (−1)n+1 . For if f (x) ≠x then the
line segment from f (x) to −x , deﬁned by t , (1 −t)f (x) −tx for 0 ≤t ≤1,
does not pass through the origin. Hence if f has no ﬁxed points, the formula
ft(x) = [(1 −t)f (x) −tx]/|(1 −t)f (x) −tx| deﬁnes a homotopy from f to

Section 2.2.
Computations and Applications
135
the antipodal map. Note that the antipodal map has no ﬁxed points, so the fact
that maps without ﬁxed points are homotopic to the antipodal map is a sort of
converse statement.
Here is an interesting application of degree:
Theorem 2.28. Sn has a continuous ﬁeld of nonzero tangent vectors iff n is odd.
Proof: Suppose x,v(x) is a tangent vector ﬁeld on Sn , assigning to a vector x ∈Sn
the vector v(x) tangent to Sn at x . Regarding v(x) as a vector at the origin instead
of at x , tangency just means that x and v(x) are orthogonal in Rn+1 . If v(x) ≠0 for
all x we may normalize v(x) so that |v(x)| = 1 by replacing v(x) by v(x)/|v(x)|.
Assuming this has been done, consider the great circle (cos t)x + (sin t)v(x) in the
plane spanned by x and v(x). Letting t go from 0 to π deﬁnes a homotopy ft(x) =
(cos t)x + (sin t)v(x) from the identity map of Sn to the antipodal map −11. This
implies that deg(−11) = deg 11, hence (−1)n+1 = 1 and n must be odd.
Conversely, if n is odd, say n = 2k−1, we can deﬁne v(x1, x2, ··· , x2k−1, x2k) =
(−x2, x1, ··· , −x2k, x2k−1). Then v(x) is orthogonal to x , so v is a tangent vector
ﬁeld on Sn which is nonzero at all points.
⊔⊓
For the much more difﬁcult problem of ﬁnding the maximum number of tan-
gent vector ﬁelds on Sn which are linearly independent at each point, see [VBKT] or
[Husemoller].
Here is another nice application of degree, giving a partial answer to a question
raised in Example 1.43:
Proposition 2.29. Z2 is the only nontrivial group which can act freely on Sn if n is
even.
Recall that an action of a group G on a space X is a homomorphism from G
to the group Homeo(X) of homeomorphisms X→X , and the action is free if the
homeomorphism corresponding to each nontrivial element of G has no ﬁxed points.
In the case of Sn , the antipodal map x , −x generates a free action of Z2 .
Proof: Since the degree of a homeomorphism must be ±1, an action of a group G
on Sn determines a degree function d : G→{±1}. This is a homomorphism since
deg f g = deg f deg g. If the action is free, then d sends every nontrivial element of
G to (−1)n+1 by property (g) above. Thus when n is even, d has trivial kernel, so
G ⊂Z2 .
⊔⊓
We shall next describe a technique for computing degrees which can be applied
to most maps that arise in practice. Suppose f : Sn→Sn has the property that for
some point y ∈Sn , the preimage f −1(y) consists of only ﬁnitely many points, say

136
Chapter 2.
Homology
x1, ··· , xm . Let U1, ··· , Um be disjoint neighborhoods of these points, mapped by f
into a neighborhood V of y . Then f (Ui −xi) ⊂V −y for each i, and we have a
commutative diagram
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
n S
H (
)
f
j
k
∗
f∗
−−−−−−→
f∗
n S
y
n
≈
≈
−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−→
H (
)
n S
H (
)
S
n
n
n
≈
≈
,
-
n S
H (
)
n S
x
n
,
-
n V
H (
)
V
y
,
-
n
i
i
pi
i
i
i
U
H (
)
U
x
,
-
n S
H (
(
))
n S
y
f
n
,
-
- 1
where all the maps are the obvious ones, in particular ki and pi are induced by inclu-
sions. The two isomorphisms in the upper half of the diagram come from excision,
while the lower two isomorphisms come from exact sequences of pairs. Via these four
isomorphisms, the top two groups in the diagram can be identiﬁed with Hn(Sn) ≈Z,
and the top homomorphism f∗becomes multiplication by an integer called the local
degree of f at xi , written deg f ||xi .
For example, if f is a homeomorphism, then y can be any point and there is
only one corresponding xi , so all the maps in the diagram are isomorphisms and
deg f ||xi = deg f = ±1. More generally, if f maps each Ui homeomorphically onto
V , then deg f ||xi = ±1 for each i. This situation occurs quite often in applications,
and it is usually not hard to determine the correct signs.
Here is the formula which reduces degree calculations to computing local degrees:
Proposition 2.30. deg f =
P
i deg f ||xi .
Proof: By excision, the central term Hn(Sn, Sn −f −1(y)) in the preceding diagram
is the direct sum of the groups Hn(Ui, Ui −xi) ≈Z, with ki the inclusion of the
ith summand. Since the upper triangle commutes, the projections of this direct sum
onto its summands are given by the maps pi . Identifying the outer groups in the
diagram with Z as before, commutativity of the lower triangle says that pij(1) = 1,
hence j(1) = (1, ··· , 1) =
P
i ki(1). Commutativity of the upper square says that the
middle f∗takes ki(1) to deg f ||xi , hence
P
i ki(1) = j(1) is taken to
P
i deg f ||xi .
Commutativity of the lower square then gives the formula deg f =
P
i deg f ||xi .
⊔⊓
Example 2.31. We can use this result to construct a map Sn→Sn of any given degree,
for each n ≥1. Let q : Sn→
W
k Sn be the quotient map obtained by collapsing the
complement of k disjoint open balls Bi in Sn to a point, and let p :
W
k Sn→Sn identify
all the summands to a single sphere. Consider the composition f = pq. For almost all
y ∈Sn we have f −1(y) consisting of one point xi in each Bi . The local degree of f at
xi is ±1 since f is a homeomorphism near xi . By pre-composing p with reﬂections
of the summands of
W
k Sn if necessary, we can make each local degree either +1 or
−1, whichever we wish. Thus we can produce a map Sn→Sn of degree ±k.

Section 2.2.
Computations and Applications
137
Example 2.32. In the case of S1 , the map f (z) = zk , where we view S1 as the unit
circle in C, has degree k. This is evident in the case k = 0 since f is then constant.
The case k < 0 reduces to the case k > 0 by composing with z , z−1 , which is a
reﬂection, of degree −1. To compute the degree when k > 0, observe ﬁrst that for
any y ∈S1 , f −1(y) consists of k points x1, ··· , xk near each of which f is a local
homeomorphism. Near each xi the map f can be homotoped, stretching by a factor
of k without changing local degree, to become the restriction of a rotation of S1 . A
rotation has degree +1 since it is homotopic to the identity, and since a rotation is a
homeomorphism, its degree equals its local degree at any point. Hence deg f ||xi = 1
and deg f = k.
Another way of obtaining a map Sn→Sn of degree k is to take a repeated sus-
pension of the map z , zk in Example 2.32, since suspension preserves degree:
Proposition 2.33. deg Sf = deg f , where Sf : Sn+1→Sn+1 is the suspension of the
map f : Sn→Sn .
Proof: Let CSn denote the cone (Sn×I)/(Sn×1) with base Sn = Sn×0 ⊂CSn ,
so CSn/Sn is the suspension of Sn . The map f induces Cf : (CSn, Sn)→(CSn, Sn)
with quotient Sf . The naturality of the boundary maps
Sf
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
H
(
)
n S
H (
)
∗
f∗
∼
∼
S
n 1
n
+
n 1
+
∂
≈
−−−−−→
H
(
)
n S
H (
)
∼
∼
S
n 1
n
+
n 1
+
∂
≈
in the long exact sequence of the pair (CSn, Sn) then
gives commutativity of the diagram at the right. Hence
if f∗is multiplication by d, so is Sf∗.
⊔⊓
Note that for f : Sn→Sn , the suspension Sf maps only one point to each of the
two ‘poles’ of Sn+1 . This implies that the local degree of Sf at each pole must equal
the global degree of Sf . Thus the local degree of a map Sn→Sn can be any integer
if n ≥2, just as the degree itself can be any integer when n ≥1.
Cellular Homology
Cellular homology is a very efﬁcient tool for computing the homology groups of
CW complexes, based on degree calculations. Before giving the deﬁnition of cellular
homology, we ﬁrst establish a few preliminary facts:
Lemma 2.34. If X is a CW complex, then:
(a) Hk(Xn, Xn−1) is zero for k ≠n, and is free abelian for k = n, with a basis in
one-to-one correspondence with the n cells of X .
(b) Hk(Xn) = 0 for k > n. In particular, if X is ﬁnite-dimensional then Hk(X) = 0
for k > dim X .
(c) The inclusion i : Xn>X induces an isomorphism i∗: Hk(Xn)→Hk(X) if k < n.
Proof: Statement (a) follows immediately from the observation that (Xn, Xn−1) is a
good pair and Xn/Xn−1 is a wedge sum of n spheres, one for each n cell of X . (We
are using Proposition 2.22 and Corollary 2.25 here.)

138
Chapter 2.
Homology
The long exact sequence of the pair (Xn, Xn−1) contains segments
Hk+1(Xn, Xn−1) -→Hk(Xn−1) -→Hk(Xn) -→Hk(Xn, Xn−1)
If k is not equal to n or n −1 then the outer two groups are zero by part (a), so
we have isomorphisms Hk(Xn−1) ≈Hk(Xn) for k ≠n, n −1. Thus if k > n we
have Hk(Xn) ≈Hk(Xn−1) ≈Hk(Xn−2) ≈··· ≈Hk(X0) = 0, proving (b). Further, if
k < n then Hk(Xn) ≈Hk(Xn+1) ≈··· ≈Hk(Xn+m) for all m ≥0, proving (c) if X is
ﬁnite-dimensional.
The proof of (c) when X is inﬁnite dimensional requires more work, and this can
be done in two different ways. The more direct approach is to descend to the chain
level and use the fact that a singular chain in X has compact image, hence meets only
ﬁnitely many cells of X by Proposition A.1 in the Appendix. Thus each chain lies
in a ﬁnite skeleton Xm . So a k cycle in X is a cycle in some Xm , and then by the
ﬁnite-dimensional case of (c), the cycle is homologous to a cycle in Xn if n > k, so
i∗: Hk(Xn)→Hk(X) is surjective. Similarly for injectivity, if a k cycle in Xn bounds
a chain in X , this chain lies in some Xm with m ≥n, so by the ﬁnite-dimensional
case the cycle bounds a chain in Xn if n > k.
The other approach is more general. From the long exact sequence of the pair
(X, Xn) it sufﬁces to show Hk(X, Xn) = 0 for k ≤n. Since Hk(X, Xn) ≈eHk(X/Xn),
this reduces us to showing:
(∗)
eHk(X) = 0 for k ≤n if the n skeleton of X is a point.
When X is ﬁnite-dimensional, (∗) is immediate from the ﬁnite-dimensional case
of (c) which we have already shown. It will sufﬁce therefore to reduce the inﬁnite-
dimensional case to the ﬁnite-dimensional case. This reduction will be achieved by
stretching X out to a complex which is at least locally ﬁnite-dimensional, using a
special case of the ‘mapping telescope’ construction described in greater generality
in §3.F.
R
Consider X×[0, ∞) with its product cell structure,
where we give [0, ∞) the cell structure with the integer
points as vertices. Let T =
S
i Xi×[i, ∞), a subcomplex
of X×[0, ∞).
The ﬁgure shows a schematic picture of T with [0, ∞) in the hor-
izontal direction and the subcomplexes Xi×[i, i + 1] as rectangles whose size in-
creases with i since Xi ⊂Xi+1 . The line labeled R can be ignored for now. We claim
that T ≃X , hence Hk(X) ≈Hk(T) for all k. Since X is a deformation retract of
X×[0, ∞) it sufﬁces to show that X×[0, ∞) deformation retracts also onto T . Let
Yi = T ∪
 X×[i, ∞)

. Then Yi deformation retracts onto Yi+1 since X×[i, i+1] defor-
mation retracts onto Xi×[i, i+1]∪X×{i+1} by Proposition 0.16. If we perform the
deformation retraction of Yi onto Yi+1 during the t interval [1 −1/2i, 1 −1/2i+1],
then this gives a deformation retraction ft of X×[0, ∞) onto T , with points in
Xi×[0, ∞) stationary under ft for t ≥1 −1/2i+1 . Continuity follows from the fact

Section 2.2.
Computations and Applications
139
that CW complexes have the weak topology with respect to their skeleta, so a map is
continuous if its restriction to each skeleton is continuous.
Recalling that X0 is a point, let R ⊂T be the ray X0×[0, ∞), and let Z ⊂T be the
union of this ray with all the subcomplexes Xi×{i}. Then Z/R is homeomorphic to
W
i Xi , a wedge sum of ﬁnite-dimensional complexes with n skeleton a point, so the
ﬁnite-dimensional case of (∗) together with Corollary 2.25 describing the homology
of wedge sums implies that eHk(Z/R) = 0 for k ≤n. The same is therefore true for
Z , from the long exact sequence of the pair (Z, R), since R is contractible. Similarly,
T/Z is a wedge sum of ﬁnite-dimensional complexes with (n + 1) skeleton a point,
since if we ﬁrst collapse each subcomplex Xi×{i} of T to a point we obtain the inﬁnite
sequence of suspensions SXi ‘skewered’ along the ray R, and then if we collapse R to
a point we obtain
W
i ΣXi where ΣXi is the reduced suspension of Xi , obtained from
SXi by collapsing the line segment X0×[i, i+1] to a point, so ΣXi has (n+1) skeleton
a point. Thus eHk(T/Z) = 0 for k ≤n + 1, and then the long exact sequence of the
pair (T, Z) implies that eHk(T) = 0 for k ≤n, and we have proved (∗).
⊔⊓
Let X be a CW complex. Using Lemma 2.34, portions of the long exact sequences
for the pairs (Xn+1, Xn), (Xn, Xn−1), and (Xn−1, Xn−2) ﬁt into a diagram
-
-
X
X
H
(
)
,
n 1
+
n 1
n
+
n 1
+
n 1
+
n 1
+
−−−−−→
X
X
H (
)
,
n
n
n
n
n 1
-
n 1
-
n 2
n
X
H (
)
n
n
X
H (
)
n
X
H (
)
n
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
X
X
H
(
)
,
n 1
-
n 1
-
-
n 1
X
H
(
)
n 1
−−−−−→
...
−−−−−→...
≈
0
0
0
∂
∂
j
j
d
d
where dn+1 and dn are deﬁned as the compositions jn∂n+1 and jn−1∂n , i.e., the
‘relativized’ boundary maps ∂n+1 and ∂n .
The composition dndn+1 includes two
successive maps in one of the exact sequences, hence is zero. Thus the horizontal
row in the diagram is a chain complex, called the cellular chain complex of X since
Hn(Xn, Xn−1) is free with basis in one-to-one correspondence with the n cells of X ,
so one can think of elements of Hn(Xn, Xn−1) as linear combinations of n cells of X .
The homology groups of this cellular chain complex are called the cellular homology
groups of X . Temporarily we denote them HCW
n
(X).
Theorem 2.35. HCW
n
(X) ≈Hn(X).
Proof: From the diagram above, Hn(X) can be identiﬁed with Hn(Xn)/ Im ∂n+1 .
Since jn is injective, it maps Im ∂n+1 isomorphically onto Im(jn∂n+1) = Im dn+1

140
Chapter 2.
Homology
and Hn(Xn) isomorphically onto Im jn = Ker ∂n . Since jn−1 is injective, Ker ∂n =
Ker dn .
Thus jn induces an isomorphism of the quotient Hn(Xn)/ Im ∂n+1 onto
Ker dn/ Im dn+1 .
⊔⊓
Here are a few immediate applications:
(i) Hn(X) = 0 if X is a CW complex with no n cells.
(ii) More generally, if X is a CW complex with k n-cells, then Hn(X) is generated
by at most k elements. For Hn(Xn, Xn−1) is free abelian on k generators, so
the subgroup Ker dn must be generated by at most k elements, hence also the
quotient Ker dn/ Im dn+1 .
(iii) If X is a CW complex having no two of its cells in adjacent dimensions, then
Hn(X) is free abelian with basis in one-to-one correspondence with the n cells
of X . This is because the cellular boundary maps dn are automatically zero in
this case.
This last observation applies for example to CPn which has a CW structure with one
cell of each even dimension 2k ≤2n as we saw in Example 0.6. Thus
Hi(CPn) ≈

Z
for i = 0, 2, 4, ··· , 2n
0
otherwise
Another simple example is Sn×Sn with n > 1, using the product CW structure con-
sisting of a 0 cell, two n cells and a 2n cell.
It is possible to prove the statements (i)-(iii) for ﬁnite-dimensional CW complexes
by induction on the dimension, without using cellular homology but only the basic
results from the previous section. However, the viewpoint of cellular homology makes
(i)-(iii) quite transparent.
Next we describe how the cellular boundary maps dn can be computed in terms
of degrees of maps of spheres. Assuming for the moment that n > 1, consider the
commutative diagram
-
n
n
-
n 1
-
n 2
-
X
X
H (
)
,
n
n 1
n
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
X
X
H
(
)
,
n 1
-
n 1
-
-
n 1
X
H
(
)
n 1
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−→
−−−→
≈
≈
≈
∂
j
q
d
∼
∼
//
//
-
-
n 1
-
n 2
X
X
H
(
)
n 1
,
-
-
n 1
-
n 2
X
X
//
-
n 2
-
n 2
X
X
H
(
)
n 1
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
-
-
n 1
D
D
H (
)
,
n
n
n −−−−−→
S
H
(
)
n 1
-
H
(
)
n 1
∂
∂
∼
∼
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
α
α
D
n
∂
α
α
α
β
β
β∗
∗
q ∗
∗
∆
ϕ
−−−−−→
α∗
Φ
where:
— Φα is the characteristic map of the cell en
α , and ϕα is its attaching map.
— q : Xn−1→Xn−1/Xn−2 is the quotient map.
— qβ : Xn−1/Xn−2→Sn−1
β
collapses the complement of the cell en−1
β
to a point, the
resulting quotient sphere being identiﬁed with Sn−1
β
= Dn−1
β
/∂Dn−1
β
via the char-
acteristic map Φβ .

Section 2.2.
Computations and Applications
141
— ∆αβ : ∂Dn
α→Sn−1
β
is the composition qβqϕα , in other words, the attaching map
of en
α followed by the quotient map Xn−1→Sn−1
β
collapsing the complement of
en−1
β
in Xn−1 to a point.
The map Φα∗takes a chosen generator [Dn
α] ∈Hn(Dn
α, ∂Dn
α) to a generator xα of the
Z summand of Hn(Xn, Xn−1) corresponding to en
α . Commutativity of the left half
of the diagram then gives dn(xα) = jn−1ϕα∗∂[Dn
α]. In terms of the basis {yβ} for
Hn−1(Xn−1, Xn−2) corresponding to the cells en−1
β
, the map qβ∗is the projection of
Hn−1(Xn−1/Xn−2) onto its Z summand corresponding to yβ . Commutativity of the
diagram then yields the formula we are looking for:
dn(xα) =
X
β
dαβyβ
where dαβ is the degree of the map ∆αβ.
Note that
P
β dαβyβ has only ﬁnitely many nonzero terms since eHn−1(Xn−1/Xn−2) is
the direct sum of the groups eHn−1(Sn−1
β
).
When n = 1 we have Xn−2 = ∅, and the preceding analysis applies if we deﬁne
Y/∅to be the disjoint union of Y with a point. There is some logic to this deﬁnition
if one considers that Y/∅should be a larger space than Y/y0 = Y for y0 ∈Y .
For actual calculations it is not necessary to resort to this trick since the cellular
boundary map d1 : H1(X1, X0)→H0(X0) is the same as the simplicial boundary map
∆1(X)→∆0(X), which is easy to compute. In many cases of interest X is connected
and has only one 0 cell, and then d1 must be 0, otherwise H0(X) would not be Z.
Example 2.36. Let Mg be the closed orientable surface of genus g with its usual CW
structure consisting of one 0 cell, 2g 1 cells, and one 2 cell attached by the product
of commutators [a1, b1] ··· [ag, bg], the associated cellular chain complex is:
0 -----→Z
d2
------------→Z2g
d1
------------→Z -----→0
As observed above, d1 must be 0 since there is only one 0 cell. Also d2 is 0 in
this case because each ai or bi appears along with its inverse in [a1, b1] ··· [ag, bg],
so the maps ∆αβ are homotopic to constant maps. Since d1 and d2 are both zero,
the homology groups of Mg are the same as the cellular chain groups, namely, Z in
dimensions 0 and 2, and Z2g in dimension 1.
Example 2.37. The closed nonorientable surface Ng of genus g has a cell structure
with one 0 cell, g 1 cells, and one 2 cell attached by the word a2
1a2
2 ··· a2
g . Again
d1 = 0, and d2 : Z→Zg is speciﬁed by the equation d2(1) = (2, ··· , 2) since each ai
appears in the attaching word of the 2 cell with total exponent 2, which means that
each ∆αβ is homotopic to the map z, z2 , of degree 2. Since d2(1) = (2, ··· , 2), we
have d2 injective and hence H2(Ng) = 0. If we change the basis for Zg by replacing
the last standard basis element (0, ··· , 0, 1) by (1, ··· , 1), we see that H1(Ng) ≈
Zg−1⊕Z2 .

142
Chapter 2.
Homology
Example 2.38. Let X be obtained from S1 ∨S1 by attaching two 2 cells by the words
a5b−3 and b3(ab)−2 . Then d2 : Z2→Z2 has matrix

5 −2
−3
1

. The two columns come
from abelianizing a5b−3 and b3(ab)−2 to 5a−3b and −2a+b, in additive notation.
The matrix has determinant −1, hence is an isomorphism. Therefore eHi(X) = 0 for
all i. Such a space X is called acyclic.
It is interesting to note that this acyclic complex X is not contractible, since
its fundamental group is nontrivial.
Namely, π1(X) has the presentation ⟨a, b |
a5b−3, b3(ab)−2 ⟩, and there is a nontrivial homomorphism from this group to the
group G of rotational symmetries of a regular dodecahedron, sending a to the rota-
tion ρa through angle 2π/5 about the axis through the center of a pentagonal face,
and b to the rotation ρb through angle 2π/3 about the axis through a vertex of this
face. The composition ρaρb is a rotation through angle π about the axis through the
midpoint of an edge abutting this vertex. Thus the relations a5 = b3 = (ab)2 deﬁn-
ing π1(X) become ρ5
a = ρ3
b = (ρaρb)2 = 1 in G, which means there is a well-deﬁned
homomorphism ρ : π1(X)→G sending a to ρa and b to ρb . It is not hard to see that
G is generated by ρa and ρb , so ρ is surjective. With more work one can compute
that the kernel of ρ is Z2 , generated by the element a5 = b3 = (ab)2 , and this Z2 is
in fact the center of π1(X). In particular, π1(X) has order 120 since G has order 60.
After these 2 dimensional examples, let us now move up to three dimensions,
where we have the additional task of computing the cellular boundary map d3 .
c
c
c
c
b
b
b
b
a
a
a
a
c
c
c
c
b
b
b
b
a
a
a
a
Example 2.39. A 3 dimensional torus
T 3 = S1×S1×S1 can be constructed
from a cube by identifying each pair
of opposite square faces as in the ﬁrst
of the two ﬁgures. The second ﬁgure
shows a slightly different pattern of
identiﬁcations of opposite faces, with the front and back faces now identiﬁed via a
rotation of the cube around a horizontal left-right axis. The space produced by these
identiﬁcations is the product K×S1 of a Klein bottle and a circle. For both T 3 and
K×S1 we have a CW structure with one 3 cell, three 2 cells, three 1 cells, and one
0 cell. The cellular chain complexes thus have the form
0 -→Z
d3
------------→Z3
d2
------------→Z3
0-----→Z -→0
In the case of the 3 torus T 3 the cellular boundary map d2 is zero by the same
calculation as for the 2 dimensional torus. We claim that d3 is zero as well. This
amounts to saying that the three maps ∆αβ : S2→S2 corresponding to the three 2 cells
have degree zero. Each ∆αβ maps the interiors of two opposite faces of the cube
homeomorphically onto the complement of a point in the target S2 and sends the
remaining four faces to this point. Computing local degrees at the center points of
the two opposite faces, we see that the local degree is +1 at one of these points and

Section 2.2.
Computations and Applications
143
−1 at the other, since the restrictions of ∆αβ to these two faces differ by a reﬂection
of the boundary of the cube across the plane midway between them, and a reﬂection
has degree −1. Since the cellular boundary maps are all zero, we deduce that Hi(T 3)
is Z for i = 0, 3, Z3 for i = 1, 2, and 0 for i > 3.
For K×S1 , when we compute local degrees for the front and back faces we ﬁnd
that the degrees now have the same rather than opposite signs since the map ∆αβ on
these two faces differs not by a reﬂection but by a rotation of the boundary of the cube.
The local degrees for the other faces are the same as before. Using the letters A, B , C
to denote the 2 cells given by the faces orthogonal to the edges a, b, c , respectively,
we have the boundary formulas d3e3 = 2C,
d2A = 2b,
d2B = 0 = d2C . It
follows that H3(K×S1) = 0, H2(K×S1) = Z⊕Z2 , and H1(K×S1) = Z⊕Z⊕Z2 .
Many more examples of a similar nature, quotients of a cube or other polyhedron
with faces identiﬁed in some pattern, could be worked out in similar fashion. But let
us instead turn to some higher-dimensional examples.
Example 2.40: Moore Spaces. Given an abelian group G and an integer n ≥1, we
shall construct a CW complex X such that Hn(X) ≈G and eHi(X) = 0 for i ≠n.
Such a space is called a Moore space, commonly written M(G, n) to indicate the
dependence on G and n.
It is probably best for the deﬁnition of a Moore space
to include the condition that M(G, n) be simply-connected if n > 1. The ones we
construct will have this property.
As an easy special case, when G = Zm we can take X to be Sn with a cell en+1
attached by a map Sn→Sn of degree m. More generally, any ﬁnitely generated G can
be realized by taking wedge sums of examples of this type for ﬁnite cyclic summands
of G, together with copies of Sn for inﬁnite cyclic summands of G.
In the general nonﬁnitely generated case let F→G be a homomorphism of a free
abelian group F onto G, sending a basis for F onto some set of generators of G. The
kernel K of this homomorphism is a subgroup of a free abelian group, hence is itself
free abelian. Choose bases {xα} for F and {yβ} for K , and write yβ =
P
α dβαxα .
Let Xn =
W
α Sn
α , so Hn(Xn) ≈F via Corollary 2.25. We shall obtain X from Xn by
attaching cells en+1
β
via maps fβ : Sn→Xn such that the composition of fβ with the
projection onto the summand Sn
α has degree dβα . Then the cellular boundary map
dn+1 will be the inclusion K > F , hence X will have the desired homology groups.
The construction of fβ generalizes the earlier construction of a map Sn→Sn of
given degree. Let fβ map the complement of
P
α |dβα| disjoint balls in Sn to the
0 cell of Xn , while mapping |dβα| of the balls onto the summand Sn
α by maps of
degree +1 if dβα > 0, or degree −1 in the opposite case.
Example 2.41. By taking a wedge sum of the Moore spaces constructed in the preced-
ing example for varying n we obtain a connected CW complex with any prescribed
sequence of homology groups in dimensions 1, 2, 3, ···.

144
Chapter 2.
Homology
Example 2.42: Real Projective Space RPn . As we saw in Example 0.4, RPn has a
CW structure with one cell ek in each dimension k ≤n, and the attaching map for
ek is the 2 sheeted covering projection ϕ : Sk−1→RPk−1 . Computing the boundary
map dk is the same as computing the degree of the composition Sk−1
ϕ-----→RPk−1
q-----→
RPk−1/RPk−2 = Sk−1 , with q the quotient map. The map qϕ is a homeomorphism
when restricted to each component of Sk−1 −Sk−2 , and these two homeomorphisms
are obtained from each other by pre-composing with the antipodal map of Sk−1 , which
has degree (−1)k . Hence deg qϕ = deg 11 + deg(−11) = 1 + (−1)k , and so dk is either
0 or multiplication by 2 according to whether k is odd or even. Thus the cellular
chain complex for RPn is
0 -→Z
2-----→Z
0-----→···
2-----→Z
0-----→Z
2-----→Z
0-----→Z -→0
if n is even
0 -→Z
0-----→Z
2-----→···
2-----→Z
0-----→Z
2-----→Z
0-----→Z -→0
if n is odd
From this it follows that
Hk(RPn) =



Z
for k = 0 and for k = n odd
Z2
for k odd, 0 < k < n
0
otherwise.
Example 2.43: Lens Spaces. This example is somewhat more complicated. Given an
integer m > 1 and integers ℓ1, ··· , ℓn relatively prime to m, deﬁne the lens space L =
Lm(ℓ1, ··· , ℓn) to be the orbit space S2n−1/Zm of the unit sphere S2n−1 ⊂Cn with the
action of Zm generated by the rotation ρ(z1, ··· , zn) = (e2πiℓ1/mz1, ··· , e2πiℓn/mzn),
rotating the jth C factor of Cn by the angle 2πℓj/m. In particular, when m = 2, ρ
is the antipodal map, so L = RP2n−1 in this case. In the general case, the projection
S2n−1→L is a covering space since the action of Zm on S2n−1 is free: Only the identity
element ﬁxes any point of S2n−1 since each point of S2n−1 has some coordinate zj
nonzero and then e2πikℓj/mzj ≠zj for 0 < k < m, as a result of the assumption that
ℓj is relatively prime to m.
We shall construct a CW structure on L with one cell ek in each dimension k ≤
2n −1 and show that the resulting cellular chain complex is
0 -→Z
0-----→Z
m
------------→Z
0-----→···
0-----→Z
m
------------→Z
0-----→Z -→0
with boundary maps alternately 0 and multiplication by m. Hence
Hk
 Lm(ℓ1, ··· , ℓn)

=



Z
for k = 0, 2n −1
Zm
for k odd, 0 < k < 2n −1
0
otherwise.
To obtain the CW structure, ﬁrst subdivide the unit circle C in the nth C factor
of Cn by taking the points e2πij/m ∈C as vertices, j = 1, ··· , m. Joining the jth
vertex of C to the unit sphere S2n−3 ⊂Cn−1 by arcs of great circles in S2n−1 yields
a (2n −2) dimensional ball B2n−2
j
bounded by S2n−3 . Speciﬁcally, B2n−2
j
consists of
the points cos θ (0, ··· , 0, e2πij/m)+sin θ (z1, ··· , zn−1, 0) for 0 ≤θ ≤π/2. Similarly,

Section 2.2.
Computations and Applications
145
joining the jth edge of C to S2n−3 gives a ball B2n−1
j
bounded by B2n−2
j
and B2n−2
j+1
,
subscripts being taken mod m. The rotation ρ carries S2n−3 to itself and rotates C
by the angle 2πℓn/m, hence ρ permutes the B2n−2
j
’s and the B2n−1
j
’s. A suitable
power of ρ, namely ρr where rℓn ≡1 mod m, takes each B2n−2
j
and B2n−1
j
to the
next one. Since ρr has order m, it is also a generator of the rotation group Zm , and
hence we may obtain L as the quotient of one B2n−1
j
by identifying its two faces B2n−2
j
and B2n−2
j+1
together via ρr .
In particular, when n = 2, B2n−1
j
is a lens-shaped 3 ball and
L is obtained from this ball by identifying its two curved
disk faces via ρr , which may be described as the com-
position of the reﬂection across the plane containing
the rim of the lens, taking one face of the lens to the
other, followed by a rotation of this face through the angle
2πℓ/m where ℓ= rℓ1 . The ﬁgure illustrates the case (m, ℓ) =
(7, 2), with the two dots indicating a typical pair of identiﬁed points in the upper and
lower faces of the lens. Since the lens space L is determined by the rotation angle
2πℓ/m, it is conveniently written Lℓ/m . Clearly only the mod m value of ℓmatters.
It is a classical theorem of Reidemeister from the 1930’s that Lℓ/m is homeomorphic
to Lℓ′/m′ iff m′ = m and ℓ′ ≡±ℓ±1 mod m. For example, when m = 7 there are only
two distinct lens spaces L1/7 and L2/7 . The ‘if’ part of this theorem is easy: Reﬂecting
the lens through a mirror shows that Lℓ/m ≈L−ℓ/m , and by interchanging the roles
of the two C factors of C2 one obtains Lℓ/m ≈Lℓ−1/m . In the converse direction,
Lℓ/m ≈Lℓ′/m′ clearly implies m = m′ since π1(Lℓ/m) ≈Zm . The rest of the theorem
takes considerably more work, however, involving either special 3 dimensional tech-
niques or more algebraic methods which generalize to classify the higher-dimensional
lens spaces as well. The latter approach is explained in [Cohen].
Returning to the construction of a CW structure on Lm(ℓ1, ··· , ℓn), observe that
the (2n −3) dimensional lens space Lm(ℓ1, ··· , ℓn−1) sits in Lm(ℓ1, ··· , ℓn) as the
quotient of S2n−3 , and Lm(ℓ1, ··· , ℓn) is obtained from this subspace by attaching
two cells, of dimensions 2n −2 and 2n −1, coming from the interiors of B2n−1
j
and
its two identiﬁed faces B2n−2
j
and B2n−2
j+1
. Inductively this gives a CW structure on
Lm(ℓ1, ··· , ℓn) with one cell ek in each dimension k ≤2n −1.
The boundary maps in the associated cellular chain complex are computed as
follows.
The ﬁrst one, d2n−1 , is zero since the identiﬁcation of the two faces of
B2n−1
j
is via a reﬂection (degree −1) across B2n−1
j
ﬁxing S2n−3 , followed by a rota-
tion (degree +1), so d2n−1(e2n−1) = e2n−2 −e2n−2 = 0.
The next boundary map
d2n−2 takes e2n−2 to me2n−3 since the attaching map for e2n−2 is the quotient map
S2n−3→Lm(ℓ1, ··· , ℓn−1) and the balls B2n−3
j
in S2n−3 which project down onto e2n−3
are permuted cyclically by the rotation ρ of degree +1. Inductively, the subsequent
boundary maps dk then alternate between 0 and multiplication by m.

146
Chapter 2.
Homology
Also of interest are the inﬁnite-dimensional lens spaces Lm(ℓ1, ℓ2, ···) = S∞/Zm
deﬁned in the same way as in the ﬁnite-dimensional case, starting from a sequence of
integers ℓ1, ℓ2, ··· relatively prime to m. The space Lm(ℓ1, ℓ2, ···) is the union of the
increasing sequence of ﬁnite-dimensional lens spaces Lm(ℓ1, ··· , ℓn) for n = 1, 2, ...,
each of which is a subcomplex of the next in the cell structure we have just con-
structed, so Lm(ℓ1, ℓ2, ···) is also a CW complex. Its cellular chain complex consists
of a Z in each dimension with boundary maps alternately 0 and m, so its reduced
homology consists of a Zm in each odd dimension.
In the terminology of §1.B, the inﬁnite-dimensional lens space Lm(ℓ1, ℓ2, ···) is
an Eilenberg-MacLane space K(Zm, 1) since its universal cover S∞is contractible, as
we showed there. By Theorem 1B.8 the homotopy type of Lm(ℓ1, ℓ2, ···) depends
only on m, and not on the ℓi ’s. This is not true in the ﬁnite-dimensional case, when
two lens spaces Lm(ℓ1, ··· , ℓn) and Lm(ℓ′
1, ··· , ℓ′
n) have the same homotopy type
iff ℓ1 ··· ℓn ≡±knℓ′
1 ··· ℓ′
n mod m for some integer k. A proof of this is outlined
in exercise 2 in §3.E and exercise 45 in §4.1.
For example, the three-dimensional
lens spaces L1/5 and L2/5 are not homotopy equivalent, though they have the same
fundamental group and the same homology groups. On the other hand, L1/7 and L2/7
are homotopy equivalent but not homeomorphic.
Euler Characteristic
For a ﬁnite CW complex X , the Euler characteristic χ(X) is deﬁned to be the
alternating sum
P
n(−1)ncn where cn is the number of n cells of X , generalizing
the familiar formula vertices −edges + faces for 2 dimensional simplicial complexes.
The following result shows that χ(X) can be deﬁned purely in terms of homology, and
hence depends only on the homotopy type of X . In particular, χ(X) is independent
of the choice of CW structure on X .
Theorem 2.44. χ(X) =
P
n(−1)n rank Hn(X).
Here the rank of a ﬁnitely generated abelian group is the number of Z summands
when the group is expressed as a direct sum of cyclic groups.
We shall need the
following fact, whose proof we leave as an exercise: If 0→A→B→C→0 is a short
exact sequence of ﬁnitely generated abelian groups, then rank B = rank A + rank C .
Proof of 2.44: This is purely algebraic. Let
0 -→Ck
dk
------------→Ck−1 -→··· -→C1
d1
------------→C0 -→0
be a chain complex of ﬁnitely generated abelian groups, with cycles Zn = Ker dn ,
boundaries Bn = Im dn+1 , and homology Hn = Zn/Bn . Thus we have short exact
sequences 0→Zn→Cn→Bn−1→0 and 0→Bn→Zn→Hn→0, hence
rank Cn = rank Zn + rank Bn−1
rank Zn = rank Bn + rank Hn

Section 2.2.
Computations and Applications
147
Now substitute the second equation into the ﬁrst, multiply the resulting equation by
(−1)n , and sum over n to get
P
n(−1)n rank Cn =
P
n(−1)n rank Hn . Applying this
with Cn = Hn(Xn, Xn−1) then gives the theorem.
⊔⊓
For example, the surfaces Mg and Ng have Euler characteristics χ(Mg) = 2 −2g
and χ(Ng) = 2 −g. Thus all the orientable surfaces Mg are distinguished from each
other by their Euler characteristics, as are the nonorientable surfaces Ng , and there
are only the relations χ(Mg) = χ(N2g).
Split Exact Sequences
Suppose one has a retraction r : X→A, so ri = 11 where i : A→X is the inclusion.
The induced map i∗: Hn(A)→Hn(X) is then injective since r∗i∗= 11. From this it
follows that the boundary maps in the long exact sequence for (X, A) are zero, so the
long exact sequence breaks up into short exact sequences
0 -→Hn(A)
i∗
------------→Hn(X)
j∗
------------→Hn(X, A) -→0
The relation r∗i∗= 11 actually gives more information than this, by the following
piece of elementary algebra:
Splitting Lemma. For a short exact sequence 0 -→A
i-----→B
j-----→C -→0 of abelian
groups the following statements are equivalent:
(a) There is a homomorphism p : B→A such that pi = 11 : A→A.
(b) There is a homomorphism s : C→B such that js = 11 : C→C .
(c) There is an isomorphism B ≈A⊕C making a commutative diagram
0
−−−−−→
A
−−−−−−−→
B
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
A
C
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
i
C
0
−−−−−−−→
j
⊕
≈
where the maps in the lower row are the obvious ones, a,(a, 0), and (a, c),c .
If these conditions are satisﬁed the exact sequence is said to split. Note that (c)
is symmetric: There is no essential difference between the roles of A and C .
Sketch of Proof: For (a) ⇒(c) one checks that the map B→A⊕C , b ,
 p(b), j(b)

,
is an isomorphism with the desired properties. For (b) ⇒(c) one uses instead the
map A⊕C→B , (a, c) , i(a) + s(c). The opposite implications (c) ⇒(a) and (c) ⇒
(b) are fairly obvious. If one wants to show (b) ⇒(a) directly, one can deﬁne p(b) =
i−1 b −sj(b)

. Further details are left to the reader.
⊔⊓
Except for the implications (b) ⇒(a) and (b) ⇒(c), the proof works equally well
for nonabelian groups. In the nonabelian case, (b) is deﬁnitely weaker than (a) and (c),
and short exact sequences satisfying (b) only determine B as a semi-direct product

148
Chapter 2.
Homology
of A and C . The difﬁculty is that s(C) might not be a normal subgroup of B . In the
nonabelian case one deﬁnes ‘splitting’ to mean that (b) is satisﬁed.
In both the abelian and nonabelian contexts, if C is free then every exact sequence
0→A
i-----→B
j-----→C→0 splits, since one can deﬁne s : C→B by choosing a basis {cα}
for C and letting s(cα) be any element bα ∈B such that j(bα) = cα . The converse
is also true: If every short exact sequence ending in C splits, then C is free. This is
because for every C there is a short exact sequence 0→A→B→C→0 with B free
— choose generators for C and let B have a basis in one-to-one correspondence with
these generators, then let B→C send each basis element to the corresponding gen-
erator — so if this sequence 0→A→B→C→0 splits, C is isomorphic to a subgroup
of a free group, hence is free.
From the Splitting Lemma and the remarks preceding it we deduce that a retrac-
tion r : X→A gives a splitting Hn(X) ≈Hn(A)⊕Hn(X, A). This can be used to show
the nonexistence of such a retraction in some cases, for example in the situation of
the Brouwer ﬁxed point theorem, where a retraction Dn→Sn−1 would give an im-
possible splitting Hn−1(Dn) ≈Hn−1(Sn−1)⊕Hn−1(Dn, Sn−1). For a somewhat more
subtle example, consider the mapping cylinder Mf of a degree m map f : Sn→Sn .
For the inclusion i : Sn > Mf of the domain Sn , the homology long exact sequence
reduces to a short exact sequence
−−−−−−−→Z −−−−−−−−→
m
Z −−−−−−−−→Z −−−−−−→0
0
−−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−→0
0
H (
)
S
n
n
H (
)
Mf
Mf
n
H (
)
S
n
n
m
,
==
==
==
If m > 1 this sequence does not split since Z is not isomorphic to Z⊕Zm , so Sn is
not a retract of Mf . In the simplest case of the degree 2 map S1→S1 , z , z2 , this
says the M¨obius band does not retract onto its boundary circle.
Homology of Groups
In §1.B we constructed for each group G a CW complex K(G, 1) having a con-
tractible universal cover, and we showed that the homotopy type of such a space
K(G, 1) is uniquely determined by G. The homology groups Hn(K(G, 1)) therefore
depend only on G, and are usually denoted simply by Hn(G). The calculations for
lens spaces in Example 2.43 show that Hn(Zm) is Zm for odd n and 0 for even n > 0.
Since S1 is a K(Z, 1) and the torus is a K(Z×Z, 1), we also know the homology of these
two groups. More generally the homology of ﬁnitely-generated abelian groups can be
computed from these examples using the K¨unneth formula in §3.B and the fact that
a product K(G, 1)×K(H, 1) is a K(G×H, 1).
Here is an application of the calculation of Hn(Zm):
Proposition 2.45. If a ﬁnite-dimensional CW complex X is a K(G, 1), then the group
G = π1(X) must be torsionfree.

Section 2.2.
Computations and Applications
149
This applies to quite a few manifolds, for example closed surfaces other than
S2 and RP2 , and also many 3 dimensional manifolds such as complements of knots
in S3 .
Proof: If G had torsion, it would have a ﬁnite cyclic subgroup Zm for some m > 1,
and the covering space of X corresponding to this subgroup of G = π1(X) would be
a K(Zm, 1). Since X is a ﬁnite-dimensional CW complex, the same would be true of its
covering space K(Zm, 1), hence the homology of the K(Zm, 1) would be nonzero in
only ﬁnitely many dimensions. But this contradicts the fact that Hn(Zm) is nonzero
for inﬁnitely many values of n.
⊔⊓
Reﬂecting the richness of group theory, the subject of Homology of Groups is
quite extensive. A good starting place for those wishing to learn more is the textbook
[K.Brown], and at a more advanced level the books [Adem-Milgram] and [Benson 1992]
treat the subject from a mostly topological viewpoint.
Mayer-Vietoris Sequences
In addition to the long exact sequence of homology groups for a pair (X, A), there
is another sort of long exact sequence, known as a Mayer-Vietoris sequence, which
is equally powerful but is sometimes more convenient to use. For a pair of subspaces
A, B ⊂X such that X is the union of the interiors of A and B , this exact sequence
has the form
··· -→Hn(A ∩B)
Φ------------→Hn(A) ⊕Hn(B)
Ψ------------→Hn(X)
∂------------→Hn−1(A ∩B) -→···
··· -→H0(X) -→0
In addition to its usefulness for calculations, the Mayer-Vietoris sequence is also ap-
plied frequently in induction arguments, where one might know that a certain state-
ment is true for A, B , and A∩B by induction, and then deduce that it is true for A∪B
by the exact sequence.
The Mayer-Vietoris sequence is easy to derive from the machinery of §2.1. Let
Cn(A+B) be the subgroup of Cn(X) consisting of chains which are sums of chains in
A and chains in B . The usual boundary map ∂: Cn(X)→Cn−1(X) takes Cn(A + B) to
Cn−1(A+B), so the Cn(A+B)’s form a chain complex. According to Proposition 2.21,
the inclusions Cn(A + B) > Cn(X) induce isomorphisms on homology groups. The
Mayer-Vietoris sequence is then the long exact sequence of homology groups asso-
ciated to the short exact sequence of chain complexes formed by the short exact
sequences
0 -→Cn(A ∩B)
ϕ
------------→Cn(A) ⊕Cn(B)
ψ
------------→Cn(A + B) -→0
where ϕ(x) = (x, −x) and ψ(x, y) = x + y .
The exactness of this short exact
sequence can be checked as follows. First, Ker ϕ = 0 since a chain in A ∩B which

150
Chapter 2.
Homology
is zero as a chain in A (or in B ) must be the zero chain. Next, Im ϕ ⊂Ker ψ since
ψϕ = 0, and Ker ψ ⊂Im ϕ since for a pair (x, y) ∈Cn(A)⊕Cn(B) the condition
x + y = 0 implies x = −y , so x is a chain in both A and B , i.e., x ∈Cn(A ∩B)
and (x, y) = (x, −x) ∈Im ϕ. Finally, exactness at Cn(A + B) is immediate from the
deﬁnition of Cn(A + B).
The boundary map ∂: Hn(X)→Hn−1(A ∩B) can easily be described by recalling
how the boundary map in the long exact sequence of homology groups associated
to a short exact sequence of chain complexes is deﬁned. An element α ∈Hn(X) is
represented by a cycle z, and by barycentric subdivision or some other method we
can choose z to be a sum x + y of chains in A and B , respectively. It need not be
true that x and y are cycles individually, but ∂x = −∂y since ∂(x + y) = 0, and the
element ∂α ∈Hn−1(A ∩B) is represented by the cycle ∂x = −∂y .
There is also a formally identical Mayer-Vietoris sequence for reduced homology
groups, obtained by augmenting the previous short exact sequence of chain complexes
in the obvious way:
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
A
B
C
0
0
0(
)
−−−−−→
0
A
C (
)
0 B
C (
)
∩
⊕
⊕
⊕
0 A
C (
B )
+
ψ
ψ
ϕ
ϕ
ε
ε
ε
ε
−−−−−−−→Z −−−−−−−−→Z
Z −−−−−−−−→Z −−−−−−→0
0
Mayer-Vietoris sequences can be thought of as the homology version of the van
Kampen theorem since if A∩B is path-connected, the H1 terms of the reduced Mayer-
Vietoris sequence yield an isomorphism H1(X) ≈H1(A)⊕H1(B)/ Im Φ. This is exactly
the abelianized statement of the van Kampen theorem, and H1 is the abelianization
of π1 for path-connected spaces, as we show in §2.A.
There are Mayer-Vietoris sequences also for decompositions X = A ∪B such that
A and B are deformation retracts of neighborhoods U and V with U ∩V deformation
retracting onto A∩B . Under these assumptions the ﬁve-lemma implies that the maps
Cn(A + B)→Cn(U + V) induce isomorphisms on homology, hence also the maps
Cn(A+B)→Cn(X), which was all that we needed to obtain a Mayer-Vietoris sequence.
For example if X is a CW complex and A and B are subcomplexes, then we can
choose for U and V neighborhoods of the form Nε(A) and Nε(B) constructed in the
Appendix, which have the property that Nε(A) ∩Nε(B) = Nε(A ∩B).
Example 2.46. Take X = Sn with A and B the northern and southern hemispheres,
so that A ∩B = Sn−1 .
Then in the reduced Mayer-Vietoris sequence the terms
eHi(A)⊕eHi(B) are zero, so we obtain isomorphisms eHi(Sn) ≈eHi−1(Sn−1). This gives
another way of calculating the homology groups of Sn by induction.
Example 2.47. We can decompose the Klein bottle K as the union of two M¨obius
bands A and B glued together by a homeomorphism between their boundary circles.
Then A, B , and A ∩B are homotopy equivalent to circles, so the interesting part of

Section 2.2.
Computations and Applications
151
the reduced Mayer-Vietoris sequence for the decomposition K = A∪B is the segment
0 -→H2(K) -→H1(A ∩B)
Φ-----→H1(A)⊕H1(B) -→H1(K) -→0
The map Φ is Z→Z⊕Z, 1,(2, −2), since the boundary circle of a M¨obius band wraps
twice around the core circle. Since Φ is injective we obtain H2(K) = 0. Furthermore
we have H1(K) ≈Z⊕Z2 since we can choose (1, 0) and (1, −1) as a basis for Z⊕Z. All
the higher homology groups of K are zero from the earlier part of the Mayer-Vietoris
sequence.
Example 2.48. Let us describe an exact sequence which is somewhat similar to the
Mayer-Vietoris sequence and which in some cases generalizes it. If we are given two
maps f , g : X→Y then we can form a quotient space Z of the disjoint union of X×I
and Y via the identiﬁcations (x, 0) ∼f (x) and (x, 1) ∼g(x), thus attaching one
end of X×I to Y by f and the other end by g. For example, if f and g are each the
identity map X→X then Z = X×S1 . If only one of f and g, say f , is the identity
map, then Z is homeomorphic to what is called the mapping torus of g, the quotient
space of X×I under the identiﬁcations (x, 0) ∼(g(x), 1). The Klein bottle is an
example, with g a reﬂection S1→S1 .
The exact sequence we want has the form
(∗)
··· ----→Hn(X)
f∗−g∗
----------------------------→Hn(Y)
i∗---------→Hn(Z) ----→Hn−1(X)
f∗−g∗
----------------------------→Hn−1(Y) ----→···
where i is the evident inclusion Y > Z .
To derive this exact sequence, consider
the map q : (X×I, X×∂I)→(Z, Y) that is the restriction to X×I of the quotient map
X×I ⨿Y→Z . The map q induces a map of long exact sequences:
−−−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
X
I
H
(
)
,
−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−→
Y
Z
H
(
)
,
Y
Hn(
)−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−→
Z
Hn(
)
n 1
+
n 1
+
×
X
H (
n
i
×
−−−→
−−−→
)
X
H (
n
×
X
I
×
∂
∂
∂
I
)
I
∂
∗
i∗
q∗
−−−−−→
q∗
−−−−−→
q∗
...
...
...
...
0
0
In the upper row the middle term is the direct sum of two copies of Hn(X), and the
map i∗is surjective since X×I deformation retracts onto X×{0} and X×{1}. Sur-
jectivity of the maps i∗in the upper row implies that the next maps are 0, which
in turn implies that the maps ∂are injective.
Thus the map ∂in the upper row
gives an isomorphism of Hn+1(X×I, X×∂I) onto the kernel of i∗, which consists of
the pairs (α, −α) for α ∈Hn(X). This kernel is a copy of Hn(X), and the middle
vertical map q∗takes (α, −α) to f∗(α) −g∗(α). The left-hand q∗is an isomor-
phism since these are good pairs and q induces a homeomorphism of quotient spaces
(X×I)/(X×∂I)→Z/Y . Hence if we replace Hn+1(Z, Y) in the lower exact sequence
by the isomorphic group Hn(X) ≈Ker i∗we obtain the long exact sequence we want.
In the case of the mapping torus of a reﬂection g : S1→S1 , with Z a Klein bottle,
the interesting portion of the exact sequence (∗) is

152
Chapter 2.
Homology
Z −−−−−−−−→Z
−−−→
−−−→
−−−−→
−−−→
0
0
=
=
H (
)
S
1
1
H (
)
Z
2
H (
)
S
1
1
−−−→
−−−→
H (
)
S
0
1
H (
)
Z
1
H (
)
S
0
1
2
Z −−−−−−−−→Z
=
=
0
11
∗
- g
−−−−→
11
∗
- g
Thus H2(Z) = 0 and we have a short exact sequence 0→Z2→H1(Z)→Z→0. This
splits since Z is free, so H1(Z) = Z2⊕Z. Other examples are given in the exercises.
If Y is the disjoint union of spaces Y1 and Y2 , with f : X→Y1 and g : X→Y2 , then
Z is the union of the mapping cylinders of these two maps. For example, suppose we
have a CW complex decomposed as the union of two subcomplexes A and B and we
take f and g to be the inclusions A∩B>A and A∩B>B . Then the double mapping
cylinder Z is homotopy equivalent to A ∪B since we can view Z as (A ∩B)×I with
A and B attached at the two ends, and then slide the attaching of A down to the B
end to produce A∪B with (A∩B)×I attached at one of its ends. By Proposition 0.18
the sliding operation preserves homotopy type, so we obtain a homotopy equivalence
Z ≃A ∪B . The exact sequence (∗) in this case is the Mayer-Vietoris sequence.
A relative form of the Mayer-Vietoris sequence is sometimes useful. If one has a
pair of spaces (X, Y) = (A ∪B, C ∪D) with C ⊂A and D ⊂B , such that X is the
union of the interiors of A and B , and Y is the union of the interiors of C and D,
then there is a relative Mayer-Vietoris sequence
··· -→Hn(A ∩B, C ∩D)
Φ------------→Hn(A, C) ⊕Hn(B, D)
Ψ------------→Hn(X, Y)
∂------------→···
To derive this, consider the commutative diagram
−−→
−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
C
D
C
0
(
)
−−→
0
C
C (
)
D
C (
)
∩
⊕
C
C (
D)
+
ψ
ϕ
−−→
−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
A
B
C
0
(
)
−−→
0
A
C (
)
B
C (
)
∩
⊕
A
C (
B )
+
ψ
ϕ
−−→
−−→
−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−→
−−→
A
B
C
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
(
)
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
0
A
C (
)
B
C (
)
∩
C
D
∩
⊕
A
C (
B
)
+
C
D
+
ψ
ϕ
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
,
C
,
D
,
,
where Cn(A + B, C + D) is the quotient of the subgroup Cn(A + B) ⊂Cn(X) by its
subgroup Cn(C + D) ⊂Cn(Y). Thus the three columns of the diagram are exact.
We have seen that the ﬁrst two rows are exact, and we claim that the third row is
exact also, with the maps ϕ and ψ induced from the ϕ and ψ in the second row.
Since ψϕ = 0 in the second row, this holds also in the third row, so the third row
is at least a chain complex. Viewing the three rows as chain complexes, the diagram
then represents a short exact sequence of chain complexes. The associated long exact
sequence of homology groups has two out of every three terms zero since the ﬁrst
two rows of the diagram are exact. Hence the remaining homology groups are zero
too, and the third row is exact.

Section 2.2.
Computations and Applications
153
The third column maps to 0→Cn(Y)→Cn(X)→Cn(X, Y)→0, inducing maps
of homology groups which are isomorphisms for the X and Y terms as we have
seen above. So by the ﬁve-lemma the maps Cn(A + B, C + D)→Cn(X, Y) also induce
isomorphisms on homology. The relative Mayer-Vietoris sequence is then the long
exact sequence of homology groups associated to the short exact sequence of chain
complexes given by the third row of the diagram.
Homology with Coefﬁcients
There is an easy generalization of the homology theory we have considered so
far which behaves in a very similar fashion and sometimes offers technical advan-
tages. The generalization is deﬁned using chains of the form
P
i niσi where each
σi is a singular n simplex in X as before, but now the coefﬁcients ni are taken
to lie in a ﬁxed abelian group G rather than Z.
Such n chains form an abelian
group Cn(X; G), and in the relative case one deﬁnes Cn(X, A; G) = Cn(X; G)/Cn(A; G).
The old formula for the boundary maps ∂can still be used for arbitrary G, namely
∂
 P
i niσi

=
P
i,j(−1)jniσi ||[v0, ··· , bvj, ··· , vn], and ∂2 = 0 by the same calcula-
tion.
So the groups Cn(X; G) and Cn(X, A; G) form chain complexes, whose ho-
mology groups Hn(X; G) and Hn(X, A; G) are called homology groups with coef-
ﬁcients in G. Reduced groups eHn(X; G) are deﬁned via the augmented chain complex
··· -→C0(X; G)
ε-----→G -→0 with ε again deﬁned by summing coefﬁcients.
The case G = Z2 is particularly simple since one is just considering sums of sin-
gular simplices with coefﬁcients 0 or 1, so by discarding terms with coefﬁcient 0
one can think of chains as just ﬁnite ‘unions’ of singular simplices. The boundary
formulas also simplify since one no longer has to worry about signs. Since signs are
an algebraic representation of orientation considerations, one can also ignore orienta-
tions, so homology with Z2 coefﬁcients is often the most natural tool in the absence
of orientability.
All the theory we developed in §2.1 for Z coefﬁcients carries over directly to gen-
eral coefﬁcient groups G, with no change in the proofs. The equivalence of simplicial
and singular homology with G coefﬁcients also carries over without complication.
The same is true for Mayer-Vietoris sequences.
Differences between Hn(X; G) and Hn(X) begin to appear only when one starts
making calculations. In the simplest case that X is a point, the method used for G = Z
shows that Hn(X; G) is G for n = 0 and 0 for n > 0. From this it follows just as for
G = Z that eHn(Sk; G) is G for n = k and 0 otherwise.
Cellular homology also generalizes to homology with coefﬁcients, with the cellu-
lar chain group Hn(Xn, Xn−1) replaced by Hn(Xn, Xn−1; G) which is a direct sum of
G’s, one for each n cell. The proof that the cellular homology groups HCW
n
(X) agree
with singular homology Hn(X) extends immediately to give HCW
n
(X; G) ≈Hn(X; G).
The cellular boundary maps are given by the same formula as for Z coefﬁcients,

154
Chapter 2.
Homology
dn(
P
α nαen
α) =
P
α,β dαβnαen−1
β
where dαβ is the degree of a map ∆αβ : Sn−1→Sn−1 .
This follows from:
Lemma 2.49. If f : Sk→Sk has degree m, then f∗: Hk(Sk; G)→Hk(Sk; G) is multi-
plication by m.
Proof: As a preliminary observation, note that a homomorphism ϕ : G1→G2 induces
maps ϕ♯: Cn(X, A; G1)→Cn(X, A; G2) commuting with boundary maps, so there are
induced homomorphisms ϕ∗: Hn(X, A; G1)→Hn(X, A; G2). These have various nat-
urality properties. For example, they give a commutative diagram mapping the long
exact sequence of homology for the pair (X, A) with G1 coefﬁcients to the correspond-
ing sequence with G2 coefﬁcients. Also, the maps ϕ∗commute with homomorphisms
f∗induced by maps f : (X, A)→(Y, B).
Now let f : Sk→Sk have degree m and let ϕ : Z→G take 1 to a given element
g ∈G.
Then we have a commutative
diagram as at the right, where commu-
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
k S
H (
)
f∗
∗
f∗
∼
k
≈
−−−−−−→
k S
G
G
H (
)
∼
k
≈
≈
≈
ϕ
ϕ
∗
ϕ
;
;
Z
−−−−−→
k S
H (
)
∼
k
k S
G
H (
)
∼
k
;
;
Z
Z
−−−−−→
G
ϕ
Z
tativity of the outer two squares comes
from the inductive calculation of these
homology groups, reducing to the case k = 0 when the commutativity is obvious.
Since the diagram commutes, the assumption that the map across the top takes
1 to m implies that the map across the bottom takes g to mg.
⊔⊓
Example 2.50. It is instructive to see what happens for RPn when the coefﬁcient
group G is chosen to be a ﬁeld F . The cellular chain complex is
···
0-----→F
2-----→F
0-----→F
2-----→F
0-----→F -→0
Hence if F has characteristic 2, for example if F = Z2 , then Hk(RPn; F) ≈F for
0 ≤k ≤n, a more uniform answer than with Z coefﬁcients. On the other hand if F has
characteristic different from 2, then the boundary maps F
2-----→F are isomorphisms,
hence Hk(RPn; F) is F for k = 0 and for k = n odd, and is zero otherwise.
In §3.A we will see that there is a general algebraic formula expressing homology
with arbitrary coefﬁcients in terms of homology with Z coefﬁcients. Some easy special
cases which give much of the ﬂavor of the general result are included in the exercises.
In spite of the fact that homology with Z coefﬁcients determines homology with
other coefﬁcient groups, there are many situations where homology with a suitably
chosen coefﬁcient group can provide more information than homology with Z coef-
ﬁcients. A good example of this is the proof of the Borsuk-Ulam theorem using Z2
coefﬁcients in §2.B.
As another illustration, we will now give an example of a map f : X→Y which
induces trivial maps f∗on homology with Z coefﬁcients but not on homology with
Zm coefﬁcients for suitably chosen m. Thus homology with Zm coefﬁcients tells us

Section 2.2.
Computations and Applications
155
that f is not homotopic to a constant map, which we would not know using only Z
coefﬁcients.
Example 2.51. Let X be a Moore space M(Zm, n), obtained from Sn by attaching
a cell en+1 by a map of degree m. The quotient map f : X→X/Sn = Sn+1 induces
trivial homomorphisms on reduced homology with Z coefﬁcients since the nonzero
reduced homology groups of X and Sn+1 occur in different dimensions. But with Zm
coefﬁcients the story is different, as we can see by considering the long exact sequence
of the pair (X, Sn), which contains the segment
0 = eHn+1(Sn; Zm) -→eHn+1(X; Zm)
f∗-----→eHn+1(X/Sn; Zm)
Exactness says that f∗is injective, hence nonzero since eHn+1(X; Zm) is Zm , the cel-
lular boundary map Hn+1(Xn+1, Xn; Zm)→Hn(Xn, Xn−1; Zm) being Zm
m-----→Zm .
Exercises
1. Prove the Brouwer ﬁxed point theorem for maps f : Dn→Dn by applying degree
theory to the map Sn→Sn which sends both the northern and southern hemispheres
of Sn to the southern hemisphere via f . [This was Brouwer’s original proof.]
2. Given a map f : S2n→S2n , show that there is some point x ∈S2n with either
f(x) = x or f (x) = −x . Deduce that every map RP2n→RP2n has a ﬁxed point. Con-
struct maps RP2n−1→RP2n−1 without ﬁxed points, e.g., from linear transformations
R2n→R2n without eigenvectors.
3. Let f : Sn→Sn be a map of degree zero. Show that there exist points x, y ∈Sn
with f (x) = x and f (y) = −y . Use this to show that if F is a continuous vector
ﬁeld deﬁned on the unit ball Dn in Rn such that F(x) ≠0 for all x , then there exists
a point on ∂Dn where F points radially outward and another point on ∂Dn where F
points radially inward.
4. Construct a surjective map Sn→Sn of degree zero, for each n ≥1.
5. Show that any two reﬂections of Sn across different hyperplanes are homotopic,
in fact homotopic through reﬂections. [The linear algebra formula for a reﬂection, in
terms of inner products, may be helpful.]
6. Show that every map Sn→Sn can be homotoped to have a ﬁxed point if n > 0.
7. For an invertible linear transformation f : Rn→Rn show that the induced map
on Hn(Rn, Rn −{0}) ≈eHn−1(Rn −{0}) ≈Z is 11 or −11 according to whether the
determinant of f is positive or negative. [Use Gaussian elimination to show that the
matrix of f can be joined by a path of invertible matrices to a diagonal matrix with
±1’s on the diagonal.]
8. A polynomial f (z) with complex coefﬁcients, viewed as a map C→C, can always
be extended to a continuous map of one-point compactiﬁcations bf : S2→S2 . Show

156
Chapter 2.
Homology
that the degree of bf equals the degree of f as a polynomial. Show also that the local
degree of bf at a root of f is the multiplicity of the root.
9. Compute the homology groups of the following 2 complexes: (a) The quotient of
S2 obtained by identifying north and south poles to a point. (b) S1×(S1 ∨S1). (c) The
space obtained from a disk D2 with the interiors of two disjoint subdisks deleted by
identifying all three resulting boundary circles together via homeomorphisms preserv-
ing clockwise orientations of these circles. (d) The quotient space of S1×S1 obtained
by identifying points in the circle S1×{x0} which differ by 2π/m rotation and also
identifying points in the circle {x0}×S1 which differ by 2π/n rotation.
10. Let X be the quotient space of S2 under the identiﬁcations x ∼−x for x in the
equator S1 . Compute the homology groups Hi(X). Do the same for S3 with antipodal
points of the equatorial S2 ⊂S3 identiﬁed.
11. In an exercise for §1.2 we described a 3 dimensional CW complex obtained from
the cube I3 by identifying opposite faces via a one-quarter twist. Compute the ho-
mology groups of this complex.
12. Show that the quotient map S1×S1→S2 collapsing the subspace S1 ∨S1 to a
point is not nullhomotopic by showing that it induces an isomorphism on H2 . On the
other hand, show via covering spaces that any map S2→S1×S1 is nullhomotopic.
13. Let X be the 2 complex obtained from S1 with its usual cell structure by attaching
two 2 cells by maps of degrees 2 and 3, respectively.
(a) Compute the homology groups of all the subcomplexes A ⊂X and the corre-
sponding quotient complexes X/A.
(b) Show that X ≃S2 , and that the only subcomplex A ⊂X with X/A ≃S2 is the
trivial subcomplex consisting of the 0-cell alone.
14. Show that a map f : Sn→Sn which satisﬁes f (x) = f (−x) for all x (such an f
is called an even function) must have even degree. Show that the degree must in fact
be zero when n is even. When n is odd, show there are even maps of any given even
degree. [Hints: Since f is even, it factors as a composition Sn→RPn→Sn . Using the
calculation of Hn(RPn) in the text, show that the induced map Hn(Sn)→Hn(RPn)
sends a generator to twice a generator when n is odd. It may be helpful to show that
the quotient map RPn→RPn/RPn−1 induces an isomorphism on Hn when n is odd.]
15. Show that if X is a CW complex then Hn(Xn) is free by identifying it with the
kernel of the cellular boundary map Hn(Xn, Xn−1)→Hn−1(Xn−1, Xn−2).
16. Consider ∆n = [v0, ··· , vn] with its natural ∆complex structure with k simplices
[vi0, ··· , vik] for i0 < ··· < ik . Compute the ranks of the simplicial (or cellular) chain
groups ∆i(∆n) and the subgroups of cycles and boundaries. [Hint: Pascal’s triangle.]
Apply this, using also the previous problem, to show that the k skeleton of ∆n has
homology groups eHi
 (∆n)k
equal to 0 for i < k, and free of rank

n
k+1

for i = k.

Section 2.2.
Computations and Applications
157
17. Show the isomorphism between cellular and singular homology is natural in the
following sense: A cellular map f : X→Y , i.e., one satisfying f (Xn) ⊂Y n for all n,
induces chain maps f∗between the cellular chain complexes of X and Y , hence also
f∗: HCW
n
(X)→HCW
n
(Y), and the latter map corresponds to f∗: Hn(X)→Hn(Y) under
the isomorphism HCW
n
≈Hn .
18. For a CW pair (X, A) show there is a relative cellular chain complex formed by
the groups Hi(Xi, Xi−1 ∪Ai), having homology groups isomorphic to Hn(X, A).
19. Compute Hi(RPn/RPm) for m < n by cellular homology, using the standard CW
structure on RPn with RPm as its m skeleton.
20. For ﬁnite CW complexes X and Y , show that χ(X×Y) = χ(X)χ(Y).
21.
If a ﬁnite CW complex X is the union of subcomplexes A and B , show that
χ(X) = χ(A) + χ(B) −χ(A ∩B).
22. For X a ﬁnite CW complex and p : eX→X an n sheeted covering space, show that
χ( eX) = nχ(X).
23. Show that if Mg , the closed orientable surface of genus g, is a covering space
of Mh then g = n(h −1) + 1 for some n, namely, n is the number of sheets in
the covering. [Conversely, if g = n(h −1) + 1 then there is an n sheeted covering
Mg→Mh , as we saw in Example 1.41.]
24. Suppose we build S2 from a ﬁnite collection of polygons by identifying edges
in pairs.
Show that in the resulting CW structure on
S2 the 1 skeleton cannot be either of the two graphs
shown, with ﬁve and six vertices. [This is one step in a
proof that neither of these graphs embeds in R2 .]
25. Show that for each n ∈Z there is a unique function ϕ assigning an integer to
each ﬁnite CW complex, such that (a) ϕ(X) = ϕ(Y) if X and Y are homeomorphic,
(b) ϕ(X) = ϕ(A) + ϕ(X/A) if A is a subcomplex of X , and (c) ϕ(S0) = n. For such
a function ϕ show that ϕ(X) = ϕ(Y) if X ≃Y .
26. For a pair (X, A), consider the space X ∪CA obtained from X by attaching a cone
on A.
(a) Show that X is a retract of X ∪CA iff A is contractible in X , i.e., there is a
homotopy ft : A→X with f0 the inclusion A > X and f1 a constant map.
(b) Show that if A is contractible in X then Hn(X, A) ≈eHn(X)⊕eHn−1(A). [Hint:
(X ∪CA)/X = SA, the suspension of A.]
27. The short exact sequences 0→Cn(A)→Cn(X)→Cn(X, A)→0 always split, but
why does this not always yield splittings Hn(X) ≈Hn(A)⊕Hn(X, A)?
28. Use the Mayer-Vietoris sequence to compute the homology groups of:
(a) The space obtained from a torus S1×S1 by attaching a M¨obius band via a homeo-
morphism from the boundary circle of the M¨obius band to the circle S1×{x0} in
the torus.

158
Chapter 2.
Homology
(b) The space obtained by attaching a M¨obius band to RP2 via a homeomorphism of
its boundary circle to the standard RP1 ⊂RP2 .
29. The surface Mg of genus g, embedded in R3 in the standard way, bounds a
compact region R. Two copies of R, glued together by the identity map between their
boundary surfaces Mg , form a closed 3-manifold X . Compute the homology groups
of X via the Mayer-Vietoris sequence for this decomposition of X into two copies of
R. Also compute the relative groups Hi(R, Mg).
30. For the mapping torus Tf of a map f : X→X , we constructed in Example 2.48 a
long exact sequence ··· -→Hn(X)
1−f∗
---------------------→Hn(X) -→Hn(Tf ) -→Hn−1(X) -→···. Use
this to compute the homology of the mapping tori of the following maps:
(a) A reﬂection S2→S2 .
(b) A map S2→S2 of degree 2.
(c) The map S1×S1→S1×S1 which is the identity on one factor and a reﬂection on
the other.
(d) The map S1×S1→S1×S1 which is a reﬂection on each factor.
(e) The map S1×S1→S1×S1 which interchanges the two factors and then reﬂects
one of the factors.
31. Use the Mayer-Vietoris sequence to show there are isomorphisms eHn(X ∨Y) ≈
eHn(X)⊕eHn(Y) if the basepoints of X and Y which are identiﬁed in X ∨Y are defor-
mation retracts of neighborhoods U ⊂X and V ⊂Y .
32. For SX the suspension of X , show by a Mayer-Vietoris sequence that there are
isomorphisms eHn(SX) ≈eHn−1(X) for all n.
33. Suppose the space X is the union of open sets A1, ··· , An such that each inter-
section Ai1 ∩··· ∩Aik is either empty or has trivial reduced homology groups. Show
that eHi(X) = 0 for i ≥n −1, and give an example showing this inequality is best
possible, for each n.
34. Derive the long exact sequence of a pair (X, A) from the Mayer-Vietoris sequence
applied to X ∪CA, where CA is the cone on A.
[We showed after the proof of
Proposition 2.22 that Hn(X, A) ≈eHn(X ∪CA) for all n.]
35.
Use the Mayer-Vietoris sequence to show that a nonorientable closed surface,
or more generally a ﬁnite simplicial complex X for which H1(X) contains torsion,
cannot be embedded as a subspace of R3 in such a way as to have a neighborhood
homeomorphic to the mapping cylinder of some map from a closed orientable surface
to X . [This assumption on a neighborhood is in fact not needed if one deduces the
result from Alexander duality in §3.3.]
36.
Show that Hi(X×Sn) ≈Hi(X)⊕Hi−n(X) for all i and n, where Hi = 0 for
i < 0 by deﬁnition. Namely, show Hi(X×Sn) ≈Hi(X) ⊕Hi(X×Sn, X×{x0}) and
Hi(X×Sn, X×{x0}) ≈Hi−1(X×Sn−1, X×{x0}). [For the latter isomorphism the rela-
tive Mayer-Vietoris sequence yields an easy proof.]

Section 2.2.
Computations and Applications
159
37. Give an elementary derivation for the Mayer-Vietoris sequence in simplicial ho-
mology for a ∆complex X decomposed as the union of subcomplexes A and B .
38. Show that a commutative diagram
A
A
B
−−−−→
C
−−−−→
D
−−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−→
E
−−−−→
n
n
n
B
−−−→
D
−−−→
n
n
−
−
−
−
→
−
−
−
−
→
−
−
−
−
→
−
−
−
−
→
−−−−→
C
−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−→
E
−−−→
n 1
+
n 1
+
-
n 1
-
n 1
-
n 1
...
...
...
...
with the two sequences across the top and bottom exact, gives rise to an exact se-
quence ··· -→En+1 -→Bn -→Cn⊕Dn -→En -→Bn−1 -→··· where the maps
are obtained from those in the previous diagram in the obvious way, except that
Bn→Cn⊕Dn has a minus sign in one coordinate.
39. Use the preceding exercise to derive relative Mayer-Vietoris sequences for CW
pairs (X, Y) = (A ∪B, C ∪D) with A = B or C = D.
40. From the long exact sequence of homology groups associated to the short ex-
act sequence of chain complexes 0 -→Ci(X)
n-----→Ci(X) -→Ci(X; Zn) -→0 deduce
immediately that there are short exact sequences
0 -→Hi(X)/nHi(X) -→Hi(X; Zn) -→n-Torsion(Hi−1(X)) -→0
where n-Torsion(G) is the kernel of the map G
n-----→G, g, ng. Use this to show that
eHi(X; Zp) = 0 for all i and all primes p iff eHi(X) is a vector space over Q for all i.
41. For X a ﬁnite CW complex and F a ﬁeld, show that the Euler characteristic χ(X)
can also be computed by the formula χ(X) =
P
n(−1)n dim Hn(X; F), the alternating
sum of the dimensions of the vector spaces Hn(X; F).
42. Let X be a ﬁnite connected graph having no vertex which is the endpoint of just
one edge, and suppose that H1(X; Z) is free abelian of rank n > 1, so the group of
automorphisms of H1(X; Z) is GLn(Z), the group of invertible n×n matrices with
integer entries whose inverse matrix also has integer entries. Show that if G is a ﬁnite
group of homeomorphisms of X , then the homomorphism G→GLn(Z) assigning to
g : X→X the induced homomorphism g∗: H1(X; Z)→H1(X; Z) is injective. Show the
same result holds if the coefﬁcient group Z is replaced by Zm with m > 2. What goes
wrong when m = 2?
43. Show that a chain complex of ﬁnitely generated free abelian groups splits as the
direct sum of subcomplexes with only one or two nonzero terms, of the form
··· -→0 -→Z -→0 -→···
or
··· -→0 -→Z
m-----→Z -→0 -→···
Use this result to deduce that if X is a CW complex with ﬁnitely many cells in each
dimension, then Hi(X; G) is the direct sum of the following groups:
(a) a copy of G for each Z summand of Hi(X)
(b) a copy of G/mG for each Zm summand of Hi(X)
(c) a copy of the kernel of G
m-----→G for each Zm summand of Hi−1(X).

160
Chapter 2.
Homology
Sometimes it is good to step back from the forest of details and look for gen-
eral patterns. In this rather brief section we will ﬁrst describe the general pattern of
homology by axioms, then we will look at some common formal features shared by
many of the constructions we have made.
Axioms for Homology
For simplicity let us restrict attention to CW complexes and focus on reduced
homology to avoid mentioning relative homology. Then a (reduced) homology the-
ory assigns to each nonempty CW complex X a sequence of abelian groups ehn(X)
and to each map f : X→Y between CW complexes a sequence of homomorphisms
f∗: ehn(X)→ehn(Y) such that (f g)∗= f∗g∗and 11∗= 11, and so that the following
three axioms are satisﬁed.
(1) If f ≃g : X→Y , then f∗= g∗: ehn(X)→ehn(Y).
(2) There are boundary homomorphisms ∂: ehn(X/A)→ehn−1(A) deﬁned for each CW
pair (X, A), ﬁtting into an exact sequence
···
∂------------→ehn(A)
i∗
------------→ehn(X)
q∗
------------→ehn(X/A)
∂------------→ehn−1(A)
i∗
------------→···
where i is the inclusion and q is the quotient map. Furthermore the boundary
maps are natural: For f : (X, A)→(Y, B) inducing a quotient map f : X/A→Y/B ,
there are commutative diagrams
Y/
X/
-
n 1
-
n 1
∂
∂
A
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
h n(
) −−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
B
h n
A
h
(
)
B
h
(
)
(
)
f∗
f∗
∼
∼
∼
∼
−
(3) For a wedge sum X =
W
α Xα with inclusions iα : Xα > X , the direct sum map
L
α iα∗:
L
α ehn(Xα)→ehn(X) is an isomorphism for each n.
Negative values for the subscripts n are permitted. Ordinary singular homology is
zero in negative dimensions by deﬁnition, but interesting homology theories with
nontrivial groups in negative dimensions do exist.
The third axiom may seem less substantial than the ﬁrst two, and indeed for ﬁnite
wedge sums it can be deduced from the ﬁrst two axioms, though not in general for
inﬁnite wedge sums, as an example in the exercises shows.
It is also possible, and not much more difﬁcult, to give axioms for unreduced ho-
mology theories. One supposes one has relative groups hn(X, A) deﬁned, specializing
to absolute groups by setting hn(X) = hn(X, ∅). Axiom (1) is replaced by its obvi-
ous relative form, and the axiom (2) is broken into two parts, the ﬁrst hypothesizing

Section 2.3.
The Formal Viewpoint
161
a long exact sequence involving these relative groups, with natural boundary maps,
the second stating some version of excision, for example hn(X, A) ≈hn(X/A, A/A)
if one is dealing with CW pairs. In axiom (3) the wedge sum is replaced by disjoint
union.
These axioms for unreduced homology are essentially the same as those origi-
nally laid out in the highly inﬂuential book [Eilenberg-Steenrod], except that axiom
(3) was omitted since the focus there was on ﬁnite complexes, and there was another
axiom specifying that the groups hn(point) are zero for n ≠0, as is true for singular
homology. This axiom was called the ‘dimension axiom,’ presumably because it spec-
iﬁes that a point has nontrivial homology only in dimension zero. It can be regarded
as a normalization axiom, since one can trivially deﬁne a homology theory where it
fails by setting hn(X, A) = Hn+k(X, A) for a ﬁxed nonzero integer k. At the time
there were no interesting homology theories known for which the dimension axiom
did not hold, though only a short time afterwards a homology theory called ‘bordism’
was deﬁned having the property that the bordism groups of a point are nonzero in
inﬁnitely many dimensions. Axiom (3) seems to have appeared ﬁrst in [Milnor 62].
Reduced and unreduced homology theories are essentially equivalent. From an
unreduced theory h one gets a reduced theory eh by setting ehn(X) equal to the
kernel of the canonical map hn(X)→hn(point).
In the other direction, one sets
hn(X) = ehn(X+) where X+ is the disjoint union of X with a point.
We leave it
as an exercise to show that these two transformations between reduced and unre-
duced homology are inverses of each other. Just as with ordinary homology, one has
hn(X) ≈ehn(X)⊕hn(x0) for any point x0 ∈X , since the long exact sequence of the
pair (X, x0) splits via a retraction X→x0 . Note that ehn(x0) = 0 for all n, as can be
seen by looking at the long exact sequence of reduced homology groups of the pair
(x0, x0).
The groups hn(x0) ≈ehn(S0) are called the coefﬁcients of the homology theo-
ries h and eh, in analogy with the case of singular homology with coefﬁcients. One
can trivially realize any sequence of abelian groups Gi as the coefﬁcient groups of a
homology theory by setting hn(X, A) =
L
i Hn−i(X, A; Gi).
In general, homology theories are not uniquely determined by their coefﬁcient
groups, but this is true for singular homology: If h is a homology theory deﬁned
for CW pairs, whose coefﬁcient groups hn(x0) are zero for n ≠0, then there are
natural isomorphisms hn(X, A) ≈Hn(X, A; G) for all CW pairs (X, A) and all n,
where G = h0(x0). This will be proved in Theorem 4.58.
We have seen how Mayer-Vietoris sequences are quite useful for singular homol-
ogy, and in fact every homology theory has Mayer-Vietoris sequences, at least for CW
complexes.
These sequences can be obtained directly from the axioms in the fol-
lowing way. For a CW complex X = A ∪B with A and B subcomplexes, consider

162
Chapter 2.
Homology
the commutative diagram consisting of the exact sequences of the pairs (X, A) and
(B, A ∩B)
n
n
...
...
...
...
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−→
B A
B
h
(
)
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
B
h n
n
(
)
h (
)
,
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
h
(
)
X
h n
n
h (
)
h (
)
(
)
A
h (
)
≈
≈
∩
B A
B
,
∩
A
B
∩
n 1
+
n 1
+
A
X,
A
X,
The vertical maps are induced by inclusions, and the vertical maps between relative
groups are isomorphisms since B/(A ∩B) = X/A. Then it is a purely algebraic fact,
whose proof is exercise 38 at the end of the previous section, that a diagram such as
this with every third vertical map an isomorphism gives rise to an exact sequence
··· -→hn(A ∩B)
ϕ-----→hn(A) ⊕hn(B)
ψ-----→hn(X)
∂-----→hn−1(A ∩B) -→···
Categories and Functors
Formally, singular homology can be regarded as a sequence of functions Hn which
assign to each space X an abelian group Hn(X) and to each map f : X→Y a homo-
morphism Hn(f ) = f∗: Hn(X)→Hn(Y), and similarly for relative homology groups.
This sort of situation arises quite often, and not just in algebraic topology, so it is
useful to introduce some general terminology for it. Roughly speaking, ‘functions’
like Hn are called ‘functors,’ and the domains and ranges of these functors are called
‘categories.’ Thus for Hn , the domain category consists of topological spaces and con-
tinuous maps, or in the relative case, pairs of spaces and continuous maps of pairs,
and the range category consists of abelian groups and homomorphisms. A key point
is that one is interested not only in the objects in the category, e.g., spaces or groups,
but also in the maps, or ‘morphisms,’ between these objects.
Now for the precise deﬁnitions. A category C consists of:
(1) a collection Ob(C) of objects.
(2) sets Mor(X, Y) of morphisms for each pair X, Y ∈Ob(C), including a distin-
guished ‘identity’ morphism 11 = 11X ∈Mor(X, X) for each X .
(3) a ‘composition of morphisms’ function ◦: Mor(X, Y)×Mor(Y, Z)→Mor(X, Z) for
each triple X, Y, Z ∈Ob(C), satisfying f ◦11 = f , 11◦f = f , and (f ◦g)◦h =
f ◦(g ◦h).
There are plenty of obvious examples, such as:
— The category of topological spaces, with continuous maps as the morphisms. Or
we could restrict to special classes of spaces such as CW complexes, keeping
continuous maps as the morphisms. We could also restrict the morphisms, e.g.,
the category of topological spaces with homeomorphisms as the morphisms.
— The category of groups, with homomorphisms as morphisms. Or the subcategory
of abelian groups, again with homomorphisms as the morphisms. Generalizing

Section 2.3.
The Formal Viewpoint
163
this is the category of modules over a ﬁxed ring, with morphisms the module
homomorphisms.
— The category of sets, with arbitrary functions as the morphisms. Or the mor-
phisms could be restricted, e.g., to injections, or to surjections.
There are also many examples of categories where the morphisms are not simply
functions, for example:
— Any group G can be viewed as a category with only one object and with G as the
morphisms of this object, so that condition (3) reduces to two of the three axioms
for a group. If we require only these two axioms, associativity and a left and right
identity, we have a ‘group without inverses,’ usually called a monoid since it is
the same thing as a category with one object.
— A partially ordered set (X, ≤) can be considered a category where the objects are
the elements of X and there is a unique morphism from x to y whenever x ≤y .
The relation x ≤x gives the morphism 11 and transitivity gives the composition
Mor(x, y)×Mor(y, z)→Mor(x, z). The condition that x ≤y and y ≤x ⇒x =
y then says that Mor(x, y)∪Mor(y, x) contains at most one element for all pairs
x, y ∈X , i.e., there is at most one morphism between any two objects.
— There is a ‘homotopy category’ whose objects are topological spaces and whose
morphisms are homotopy classes of maps, rather than actual maps. This uses
the fact that composition is well-deﬁned on homotopy classes: f0g0 ≃f1g1 if
f0 ≃f1 and g0 ≃g1 .
— Chain complexes are the objects of a category, with chain maps as morphisms.
This category has various interesting subcategories, obtained by restricting the
objects. For example, we could take chain complexes whose groups are zero in
negative dimensions, or zero outside some ﬁnite range. Or we could restrict to
exact sequences, or short exact sequences. In each case we take morphisms to be
chain maps, i.e., commutative diagrams. Going a step further, there is a category
whose objects are short exact sequences of chain complexes and whose mor-
phisms are commutative diagrams of maps between such short exact sequences.
A functor F from a category C to a category D assigns to each object X in C
an object F(X) in D and to each morphism f ∈Mor(X, Y) a morphism F(f ) ∈
Mor
 F(X), F(Y)

, such that F(11) = 11 and F(f ◦g) = F(f )◦F(g).
In the case of
the functor Hn the latter two conditions are the familiar properties 11∗= 11 and
(fg)∗= f∗g∗of induced maps. Strictly speaking, what we have just deﬁned is a
covariant functor. A contravariant functor would differ from this by assigning to
f ∈Mor(X, Y) a ‘backwards’ morphism F(f ) ∈Mor
 F(Y), F(X)

with F(11) = 11 and
F(f ◦g) = F(g)◦F(f ). A classical example of this is the dual vector space functor,
which assigns to a vector space V over a ﬁxed scalar ﬁeld K the dual vector space
F(V) = V ∗of linear maps V→K , and to each linear transformation f : V→W the

164
Chapter 2.
Homology
dual map F(f ) = f ∗: W ∗→V ∗, in the reverse direction. In the next chapter we will
study the contravariant version of homology, called cohomology.
A number of the constructions we have studied in this chapter are functors:
— The singular chain complex functor assigns to a space X the chain complex of
singular chains in X and to a map f : X→Y the induced chain map.
This is
a functor from the category of spaces and continuous maps to the category of
chain complexes and chain maps.
— The algebraic homology functor assigns to a chain complex its sequence of ho-
mology groups and to a chain map the induced homomorphisms on homology
deﬁnes a functor from the category of chain complexes and chain maps to the
category whose objects are sequences of abelian groups and whose morphisms
are sequences of homomorphisms.
— The composition of the two preceding functors is the functor assigning to a space
its singular homology groups.
— The ﬁrst example above, the singular chain complex functor, can itself be re-
garded as the composition of two functors. The ﬁrst functor assigns to a space
X its singular complex ∆(X), a ∆complex, and the second functor assigns to
a ∆complex its simplicial chain complex. This is what the two functors do on
objects, and what they do on morphisms can be described in the following way. A
map of spaces f : X→Y induces a map f∗: ∆(X)→∆(Y) by composing singular
simplices ∆n→X with f . The map f∗is a map between ∆complexes taking the
distinguished characteristic maps in the domain ∆complex to the distinguished
characteristic maps in the target ∆complex. Call such maps ∆maps and let
them be the morphisms in the category of ∆complexes. Note that a ∆map in-
duces a chain map between simplicial chain complexes, taking basis elements to
basis elements, so we have a simplicial chain complex functor taking the category
of ∆complexes and ∆maps to the category of chain complexes and chain maps.
— There is a functor assigning to a pair of spaces (X, A) the associated long exact
sequence of homology groups. Morphisms in the domain category are maps of
pairs, and in the target category morphisms are maps between exact sequences
forming commutative diagrams. This functor is the composition of two functors,
the ﬁrst assigning to (X, A) a short exact sequence of chain complexes, the sec-
ond assigning to such a short exact sequence the associated long exact sequence
of homology groups.
Morphisms in the intermediate category are the evident
commutative diagrams.
Another sort of process we have encountered is the transformation of one functor
into another, for example:
— Boundary maps Hn(X, A)→Hn−1(A) in singular homology, or indeed in any ho-
mology theory.

Section 2.3.
The Formal Viewpoint
165
— Change-of-coefﬁcient homomorphisms Hn(X; G1)→Hn(X; G2) induced by a ho-
momorphism G1→G2 , as in the proof of Lemma 2.49.
Formally, if one has two functors F, G : C→D then a natural transformation T from
F to G assigns a morphism TX : F(X)→G(X) to each object
X ∈C , in such a way that for each morphism f : X→Y in
C the square at the right commutes. The case that F and G
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
TX
TY
X
F (
)
f
F (
)
f
G(
)
Y
F (
)
−−−−−→
X
G(
)
Y
G(
)
are contravariant rather than covariant is similar.
We have been describing the passage from topology to the abstract world of cat-
egories and functors, but there is also a nice path in the opposite direction:
— To each category C there is associated a ∆complex BC called the classifying
space of C , whose n simplices are the strings X0→X1→···→Xn of morphisms
in C . The n + 1 faces of this simpex are obtained by composing two adjacent
morphisms in the string (this yields n −1 faces) or by deleting the ﬁrst or last
morphism, to get the remaining two faces. In case C has a single object, whose
morphisms form a group G, then BC is the same as the ∆complex BG con-
structed in Example 1B.7, a K(G, 1) space. In general, BC need not be a K(G, 1),
however. For example, if we start with a ∆complex X and regard its set of sim-
plices as a partially ordered set C(X) under the relation of inclusion of faces,
then BC(X) is the barycentric subdivision of X .
— A functor F : C→D induces a map BC→BD. This is the ∆map which sends an
n simplex X0→X1→···→Xn to the n simplex F(X0)→F(X1)→···→F(Xn).
— A natural transformation from a functor F to a functor G induces a homotopy
between the induced maps of classifying spaces. We leave this for the reader to
make explicit, using the subdivision of ∆n×I into (n + 1) simplices described
earlier in the chapter.
Exercises
1. If Tn(X, A) denotes the torsion subgroup of Hn(X, A; Z), show that the functors
(X, A) , Tn(X, A), with the obvious induced homomorphisms Tn(X, A)→Tn(Y, B)
and boundary maps Tn(X, A)→Tn−1(A), do not deﬁne a homology theory. Do the
same for the ‘mod torsion’ functor MTn(X, A) = Hn(X, A; Z)/Tn(X, A).
2. Deﬁne a candidate for a reduced homology theory on CW complexes by ehn(X) =
Q
i eHi(X)
 L
i eHi(X).
Thus ehn(X) is independent of n and is zero if X is ﬁnite-
dimensional, but is not identically zero, e.g., for X =
W
i Si . Show that the axioms for
a homology theory are satisﬁed except that the wedge axiom fails.
3. Show that if eh is a reduced homology theory, then ehn(point) = 0 for all n. Deduce
that there are suspension isomorphisms ehn(X) ≈ehn+1(SX) for all n.
4. Show that the wedge axiom for homology theories follows from the other axioms
in the case of ﬁnite wedge sums.

166
Chapter 2.
Homology
There is a close connection between H1(X) and π1(X), arising from the fact that
a map f : I→X can be viewed as either a path or a singular 1 simplex. If f is a loop,
with f (0) = f (1), this singular 1 simplex is a cycle since ∂f = f (1) −f (0).
Theorem 2A.1. By regarding loops as singular 1 cycles, we obtain a homomorphism
h : π1(X, x0)→H1(X). If X is path-connected, then h is surjective and has kernel
the commutator subgroup of π1(X), so h induces an isomorphism from the abelian-
ization of π1(X) onto H1(X).
Proof: Recall the notation f ≃g for the relation of homotopy, ﬁxing endpoints,
between paths f and g. Regarding f and g as chains, the notation f ∼g will mean
that f is homologous to g, that is, f −g is the boundary of some 2 chain. Here are
some facts about this relation.
(i) If f is a constant path, then f ∼0. Namely, f is the boundary of the constant
singular 2 simplex σ having the same image point as f , since
∂σ = σ ||[v1, v2] −σ ||[v0, v2] + σ ||[v0, v1] = f −f + f = f
f
g
v
v
v
v
σ1
0
1
3
2
σ2
(ii) If f ≃g then f ∼g.
To see this, consider a homo-
topy F : I×I→X from f to g. This yields a pair of singular
2 simplices σ1 and σ2 in X by subdividing the square I×I
into two triangles [v0, v1, v3] and [v0, v2, v3], as shown in
the ﬁgure. When one computes ∂(σ1 −σ2), the two restric-
tions of F to the diagonal of the square cancel, leaving f −g
together with two constant singular 1 simplices from the left and right edges of the
square. By (i) these are boundaries, so f −g is also a boundary.
f
f
g
g
v
v0
1
v2
(iii) f g ∼f +g, where f g denotes the product of the paths
f and g. In fact we have the formula ∂σ = g −f g +f where
σ : ∆2→X is the composition of the orthogonal projection of
∆2 = [v0, v1, v2] onto the edge [v0, v2] followed by the map
f g : [v0, v2]→X .
(iv) f ∼−f , where f is the inverse path of f . This follows from the preceding three
observations, which give f + f ∼f f ∼0.
Applying (ii) and (iii) to loops, it follows that we have a well-deﬁned homomor-
phism h : π1(X, x0)→H1(X) sending the homotopy class of a loop f to the homology
class of the 1 cycle f .

Section 2.A.
Homology and Fundamental Group
167
To show h is surjective when X is path-connected, let a 1 cycle
P
i niσi be given.
After relabeling the σi ’s we may assume each ni is ±1.
By (iv) we may assume
each ni = +1, so our 1 cycle is
P
i σi . If some σi is not a loop, then the fact that
∂
 P
i σi

= 0 means there must be another σj such that the composed path σi σj is
deﬁned. By (iii) we may then combine the terms σi and σj into a single term σi σj .
Iterating this, we reduce to the case that each σi is a loop. Since X is path-connected
we may choose a path γi from x0 to the basepoint of σi . We have γi σi γi ∼σi by
(iii) and (iv), so we may assume all σi ’s are loops at x0 . Then we can combine all the
σi ’s into a single σ by (iii). Thus h is surjective.
The commutator subgroup of π1(X) is contained in the kernel of h since H1(X)
is abelian. To obtain the reverse inclusion we will show that every class [f ] in Ker h
is trivial in the abelianization π1(X)ab of π1(X).
If h([f ]) = 0 then f , as a 1 cycle, is the boundary of a 2 chain
P
i niσi . Again
we may assume each ni is ±1. As in the discussion preceding Proposition 2.6, we can
associate to this chain
P
i niσi a 2 dimensional ∆complex K by taking a 2 simplex
∆2
i for each σi and identifying certain pairs of edges of these 2 simplices. Namely,
if we apply the usual boundary formula to write ∂σi = τi0 −τi1 + τi2 for singular
1 simplices τij , then the formula
(∗)
f = ∂
 P
i niσi

=
P
i ni∂σi =
P
i,j ni(−1)jτij
implies that we can group all but one of the τij ’s into pairs for which the two coef-
ﬁcients ni(−1)j in each pair are of opposite sign. The one remaining τij is equal to
f . We then identify edges of the ∆2
j ’s corresponding to the paired τij ’s, preserving
orientations of these edges so that we obtain a ∆complex K .
The maps σi ﬁt together to give a map σ : K→X . We can deform σ , staying
ﬁxed on the edge corresponding to f , so that each vertex maps to the basepoint x0 ,
in the following way. Paths from the images of these vertices to x0 deﬁne such a
homotopy on the union of the 0 skeleton of K with the edge corresponding to f ,
and then we can appeal to the homotopy extension property in Proposition 0.16 to
extend this homotopy to all of K . (Or one can just construct such an extension by
hand.) Restricting the new σ to the simplices ∆2
i , we obtain a new chain
P
i niσi with
boundary equal to f , and with all τij ’s loops at x0 .
We now interpret the formula (∗) in π1(X)ab , using additive notation for the
group operation in this abelian group. The three summations in (∗) are obviously
equal in π1(X)ab , and the last summation equals [f ] in π1(X)ab by the deﬁnition of
the pairing of the τij ’s. Each term ∂σi = τi0−τi1+τi2 is zero in
π1(X)ab since σi itself gives a nullhomotopy of the composed
loop τi0 −τi1 + τi2 . We conclude that the loop f is trivial in
π1(X)ab .
⊔⊓
v0
v1
v2
σi
τ
τ
τ
i2
i1
i0

168
Chapter 2.
Homology
One can see quite clearly what is happening at the end of this proof by look-
ing more closely at the geometry. The complex K is in fact a compact surface with
boundary consisting of a single circle formed by the edge corresponding to f . This is
because any pattern of identiﬁcations of pairs of edges of a ﬁnite collection of disjoint
2 simplices produces a compact surface with boundary. From the algebraic formula
f = ∂
 P
i niσi

it is not hard to check that K is an orientable surface. Quoting a
basic theorem from the topology of surfaces, we see that the
component of K containing the boundary circle is a closed ori-
entable surface of some genus g with an open disk removed.
Giving this surface the cell structure indicated in the ﬁgure, it
then becomes obvious that f is homotopic to a product of g
commutators in π1(X).
b
f
b
a
a
c
c
d
d
Exercises
1.
Verify the statement made in the preceding paragraph that K is an orientable
surface.
2. Show that the map h : π1(X, x0)→H1(X) can also be deﬁned by h([f ]) = f∗(α)
where f : S1→X represents a given element of π1(X, x0), f∗is the induced map on
H1 , and α is a suitable generator of H1(S1) ≈Z.
In this section we use homology theory to prove some interesting results in topol-
ogy and algebra whose statements give no hint that algebraic topology might be in-
volved.
To begin, we have the following calculations:
Proposition 2B.1.
(a) If D is a subspace of Sn homeomorphic to Dk for some k ≥0, then eHi(Sn −D)
is 0 for all i.
(b) If S is a subspace of Sn homeomorphic to Sk for some k with 0 ≤k < n, then
eHi(Sn −S) is Z for i = n −k −1 and 0 otherwise.
As a special case of (b) we have the Jordan curve theorem: A subspace of S2
homeomorphic to S1 separates S2 into two complementary components, or equiv-
alently, path-components since open subsets of Sn are locally path-connected. One
could just as well use R2 in place of S2 here since deleting a point from an open set
in S2 does not affect its connectedness. More generally, (b) says that a subspace of

Section 2.B.
Classical Applications
169
Sn homeomorphic to Sn−1 separates it into two components, and these components
have the same homology groups as a point. However, there are examples where these
complementary components are not simply-connected, for example the well-known
Alexander horned sphere in S3 ; see [Rolfsen]. These complications involving embed-
ded Sn−1 ’s in Sn are all local in nature since any locally nicely embedded Sn−1 in Sn
is equivalent to the standard Sn−1 ⊂Sn , in the sense that there is a homeomorphism
of Sn taking the embedded Sn−1 onto the standard equatorial Sn−1 , so in particular
both complementary regions are homeomorphic to open balls; see [M.Brown] for a pre-
cise statement and proof of this. When n = 2 it is a classical theorem of Schoenﬂies
that this holds for arbitrary embeddings S1 > S2 .
By contrast, when we come to embeddings of Sn−2 in Sn , even locally nice embed-
dings need not be equivalent to the standard one. This is the subject of knot theory,
including the classical case of knotted embeddings of S1 in S3 or R3 . For embeddings
of Sn−2 in Sn the complement always has the same homology as S1 , according to the
theorem, but the fundamental group can be quite different. In spite of the fact that
the homology of a knot complement does not detect knottedness, it is still possible to
use homology to distinguish different knots by looking at the homology of covering
spaces of their complements. For more on this see [Rolfsen].
Proof: We prove (a) by induction on k. When k = 0, Sn −D is homeomorphic to Rn ,
so this case is trivial. For the induction step, let h : Ik→D be a homeomorphism, and
consider the open sets A = Sn −h(Ik−1×[0, 1/2]) and B = Sn −h(Ik−1×[1/2, 1]), with
A∩B = Sn−D and A∪B = Sn−h(Ik−1×{1/2}). By induction eHi(A∪B) = 0 for all i, so
the Mayer-Vietoris sequence gives isomorphisms Φ : eHi(Sn −D)→eHi(A)⊕eHi(B) for
all i. Modulo signs, the two components of Φ are induced by the inclusions Sn−D>A
and Sn −D > B , so if there exists an i dimensional cycle α in Sn −D which is not
a boundary in Sn −D, then α is also not a boundary in at least one of A and B .
When i = 0 the word ‘cycle’ here is to be interpreted in the sense of augmented chain
complexes since we are dealing with reduced homology. Repeating this argument, we
can further subdivide the last I factor of Ik into quarters, eighths, etc., producing a
nested sequence of closed subintervals I1 ⊃I2 ⊃··· with intersection a point p ∈I ,
such that α is not a boundary in Sn −h(Ik−1×Im) for any m.
By induction on
k, α is the boundary of a chain β in Sn −h(Ik−1×{p}). This β is a ﬁnite linear
combination of singular simplices with compact image in Sn −h(Ik−1×{p}). The
union of these images is covered by the nested sequence of open sets Sn−h(Ik−1×Im),
so by compactness β must actually be a chain in Sn −h(Ik−1×Im) for some m. This
contradiction shows that α must be a boundary in Sn −D, ﬁnishing the induction
step.
Part (b) is also proved by induction on k, starting with the trivial case k = 0
when Sn −S is homeomorphic to Sn−1×R. For the induction step, write S = D1 ∪D2
with D1 and D2 homeomorphic to Dk and D1 ∩D2 homeomorphic to Sk−1 . The

170
Chapter 2.
Homology
Mayer-Vietoris sequence for A = Sn −D1 and B = Sn −D2 , which have trivial reduced
homology by part (a), then gives isomorphisms eHi(Sn −S) ≈eHi+1(Sn −(D1 ∩D2))
for all i.
⊔⊓
The next theorem says that for subspaces of Rn , the property of being open is
a topological invariant. This accounts for the classical name ‘Invariance of Domain’
associated to this result, ‘domain’ being a synonym for ‘open set’ in Rn .
Theorem 2B.2. If a subspace X of Rn is homeomorphic to an open set in Rn , then
X is itself open in Rn .
Proof: Regarding Sn as the one-point compactiﬁcation of Rn , an equivalent state-
ment is that X is open in Sn , and this is what we shall prove. Each x ∈X has a
neighborhood D in X homeomorphic to Dn , with x corresponding to the center of
Dn under this homeomorphism. Let S ⊂D correspond to Sn−1 = ∂Dn under this
homeomorphism. Then Sn −D is open, and is connected by the case k = n, i = 0 in
part (a) of the previous proposition, using the fact that connectedness is equivalent
to path-connectedness for open sets in Sn . Also, Sn −S is open and has exactly two
components by the case k = n −1, i = 0 of (b) of the proposition. Thus we have
Sn −S decomposed as the disjoint union of the connected sets Sn −D and D −S ,
so these must be the two components of Sn −S . In particular, D −S is open, being
a component of the open set Sn −S . So D −S is an open neighborhood of x in Sn ,
and since this neighborhood is contained in X we conclude that X is open.
⊔⊓
Here is an application involving the notion of an n manifold, which is a Hausdorff
space locally homeomorphic to Rn :
Corollary 2B.3. If M is a compact n manifold and N is a connected n manifold,
then an embedding M > N must be surjective.
Proof: M is closed in N since it is compact and N is Hausdorff. Hence it sufﬁces
to show M is also open in N . For x ∈M let V ⊂N and U ⊂M be neighborhoods
homeomorphic to Rn . We may assume U ⊂V , and then the theorem implies that U
is open in V , hence in N .
⊔⊓
For example, the corollary says that Sn cannot be embedded as a subspace of Rn ,
since if it were we would have Sn ≈Rn but Sn is compact while Rn is not. A conse-
quence of this is that Rn contains no subspace homeomorphic to Rm with m > n, for
if Rn contained such a subspace it would also contain a subspace homeomorphic to
Sn since Sn ⊂Rm if n < m. More generally, there cannot be a continuous injection
Rm→Rn when m > n since this would give a continuous injection Sn→Rn , which
would be a homeomorphism onto its image since Sn is compact.

Section 2.B.
Classical Applications
171
The Invariance of Domain and the n dimensional generalization of the Jordan
curve theorem were ﬁrst proved by Brouwer around 1910, at a very early stage in the
development of algebraic topology.
Division Algebras
Here is an algebraic application of homology theory due to H. Hopf:
Theorem 2B.4. R and C are the only ﬁnite-dimensional division algebras over R
which are commutative and have an identity.
By deﬁnition, an algebra structure on Rn is simply a bilinear multiplication map
Rn×Rn→Rn , (a, b) , ab. Thus the product satisﬁes left and right distributivity,
a(b+c) = ab+ac and (a+b)c = ac +bc , and scalar associativity, α(ab) = (αa)b =
a(αb) for α ∈R. Commutativity, full associativity, and an identity element are not
assumed. An algebra is a division algebra if the equations ax = b and xa = b are
always solvable whenever a ≠0. In other words, the linear transformations x , ax
and x,xa are surjective when a ≠0. These are linear maps Rn→Rn , so surjectivity
is equivalent to having trivial kernel, i.e., the absence of zero-divisors.
The four classical examples are R, C, the quaternions H, and the octonions O.
Frobenius proved in 1877 that R, C, and H are the only ﬁnite-dimensional associative
division algebras over R, and in 1898 Hurwitz proved that these three together with
O are the only ﬁnite-dimensional division algebras over R with a product satisfying
|ab| = |a||b|. See [Ebbinghaus]. We will show in §3.2 that a ﬁnite-dimensional divi-
sion algebra must have dimension a power of 2. By reﬁnements of these topological
arguments, Adams showed that in fact the only possible dimensions are 1, 2, 4, and
8. A very nice proof using K-theory is in [Adams-Atiyah], and an exposition of this
proof can be found also in [VBKT].
Proof: Suppose ﬁrst that Rn has a commutative division algebra structure. Deﬁne
a map f : Sn−1→Sn−1 by f (x) = x2/|x2|. This is well-deﬁned since x ≠0 implies
x2 ≠0 in a division algebra, hence |x2| > 0. The map f is continuous since the
multiplication map Rn×Rn→Rn is bilinear, hence continuous. Since f (−x) = f (x),
f induces a quotient map f : RPn−1→Sn−1 . The following argument shows that f
is injective. An equality f (x) = f (y) implies x2 = α2y2 for α = (|x2|/|y2|)1/2 >
0. Thus we have x2 −α2y2 = 0, which factors as (x + αy)(x −αy) = 0 using
commutativity and the fact that α is a real scalar. Since there are no divisors of zero
we deduce that x = ±αy . Since x and y are unit vectors and α is a positive real
scalar, this yields x = ±y , so x and y determine the same point of RPn−1 , which
means that f is injective.
Since f is an injective map of compact Hausdorff spaces, it must be a homeo-
morphism onto its image. By Corollary 2B.3, f must in fact be surjective if we are
not in the trivial case n = 1. Thus we have a homeomorphism RPn−1 ≈Sn−1 . This

172
Chapter 2.
Homology
implies n = 2 since RPn−1 and Sn−1 have different fundamental groups and different
homology groups if n > 2.
It remains to show that a 2 dimensional commutative division algebra A with
identity is isomorphic to C. This is elementary algebra: If j ∈A is not a real scalar
multiple of the identity element 1 ∈A and we write j2 = a + bj for a, b ∈R, then
(j −b/2)2 = a + b2/4 so by rechoosing j we may assume that j2 = a ∈R. If a ≥0,
say a = c2 , then j2 = c2 implies (j + c)(j −c) = 0 so j = ±c , contradicting the
choice of j . So j2 = −c2 and by rescaling j we may assume j2 = −1, hence A is
isomorphic to C.
⊔⊓
Leaving out the last paragraph, the proof shows that a ﬁnite-dimensional commu-
tative division algebra, not necessarily with an identity, must have dimension at most
2. Oddly enough, there do exist 2 dimensional commutative division algebras with-
out identity elements, for example C with the modiﬁed multiplication z · w = zw ,
the bar denoting complex conjugation.
The Borsuk-Ulam Theorem
The proof of the following theorem of Borsuk shows how useful homology with
coefﬁcients other than Z can be.
Proposition 2B.5. A map f : Sn→Sn which is odd, satisfying f (−x) = −f (x) for
all x , must have odd degree.
The corresponding result that even maps have even degree is easier, requiring
only homology with Z coefﬁcients, and was an exercise for §2.2.
The main ingredient in the proof will be a certain exact sequence associated to a
two-sheeted covering space p : eX→X ,
··· -→Hn(X; Z2)
τ∗-----→Hn( eX; Z2)
p∗-----→Hn(X; Z2) -→Hn−1(X; Z2) -→···
This is the long exact sequence of homology groups associated to a short exact se-
quence of chain complexes
0 -→Cn(X; Z2)
τ-----→Cn( eX; Z2)
p♯-----→Cn(X; Z2) -→0
The map p♯is surjective since singular simplices σ : ∆n→X always lift to
eX , as
∆n is simply-connected.
Each σ has in fact precisely two lifts eσ and α eσ for α
the nontrivial deck transformation of the covering space. Because we are using Z2
coefﬁcients, the kernel of p♯is generated by the sums eσ + α eσ . So if we deﬁne τ
to send each σ : ∆n→X to the sum of its two lifts to e∆n , then the image of τ is the
kernel of p♯. Obviously τ is injective, so we have the short exact sequence indicated.
Since τ and p♯commute with boundary maps, we have a short exact sequence of
chain complexes, yielding the long exact sequence of homology groups.
The map τ∗is a special case of more general transfer homomorphisms considered
in §3.H. The long exact sequence involving the transfer maps τ∗we call the transfer

Section 2.B.
Classical Applications
173
sequence. It can also be viewed as a special case of the Gysin sequences discussed
in §4.D. There is a generalization of the transfer sequence to homology with other
coefﬁcients, but this uses a more elaborate form of homology called ‘homology with
local coefﬁcients,’ as we show in §3.I.
Proof of 2B.5: If f is odd, it induces a quotient map f : RPn→RPn , and the proof
will consist of examining the map from the transfer sequence for the covering space
p : Sn→RPn to itself induced by f and f . This transfer sequence has the following
form, where to simplify notation we abbreviate RPn to P n and we let the coefﬁcient
group Z2 be implicit.
−−−→
−−−→−−−→
H
0
0
P
n
n
(
)
S
H (
)
p
−−−→
−−−→
P
H
0
(
)
n
n
n
∗
∗
≈
−−−→
P
H (
)
n
n
≈
-
n 1
−−−→−−−→
−−−→
H
0
0
P
n
(
)
−−−→
P
H (
)
n
i 
≈
-
i 1
τ
−−−→
−−−→
H
0
0
P
n
n
(
)
P
H (
)
−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
P
H
0
(
)
n
≈
−−−→
S
H (
)
n
≈
p
1
0
0
0
∗
...
...
−−−→
...
...
The initial 0 is Hn+1(P n; Z2), which vanishes since P n is an n dimensional CW com-
plex. The other terms which are zero are Hi(Sn) for 0 < i < n. We assume n > 1,
leaving the minor modiﬁcations needed for the case n = 1 to the reader. All the terms
which are not zeroes are Z2 , by cellular homology. (Alternatively, this exact sequence
can be used to compute the homology groups Hi(RPn; Z2) if one does not already
know them.) Since all the nonzero groups in the sequence are Z2 , exactness forces
the maps to be isomorphisms or zero as indicated.
The maps f and f induce a map from the transfer sequence to itself, and we
will need to know that the squares in the resulting diagram commute. This follows
from the naturality of the long exact sequence of homology associated to a short exact
sequence of chain complexes, once we verify commutativity of the diagram
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
P
C
0
(
)
−−−−−→
C
0
i
i
i
n
P
n
n
(
)
S
C (
)
τ
♯
p
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
P
C
0
(
)
C
0
i
i
i
n
P
n
n
(
)
S
C (
)
τ
♯
p
♯
f
♯
f
♯
f−
−
Here the right-hand square commutes since pf = f p. The left-hand square com-
mutes since for a singular i simplex σ : ∆i→P n with lifts eσ1 and eσ2 , the two lifts of
fσ are f eσ1 and f eσ2 since f takes antipodal points to antipodal points.
Now we can see that all the maps f∗and f ∗in the commutative diagram of
transfer sequences are isomorphisms by induction on dimension, using the evident
fact that if three maps in a commutative square are isomorphisms, so is the fourth.
The induction starts with the trivial fact that f∗and f ∗are isomorphisms in dimen-
sion zero.

174
Chapter 2.
Homology
In particular we deduce that the map f∗: Hn(Sn; Z2)→Hn(Sn; Z2) is an isomor-
phism. By Lemma 2.49 this map is multiplication by the degree of f mod 2, so the
degree of f must be odd.
⊔⊓
The fact that odd maps have odd degree easily implies the Borsuk-Ulam theorem:
Corollary 2B.6. For every map g : Sn→Rn there exists a point x ∈Sn with g(x) =
g(−x).
Proof: Let f (x) = g(x) −g(−x), so f is odd.
We need to show f (x) = 0 for
some x . If this is not the case, we can replace f (x) by f (x)/|f (x)| to get a new
map f : Sn→Sn−1 which is still odd. The restriction of this f to the equator Sn−1
then has odd degree by the proposition. But this restriction is nullhomotopic via the
restriction of f to one of the hemispheres bounded by Sn−1 .
⊔⊓
Exercises
1. Compute Hi(Sn −X) when X is a subspace of Sn homeomorphic to Sk ∨Sℓor to
Sk ⨿Sℓ.
2. Show that eHi(Sn −X) ≈eHn−i−1(X) when X is homeomorphic to a ﬁnite connected
graph. [First do the case that the graph is a tree.]
3. In the unit sphere Sp+q−1 ⊂Rp+q let Sp−1 and Sq−1 be the subspheres consisting
of points whose last q and ﬁrst p coordinates are zero, respectively. Show that Sp−1
and Sq−1 are not the boundaries of any pair of disjointly embedded disks Dp and Dq
in Dp+q .
4. Show that R2n+1 is not a division algebra over R if n > 0 by showing that if it were,
then for nonzero a ∈R2n+1 the map S2n→S2n , x , ax/|ax| would be homotopic
to x , −ax/|ax|, but these maps have different degrees.
5. Make the transfer sequence explicit in the case of a trivial covering eX→X , where
eX = X×S0 .
6. Use the transfer sequence for the covering S∞→RP∞to compute Hn(RP∞; Z2).
7. Use the transfer sequence for the covering X×S∞→X×RP∞to produce isomor-
phisms Hn(X×RP∞; Z2) ≈
L
i=0
nHi(X; Z2) for all n.

Section 2.C.
Simplicial Approximation
175
Many spaces of interest in algebraic topology can be given the structure of sim-
plicial complexes, and early in the history of the subject this structure was exploited
as one of the main technical tools. Later, CW complexes largely superceded simplicial
complexes in this role, but there are still some occasions when the extra structure of
simplicial complexes can be quite handy. This will be illustrated nicely by the proof
of the classical Lefschetz ﬁxed point theorem in this section.
One of the good features of simplicial complexes is that arbitrary continuous
maps between them can always be deformed to maps which are linear on the sim-
plices of some subdivision of the domain complex.
This is the idea of ‘simplicial
approximation,’ which goes back all the way to Brouwer and Alexander before 1920.
To state this result in its most basic form we ﬁrst need a deﬁnition. If K and L are
simplicial complexes, then a map f : K→L is simplicial if it sends each simplex of K
to a simplex of L by a linear map taking vertices to vertices. Since a linear map from
a simplex to a simplex is uniquely determined by its values on vertices, this means
that a simplicial map is uniquely determined by its values on vertices. Also, it is easy
to see that a map from the vertices of K to the vertices of L extends to a simplicial
map iff it sends the vertices of each simplex of K to the vertices of some simplex of
L.
Here then is the Simplicial Approximation Theorem:
Theorem 2C.1. If K is a ﬁnite simplicial complex and L is an arbitrary simplicial
complex, then any map f : K→L is homotopic to a map which is simplicial with
respect to some iterated barycentric subdivision of K .
To see that subdivision of K is essential for the validity of this result, consider
the case of maps Sn→Sn . With ﬁxed simplicial structures on the domain and range
spheres there are only ﬁnitely many simplicial maps, hence only ﬁnitely many de-
grees are realized by simplicial maps. The latter statement remains true even if the
simplicial structure on the range sphere is allowed to vary, since if the range sphere
has more vertices than the domain sphere then the map cannot be surjective hence
must have degree zero, while if the number of vertices in the range sphere is bounded
then the number of possible simplicial structures on this sphere is ﬁnite, and each
simplicial structure can realize only ﬁnitely many degrees.
Before proving the simplicial approximation theorem we need some terminology
and a lemma. The star St σ of a simplex σ in a simplicial complex X is deﬁned
to be the subcomplex consisting of all the simplices of X which contain σ . Closely
related to this is the open star st σ , which is the union of the interiors of all simplices

176
Chapter 2.
Homology
containing σ , where the interior of a simplex τ is by deﬁnition τ −∂τ . Thus st σ is
an open set in X whose closure is St σ .
Lemma 2C.2. For vertices v1, ··· , vn of a simplicial complex X , the intersection
st v1 ∩··· ∩st vn is empty unless v1, ··· , vn are the vertices of a simplex σ of X ,
in which case st v1 ∩··· ∩st vn = st σ .
Proof: The intersection st v1 ∩··· ∩st vn consists of the interiors of all simplices
τ whose vertex set contains {v1, ··· , vn}. If st v1 ∩··· ∩st vn is nonempty, such
a τ exists and contains the simplex σ = [v1, ··· , vn] ⊂X . Since the simplices τ
containing {v1, ··· , vn} are just the simplices containing σ , we obtain the result that
st v1 ∩··· ∩st vn = st σ .
⊔⊓
Proof of 2C.1: Choose a metric on K which restricts to the standard Euclidean metric
on each simplex of K .
For example, K can be viewed as a subcomplex of a sim-
plex ∆N whose vertices are all the vertices of K , and we can restrict a standard met-
ric on ∆N to give a metric on K . Let ε be a Lebesgue number for the open cover
{ f −1 st w

| w is a vertex of L } of K . After iterated barycentric subdivision of K we
may assume that each simplex has diameter less than ε/2. The closed star of each
vertex v of K then has diameter less than ε, hence this closed star maps by f to
the open star of some vertex g(v) of L. The resulting map g : K0→L0 thus satisﬁes
f(St v) ⊂st g(v) for all vertices v of K .
To see that g extends to a simplicial map g : K→L, consider the problem of
extending g over a simplex [v1, ··· , vn] of K . An interior point x of this simplex
lies in st vi for each i, so f (x) lies in st g(vi) for each i, since f (st vi) ⊂st g(vi) by
the deﬁnition of g(vi). Thus st g(v1)∩···∩st g(vn) ≠∅, so [g(v1), ··· , g(vn)] is a
simplex of L by the lemma, and we can extend g linearly over [v1, ··· , vn]. Both f (x)
and g(x) lie in a single simplex of L since g(x) lies in [g(v1), ··· , g(vn)] and f (x)
lies in the star of this simplex. So taking the linear path (1−t)f (x)+tg(x), 0 ≤t ≤1,
in the simplex containing f (x) and g(x) deﬁnes a homotopy from f to g. To check
continuity of this homotopy it sufﬁces to restrict to the simplex [v1, ··· , vn], where
continuity is clear since f (x) varies continuously in the star of [g(v1), ··· , g(vn)]
and g(x) varies continuously in [g(v1), ··· , g(vn)].
⊔⊓
Notice that if f already sends some vertices of K to vertices of L then we may
choose g to equal to f on these vertices, and hence the homotopy from f to g will
be stationary on these vertices. This is convenient if one is in a situation where one
wants maps and homotopies to preserve basepoints.
The proof makes it clear that the simplicial approximation g can be chosen not
just homotopic to f but also close to f if we allow subdivisions of L as well as K .

Section 2.C.
Simplicial Approximation
177
The Lefschetz Fixed Point Theorem
This very classical application of homology is a considerable generalization of the
Brouwer ﬁxed point theorem, and it is also related to the Euler characteristic formula.
For a homomorphism ϕ : Zn→Zn with matrix [aij], the trace tr ϕ is deﬁned
to be
P
i aii , the sum of the diagonal elements of [aij].
Since tr([aij][bij]) =
tr([bij][aij]), conjugate matrices have the same trace, and it follows that tr ϕ is in-
dependent of the choice of basis for Zn . For a homomorphism ϕ : A→A of a ﬁnitely
generated abelian group A we can then deﬁne tr ϕ to be the trace of the induced
homomorphism ϕ : A/Torsion→A/Torsion.
For a map f : X→X of a ﬁnite CW complex X , or more generally any space whose
homology groups are ﬁnitely generated and vanish in high dimensions, the Lefschetz
number τ(f ) is deﬁned to be
P
n(−1)n tr
 f∗: Hn(X)→Hn(X)

. In particular, if f
is the identity, or is homotopic to the identity, then τ(f ) is the Euler characteristic
χ(X) since the trace of the n×n identity matrix is n.
Here is the Lefschetz Fixed Point Theorem:
Theorem 2C.3. If X is a ﬁnite simplicial complex, or more generally a retract of a
ﬁnite simplicial complex, and f : X→X is a map with τ(f ) ≠0, then f has a ﬁxed
point.
As we show in Theorem A.7 in the Appendix, every compact, locally contractible
space which can be embedded in a Euclidean space of some dimension is a retract of a
ﬁnite simplicial complex. This includes compact manifolds and ﬁnite CW complexes,
for example. The compactness hypothesis is essential, since a translation of R has τ =
1 but no ﬁxed points. For an example showing that local properties are also signiﬁcant,
let X be the compact subspace of R2 consisting of two concentric circles together with
a copy of R between them whose two ends spiral into the two
circles, wrapping around them inﬁnitely often, and let f : X→X
be a homeomorphism translating the R along itself and rotating
the circles, with no ﬁxed points. Since f is homotopic to the
identity, we have τ(f ) = χ(X), which equals 1 since the three
path components of X are two circles and a line.
If X has the same homology groups as a point, at least modulo torsion, the the-
orem says that every map has a ﬁxed point. This holds for example for RPn if n is
even. The case of projective spaces is interesting because of its connection with linear
algebra. An invertible linear transformation f : Rn→Rn takes lines through 0 to lines
through 0, hence induces a map f : RPn−1→RPn−1 . Fixed points of f are equivalent
to eigenvectors of f . The characteristic polynomial of f has odd degree if n is odd,
hence has a real root, so an eigenvector exists in this case. This is in agreement with the
observation above that every map RP2k→RP2k has a ﬁxed point. On the other hand

178
Chapter 2.
Homology
the rotation of R2k deﬁned by f (x1, ··· , x2k) = (x2, −x1, x4, −x3, ··· , x2k, −x2k−1),
has no eigenvectors and its projectivization f : RP2k−1→RP2k−1 has no ﬁxed points.
Similarly, in the complex case an invertible linear transformation f : Cn→Cn in-
duces f : CPn−1→CPn−1 , and this always has a ﬁxed point since the characteristic
polynomial always has a complex root. Nevertheless, as in the real case there is a map
f : CP2k−1→CP2k−1 without ﬁxed points. Namely, consider the map f : C2k→C2k de-
ﬁned by f (z1, ··· , z2k) = (z2, −z1, z4, −z3, ··· , z2k, −z2k−1). This is only ‘conjugate-
linear’ over C, but this is still good enough to imply that f induces a well-deﬁned map
f on CP2k−1 . Then it is an easy algebra exercise to check that f has no ﬁxed points.
The similarity between the real and complex cases persists in the fact that every map
CP2k→CP2k has a ﬁxed point, though to deduce this one needs more structure than
just homology, so this will be left as an exercise for §3.2, using cup products.
One could go further and consider the quaternionic case. Oddly enough, every
map HPn→HPn has a ﬁxed point if n > 1, according to an exercise in §4.K. When
n = 1 the antipodal map of S3 = HP1 has no ﬁxed points.
Proof of 2C.3: The general case easily reduces to the case of ﬁnite simplicial com-
plexes, for suppose r : K→X is a retraction of the ﬁnite simplicial complex K onto
X . For a map f : X→X , the composition f r : K→X ⊂K then has exactly the same
ﬁxed points as f . Since r∗: Hn(K)→Hn(X) is projection onto a direct summand, we
clearly have tr f∗r∗= tr f∗, so τ(f∗r∗) = τ(f∗).
For X a ﬁnite simplicial complex, suppose f : X→X has no ﬁxed points.
We
claim there is a subdivision L of X , a further subdivision K of L, and a simplicial
map g : K→L homotopic to f such that g(σ) ∩σ = ∅for each simplex σ of K . To
see this, ﬁrst choose a metric d on X as in the proof of the preceding proposition.
Since f has no ﬁxed points, d
 x, f(x)

> 0 for all x ∈X , so by the compactness of X
there is an ε > 0 such that d
 x, f(x)

> ε for all x . Choose a subdivision L of X so
that the stars of all simplices have diameter less than ε/2. By the proposition, there is
a subdivision K of L and a simplicial map g : K→L homotopic to f . By construction,
this g has the property that for each simplex σ of K , f (σ) is contained in the star of
the simplex g(σ). We may assume the subdivision K is chosen ﬁne enough so that
its simplices all have diameter less than ε/2. Then g(σ)∩σ = ∅for each simplex σ
of K since for x ∈σ , σ lies within distance ε/2 of x and g(σ) lies within distance
ε/2 of f (x), while d
 x, f (x)

> ε.
For such a g : K→L, the Lefschetz numbers τ(f ) and τ(g) are equal since f
and g are homotopic. Since g is simplicial, it takes the n skeleton Kn of K to the
n skeleton Ln of L, for each n. Since K is a subdivision of L, Ln is contained in Kn ,
and hence g(Kn) ⊂Kn for all n. Thus g induces a chain map of the cellular chain
complex {Hn(Kn, Kn−1)} to itself.

Section 2.C.
Simplicial Approximation
179
The next thing to observe is that
τ(g) =
X
n
(−1)n tr
 g∗: Hn(Kn, Kn−1)→Hn(Kn, Kn−1)

.
This is the analog of Theorem 2.44 for trace instead of rank, and is proved in pre-
cisely the same way, based on the elementary algebraic fact that trace is additive for
endomorphisms of short exact sequences, i.e., given a commutative diagram
0
A
α
β
γ
−−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−−→
B
−−−−−−→
C
−−−−−−→
0
−−−−−→
0
A
−−−−−→
B
−−−−−−→
C
−−−−−−→
0
−−−−−→
with exact rows, then tr β = tr α+tr γ . This algebraic fact can be proved by reducing to
the easy case that A, B , and C are free by ﬁrst factoring out the torsion in B , hence
also in A, then eliminating any remaining torsion in C by replacing A by a larger
subgroup A′ ⊂B , with A having ﬁnite index in A′ . The details of this argument are
left to the reader.
Finally, note that g∗: Hn(Kn, Kn−1)→Hn(Kn, Kn−1) has trace 0 since the matrix
for g∗has zeros down the diagonal, in view of the fact that g(σ) ∩σ = ∅for each
n simplex σ . So τ(f ) = τ(g) = 0.
⊔⊓
Fixed point theory is a well-developed side branch of algebraic topology which
will not be touched upon much in this book. For a nice introduction see [R.Brown].
Simplicial Approximations to CW Complexes
The simplicial approximation theorem concerns maps, and there is a somewhat
analogous statement about spaces:
Theorem 2C.4. Every CW complex X is homotopy equivalent to a simplicial complex,
which can be chosen to be of the same dimension as X , ﬁnite if X is ﬁnite, and
countable if X is countable.
We will build a simplicial complex Y ≃X inductively as an increasing union of
subcomplexes Yn homotopy equivalent to the skeleta Xn . For the inductive step,
assuming we have already constructed Yn ≃Xn , let en+1 be an (n + 1) cell of X
attached by a map ϕ : Sn→Xn . The map Sn→Yn corresponding to ϕ under the
homotopy equivalence Yn ≃Xn is homotopic to a simplicial map f : Sn→Yn by the
simplicial approximation theorem, and it is not hard to see that the spaces Xn∪ϕ en+1
and Yn ∪f en+1 are homotopy equivalent, where the subscripts denote attaching en+1
via ϕ and f , respectively; see Proposition 0.18 for a proof. We can view Yn ∪f en+1
as the mapping cone Cf , obtained from the mapping cylinder of f by collapsing the
domain end to a point. If we knew that the mapping cone of a simplicial map was a
simplicial complex, then by performing the same construction for all the (n+1) cells
of X we would have completed the induction step. Unfortunately, and somewhat

180
Chapter 2.
Homology
surprisingly, mapping cones and mapping cylinders are rather awkward objects in the
simplicial category. To avoid this awkwardness we will instead construct simplicial
analogs of mapping cones and cylinders which have all the essential features of actual
mapping cones and cylinders.
Let us ﬁrst construct the simplicial analog of a mapping cylinder. For a simpli-
cial map f : K→L this will be a simplicial complex M(f) containing both L and the
barycentric subdivision K′ of K as subcomplexes, and such that there is a deforma-
tion retraction rt of M(f ) onto L with r1 ||K′ = f . The ﬁgure shows the case that f
is a simplicial surjection ∆2→∆1 . The construction proceeds
one simplex of K at a time, by induction on dimension.
To begin, the ordinary mapping cylinder of f ||K0 sufﬁces
for M(f ||K0). Assume inductively that we have already con-
structed M(f ||Kn−1). Let σ be an n simplex of K and let
τ = f (σ), a simplex of L of dimension n or less. In particular,
we assume we have already constructed M(f : ∂σ→τ) with the desired properties,
and then we let M(f : σ→τ) be the cone on M(f : ∂σ→τ), as shown in the ﬁgure.
The space M(f : ∂σ→τ) is contractible since by induction it deformation retracts
onto τ which is contractible.
The cone M(f : σ→τ) is of course contractible, so
the inclusion of M(f : ∂σ→τ) into M(f : σ→τ) is a homotopy equivalence. This
implies that M(f : σ→τ) deformation retracts onto M(f : ∂σ→τ) by Corollary 0.20
(or one can give a direct argument using the fact that M(f : ∂σ→τ) is contractible).
Performing these constructions for all n simplices σ , we obtain M(f ||Kn) with a
deformation retraction onto M(f ||Kn−1). Taking the union over all n yields M(f)
with a deformation retraction rt onto L, namely the inﬁnite concatenation of the
previous deformation retractions, with the deformation retraction of M(f ||Kn) onto
M(f ||Kn−1) performed in the t interval [1/2n+1, 1/2n]. The map r1 ||K produced
by this process may not equal f , but it is homotopic to f via the linear homotopy
tf +(1−t)r1 , which is deﬁned since r1(σ) ⊂f (σ) for all simplices σ of K . By apply-
ing the homotopy extension property to the homotopy of r1 which equals tf +(1−t)r1
on K and the identity map on L, we can improve our deformation retraction of M(f)
onto L so that its restriction to K at time 1 is f .
From the simplicial analog M(f) of a mapping cylinder we construct the simpli-
cial ‘mapping cone’ C(f ) by attaching the ordinary cone on K′ to the subcomplex
K′ ⊂M(f ).
Proof of 2C.4: We will construct for each n a CW complex Zn containing Xn as a
deformation retract and also containing as a deformation retract a subcomplex Yn
which is a simplicial complex. Beginning with Y0 = Z0 = X0 , suppose inductively that
we have already constructed Yn and Zn . Let the cells en+1
α
of X be attached by maps
ϕα : Sn→Xn . Using the simplicial approximation theorem, there is a homotopy from
ϕα to a simplicial map fα : Sn→Yn . The CW complex Wn = Zn
S
α M(fα) contains a

Section 2.C.
Simplicial Approximation
181
simplicial subcomplex Sn
α homeomorphic to Sn at one end of M(fα), and the homeo-
morphism Sn ≈Sn
α is homotopic in Wn to the map fα , hence also to ϕα . Let Zn+1 be
obtained from Zn by attaching Dn+1
α
×I ’s via these homotopies between the ϕα ’s and
the inclusions Sn
α>Wn . Thus Zn+1 contains Xn+1 at one end, and at the other end we
have a simplicial complex Yn+1 = Yn
S
α C(fα), where C(fα) is obtained from M(fα)
by attaching a cone on the subcomplex Sn
α . Since Dn+1×I deformation retracts onto
∂Dn+1×I ∪Dn+1×{0}, we see that Zn+1 deformation retracts onto Zn ∪Yn+1 , which
in turn deformation retracts onto Yn ∪Yn+1 = Yn+1 by induction. Likewise, Zn+1
deformation retracts onto Xn+1 ∪Wn which deformation retracts onto Xn+1 ∪Zn and
hence onto Xn+1 ∪Xn = Xn+1 by induction.
Let Y =
S
n Yn and Z =
S
n Zn . The deformation retractions of Zn onto Xn
give deformation retractions of X ∪Zn onto X , and the inﬁnite concatenation of the
latter deformation retractions is a deformation retraction of Z onto X . Similarly, Z
deformation retracts onto Y .
⊔⊓
Exercises
1. Use the Lefschetz Fixed Point Theorem to show that a map Sn→Sn has a ﬁxed
point unless its degree is equal to the degree of the antipodal map x , −x .
2. Verify that the formula f (z1, ··· , z2k) = (z2, −z1, z4, −z3, ··· , z2k, −z2k−1) deﬁnes
a map f : C2k→C2k inducing a quotient map CP2k−1→CP2k−1 without ﬁxed points.
3. If X is a ﬁnite simplicial complex and f : X→X is a simplicial homeomorphism,
show that the Lefschetz number τ(f ) equals the Euler characteristic of the set of ﬁxed
points of f . In particular, τ(f ) is the number of ﬁxed points if the ﬁxed points are
isolated. [Hint: Barycentrically subdivide X to make the ﬁxed point set a subcomplex.]
4. Let M be a closed orientable surface embedded in R3 in such a way that reﬂection
across a plane P deﬁnes a homeomorphism r : M→M ﬁxing M ∩P , a collection of
circles. Is it possible to homotope r to have no ﬁxed points?
5. Let X be homotopy equivalent to a ﬁnite simplicial complex and let Y be homotopy
equivalent to a ﬁnite or countably inﬁnite simplicial complex. Using the simplicial ap-
proximation theorem, show that there are at most countably many homotopy classes
of maps X→Y .
6. Show that there are only countably many homotopy types of ﬁnite CW complexes.


Cohomology is an algebraic variant of homology, the result of a simple dualiza-
tion in the deﬁnition. Not surprisingly, cohomology groups satisfy axioms much like
the axioms for homology, except that induced homomorphisms go in the opposite
direction as a result of the dualization. The basic difference between homology and
cohomology is thus that cohomology groups are contravariant functors while homol-
ogy groups are covariant. In terms of intrinsic information, however, there is not a big
difference between homology groups and cohomology groups. The homology groups
of a space determine its cohomology groups, and the converse holds at least when
the homology groups are ﬁnitely generated.
What is a little surprising is that contravariance leads to extra structure in co-
homology. This ﬁrst appears in a natural product, called cup product, which makes
the cohomology groups of a space into a ring. This is an extremely useful piece of
additional structure, and much of this chapter is devoted to studying cup products,
which are considerably more subtle than the additive structure of cohomology.
How does contravariance lead to a product in cohomology which is not present in
homology? There is indeed a natural product in homology, called ‘cross product,’ but
this has a somewhat different form, Hi(X)×Hj(Y) -→Hi+j(X×Y). If X and Y are
CW complexes, this product is induced from a map of cellular chains sending a pair
(ei, ej) consisting of a cell of X and a cell of Y to the product cell ei×ej in X×Y .
The details of this construction are given in §3B. Taking X = Y , we thus have the ﬁrst
half of a hypothetical product
Hi(X)×Hj(X) -→Hi+j(X×X) -→Hi+j(X)
The difﬁculty is in deﬁning the second map. The natural thing would be for this to be
induced by a map X×X→X . The multiplication map in a topological group or more
generally an H–space is such a map, and the resulting product, called Pontryagin prod-
uct, can be quite useful; see §3C. But for general X , the only natural maps X×X→X

184
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
are the projections onto one of the factors, and since these projections collapse the
other factor to a point, the resulting product in homology is rather trivial.
With cohomology, however, the situation is better. One still has a cross product
Hi(X)×Hj(Y) -→Hi+j(X×Y) which can be constructed in much the same way as in
homology, so one can again take X = Y and get the ﬁrst half of a product
Hi(X)×Hj(X) -→Hi+j(X×X) -→Hi+j(X)
But now by contravariance the second map would be induced by a map X→X×X ,
and there is an obvious candidate for this map, the diagonal map ∆(x) = (x, x). This
turns out to work very nicely, giving a well-behaved product in cohomology, the cup
product.
Another sort of extra structure in cohomology whose existence is traceable to
contravariance is provided by cohomology operations. These make the cohomology
groups of a space into a module over a certain rather complicated ring. Cohomology
operations lie at a depth somewhat greater than the cup product structure, so we
defer their study to §4L.
The extra layer of algebra in cohomology arising from the dualization in its deﬁ-
nition may seem at ﬁrst to be separating it further from topology, but there are a quite
a few topological situations where cohomology arises quite naturally. One of these is
Poincar´e duality, the topic of the third section of this chapter. Another is obstruction
theory, in §4.3. Characteristic classes in vector bundle theory (see [Milnor-Stasheff]
or [VBKT]) provide yet another instance.
From the viewpoint of homotopy theory, cohomology is in some ways more basic
than homology. As we shall see in §4.3, cohomology has a description in terms of
homotopy classes of maps which is very similar to, and in a sense dual to, the deﬁnition
of homotopy groups. There is an analog of this for homology described in §4F, but
the construction is more complicated.
The Idea of Cohomology
Let us look at a few low-dimensional examples to get an idea of how one might be
led naturally to consider cohomology groups, and to see what properties of a space
they might be measuring. For the sake of simplicity we consider simplicial cohomology
of ∆complexes, rather than singular cohomology of more general spaces.
Taking the simplest case ﬁrst, let X be a 1 dimensional ∆complex, or in other
words an oriented graph. For a ﬁxed abelian group G, the set of all functions from ver-
tices of X to G also forms an abelian group, which we denote by ∆0(X; G). Similarly
the set of all functions assigning an element of G to each edge of X forms an abelian
group ∆1(X; G). We will be interested in the homomorphism δ : ∆0(X; G)→∆1(X; G)
sending ϕ ∈∆0(X; G) to the function δϕ ∈∆1(X; G) whose value on an oriented
edge [v0, v1] is the difference ϕ(v1) −ϕ(v0). For example, X might be the graph

The Idea of Cohomology
185
formed by a system of trails on a mountain, with vertices at the junctions between
trails. The function ϕ could then assign to each junction its elevation above sea level,
in which case δϕ would measure the net change in elevation along the trail from one
junction to the next. Or X might represent a simple electrical circuit with ϕ mea-
suring voltages at the connection points, the vertices, and δϕ measuring changes in
voltage across the components of the circuit, represented by edges.
Regarding the map δ : ∆0(X; G)→∆1(X; G) as a chain complex with 0’s before and
after these two terms, the homology groups of this chain complex are by deﬁnition the
simplicial cohomology groups of X . Speciﬁcally, these groups are H0(X; G) = Ker δ ⊂
∆0(X; G) and H1(X; G) = ∆1(X; G)/ Im δ. For simplicity we are using here the same
notation as will be used for singular cohomology later in the chapter, in anticipation
of the theorem that the two theories coincide for ∆complexes, as we show in §3.1.
The group H0(X; G) is easy to describe explicitly. A function ϕ ∈∆0(X; G) has
δϕ = 0 iff ϕ takes the same value at both ends of each edge of X , and this is
equivalent to saying that ϕ is constant on each component of X . So H0(X; G) is the
group of all functions from the set of components of X to G. This is a direct product
of copies of G, one for each component of X .
The cohomology group H1(X; G) = ∆1(X; G)/ Im δ will be trivial iff the equation
δϕ = ψ has a solution ϕ ∈∆0(X; G) for each ψ ∈∆1(X; G). Solving this equation
means deciding whether specifying the change in ϕ across each edge of X determines
an actual function ϕ ∈∆0(X; G). This is rather like the calculus problem of ﬁnding a
function having a speciﬁed derivative, with the difference operator δ playing the role
of differentiation. As in calculus, if a solution of δϕ = ψ exists, it will be unique up
to adding an element of the kernel of δ, that is, a function which is constant on each
component of X .
The equation δϕ = ψ is always solvable if X is a tree since if we choose arbitrarily
a value for ϕ at a basepoint vertex v0 , then if the change in ϕ across each edge of
X is speciﬁed, this uniquely determines the value of ϕ at every other vertex v by
induction along the unique path from v0 to v in the tree. For a general X which is
not a tree, we may choose a maximal tree in each component of X , and then the values
of ψ on the edges of these maximal trees determine ϕ uniquely up to a constant on
each component of X . But in order for the equation δϕ = ψ to hold, the value of
ψ on each edge not in the maximal trees must equal the difference in the already-
determined values of ϕ at the two ends of the edge. This condition need not be
satisﬁed since ψ can have arbitrary values on these edges.
Thus we see that the
homology group H1(X; G) is a direct product of copies of the group G, one copy for
each edge of X not in one of the chosen maximal trees. This can be compared with
the homology group H1(X; G) which consists of a direct sum of copies of G, one
for each edge of X not in one of the maximal trees. Note that the relation between
H1(X; G) and H1(X; G) is the same as the relation between H0(X; G) and H0(X; G),

186
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
with H0(X; G) being a direct product of copies of G and H0(X; G) a direct sum, with
one copy for each component of X in either case.
Now let us move up a dimension, taking X to be a 2 dimensional ∆complex.
Deﬁne ∆0(X; G) and ∆1(X; G) as before, as functions from vertices and edges of X
to the abelian group G, and deﬁne ∆2(X; G) to be the functions from 2 simplices of
X to G. A homomorphism δ : ∆1(X; G)→∆2(X; G) is deﬁned by δψ([v0, v1, v2]) =
ψ([v0, v1]) + ψ([v1, v2]) −ψ([v0, v2]), a signed sum of the values of ψ on the three
edges in the boundary of [v0, v1, v2], just as δϕ for ϕ ∈∆0(X; G) was a signed
sum of the values of ϕ on the boundary of [v0, v1]. The two maps ∆0(X; G)
δ-----→
∆1(X; G)
δ-----→∆2(X; G) form a chain complex since for ϕ ∈∆0(X; G) we have δδϕ =
 ϕ(v1) −ϕ(v0)

+
 ϕ(v2) −ϕ(v1)

−
 ϕ(v2) −ϕ(v0)

= 0. Extending this chain
complex by 0’s on each end, the resulting homology groups are by deﬁnition the
cohomology groups Hi(X; G).
The formula for the map δ : ∆1(X; G)→∆2(X; G) can be looked at from a couple
different viewpoints. First, we see that δψ = 0 iff ψ satisﬁes the ‘homomorphism’
property ψ([v0, v2]) = ψ([v0, v1])+ψ([v1, v2]), where we think of the edge [v0, v2]
as the ‘product’ of the edges [v0, v1] and [v1, v2]. Thus δψ measures the deviation
of ψ from being additive.
From another point of view, δψ can be regarded as an obstruction to ﬁnding
ϕ ∈∆0(X; G) with ψ = δϕ, in that if ψ = δϕ then δψ = 0, since δδϕ = 0 as
we saw above. We can think of δψ as a local obstruction to solving ψ = δϕ since
it depends only on the values of ψ within individual 2 simplices of X . If this local
obstruction vanishes, then ψ deﬁnes an element of H1(X; G) which is zero iff ψ = δϕ
has an actual solution. This class in H1(X; G) is thus the global obstruction to solving
ψ = δϕ. This situation is similar to the calculus problem of determining whether a
given vector ﬁeld is the gradient vector ﬁeld of some function. The local obstruction
here is the vanishing of the curl of the vector ﬁeld, and the global obstruction is the
vanishing of all line integrals around closed loops in the domain of the vector ﬁeld.
The ‘cocycle condition’ δψ = 0 has a third interpretation of a more geometric
nature when X is a surface and the group G is Z or Z2 . Consider ﬁrst the simpler
case G = Z2 . Then if δψ = 0 on a simplex [v0, v1, v2], either ψ is zero on all three
edges of the simplex, or ψ is zero on one edge and 1 on the other two edges. In the
latter case, suppose we connect these two edges by a curve in [v0, v1, v2].
v
1
1
0
0
v2
v1
v
0
1
1
0
v2
v1
v
1
0
1
0
v2
v1
Doing this for all 2 simplices of X , we obtain a collection Cψ of disjoint curves in X
crossing the 1-skeleton transversely. Since Cψ determines ψ uniquely, we can view

The Idea of Cohomology
187
Cψ as a sort of geometric representation of ψ.
When G = Z we can reﬁne this construction by putting a number of curves in
each 2 simplex, each curve having a trans-
verse orientation indicated by the arrow
in the ﬁgure, the orientation which
v
5
2
3
0
v2
v1
v
1
3
- 2
0
v2
v1
agrees or disagrees with the orien-
tation of each edge according to
the sign of the value of ψ on the edge.
The resulting collection Cψ of disjoint
curves in X can be thought of as something like level curves for a function ϕ with
δϕ = ψ, if such a function exists. The value of
ϕ changes by 1 each time a curve of Cψ
is crossed. For example, if X is a
4
4
3
2
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
disk then H1(X; Z) = 0, as will be
shown in this chapter, so δψ = 0
implies ψ = δϕ for some ϕ, hence
every transverse curve system Cψ forms
the level curves of a function ϕ.
On the
other hand, if X is an annulus then this need no longer
be true, as illustrated in the example shown in the ﬁg-
ure to the right, where the equation ψ = δϕ obviously
1
1
1
1
?
?
1
1
0
0
0
0
has no solution even though δψ = 0. By identifying
the inner and outer boundary circles of this annulus we
obtain a similar example on the torus.
The key to relating cohomology groups to homology groups is the observation
that a function from i simplices of X to G is equivalent to a homomorphism from the
simplicial chain group ∆i(X) to G. This is because ∆i(X) is free abelian with basis the
i simplices of X , and a homomorphism with domain a free abelian group is uniquely
determined by its values on basis elements, which can be assigned arbitrarily. Thus we
have an identiﬁcation of ∆i(X; G) with the group Hom(∆i(X), G) of homomorphisms
∆i(X)→G, which is called the dual group of ∆i(X). There is also a simple relationship
of duality between the homomorphism δ : ∆i(X; G)→∆i+1(X; G) and the boundary
homomorphism ∂: ∆i+1(X)→∆i(X). The general formula for δ is
δϕ([v0, ··· , vi+1]) =
X
j
(−1)jϕ([v0, ··· , bvj, ··· , vi+1])
and the latter sum is just ϕ(∂[v0, ··· , vi+1]). Thus we have δϕ = ϕ∂. In other words,
δ sends each ϕ ∈Hom(∆i(X), G) to the composition ∆i+1(X)
∂-----→∆i(X)
ϕ-----→G, which
in the language of linear algebra means that δ is the dual map of ∂.
Thus we have the algebraic problem of understanding the relationship between
the homology groups of a chain complex and the homology groups of the dual complex
obtained by applying the functor C,Hom(C, G). This is the ﬁrst topic of the chapter.

188
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
Homology groups Hn(X) are the result of a two-stage process: First one forms a
chain complex ··· -----→Cn
∂-----→Cn−1 -----→··· of singular, simplicial, or cellular chains,
then one takes the homology groups of this chain complex, Ker ∂/ Im ∂. To obtain
the cohomology groups Hn(X; G) we interpolate an intermediate step, replacing the
chain groups Cn by the dual groups Hom(Cn, G) and the boundary maps ∂by their
dual maps δ, before forming the cohomology groups Ker δ/ Im δ. The plan for this
section is ﬁrst to sort out the algebra of this dualization process and show that the
cohomology groups are determined algebraically by the homology groups, though
in a somewhat subtle way.
Then after this algebraic excursion we will deﬁne the
cohomology groups of spaces and show these satisfy basic properties very much like
those for homology. The payoff for all this formal work will begin to be apparent in
subsequent sections.
The Universal Coefﬁcient Theorem
Let us begin with a simple example. Consider the chain complex
−−−−−−−−→
0
Z
Z −−−−−−−−→
2
Z −−−−−−−−→
0
Z−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
0
0
=
C3
=
C2
=
C1
=
C0
where Z
2-----→Z is the map x , 2x . If we dualize by taking Hom(−, G) with G = Z,
we obtain the cochain complex
0
Z
Z
2
Z
0
Z
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→−−−−−−→−−−−−−→−−−−−−→
0
0
=
C3
=
C2
=
C1
=
C0
∗
∗
∗
∗
In the original chain complex the homology groups are Z’s in dimensions 0 and 3,
together with a Z2 in dimension 1. In the cohomology of the cochain complex we still
get Z’s in dimensions 0 and 3, but the Z2 has shifted up a dimension, to dimension 2.
More generally, consider any chain complex of ﬁnitely generated free abelian
groups.
It was an exercise in §2.2 to show that such a chain complex splits as
the direct sum of elementary complexes 0→Z→0 and 0→Z
m-----→Z→0. Applying
Hom(−, Z), we obtain the direct sum of the corresponding dual complexes 0←Z←0
and 0←Z
m
←------ Z←0. Thus the cohomology groups are the same as the homology
groups except that torsion is shifted up one dimension. We will see later in this section
that the same relation between homology and cohomology holds whenever the homol-
ogy groups are ﬁnitely generated, even when the chain groups are not ﬁnitely gener-
ated. It would also be quite easy to see in this example what happens if Hom(−, Z) is
replaced by Hom(−, G), since the dual elementary cochain complexes would then be
0←G←0 and 0←G
m
←------ G←0.

Section 3.1.
Cohomology Groups
189
Consider now a completely general chain complex C of free abelian groups, of
the form ··· -→Cn
∂-----→Cn−1 -→···. To dualize this complex we replace each chain
group Cn by its dual cochain group C∗
n = Hom(Cn, G), the group of homomorphisms
Cn→G, and we replace each boundary map ∂: Cn→Cn−1 by its dual coboundary map
δ = ∂∗: C∗
n−1→C∗
n . The reason why δ goes in the opposite direction from ∂, increas-
ing rather than decreasing dimension, is that, for a homomorphism α : A→B , the
dual homomorphism α∗: Hom(B, G)→Hom(A, G) is deﬁned by α∗(ϕ) = ϕα, so α∗
sends ϕ : B→G to the composition A
α-----→B
ϕ-----→G. Dual homomorphisms obviously
satisfy (αβ)∗= β∗α∗, 11∗= 11, and 0∗= 0. In particular, since ∂∂= 0 it follows that
δδ = 0, so the cohomology group Hn(C; G) can be deﬁned as the ‘homology group’
Ker δ/ Im δ at C∗
n in the cochain complex ··· -→C∗
n
δ-----→C∗
n+1 -→···.
Our goal is to show that the cohomology groups Hn(C; G) are determined solely
by G and the homology groups Hn(C) = Ker ∂/ Im ∂. A ﬁrst guess might be that
Hn(C; G) is isomorphic to Hom(Hn(C), G), but this is overly optimistic, as shown by
the example above where H2 was zero while H2 was nonzero. Nevertheless, there is
a natural map h : Hn(C; G)→Hom(Hn(C), G), deﬁned as follows. Denote the cycles
and boundaries by Zn = Ker ∂⊂Cn and Bn = Im ∂⊂Cn . A class in Hn(C; G) is
represented by a homomorphism ϕ : Cn→G such that δϕ = 0, i.e., ϕ∂= 0, or in
other words, ϕ vanishes on Bn . The restriction ϕ0 = ϕ||Zn then induces a quotient
homomorphism ϕ0 : Zn/Bn→G, an element of Hom(Hn(C), G). If ϕ is in Im δ, say
ϕ = δψ = ψ∂, then ϕ is zero on Zn , so ϕ0 = 0 and hence also ϕ0 = 0. Thus there is
a well-deﬁned quotient map h : Hn(C; G)→Hom(Hn(C), G) sending the cohomology
class of ϕ to ϕ0 . Obviously h is a homomorphism.
It is not hard to see that h is surjective. The short exact sequence
0 -→Zn -→Cn
∂-----→Bn−1 -→0
splits since Bn−1 is free, being a subgroup of the free abelian group Cn−1 .
Thus
there is a projection homomorphism p : Cn→Zn which restricts to the identity on Zn .
Composing with p gives a way of extending homomorphisms ϕ0 : Zn→G to homo-
morphisms ϕ = ϕ0p : Cn→G. In particular, this extends homomorphisms Zn→G
which vanish on Bn , i.e., homomorphisms Hn(C)→G, to homomorphisms Cn→G
which still vanish on Bn , i.e., elements of Ker δ. Thus we have a homomorphism
Hom(Hn(C), G)→Ker δ.
Composing this with the quotient map Ker δ→Hn(C; G)
gives a homomorphism from Hom(Hn(C), G) to Hn(C; G). If we follow this map by
h we get the identity map on Hom(Hn(C), G) since the effect of composing with h
is simply to undo the effect of extending homomorphisms via p. This shows that h
is surjective. In fact it shows that we have a split short exact sequence
0 -→Ker h -→Hn(C; G)
h-----→Hom(Hn(C), G) -→0
The remaining task is to analyze Ker h. A convenient way to start the process is
to consider not just the chain complex C , but also its subcomplexes consisting of the

190
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
cycles and the boundaries. Thus we consider the commutative diagram of short exact
sequences
(i)
Cn 1
+ −−−−−→
Zn 1
+ −−−−−→
−−−−−→
B
0
0
n−−−−−→
∂
∂
Cn−−−−−→
Zn−−−−−→
−−−−−→
B
0
0
0
0
−−−−−→
∂
−−→
−−→
−−→
-
n 1
where the vertical boundary maps on Zn+1 and Bn are the restrictions of the boundary
map in the complex C , hence are zero. Dualizing (i) gives a commutative diagram
(ii)
Cn 1
+
−−−−−→
Zn 1
+
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
B
0
0
n
−−−−−→
Cn
−−−−−→
Zn
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
B
0
0
0
0
−−−−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
-
n 1
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
δ
The rows here are exact since, as we have already remarked, the rows of (i) split, and
the dual of a split short exact sequence is a split short exact sequence because of the
natural isomorphism Hom(A ⊕B, G) ≈Hom(A, G) ⊕Hom(B, G).
We may view (ii), like (i), as part of a short exact sequence of chain complexes,
with the coboundary maps in the Z∗
n and B∗
n complexes zero since they are the duals
of those in (i). The associated long exact sequence of homology groups then has the
form
(iii)
···←------ B∗
n←------ Z∗
n←------ Hn(C; G)←------ B∗
n−1←------ Z∗
n−1←------ ···
The ‘boundary maps’ Z∗
n→B∗
n in this long exact sequence are in fact the dual maps
i∗
n of the inclusions in : Bn→Zn , as one sees by recalling how these boundary maps
are deﬁned: In (ii) one takes an element of Z∗
n , pulls this back to C∗
n , applies δ to
get an element of C∗
n+1 , then pulls this back to B∗
n . The ﬁrst of these steps extends
a homomorphism ϕ0 : Zn→G to ϕ : Cn→G, the second step composes this ϕ with
∂, and the third step undoes this composition and restricts ϕ to Bn . The net effect
is just to restrict ϕ0 from Zn to Bn .
A long exact sequence can always be broken up into short exact sequences, and
doing this for the sequence (iii) yields short exact sequences
(iv)
0←------ Ker i∗
n←------ Hn(C; G)←------ Coker i∗
n−1←------ 0
The group Ker i∗
n can be identiﬁed naturally with Hom(Hn(C), G) since elements of
Ker i∗
n are homomorphisms Zn→G which vanish on the subgroup Bn , and such ho-
momorphisms are the same as homomorphisms Zn/Bn→G. Under this identiﬁcation
of Ker i∗
n with Hom(Hn(C), G), the map Hn(C; G)→Ker i∗
n in (iv) becomes the map
h considered earlier. Thus we can rewrite (iv) as a short exact sequence
(v)
0 -→Coker i∗
n−1 -→Hn(C; G)
h-----→Hom(Hn(C), G) -→0
which splits.
Our objective now is to show that the more mysterious term Coker i∗
n−1 de-
pends only on Hn−1(C) and G, in a natural, functorial way. First let us observe that

Section 3.1.
Cohomology Groups
191
Coker i∗
n−1 would be zero if it were always true that the dual of a short exact sequence
was exact, since the dual of the short exact sequence
(vi)
0 -→Bn−1
in−1
------------→Zn−1 -→Hn−1(C) -→0
is the sequence
(vii)
0←------ B∗
n−1
i∗
n−1
←------------- Z∗
n−1←------ Hn−1(C)∗←------ 0
so if this were exact at B∗
n−1 , i∗
n−1 would be surjective, hence Coker i∗
n−1 would be
zero. This argument does apply if Hn−1(C) happens to be free, since (vi) splits in this
case, which implies that (vii) is also split exact. So in this case the map h in (v) is an
isomorphism. However, in the general case it is easy to produce examples of short
exact sequences whose duals are not exact, e.g., if we dualize 0 -→Z
n-----→Z -→Zn -→0
by applying Hom(−, Z) we get 0←------ Z
n
←------ Z←------ 0←------ 0 which fails to be exact at the
left-hand Z, precisely the place we are interested in for Coker i∗
n−1 .
We might mention in passing that the loss of exactness at the left end of a short
exact sequence after dualization is in fact all that goes wrong, in view of the following:
Exercise. If A→B→C→0 is exact, then dualizing by applying Hom(−, G) yields an
exact sequence A∗←B∗←C∗←0.
However, we will not need this fact in what follows.
The exact sequence (vi) has the special feature that both Bn−1 and Zn−1 are free,
so (vi) can be regarded as a free resolution of Hn−1(C), where a free resolution of an
abelian group H is an exact sequence
··· -→F2
f2
------------→F1
f1
------------→F0
f0
------------→H -→0
with each Fn free. If we dualize this free resolution by applying Hom(−, G), we may
lose exactness, but at least we get a chain complex (or perhaps we should say ‘cochain
complex,’ but algebraically there is no difference):
···←------ F∗
1
f ∗
1
←------------- F∗
0
f ∗
0
←------------- H∗←------ 0
Let us use the temporary notation Hn(F; G) for the homology group Ker f ∗
n+1/ Im f ∗
n
of this dual complex.
Note that the group Coker i∗
n−1 which we are interested in
is H1(F; G) where F is the free resolution in (vi). Part (b) of the following lemma
therefore shows that Coker i∗
n−1 depends only on Hn−1(C) and G.

192
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
Lemma 3.1.
(a) Given free resolutions F and F′ of abelian groups H and H′ , then every homo-
morphism α : H→H′ can be extended to a chain map between these two free
resolutions:
−−−−−→
F
f
1
1
−−−−−→
−−−−−→F
f
2
2
−−−−−→
F
−−−−−→
H
0
f
0
0
0
...
−−−−−→
F
f
1
1
−−−−−→
−−−−−→F
f
2
2
−−−−−→
F
−−−−−→
H
0
f
0
0
...
′
′
′
′
′
′
′
−−−−→
α
−−−−→
α
1
−−−−→
α
2
−−−−→
α
Furthermore, any two such chain maps extending α are chain homotopic.
(b) Given any two free resolutions F and F′ of H , there are canonical isomorphisms
Hn(F; G) ≈Hn(F′; G) for all n.
Proof: The αi ’s will be constructed inductively. Since the Fi ’s are free, it sufﬁces to
deﬁne each αi on a basis for Fi . To deﬁne α0 , observe that surjectivity of f ′
0 implies
that for each basis element x of F0 there exists x′ ∈F′
0 such that f ′
0(x′) = αf0(x),
so we deﬁne α0(x) = x′ . We would like to deﬁne α1 in the same way, sending a basis
element x ∈F1 to an element x′ ∈F′
1 such that f ′
1(x′) = α0f1(x). Such an x′ will
exist if α0f1(x) lies in Im f ′
1 = Ker f ′
0 , which it does since f ′
0α0f1 = αf0f1 = 0. The
same procedure deﬁnes all the subsequent αi ’s.
If we have another chain map extending α given by maps α′
i : Fi→F′
i , then the
differences βi = αi −α′
i deﬁne a chain map extending the zero map β : H→H′ . It
will sufﬁce to construct maps λi : Fi→F′
i+1 deﬁning a chain homotopy from βi to 0,
i.e., with βi = f ′
i+1λi + λi−1fi . The λi ’s are constructed inductively by a procedure
much like the construction of the αi ’s.
When i = 0 we let λ−1 : H→F′
0 be zero,
and then the desired relation becomes β0 = f ′
1λ0 . We can achieve this by letting
λ0 send a basis element x to an element x′ ∈F′
1 such that f ′
1(x′) = β0(x). Such
an x′ exists since Im f ′
1 = Ker f ′
0 and f ′
0β0(x) = βf0(x) = 0.
For the inductive
step we wish to deﬁne λi to take a basis element x ∈Fi to an element x′ ∈F′
i+1
such that f ′
i+1(x′) = βi(x) −λi−1fi(x). This will be possible if βi(x) −λi−1fi(x)
lies in Im f ′
i+1 = Ker f ′
i , which will hold if f ′
i (βi −λi−1fi) = 0. Using the relation
f ′
i βi = βi−1fi and the relation βi−1 = f ′
i λi−1 + λi−2fi−1 which holds by induction, we
have
f ′
i (βi −λi−1fi) = f ′
i βi −f ′
i λi−1fi
= βi−1fi −f ′
i λi−1fi = (βi−1 −f ′
i λi−1)fi = λi−2fi−1fi = 0
as desired. This ﬁnishes the proof of (a).
The maps αn constructed in (a) dualize to maps α∗
n : F′∗
n →F∗
n forming a chain
map between the dual complexes F′∗and F∗. Therefore we have induced homomor-
phisms on cohomology α∗: Hn(F′; G)→Hn(F; G). These do not depend on the choice
of αn ’s since any other choices α′
n are chain homotopic, say via chain homotopies
λn , and then α∗
n and α′∗
n
are chain homotopic via the dual maps λ∗
n since the dual
of the relation αi −α′
i = f ′
i+1λi + λi−1fi is α∗
i −α′∗
i
= λ∗
i f ′∗
i+1 + f ∗
i λ∗
i−1 .

Section 3.1.
Cohomology Groups
193
The induced homomorphisms α∗: Hn(F′; G)→Hn(F; G) satisfy (βα)∗= α∗β∗
for a composition H
α-----→H′
β-----→H′′ with a free resolution F′′ of H′′ also given, since
one can choose the compositions βnαn of extensions αn of α and βn of β as an
extension of βα. In particular, if we take α to be an isomorphism and β to be its
inverse, with F′′ = F , then α∗β∗= (βα)∗= 11, the latter equality coming from the
obvious extension of 11 : H→H by the identity map of F . The same reasoning shows
β∗α∗= 11, so α∗is an isomorphism. Finally, if we specialize further, taking α to
be the identity but with two different free resolutions F and F′ , we get a canonical
isomorphism 11∗: Hn(F′; G)→Hn(F; G).
⊔⊓
Every abelian group H has a free resolution of the form 0→F1→F0→H→0,
with Fi = 0 for i > 1. Namely, choose a set of generators for H and let F0 be a free
abelian group with basis in one-to-one correspondence with these generators, and
then we have a surjective homomorphism f0 : F0→H sending the basis elements to
the chosen generators. The kernel of f0 is free, being a subgroup of a free abelian
group, so we can let F1 be this kernel with f1 : F1→F0 the inclusion, and we can then
take Fi = 0 for i > 1. For this free resolution we obviously have Hn(F; G) = 0 for
n > 1, so this must also be true for all free resolutions. Thus the only interesting group
Hn(F; G) is H1(F; G). As we have seen, this group depends only on H and G, and the
standard notation for it is Ext(H, G). This notation arises from the fact that Ext(H, G)
has an interpretation as the set of isomorphism classes of extensions of G by H , i.e.,
short exact sequences 0→G→J→H→0, with a natural deﬁnition of isomorphism
between such exact sequences. This is explained in books on homological algebra, for
example [K.Brown], [Hilton-Stammbach], or [MacLane 63]. However, this interpretation
of Ext(H, G) is rarely needed in algebraic topology.
Summarizing, we have established the following algebraic result:
Theorem 3.2. If a chain complex C of free abelian groups has homology groups
Hn(C), then the cohomology groups Hn(C; G) of the cochain complex Hom(Cn, G)
are determined by split exact sequences
0 -→Ext(Hn−1(C), G) -→Hn(C; G)
h-----→Hom(Hn(C), G) -→0
⊔⊓
This is known as the universal coefﬁcient theorem for cohomology because
it is formally analogous to the universal coefﬁcient theorem for homology in §3.A
which expresses homology with arbitrary coefﬁcients in terms of homology with Z
coefﬁcients.
Computing Ext(H, G) for ﬁnitely generated H is not difﬁcult using the following
three properties:
Ext(H ⊕H′, G) ≈Ext(H, G) ⊕Ext(H′, G)
Ext(H, G) = 0
if H is free.
Ext(Zn, G) ≈G/nG

194
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
The ﬁrst of these comes from using the direct sum of free resolutions of H and H′
as a free resolution for H ⊕H′ . If H is free, the free resolution 0→H→H→0 yields
the second property, while the third comes from dualizing the free resolution
0 -→Z
n-----→Z -→Zn -→0
to produce an exact sequence
Z
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
0
0
==
==
==
(
)
n
n
n
n
,
Ext
G
Z
−−−−−−→
(
)
,
Hom
G
Z
−−−−−−→
(
)
,
Hom
G
Z
(
)
,
Hom
G
G/nG
G
−−−−−−−−→
G
In particular, these three properties imply that Ext(H, Z) is isomorphic to the torsion
subgroup of H if H is ﬁnitely generated. Since Hom(H, Z) is isomorphic to the free
part of H if H is ﬁnitely generated, we have:
Corollary 3.3. If the homology groups Hn and Hn−1 of a chain complex C of free
abelian groups are ﬁnitely generated, with torsion subgroups Tn ⊂Hn and Tn−1 ⊂
Hn−1 , then Hn(C; Z) ≈(Hn/Tn)⊕Tn−1 .
⊔⊓
It is useful in many situations to know that the short exact sequences in the
universal coefﬁcient theorem are natural, i.e., a chain map α between chain complexes
C and C′ of free abelian groups induces a commutative diagram
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
0
0
(
h
,
Ext
-
C
Hn 1(
) G)
−−−−−−→
(
,
Hom
C
Hn(
) G)
;
C
H
n(
G)
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
0
0
(
h
,
Ext
-
C
Hn 1(
) G)
)
−−−−−−→
(
,
Hom
C
Hn(
) G)
;
C
H
n(
(
G
)
′
′
′
∗
α
∗
∗
α
(
)
∗
∗
α
This is apparent if one just thinks about the construction; one obviously obtains a map
between the short exact sequences (iv) containing Ker i∗
n and Coker i∗
n−1 , the identi-
ﬁcation Ker i∗
n = Hom(Hn(C), G) is certainly natural, and the proof of Lemma 3.1
shows that Ext(H, G) depends naturally on H .
However, the splitting in the universal coefﬁcient theorem is not natural since
it depends on the choice of the projections p : Cn→Zn . An exercise at the end of
the section gives a topological example showing that the splitting in fact cannot be
natural.
The naturality property together with the ﬁve-lemma proves:
Corollary 3.4. If a chain map between chain complexes of free abelian groups in-
duces an isomorphism on homology groups, then it induces an isomorphism on co-
homology groups with any coefﬁcient group G.
⊔⊓
One could attempt to generalize the algebraic machinery of the universal coefﬁ-
cient theorem by replacing abelian groups by modules over a chosen ring R and Hom
by HomR , the R module homomorphisms. The key fact about abelian groups that
was needed was that subgroups of free abelian groups are free. Submodules of free

Section 3.1.
Cohomology Groups
195
R modules are free if R is a principal ideal domain, so in this case the generalization
is automatic. One obtains natural split short exact sequences
0 -→ExtR(Hn−1(C), G) -→Hn(C; G)
h-----→HomR(Hn(C), G) -→0
where C is a chain complex of free R modules with boundary maps R module ho-
momorphisms, and the coefﬁcient group G is also an R module. If R is a ﬁeld, for
example, then R modules are always free and so the ExtR term is always zero since
we may choose free resolutions of the form 0→F0→H→0.
It is interesting to note that the proof of Lemma 3.1 on the uniqueness of free res-
olutions is valid for modules over an arbitrary ring R. It is easy to see moveover that
every R module H has a free resolution, constructed in the following way. Choose a
set of generators for H as an R module, and let F0 be a free R modlue with basis in
one-to-one correspondence with these generators. Thus we have a surjective homo-
morphism f0 : F0→H sending the basis elements to the chosen generators. Now re-
peat the process with Ker f0 in place of H , constructing a homomorphism f1 : F1→F0
sending a basis for a free R module F1 onto generators for Ker f0 . And similarly for
Ker f1 , etc.
By Lemma 3.1 the groups Hn(F; G) depend only on H and G, not the free res-
olution F . The standard notation for Hn(F; G) is Extn
R(H, G). For sufﬁciently com-
plicated rings R the groups Extn
R(H, G) can be nonzero for n > 1. In certain more
advanced topics in algebraic topology these Extn
R groups play an essential role.
(A parenthetical remark about the deﬁnition of Extn
R(H, G): By the Exercise stated
earlier, exactness of F1→F0→H→0 implies exactness of F∗
1 ←F∗
0 ←H∗←0. This
means that H0(F; G) as deﬁned above is zero.
Rather than having Ext0
R(H, G) be
automatically zero, it is better to deﬁne Hn(F; G) as the nth homology group of
the complex ···←F∗
1 ←F∗
0 ←0 with the term H∗omitted. This can be viewed as
deﬁning the groups Hn(F; G) to be unreduced cohomology groups. With this modiﬁed
deﬁnition we have Ext0
R(H, G) = H0(F; G) = H∗= HomR(H, G) by the exactness
of F∗
1 ←F∗
0 ←H∗←0. The real reason why unreduced Ext groups are better than
reduced groups is perhaps to be found in certain exact sequences involving Ext and
Hom derived in §3.G, which would not work with the Hom terms replaced by zeros.)
Cohomology of Spaces
Now we return to topology. Given a space X and an abelian group G, we deﬁne
the group Cn(X; G) of singular n cochains with coefﬁcients in G to be the dual group
Hom(Cn(X), G) of the singular chain group Cn(X). Thus an n-cochain ϕ ∈Cn(X; G)
assigns to each singular n simplex σ : ∆n→X a value ϕ(σ) ∈G. Since the singular
n simplices form a basis for Cn(X), these values can be chosen arbitrarily, hence
n cochains are exactly equivalent to functions from singular n simplices to G.
The coboundary map δ : Cn(X; G)→Cn+1(X; G) is the dual ∂∗, so for a cochain
ϕ ∈Cn(X; G), its coboundary δϕ is the composition Cn+1(X)
∂-----→Cn(X)
ϕ-----→G. This

196
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
means that for a singular (n + 1) simplex σ : ∆n+1→X we have
δϕ(σ) =
X
i
(−1)iϕ(σ ||[v0, ··· , bvi, ··· , vn+1])
It is automatic that δ2 = 0 since δ2 is the dual of ∂2 = 0. Therefore we can deﬁne the
cohomology group Hn(X; G) with coefﬁcients in G to be the quotient Ker δ/ Im δ at
Cn(X; G) in the cochain complex
···←------ Cn+1(X; G)
δ
←------------- Cn(X; G)
δ
←------------- Cn−1(X; G)←------ ···←------ C0(X; G)←------ 0
Elements of Ker δ are cocycles, and elements of Im δ are coboundaries. For a cochain
ϕ to be a cocycle means that δϕ = ϕ∂= 0, i.e., ϕ vanishes on boundaries.
Since the chain groups Cn(X) are free, the algebraic universal coefﬁcient theorem
takes on the topological guise of split short exact sequences
0 -→Ext(Hn−1(X), G) -→Hn(X; G) -→Hom(Hn(X), G) -→0
which describe how cohomology groups with arbitrary coefﬁcients are determined
purely algebraically by homology groups with Z coefﬁcients. For example, if the ho-
mology groups of X are ﬁnitely generated then Corollary 3.3 tells how to compute
the cohomology groups Hn(X; Z) from the homology groups.
When n = 0 there is no Ext term, and the universal coefﬁcient theorem reduces
to an isomorphism H0(X; G) ≈Hom(H1(X), G). This can also be seen directly from
the deﬁnitions. Since singular 0 simplices are just points of X , a cochain in C0(X; G)
is an arbitrary function ϕ : X→G, not necessarily continuous. For this to be a cocycle
means that for each singular 1 simplex σ : [v0, v1]→X we have δϕ(σ) = ϕ(∂σ) =
σ(v1)−σ(v0) = 0 , i.e., ϕ is constant on path-components of X . Thus H0(X; G) is all
the functions from path-components of X to G. This is the same as Hom(H0(X), G).
In the case of H1(X; G) the universal coefﬁcient theorem also gives an isomor-
phism H1(X; G) ≈Hom(H1(X), G) since Ext(H0(X), G) = 0 because H0(X) is free.
If X is path-connected, H1(X) is the abelianization of π1(X), and we can identify
Hom(H1(X), G) with Hom(π1(X), G) since G is abelian.
The universal coefﬁcient theorem has a simpler form if we take coefﬁcients in
a ﬁeld F for both homology and cohomology.
In §2.2 we deﬁned the homology
groups Hn(X; F) as the homology groups of the chain complex of free F modules
Cn(X; F), where Cn(X; F) has basis the singular n simplices in X . The dual com-
plex HomF(Cn(X; F), F) of F module homomorphisms is the same as Hom(Cn(X), F)
since both can be identiﬁed with the functions from singular n simplices to F . Hence
the homology groups of the dual complex HomF(Cn(X; F), F) are the cohomology
groups Hn(X; F). In the generalization of the universal coefﬁcient theorem to the
case of modules over a principal ideal domain, the ExtF terms vanish since F is a
ﬁeld, so we obtain isomorphisms
Hn(X; F) ≈HomF(Hn(X; F), F)

Section 3.1.
Cohomology Groups
197
Thus, with ﬁeld coefﬁcients, cohomology is the exact dual of homology. Note that
when F = Zp or Q we have HomF(H, G) = Hom(H, G), the group homomorphisms,
for arbitrary F modules G and H .
For the remainder of this section we will go through the main features of singular
homology and check that they extend without much difﬁculty to cohomology.
(1) Reduced Groups. Reduced cohomology groups eHn(X; G) can be deﬁned by dual-
izing the augmented chain complex ···→C0(X)
ε-----→Z→0, then taking Ker / Im. As
with homology, this gives eHn(X; G) = Hn(X; G) for n > 0, and the universal coefﬁ-
cient theorem identiﬁes eH0(X; G) with Hom( eH0(X), G). We can describe the differ-
ence between eH0(X; G) and H0(X; G) more explicitly by using the interpretation of
H0(X; G) as functions X→G which are constant on path-components. Recall that the
augmentation map ε : C0(X)→Z sends each singular 0 simplex σ to 1, so the dual
map ε∗sends a homomorphism ϕ : Z→G to the composition C0(X)
ε-----→Z
ϕ-----→G,
which is the function σ , ϕ(1). This is a constant function X→G, and since ϕ(1)
can be any element of G, the image of ε∗consists of precisely the constant func-
tions. Thus eH0(X; G) is all functions X→G which are constant on path-components,
modulo the functions which are constant on all of X .
(2) Relative Groups and the Long Exact Sequence of a Pair. To deﬁne relative groups
Hn(X, A; G) for a pair (X, A) we ﬁrst dualize the short exact sequence
0 -→Cn(A)
i-----→Cn(X)
j-----→Cn(X, A) -→0
by applying Hom(−, G) to get
0←------ Cn(A; G)
i∗
←------ Cn(X; G)
j∗
←------ Cn(X, A; G)←------ 0
where by deﬁnition Cn(X, A; G) = Hom(Cn(X, A), G). This sequence is exact by the
following direct argument. The map i∗restricts a cochain on X to a cochain on A.
Thus for a function from singular n simplices in X to G, the image of this function
under i∗is obtained by restricting the domain of the function to singular n simplices
in A. Every function from singular n simplices in A to G can be extended to be
deﬁned on all singular n simplices in X , for example by assigning the value 0 to
all singular n simplices not in A, so i∗is surjective. The kernel of i∗consists of
cochains taking the value 0 on singular n simplices in A.
Such cochains are the
same as homomorphisms Cn(X, A) = Cn(X)/Cn(A)→G, so the kernel of i∗is exactly
Cn(X, A; G) = Hom(Cn(X, A), G), giving the desired exactness. Notice that we can
view Cn(X, A; G) as the functions from singular n simplices in X to G which vanish
on simplices in A, since the basis for Cn(X) consisting of singular n-simplices in X
is the disjoint union of the simplices with image contained in A and the simplices
with image not contained in A.
Relative coboundary maps δ : Cn(X, A; G)→Cn+1(X, A; G) are obtained as restric-
tions of the absolute δ’s, so relative cohomology groups Hn(X, A; G) are deﬁned. The

198
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
fact that the relative cochain group is a subgroup of the absolute cochains, namely the
cochains which vanish on chains in A, means that relative cohomology is conceptually
a little simpler than relative homology.
The maps i∗and j∗commute with δ since i and j commute with ∂, so the
preceding displayed short exact sequence of cochain groups is part of a short exact
sequence of cochain complexes, giving rise to an associated long exact sequence of
cohomology groups
··· -→Hn(X, A; G)
j∗
-----→Hn(X; G)
i∗-----→Hn(A; G)
δ-----→Hn+1(X, A; G) -→···
By similar reasoning one obtains a long exact sequence of reduced cohomology groups
for a pair (X, A) with A nonempty, where eHn(X, A; G) = Hn(X, A; G) for all n, as in
homology. Taking A to be a point x0 , this exact sequence gives an identiﬁcation of
eHn(X; G) with Hn(X, x0; G).
More generally there is a long exact sequence for a triple (X, A, B) coming from
the short exact sequences
0←------ Cn(A, B; G)
i∗
←------ Cn(X, B; G)
j∗
←------ Cn(X, A; G)←------ 0
The long exact sequence of reduced cohomology can be regarded as the special case
that B is a point.
The connecting homomorphism δ : Hn(A; G)→Hn+1(X, A; G) and its homology
analog ∂: Hn+1(X, A)→Hn(A) are deﬁned via the following diagrams:
G )
;
X G
C (
)
;
n
A G
C (
)
;
n
X
C
(
n 1
+
G )
;
X A
C
(
,
n 1
+
−−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−−→
G )
;
X G
C (
)
;
A G
C (
)
;
n
n
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
X
C
(
n 1
+
n 1
+
G )
;
X A
C
(
,
−−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−−→
The connecting homomorphisms are represented by the dashed arrows, which are
well-deﬁned only when the chain and cochain groups are replaced by homology and
cohomology groups. Since the left-hand diagram is the dual of the right-hand one,
apart from the dashed arrows, one would expect that the dashed arrows also have a
close dual relationship, via a commutative square
A G
H (
)
;
G )
;
n
−−−−−−−−−→
X A
H
(
,
n 1
+
Hom (
Hom (
A
G
H (
)
),
G )
),
n
−−−−−→
X A
H
(
,
n 1
+
δ
∗
∂
−−−−−→
h
−−−−−→
h
To verify commutativity, represent an element α ∈Hn(A; G) by a cocycle ϕ ∈
Cn(A; G). To apply the horizontal map δ in the square, we ﬁrst extend ϕ to a cochain
ϕ ∈Cn(X; G), say by letting it take the value 0 on singular simplices not in A. Then
we compose ϕ with ∂: Cn+1(X)→Cn(X) to get a cochain ϕ∂∈Cn+1(X; G) which
actually lies in Cn+1(X, A; G) since the original ϕ was a cocycle in A. This cochain
ϕ∂∈Cn+1(X, A; G) represents δα in Hn+1(X, A; G). Now we apply the map h, which

Section 3.1.
Cohomology Groups
199
simply restricts the domain of ϕ∂to relative cycles in Cn+1(X, A), i.e., (n+1) chains
in X whose boundary lies in A. On such chains we have ϕ∂= ϕ∂since the extension
of ϕ to ϕ is irrelevant. The net result of all this is that hδ(α) is represented by ϕ∂.
Let us compare this with ∂∗h(α). Applying h to ϕ restricts its domain to cycles in
A. Then applying ∂∗composes with the map which sends a relative (n + 1) cycle in
X to its boundary in A. Thus ∂∗h(α) is represented by ϕ∂just as hδ(α) was, and
so the square commutes.
(3) Induced Homomorphisms. Dual to the chain maps f♯: Cn(X)→Cn(Y) induced
by f : X→Y are the cochain maps f ♯: Cn(Y; G)→Cn(X; G). The relation f♯∂= ∂f♯
dualizes to δf ♯= f ♯δ, so f ♯induces homomorphisms f ∗: Hn(Y; G)→Hn(X; G).
In the relative case a map f : (X, A)→(Y, B) induces f ∗: Hn(Y, B; G)→Hn(X, A; G)
by the same reasoning, and in fact f induces a map between short exact sequences of
cochain complexes, hence a map between long exact sequences of cohomology groups,
with commuting squares. The properties (f g)♯= g♯f ♯and 11♯= 11 imply (f g)∗=
g∗f ∗and 11∗= 11, so X , Hn(X; G) and (X, A) , Hn(X, A; G) are contravariant
functors, the ‘contra’ indicating that induced maps go in the reverse direction.
The algebraic universal coefﬁcient theorem applies also to relative cohomology
since the relative chain groups Cn(X, A) are free, and there is a naturality statement:
A map f : (X, A)→(Y, B) induces a commutative diagram
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
0
0
(
h
f
f
,
,
Ext
-
X A
,
X A
,
X A
Hn 1(
) G)
−−−−−−→
(
,
Hom Hn(
) G)
;
H
n(
G)
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
0
0
(
h
,
,
Ext
-
Y B
,
Y B
,
Y B
Hn 1(
) G)
)
−−−−−−→
(
,
Hom Hn(
) G)
;
H
n(
(
G
)
∗
∗
∗
f
(
)
∗
∗
This follows from the naturality of the algebraic universal coefﬁcient sequences since
the vertical maps are induced by the chain maps f♯: Cn(X, A)→Cn(Y, B). When the
subspaces A and B are empty we obtain the absolute forms of these results.
(4) Homotopy Invariance.
The statement is that if f ≃g : (X, A)→(Y, B), then
f ∗= g∗: Hn(Y, B)→Hn(X, A).
This is proved by direct dualization of the proof
for homology. From the proof of Theorem 2.10 we have a chain homotopy P satis-
fying g♯−f♯= ∂P + P∂. This relation dualizes to g♯−f ♯= P ∗δ + δP ∗, so P ∗is a
chain homotopy between the maps f ♯, g♯: Cn(Y; G)→Cn(X; G). This restricts also
to a chain homotopy between f ♯and g♯on relative cochains, the cochains which
are zero on singular simplices in the subspaces B and A. Since f ♯and g♯are chain
homotopic, they induce the same homomorphism f ∗= g∗on cohomology.
(5) Excision. For cohomology this says that for subspaces Z ⊂A ⊂X with the closure
of Z contained in the interior of A, the inclusion i : (X −Z, A −Z)> (X, A) induces
isomorphisms i∗: Hn(X, A; G)→Hn(X −Z, A −Z; G) for all n. This follows from
the corresponding result for homology by the naturality of the universal coefﬁcient
theorem and the ﬁve-lemma. Alternatively, if one wishes to avoid appealing to the

200
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
universal coefﬁcient theorem, the proof of excision for homology dualizes easily to
cohomology by the following argument. In the proof for homology there were chain
maps ρ : Cn(X)→Cn(A + B) and ι : Cn(A + B)→Cn(X) such that ρι = 11 and 11 −
ιρ = ∂D + D∂for a chain homotopy D. Dualizing by taking Hom(−, G), we have
maps ρ∗and ι∗between Cn(A + B; G) and Cn(X; G) which induce isomorphisms
on cohomology since ι∗ρ∗= 11 and 11 −ρ∗ι∗= D∗δ + δD∗. By the ﬁve-lemma,
the maps Cn(X, A; G)→Cn(A + B, A; G) also induce isomorphisms on cohomology.
Since there is an obvious identiﬁcation of Cn(A + B, A; G) with Cn(B, A ∩B; G), we
get isomorphisms Hn(X, A) ≈Hn(B, A ∩B; G) induced by the inclusion (B, A ∩B)>
(X, A).
(6) Axioms for Cohomology. These are exactly dual to the axioms for homology.
Restricting attention to CW complexes again, a (reduced) cohomology theory is a
sequence of contravariant functors ehn from CW complexes to abelian groups, to-
gether with natural coboundary homomorphisms δ : ehn(A)→ehn+1(X/A) for CW pairs
(X, A), satisfying the following axioms:
(1) If f ≃g : X→Y , then f ∗= g∗: ehn(Y)→ehn(X).
(2) For each CW pair (X, A) there is a long exact sequence
···
δ------------→ehn(X/A)
q∗
------------→ehn(X)
i∗
------------→ehn(A)
δ------------→ehn+1(X/A)
q∗
------------→···
where i is the inclusion and q is the quotient map.
(3) For a wedge sum X =
W
α Xα with inclusions iα : Xα > X , the product map
Q
αi∗
α : ehn(X)→
Q
α ehn(Xα) is an isomorphism for each n.
We have already seen that the ﬁrst axiom holds for singular cohomology. The sec-
ond axiom follows from excision in the same way as for homology, via isomorphisms
eHn(X/A; G) ≈Hn(X, A; G). Note that the third axiom involves direct product, rather
than the direct sum which appeared in the homology version.
This is because of
the natural isomorphism Hom(
L
αAα, G) ≈
Q
αHom(Aα, G), which implies that the
cochain complex of a disjoint union
`
α Xα is the direct product of the cochain com-
plexes of the individual Xα ’s, and this direct product splitting passes through to co-
homology groups. The same argument applies in the relative case, so we get isomor-
phisms Hn(
`
α Xα,
`
α Aα; G) ≈
Q
αHn(Xα, Aα; G). The third axiom is obtained by tak-
ing the Aα ’s to be basepoints xα and passing to the quotient
`
α Xα/
`
α xα =
W
α Xα .
The relation between reduced and unreduced cohomology theories is the same as
for homology, as described in §2.3.
(7) Simplicial Cohomology. If X is a ∆complex and A ⊂X is a subcomplex, then the
simplicial chain groups ∆n(X, A) dualize to simplicial cochain groups ∆n(X, A; G) =
Hom(∆n(X, A), G), and the resulting cohomology groups are by deﬁnition the sim-
plicial cohomology groups Hn
∆(X, A; G). Since the inclusions ∆n(X, A) ⊂Cn(X, A)
induce isomorphisms H∆
n(X, A) ≈Hn(X, A), Corollary 3.4 implies that the dual maps
Cn(X, A; G)→∆n(X, A; G) also induce isomorphisms Hn(X, A; G) ≈Hn
∆(X, A; G).

Section 3.1.
Cohomology Groups
201
(8) Cellular Cohomology. For a CW complex X this is deﬁned via the cellular cochain
complex formed by the horizontal sequence in the following diagram, where coefﬁ-
cients in a given group G are understood, and the cellular coboundary maps dn are
the compositions δnjn , making the triangles commute. Note that dndn−1 = 0 since
jnδn−1 = 0.
-
X
X
H
(
)
,
n 1
+
n 1
n
+
n 1
+
−−−−−→
X
X
H (
)
,
n
n
n
n 1
-
n 1
-
n 1
-
n 1
-
n 2
n
n
X
H (
)
n
n
X
H (
)
n
X
H (
)
n
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
X
X
H
(
)
,
-
n 1
-
n 1
-
n 1
-
n 1 X
H
(
)
−−−−−→
...
−−−−−→...
≈
0
0
0
j
j
d
d
δ
δ
Theorem 3.5. Hn(X; G) ≈Ker dn/ Im dn−1 . Furthermore, the cellular cochain com-
plex {Hn(Xn, Xn−1; G), dn} is isomorphic to the dual of the cellular chain complex,
obtained by applying Hom(−, G).
Proof: The universal coefﬁcient theorem implies that Hk(Xn, Xn−1; G) = 0 for k ≠n.
The long exact sequence of the pair (Xn, Xn−1) then gives isomorphisms Hk(Xn; G) ≈
Hk(Xn−1; G) for k ≠n, n −1. Hence by induction on n we obtain Hk(Xn; G) = 0 if
k > n. Thus the diagonal sequences in the preceding diagram are exact. The universal
coefﬁcient theorem also gives Hk(X, Xn+1; G) = 0 for k ≤n + 1, so Hn(X; G) ≈
Hn(Xn+1; G). The diagram then yields isomorphisms
Hn(X; G) ≈Hn(Xn+1; G) ≈Ker δn ≈Ker dn/ Im δn−1 ≈Ker dn/ Im dn−1
For the second statement in the theorem we have the diagram
-
X
X
G
H (
)
;
,
k 1
k
k
−−−−−−−−−→
X
G
H (
)
;
G )
;
k
k
−−−−−−−−−→
X
X
H
(
,
k 1
k
+
k 1
+
-
X
X
G
H
Hom
(
(
Hom (
Hom (
)
),
,
k 1
k
k
−−−−−→
X
G
H (
)
),
G )
),
k
k
−−−−−→
X
X
H
(
,
k 1
k
+
k 1
+
δ
∗
∂
−−−−−→
h
−−−−−→
h
−−−−−→
h
The cellular coboundary map is the composition across the top, and we want to see this
is the same as the composition across the bottom. The ﬁrst and third vertical maps are
isomorphisms by the universal coefﬁcient theorem, so it sufﬁces to show the diagram
commutes. The ﬁrst square commutes by naturality of h, and commutativity of the
second square was shown in the discussion of the long exact sequence of cohomology
groups of a pair (X, A).
⊔⊓
(9) Mayer-Vietoris Sequences. In the absolute case these take the form
··· -→Hn(X; G)
Ψ-----→Hn(A; G) ⊕Hn(B; G)
Φ-----→Hn(A ∩B; G) -→Hn+1(X; G) -→···

202
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
where X is the union of the interiors of A and B . This is the long exact sequence
associated to the short exact sequence of cochain complexes
0 -→Cn(A + B, G)
ψ-----→Cn(A; G) ⊕Cn(B; G)
ϕ-----→Cn(A ∩B; G) -→0
Here Cn(A + B; G) is the dual of the subgroup Cn(A + B) ⊂Cn(X) consisting of
sums of singular n simplices lying in A or in B . The inclusion Cn(A + B) ⊂Cn(X)
is a chain homotopy equivalence by Proposition 2.21, so the dual restriction map
Cn(X; G)→Cn(A + B; G) is also a chain homotopy equivalence, hence induces an
isomorphism on cohomology as shown in (5) above. The map ψ has coordinates the
two restrictions to A and B , and ϕ takes the difference of the restrictions to A ∩B ,
so it is obvious that ϕ is onto with kernel the image of ψ.
There is a relative Mayer-Vietoris sequence
··· -→Hn(X, Y; G) -→Hn(A, C; G) ⊕Hn(B, D; G) -→Hn(A ∩B, C ∩D; G) -→···
for a pair (X, Y) = (A ∪B, C ∪D) with C ⊂A and D ⊂B such that X is the union of
the interiors of A and B while Y is the union of the interiors of C and D. To derive
this, consider ﬁrst the map of short exact sequences of cochain complexes:
A
B
G
C (
)
;
n
+
C
D
+
,
A
B G
C (
)
;
n
+
−−−−→
C
D G
0
C (
)
;
n
+
−−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−→
0
X
G
C (
)
;
n
Y
,
X G
C (
)
;
n
−−−−−−−−−−→
Y G
0
C (
)
;
n
−−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−→
0
−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
Here Cn(A+B, C+D; G) is deﬁned as the kernel of the restriction map Cn(A+B; G) -→
Cn(C + D; G), so the second sequence is exact. The vertical maps are restriction. The
second and third of these induce isomorphisms on cohomology, as we have seen, so
by the ﬁve-lemma the ﬁrst vertical map also induces isomorphisms on cohomology.
The relative Mayer-Vietoris sequence is then the long exact sequence associated to the
short exact sequence of cochain complexes
0 -→Cn(A + B, C + D; G)
ψ-----→Cn(A, C; G) ⊕Cn(B, D; G)
ϕ-----→Cn(A ∩B, C ∩D; G) -→0
This is exact since it is the dual of the short exact sequence
0 -→Cn(A ∩B, C ∩D) -→Cn(A, C) ⊕Cn(B, D) -→Cn(A + B, C + D) -→0
constructed in §2.2, which splits since Cn(A+B, C +D) is free with basis the singular
n simplices in A or in B which do not lie in C or in D.
Exercises
1. Show that Ext(H, G) is a contravariant functor of H for ﬁxed G, and a covariant
functor of G for ﬁxed H .
2. Show that the maps G
n-----→G and H
n-----→H which multiply each element by the
integer n also induce multiplication by n in Ext(H, G).

Section 3.1.
Cohomology Groups
203
3. Regarding Z2 as a module over the ring Z4 , construct a resolution of Z2 by free
modules over Z4 and use this to show that Extn
Z4(Z2, Z2) is nonzero for all n.
4. What happens if one deﬁnes homology groups hn(X; G) as the homology groups
of the chain complex ···→Hom(G, Cn(X))→Hom(G, Cn−1(X))→···? More specif-
ically, what are the groups hn(X; G) when G = Z, Zm , and Q?
5. Regarding a cochain ϕ ∈C1(X; G) as a function from paths in X to G, show that
if ϕ is a cocycle, then
(a) ϕ(f g) = ϕ(f ) + ϕ(g).
(b) ϕ takes the value 0 on constant paths.
(c) ϕ(f ) = ϕ(g) if f ≃g.
(d) ϕ is a coboundary iff ϕ(f ) depends only on the endpoints of f , for all f .
[In particular, (a) and (c) give a map H1(X; G)→Hom(π1(X), G), which the universal
coefﬁcient theorem says is an isomorphism if X is path-connected.]
6. (a) Directly from the deﬁnitions, compute the simplicial cohomology groups of
S1×S1 with Z and Z2 coefﬁcients, using the ∆complex structure given in §2.1.
(b) Do the same for RP2 and the Klein bottle.
7. Show that the functors hn(X) = Hom(Hn(X), Z) do not deﬁne a cohomology theory
on the category of CW complexes.
8. Many basic homology arguments work just as well for cohomology even though
maps go in the opposite direction. Verify this in the following cases:
(a) Compute Hi(Sn; G) by induction on n in two ways: using the long exact sequence
of a pair, and using the Mayer-Vietoris sequence.
(b) Show that if A is a closed subspace of X which is a deformation retract of some
neighborhood, then the quotient map X→X/A induces isomorphisms Hn(X, A; G) ≈
eHn(X/A; G) for all n.
(c) Show that if A is a retract of X then Hn(X; G) ≈Hn(A; G)⊕Hn(X, A; G).
9. Show that if f : Sn→Sn has degree d then f ∗: Hn(Sn; G)→Hn(Sn; G) is multipli-
cation by d.
10. For the lens space Lm(ℓ1, ··· , ℓn) deﬁned in Example 2.43, compute the cohomol-
ogy groups using the cellular cochain complex and taking coefﬁcients in Z, Q, Zm ,
and Zp for p prime. Verify that the answers agree with those given by the universal
coefﬁcient theorem.
11. Let X be a Moore space M(Zm, n) obtained from Sn by attaching a cell en+1 by
a map of degree m.
(a) Show that the quotient map X→X/Sn = Sn+1 induces the trivial map on eHi(−; Z)
for all i, but not on Hn+1(−; Z). Deduce that the splitting in the universal coefﬁcient
theorem for cohomology cannot be natural.
(b) Show that the inclusion Sn > X induces the trivial map on eHi(−; Z) for all i, but
not on Hn(−; Z).

204
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
12. Show Hk(X, Xn; G) = 0 if X is a CW complex and k ≤n, by using the cohomology
version of the second proof of the corresponding result for homology in Lemma 2.34.
13. Let ⟨X, Y⟩denote the set of basepoint-preserving homotopy classes of basepoint-
preserving maps X→Y . Using Proposition 1B.9, show that if X is a connected CW
complex and G is an abelian group, then the map ⟨X, K(G, 1)⟩→H1(X; G) sending a
map f : X→K(G, 1) to the induced homomorphism f∗: H1(X)→H1(K(G, 1)) ≈G is
a bijection, where we identify H1(X; G) with Hom(H1(X), G) via the universal coefﬁ-
cient theorem.
In the introduction to this chapter we sketched a deﬁnition of cup product in
terms of another product called cross product. However, to deﬁne the cross product
from scratch takes a fair bit of effort, so we will proceed in the opposite order, ﬁrst
giving an elementary deﬁnition of cup product via an explicit formula with simplices,
then afterwards deﬁning cross product in terms of cup product. The other approach
of deﬁning cup product via cross product is explained at the end of §3.B.
To deﬁne the cup product we consider cohomology with coefﬁcients in a ring
R, the most common choices being Z, Zn , and Q. For cochains ϕ ∈Ck(X; R) and
ψ ∈Cℓ(X; R), the cup product ϕ ⌣ψ ∈Ck+ℓ(X; R) is the cochain whose value on a
singular simplex σ : ∆k+ℓ→X is given by the formula
(ϕ ⌣ψ)(σ) = ϕ
 σ ||[v0, ··· , vk]

ψ
 σ ||[vk, ··· , vk+ℓ]

where the right-hand side is the product in R. To see that this cup product of cochains
induces a cup product of cohomology classes we need a formula relating it to the
coboundary map:
Lemma 3.6. δ(ϕ⌣ψ) = δϕ⌣ψ+(−1)kϕ⌣δψ for ϕ ∈Ck(X; R) and ψ ∈Cℓ(X; R).
Proof: For σ : ∆k+ℓ+1→X we have
(δϕ ⌣ψ)(σ) =
k+1
X
i=0
(−1)iϕ
 σ||[v0, ··· , bvi, ··· , vk+1]

ψ
 σ||[vk+1, ··· , vk+ℓ+1]

(−1)k(ϕ ⌣δψ)(σ) =
k+ℓ+1
X
i=k
(−1)iϕ
 σ||[v0, ··· , vk]

ψ
 σ||[vk, ··· , bvi, ··· , vk+ℓ+1]

Adding these two expressions, the last term of the ﬁrst sum cancels the ﬁrst term of
the second sum, and the remaining terms are exactly δ(ϕ ⌣ψ)(σ) = (ϕ ⌣ψ)(∂σ)
since ∂σ =
Pk+ℓ+1
i=0
(−1)iσ ||[v0, ··· , bvi, ··· , vk+ℓ+1].
⊔⊓

Section 3.2.
Cup Product
205
From the formula δ(ϕ ⌣ψ) = δϕ ⌣ψ ± ϕ ⌣δψ it is apparent that the cup
product of two cocycles is again a cocycle. Also, the cup product of a cocycle and a
coboundary, in either order, is a coboundary since ϕ ⌣δψ = ±δ(ϕ ⌣ψ) if δϕ = 0,
and δϕ ⌣ψ = δ(ϕ ⌣ψ) if δψ = 0. It follows that there is an induced cup product
Hk(X; R) × Hℓ(X; R)
⌣
--------------------------------→Hk+ℓ(X; R)
This is associative and distributive since cup product at the cochain level is. If R
has an identity element 1, then the 0 cocycle taking the value 1 on each singular
0 simplex deﬁnes an element 1 ∈H0(X; R) which is an identity for cup product.
A cup product for simplicial cohomology can be deﬁned by the same formula as
for singular cohomology, so the canonical isomorphism between simplicial and singu-
lar cohomology respects cup products. Here are three examples of direct calculations
of cup products using simplicial cohomology.
Example 3.7.
Let M be the closed orientable surface of
genus g ≥1 with the ∆complex structure shown in
the ﬁgure for the case g = 2.
The cup product of
interest is H1(M)×H1(M)→H2(M). Taking Z coef-
b
b
a
a
a
a
b
b
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
α
2
α
β
2
β
+ +
+
+
_
_
_
_
ﬁcients, a basis for H1(M) is formed by the edges ai
and bi , as we showed in Example 2.36 when we com-
puted the homology of M using cellular homology.
We have H1(M) ≈Hom(H1(M), Z) by cellular cohomol-
ogy or the universal coefﬁcient theorem. A basis for H1(M)
determines a dual basis for Hom(H1(M), Z), so dual to ai is the cohomology class αi
assigning the value 1 to ai and 0 to the other basis elements, and similarly we have
cohomology classes βi dual to bi .
To represent αi by a simplicial cocycle ϕi we need to choose values for ϕi on
the edges radiating out from the central vertex in such a way that δϕi = 0. This is the
‘cocycle condition’ discussed in the introduction to this chapter, where we saw that it
has a geometric interpretation in terms of curves transverse to the edges of M . With
this interpretation in mind, consider the arc labelled αi in the ﬁgure, which represents
a loop in M meeting ai in one point and disjoint from all the other basis elements aj
and bj . We deﬁne ϕi to have the value 1 on edges meeting the arc αi and the value
0 on all other edges. Thus ϕi counts the number of intersections of each edge with
the arc αi . In similar fashion we obtain a cocycle ψi counting intersections with the
arc βi , and ψi represents the cohomology class βi dual to bi .
Now we can compute cup products by applying the deﬁnition. Keeping in mind
the fact that the ordering of the vertices of each 2 simplex is compatible with the
indicated orientations of its edges, we see for example that ϕ1 ⌣ψ1 takes the value
0 on all 2 simplices except the one with outer edge b1 in the lower right part of the
ﬁgure, where it takes the value 1. Thus ϕ1 ⌣ψ1 takes the value 1 on the 2 chain c

206
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
formed by the sum of all the 2 simplices with the signs indicated in the center of the
ﬁgure. It is an easy calculation that ∂c = 0. Since there are no 3 simplices, c is not a
boundary, so it represents a nonzero element of H2(M). The fact that (ϕ1 ⌣ψ1)(c)
is a generator of Z implies both that c represents a generator of H2(M) ≈Z and that
ϕ1 ⌣ψ1 represents the dual generator γ of H2(M) ≈Hom(H2(M), Z) ≈Z. Thus
α1 ⌣β1 = γ . In similar fashion one computes:
αi ⌣βj =



γ, i = j
0, i ≠j


= −(βi ⌣αj),
αi ⌣αj = 0,
βi ⌣βj = 0
These relations determine the cup product H1(M)×H1(M)→H2(M) completely since
cup product is distributive. Notice that cup product is not commutative in this exam-
ple since αi ⌣βi = −(βi ⌣αi). We will show in Theorem 3.12 below that this is the
worst that can happen: Cup product is commutative up to a sign depending only on
dimension.
One can see in this example that nonzero cup products of distinct classes αi or
βj occur precisely when the corresponding loops αi or βj intersect. This is also true
for the cup product of αi or βi with itself if we allow ourselves to take two copies of
the corresponding loop and deform one of them to be disjoint from the other.
Example 3.8. The closed nonorientable surface N of genus
g can be treated in similar fashion if we use Z2 coef-
ﬁcients.
Using the ∆complex structure shown, the
edges ai give a basis for H1(N; Z2), and the dual basis
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
1
1
1
2
2
2
3
3
4
4
α
3
α
α
4
α
elements αi ∈H1(N; Z2) can be represented by cocy-
cles with values given by counting intersections with
the arcs labelled αi in the ﬁgure. Then one computes
that αi ⌣αi is the nonzero element of H2(N; Z2) ≈Z2
and αi⌣αj = 0 for i ≠j . In particular, when g = 1 we have
N = RP2 , and the cup product of a generator of H1(RP2; Z2) with itself is a generator
of H2(RP2; Z2).
The remarks in the paragraph preceding this example apply here also, but with
the following difference: When one tries to deform a second copy of the loop αi in
the present example to be disjoint from the original copy, the best one can do is make
it intersect the original in one point. This reﬂects the fact that αi⌣αi is now nonzero.
Example 3.9. Let X be the 2 dimensional CW complex obtained by attaching a 2 cell
to S1 by the degree m map S1→S1 , z, zm . Using cellular cohomology, or cellular
homology and the universal coefﬁcient theorem, we see that Hn(X; Z) consists of a
Z for n = 0 and a Zm for n = 2, so the cup product structure with Z coefﬁcients is
uninteresting. However with Zm coefﬁcients we have Hi(X; Zm) ≈Zm for i = 0, 1, 2
so there is the possibility that the cup product of two 1 dimensional classes can be
nontrivial.

Section 3.2.
Cup Product
207
T
T
T
T0
1
2
3
e1
e2
e3
e
e
e
e
v
w
w
w
w
e
0
To obtain a ∆complex structure on X , take a reg-
ular m gon subdivided into m triangles Ti around a
central vertex v , as shown in the ﬁgure for the case
m = 4, then identify all the outer edges by rotations
of the m gon. This gives X a ∆complex structure
with 2 vertices, m + 1 edges, and m 2 simplices. A
generator α of H1(X; Zm) is represented by a cocycle
ϕ assigning the value 1 to the edge e, which gener-
ates H1(X). The condition that ϕ be a cocycle means that ϕ(ei) + ϕ(e) = ϕ(ei+1)
for all i, subscripts being taken mod m. So we may take ϕ(ei) = i ∈Zm . Hence
(ϕ ⌣ϕ)(Ti) = ϕ(ei)ϕ(e) = i. The map h : H2(X; Zm)→Hom(H2(X; Zm), Zm) is an
isomorphism since
P
i Ti is a generator of H2(X; Zm) and there are 2 cocycles taking
the value 1 on
P
i Ti , for example the cocycle taking the value 1 on one Ti and 0 on
all the others. The cocycle ϕ⌣ϕ takes the value 0+1+···+(m−1) on
P
i Ti , hence
represents 0 + 1 + ··· + (m −1) times a generator β of H2(X; Zm). In Zm the sum
0 + 1 + ··· + (m −1) is 0 if m is odd and k if m = 2k since the terms 1 and m −1
cancel, 2 and m −2 cancel, etc. Thus, writing α2 for α ⌣α, we have α2 = 0 if m is
odd and α2 = kβ if m = 2k.
In particular, if m = 2, X is RP2 and α2 = β in H2(RP2; Z2), as we showed
already in Example 3.8.
The cup product formula (ϕ ⌣ψ)(σ) = ϕ
 σ ||[v0, ··· , vk]

ψ
 σ ||[vk, ··· , vk+ℓ]

also gives relative cup products
Hk(X; R) × Hℓ(X, A; R)
⌣
--------------------------------→Hk+ℓ(X, A; R)
Hk(X, A; R) × Hℓ(X; R)
⌣
--------------------------------→Hk+ℓ(X, A; R)
Hk(X, A; R) × Hℓ(X, A; R)
⌣
--------------------------------→Hk+ℓ(X, A; R)
since if ϕ or ψ vanishes on chains in A then so does ϕ ⌣ψ. There is a more general
relative cup product
Hk(X, A; R) × Hℓ(X, B; R)
⌣
--------------------------------→Hk+ℓ(X, A ∪B; R)
when A and B are open subsets of X , or when A and B are subcomplexes of the
CW complex X , obtained as follows.
The absolute cup product restricts to a cup
product Ck(X, A; R)×Cℓ(X, B; R)→Ck+ℓ(X, A + B; R) where Cn(X, A + B; R) is the
subgroup of Cn(X; R) consisting of cochains vanishing on chains in A and on chains
in B . If A and B are open in X , the inclusions Cn(X, A ∪B; R) ⊂Cn(X, A + B; R)
induce isomorphisms on cohomology, via the ﬁve-lemma and the fact that the restric-
tion maps Cn(A ∪B; R)→Cn(A + B; R) induce isomorphisms on cohomology as we
saw in the discussion of excision in the previous section. Therefore the cup product
Ck(X, A; R)×Cℓ(X, B; R)→Ck+ℓ(X, A+B; R) induces the desired relative cup product

208
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
Hk(X, A; R)×Hℓ(X, B; R)→Hk+ℓ(X, A ∪B; R). This holds also when X is a CW com-
plex with A and B subcomplexes since the maps Cn(A ∪B; R)→Cn(A + B; R) induce
isomorphisms on cohomology in this case too, just as we saw for homology in §2.2.
Example 3.10. Write Rn as Rk×Rℓwhere n = k+ℓ. Let us compute the relative cup
product
Hk(Rn, Rn −Rℓ; Z) × Hℓ(Rn, Rn −Rk; Z) -→Hn(Rn, Rn −{0}; Z)
All three of these cohomology groups are isomorphic to Z, and we will show that if
α and β generate the ﬁrst two groups, then α ⌣β generates the third group. The
argument will work just as well for any coefﬁcient ring R in place of Z, with ‘generator’
interpreted to mean an invertible element of R.
It will sufﬁce to ﬁnd a linear embedding σ : ∆n→Rn with the following three
properties:
v
v
v
0
n
k
k
R
ℓ
R
(a) The origin of Rn lies in the interior of σ(∆n).
(b) The origin of Rk lies in the interior of the projection
of σ([v0, ··· , vk]) onto Rk .
(c) The origin of Rℓlies in the interior of the projection
of σ([vk, ··· , vn]) onto Rℓ.
For if we have these properties, then σ represents a generator of Hn(Rn, Rn −{0}; Z),
while the restrictions σk and σℓof σ to [v0, ··· , vk] and [vk, ··· , vn] represent
generators of Hk(Rn, Rn −Rℓ; Z) and Hℓ(Rn, Rn −Rk; Z). Since the map h in the
universal coefﬁcient theorem is an isomorphism for the relative cohomology groups
we are considering here, relative cocycles ϕ and ψ representing α and β take the
value ±1 on σk and σℓ, so ϕ ⌣ψ takes the value ±1 on σ . Thus α ⌣β generates
Hn(Rn, Rn −{0}; Z).
To obtain an n simplex in Rn with the properties (a)-(c), ﬁrst consider the simplex
sn consisting of n tuples (x1, ··· , xn) satisfying 1 ≥x1 ≥··· ≥xn ≥0.
The
vertices of sn are the points vi with ﬁrst i coordinates 1 and remaining coordinates
0. The standard simplex ∆n consists of nonnegative (n + 1) tuples (t0, ··· , tn) with
P
i ti = 1, and we obtain a linear homeomorphism σ : ∆n→sn preserving the order
of vertices by setting σ(t0, ··· , tn) = (x1, ··· , xn) where xi = ti + ··· + tn , so the
ti ’s are the differences between adjacent xi ’s. Note that the projections of Rn onto
Rk and Rℓtake sn onto the simplices sk and sℓ. An interior point of sn is any point
whose coordinates satisfy the strict inequalities 1 > x1 > ··· > xn > 0, so under the
two projections to Rk and Rℓthis point projects to interior points of sk and sℓ. To
obtain a simplex satisfying the conditions (a)-(c) it therefore sufﬁces to translate sn
so that the origin of Rn lies in its interior.

Section 3.2.
Cup Product
209
The Cohomology Ring
Since cup product is associative and distributive, it is natural to try to make it
the multiplication in a ring structure on the cohomology groups of a space X . This is
easy to do if we simply deﬁne H∗(X; R) to be the direct sum of the groups Hn(X; R).
Elements of H∗(X; R) are ﬁnite sums
P
i αi with αi ∈Hi(X; R), and the product of
two such sums is deﬁned to be
 P
i αi
 P
j βj

=
P
i,j αiβj . It is routine to check
that this makes H∗(X; R) into a ring, with identity if R has an identity. Similarly,
H∗(X, A; R) is a ring via the relative cup product. Taking scalar multiplication by
elements of R into account, these rings can also be regarded as R algebras.
For example, the calculations in Example 3.8 or 3.9 above show that H∗(RP2; Z2)
consists of the polynomials a0+a1α+a2α2 with coefﬁcients ai ∈Z2 , so H∗(RP2; Z2)
is the quotient Z2[α]/(α3) of the polynomial ring Z2[α] by the ideal generated by
α3 .
This example illustrates how H∗(X; R) often has a more compact description
than the sequence of individual groups Hn(X; R), so there is a certain economy in
the change of scale which comes from regarding all the groups Hn(X; R) as part of a
single object H∗(X; R).
Adding cohomology classes of different dimensions to form H∗(X; R) is a conve-
nient formal device, but it has little topological signiﬁcance. One always regards the
cohomology ring as a graded ring: a ring with a decomposition as a sum
L
k≥0Ak of
additive subgroups Ak such that the multiplication takes Ak×Aℓto Ak+ℓ.
Among the simplest graded rings are polynomial rings R[α] and their truncated
versions R[α]/(αn), consisting of polynomials of degree less than n. The example
we have seen is H∗(RP2; Z2) ≈Z2[α]/(α3). Generalizing this, we have:
Theorem 3.11. H∗(RPn; Z2) ≈Z2[α]/(αn+1) and H∗(RP∞; Z2) ≈Z2[α], where α
is a generator of H1(RPn; Z2) or H1(RP∞; Z2), respectively. For complex projective
spaces, H∗(CPn; Z) ≈Z[α]/(αn+1) and H∗(CP∞; Z) ≈Z[α] where α is a generator
of H2(CPn; Z) or H2(CP∞; Z).
This turns out to be a quite important result which can be proved in a number of
different ways. The proof we give here consists of a direct reduction to the relative
cup product calculation in Example 3.10 above. Another proof using Poincar´e duality
will be given in Example 3.39. A third proof is contained in §4.D as an application of
the Gysin sequence.
Proof: Let us do the case of RPn ﬁrst. To simplify notation we abbreviate RPn to P n
and we let the coefﬁcient group Z2 be implicit. Since the inclusion P n−1>P n induces
an isomorphism on Hi for i ≤n −1, it sufﬁces by induction on n to show that the
cup product of a generator of Hn−1(P n) with a generator of H1(P n) is a generator
of Hn(P n). It will be no more work to show more generally that the cup product of

210
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
a generator of Hi(P n) with a generator of Hn−i(P n) is a generator of Hn(P n). As a
further notational aid, we let j = n −i, so i + j = n.
The proof uses some of the geometric structure of P n . Recall that P n consists of
nonzero vectors (x0, ··· , xn) ∈Rn+1 modulo multiplication by nonzero scalars. In-
side P n is a copy of P i represented by vectors whose last j coordinates xi+1, ··· , xn
are zero. We also have a copy of P j represented by points whose ﬁrst i coordinates
x0, ··· , xi−1 are zero. The intersection P i∩P j is a single point
p, represented by vectors whose only nonzero coordinate
P
j
P
i
P
n - 1
P
i - 1
P
i - 1
p
is xi . Let U be the subspace of P n represented by vec-
tors with nonzero coordinate xi . Each point in U may be
represented by a unique vector with xi = 1 and the other
n coordinates arbitrary, so U is homeomorphic to Rn , with
p corresponding to 0 under this homeomorphism. We can write this Rn as Ri×Rj ,
with Ri as the coordinates x0, ··· , xi−1 and Rj as the coordinates xi+1, ··· , xn . In
the ﬁgure P n is represented as a disk with antipodal points of its boundary sphere
identiﬁed to form a P n−1 ⊂P n with U = P n −P n−1 the interior of the disk.
Consider the diagram
P
H (
)
i
n
P
H (
)
j
n
P
H (
)
n
n
×
−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
P
H (
)
i
n P
n P
j
P
H (
)
j
n
P
H (
)
{
}
n
n
×
−−−−−→
,
-
P
n P
p
i
,
-
P
n
,
-
R
H (
)
i
n R
n R
j
R
H (
)
j
n
R
H (
)
{
}
n
n
×
−−−−−→
,
-
R
n R
0
i
,
-
R
n
,
-
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
which commutes by naturality of cup product.
The lower cup product map takes
generator cross generator to generator as we showed in Example 3.10 above. The
same will be true for the top row if the four vertical maps are isomorphisms, so this
is what remains to be proved.
It is easy to see that the two vertical maps in the right column are isomorphisms.
For the lower map excision gives the isomorphism. For the upper map, the fact that
P n −{p} deformation retracts to P n−1 gives an isomorphism Hn(P n, P n −{0}) ≈
Hn(P n, P n−1) via the ﬁve-lemma applied to the long exact sequences for these pairs.
And Hn(P n, P n−1) ≈Hn(P n) by cellular cohomology.
To see that the vertical maps in the left column are isomorphisms we use the
following commutative diagram
)
{
}
p
P
H (
)
i
n
P
H (
)
i
n P
n P
j
,
-
P
H (
)
i
n P
,
R
H (
)
i
n R
n R
j
)
{
}
−−−→
−−−→
−−−−→
,
-
0
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
-
i 1
P
H (
)
i
i
P
H (
i
i P
i
,
-
P
H (
)
i
i P
,
R
H (
i
i R
i
−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
,
-
-
i 1
If we can show all these maps are isomorphisms, then the same argument will apply
with i and j interchanged, and the proof for RPn will be ﬁnished.

Section 3.2.
Cup Product
211
The left-hand square consists of isomorphisms by cellular cohomology. The right-
hand vertical map is obviously an isomorphism. The lower right horizontal map is
an isomorphism by excision, and the map to the left of this is an isomorphism since
P i −{p} deformation retracts onto P i−1 . The remaining maps will be isomorphisms
if the middle map in the upper row is an isomorphism.
And this map is in fact
an isomorphism because P n −P j deformation retracts onto P i−1 by the following
argument. The subspace P n −P j ⊂P n consists of points represented by vectors
v = (x0, ··· , xn) with at least one of the coordinates x0, ··· , xi−1 nonzero.
The
formula ft(v) = (x0, ··· , xi−1, txi, ··· , txn) for t decreasing from 1 to 0 gives a
well-deﬁned deformation retraction of P n −P j onto P i−1 since ft(λv) = λft(v) for
scalars λ ∈R.
The case of RP∞follows from the ﬁnite-dimensional case since the inclusion
RPn > RP∞induces isomorphisms on Hi(−; Z2) for i ≤n by cellular cohomology.
Complex projective spaces are handled in precisely the same way, using Z coef-
ﬁcients. The only notational changes needed are to replace each Hk by H2k , and of
course R by C.
⊔⊓
There are also quaternionic projective spaces HPn and HP∞, deﬁned exactly as
in the complex case, with CW structures of the form e0 ∪e4 ∪e8 ∪···.
Associa-
tivity of quaternion multiplication is needed for the identiﬁcation v ∼λv to be an
equivalence relation, so the deﬁnition does not extend to octonionic projective spaces,
though there is an octonionic projective plane OP2 which will be deﬁned in §4.3. The
cup product structure in quaternionic projectives spaces is just like that in complex
projective spaces, except that the generator is 4 dimensional:
H∗(HP∞; Z) ≈Z[α]
and
H∗(HPn; Z) ≈Z[α]/(αn+1),
with α ∈H4
The same proof as in the real and complex cases works here too.
The cup product structure for RP∞with Z coefﬁcients can easily be deduced
from the cup product structure with Z2 coefﬁcients, as follows. In general, a ring
homomorphism R→S induces a ring homomorphism H∗(X, A; R)→H∗(X, A; S). In
the case of the projection Z→Z2 we get for RP∞an induced chain map of cellular
cochain complexes with Z and Z2 coefﬁcients:
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
Z
−−−−−→
0
0
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
...
2
Z2
Z
−−−−−→
2
Z
−−−−−→
2
Z
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
2
−−−−−→
Z
−−−−−→
0
...
Z
Z
−−−−−→
Z
−−−−−→
Z
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
The vertical maps are surjective, and from this it follows that the ring homomor-
phism H∗(RP∞; Z)→H∗(RP∞; Z2) is injective in positive dimensions, with image the
even-dimensional part of H∗(RP∞; Z2).
(This can also be deduced from the uni-
versal coefﬁcient theorem.) Hence H∗(RP∞; Z) ≈Z[α]/(2α) for α a generator of
H2(RP∞; Z) ≈Z2 .

212
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
The cup product structure in H∗(RPn; Z) can be computed in a similar fashion,
though the description is a little cumbersome:
H∗(RP2k; Z) ≈Z[α]/(2α, αk+1)
H∗(RP2k+1; Z) ≈Z[α, β]/(2α, αk+1, β2, αβ)
where β is a generator of H2k+1(RP2k+1; Z) ≈Z. Thus the rings H∗(RP2k+1; Z) and
H∗(RP2k ∨S2k+1; Z) are isomorphic, though with Z2 coefﬁcients this is no longer
true, since the generator α ∈H1(RP2k+1; Z2) has α2k+1 ≠0, while α2k+1 = 0 for the
generator α ∈H1(RP2k ∨S2k+1; Z2).
The natural question of whether the cohomology ring is commutative is answered
by the following:
Theorem 3.12. The identity α⌣β = (−1)kℓβ⌣α holds for all α ∈Hk(X, A; R) and
β ∈Hℓ(X, A; R), if the coefﬁcient ring R is commutative.
Taking α = β, this implies in particular that if α is an element of Hk(X, A; R)
with k odd, then 2α2 = 0 in H2k(X, A; R). Hence if H2k(X, A; R) has no elements of
order two, then α2 = 0. For example, if X is the 2 complex obtained by attaching a
disk to S1 by a map of degree m as in Example 3.9 above, then we can deduce that
the square of a generator of H1(X; Zm) is zero if m is odd, and is either zero or the
unique element of H2(X; Zm) ≈Zm of order two if m is even. As we showed, the
square is in fact nonzero when m is even.
A graded ring satisfying the commutativity property of the theorem is usually
called simply commutative in the context of algebraic topology, in spite of the po-
tential for misunderstanding. In the older literature one ﬁnds less ambiguous terms
such as graded-commutative, anti-commutative, or skew-commutative.
Proof: Consider ﬁrst the case A = ∅.
Given cochains ϕ ∈Ck(X; R) and ψ ∈
Cℓ(X, R), one can see from the deﬁnition that the cup products ϕ ⌣ψ and ψ ⌣ϕ
differ only by a permutation of the vertices of ∆k+ℓ. The idea of the proof is to study a
particularly nice permutation of vertices, namely totally reversing their order, replac-
ing [v0, ··· , vn] by [vn, ··· , v0]. This has the convenient feature of also reversing
the ordering of vertices in any face.
For a singular n simplex σ : [v0, ··· , vn]→X , let σ be the singular n simplex
obtained by preceding σ by the linear homeomorphism of [v0, ··· , vn] reversing
the order of the vertices. Thus σ(vi) = σ(vn−i). This reversal of vertices is the
product of n + (n −1) + ··· + 1 = n(n + 1)/2 transpositions of adjacent vertices,
each of which reverses orientation of the n simplex, being a reﬂection across an (n−
1) dimensional hyperplane.
So to take orientations into account we would expect
that a sign εn = (−1)n(n+1)/2 ought to be inserted. Hence we deﬁne a homomorphism
ρ : Cn(X)→Cn(X) by ρ(σ) = εnσ .

Section 3.2.
Cup Product
213
We will show that ρ is a chain map chain homotopic to the identity, so ρ induces
the identity on cohomology.
From this the theorem quickly follows.
Namely, the
formulas
(ρ∗ϕ ⌣ρ∗ψ)(σ) = ϕ(εkσ||[vk, ··· , v0])ψ(εℓσ||[vk+ℓ, ··· , vk])
ρ∗(ψ ⌣ϕ)(σ) = εk+ℓψ(σ||[vk+ℓ, ··· , vk])ϕ(σ||[vk, ··· , v0])
show that εkεℓ(ρ∗ϕ ⌣ρ∗ψ) = εk+ℓρ∗(ψ ⌣ϕ), since we assume R is commutative.
A trivial calculation gives εk+ℓ= (−1)kℓεkεℓ, hence ρ∗ϕ ⌣ρ∗ψ = (−1)kℓρ∗(ψ ⌣ϕ).
Since ρ is chain homotopic to the identity, the ρ∗’s disappear when we pass to coho-
mology classes, and so we obtain the desired formula α ⌣β = (−1)kℓβ ⌣α.
The chain map property ∂ρ = ρ∂can be veriﬁed by calculating, for a singular
n simplex σ ,
∂ρ(σ) = εn
X
i
(−1)iσ||[vn, ··· , bvn−i, ··· , v0]
ρ∂(σ) = ρ
X
i
(−1)iσ||[v0, ··· , bvi, ··· , vn]

= εn−1
X
i
(−1)n−iσ||[vn, ··· , bvn−i, ··· , v0]
which reduces us to the easily-checked identity εn = (−1)nεn−1 .
To deﬁne a chain homotopy between ρ and the identity we are motivated by the
construction of the prism operator P in the proof that homotopic maps induce the
same homomorphism on homology, in Theorem 2.10. The main ingredient in the con-
struction of P was a subdivision of ∆n×I into (n + 1) simplices with vertices vi in
∆n×0 and wi in ∆n×1, the vertex wi lying directly above vi . Using the same subdivi-
sion, and letting π : ∆n×I→∆n be the projection, we now deﬁne P : Cn(X)→Cn+1(X)
by
P(σ) =
X
i
(−1)iεn−i(σπ)||[v0, ··· , vi, wn, ··· , wi].
Thus the w vertices are written in reverse order, and there is a compensating sign
εn−i . One can view this formula as arising from the ∆complex structure on ∆n×I
in which the vertices are ordered v0, ··· , vn, wn, ··· , w0 rather than the more natural
ordering v0, ··· , vn, w0, ··· , wn .
To show ∂P + P∂= ρ −11 we ﬁrst calculate ∂P , leaving out σ ’s and σπ ’s for
notational simplicity:
∂P =
X
j≤i
(−1)i(−1)jεn−i[v0, ··· , bvj, ··· , vi, wn, ··· , wi]
+
X
j≥i
(−1)i(−1)i+1+n−jεn−i[v0, ··· , vi, wn, ··· , c
wj, ··· , wi].
The j = i terms in these two sums give
εn[wn, ··· , w0] +
X
i>0
εn−i[v0, ··· , vi−1, wn, ··· , wi]
+
X
i<n
(−1)n+i+1εn−i[v0, ··· , vi, wn, ··· , wi+1] −[v0, ··· , vn].

214
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
In this expression the two summation terms cancel since replacing i by i −1 in the
second sum produces a new sign (−1)n+iεn−i+1 = −εn−i . The remaining two terms
εn[wn, ··· , w0] and −[v0, ··· , vn] represent ρ(σ) −σ .
So in order to show that
∂P + P∂= ρ −11, it remains to check that in the formula for ∂P above, the terms with
j ≠i give −P∂. Calculating P∂from the deﬁnitions, we have
P∂=
X
i<j
(−1)i(−1)jεn−i−1[v0, ··· , vi, wn, ··· , c
wj, ··· , wi]
+
X
i>j
(−1)i−1(−1)jεn−i[v0, ··· , bvj, ··· , vi, wn, ··· , wi].
Since εn−i = (−1)n−iεn−i−1 , this ﬁnishes the veriﬁcation that ∂P + P∂= ρ −11, and
so the theorem is proved when A = ∅. The proof also applies when A ≠∅since the
maps ρ and P take chains in A to chains in A, so the dual homomorphisms ρ∗and
P ∗act on relative cochains.
⊔⊓
Induced homomorphisms are ring homomorphisms:
Proposition 3.13. For a map f : X→Y , the induced maps f ∗: Hn(Y; R)→Hn(X; R)
satisfy f ∗(α ⌣β) = f ∗(α) ⌣f ∗(β), and similarly in the relative case.
Proof: This comes from the cochain formula f ♯(ϕ) ⌣f ♯(ψ) = f ♯(ϕ ⌣ψ):
(f ♯ϕ ⌣f ♯ψ)(σ) = f ♯ϕ(σ||[v0, ··· , vk])f ♯ψ(σ||[vk, ··· , vk+ℓ])
= ϕ(f σ||[v0, ··· , vk])ψ(f σ||[vk, ··· , vk+ℓ])
= (ϕ ⌣ψ)(f σ) = f ♯(ϕ ⌣ψ)(σ)
⊔⊓
Example 3.14. The isomorphism H∗(
`
α Xα; R)
≈-----→
Q
αH∗(Xα; R) whose coordinates
are induced by the inclusions iα : Xα >
`
α Xα is a ring isomorphism, with respect
to the usual coordinatewise multiplication in a product ring, because each coordinate
function i∗
α is a ring homomorphism. Similarly for a wedge sum the isomorphism
eH∗(
W
α Xα; R) ≈
Q
α eH∗(Xα; R) is a ring isomorphism. Here we take reduced cohomol-
ogy to be cohomology relative to a basepoint, and we use relative cup products. We
should assume the basepoints xα ∈Xα are deformation retracts of neighborhoods,
to be sure that the claimed isomorphism does indeed hold.
This product ring structure for wedge sums can sometimes be used to rule out
splittings of a space as a wedge sum up to homotopy equivalence. For example, con-
sider CP2 , which is S2 with a cell e4 attached by a certain map f : S3→S2 . Using
homology or just the additive structure of cohomology it is impossible to conclude
that CP 2 is not homotopy equivalent to S2 ∨S4 , and hence that f is not homotopic
to a constant map. However, with cup products we can distinguish these two spaces
since the square of each element of H2(S2 ∨S4; Z) is zero in view of the ring iso-
morphism eH∗(S2 ∨S4; Z) ≈eH∗(S2; Z)⊕eH∗(S4; Z), but the square of a generator of
H2(CP2; Z) is nonzero by Theorem 3.11.

Section 3.2.
Cup Product
215
More generally, cup products can be used to distinguish inﬁnitely many different
homotopy classes of maps S4n−1→S2n for all n ≥1. This is systematized in the
notion of the Hopf invariant, which is studied in §4.B.
A K¨unneth Formula
One might guess that there should be some connection between cup product and
product spaces, and indeed this is the case, as we will show in this subsection.
To begin, we deﬁne the cross product, or external cup product as it is sometimes
called. This is the map
H∗(X; R)×H∗(Y; R)
×
--------------------------------→H∗(X×Y; R)
given by a×b = p∗
1 (a)⌣p∗
2 (b) where p1 and p2 are the projections of X×Y onto X
and Y . Since cup product is distributive, the cross product is bilinear, that is, linear
in each variable separately.
To take a trivial example, if X and Y are each a point and R = Z, then the cross
product is simply the multiplication map Z×Z→Z, (x, y) , xy . This is certainly
bilinear, but it is not a homomorphism of groups Z×Z→Z. However, there is a stan-
dard way to convert bilinear maps into homomorphisms, using the notion of tensor
product.
Let us digress a moment to recall the deﬁnition and basic properties of
tensor product.
For abelian groups A and B the tensor product A⊗B is deﬁned to be the abelian
group with generators a ⊗b for a ∈A, b ∈B , and relations (a+a′) ⊗b = a ⊗b+a′ ⊗b
and a ⊗(b + b′) = a ⊗b + a ⊗b′ . So the zero element of A⊗B is 0 ⊗0 = 0 ⊗b = a ⊗0,
and −(a ⊗b) = −a ⊗b = a ⊗(−b). Some readily veriﬁed elementary properties are:
(1) A⊗B ≈B ⊗A
(2) (
L
iAi)⊗B ≈
L
i(Ai ⊗B)
(3) (A⊗B)⊗C ≈A⊗(B ⊗C)
(4) Z⊗A ≈A
(5) Zn ⊗A ≈A/nA
(6) A pair of homomorphisms f : A→A′ and g : B→B′ induces a homomorphism
f ⊗g : A⊗B→A′ ⊗B′ via (f ⊗g)(a ⊗b) = f (a) ⊗g(b).
(7) A map ϕ : A×B→C which is a homomorphism in each variable separately in-
duces a homomorphism A⊗B→C sending a ⊗b to ϕ(a, b).
In (1)-(5) the isomorphisms are the obvious ones, e.g., a ⊗b,b ⊗a in (1) and n ⊗a,
na in (4). Properties (1), (2), (4), and (5) allow the calculation of tensor products of
ﬁnitely generated abelian groups.
The generalization to tensor product of modules over a commutative ring R is
easy. One deﬁnes A⊗RB for R modules A and B to be the quotient of A⊗B obtained
by imposing the further relations ra ⊗b = a ⊗rb for r ∈R, a ∈A, and b ∈B . This
relation guarantees that A⊗RB is again an R module. (In case R is not commutative

216
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
one assumes A is a right R module and B is a left R module, and the relation is
written instead ar ⊗b = a ⊗rb, but now A⊗RB is only an abelian group, not an
R module in general.) It is a small algebra exercise to see that A⊗RB = A⊗B when R =
Zm or Q. But in general A⊗RB is not the same as A⊗B . For example, if R = Q(
√
2),
a 2 dimensional vector space over Q, then R⊗RR = R but R⊗R is a 4 dimensional
vector space over Q. And R⊗R is quite huge compared with R⊗RR = R.
The statements (1)-(3), (6), and (7) above hold equally well for tensor products
of R modules. The generalization of (4) is the canonical isomorphism R⊗RA ≈A,
r ⊗a , ra.
Property (7) of tensor products guarantees that the cross product as deﬁned above
gives rise to a homomorphism
H∗(X; R) ⊗RH∗(Y; R)
×
-------------------------→H∗(X×Y; R),
a ⊗b , a×b
which we shall also call cross product. This map becomes a ring homomorphism if
we deﬁne the multiplication in a tensor product of graded rings by (a ⊗b)(c ⊗d) =
(−1)|b||c|ac ⊗bd where |x| denotes the dimension of x . Namely the cross product
map sends (a ⊗b)(c ⊗d) = (−1)|b||c|ac ⊗bd to
(−1)|b||c|ac×bd = (−1)|b||c|p∗
1 (a ⌣c) ⌣p∗
2 (b ⌣d)
= (−1)|b||c|p∗
1 (a) ⌣p∗
1 (c) ⌣p∗
2 (b) ⌣p∗
2 (d)
= p∗
1 (a) ⌣p∗
2 (b) ⌣p∗
1 (c) ⌣p∗
2 (d)
= (a×b)(c×d)
which is the product of the images of a ⊗b and c ⊗d.
Theorem 3.15. The cross product H∗(X; R)⊗RH∗(Y; R)→H∗(X×Y; R) is an iso-
morphism of rings if X and Y are CW complexes and Hk(Y; R) is a ﬁnitely-generated
free R module for all k.
Results of this type, computing homology or cohomology of a product space, are
known as K¨unneth formulas. The hypothesis that X and Y are CW complexes will be
shown to be unnecessary in §4.1 when we consider CW approximations to arbitrary
spaces. On the other hand, the freeness hypothesis cannot always be dispensed with,
as we shall see in §3.B when we obtain a completely general K¨unneth formula for the
homology of a product space.
When the conclusion of the theorem holds, the ring structure in H∗(X×Y; R) is
determined by the ring structures in H∗(X; R) and H∗(Y; R). Example 3E.6 shows
that some hypotheses are necessary in order for this to be true.
Before proving the theorem, let us look at some examples.
Example 3.16.
The theorem says that H∗(RP∞×RP∞; Z2) is isomorphic as a ring
to H∗(RP∞; Z2)⊗H∗(RP∞; Z2). By Theorem 3.11 this is Z2[α]⊗Z2[β], which is just
the polynomial ring Z2[α, β]. More generally we see by induction that for a product

Section 3.2.
Cup Product
217
of n copies of RP∞the Z2 cohomology is a polynomial ring in n variables. Similar
remarks apply to CP∞and HP∞with coefﬁcients in an arbitrary commutative ring.
Example 3.17: Exterior Algebras. The theorem implies that H∗(Sk×Sℓ; Z) is free
with additive basis {1, α, β, α ⌣β} where α ∈Hk(Sk×Sℓ; Z) and β ∈Hℓ(Sk×Sℓ; Z)
are pullbacks of generators of Hk(Sk; Z) and Hℓ(Sℓ; Z), hence satisfy α2 = β2 = 0.
The rest of the ring structure of H∗(Sk×Sℓ; Z) is determined by the commutativity
relation αβ = (−1)kℓβα. If both k and ℓare odd, H∗(Sk×Sℓ; Z) is thus the exterior
algebra ΛZ[α, β]. In general, the exterior algebra ΛR[α1, α2, ···] over a commutative
ring R with identity is the free R module with basis the ﬁnite products αi1 ··· αik ,
i1 < ··· < ik , with multiplication deﬁned by the rules αiαj = −αjαi and α2
i = 0, the
latter relation being a special case of the former if 2 ≠0 in R. The empty product
of αi ’s is allowed, and provides an identity element 1 ∈ΛR[α1, α2, ···]. We could
also describe ΛR[α1, α2, ···] as the graded tensor product over R of the one-variable
exterior algebras ΛR[αi] where the αi ’s have odd dimension.
The theorem then
gives an isomorphism H∗(Sk1 × ··· ×Skn; Z) ≈ΛZ[α1, ··· , αn] if the dimensions ki
are all odd. With some ki ’s even, one would have the tensor product of an exterior
algebra for the odd-dimensional spheres and truncated polynomial rings Z[α]/(α2)
for the even-dimensional spheres. Of course, ΛZ[α] and Z[α]/(α2) are isomorphic as
rings, but when one takes tensor products in the graded sense it becomes important
to distinguish them as graded rings, with α odd-dimensional in ΛZ[α] and even-
dimensional in Z[α]/(α2). These remarks apply more generally with any coefﬁcient
ring R in place of Z, though when R = Z2 there is no need to distinguish between the
odd and even dimensional cases since signs become irrelevant.
The idea of the proof of the theorem will be to consider, for a ﬁxed CW complex
Y , the functors
hn(X, A) =
L
i
 Hi(X, A; R)⊗RHn−i(Y; R)

kn(X, A) = Hn(X×Y, A×Y; R).
The cross product, or a relative version of it, deﬁnes a map µ : hn(X, A)→kn(X, A)
which we want to show is an isomorphism when X is a CW complex and A = ∅. We
will show:
(1) h∗and k∗are cohomology theories on the category of CW pairs.
(2) µ is a natural transformation, i.e., it commutes with induced homomorphisms
and with coboundary homomorphisms in long exact sequences of pairs.
It is obvious that µ : hn(X)→kn(X) is an isomorphism when X is a point since it is
just the scalar multiplication map R⊗RHn(Y; R)→Hn(Y; R). The following general
fact will then imply the theorem.
Proposition 3.18. A natural transformation between unreduced cohomology theo-
ries on the category of CW pairs which is an isomorphism when the CW pair is a point
is an isomorphism for all CW pairs.

218
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
Proof: Let µ : h∗(X, A)→k∗(X, A) be the natural transformation. By the ﬁve-lemma
it will sufﬁce to show that µ is an isomorphism when A = ∅.
First we do the case of ﬁnite-dimensional X by induction on dimension.
The
induction starts with the case that X is 0 dimensional, where the result holds by
hypothesis and by the axiom for disjoint unions.
For the induction step, µ gives
a map between the two long exact sequences for the pair (Xn, Xn−1), with squares
which commute since µ is a natural transformation.
The ﬁve-lemma reduces the
inductive step to showing that µ is an isomorphism for (X, A) = (Xn, Xn−1). Let
Φ :
`
α (Dn
α, ∂Dn
α)→(Xn, Xn−1) be a collection of characteristic maps for all the n cells
of X . By excision Φ∗is an isomorphism for h∗and k∗, so naturality reduces us to
showing that µ is an isomorphism for (X, A) =
`
α (Dn
α, ∂Dn
α). The axiom for disjoint
unions reduces us further to the case (Dn, ∂Dn). This case follows by applying the
ﬁve-lemma to the long exact sequences of this pair, since Dn is contractible, hence is
covered by the 0 dimensional case, and ∂Dn is (n −1) dimensional.
The case that X is inﬁnite-dimensional reduces to the ﬁnite-dimensional case by a
telescope argument as in the proof of Lemma 2.34. We leave this for the reader since
the ﬁnite-dimensional case sufﬁces for the special h∗and k∗we are considering,
as hi(X, Xn) and ki(X, Xn) are both zero when n > i, by cellular cohomology for
example.
⊔⊓
Proof of 3.15: It remains to check that h∗and k∗are cohomology theories, and
that µ is a natural transformation. Since we are dealing with unreduced cohomology
theories there are four axioms to verify.
(1) Homotopy invariance: f ≃g implies f ∗= g∗. This is obvious for both h∗and
k∗.
(2) Excision: h∗(X, A) ≈h∗(B, A∩B) for A and B subcomplexes of the CW complex
X = A ∪B . This is obvious, and so is the corresponding statement for k∗since
(A×Y) ∪(B×Y) = (A ∪B)×Y and (A×Y) ∩(B×Y) = (A ∩B)×Y .
(3) The long exact sequence of a pair. This is a triviality for k∗, but a few words of
explanation are needed for h∗, where the desired exact sequence is obtained in
two steps. For the ﬁrst step, tensor the long exact sequence of ordinary coho-
mology groups for a pair (X, A) with the free R module Hn(Y; R), for a ﬁxed n.
This yields another exact sequence because Hn(Y; R) is a direct sum of copies
of R, so the result of tensoring an exact sequence with this direct sum is simply
to produce a direct sum of copies of the exact sequence, which is again an exact
sequence. The second step is to let n vary, taking a direct sum of the previously
constructed exact sequences for each n, with the nth exact sequence shifted up
by n dimensions.
(4) Disjoint unions. Again this axiom obviously holds for k∗but some justiﬁcation
is required for h∗. What is needed is the algebraic fact that there is a canonical

Section 3.2.
Cup Product
219
isomorphism
 Q
αMα
⊗RN ≈
Q
α
 Mα ⊗RN

for R modules Mα and a ﬁnitely-
generated free R module N . Since N is a direct product of ﬁnitely many copies
Rβ of R, Mα ⊗RN is a direct product of corresponding copies Mαβ = Mα ⊗RRβ of
Mα and the desired relation becomes
Q
β
Q
αMαβ ≈
Q
α
Q
βMαβ , which is obviously
true.
It remains to check the naturality of µ. Naturality with respect to maps between
spaces is immediate from the naturality of cup products. Naturality with respect to
coboundary maps in long exact sequences is commutativity of the square
A R
R
H (
)
H
(
−−−−−−→
H
(
−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−→
;
Y R
H (
)
i
j
i 1
;
A
Y
H
(
×
X
Y
×
A
Y
×
R)
i j 1
;
X A R)
R)
;
,
;
⊗
⊗
µ
R
−−−−−→
Y R
H (
)
j
;
,
⊗
µ
δ
δ
+
i j
+
+
+
1
1
An element of the upper left module is a sum of classes represented by products
ϕ ⊗ψ for cocycles ϕ ∈Ci(A; R) and ψ ∈Cj(Y; R). Each ϕ can be extended to a
cochain ϕ ∈Ci(X; R). Then ϕ ⊗ψ maps rightward to δϕ ⊗ψ and then downward
to p♯
1(δϕ) ⌣p♯
2(ψ). Going the other way around the square, ϕ ⊗ψ maps downward
to p♯
1(ϕ) ⌣p♯
2(ψ) and then rightward to δ
 p♯
1(ϕ) ⌣p♯
2(ψ)

since p♯
1(ϕ) ⌣p♯
2(ψ)
extends p♯
1(ϕ) ⌣p♯
2(ψ) over X×Y . Finally, δ
 p♯
1(ϕ) ⌣p♯
2(ψ)

= p♯
1(δϕ) ⌣p♯
2(ψ)
since δψ = 0.
⊔⊓
The following theorem of Hopf is a nice algebraic application of the cup product
structure in H∗(RPn×RPn; Z2), which the K¨unneth formula describes.
Theorem 3.19. If Rn has the structure of a division algebra over the scalar ﬁeld R,
then n must be a power of 2.
Proof: Given a division algebra structure on Rn , deﬁne a map g : Sn−1×Sn−1→Sn−1
by g(x, y) = xy/|xy|. This is well-deﬁned since there are no zero-divisors, and con-
tinuous by the bilinearity of the multiplication. From the relations (−x)y = −(xy) =
x(−y) it follows that g(−x, y) = −g(x, y) = g(x, −y). This implies that g induces
a quotient map h : RPn−1×RPn−1→RPn−1 .
We claim that h∗: H1(RPn−1; Z2)→H1(RPn−1×RPn−1; Z2) is the map h∗(γ) =
α + β where γ generates H1(RPn−1; Z2) and α and β are the pullbacks of γ under
the projections of RPn−1×RPn−1 onto its two factors. This can be proved as follows.
We may assume n > 2, so π1(RPn−1) ≈Z2 . Let λ : I→Sn−1 be a path joining a point x
to the antipodal point −x . Then for ﬁxed y , the path s , g(λ(s), y) joins g(x, y)
to g(−x, y) = −g(x, y). Hence, identifying antipodal points, h takes a nontrivial
loop in the ﬁrst RPn−1 factor of RPn−1×RPn−1 to a nontrivial loop in RPn−1 . The
same argument works for the second factor, so the restriction of h to the 1 skeleton
S1 ∨S1 is homotopic to the map which includes each S1 summand of S1 ∨S1 into
RPn−1 as the 1 skeleton. Since restriction to the 1 skeleton is an isomorphism on
H1(−; Z2) for both RPn−1 and RPn−1×RPn−1 , it follows that h∗(γ) = α + β.

220
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
Since γn = 0 we have 0 = h∗(γn) = (α + β)n =
P
k

n
k

αkβn−k .
This is an
equation in the ring H∗(RPn−1×RPn−1; Z2) ≈Z2[α, β]/(αn, βn), so the coefﬁcient

n
k

must be zero in Z2 for all k in the range 0 < k < n. It is a rather easy number
theory fact that this happens only when n is a power of 2. Namely, an obviously
equivalent statement is that in the polynomial ring Z2[x], the equality (1 + x)n =
1 + xn holds only when n is a power of 2.
To prove the latter statement, write
n as a sum of powers of 2, n = n1 + ··· + nk with n1 < ··· < nk . Then (1 +
x)n = (1 + x)n1 ··· (1 + x)nk = (1 + xn1) ··· (1 + xnk) since squaring is an additive
homomorphism with Z2 coefﬁcients. If one multiplies the product (1 + xn1) ··· (1 +
xnk) out, no terms combine or cancel since ni ≥2ni−1 for each i, and so the resulting
polynomial has 2k terms. Thus if this polynomial equals 1 + xn we must have k = 1,
which means that n is a power of 2.
⊔⊓
It is sometimes important to have a relative version of the K¨unneth Formula in
Theorem 3.15. The relative cross product is
H∗(X, A; R) ⊗RH∗(Y, B; R)
×
-------------------------→H∗(X×Y, A×Y ∪X×B; R)
for CW pairs (X, A) and (Y, B), deﬁned just as in the absolute case by a×b =
p∗
1 (a) ⌣p∗
2 (b) where p∗
1 (a) ∈H∗(X×Y, A×Y; R) and p∗
2 (b) ∈H∗(X×Y, X×B; R).
Theorem 3.20. For CW pairs (X, A) and (Y, B) the cross product homomorphism
H∗(X, A; R)⊗RH∗(Y, B; R)→H∗(X×Y, A×Y ∪X×B; R) is an isomorphism of rings
if Hk(Y, B; R) is a ﬁnitely generated free R module for each k.
Proof: First note that the case B = ∅was covered in the course of the proof of the
absolute case. So it sufﬁces to deduce the case B ≠∅from the case B = ∅.
The following commutative diagram shows that collapsing B to a point reduces
us to the case that B is a point.
B/B
X A
R
H (
)
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−→
,
Y B
H (
)
,
A
Y
H (
×
X
Y
×
X
B
×
×
×
)
,
⊗
−−−−−→
∗
∗
∗
X A
R
H (
)
,
Y/B
Y/B
H (
)
,
⊗
∗
∗
∪
A
H (
(
×
X ×
X ×
)
)
Y/B
(
)
B/B
(
)
,
∗
∪
≈
≈
The lower map is an isomorphism since the quotient spaces (X×Y)/(A×Y ∪X×B)
and
 X×(Y/B)

/
 A×(Y/B) ∪X×(B/B)

are the same.
In the case that B is a point y0 ∈Y , consider the commutative diagram
X A
R
H (
)
−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
,
Y y
H (
)
,
A
Y
H (
×
X
Y
×
X
y
×
×
−−−−−−−→
×
)
,
⊗
×
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
∗
∗
∗
X A
R
H (
)
,
Y
Y
H (
)
⊗
∗
∗
−−−−→
−−−−−−−−→
X A
R
H (
)
,
H (
⊗
∗
∗
∪
A
H (
×
X ×
)
Y
,
∗
0
0
A
Y
H (
×
A
Y
×
X
y
×
)
,
∗
∪
0
0
H (
A
y
×
X
y
×
)
,
∗
0
y )
0
≈

Section 3.2.
Cup Product
221
Since y0 is a retract of Y , the upper row of this diagram is a split short exact sequence.
The lower row is the long exact sequence of a triple, and it too is a split short exact
sequence since (X×y0, A×y0) is a retract of (X×Y, A×Y). The middle and right
cross product maps are isomorphisms by the case B = ∅since Hk(Y; R) is a ﬁnitely
generated free R module if Hk(Y, y0; R) is. The ﬁve-lemma then implies that the
left-hand cross product map is an isomorphism as well.
⊔⊓
The relative cross product for pairs (X, x0) and (Y, y0) gives a reduced cross
product
eH∗(X; R) ⊗R eH∗(Y; R)
×
-------------------------→eH∗(X ∧Y; R)
where X∧Y is the smash product X×Y/(X×{y0}∪{x0}×Y). The preceding theorem
implies that this reduced cross product is an isomorphism if eH∗(X; R) or eH∗(Y; R)
is free and ﬁnitely generated in each dimension. For example, we have isomorphisms
eHn(X; R) ≈eHn+k(X ∧Sk; R) via cross product with a generator of Hk(Sk; R) ≈R. The
space X∧Sk is the k fold reduced suspension ΣkX of X , so we see that the suspension
isomorphisms eHn(X; R) ≈eHn+k(ΣkX; R) which exist by elementary exact sequence
arguments can also be obtained via cross product with a generator of eH∗(Sk; R).
Spaces with Polynomial Cohomology
We saw in Theorem 3.11 that RP∞, CP∞, and HP∞have cohomology rings which
are polynomial algebras. We will describe now a construction for enlarging S2n to
a space J(S2n) whose cohomology ring H∗(J(S2n); Z) is almost the polynomial ring
Z[x] on a generator x of dimension 2n. And with Q coefﬁcients, H∗(J(S2n); Q) is
exactly the polynomial ring Q[x]. This construction, known as the James reduced
product, is also of interest because of its connections with loopspaces, described in
§4.I.
For a space X , let Xk be the product of k copies of X . From the disjoint union
`
k≥1 Xk , let us form a quotient space J(X) by identifying (x1, ··· , xi, ··· , xk) with
(x1, ··· , bxi, ··· , xk) if xi = e, a chosen basepoint of X . Points of J(X) can thus
be thought of as k tuples (x1, ··· , xk), k ≥0, with no xi = e. Inside J(X) is the
subspace Jm(X) consisting of the points (x1, ··· , xk) with k ≤m.
This can be
viewed as a quotient space of Xm under the identiﬁcations (x1, ··· , xi, e, ··· , xm) ∼
(x1, ··· , e, xi, ··· , xm). For example, J1(X) = X and J2(X) = X×X/(x, e) ∼(e, x).
If X is a CW complex with e a 0 cell, the quotient map Xm→Jm(X) glues together
the m subcomplexes of the product complex Xm where one coordinate is e. These
glueings are by homeomorphisms taking cells onto cells, so Jm(X) inherits a CW
structure from Xm . There are natural inclusions Jm(X) ⊂Jm+1(X) as subcomplexes,
and J(X) is the union of these subcomplexes, hence is also a CW complex.

222
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
Proposition 3.21. For n > 0, H∗ J(Sn); Z

consists of a Z in each dimension a
multiple of n. If n is even, the ith power of a generator of Hn J(Sn); Z

is i! times
a generator of Hin J(Sn); Z

, for each i ≥1. If n is odd H∗ J(Sn); Z

is isomorphic
as a graded ring to H∗(Sn; Z)⊗H∗ J(S2n); Z

.
Thus for n even, H∗ J(Sn); Z

can be identiﬁed with the subring of the polyno-
mial ring Q[x] additively generated by the monomials xi/i!. This subring is called a
divided polynomial algebra, and is denoted by ΓZ[x].
Proof: Giving Sn its usual CW structure, the resulting CW structure on J(Sn) con-
sists of exactly one cell in each dimension a multiple of n. Thus if n > 1 we deduce
immediately from cellular cohomology that H∗ J(Sn); Z

consists exactly of Z’s in
dimensions a multiple of n. An alternative argument which works also when n = 1
is the following. Consider the quotient map q : (Sn)m→Jm(Sn). This carries each
cell of (Sn)m homeomorphically onto a cell of Jm(Sn). In particular q is a cellular
map, taking k skeleton to k skeleton for each k, so q induces a chain map of cellular
chain complexes. This chain map is surjective since each cell of Jm(Sn) is the homeo-
morphic image of a cell of (Sn)m . Hence all the cellular boundary maps for Jm(Sn)
will be trivial if the same is true for (Sn)m , which it must be in order for H∗ (Sn)m; Z

to have the structure given by Theorem 3.15.
Since q maps each of the m n cells of (Sn)m homeomorphically onto the n cell
of Jm(Sn), we see from cellular cohomology that a generator α ∈Hn Jm(Sn); Z

pulls
back by q∗to the sum α1+···+αm of the generators of Hn (Sn)m; Z

corresponding
to the n cells of (Sn)m . If n is even, the cup product structure in H∗ J(Sn); Z

is
strictly commutative and H∗ (Sn)m; Z

≈Z[α1, ··· , αm]/(α2
1, ··· , α2
m). The power
αm then pulls back to (α1 +···+αm)m = m!α1 ··· αm , where the product α1 ··· αm
generates Hmn (Sn)m; Z

≈Z. The map q is a homeomorphism from the mn cell of
(Sn)m to the mn cell of Jm(Sn), so q∗is an isomorphism on Hmn . This implies that
αm is m! times a generator of Hmn Jm(Sn); Z

. Since the cells of J(Sn)−Jm(Sn) have
dimension at least (m + 1)n, the inclusion Jm(Sn) ⊂J(Sn) induces isomorphisms
on Hi for i ≤mn. Thus if we let xi denote a generator of Hin J(Sn); Z

, we have
xm
1 = ±m!xm for all m, and the sign can be made + by rechoosing xm if necessary.
The case n odd is similar and will be left as an exercise for the reader.
⊔⊓
In ΓZ[x] ⊂Q[x], if we write xi for xi/i!, then the multiplicative structure is
given by xixj =

i+j
i

xi+j . More generally, for a commutative ring R we could deﬁne
ΓR[x] to be the free R module with basis x0 = 1, x1, x2, ··· and multiplication deﬁned
by xixj =

i+j
i

xi+j . The preceding proposition implies that H∗ J(S2n); R

≈ΓR[x].
When R = Q it is clear that ΓQ[x] is just Q[x]. However, for R = Zp with p prime
something quite different happens: There is an isomorphism
ΓZp[x] ≈Zp[x1, xp, xp2, ···]/(xp
1 , xp
p, xp
p2, ···) =
O
i≥0
Zp[xpi]/(xp
pi)

Section 3.2.
Cup Product
223
as we show in §3.C, where we will also see that divided polynomial algebras are in a
certain sense dual to polynomial algebras.
The examples of projective spaces lead naturally to the following question: Given
a coefﬁcient ring R and an integer d > 0, is there a space X having H∗(X; R) ≈R[α]
with α ∈Hd(X; R)?
Historically, it took major advances in the theory to answer
this simple-looking question. Here is a
table giving all the possible values of
d for some of the most obvious and
important choices of R, namely Z, Q,
Z2 , and Zp with p an odd prime.
As
R
d
Z
2, 4
Q
any even number
Z2
1, 2, 4
Zp
any even divisor of 2(p −1)
we have seen, projective spaces give the examples for Z and Z2 . Examples for Q
are the spaces J(Sd), and examples for Zp are constructed in §3.H. Showing that
no other d’s are possible takes considerably more work. The fact that d must be
even when R ≠Z2 is a consequence of the commutativity property of cup product.
In Theorem 4L.9 and Corollary 4L.10 we will settle the case R = Z and show that d
must be a power of 2 for R = Z2 and a power of p times an even divisor of 2(p −1)
for R = Zp , p odd. Ruling out the remaining cases is best done using K–theory, as
in [VBKT] or the classical reference [Adams-Atiyah]. However there is one slightly
anomalous case, R = Z2 , d = 8, which must be treated by special arguments; see
[Toda63].
It is an interesting fact that for each even d there exists a CW complex Xd which
is simultaneously an example for all the admissible choices of coefﬁcients R in the
table. Moreover, Xd can be chosen to have the simplest CW structure consistent with
its cohomology, namely a single cell in each dimension a multiple of d. For example,
we may take X2 = CP∞and X4 = HP∞. The next space X6 would have H∗(X6; Zp) ≈
Zp[α] for p = 7, 13, 19, 31, ···, primes of the form 3s + 1, the condition 6|2(p −1)
being equivalent to p = 3s + 1. (By a famous theorem of Dirichlet there are inﬁnitely
many primes in any such arithmetic progression.) Note that, in terms of Z coefﬁcients,
Xd must have the property that for a generator α of Hd(Xd; Z), each power αi is an
integer ai times a generator of Hdi(Xd; Z), with ai ≠0 if H∗(Xd; Q) ≈Q[α] and ai
relatively prime to p if H∗(Xd; Zp) ≈Zp[α]. A construction of Xd is given in [SSAT],
or in the original source [Hoffman-Porter].
One might also ask about realizing the truncated polynomial ring R[α]/(αn+1),
in view of the examples provided by RPn , CPn , and HPn , leaving aside the trivial case
n = 1 where spheres provide examples. The analysis for polynomial rings also settles
which truncated polynomial rings are realizable; there are just a few more than for
the full polynomial rings.
There is also the question of realizing polynomial rings R[α1, ··· , αn] with gen-
erators αi in speciﬁed dimensions di . Since R[α1, ··· , αm]⊗RR[β1, ··· , βn] is equal
to R[α1, ··· , αm, β1, ··· , βn], the product of two spaces with polynomial cohomology

224
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
is again a space with polynomial cohomology, assuming the number of polynomial
generators is ﬁnite in each dimension. For example, the n fold product (CP∞)n has
H∗ (CP∞)n; Z

≈Z[α1, ··· , αn] with each αi 2 dimensional. Similarly, products of
the spaces J(Sdi) realize all choices of even di ’s with Q coefﬁcients.
However, with Z and Zp coefﬁcients, products of one-variable examples do not
exhaust all the possibilities. As we show in §4.D, there are three other basic examples
with Z coefﬁcients:
1. Generalizing the space CP∞of complex lines through the origin in C∞, there is
the Grassmann manifold Gn(C∞) of n dimensional vector subspaces of C∞, and
this has H∗(Gn(C∞); Z) ≈Z[α1, ··· , αn] with αi of dimension 2i. This space is
also known as BU(n), the ‘classifying space’ of the unitary group U(n). It is
central to the study of vector bundles and K–theory.
2. Replacing C by H, there is the quaternionic Grassmann manifold Gn(H∞), also
known as BSp(n), the classifying space for the symplectic group Sp(n), with
H∗(Gn(H∞); Z) ≈Z[α1, ··· , αn] with αi of dimension 4i.
3. There is a classifying space BSU(n) for the special unitary group SU(n), whose
cohomology is the same as for BU(n) but with the ﬁrst generator α1 omitted, so
H∗(BSU(n); Z) ≈Z[α2, ··· , αn] with αi 2i dimensional.
These examples and their products account for all the realizable polynomial cup prod-
uct rings with Z coefﬁcients, according to a theorem in [Adams-Wilkerson]. The situ-
ation for Zp coefﬁcients is more complicated and will be discussed in §3.H.
Here is the evident general question along these lines:
The Realization Problem. Which graded commutative R algebras occur as cup prod-
uct algebras H∗(X; R) of spaces X ?
This is a difﬁcult problem, with the degree of difﬁculty depending strongly on the
coefﬁcient ring R. The most accessible case is R = Q, where essentially every graded
commutative Q algebra is realizable, as shown in [Quillen]. Next in order of difﬁculty
is R = Zp with p prime. This is much harder than the case of Q, and only partial
results, obtained with much labor, are known, mainly about realizing polynomial rings.
Finally there is R = Z, about which very little is known beyond what is implied by the
Zp cases.
Polynomial algebras are examples of free graded commutative algebras, where
‘free’ means loosely ‘having no unnecessary relations.’ In general, a free graded com-
mutative algebra is a tensor product of single-generator free graded commutative
algebras. The latter are either polynomial algebras R[α] on even-dimension gener-
ators α or quotients R[α]/(2α2) with α odd-dimensional. Note that if R is a ﬁeld
then R[α]/(2α2) is either the exterior algebra ΛR[α] if the characteristic of R is not
2, or the polynomial algebra R[α] otherwise. Every graded commutative algebra is a
quotient of a free one, clearly.

Section 3.2.
Cup Product
225
Example 3.22: Subcomplexes of the n Torus. To give just a small hint of the end-
less variety of nonfree cup product algebras which can be realized, consider subcom-
plexes of the n torus T n , the product of n copies of S1 . Here we give S1 its stan-
dard minimal cell structure and T n the resulting product cell structure. We know
that H∗(T n; Z) is the exterior algebra ΛZ[α1, ··· , αn], with the monomial αi1 ··· αik
corresponding via cellular cohomology to the k cell e1
i1 × ··· ×e1
ik . So if we pass to
a subcomplex X ⊂T n by omitting certain cells, then H∗(X; Z) is the quotient of
ΛZ[α1, ··· , αn] obtained by setting the monomials corresponding to the omitted cells
equal to zero. Since we are dealing with rings, we are factoring out by an ideal in
ΛZ[α1, ··· , αn], the ideal generated by the monomials corresponding to the ‘minimal’
omitted cells, those whose boundary is entirely contained in X . For example, if we
take X to be the subcomplex of T 3 obtained by deleting the cells e1
1×e1
2×e1
3 and
e1
2×e1
3 , then H∗(X; Z) ≈ΛZ[α1, α2, α3]/(α2α3).
How many different subcomplexes of T n are there? To each subcomplex X ⊂T n
we can associate a ﬁnite simplicial complex CX by the following procedure. View T n
as the quotient of the n cube In obtained by identifying opposite faces. If we inter-
sect the cube In ⊂Rn with the hyperplane x1 + ··· + xn = ε for small ε > 0, we
get a simplex ∆n−1 , and if q : In→T n is the quotient map, then ∆n−1 ∩q−1(X) is a
subcomplex CX of ∆n−1 . The k cells of X correspond exactly to the (k−1) simplices
of CX . Clearly X is uniquely determined by CX , and it is easy to see that every sub-
complex of ∆n−1 occurs as CX for some subcomplex X of T n . Since every simplicial
complex with n vertices is a subcomplex of ∆n−1 , we see that T n has quite a large
number of subcomplexes, if n is not too small. Of course, it may be that some of
the resulting cohomology rings H∗(X; Z) are isomorphic for different subcomplexes
X ⊂T n . For example, one could just permute the factors of T n to change X with-
out affecting its cohomology ring. Whether there are less trivial examples is a harder
algebraic problem.
Somewhat more elaborate examples could be produced by looking at subcom-
plexes of the product of n copies of CP∞. In this case the cohomology rings are
isomorphic to polynomial rings modulo ideals generated by monomials. One could
also take subcomplexes of a product of S1 ’s and CP∞’s. However, this is still a whole
lot less complicated than the general case, where one takes free algebras modulo ide-
als generated by arbitrary polynomials having all their terms of the same dimension.
Let us conclude this section with an example of a cohomology ring which is not
too far removed from a polynomial ring.
Example 3.23: Cohen-Macauley Rings. Consider the quotient space X = CP∞/CPn−1 .
The quotient map CP∞→X induces an injection H∗(X; Z)→H∗(CP∞; Z) embedding
H∗(X; Z) in Z[α] as the subring generated by 1, αn, αn+1, ···. If we view this sub-
ring as a module over Z[αn], it is free with basis {1, αn+1, αn+2, ··· , α2n−1}. Thus

226
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
H∗(X; Z) is an example of a Cohen-Macauley ring: A ring which contains a polyno-
mial subring over which it is a ﬁnitely-generated free module. While polynomial cup
product rings are rather rare, Cohen-Macauley cup product rings occur much more
frequently.
Exercises
1. Assuming as known the cup product structure on the torus S1×S1 , compute the
cup product structure in H∗(Mg) for Mg the closed orientable surface of genus g,
by using the quotient map from Mg to a wedge-sum of g tori, shown below.
2. Using the cup product Hk(X, A; R)×Hℓ(X, B; R)→Hk+ℓ(X, A ∪B; R), show that
if X is the union of contractible open subsets A and B , then all cup products of
positive-dimensional classes in H∗(X; R) are zero. This applies in particular if X is
a suspension. Generalize to the situation that X is the union of n contractible open
subsets, to show that all n fold cup products of positive-dimensional classes are zero.
3. (a) Using the cup product structure, show there is no map RPn→RPm inducing
a nontrivial map H1(RPm; Z2)→H1(RPn; Z2) if n > m. What is the corresponding
result for maps CPn→CPm ?
(b) Prove the Borsuk-Ulam theorem by the following argument. Suppose on the con-
trary that f : Sn→Rn satisﬁes f (x) ≠f (−x) for all x . Then deﬁne g : Sn→Sn−1 by
g(x) =
 f (x) −f (−x)

/|f (x) −f (−x)|, so g(−x) = −g(x) and g induces a map
RPn→RPn−1 . Show that part (a) applies to this map.
4. Apply the Lefschetz ﬁxed point theorem to show that every map f : CPn→CPn has
a ﬁxed point if n is even, using the fact that f ∗: H∗(CPn; Z)→H∗(CPn; Z) is a ring
homomorphism. When n is odd show there is a ﬁxed point unless f ∗(α) = −α, for
α a generator of H2(CPn; Z). [See Exercise 2 in §2.C for an example of a map without
ﬁxed points in this exceptional case.]
5. Compute the ring structure in H∗(RP∞; Z4) and more generally H∗(RP∞; Zm).
6. Use cup products to compute the map H∗(CPn; Z)→H∗(CPn; Z) induced by the
map CPn→CPn which is a quotient of the map Cn+1→Cn+1 raising each coordinate
to the dth power, (z0, ··· , zn), (zd
0 , ··· , zd
n), for a ﬁxed integer d > 0. [First do the
case n = 1.]
7. Use cup products to show that RP3 is not homotopy equivalent to RP2 ∨S3 .
8. Let X be CP2 with a cell e3 attached by a map S2→CP1 ⊂CP2 of degree p, and
let Y = M(Zp, 2) ∨S4 . Thus X and Y have the same 3 skeleton but differ in the way

Section 3.2.
Cup Product
227
their 4 cells are attached. Show that X and Y have isomorphic cohomology rings
with Z coefﬁcients but not with Zp coefﬁcients.
9. Show that if Hn(X; Z) is ﬁnitely generated and free for each n, then H∗(X; Zp) ≈
H∗(X; Z)⊗Zp as rings, so in particular the ring structure with Z coefﬁcients deter-
mines the ring structure with Zp coefﬁcients.
10. Show that the cross product map H∗(X; Z)⊗H∗(Y; Z)→H∗(X×Y; Z) is not an
isomorphism if X and Y are inﬁnite discrete sets. [This shows the necessity of the
ﬁnite-generation hypothesis in Theorem 3.15.]
11. Using cup products, show that a map Sk+ℓ→Sk×Sℓmust induce the trivial ho-
momorphism Hk+ℓ(Sk+ℓ)→Hk+ℓ(Sk×Sℓ).
12. Show that the spaces (S1×CP∞)/(S1×{x0}) and S3×CP∞have isomorphic coho-
mology rings with Z or any other coefﬁcients. [An exercise for §4.L is to show these
two spaces are not homotopy equivalent.]
13. Describe H∗(CP∞/CP1; Z) as a ring with ﬁnitely many multiplicative generators.
How does this ring compare with H∗(S6×HP∞; Z)?
14. Let q : RP∞→CP∞be the natural quotient map obtained by regarding both spaces
as quotients of S∞, modulo multiplication by real scalars in one case and complex
scalars in the other. Show that the induced map q∗: H∗(CP∞; Z)→H∗(RP∞; Z) is sur-
jective in even dimensions by showing ﬁrst by a geometric argument that the restric-
tion q : RP2→CP1 induces a surjection on H2 and then appealing to cup product struc-
tures. Next, form a quotient space X of RP∞⨿CPn by identifying each point x ∈RP2n
with q(x) ∈CPn . Show there are ring isomorphisms H∗(X; Z) ≈Z[α]/(2αn+1) and
H∗(X; Z2) ≈Z2[α, β]/(β2 −αn+1), where α has dimension 2 and β has dimension
2n+1. Make a similar construction and analysis for the quotient map q : CP∞→HP∞.
15.
For a ﬁxed coefﬁcient ﬁeld F , deﬁne the Poincar´e series of a space X to be
the formal power series p(t) =
P
i aiti where ai is the dimension of Hi(X; F) as a
vector space over F , assuming this dimension is ﬁnite for all i. Show that p(X×Y) =
p(X)p(Y). Compute the Poincar´e series for Sn , RPn , RP∞, CPn , CP∞, and the spaces
in the preceding three exercises.
16. Show that if X and Y are ﬁnite CW complexes such that H∗(X; Z) and H∗(Y; Z)
contain no elements of order a power of a given prime p, then the same is true for
X×Y . [Apply Theorem 3.15 with coefﬁcients in various ﬁelds.]
17. Show that H∗(J(Sn); Z) for n odd is the tensor product of an exterior algebra on
an n dimensional generator with a divided polynomial algebra on a 2n dimensional
generator.
18. For the closed orientable surface M of genus g ≥1, show that for each nonzero
α ∈H1(M; Z) there exists β ∈H1(M; Z) with αβ ≠0. Deduce that M is not homotopy
equivalent to a wedge sum X ∨Y of CW complexes with nontrivial reduced homology.
Do the same for closed nonorientable surfaces using cohomology with Z2 coefﬁcients.

228
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
Algebraic topology is most often concerned with properties of spaces which de-
pend only on homotopy type, so local topological properties do not play much of
a role. Digressing somewhat from this viewpoint, in this section we study a class
of spaces whose most prominent feature is their local topology, namely manifolds,
which are locally homeomorphic to Rn . It is somewhat miraculous that just this lo-
cal homegeneity property, together with global compactness, is enough to impose a
strong symmetry on the homology and cohomology groups of such spaces, as well
as strong nontriviality of cup products. This is the Poincar´e duality theorem, one of
the earliest theorems in the subject. In fact, Poincar´e’s original work on the duality
property came before homology and cohomology had even been properly deﬁned,
and it took many years for the concepts of homology and cohomology to be reﬁned
sufﬁciently to put Poincar´e duality on a ﬁrm footing.
Let us proceed now to deﬁnitions. A manifold of dimension n, or more concisely
an n manifold, is a Hausdorff space M in which each point has an open neighborhood
homeomorphic to Rn . The dimension of M is intrinsically characterized by the fact
that for x ∈M , the local homology group Hi(M, M−{x}; Z) is nonzero only for i = n,
namely Hi(M, M −{x}; Z) ≈Hi(Rn, Rn−{0}; Z) by excision, and Hi(Rn, Rn−{0}; Z) ≈
eHi−1(Rn −{0}; Z) ≈eHi−1(Sn−1; Z) since Rn is contractible and Rn −{0} deformation
retracts onto Sn−1 .
A compact manifold is called closed, to distinguish it from the more general
notion of a compact manifold with boundary which will be considered later in this
section. For example Sn is obviously a closed manifold, as are RPn and lens spaces
since they have Sn as a covering space. Complex and quaternionic projective spaces
are also closed manifolds. For example, CPn is compact since it is a quotient space of
S2n+1 , and the manifold property is satisﬁed since CPn has an open cover consisting
of the sets Ui = { [z0, ··· , zn] ∈CPn | zi = 1 } each of which is homeomorphic to
R2n . Further examples of closed manifolds can be generated from these using the
obvious fact that the product of closed manifolds of dimensions m and n is a closed
manifold of dimension m + n.
Poincar´e duality in its most primitive form asserts that for a closed orientable
manifold M of dimension n, there are isomorphisms Hk(M; Z) ≈Hn−k(M; Z) for
all k. Implicit here is the convention that homology and cohomology groups of nega-
tive dimension are zero, so all the nontrivial homology and cohomology of M lies in
the dimension range from 0 to n. The deﬁnition of ‘orientable’ will be given below.
Without the orientability hypothesis there is a weaker statement that Hk(M; Z2) ≈
Hn−k(M; Z2) for all k. As we show in Corollaries A.8 and A.9 in the Appendix, the

Section 3.3.
Poincar´e Duality
229
homology groups of a closed manifold are all ﬁnitely generated. So via the univer-
sal coefﬁcient theorem, Poincar´e duality for a closed orientable n manifold M can
be stated just in terms of homology: Modulo their torsion subgroups, Hk(M; Z) and
Hn−k(M; Z) are isomorphic, and the torsion subgroups of Hk(M; Z) and Hn−k−1(M; Z)
are isomorphic. However, the statement in terms of cohomology is really more natu-
ral.
Poincar´e duality thus expresses a certain symmetry in the homology of closed
orientable manifolds. For example, consider the n dimensional torus T n , the product
of n circles. By induction on n it follows from the K¨unneth formula, or from the
easy special case Hi(X×S1; Z) ≈Hi(X; Z)⊕Hi−1(X; Z) which was an exercise in §2.2,
that Hk(T n; Z) is isomorphic to the sum of

n
k

copies of Z.
So Poincar´e duality
is reﬂected in the relation

n
k

=

n
n−k

. The reader might also check that Poincar´e
duality is consistent with our calculations of the homology of projective spaces and
lens spaces, which are all orientable except for RPn with n even.
For many manifolds there is a very nice geometric proof of Poincar´e duality using
the notion of dual cell structures. The germ of this idea can be traced back to the ﬁve
regular Platonic solids: the tetrahedron, cube, octahedron, dodecahedron, and icosa-
hedron. Each of these polyhedra has a dual polyhedron whose vertices are the center
points of the faces of the given polyhedron. Thus the dual of the cube is the octahe-
dron, and vice versa. Similarly the dodecahedron and icosahedron are dual to each
other, and the tetrahedron is its own dual. One can regard each of these polyhedra
as deﬁning a cell structure C on S2 with a dual cell structure C∗determined by the
dual polyhedron. Each vertex of C lies in a dual 2 cell of C∗, each edge of C crosses
a dual edge of C∗, and each 2 cell
of C contains a dual vertex of C∗.
The ﬁrst ﬁgure at the right shows
the case of the cube and octahe-
dron. There is no need to restrict
to regular polyhedra here, and we
can generalize further by replacing S2 by any surface. A portion of a more-or-less
random pair of dual cell structures is shown in the second ﬁgure above. On the torus,
if we lift a dual pair of cell structures to the universal cover R2 , we get a dual pair of
periodic tilings of the plane, as in the next three ﬁgures.
The standard CW structure on the surface of genus g, obtained from a 4g gon by iden-

230
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
tifying edges via the product of commutators [a1, b1] ··· [ag, bg], is homeomorphic
to its own dual:
Given a pair of dual cell structures C and C∗on a closed surface M , the pair-
ing of cells with dual cells gives identiﬁcations of cellular chain groups C∗
0 = C2 ,
C∗
1 = C1 , and C∗
2 = C0 . If we use Z coefﬁcients these identiﬁcations are not quite
canonical since there is an ambiguity of sign for each cell, the choice of a generator
for the corresponding Z summand of the cellular chain complex. We can avoid this
ambiguity by considering the simpler situation of Z2 coefﬁcients, where the identiﬁ-
cations Ci = C∗
2−i are completely canonical. The key observation now is that under
these identiﬁcations, the cellular boundary map ∂: Ci→Ci−1 becomes the cellular
coboundary map δ : C∗
2−i→C∗
2−i+1 since ∂assigns to a cell the sum of the cells which
are its faces while δ assigns to a cell the sum of the cells of which it is a face. Thus
Hi(C; Z2) ≈H2−i(C∗; Z2), and hence Hi(M; Z2) ≈H2−i(M; Z2) since C and C∗are
cell structures on the same surface M .
To reﬁne this argument to Z coefﬁcients the problem of signs must be addressed.
After analyzing the situation more closely, one sees that if M is orientable, it is pos-
sible to make consistent choices of orientations of all the cells of C and C∗so that
the boundary maps in C agree with the coboundary maps in C∗, and therefore one
gets Hi(C; Z) ≈H2−i(C∗; Z), hence Hi(M; Z) ≈H2−i(M; Z).
For manifolds of higher dimension the situation is entirely analogous. One would
consider dual cell structures C and C∗on a closed n manifold M , each i cell of C
being dual to a unique (n−i) cell of C∗which it intersects in one point ‘transversely.’
For example on the 3 dimensional torus S1×S1×S1 one could take the standard cell
structure which lifts to the decomposition of the universal cover R3 into cubes with
vertices at the integer lattice points Z3 , and then the dual cell structure is obtained
by translating this by the vector (1/2, 1/2, 1/2). Each edge then has a dual 2 cell which
it pierces orthogonally, and each vertex lies in a dual 3 cell.
All the manifolds one commonly meets, for example all differentiable manifolds,
have dually paired cell structures with the properties needed to carry out the proof
of Poincar´e duality we have just sketched. However, to construct these cell structures
requires a certain amount of manifold theory. To avoid this, and to get a theorem
which applies to all manifolds, we shall take a completely different approach, using
algebraic topology to replace the geometry of dual cell structures.

Section 3.3.
Poincar´e Duality
231
Orientations and Homology
Let us consider the question of how one might deﬁne orientability for manifolds.
First there is the local question: What is an orientation of Rn ? Whatever an orientation
of Rn is, it should have the property that it is preserved under rotations and reversed
by reﬂections. For example, in R2 the notions of ‘clockwise’ and ‘counterclockwise’
certainly have this property, as do ‘right-handed’ and ‘left-handed’ in R3 . We shall
take the viewpoint that this property is what characterizes orientations, so anything
satisfying the property can be regarded as an orientation.
With this in mind, we propose the following as an algebraic-topological deﬁnition:
An orientation of Rn at a point x is a choice of generator of the inﬁnite cyclic group
Hn(Rn, Rn −{x}), where the absence of a coefﬁcient group from the notation means
that we take coefﬁcients in Z. To verify that the characteristic property of orienta-
tions is satisﬁed we use the isomorphisms Hn(Rn, Rn −{x}) ≈Hn−1(Rn −{x}) ≈
Hn−1(Sn−1) where Sn−1 is a sphere centered at x . Since these isomorphisms are nat-
ural, and rotations of Sn−1 have degree 1 (they are homotopic to the identity) while
reﬂections have degree −1, we see that a rotation ρ of Rn ﬁxing x takes a generator
α of Hn(Rn, Rn −{x}) to itself, meaning that ρ∗(α) = α, while a reﬂection takes α
to −α.
Note that with this deﬁnition, an orientation of Rn at a point x determines an
orientation at every other point y via the canonical isomorphisms Hn(Rn, Rn−{x}) ≈
Hn(Rn, Rn −B) ≈Hn(Rn, Rn −{y}) where B is any ball containing both x and y .
An advantage of this deﬁnition of local orientation is that it can be applied to any
n dimensional manifold M . Thus we deﬁne a local orientation of M at a point x to
be a choice of generator µx of the inﬁnite cyclic group Hn(M, M −{x}).
Notational Convention: In what follows we will very often be looking at homology
groups of the form Hn(X, X −A). To simplify notation we will write Hn(X, X −A)
as Hn(X ||A), or more generally Hn(X ||A; G) if a coefﬁcient group G needs to be
speciﬁed. By excision, Hn(X ||A) depends only on a neighborhood of A in X , so it
makes sense to view Hn(X ||A) as local homology of X at A.
Having settled what local orientations at points of a manifold are, a global orien-
tation ought to be ‘a consistent choice of local orientations at all points.’ We make this
precise by the following deﬁnition. An orientation of an n dimensional manifold M
is a function x,µx assigning to each x ∈M a local orientation µx ∈Hn(M ||x), sat-
isfying the ‘local consistency’ condition that each x ∈M has a neighborhood Rn ⊂M
containing an open ball B of ﬁnite radius about x such that all the local orientations
µy at points y ∈B are the images of one generator µB of Hn(M ||B) ≈Hn(Rn ||B)
under the natural maps Hn(M ||B)→Hn(M ||y). If an orientation exists for M , then
M is called orientable.
Every manifold M has a two-sheeted covering space f
M which is orientable. For

232
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
example, RP2 is covered by S2 , and the Klein bottle has the torus as a two-sheeted
covering space. The general construction goes as follows. As a set, let
f
M = { µx | x ∈M and µx is a local orientation of M at x }.
The map µx , x deﬁnes a two-to-one surjection f
M→M , and we wish to topologize
f
M to make this a covering space projection. Given an open ball B ⊂Rn ⊂M of ﬁnite
radius and a generator µB ∈Hn(M ||B), let U(µB) be the set of all µx ∈f
M such that
x ∈B and µx is the image of µB under the natural map Hn(M ||B)→Hn(M ||x). It is
easy to check that these sets U(µB) form a basis for a topology on f
M , and that the
projection f
M→M is a covering space. The manifold f
M is orientable since each point
µx ∈f
M has a canonical local orientation given by the element eµx ∈Hn(f
M ||µx) cor-
responding to µx under the isomorphisms Hn(f
M ||µx) ≈Hn(U(µB)||µx) ≈Hn(B ||x),
and by construction these local orientations satisfy the local consistency condition
necessary to deﬁne a global orientation.
Proposition 3.24. If M is connected, then M is orientable iff f
M has two components.
In particular, M is orientable if it is simply-connected, or more generally if π1(M)
has no subgroup of index two.
The ﬁrst statement is a formulation of the popular notion of nonorientability as
being able to go around some closed loop and come back with the opposite orientation,
since in terms of the covering space f
M→M this corresponds to a loop in M which
lifts to a path in f
M connecting two distinct points with the same image in M . The
existence of such paths is equivalent to f
M being connected.
Proof: If M is connected, f
M has either one or two components since it is a two-sheeted
covering space of M . If it has two components, they are each mapped homeomorphi-
cally to M by the covering projection, so M is orientable, being homeomorphic to
a component of the orientable manifold f
M . Conversely, if M is orientable, it has
exactly two orientations since it is connected, and each of these orientations deﬁnes
a component of f
M . The last statement of the proposition follows since connected
two-sheeted covering spaces of M correspond to index-two subgroups of π1(M), by
the classiﬁcation of covering spaces.
⊔⊓
The covering space f
M→M can be embedded in a larger covering space MZ→M
where MZ consists of all elements αx ∈Hn(M ||x) as x ranges over M . As before
we topologize MZ via the basis of sets U(αB) consisting of αx ’s with x ∈B and αx
the image of an element αB ∈Hn(M ||B) under the map Hn(M ||B)→Hn(M ||x). The
covering space MZ→M is inﬁnite-sheeted since for ﬁxed x ∈M the αx ’s range over
the inﬁnite cyclic group Hn(M ||x). Restricting αx to be zero, we get a copy M0 of M
in MZ . The rest of MZ consists of an inﬁnite sequence of copies Mk of f
M , k = 1, 2, ···,
where Mk consists of the αx ’s which are k times either generator of Hn(M ||x).

Section 3.3.
Poincar´e Duality
233
A continuous map M→MZ of the form x , αx ∈Hn(M ||x) is called a section
of the covering space. An orientation of M is the same thing as a section x , µx
such that µx is a generator of Hn(M ||x) for each x .
One can generalize the deﬁnition of orientation by replacing the coefﬁcient group
Z by any commutative ring R with identity. Then an R orientation of M assigns to
each x ∈M a generator of Hn(M ||x; R) ≈R, subject to the corresponding local
consistency condition, where a ‘generator’ of R is an element u such that Ru = R.
Since we assume R has an identity element, this is equivalent to u being a unit,
i.e., an invertible element of R. The deﬁnition of the covering space MZ generalizes
immediately to a covering space MR→M , and an R orientation is a section of this
covering space whose value at each x ∈M is a generator of Hn(M ||x; R).
The structure of MR is easy to describe. In view of the canonical isomorphism
Hn(M ||x; R) ≈Hn(M ||x)⊗R, each r ∈R determines a subcovering space Mr of MR
consisting of the points ±µx ⊗r ∈Hn(M ||x; R) for µx a generator of Hn(M ||x). If
r has order 2 in R then r = −r so Mr is just a copy of M , and otherwise Mr is
isomorphic to the two-sheeted cover f
M . The covering space MR is the union of these
Mr ’s, which are disjoint except for the equality Mr = M−r .
In particular we see that an orientable manifold is R orientable for all R, while
a nonorientable manifold is R orientable iff R contains a unit of order 2, which is
equivalent to having 2 = 0 in R. Thus every manifold is Z2 orientable. In practice
this means that the two most important cases are R = Z and R = Z2 . In what follows
the reader should keep these two cases foremost in mind, but we will usually state
results for a general R.
The orientability of a closed manifold is reﬂected in the structure of its homology,
according to the following result.
Theorem 3.25. Let M be a closed connected n manifold. Then:
(a) If M is R orientable, the map Hn(M; R)→Hn(M ||x; R) ≈R is an isomorphism
for all x ∈M .
(b) If M is not R orientable, the map Hn(M; R)→Hn(M ||x; R) ≈R is injective with
image { r ∈R | 2r = 0 } for all x ∈M .
(c) Hi(M; R) = 0 for i > n.
In particular, Hn(M; Z) is Z or 0 depending on whether M is orientable or not,
and in either case Hn(M; Z2) = Z2 .
An element of Hn(M; R) whose image in Hn(M ||x; R) is a generator for all x is
called a fundamental class for M with coefﬁcients in R. By the theorem, a funda-
mental class exists if M is closed and R orientable. The converse is also true. For
let µ ∈Hn(M; R) be a fundamental class and let µx denote its image in Hn(M ||x; R).
The function x,µx is then an R orientation, since the map Hn(M; R)→Hn(M ||x; R)
factors through Hn(M ||B; R) for B any open ball in M . Furthermore, M must be com-

234
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
pact since µx can only be nonzero for x in the compact set in M which is the image
of a cycle representing µ. In view of these remarks a fundamental class could also be
called an orientation class for M .
The theorem will follow fairly easily from a more technical statement:
Lemma 3.26. Let M be a manifold of dimension n and let A ⊂M be a compact
subset. Then:
(a) Hi(M ||A; R) = 0 for i > n, and a class in Hn(M ||A; R) is zero iff its image in
Hn(M ||x; R) is zero for all x ∈A.
(b) If x,αx is a section of the covering space MR→M , then there is a unique class
αA ∈Hn(M ||A; R) whose image in Hn(M ||x; R) is αx for all x ∈A.
To deduce the theorem from this, choose A = M , a compact set by assumption.
Then (c) of the theorem is immediate. To obtain (a) and (b) of the theorem, let Γ be
the set of sections of MR→M . The sum of two sections is a section, and a scalar
multiple of a section is a section, so Γ is an R module. There is a homomorphism
Hn(M; R)→Γ sending a class α to the section x , αx , where αx is the image of α
under the map Hn(M; R)→Hn(M ||x; R). The lemma asserts that this homomorphism
is an isomorphism. If M is connected, each section is uniquely determined by its value
at one point, so the remaining statements of the theorem are apparent from the earlier
discussion of the structure of MR .
⊔⊓
Proof of 3.26: The coefﬁcient ring R will play no special role in the argument so we
shall omit it from the notation. Note that the uniqueness part of (b) follows from (a).
We break the proof up into several steps.
(1) First we observe that if the lemma is true for compact sets A, B , and A ∩B then
it is true for A ∪B . To see this, consider the Mayer-Vietoris sequence:
0 -→Hn(M ||A ∪B)
Φ-----→Hn(M ||A) ⊕Hn(M ||B)
Ψ-----→Hn(M ||A ∩B)
Here the zero on the left comes from the assumption that Hn+1(M ||A ∩B) = 0. The
map Φ is Φ(α) = (α, −α) and Ψ is Ψ(α, β) = α + β, where we omit notation for
maps on homology induced by inclusion. The terms Hi(M ||A ∪B) farther to the left
in this sequence are sandwiched between groups which are zero by assumption, so
Hi(M ||A ∪B) = 0 for i > n. If a class α ∈Hn(M ||A ∪B) has image zero in Hn(M ||x)
for all x ∈A ∪B , its images in Hn(M ||A) and Hn(M ||B) have the same property,
hence are zero by hypothesis, so α itself must be zero since Φ is injective.
This
gives (a). For (b), if x , αx is a section, the hypothesis gives classes αA ∈Hn(M ||A)
and αB ∈Hn(M ||B) having image αx for all x in A or B respectively. The images of
αA and αB in Hn(M ||A ∩B) then satisfy the deﬁning property of αA∩B , hence must
equal αA∩B . Exactness of the sequence then implies that (αA, −αB) = Φ(αA∪B) for

Section 3.3.
Poincar´e Duality
235
some αA∪B ∈Hn(M ||A∪B). This means that αA∪B maps to αA and αB , so αA∪B has
image αx for all x ∈A ∪B since αA and αB have this property.
(2) Next we reduce to the case M = Rn . A compact set A ⊂M can be written as the
union of ﬁnitely many compact sets A1, ··· , Am each contained in an open Rn ⊂M .
We apply the result in (1) to A1 ∪··· ∪Am−1 and Am . The intersection of these two
sets is (A1 ∩Am)∪···∪(Am−1 ∩Am), a union of m −1 compact sets each contained
in an open Rn ⊂M . By induction on m this reduces us to the case m = 1, where by
excision we may replace M by the neighborhood Rn ⊂M .
(3) When M = Rn and A is a ﬁnite simplicial complex K with simplices linearly
embedded in Rn , the result follows by induction on the number of open simplices of
K , i.e., cells of K viewed as a CW complex, using (1) along with the easy case that K
is a single simplex.
(4) For an arbitrary compact set A ⊂Rn let α ∈Hi(Rn ||A) be represented by a relative
cycle z, and let C ⊂Rn −A be the union of the images of the singular simplices in
∂z. Since C is compact, it has a positive distance δ from A. Choose a large simplex
∆n ⊂Rn containing A, and subdivide ∆n , say by repeated barycentric subdivision,
so that all the simplices of the subdivision have diameter less than δ. Let K be the
union of all the simplices of this subdivision which meet A, so K is a ﬁnite simplicial
complex containing A and disjoint from C . The relative cycle z deﬁnes an element
αK ∈Hi(Rn ||K) mapping to the given α ∈Hi(Rn ||A). If i > n then by (3) we have
Hi(Rn ||K) = 0, so αK = 0, which implies α = 0 and hence Hi(Rn ||A) = 0. If i = n
and αx is zero in Hn(Rn ||x) for all x ∈A then in fact this holds for all x ∈K , where
αx in this case means the image of αK . This is because K is a union of simplices
σ meeting A and Hn(Rn ||σ)→Hn(Rn ||x) is an isomorphism for all x ∈σ . Since
αx = 0 for all x ∈K , (3) then says that αK is zero, hence also α, so (a) is ﬁnished.
The existence statement in (b) for M = Rn is obvious — just take a large ball B ⊃A
and use the fact that Hn(Rn ||B)→Hn(Rn ||x) is an isomorphism for all x ∈B .
⊔⊓
For a closed n manifold having the structure of a ∆complex there is a more
explicit construction for a fundamental class.
Consider the case of Z coefﬁcients
for example.
In simplicial homology a fundamental class must be represented by
some linear combination
P
i kiσi of the n simplices σi of M . The condition that the
fundamental class maps to a generator of Hn(M ||x; Z) for points x in the interiors of
the σi ’s means that each coefﬁcient ki must be ±1. The ki ’s must also be such that
P
i kiσi is a cycle. This implies that if σi and σj share a common (n−1) dimensional
face, then ki determines kj and vice versa. Analyzing the situation more closely, one
can show that a choice of signs for the ki ’s making
P
i kiσi a cycle is possible iff
M is orientable, and if such a choice is possible, then the cycle
P
i kiσi deﬁnes a
fundamental class. With Z2 coefﬁcients there is no issue of signs, and
P
i σi always
deﬁnes a fundamental class.

236
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
We can also squeeze some information about Hn−1(M) from the preceding the-
orem:
Corollary 3.27. If M is a closed connected n manifold then the torsion subgroup of
Hn−1(M; Z) is trivial if M is orientable and Z2 if M is nonorientable.
Proof: This is an application of the universal coefﬁcient theorem for homology. By
Corollaries A.8 and A.9 in the Appendix the homology groups of M are ﬁnitely gener-
ated. In the orientable case, if Hn−1(M; Z) contained torsion, then for some prime p,
Hn(M; Zp) would be larger than the Zp coming from Hn(M; Z). In the nonorientable
case, Theorem 3.25 says that Hn(M; Zm) is either Z2 or 0 depending on whether m
is even or odd. This forces the torsion subgroup of Hn−1(M; Z) to be Z2 .
⊔⊓
The reader who is familiar with Bockstein homomorphisms, which are discussed
in §3.E, will recognize that the Z2 in Hn−1(M; Z) in the nonorientable case is the im-
age of the Bockstein homomorphism Hn(M; Z2)→Hn−1(M; Z) coming from the short
exact sequence of coefﬁcient groups 0→Z→Z→Z2→0.
The structure of Hn(M; G) and Hn−1(M; G) for a closed connected n manifold
M can be explained very nicely in terms of cellular homology when M has a CW
structure with a single n cell, which is the case for a large number of manifolds.
(There can be no cells of higher dimension since a cell of maximal dimension pro-
duces nontrivial local homology in that dimension.) Consider the cellular boundary
map d : Cn(M)→Cn−1(M) with Z coefﬁcients. Since M has a single n cell we have
Cn(M) = Z. If M is orientable then d must be zero since Hn(M; Z) = Z. Then since
d is zero, Hn−1(M; Z) must be free. On the other hand, if M is nonorientable then d
must take a generator of Cn(M) to twice a generator α of a Z summand of Cn−1(M),
in order for Hn(M; Zp) to be zero for odd primes p and Z2 for p = 2. The cellular
chain α must be a cycle since 2α is a boundary and hence a cycle. It follows that the
torsion subgroup of Hn−1(M; Z) must be a Z2 generated by α.
Concerning the homology of noncompact manifolds there is the following general
statement.
Proposition 3.28. If M is a connected noncompact n manifold then Hi(M; R) = 0
for i ≥n.
Proof: Represent an element of Hi(M; R) by a cycle z. This has compact image in M ,
so there is an open set U ⊂M containing the image of z and having compact closure
U ⊂M . Let V = M −U . Part of the long exact sequence of the triple (M, U ∪V, V)
ﬁts into a commutative diagram
M
V
U
R
H
(
)
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
M
(
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
;
,
,
R
H (
)
;
U R
H (
)
;
R)
;
i 1
i
i
Hi
+
∪
V V
U∪
,
R
H (
)
;
i
V
M
≈

Section 3.3.
Poincar´e Duality
237
When i > n, the two groups on either side of Hi(U ∪V, V; R) are zero by Lemma 3.26
since U ∪V and V are the complements of compact sets in M . Hence Hi(U; R) = 0,
so z is a boundary in U and therefore in M , and we conclude that Hi(M; R) = 0.
When i = n note ﬁrst that since M is connected, the image [z]x of the class
[z] ∈Hn(M; R) in Hn(M ||x; R) ≈R must either be zero for all x or nonzero for all
x . Since M is noncompact, [z]x must therefore be zero for all x since there are
points x not in the image of z, which is compact. By Lemma 3.26, z then represents
zero in Hn(M, V; R), hence also in Hn(U; R) since the ﬁrst term in the upper row of
the diagram is zero when i = n, by Lemma 3.26 again. So [z] = 0 in Hn(M; R) and
hence Hn(M; R) = 0.
⊔⊓
The Duality Theorem
Our next task is to deﬁne a map Hk(M; R)→Hn−k(M; R) which Poincar´e duality
asserts is an isomorphism, under the assumption that M is an R orientable closed
n manifold. The deﬁnition of this map will be in terms of a general construction
called cap product, which has obvious afﬁnities with cup product.
For an arbitrary space X and coefﬁcient ring R, deﬁne an R bilinear cap product
map ⌢: Ck(X; R)×Cℓ(X; R)→Ck−ℓ(X; R) for k ≥ℓby
σ ⌢ϕ = ϕ
 σ ||[v0, ··· , vℓ]

σ ||[vℓ, ··· , vk]
for σ : ∆k→X and ϕ ∈Cℓ(X; R).
One checks the formula
∂(σ ⌢ϕ) = (−1)ℓ(∂σ ⌢ϕ −σ ⌢δϕ)
by computing:
∂σ ⌢ϕ =
ℓX
i = 0
(−1)iϕ
 σ||[v0, ··· , bvi, ··· , vℓ+1]

σ||[vℓ+1, ··· , vk]
+
k
X
i = ℓ+1
(−1)iϕ
 σ||[v0, ··· , vℓ]

σ||[vℓ, ··· , bvi, ··· , vk]
σ ⌢δϕ =
ℓ+1
X
i = 0
(−1)iϕ
 σ||[v0, ··· , bvi, ··· , vℓ+1]

σ||[vℓ+1, ··· , vk]
∂(σ ⌢ϕ) =
k
X
i = ℓ
(−1)i−ℓϕ
 σ||[v0, ··· , vℓ]

σ||[vℓ, ··· , bvi, ··· , vk]
From the relation ∂(σ ⌢ϕ) = ±(∂σ ⌢ϕ −σ ⌢δϕ) we see that the cap product of a
cycle σ and a cocycle ϕ is a cycle. Further, if ∂σ = 0 then ∂(σ ⌢ϕ) = ±(σ ⌢δϕ),
so the cap product of a cycle and a coboundary is a boundary. And if δϕ = 0 then
∂(σ ⌢ϕ) = ±(∂σ ⌢ϕ), so the cap product of a boundary and a cocycle is a boundary.
These facts imply that there is an induced cap product
Hk(X; R)×Hℓ(X; R)
⌢
-------------------------→Hk−ℓ(X; R)

238
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
This is clearly R linear in each variable.
Using the same formulas, one checks that cap product has the relative forms
Hk(X, A; R)×Hℓ(X; R)
⌢
-------------------------→Hk−ℓ(X, A; R)
Hk(X, A; R)×Hℓ(X, A; R)
⌢
-------------------------→Hk−ℓ(X; R)
For example, in the second case the cap product Ck(X; R)×Cℓ(X; R)→Ck−ℓ(X; R)
restricts to zero on the submodule Ck(A; R)×Cℓ(X, A; R), so there is an induced cap
product Ck(X, A; R)×Cℓ(X, A; R)→Ck−ℓ(X; R). The formula for ∂(σ ⌢ϕ) still holds,
so the chain and cochain groups can be replaced by homology and cohomology groups.
There is also a more general relative cap product
Hk(X, A ∪B; R)×Hℓ(X, A; R)
⌢
-------------------------→Hk−ℓ(X, B; R),
deﬁned when A and B are open sets in X , using the fact that Hk(X, A ∪B; R) can be
computed using the chain groups Cn(X, A + B; R) = Cn(X; R)/Cn(A + B; R), as in the
derivation of relative Mayer-Vietoris sequences in §2.2.
Cap product satisﬁes a naturality property which is a little more awkward to state
than the corresponding result for cup product since both covariant and contravariant
functors are involved. Given a map f : X→Y , the relevant induced maps on homology
and cohomology ﬁt into a diagram
X
H (
)
X
H (
)
k
X
H
(
)
k
×
ℓ
ℓ
-
−−−−−→
Y
H (
)
Y
H (
)
k
Y
H
(
)
k
×
ℓ
ℓ
-
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
∗
f
−−−−−→
∗
f
−−−−−→
∗
f
It does not quite make sense to say this diagram commutes, but the spirit of commu-
tativity is contained in the formula
f∗(α) ⌢ϕ = f∗
 α ⌢f ∗(ϕ)

which is obtained by substituting f σ for σ in the deﬁnition of cap product: f σ ⌢ϕ =
ϕ
 f σ ||[v0, ··· , vℓ]

f σ ||[vℓ, ··· , vk]. There are evident relative versions as well.
Now we can state Poincar´e duality for closed manifolds:
Theorem 3.29 (Poincar´e Duality). If M is a closed R orientable n manifold with
fundamental class [M] ∈Hn(M; R), then the map D : Hk(M; R) -→Hn−k(M; R) de-
ﬁned by D(α) = [M] ⌢α is an isomorphism for all k.
Recall that a fundamental class for M is an element of Hn(M; R) whose image in
Hn(M ||x; R) is a generator for all x ∈M . The existence of such a class was shown in
Theorem 3.25.
Example 3.30: Surfaces.
Let M be the closed orientable surface of genus g, ob-
tained as usual from a 4g gon by identifying pairs of edges according to the word
a1b1a−1
1 b−1
1
··· agbga−1
g b−1
g .
A ∆complex structure on M is obtained by coning

Section 3.3.
Poincar´e Duality
239
off the 4g gon to its center, as indicated in the ﬁgure for
the case g = 2.
We can compute cap products using
b
b
a
a
a
a
b
b
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
α
2
α
β
2
β
+ +
+
+
_
_
_
_
simplicial homology and cohomology since cap prod-
ucts are deﬁned for simplicial homology and coho-
mology by exactly the same formula as for singular
homology and cohomology, so the isomorphism be-
tween the simplicial and singular theories respects cap
products. A fundamental class [M] generating H2(M)
is represented by the 2 cycle which is the sum of all 4g
2 simplices with the signs indicated. The edges ai and bi form a basis for H1(M).
Under the isomorphism H1(M) ≈Hom(H1(M), Z), the cohomology class αi corre-
sponding to ai assigns the value 1 to ai and 0 to the other basis elements. This
class αi is represented by the cocycle ϕi assigning the value 1 to the 1 simplices
meeting the arc labeled αi in the ﬁgure and 0 to the other 1 simplices. Similarly we
have a class βi corresponding to bi , represented by the cycle ψi assigning the value
1 to the 1 simplices meeting the arc βi . Applying the deﬁnition of cap product, we
have [M]⌢ϕi = bi and [M]⌢ψi = −ai since in both cases there is just one 2 simplex
[v0, v1, v2] where ϕi or ψi is nonzero on the edge [v0, v1]. Thus bi is the Poincar´e
dual of αi and −ai is the Poincar´e dual of βi . If we interpret Poincar´e duality entirely
in terms of homology, identifying αi with its Hom-dual ai and βi with bi , then the
classes ai and bi are Poincar´e duals of each other, up to sign at least. Geometrically,
Poincar´e duality is reﬂected in the fact that the loops αi and bi are homotopic, as are
the loops βi and ai .
The closed nonorientable surface N of genus g can be
treated in the same way if we use Z2 coefﬁcients. We
view N as obtained from a 2g gon by identifying con-
secutive pairs of edges according to the word a2
1 ··· a2
g .
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
1
1
1
2
2
2
3
3
4
4
α
3
α
α
4
α
We have classes αi ∈H1(N; Z2) represented by cocy-
cles ϕi assigning the value 1 to the edges meeting the
arc αi . Then [N]⌢ϕi = ai , so ai is the Poincar´e dual
of αi , In terms of homology, ai is the Hom-dual of αi ,
so ai is its own Poincar´e dual. Geometrically, the loops ai
on N are homotopic to their Poincar´e dual loops αi .
Our proof of Poincar´e duality, like the construction of fundamental classes, will be
by an inductive argument using Mayer-Vietoris sequences. The induction step requires
a version of Poincar´e duality for open subsets of M , which are noncompact and can
satisfy Poincar´e duality only when a different kind of cohomology called cohomology
with compact supports is used.

240
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
Cohomology with Compact Supports
Before giving the general deﬁnition, let us look at the conceptually simpler notion
of simplicial cohomology with compact supports. Here one starts with a ∆complex
X which is locally compact. This is equivalent to saying that every point has a neigh-
borhood which meets only ﬁnitely many simplices. Consider the subgroup ∆i
c(X; G)
of the simplicial chain group ∆i(X; G) consisting of cochains which are compactly
supported in the sense that they take nonzero values on only ﬁnitely many sim-
plices. The coboundary of such a cochain ϕ can have a nonzero value only on those
(i+1) simplices having a face on which ϕ is nonzero, and there are only ﬁnitely many
such simplices by the local compactness assumption, so δϕ lies in ∆i+1
c
(X; G). Thus
we have a subcomplex of the simplicial cochain complex. The resulting cohomology
groups for this subcomplex we denote, somewhat awkwardly, by H∆i
c(X; G).
Example 3.31.
Let us compute these cohomology groups when X = R with the
∆complex structure having vertices at the integer points and 1 simplices the in-
tervals [n, n + 1]. For a simplicial 0 cochain to be a cocycle it must take the same
value on all vertices, but then if the cochain lies in ∆0
c(X) it must be identically zero.
Thus H∆0
c(R; G) = 0. However, H∆1
c(R; G) is nonzero. Namely, consider the map
Σ : ∆1
c(R; G)→G sending each cochain to the sum of its values on all the 1 simplices.
Note that Σ is not deﬁned on all of ∆1(X), just on ∆1
c(X). The map Σ vanishes on
coboundaries, so it induces a map H∆1
c(R; G)→G. This is surjective since every ele-
ment of ∆1
c(X) is a cocycle. It is an easy exercise to verify that it is also injective, so
H∆1
c(R; G) ≈G.
In similar fashion one could deﬁne compactly supported cellular cohomology of
a locally compact CW complex, using cellular cochains which are nonzero on only
ﬁnitely many cells.
What we are really interested in however is singular cohomology with compact
supports for spaces without any simplicial or cellular structure. The quickest deﬁ-
nition of this is the following. Let Ci
c(X; G) be the subgroup of Ci(X; G) consisting
of cochains ϕ : Ci(X)→G for each of which there exists a compact set K = Kϕ ⊂X
such that ϕ is zero on all chains in X −K . Note that δϕ is then also zero on chains
in X −K , so δϕ lies in Ci+1
c
(X; G) and the Ci
c(X; G)’s for varying i form a subcom-
plex of the singular cochain complex of X . The cohomology groups Hi
c(X; G) of this
subcomplex are the cohomology groups with compact supports.
Cochains in Ci
c(X; G) have compact support in only a rather weak sense.
A
stronger and perhaps more natural condition would have been to require cochains
to be nonzero only on singular simplices contained in some compact set, depend-
ing on the cochain. However, such ‘compactly supported’ cochains do not in general
form a subcomplex of the singular cochain complex. For example, if X = R and ϕ is

Section 3.3.
Poincar´e Duality
241
a 0 cochain assigning a nonzero value to one point of R and zero to all other points,
then δϕ assigns a nonzero value to arbitrarily large 1 simplices.
It will be quite useful to have an alternative deﬁnition of Hi
c(X; G) in terms of alge-
braic limits. The way that limits enter the picture is the following. The cochain group
Ci
c(X; G) is the union of its subgroups Ci(X, X −K; G) as K ranges over compact sub-
sets of X . Each inclusion K>L induces inclusions Ci(X, X −K; G)>Ci(X, X −L; G)
for all i, so there are induced maps Hi(X, X −K; G)→Hi(X, X −L; G). These need not
be injective, but one might still hope that Hi
c(X; G) is somehow describable in terms
of the system of groups Hi(X, X −K; G) for varying K . This is indeed the case, and
it is algebraic limits which provide the description.
Suppose one has abelian groups Gα indexed by some partially ordered index set
I having the property that for each pair α, β ∈I there exists γ ∈I with α ≤γ and
β ≤γ . Such an I is called a directed set. Suppose also that for each pair α ≤β one
has a homomorphism fαβ : Gα→Gβ , such that fαα = 11 for each α, and if α ≤β ≤γ
then fαγ is the composition of fαβ and fβγ . Given this data, there are two equivalent
ways of deﬁning the direct limit group lim
--→Gα . The quicker deﬁnition is that lim
--→Gα
is the quotient of the direct sum
L
α Gα by the subgroup generated by all elements
of the form a −fαβ(a) for a ∈Gα , where we are viewing each Gα as a subgroup of
L
α Gα . The other deﬁnition, which is often more convenient to work with, runs as
follows. Deﬁne an equivalence relation on the set
`
α Gα by a ∼b if fαγ(a) = fβγ(b)
for some γ , where a ∈Gα and b ∈Gβ . This is clearly reﬂexive and symmetric,
and transitivity follows from the directed set property. It could also be described
as the equivalence relation generated by setting a ∼fαβ(a). Any two equivalence
classes [a] and [b] have representatives a′ and b′ lying in the same Gγ , so deﬁne
[a] + [b] = [a′ + b′]. One checks this is well-deﬁned and gives an abelian group
structure to the set of equivalence classes. It is easy to check further that the map
sending an equivalence class [a] to the coset of a in lim
--→Gα is a homomorphism, with
an inverse induced by the map
P
i ai ,
P
i[ai] for ai ∈Gαi . Thus we can identify
lim
--→Gα with the group of equivalence classes [a].
A useful consequence of this is that if we have a subset J ⊂I with the property
that for each α ∈I there exists a β ∈J with α ≤β, then lim
--→Gα is the same whether
we compute it with α varying over I or just over J . In particular, if I has a maximal
element γ , we can take J = {γ} and then lim
--→Gα = Gγ .
Suppose now that we have a space X expressed as the union of a collection of
subspaces Xα which form a directed set with respect to the inclusion relation. Then
the groups Hi(Xα; G) for ﬁxed i and G form a directed system, and the natural maps
Hi(Xα; G)→Hi(X; G) induce a homomorphism lim
--→Hi(Xα; G)→Hi(X; G).

242
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
Proposition 3.32. If a space X is the union of a directed set of subspaces Xα with
the property that each compact set in X is contained in some Xα , then the natural
map lim
--→Hi(Xα; G)→Hi(X; G) is an isomorphism for all i and G.
Proof: For surjectivity, represent a cycle in X by a ﬁnite sum of singular simplices.
The union of the images of these singular simplices is compact in X , hence lies in
some Xα , so the map lim
--→Hi(Xα; G)→Hi(X; G) is surjective. Injectivity is similar: If
a cycle in some Xα is a boundary in X , compactness implies it is a boundary in some
Xβ ⊃Xα , hence represents zero in lim
--→Hi(Xα; G).
⊔⊓
Now we can give the alternative deﬁnition of cohomology with compact supports
in terms of direct limits. For a space X , the compact subsets K ⊂X form a directed
set under inclusion since the union of two compact sets is compact. To each compact
K ⊂X we associate the group Hi(X, X −K; G), with a ﬁxed i and coefﬁcient group G,
and to each inclusion K ⊂L of compact sets we associate the natural homomorphism
Hi(X, X−K; G)→Hi(X, X−L; G). The resulting limit group lim
--→Hi(X, X−K; G) is then
equal to Hi
c(X; G) since each element of this limit group is represented by a cocycle in
Ci(X, X −K; G) for some compact K , and such a cocycle is zero in lim
--→Hi(X, X −K; G)
iff it is the coboundary of a cochain in Ci−1(X, X −L; G) for some compact L ⊃K .
Note that if X is compact, then Hi
c(X; G) = Hk(X; G) since there is a unique
maximal compact set K ⊂X , namely X itself. This is also immediate from the original
deﬁnition since Ci
c(X; G) = Ci(X; G) if X is compact.
Example 3.33: H∗
c (Rn; G). To compute lim
--→Hi(Rn, Rn −K; G) it sufﬁces to let K
range over balls Bk of integer radius k centered at the origin since every compact set
is contained in such a ball. Since Hi(Rn, Rn −Bk; G) is nonzero only for i = n, when
it is G, and the maps Hn(Rn, Rn −Bk; G)→Hn(Rn, Rn −Bk+1; G) are isomorphisms,
we deduce that Hi
c(Rn; G) = 0 for i ≠n and Hn
c (Rn; G) ≈G.
This example shows that cohomology with compact supports is not an invariant
of homotopy type. The reason for this is that a map such as the constant map from
Rn to a point does not induce a map on cohomology with compact supports. The
maps which induce maps on H∗
c are the proper maps, for which the inverse image
of each compact set is compact. In the proof of Poincar´e duality we will not need to
worry about induced maps in this generality however, since it will be sufﬁcient just to
consider the inclusion maps among open sets in a ﬁxed manifold, and these inclusion
maps are proper maps.
The group Hi(X, X −K; G) for K compact depends only on a neighborhood of
K in X , by excision. As convenient shorthand notation we will write this group as
Hi(X ||K; G), in analogy with the similar notation we used earlier for local homology.
One can think of cohomology with compact supports as the limit of these ‘local coho-
mology groups at compact subsets.’

Section 3.3.
Poincar´e Duality
243
Duality for Noncompact Manifolds
For M an R orientable n manifold, possibly noncompact, we can deﬁne a dual-
ity map DM : Hk
c (M; R)→Hn−k(M; R) by a limiting process in the following way. For
compact sets K ⊂L ⊂M we have a diagram
M K R
H (
)
n
H
(
n
×
k
-
−−−−−→
M
H
(
n k
-
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
∗
i
−−−−−→
∗
i
;
||
M K R
H (
)
k
;
||
M L R
H (
)
n
×
;
||
M L R
H (
)
k
;
||
M R)
R)
;
;
===
Recall that the notation Hn(M ||K; R) is an abbreviation for Hn(M, M −K; R), and
similarly for the other terms in the diagram. By Lemma 3.26 there are unique elements
µK ∈Hn(M ||K; R) and µL ∈Hn(M ||L; R) restricting to a given orientation of M at
each point of K and L, respectively. From the uniqueness we have i∗(µL) = µK . By
naturality of cap product, i∗(µL)⌢x = µL⌢i∗(x) for all x ∈Hk(M ||K; R), so µK⌢x =
µL ⌢i∗(x). Therefore, letting K vary over compact sets in M , the homomorphisms
Hk(M ||K; R)→Hn−k(M; R), x,µK ⌢x , induce in the limit a duality homomorphism
DM : Hk
c (M; R)→Hn−k(M; R).
Since H∗
c (M; R) = H∗(M; R) if M is compact, the following result generalizes
Poincar´e duality for closed manifolds.
Theorem 3.34. The duality map DM : Hk
c (M; R)→Hn−k(M; R) is an isomorphism
for all k whenever M is an R oriented n manifold.
To simplify notation we shall omit the coefﬁcient ring R throughout the proof.
The main technical step to be proved is:
Lemma 3.35. If M is the union of two open sets U and V , then there is a diagram
of Mayer-Vietoris sequences, which is commutative up to sign:
V
U
H (
)
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
c
k
+
∩
∩
V
U
H
(
)
c
k 1
∩
U
H (
)
c
k
M
H (
)
c
k
V
H
DU
DV
(
)
c
k
⊕
⊕
...
...
V
U
H
(
)
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
n k
∩
V
U
H
(
)
∩
U
H
(
)
M
H
(
)
V
H
(
)
⊕
...
...
-
n k
-
n k
-
-
n k
-
n k 1
-
-
−−−−−→
DM  
−−−−−→
DU
V
−−−−−→
∩
DU
V
−−−−−→
Proof: Compact sets K ⊂U and L ⊂V give rise to the Mayer-Vietoris sequence in
the upper row of the following diagram, whose lower row is also a Mayer-Vietoris
sequence.
L
K
H (
)
)
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
k
∩
∩
M
H (
)
k
⊕
⊕
...
...
V
U
H
(
)
−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−→
n k
∩
U
H
(
)
M
H
(
)
V
H
(
)
⊕
...
...
-
n k
-
n k
-
-
n k
-
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
K
L
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
||
K
H (
k M ||
K
M ||
)
L
L
H (
k M ||
L
K
H (
)
)
k
∩
V
U∩
⊕
||
K
H (
k U ||
)
L
H (
k V ||
∪
∪
≈
≈
µ
K
µ
L
µ
L
K
µ

244
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
The two maps labelled isomorphisms come from excision. Assuming this diagram
commutes, consider passing to the limit over compact sets K ⊂U and L ⊂V . Since
each compact set in U ∩V is contained in an intersection K∩L of compact sets K ⊂U
and L ⊂V , and similarly for U ∪V , the diagram induces a limit diagram having the
form stated in the lemma. The ﬁrst row of this limit diagram is exact since a direct
limit of exact sequences is exact; this is an exercise at the end of the section, and
follows easily from the deﬁnition of direct limits.
It remains to consider the commutativity of the preceding diagram involving K
and L. In the two squares shown, not involving boundary or coboundary maps, it is a
triviality to check commutativity at the level of cycles and cocycles. Less trivial is the
third square, which we rewrite in the following way:
(∗)
−−−−−→
∩
H (
)
k
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
M
H
(
)
V
U
H
(
)
n k 1
∩
-
-
n k
-
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
K
L
L
K
H
(
) −−−−−→
k 1
∩
M ||
K
M ||
L
L
K
)
∩
V
U∩
||
∪
∪
≈
µ
L
K
µ
δ
+
H
(
k 1
+
∂
Letting A = M −K and B = M −L, the map δ is the coboundary map in the Mayer-
Vietoris sequence obtained from the short exact sequence of cochain complexes
0 -→C∗(M, A + B) -→C∗(M, A) ⊕C∗(M, B) -→C∗(M, A ∩B) -→0
where C∗(M, A + B) consists of cochains on M vanishing on chains in A and chains
in B . To evaluate the Mayer-Vietoris coboundary map δ on a cocycle ϕ ∈C∗(M, A∩B)
one ﬁrst writes ϕ = ϕA −ϕB for ϕA ∈C∗(M, A) and ϕB ∈C∗(M, B), and then δ[ϕ]
is represented by the cocycle δϕA = δϕB ∈C∗(M, A + B). (The equality δϕA = δϕB
comes from the fact that ϕ is a cocycle, so δϕ = δϕA −δϕB = 0.) Similarly, the
boundary map ∂in the homology Mayer-Vietoris sequence is obtained by representing
an element of Hi(M) by a cycle z which is a sum of chains zU ∈Ci(U) and zV ∈
Ci(V), and then ∂[z] = [∂zU].
Via barycentric subdivision, the class µK∪L can be represented by a chain α which
is a sum αU−L + αU∩V + αV−K of chains in U −L, U ∩V , and V −K , respectively,
since these three open sets cover M . Then αU∩V represents µK∩L since the other two
chains αU−L and αV−K lie in the complement of K∩L, hence vanish in Hn(M ||K∩L) ≈
Hn(U ∩V ||K ∩L). Similarly, αU−L + αU∩V represents µK .
K
L
U
V
α
α
αU L
V K
U∩V
_
_

Section 3.3.
Poincar´e Duality
245
In the square (∗) let ϕ be a cocycle representing an element of Hk(M ||K ∪L).
Under δ this maps to the cohomology class of δϕA . Continuing on to Hn−k−1(U ∩V)
we obtain αU∩V ⌢δϕA , which is in the same homology class as ∂αU∩V ⌢ϕA since
∂(αU∩V ⌢ϕA) = (−1)k(∂αU∩V ⌢ϕA −αU∩V ⌢δϕA)
and αU∩V ⌢ϕA is a chain in U ∩V .
Going around the square (∗) the other way, ϕ maps ﬁrst to α⌢ϕ. To apply the
Mayer-Vietoris boundary map ∂to this, we write α ⌢ϕ as a sum of a chain in U and
a chain in V ,
α ⌢ϕ = (αU−L ⌢ϕ) + (αU∩V ⌢ϕ + αV−K ⌢ϕ)
then we take the boundary of the ﬁrst of these two chains, obtaining [∂(αU−L ⌢ϕ)] ∈
Hn−k−1(U ∩V). It remains to compare this with [∂αU∩V ⌢ϕA]. We have
∂(αU−L ⌢ϕ) = (−1)k∂αU−L ⌢ϕ
since δϕ = 0
= (−1)k∂αU−L ⌢ϕA
since ∂αU−L ⌢ϕB = 0,
ϕB being
zero on chains in B = M −L
= (−1)k+1∂αU∩V ⌢ϕA
where this last equality comes from the fact that ∂(αU−L + αU∩V) ⌢ϕA = 0 since
∂(αU−L + αU∩V) is a chain in U −K by the earlier observation that αU−L + αU∩V
represents µK , and ϕA vanishes on chains in A = M −K .
Thus the square (∗) commutes up to a sign depending only on k.
⊔⊓
Proof of Poincar´e Duality: There are two inductive steps, ﬁnite and inﬁnite:
(A) If M is the union of open sets U and V and if DU , DV , and DU∩V are isomor-
phisms, then so is DM . Via the ﬁve-lemma, this is immediate from the preceding
lemma.
(B) If M is the union of a sequence of open sets U1 ⊂U2 ⊂··· and each duality map
DUi : Hk
c (Ui)→Hn−k(Ui) is an isomorphism, then so is DM . To show this we notice
ﬁrst that by excision, Hk
c (Ui) can be regarded as the limit of the groups Hk(M ||K) as K
ranges over compact subsets of Ui . Then there are natural maps Hk
c (Ui)→Hk
c (Ui+1)
since the second of these groups is a limit over a larger collection of K ’s. Thus we
can form lim
--→Hk
c (Ui) which is obviously isomorphic to Hk
c (M) since the compact
sets in M are just the compact sets in all the Ui ’s. By Proposition 3.32, Hn−k(M) ≈
lim
--→Hn−k(Ui). The map DM is thus the limit of the isomorphisms DUi , hence is an
isomorphism.
Now after all these preliminaries we can prove the theorem in three easy steps:
(1) The case M = Rn can be proved by regarding Rn as the interior of ∆n , and
then the map DM can be identiﬁed with the map Hk(∆n, ∂∆n)→Hn−k(∆n) given by
cap product with a unit times the generator [∆n] ∈Hn(∆n, ∂∆n), where [∆n] is the
homology class of the identity map of ∆n . The only nontrivial value of k is k = n,

246
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
when the cap product map is an isomorphism since a generator of Hn(∆n, ∂∆n) ≈
Hom(Hn(∆n, ∂∆n), R) is represented by the cocycle taking the value 1 on [∆n], which
means that [∆n] ⌢[ϕ] is a generator of H0(∆n).
(2) More generally, DM is an isomorphism for M an arbitrary open set in Rn . To see
this, ﬁrst write M as a countable union of convex open sets Ui , for example open
balls, and let Vi =
S
j<i Uj . We apply (A) to Ui and Vi . Both Vi and Ui ∩Vi are unions
of i −1 convex open sets, so by induction on the number of convex open sets in a
cover, DVi and DUi∩Vi are isomorphisms. By (1), DUi is an isomorphism since Ui is
homeomorphic to Rn . So DUi∪Vi is an isomorphism. Since M is the increasing union
of the Vi ’s and each DVi is an isomorphism, so is DM by (B).
(3) If M is a ﬁnite or countably inﬁnite union of open sets Ui homeomorphic to Rn ,
the theorem now follows by the argument in (2), with each appearance of the words
‘convex open set’ replaced by ‘open set in Rn .’ Thus the proof is ﬁnished for closed
manifolds, as well as for all noncompact manifolds which one ever encounters in
actual practice.
To handle a completely general noncompact manifold M we use a Zorn’s Lemma
argument. Consider the collection of open sets U ⊂M for which the duality maps
DU are isomorphisms. This collection is partially ordered by inclusion, and the union
of every totally-ordered subcollection is again in the collection by the argument in (B),
which did not really use the hypothesis that the collection {Ui} was indexed by the
positive integers. Zorn’s Lemma then implies that there exists a maximal open set
U for which the theorem holds. If U ≠M , choose a point x ∈M −U and an open
neighborhood V of x homeomorphic to Rn . The theorem holds for V and U ∩V by
(1) and (2), and it holds for U by assumption, so by (A) it holds for U ∪V , contradicting
the maximality of U .
⊔⊓
Corollary 3.36. A closed manifold of odd dimension has Euler characteristic zero.
Proof: Let M be a closed n manifold. If M is orientable, we have rank Hi(M; Z) =
rank Hn−i(M; Z), which equals rank Hn−i(M; Z) by the universal coefﬁcient theorem.
Thus if n is odd, all the terms of
P
i(−1)i rank Hi(M; Z) cancel in pairs.
If M is not orientable we apply the same argument using Z2 coefﬁcients, with
rank Hi(M; Z) replaced by dim Hi(M; Z2), the dimension as a vector space over Z2 ,
to conclude that
P
i(−1)i dim Hi(M; Z2) = 0. It remains to check that this alternating
sum equals the Euler characteristic
P
i(−1)i rank Hi(M; Z). We can do this by using
the isomorphisms Hi(M; Z2) ≈Hi(M; Z2) and applying the universal coefﬁcient theo-
rem for cohomology. Each Z summand of Hi(M; Z) gives a Z2 summand of Hi(M; Z2).
Each Zm summand of Hi(M; Z) with m even gives Z2 summands of Hi(M; Z2) and
Hi−1(M, Z2), whose contributions to
P
i(−1)i dim Hi(M; Z2) cancel. And Zm sum-
mands of Hi(M; Z) with m odd contribute nothing to H∗(M; Z2).
⊔⊓

Section 3.3.
Poincar´e Duality
247
Connection with Cup Product
There is a close relationship between cup and cap product, arising from the for-
mula
(∗)
ψ(α ⌢ϕ) = (ϕ ⌣ψ)(α)
for α ∈Ck+ℓ(X; R), ϕ ∈Ck(X; R), and ψ ∈Cℓ(X; R). This holds since for a singular
(k + ℓ) simplex σ : ∆k+ℓ→X we have
ψ(σ ⌢ϕ) = ψ
 ϕ
 σ||[v0, ··· , vk]

σ||[vk, ··· , vk+ℓ]

= ϕ
 σ||[v0, ··· , vk]

ψ
 σ||[vk, ··· , vk+ℓ]

= (ϕ ⌣ψ)(σ).
The formula (∗) says that the map ϕ⌣: Cℓ(X; R)→Ck+ℓ(X; R) is equal to the map
HomR(Cℓ(X; R)→HomR(Ck+ℓ(X; R) dual to ⌢ϕ. Passing to homology and cohomol-
ogy, we obtain a commutative diagram
−−−−−−→
h
(
Hom
;
X R
H (
R
)
ℓ
;
X R
H (
(
)
),R)
ℓ
−−−−−−→
h
(
Hom
;
X R
H
(
R
)
k ℓ
;
X R
H
(
),R)
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
ϕ
ϕ ∗
+
k ℓ
+
When the maps h are isomorphisms, for example when R is a ﬁeld or when R = Z
and the homology groups of X are free, then the map ϕ⌣is the dual of ⌢ϕ. Thus in
these cases cup and cap product determine each other, at least if one assumes ﬁnite
generation so that cohomology determines homology as well as vice versa. However,
there are examples where cap and cup products are not equivalent when R = Z and
there is torsion in homology.
By means of the formula (∗), Poincar´e duality has nontrivial implications for
the cup product structure of manifolds. For a closed R orientable n manifold M ,
consider the cup product pairing
Hk(M; R)×Hn−k(M; R) -→R,
(ϕ, ψ) , (ϕ ⌣ψ)[M]
Such a bilinear pairing A×B→R is said to be nonsingular if the maps A→Hom(B, R)
and B→Hom(A, R), obtained by viewing the pairing as a function of each variable
separately, are both isomorphisms.
Proposition 3.37. The cup product pairing is nonsingular for closed R orientable
manifolds when R is a ﬁeld, or when R = Z and torsion in H∗(M; Z) is factored out.
Proof: Consider the composition
Hn−k(M; R)
h-----→HomR(Hn−k(M; R), R)
D∗-----→HomR(Hk(M; R), R)
where h is the map appearing in the universal coefﬁcient theorem, induced by eval-
uation of cochains on chains, and D∗is the Hom dual of the Poincar´e duality map

248
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
D : Hk→Hn−k . The composition D∗h sends ψ ∈Hn−k(M; R) to the homomorphism
ϕ, ψ([M]⌢ϕ) = (ϕ ⌣ψ)[M]. For ﬁeld coefﬁcients or for integer coefﬁcients with
torsion factored out, h is an isomorphism. Nonsingularity of the pairing in one of its
variables is then equivalent to D being an isomorphism. Nonsingularity in the other
variable follows by commutativity of cup product.
⊔⊓
Corollary 3.38. If M is a closed connected orientable n manifold, then for each
element α ∈Hk(M; Z) of inﬁnite order which is not a proper multiple of another
element there exists an element β ∈Hn−k(M; Z) such that α ⌣β is a generator of
Hn(M; Z) ≈Z. With coefﬁcients in a ﬁeld the same conclusion holds for any α ≠0.
Proof: The hypotheses on α mean that it generates a Z summand of Hk(M; Z). There
is then a homomorphism ϕ : Hk(M; Z)→Z with ϕ(α) = 1. By the nonsingularity
of the cup product pairing, ϕ is realized by taking cup product with an element
β ∈Hn−k(M; Z) and evaluating on [M], so α ⌣β generates Hn(M; Z). The case of
ﬁeld coefﬁcients is similar.
⊔⊓
Example 3.39: Projective Spaces.
The cup product structure of H∗(CPn; Z) as a
truncated polynomial ring Z[α]/(αn+1) with α ∈H2(CPn; Z) can easily be deduced
from this as follows. The inclusion CPn−1 ⊂CPn induces an isomorphism on Hi for
i ≤2n −2, so by induction on n, H2i(CPn; Z) is generated by αi for i < n. By the
corollary, there is an integer m such that the product α ⌣mαn−1 = mαn generates
H2n(CPn; Z), which implies m = ±1 and therefore H∗(CPn; Z) ≈Z[α]/(αn+1). The
same argument shows H∗(HPn; Z) ≈Z[α]/(αn+1)with α ∈H4 . For RPn one can use
the same argument with Z2 coefﬁcients to deduce that H∗(RPn; Z2) ≈Z2[α]/(αn+1)
with α now 1 dimensional. The cup product structure in inﬁnite-dimensional pro-
jective spaces follows from the ﬁnite-dimensional case, as we saw in the proof of
Theorem 3.11.
Could there be a closed manifold whose cohomology is additively isomorphic to
that of CPn but with a different cup product structure? For n = 2 the answer is
no since duality implies that the square of a generator of H2 must be a generator of
H4 . For n = 3, duality says that the product of generators of H2 and H4 must be a
generator of H6 , but nothing is said about the square of a generator of H2 . Indeed, for
S2×S4 , whose cohomology has the same additive structure as CP3 , the square of the
generator of H2(S2×S4; Z) is zero since it is the pullback of a generator of H2(S2; Z)
under the projection S2×S4→S2 and in H∗(S2; Z) the square of the generator of H2
is zero. More generally, there are closed 6 manifolds having the same cohomology
groups as CP3 but where the square of the generator of H2 is an arbitrary multiple
of a generator of H4 . (These manifolds are ﬁber bundles over S4 with ﬁber S2 ; see
[VBKT].)
Example 3.40: Lens Spaces. Cup products in lens spaces can be computed in the
same way as in projective spaces. For a lens space L2n+1 of dimension 2n + 1 with

Section 3.3.
Poincar´e Duality
249
fundamental group Zm , we computed Hi(L2n+1; Z) in Example 2.43 to be Z for i = 0
and 2n + 1, Zm for odd i < 2n + 1, and 0 otherwise. In particular, this implies that
L2n+1 is orientable, which also follows since L2n+1 is the orbit space of an action of
Zm on S2n+1 by orientation preserving homeomorphisms; see the exercises at the
end of the section. By the universal coefﬁcient theorem, Hi(L2n+1; Zm) is Zm for
each i ≤2n + 1. Let α ∈H1(L2n+1; Zm) and β ∈H2(L2n+1; Zm) be generators. The
statement we wish to prove is:
Hj(L2n+1; Zm) is generated by
(
βi
for j = 2i
αβi
for j = 2i + 1
By induction on n we may assume this holds for j ≤2n−1 since we have a lens space
L2n−1 ⊂L2n+1 with this inclusion inducing an isomorphism on Hj for j ≤2n −1,
as one sees by comparing the cellular chain complexes for L2n−1 and L2n+1 . The
corollary does not apply directly for Zm coefﬁcients with arbitrary m, but its proof
does since the maps h : Hi(L2n+1; Zm)→Hom(Hi(L2n+1; Zm), Zm) are isomorphisms.
We conclude that β ⌣kαβn−1 generates H2n+1(L2n+1; Zm) for some integer k. We
must have k relatively prime to m, otherwise the product β⌣kαβn−1 = kαβn would
have order less than m and so could not generate H2n+1(L2n+1; Zm). Then since k
is relatively prime to m, αβn is also a generator of H2n+1(L2n+1; Zm). From this it
follows that βn must generate H2n(L2n+1; Zm), otherwise it would have order less
than m and so therefore would αβn .
The rest of the cup product structure on H∗(L2n+1; Zm) is determined once α2
is expressed as a multiple of β. When m is odd, the commutativity formula for cup
product implies α2 = 0. When m is even, commutativity implies only that α2 is
either zero or the unique element of H2(L2n+1; Zm) ≈Zm of order two. In fact it is
the latter possibility which holds, since the 2 skeleton L2 is the circle L1 with a 2 cell
attached by a map of degree m, and we computed the cup product structure in this
2 complex in Example 3.9. It does not seem to be possible to deduce the nontriviality
of α2 from Poincar´e duality alone, except when m = 2.
The cup product structure for an inﬁnite-dimensional lens space L∞follows from
the ﬁnite-dimensional case since the restriction map Hj(L∞; Zm)→HjL2n+1; Zm) is
an isomorphism for j ≤2n + 1. As with RPn , the ring structure in H∗(L2n+1; Z) is
determined by the ring structure in H∗(L2n+1; Zm), and likewise for L∞, where one
has the slightly simpler structure H∗(L∞; Z) ≈Z[α]/(mα) with α 2 dimensional.
The case of L2n+1 is obtained from this by setting αn+1 = 0 and adjoining the extra
Z ≈H2n+1(L2n+1; Z).
A different derivation of the cup product structure in lens spaces is given in
Example 3E.2.
Using the ad hoc notation Hk
free(M) for Hk(M) modulo its torsion subgroup,
the preceding proposition implies that for a closed orientable manifold M of dimen-
sion 2n, the middle-dimensional cup product pairing Hn
free(M)×Hn
free(M)→Z is a

250
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
nonsingular bilinear form on Hn
free(M). This form is symmetric or skew-symmetric
according to whether n is even or odd. The algebra in the skew-symmetric case is
rather simple: With a suitable choice of basis, the matrix of a skew-symmetric nonsin-
gular bilinear form over Z can be put into the standard form consisting of 2×2 blocks
  0
1
−1
0

along the diagonal and zeros elsewhere, according to an algebra exercise at the
end of the section. In particular, the rank of Hn(M2n) must be even when n is odd.
We are already familiar with these facts in the case n = 1 by the explicit computations
of cup products for surfaces in §3.2.
The symmetric case is much more interesting algebraically. There are only ﬁnitely
many isomorphism classes of symmetric nonsingular bilinear forms over Z of a ﬁxed
rank, but this ‘ﬁnitely many’ grows rather rapidly, e.g., more than 80 million for rank
32; see [Serre] for an exposition of this beautiful chapter of number theory. It is known
that for each even n ≥2, every symmetric nonsingular form actually occurs as the
cup product pairing in some closed manifold M2n . One can even take M2n to be
simply-connected and have the bare minimum of homology: Z’s in dimensions 0 and
2n and a Zk in dimension n. For n = 2 there are at most two nonhomeomorphic
simply-connected closed 4 manifolds with the same bilinear form. Namely, there are
two manifolds with the same form if the square α⌣α of some α ∈H2(M4) is an odd
multiple of a generator of H4(M4), e.g., if M = CP2 ; and otherwise the M4 is unique,
e.g., if M = S4 or S2×S2 ; see [Freedman-Quinn]. In §4.C we take the ﬁrst step in
this direction by proving a classical result of J.H.C.Whitehead that the homotopy type
of a simply-connected closed 4 manifold is uniquely determined by its cup product
structure.
Other Forms of Duality
Generalizing the deﬁnition of a manifold, an n manifold with boundary is a Haus-
dorff space M in which each point has an open neighborhood homeomorphic either
to Rn or to the half-space Rn
+ = { (x1, ··· , xn) ∈Rn | xn ≥0 }. If x ∈M corresponds
under such a homeomorphism to a point (x1, ··· , xn) ∈Rn
+ with xn = 0, then by exci-
sion we have Hn(M, M −{x}; Z) ≈Hn(Rn
+, Rn
+ −{0}; Z) = 0, whereas if x corresponds
to a point (x1, ··· , xn) ∈Rn
+ with xn > 0 or to a point of Rn , then Hn(M, M−{x}; Z) ≈
Hn(Rn, Rn −{0}; Z) ≈Z. Thus the points x with Hn(M, M −{x}; Z) = 0 form a well-
deﬁned subspace. This subspace is denoted ∂M , the boundary of M . For example,
∂Rn
+ = Rn−1 and ∂Dn = Sn−1 . It is evident that ∂M is an (n−1) dimensional manifold
with empty boundary.
If M is a manifold with boundary, then a collar neighborhood of ∂M in M is an
open neighborhood homeomorphic to ∂M×[0, 1) by a homeomorphism taking ∂M
to ∂M×{0}.
Proposition 3.41. If M is a compact manifold with boundary, then ∂M has a collar
neighborhood.

Section 3.3.
Poincar´e Duality
251
Proof: Let M′ be M with an external collar attached, i.e., M′ is the quotient of the
disjoint union of M and ∂M×[0, 1] in which x ∈∂M is identiﬁed with (x, 0) ∈
∂M×[0, 1]. It will sufﬁce to construct a homeomorphism h : M→M′ since ∂M′ clearly
has a collar neighborhood.
Since M is compact, so is the closed subspace ∂M . This implies that we can
choose a ﬁnite number of continuous functions ϕi : ∂M→[0, 1] such that the sets
Vi = ϕ−1
i (0, 1] form an open cover of ∂M and each Vi has closure contained in an
open set Ui ⊂M homeomorphic to the half-space Rn
+ . After dividing each ϕi by
P
j ϕj we may assume
P
i ϕi = 1.
Let ψk = ϕ1 + ··· + ϕk and let Mk ⊂M′ be the union of M with the points
(x, t) ∈∂M×[0, 1] with t ≤ψk(x). By deﬁnition ψ0 = 0 and M0 = M . We con-
struct a homeomorphism hk : Mk−1→Mk as follows. The homeomorphism Ui ≈Rn
+
gives a collar neighborhood ∂Ui×[−1, 0] of ∂Ui in Ui , with x ∈∂Ui corresponding
to (x, 0) ∈∂Ui×[−1, 0]. Via the external collar ∂M×[0, 1] we then have an embed-
ding ∂Ui×[−1, 1] ⊂M′ . We deﬁne hk to be the identity outside this ∂Ui×[−1, 1],
and for x ∈∂Uk we let hk stretch the segment {x}×[−1, ψk−1(x)] linearly onto
{x}×[−1, ψk(x)].
The composition of all the hk ’s then gives a homeomorphism
M ≈M′ , ﬁnishing the proof.
⊔⊓
More generally, collars can be constructed for the boundaries of paracompact
manifolds in the same way.
A compact manifold M with boundary is deﬁned to be R orientable if M −∂M is
R orientable as a manifold without boundary. If ∂M×[0, 1) ⊂M is a collar neighbor-
hood of ∂M , then Hi(M, ∂M; R) is naturally isomorphic to Hi(M −∂M, ∂M×(0, ε); R),
so when M is R orientable, Lemma 3.26 gives a relative fundamental class [M] ∈
Hn(M, ∂M; R) restricting to a given orientation at each point of M −∂M .
Generalizing Poincar´e duality for closed manifolds, we have:
Theorem 3.42. Suppose M is a compact R orientable n manifold whose boundary
∂M is decomposed as the union of two compact (n −1) dimensional manifolds A
and B such that A ∩B = ∂A = ∂B . Then cap product with a fundamental class
[M] ∈Hn(M, ∂M; R) gives isomorphisms DM : Hk(M, A; R)→Hn−k(M, B; R) for all k.
The possibility that A, B , or A ∩B is empty is not excluded. The cases A = ∅
and B = ∅are sometimes called ‘Lefschetz duality.’
Proof: The cap product map DM : Hk(M, A; R)→Hn−k(M, B; R) is deﬁned since the
existence of collar neighborhoods of A ∩B in A and B and ∂M in M implies that
A and B are deformation retracts of open neighborhoods U and V in M such that
U ∪V deformation retracts onto A ∪B = ∂M and U ∩V deformation retracts onto
A ∩B .

252
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
The case B = ∅is proved by applying Theorem 3.34 to M−∂M . Via a collar neigh-
borhood of ∂M we see that Hk(M, ∂M; R) ≈Hk
c (M −∂M; R), and there are obvious
isomorphisms Hn−k(M; R) ≈Hn−k(M −∂M; R).
The general case reduces to the case B = ∅by applying the ﬁve-lemma to the
following diagram, where coefﬁcients in R are implicit:
M A
M
H (
)
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
k
+
H
(
)
k 1
H (
)
k
M
H (
k
...
...
M
H
(
)
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
n k
M
H
(
)
M
H
(
)
...
...
-
n k
-
n k 1
-
-
B
H
(
)
n k 1
-
-
−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
∂
∂
,
B
,
A)
,
B
H (
k
−−−−−→
∂
B
)
,
M,
M
∂
M,
[ ]
M
[ ]
M
[ ]
M
[ ]
B
≈
For commutativity of the middle square one needs to check that the boundary map
Hn(M, ∂M)→Hn−1(∂M) sends a fundamental class for M to a fundamental class for
∂M . We leave this as an exercise at the end of the section.
⊔⊓
Next we turn to Alexander duality:
Theorem 3.43. If K is a compact, locally contractible, nonempty, proper subspace
of Sn , then eHi(Sn −K; Z) ≈eHn−i−1(K; Z) for all i.
The special case that K is a sphere or disk was treated by more elementary means
in Proposition 2B.1. As remarked there, it is interesting that the homology of Sn −K
does not depend on the way that K is embedded in Sn . There can be local pathologies
as in the case of the Alexander horned sphere, or global complications as with knotted
circles in S3 , but these have no effect on the homology of the complement. The only
requirement is that K is not too bad a space itself. An example where the theorem fails
without the local contractibility assumption is the ‘quasi-circle,’ deﬁned in an exercise
for §1.3. This is a compact subspace K ⊂R2 which we can regard as a subspace of
S2 by adding a point at inﬁnity. Then we have eH0(S2 −K; Z) ≈Z since S2 −K has two
path-components, but eH1(K; Z) = 0 since K is simply-connected.
Proof: We will obtain the desired isomorphism when i ≠0 as the composition of ﬁve
isomorphisms (coefﬁcients in Z will be implicit throughout the proof)
Hi(Sn −K; Z) ≈Hn−i
c
(Sn −K)
≈lim
--→Hn−i(Sn −K, U −K)
≈lim
--→Hn−i(Sn, U)
≈lim
--→eHn−i−1(U)
if i ≠0
≈eHn−i−1(K)
where the direct limits are taken with respect to open neighborhoods U of K . The
ﬁrst isomorphism is Poincar´e duality. The second is the deﬁnition of cohomology
with compact supports. The third is excision. The fourth comes from the long exact

Section 3.3.
Poincar´e Duality
253
sequences of the pairs (Sn, U). For the ﬁnal isomorphism, an easy special case is
when K has a neighborhood which is a mapping cylinder of some map X→K , as in
the ‘letter examples’ at the beginning of Chapter 0, since in this case we can compute
the direct limit using neighborhoods U which are segments of the mapping cylinder
which deformation retract to K .
To obtain the last isomorphism in the general case we need to quote Theorem A.7
in the Appendix, which says that K is a retract of some neighborhood U0 in Sn since
K is locally contractible. In computing the direct limits we can then restrict attention
to open sets U ⊂U0 , which all retract to K by restricting the retraction of U0 . This
implies that the natural restriction map lim
--→H∗(U)→H∗(K) is surjective since we
can pull back each element of H∗(K) to the direct limit via the retractions U→K .
To see injectivity of the map lim
--→H∗(U)→H∗(K), we ﬁrst observe that each
neighborhood U ⊂U0 of K contains a neighborhood V such that the inclusion V >
U is homotopic to the retraction V→K ⊂U . Namely, regarding U as a subspace
of an Rn ⊂Sn , the linear homotopy U ×I→Rn from the identity to the retraction
U→K takes K×I to K , hence takes V ×I to U for some neighborhood V of K ,
by compactness of I .
Since the inclusion V > U is homotopic to the retraction
V→K ⊂U , the restriction H∗(U)→H∗(V) factors through H∗(K), and therefore if
an element of H∗(U) restricts to zero in H∗(K), it restricts to zero in H∗(V). This
implies that the map lim
--→H∗(U)→H∗(K) is injective.
The only difﬁculty in the case i = 0 is that the fourth of the ﬁve isomorphisms
above does not hold, and instead we have only a short exact sequence
0 -→eHn−i−1(U) -→Hn−i(Sn, U) -→eHn−i(Sn) -→0
To get around this little problem, observe that all the groups involved in the ﬁrst
three of the ﬁve isomorphisms map naturally to the corresponding groups with K
and U empty. Then if we take the kernels of these maps we get an isomorphism
eH0(Sn −K) ≈lim
--→eHn(U), and we have seen that the latter group is isomorphic to
eHn(K).
⊔⊓
Corollary 3.44. If X ⊂Rn is compact and locally contractible then Hi(X; Z) is 0 for
i ≥n and torsionfree for i = n −1 and n −2.
For example, a closed nonorientable n manifold M cannot be embedded as a
subspace of Rn+1 since Hn−1(M; Z) contains a Z2 subgroup, by Corollary 3.27.
Proof: Viewing X as a subspace of the one-point compactiﬁcation Sn , Alexander
duality gives isomorphisms eHi(X; Z) ≈eHn−i−1(Sn −X; Z). The latter group is zero
for i ≥n and torsionfree for i = n −1, so the result follows from the universal
coefﬁcient theorem since X has ﬁnitely-generated homology groups.
⊔⊓
Here is another kind of duality which generalizes the calculation of the local ho-
mology groups Hi(Rn, Rn −{x}; Z):

254
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
Proposition 3.45. If K is a compact, locally contractible subspace of an orientable
n manifold M , then there are isomorphisms Hi(M, M −K; Z) ≈Hn−i(K; Z) for all i.
Proof: Let U be an open neighborhood of K in M and let V be the complement of
a compact set in M . We assume U ∩V = ∅. Then cap product with fundamental
classes gives a commutative diagram with exact rows:
M
H (
i
M
H (
i
K
M
H (
)
i
-
K
M
)
)
-
,
M
H
(
n i
V
U
)
,
U
H (
i
K
U
)
-
,
≈
≈
−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−→
-
M
H
(
n i
V )
,
-
∪
H
(
n i
V V
U
)
)
,
-
H
(
n i U
-
∪
...
...
...
...
Passing to the direct limit over decreasing U ⊃K and V , the ﬁrst two vertical arrows
become the Poincar´e duality isomorphisms Hi(M −K) ≈Hn−i
c
(M −K) and Hi(M) ≈
Hn−i
c
(M). The ﬁve-lemma then gives an isomorphism Hi(M, M −K) ≈lim
--→Hn−i(U).
The latter group will be isomorphic to Hn−i(K) by the argument in the proof of The-
orem 3.43, provided that K is a retract of some neighborhood in M . To obtain such
a retraction we can ﬁrst construct a map M > Rk which is an embedding near the
compact set K , for some large k, by the method of Corollary A.9 in the Appendix.
Then a neighborhood of K in Rk retracts onto K by Theorem A.7 in the Appendix, so
the restriction of this retraction to a neighborhood of K in M ﬁnishes the job.
⊔⊓
There is a way of extending Alexander duality and the duality in the preceding
proposition to compact sets K which are not locally contractible, by replacing the
singular cohomology of K by another kind of cohomology called ˇCech cohomology.
This is deﬁned in the following way. To each open cover U = {Uα} of a given space X
we can associate a simplicial complex N(U) called the nerve of U. This has a vertex
vα for each Uα , and a set of k + 1 vertices spans a k-simplex whenever the k + 1
corresponding Uα ’s have nonempty intersection. When another cover V = {Vβ} is
a reﬁnement of U, so each Vβ is contained in some Uα , then these inclusions in-
duce a simplicial map N(V )→N(U) which is well-deﬁned up to homotopy. We can
then form the direct limit lim
--→Hi(N(U); G) with respect to ﬁner and ﬁner open cov-
ers U. This limit group is by deﬁnition the ˇCech cohomology group ˇ
Hi(X; G). For a
full exposition of this cohomology theory see [Eilenberg-Steenrod]. With an analogous
deﬁnition of relative groups, ˇCech cohomology turns out to satisfy the same axioms as
singular cohomology, and indeed a stronger form of excision: a map (X, A)→(Y, B)
which restricts to a homeomorphism X −A→Y −B induces isomorphisms on ˇCech
cohomology groups. For spaces homotopy equivalent to CW complexes, ˇCech coho-
mology coincides with singular cohomology, but for spaces with local complexities it
often behaves more reasonably. For example, if X is the subspace of R3 consisting of
the spheres of radius 1/n and center (1/n, 0, 0) for n = 1, 2, ··· then contrary to what
one might expect, H3(X; Z) is nonzero, as shown in [Barratt-Milnor]. But ˇ
H3(X; Z) = 0
and ˇ
H2(X; Z) = Z∞, the direct sum of countably many copies of Z.

Section 3.3.
Poincar´e Duality
255
Oddly enough, the corresponding ˇCech homology groups deﬁned using inverse
limits are not so well-behaved. This is because the exactness axiom fails due to the
algebraic fact that an inverse limit of exact sequences need not be exact, as a direct
limit would be; see §3.F. However, there is a way around this problem using a more
reﬁned deﬁnition. This is ‘Steenrod homology theory,’ which the reader can ﬁnd out
about in [Milnor 95].
Exercises
1. Show that there exist nonorientable manifolds of dimension one if the Hausdorff
condition is dropped from the deﬁnition of a manifold.
2. If M is an n manifold, n > 1, show that M is orientable iff M −{x} is orientable,
for an arbitrary point x ∈M .
3. Show that every covering space of an orientable manifold is orientable.
4.
Given a covering space action of a group G on an orientable manifold M by
orientation-preserving homeomorphisms, show that the quotient manifold M/G is
also orientable.
5. Show that M×N is orientable iff M and N are both orientable.
The next two problems use the notion of connected sum of n manifolds M1 and
M2 . This is an n manifold M constructed from M1 ⨿M2 by deleting the interiors of
closed n balls B1 ⊂M1 and B2 ⊂M2 and identifying the resulting boundary spheres
∂B1 and ∂B2 via some homeomorphism between them. (Assume that each Bi embeds
nicely in a larger open ball in Mi .) One writes M = M1♯M2 in this situation.
6. Show that if M1 and M2 are closed connected n manifolds then there are iso-
morphisms Hi(M1♯M2; Z) ≈Hi(M1; Z)⊕Hi(M2; Z) for 0 < i < n, with one excep-
tion: if both M1 and M2 are nonorientable, then Hn−1(M1♯M2; Z) is obtained from
Hn−1(M1; Z)⊕Hn−1(M2; Z) by replacing one of the two Z2 summands by a Z sum-
mand. [Euler characteristics may help in the exceptional case.]
7. Show that the Euler characteristic of a connected sum of even-dimensional closed
connected manifolds is given by χ(M1♯M2) = χ(M1) + χ(M2) −2, whereas in the
odd-dimensional case one has χ(M1♯M2) = χ(M1) + χ(M2)
8. For a map f : M→N between connected closed orientable n manifolds with fun-
damental classes [M] and [N], the degree of f is deﬁned to be the integer d such
that f∗([M]) = d[N], so the sign of the degree depends on the choice of fundamen-
tal classes. Show that for any connected closed orientable n manifold M there is a
degree 1 map M→Sn .
9. For a map f : M→N between connected closed orientable n manifolds, suppose
there is a ball B ⊂N such that f −1(B) is the disjoint union of of balls Bi each mapped
homeomorphically by f onto B . Show the degree of f is
P
i εi where εi is +1 or −1

256
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
according to whether f : Bi→B preserves or reverses local orientations induced from
given fundamental classes [M] and [N].
10. Show that a p sheeted covering space projection M→N has degree ±p, when M
and N are connected closed orientable manifolds.
11. Show that for a degree 1 map f : M→N of connected closed orientable manifolds,
the induced map f∗: π1M→π1N is surjective, hence also f∗: H1(M)→H1(N). [Lift
f to the covering space eN→N corresponding to the subgroup Im f∗⊂π1N , then
consider the two cases that this covering is ﬁnite-sheeted or inﬁnite-sheeted.]
12. If Mg denotes the closed orientable surface of genus g, show that degree 1 maps
Mg→Mh exist iff g ≥h.
13. As an algebraic application of the preceding problem, show that in a free group
F with basis x1, ··· , x2k , the product of commutators [x1, x2] ··· [x2k−1, x2k] is not
equal to a product of fewer than k commutators [vi, wi] of elements vi, wi ∈F .
[Recall that the 2 cell of Mk is attached by the product [x1, x2] ··· [x2k−1, x2k]. From
a relation [x1, x2] ··· [x2k−1, x2k] = [v1, w1] ··· [vj, wj] in F , construct a degree 1
map Mj→Mk .]
14. Let M′
h ⊂Mg be a compact subsurface of genus h with one boundary circle, i.e.,
M′
h is homeomorphism to Mh with an open disk removed. Show there is no retraction
Mg→M′
h if h > g/2. [Apply the previous problem, using the fact that Mg −M′
h has
genus g −h.]
15.
Let X be the subspace of R2 which is the union of the circles of radius 1/n
and center (1/n, 0) for n = 1, 2, ···.
If fn : I→X is the loop based at the origin
winding once around the nth circle, show that the inﬁnite product of commutators
[f1, f2][f3, f4] ··· deﬁnes a loop in X which is nontrivial in H1(X). [Use problem
13.] If we view X as the wedge sum of the subspaces A and B consisting of the odd-
numbered and even-numbered circles, respectively, use the same loop to show that
the map H1(X)→H1(A)⊕H1(B) induced by the retractions of X onto A and B is not
an isomorphism.
16. For an n manifold M and a compact subspace A ⊂M show that Hn(M, M −A; R)
is isomorphic to the group of sections of the covering space MR→M over A, i.e.,
maps A→MR whose composition with MR→M is the identity.
17. Show that (α⌢ϕ)⌢ψ = α⌢(ϕ⌣ψ) for all α ∈Ck(X; R), ϕ ∈Cℓ(X; R), and ψ ∈
Cm(X; R). Deduce that cap product makes H∗(X; R) into a right H∗(X; R) module.
18. Show that a direct limit of exact sequences is exact. More generally, show that
homology commutes with direct limits: If {Cα, fαβ} is a directed system of chain
complexes, with the maps fαβ : Cα→Cβ chain maps, then Hn(lim
--→Cα) = lim
--→Hn(Cα).
19. Show that a direct limit lim
--→α Gα of torsionfree abelian groups Gα is torsionfree.
More generally, show that any ﬁnitely-generated subgroup of lim
--→α Gα is realized as
a subgroup of some Gα .

Section 3.3.
Poincar´e Duality
257
20. Show that a direct limit of countable abelian groups over a countable indexing
set is countable. Apply this to show that if X is an open set in Rn then Hi(X; Z) is
countable for all i.
21. Show that H0
c (X; G) = 0 if X is path-connected and noncompact.
22. For a space X , let X be the one-point compactiﬁcation. If the added point, denoted
∞, has a neighborhood in X which is a cone with ∞the cone point, show that the
evident map Hn
c (X; G)→Hn(X, ∞; G) is an isomorphism for all n. [Question: Does
this result hold when X = Z×R?]
23. Show that Hn
c (X×R; G) ≈Hn−1
c
(X; G) for all n.
24. Show that for a locally compact ∆complex X the simplicial cohomology groups
H∆i
c(X; G) are isomorphic to the singular cohomology groups Hi
c(X; G). This can
be done by showing that ∆i
c(X; G) is the union of its subgroups ∆i(X, A; G) as A
ranges over subcomplexes of X which contain all but ﬁnitely many simplices, and
likewise Ci
c(X; G) is the union of its subgroups Ci(X, A; G) for the same family of
subcomplexes A.
25. Let M be a closed connected 3 manifold with H1(M; Z) ≈Zr ⊕F , the direct sum
of a free abelian group of rank r and a ﬁnite group F . Show that H2(M; Z) is Zr
if M is orientable and Zr−1⊕Z2 if M is nonorientable. In particular, r ≥1 when
M is nonorientable. Using Problem 6, construct examples showing there are no other
restrictions on the homology groups of closed 3 manifolds. [In the nonorientable case
consider the manifold N obtained from S2×I by identifying S2×{0} with S2×{1}
via a reﬂection of S2 .]
26. Show that if a closed orientable manifold M of dimension 2k has Hk−1(M; Z)
torsionfree, then Hk(M; Z) is also torsionfree.
27. Compute the cup product structure in H∗(S2×S8♯S4×S6; Z), showing in partic-
ular that the only nontrivial cup products are those dictated by Poincar´e duality. [See
Problem 6. The result has an evident generalization to connected sums of Si×Sn−i ’s
for ﬁxed n and varying i.]
28. Show that with respect to a suitable basis, a skew-symmetric nonsingular bilinear
form over Z can be represented by a matrix consisting of 2×2 blocks
  0
1
−1
0

along
the diagonal and zeros elsewhere. [For the matrix of a bilinear form, the following
operation can be realized by a change of basis: add an integer multiple of the ith row
to the jth row and add the same integer multiple of the ith column to the jth column.
Use this to ﬁx up each column in turn. Note that a skew-symmetric matrix must have
zeros on the diagonal.]
29. Show that a nonsingular symmetric or skew-symmetric bilinear pairing of the form
Fn×Fn→F , with F a ﬁeld, cannot be identically zero when restricted to all pairs v ,
w in a k dimensional subspace V ⊂Fn if k > n/2.

258
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
30. Use the preceding problem to show that if the closed orientable surface Mg of
genus g retracts onto a graph X ⊂Mg , then H1(X) has rank at most g. Deduce an
alternative proof of Problem 14 from this, and construct a retraction of Mg onto a
wedge of k circles for each k ≤g.
31. Show that the boundary of an R orientable manifold is also R orientable.
32. Show that if M is a compact R orientable n manifold, then the boundary map
Hn(M, ∂M; R)→Hn−1(∂M; R) sends a fundamental class for (M, ∂M) to a fundamen-
tal class for ∂M .
33. Show that a compact manifold does not retract onto its boundary.
34. For a compact manifold M verify that the following diagram relating Poincar´e
duality for M and ∂M is commutative, up to sign at least:
M R
M
H (
)
−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
k
H
(
)
k 1
H (
)
k
M
H (
k
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
M
H
(
)
n k
-
H
(
n k 1
-
-
−−−−−→
∂
∂
∂
;
R
;
R
;
M
H
(
)
n k
-
R
;
M
H
(
)
n k
-
R
;
)
M,
M
∂
)
R
;
M
∂
,
M
∂
∂
R
;
R
;
[ ]
M
−−−−−→
[ ]
M
−−−−−→
[  ]
M
∂
−−−−−→
[  ]
M
-
35. If M is a noncompact R orientable n manifold with boundary ∂M having a col-
lar neighborhood in M , show there are Poincar´e duality isomorphisms Hk
c (M; R) ≈
Hn−k(M, ∂M; R) for all k, using the ﬁve-lemma and a diagram
M R
M
H (
)
−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
k
H
(
)
k 1
H (
)
k
M
H (
k
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
M
H
(
)
n k
-
H
(
n k 1
-
-
−−−−−→
∂
∂
;
R
;
R
;
M
H
(
)
n k
-
R
;
M
H
(
)
n k
-
R
;
)
M,
M
∂
)
R
;
M
∂
,
M
∂
∂
R
;
R
;
DM
D M
DM
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
∂
D M
∂
−−−−−→
-
c
c
c
c

Section 3.A.
The Universal Coefﬁcient Theorem for Homology
259
The object of this section is to derive the general algebraic formula which com-
putes homology with arbitrary coefﬁcients in terms of homology with Z coefﬁcients.
The theory parallels rather closely the universal coefﬁcient theorem for cohomology
in §3.1.
The ﬁrst thing to notice is that the deﬁnition of homology with coefﬁcients given
in §2.2 can be reformulated in terms of tensor products. The chain group Cn(X; G)
was deﬁned there to consist of the ﬁnite formal sums
P
i giσi with gi ∈G and
σi : ∆n→X .
This means that Cn(X; G) is a direct sum of copies of G, with one
copy for each singular n simplex in X .
More generally, the relative chain group
Cn(X, A; G) = Cn(X; G)/Cn(A; G) is also a direct sum of copies of G, one for each
singular n simplex in X not contained in A. From the basic properties of tensor prod-
ucts listed in the discussion of the K¨unneth formula in §3.2 it follows that Cn(X, A; G)
is naturally isomorphic to Cn(X, A)⊗G, via the correspondence
P
i giσi,
P
i σi ⊗gi .
Under this isomorphism the boundary map Cn(X, A; G)→Cn−1(X, A; G) corresponds
to ∂⊗11 : Cn(X, A)⊗G→Cn−1(X, A)⊗G where ∂: Cn(X, A)→Cn−1(X, A) is the usual
boundary map for Z coefﬁcients. Thus we have the following algebraic problem:
Given a chain complex ··· -→Cn
∂n-----→Cn−1 -→··· of free abelian groups Cn , is it
possible to compute the homology groups Hn(C; G) of the associated chain complex
··· -----→Cn ⊗G
∂n⊗11
----------------------------→Cn−1 ⊗G -----→··· just in terms of G and the homology groups
Hn(C) of the original complex?
To approach this problem, the idea will be to compare the chain complex C with two
simpler subcomplexes, consisting of the cycles and the boundaries in C , and see what
happens upon tensoring all three complexes with G.
Let Zn = Ker ∂n ⊂Cn and Bn = Im ∂n+1 ⊂Cn . The restrictions of ∂n to these
two subgroups are zero, so they can be regarded as subcomplexes Z and B of C with
trivial boundary maps. Thus we have a short exact sequence of chain complexes, part
of which is:
(i)
Cn
B
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
Z
0
0
n−−−−−→
−−−−−→
-
Cn 1
-
Z
0
0
n 1
-
Bn 2
-
n 1
-
n 1
∂
-
n 1
∂
n
∂
n
∂
n
∂
The rows in this diagram split since each Bn is free, being a subgroup of the free group
Cn . Thus Cn ≈Zn⊕Bn−1 , but the chain complex C is not the direct sum of the chain

260
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
complexes Z and B since the latter have trivial boundary maps but the boundary
maps in C may be nontrivial. Now tensor with G to get a commutative diagram
(ii)
Cn
B
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
Z
G
0
0
n
−−−−−−→
−−−−−→
-
Cn 1
-
Z
0
0
n 1
-
Bn 2
-
n 1
-
n 1
∂
-
n 1
∂
n
∂
n
∂
n
∂
⊗
G
⊗
G
⊗
G
⊗
G
⊗
⊗
G
⊗
1
1
⊗1
1
⊗1
1
⊗1
1
⊗1
1
The rows are exact since the rows in (i) split and tensor products satisfy (A⊕B)⊗G ≈
A⊗G⊕B ⊗G, so the rows in (ii) are split exact sequences too. Thus we have a short
exact sequence of chain complexes 0→Z ⊗G→C ⊗G→B ⊗G→0. Since the boundary
maps are trivial in Z ⊗G and B ⊗G, the associated long exact sequence of homology
groups has the form
(iii)
··· -→Bn ⊗G -→Zn ⊗G -→Hn(C; G) -→Bn−1 ⊗G -→Zn−1 ⊗G -→···
The ‘boundary’ maps Bn ⊗G→Zn ⊗G in this sequence are the obvious ones, in ⊗11,
where in : Bn→Zn is the inclusion. This is evident from the deﬁnition of the boundary
map in a long exact sequence of homology groups: In the diagram (ii) one takes an
element of Bn−1 ⊗G, pulls it back via (∂n ⊗11)−1 to Cn ⊗G, then applies ∂n ⊗11 to get
into Cn−1 ⊗G, then pulls back to Zn−1 ⊗G.
The long exact sequence (iii) can be broken up into short exact sequences
(iv)
0 -→Coker(in ⊗11) -→Hn(C; G) -→Ker(in−1 ⊗11) -→0
where Coker(in ⊗11) = (Zn ⊗G)/ Im(in ⊗11). The next lemma shows this cokernel is
just Hn(C)⊗G.
Lemma 3A.1. If the sequence of abelian groups A
i-----→B
j-----→C -----→0 is exact, then
so is A⊗G
i⊗11
------------------→B ⊗G
j⊗11
------------------→C ⊗G -----→0.
Proof: Certainly the compositions of two successive maps in the latter sequence are
zero. Also, j ⊗11 is clearly surjective since j is. To check exactness at B ⊗G it sufﬁces
to show that the map B ⊗G/ Im(i ⊗11)→C ⊗G induced by j ⊗11 is an isomorphism,
which we do by constructing its inverse. Deﬁne a map ϕ : C×G→B ⊗G/ Im(i ⊗11) by
ϕ(c, g) = b ⊗g where j(b) = c . This ϕ is well-deﬁned since if j(b) = j(b′) = c
then b −b = i(a) for some a ∈A by exactness, so b ⊗g −b′ ⊗g = (b −b′) ⊗g =
i(a) ⊗g ∈Im(i ⊗11).
Since ϕ is a homomorphism in each variable separately, it
induces a homomorphism C ⊗G→B ⊗G/ Im(i ⊗11). This is clearly an inverse to the
map B ⊗G/ Im(i ⊗11)→C ⊗G.
⊔⊓
It remains to understand Ker(in−1 ⊗11), or equivalently Ker(in ⊗11). The situation
is that tensoring the short exact sequence
(v)
0 -→Bn
in
------------→Zn -----→Hn(C) -→0

Section 3.A.
The Universal Coefﬁcient Theorem for Homology
261
with G produces a sequence which becomes exact only by insertion of the extra term
Ker(in ⊗11):
(vi)
0 -→Ker(in ⊗11) -----→Bn ⊗G
in⊗11
-------------------------→Zn ⊗G -----→Hn(C)⊗G -→0
What we will show is that Ker(in ⊗11) does not really depend on Bn and Zn but only
on their quotient Hn(C), and of course G.
The sequence (v) is a free resolution of Hn(C), where as in §3.1 a free resolution
of an abelian group H is an exact sequence
··· -----→F2
f2
------------→F1
f1
------------→F0
f0
------------→H -----→0
with each Fn free.
Tensoring a free resolution of this form with a ﬁxed group G
produces a chain complex
··· -----→F1 ⊗G
f1⊗11
-------------------------→F0 ⊗G
f0⊗11
-------------------------→H ⊗G -----→0
By Lemma 3A.1 this is exact at F0 ⊗G and H ⊗G, but to the left of these two terms
it may not be exact. For the moment let us write Hn(F ⊗G) for the homology group
Ker(fn ⊗11)/ Im(fn+1 ⊗11).
Lemma 3A.2. For any two free resolutions F and F′ of H there are canonical iso-
morphisms Hn(F ⊗G) ≈Hn(F′ ⊗G) for all n.
Proof: We will use Lemma 3.1(a). In the situation described there we have two free
resolutions F and F′ with a chain map between them.
If we tensor the two free
resolutions with G we obtain chain complexes F ⊗G and F′ ⊗G with the maps αn ⊗11
forming a chain map between them. Passing to homology, this chain map induces
homomorphisms α∗: Hn(F ⊗G)→Hn(F′ ⊗G) which are independent of the choice of
αn ’s since if αn and α′
n are chain homotopic via a chain homotopy λn then αn ⊗11
and α′
n ⊗11 are chain homotopic via λn ⊗11.
For a composition H
α-----→H′
β-----→H′′ with free resolutions F , F′ , and F′′ of these
three groups also given, the induced homomorphisms satisfy (βα)∗= β∗α∗since
we can choose for the chain map F→F′′ the composition of chain maps F→F′→F′′ .
In particular, if we take α to be an isomorphism, with β its inverse and F′′ = F ,
then β∗α∗= (βα)∗= 11∗= 11, and similarly with β and α reversed. So α∗is an
isomorphism if α is an isomorphism. Specializing further, taking α to be the identity
but with two different free resolutions F and F′ , we get a canonical isomorphism
11∗: Hn(F ⊗G)→Hn(F′ ⊗G).
⊔⊓
The group Hn(F ⊗G), which depends only on H and G, is denoted Torn(H, G).
Since a free resolution 0→F1→F0→H→0 always exists, as noted in §3.1, it follows
that Torn(H, G) = 0 for n > 1. Usually Tor1(H, G) is written simply as Tor(H, G).
As we shall see later, Tor(H, G) provides a measure of the common torsion of H and
G, hence the name ‘Tor.’

262
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
What is Tor0(H, G)?
With the deﬁnition given above it would be zero since
Lemma 3A.1 implies that F1 ⊗G→F0 ⊗G→H ⊗G→0 is exact. It is probably better
to modify the deﬁnition of Hn(F ⊗G) to be the homology groups of the sequence
···→F1 ⊗G→F0 ⊗G→0, omitting the term H ⊗G which can be regarded as a kind
of augmentation. With this revised deﬁnition, Lemma 3A.1 then gives an isomorphism
Tor0(H, G) ≈H ⊗G.
We should remark that Tor(H, G) is a functor of both G and H : Homomorphisms
α : H→H′ and β : G→G′ induce homomorphisms α∗: Tor(H, G)→Tor(H′, G) and
β∗: Tor(H, G)→Tor(H, G′), satisfying (αα′)∗= α∗α′
∗, (ββ′)∗= β∗β′
∗, and 11∗= 11.
The induced map α∗was constructed in the proof of Lemma 3A.2, while for β the
construction of β∗is obvious.
Before going into calculations of Tor(H, G) let us ﬁnish analyzing the earlier exact
sequence (iv). Recall that we have a chain complex C of free abelian groups, with
homology groups denoted Hn(C), and tensoring C with G gives another complex
C ⊗G whose homology groups are denoted Hn(C; G). The following result is known
as the Universal Coefﬁcient Theorem for Homology since it describes homology with
arbitrary coefﬁcients in terms of homology with Z coefﬁcients, which are therefore
‘universal.’
Theorem 3A.3. If C is a chain complex of free abelian groups, then there are natural
short exact sequences
0 -→Hn(C)⊗G -→Hn(C; G) -→Tor(Hn−1(C), G) -→0
for all n and all G, and these sequences split, though not naturally.
Naturality means that a chain map C→C′ induces a map between the correspond-
ing short exact sequences, with commuting squares.
Proof: The exact sequence in question is (iv) since we have shown that we can iden-
tify Coker(in ⊗11) with Hn(C)⊗G and Ker in−1 with Tor(Hn−1(C), G). Verifying the
naturality of this sequence is a mental exercise in deﬁnition-checking which we leave
to the reader.
The splitting is obtained as follows.
We observed earlier that the short exact
sequence 0→Zn→Cn→Bn−1→0 splits, so there is a projection p : Cn→Zn which
restricts to the identity on Zn . The map p gives an extension of the quotient map
Zn→Hn(C) to a homomorphism Cn→Hn(C). Letting n vary, we then have a chain
map C→H(C) where the groups Hn(C) are regarded as a chain complex with trivial
boundary maps, so the chain map condition is automatic. Now tensor with G to get
a chain map C ⊗G→H(C)⊗G. Taking homology groups, we then have induced ho-
momorphisms Hn(C; G)→Hn(C)⊗G since the boundary maps in the chain complex
H(C)⊗G are trivial.
The homomorphisms Hn(C; G)→Hn(C)⊗G give the desired
splitting since at the level of chains they are the identity on cycles in C , by the deﬁni-
tion of p.
⊔⊓

Section 3.A.
The Universal Coefﬁcient Theorem for Homology
263
Corollary 3A.4. For each pair of spaces (X, A) there are split exact sequences
0 -→Hn(X, A)⊗G -→Hn(X, A; G) -→Tor(Hn−1(X, A), G) -→0
for all n, and these sequences are natural with respect to maps (X, A)→(Y, B).
⊔⊓
The splitting is not natural, for if it were, a map X→Y which induced trivial
maps Hn(X)→Hn(Y) and Hn−1(X)→Hn−1(Y) would have to induce the trivial map
Hn(X; G)→Hn(Y; G) for all G, but in Example 2.51 we saw an instance where this
fails, namely the quotient map M(Zm, n)→Sn+1 with G = Zm .
The basic tools for computing Tor are given by:
Proposition 3A.5.
(1) Tor(A, B) ≈Tor(B, A).
(2) Tor(
L
iAi, B) ≈
L
iTor(Ai, B).
(3) Tor(A, B) = 0 if A or B is free, or more generally torsionfree.
(4) Tor(A, B) ≈Tor(T(A), B) where T(A) is the torsion subgroup of A.
(5) Tor(Zn, A) ≈Ker(A
n-----→A).
(6) For each short exact sequence 0→B→C→D→0 there is a naturally associated
exact sequence
0→Tor(A, B)→Tor(A, C)→Tor(A, D)→A⊗B→A⊗C→A⊗D→0
Proof: Statement (2) is easy since one can choose as a free resolution of
L
i Ai the
direct sum of free resolutions of the Ai ’s. Also easy is (5), which comes from tensoring
the free resolution 0→Z
n-----→Z→Zn→0 with A.
For (3), if A is free it has a free resolution with Fn = 0 for n ≥1, so Tor(A, B) = 0
for all B . On the other hand, if B is free, then tensoring a free resolution of A with
B preserves exactness, since tensoring a sequence with a direct sum of Z’s produces
just a direct sum of copies of the given sequence. So Tor(A, B) = 0 in this case too.
The generalization to torsionfree A or B will be given below.
For (6), choose a free resolution 0→F1→F0→A→0 and tensor with the given
short exact sequence to get a commutative diagram
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
F
B
0
0
1
F1
F1
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
⊗
C
⊗
D
⊗
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
F
B
0
0
0
F0
F0
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
⊗
C
⊗
D
⊗
The rows are exact since tensoring with a free group preserves exactness. Extending
the three columns by zeros above and below, we then have a short exact sequence
of chain complexes whose associated long exact sequence of homology groups is the
desired six-term exact sequence.
To prove (1) we apply (6) to a free resolution 0→F1→F0→B→0. Since Tor(A, F1)
and Tor(A, F0) vanish by the part of (3) which we have proved, the six-term sequence
in (6) reduces to the ﬁrst row of the following diagram:

264
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
A
0
F1
A
F0
A
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
⊗
⊗
B
⊗
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
F
A
0
1
F0
B
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
0 −−−−−→
0 −−−−−→
⊗
A
⊗
A
⊗
B
A
Tor (
)
,
A
B
Tor (
)
,
≈
≈
≈
The second row comes from the deﬁnition of Tor(B, A). The vertical isomorphisms
come from the natural commutativity of tensor product. Since the squares commute,
there is induced a map Tor(A, B)→Tor(B, A), which is an isomorphism by the ﬁve-
lemma.
Now we can prove the statement (3) in the torsionfree case. For a free resolution
0 -→F1
ϕ-----→F0 -→A -→0 we wish to show that ϕ ⊗11 : F1 ⊗B→F0 ⊗B is injective
if B is torsionfree. Suppose
P
i xi ⊗bi lies in the kernel of ϕ ⊗11. This means that
P
i ϕ(xi) ⊗bi can be reduced to 0 by a ﬁnite number of applications of the deﬁning
relations for tensor products. Only a ﬁnite number of elements of B are involved in
this process. These lie in a ﬁnitely generated subgroup B0 ⊂B , so
P
i xi ⊗bi lies in
the kernel of ϕ ⊗11 : F1 ⊗B0→F0 ⊗B0 . This kernel is zero since Tor(A, B0) = 0, B0
being ﬁnitely generated and torsionfree hence free.
Finally, we can obtain statement (4) by applying (6) to the short exact sequence
0→T(A)→A→A/T(A)→0 since A/T(A) is torsionfree.
⊔⊓
In particular, (5) gives Tor(Zm, Zn) ≈Zq where q is the greatest common divisor
of m and n. Thus Tor(Zm, Zn) is isomorphic to Zm ⊗Zn , though somewhat by acci-
dent. Combining this isomorphism with (2) and (3) we see that for ﬁnitely generated
A and B , Tor(A, B) is isomorphic to the tensor product of the torsion subgroups of
A and B , or roughly speaking, ‘the common torsion of A and B .’ This is one reason
for the ‘Tor’ designation, further justiﬁcation being (3) and (4).
Homology calculations are often simpliﬁed by taking coefﬁcients in a ﬁeld, usually
Q or Zp for p prime. In general this gives less information than taking Z coefﬁcients,
but still some of the essential features are retained, as the following result indicates:
Corollary 3A.6.
(a) Hn(X; Q) ≈Hn(X; Z)⊗Q, so when Hn(X; Z) is ﬁnitely generated, the dimension
of Hn(X; Q) as a vector space over Q equals the rank of Hn(X; Z).
(b) If Hn(X; Z) and Hn−1(X; Z) are ﬁnitely generated, then for p prime, Hn(X; Zp)
consists of:
(i) a Zp summand for each Z summand of Hn(X; Z)
(ii) a Zp summand for each Zpk summand in Hn(X; Z), k ≥1
(iii) a Zp summand for each Zpk summand in Hn−1(X; Z), k ≥1.
⊔⊓
Even in the case of nonﬁnitely generated homology groups, ﬁeld coefﬁcients still
give good qualitative information:

Section 3.A.
The Universal Coefﬁcient Theorem for Homology
265
Corollary 3A.7.
(a)
eHn(X; Z) = 0 for all n iff eHn(X; Q) = 0 and eHn(X; Zp) = 0 for all n and all
primes p.
(b) A map f : X→Y induces isomorphisms on homology with Z coefﬁcients iff it
induces isomorphisms on homology with Q and Zp coefﬁcients for all primes p.
Proof: Statement (b) follows from (a) by passing to the mapping cone of f .
The
universal coefﬁcient theorem gives the ‘only if’ half of (a). For the ‘if’ implication it
sufﬁces to show that if an abelian group A is such that A⊗Q = 0 and Tor(A, Zp) = 0
for all primes p, then A = 0. For the short exact sequences 0→Z
p-----→Z→Zp→0 and
0→Z→Q→Q/Z→0, the six-term exact sequences in (6) of the proposition become
0 -→Tor(A, Zp) -→A
p-----→A -→A⊗Zp -→0
0 -→Tor(A, Q/Z) -→A -→A⊗Q -→A⊗Q/Z -→0
If Tor(A, Zp) = 0 for all p, then exactness of the ﬁrst sequence implies that A
p-----→A
is injective for all p, so A is torsionfree. Then Tor(A, Q/Z) = 0 by (3) or (4) of the
proposition, so the second sequence implies that A→A⊗Q is injective, hence A = 0
if A⊗Q = 0.
⊔⊓
The algebra by means of which the Tor functor is derived from tensor products
has a very natural generalization in which abelian groups are replaced by modules
over a ﬁxed ring R with identity, using the deﬁnition of tensor product of R modules
given in §3.2. Free resolutions of R modules are deﬁned in the same way as for abelian
groups, using free R modules, which are direct sums of copies of R. Lemmas 3A.1 and
3A.2 carry over to this context without change, and so one has functors TorR
n(A, B).
However it need not be true that TorR
n(A, B) = 0 for n > 1. The reason this was
true when R = Z was that subgroups of free groups are free, but submodules of free
R modules need not be free in general. If R is a principal ideal domain, submodules
of free R modules are free, so in this case the rest of the algebra, in particular the
universal coefﬁcient theorem, goes through without change.
When R is a ﬁeld, modules are vector spaces, so every module is free, which
simpliﬁes the theory considerably. Tensoring an exact sequence with a free module
clearly preserves exactness, since one is just taking the direct sum of copies of the
sequence.
Thus the sequence (ii) is automatically exact and one immediately has
Hn(C ⊗F G) ≈Hn(C)⊗F G if F is a ﬁeld.
Exercises
1. Use the universal coefﬁcient theorem to show that if H∗(X; Z) is ﬁnitely generated,
so the Euler characteristic χ(X) =
P
n(−1)n rank Hn(X; Z) is deﬁned, then for any
coefﬁcient ﬁeld F we have χ(X) =
P
n(−1)n dim Hn(X; F).

266
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
2. Show that Tor(A, Q/Z) is isomorphic to the torsion subgroup of A. Deduce that
A is torsionfree iff Tor(A, B) = 0 for all B .
3. Show that if eHn(X; Q) and eHn(X; Zp) are zero for all n and all primes p, then
eHn(X; Z) = 0 for all n, and hence eHn(X; G) = 0 for all G and n.
4. Show that ⊗and Tor commute with direct limits: (lim
--→Aα)⊗B = lim
--→(Aα ⊗B) and
Tor(lim
--→Aα, B) = lim
--→Tor(Aα, B).
5.
From the fact that Tor(A, B) = 0 if A is free deduce that Tor(A, B) = 0 if A
is torsionfree by applying the previous problem to the directed system of ﬁnitely
generated subgroups Aα of A.
6. Show that Tor(A, B) is always a torsion group, and that Tor(A, B) contains an
element of order n iff A and B contain elements of order n.
K¨unneth formulas describe the homology or cohomology of a product space in
terms of the homology or cohomology of the factors. In nice cases these formulas take
the form H∗(X×Y; R) ≈H∗(X; R)⊗H∗(Y; R) or H∗(X×Y; R) ≈H∗(X; R)⊗H∗(Y; R)
for a coefﬁcient ring R. For the case of cohomology, such a formula was given in
Theorem 3.15, with hypotheses of ﬁnite generation and freeness on the cohomology
of one factor. To obtain a completely general formula without these hypotheses it
turns out that homology is more natural than cohomology, and the main aim in this
section is to derive the general K¨unneth formula for homology. The new feature of
the general case is that an extra Tor term is needed to describe the full homology of
a product.
The Cross Product in Homology
A major component of the K¨unneth formula is a cross product map
Hi(X; R)×Hj(Y; R)→Hi+j(X×Y; R)
There are two ways to deﬁne this. One is a direct deﬁnition for singular homology,
involving explicit simplicial formulas. More enlightening, however, is the deﬁnition in
terms of cellular homology. This necessitates assuming X and Y are CW complexes,
but this hypothesis can later be removed by the technique of CW approximation in
§4.1. We shall focus therefore on the cellular deﬁnition, leaving the simplicial deﬁni-
tion to later in this section for those who are curious to see how it goes.

Section 3.B.
The General K¨unneth Formula
267
The key ingredient in the deﬁnition of the cellular cross product will be the fact
that the cellular boundary map satisﬁes d(ei×ej) = dei×ej + (−1)iei×dej . Implicit
in the right side of this formula is the convention of treating the symbol ‘ × ’ as a
bilinear operation on cellular chains.
With this convention we can then say more
generally that d(a×b) = da×b + (−1)ia×db whenever a is a cellular i chain and
b is a cellular j chain. This formula implies that the cross product of two cycles is
a cycle. Also, the product of a boundary and a cycle is a boundary since da×b =
d(a×b) if db = 0, and similarly a×db = (−1)id(a×b) if da = 0. Hence there is an
induced homomorphism Hi(X; R)×Hj(Y; R)→Hi+j(X×Y; R), which is by deﬁnition
the cross product in cellular homology. Since it is bilinear, it could also be viewed
as a homomorphism Hi(X; R)⊗RHj(Y; R)→Hi+j(X×Y; R). In either form, this cross
product turns out to be independent of the cell structures on X and Y .
Our task then is to express the boundary maps in the cellular chain complex
C∗(X×Y) for X×Y in terms of the boundary maps in the cellular chain complexes
C∗(X) and C∗(Y). For simplicity we consider homology with Z coefﬁcients here,
but the same formular for arbitrary coefﬁcients follows immediately from this special
case. With Z coefﬁcients, the cellular chain group Ci(X) is free with basis the i cells
of X , but there is a sign ambiguity for the basis element corresponding to each cell ei ,
namely the choice of a generator for the Z summand of Hi(Xi, Xi−1) corresponding
to ei . Only when i = 0 is this choice canonical. We refer to these choices as ‘choosing
orientations for the cells.’ A choice of such orientations allows cellular i chains to be
written unambiguously as linear combinations of i cells.
The formula d(ei×ej) = dei×ej +(−1)iei×dej is not completely canonical since
it contains the sign (−1)i but not (−1)j . Evidently there is some distinction being
made between the two factors of ei×ej . Since the signs arise from orientations, we
need to make explicit how an orientation of cells ei and ej determines an orientation
of ei×ej . Via characteristic maps, orientations can be obtained from orientations of
the domain disks of the characteristic maps. It will be convenient to choose these
domains to be cubes since the product of two cubes is again a cube. Thus for a cell ei
α
we take a characteristic map Φα : Ii→X where Ii is the product of i intervals [0, 1].
An orientation of Ii is a generator of Hi(Ii, ∂Ii), and the image of this generator under
Φα∗gives an orientation of ei
α . We can identify Hi(Ii, ∂Ii) with Hi(Ii, Ii−{x}) for any
x in the interior of Ii , and then an orientation is determined by a linear embedding
∆i→Ii with x chosen in the interior of the image of this embedding. The embedding
is determined by its sequence of vertices v0, ··· , vi . The vectors v1 −v0, ··· , vi −v0
are linearly independent in Ii , thought of as the unit cube in Ri , so an orientation
in our sense is equivalent to an orientation in the sense of linear algebra, that is,
an equivalence class of ordered bases, two ordered bases being equivalent if they
differ by a linear transformation of positive determinant. (An ordered basis can be
continuously deformed to an orthonormal basis, by the Gram-Schmidt process, and

268
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
two orthonormal bases are related either by a rotation or a rotation followed by a
reﬂection, according to the sign of the determinant of the transformation taking one
to the other.)
With this in mind, we adopt the convention that an orientation of Ii×Ij = Ii+j is
obtained by choosing an ordered basis consisting of an ordered basis for Ii followed
by an ordered basis for Ij . Notice that reversing the orientation for either Ii or Ij
then reverses the orientation for Ii+j , so all that really matters is the order of the two
factors of Ii×Ij .
Proposition 3B.1. The boundary map in the cellular chain complex C∗(X×Y) is
determined by the boundary maps in the cellular chain complexes C∗(X) and C∗(Y)
via the formula d(ei×ej) = dei×ej + (−1)iei×dej .
Proof: Let us ﬁrst consider the special case of the cube In . We give I the CW structure
with two vertices and one edge, so the ith copy of I has a 1 cell ei and 0 cells 1i and
0i , with dei = 1i −0i . The n cell in the product In is e1× ··· ×en , and we claim that
(∗)
d(e1× ··· ×en) =
X
i
(−1)i+1e1× ··· ×dei× ··· ×en
This formula is correct modulo the signs of the individual terms e1× ··· ×0i× ··· ×en
and e1× ··· ×1i× ··· ×en since these are exactly the (n −1) cells in the boundary
sphere ∂In of In . To obtain the signs in (∗), note that switching the two ends of an
I factor of In produces a reﬂection of ∂In , as does a transposition of two adjacent
I factors. Since reﬂections have degree −1, this implies that (∗) is correct up to an
overall sign. This ﬁnal sign can be determined by looking at any term, say the term
01×e1× ··· ×en , which has a minus sign in (∗). To check that this is right, consider
the n simplex [v0, ··· , vn] with v0 at the origin and vk the unit vector along the
kth coordinate axis for k > 0. This simplex deﬁnes the ‘positive’ orientation of In as
described earlier, and in the usual formula for its boundary the face [v0, v2, ··· , vn],
which deﬁnes the positive orientation for the face 01×e1× ··· ×en of In , has a minus
sign.
If we write In = Ii×Ij with i + j = n and we set ei = e1× ··· ×ei and ej =
ei+1× ··· ×en , then the formula (∗) becomes d(ei×ej) = dei×ej + (−1)iei×dej .
We will use naturality to reduce the general case of the boundary formula to this
special case. When dealing with cellular homology, the maps f : X→Y which induce
chain maps f∗: C∗(X)→C∗(Y) of the cellular chain complexes are the cellular maps,
taking Xn to Y n for all n, hence (Xn, Xn−1 to (Y n, Y n−1). The naturality statement
we want is then:
Lemma 3B.2. For cellular maps f : X→Z and g : Y→W , the cellular chain maps
f∗: C∗(X)→C∗(Z), g∗: C∗(Y)→C∗(W), and (f ×g)∗: C∗(X×Y)→C∗(Z×W) sat-
isfy (f ×g)∗= f∗×g∗.

Section 3.B.
The General K¨unneth Formula
269
Proof: The relation (f ×g)∗= f∗×g∗means that if f∗(ei
α) =
P
γ mαγei
γ and if
g∗(ej
β) =
P
δ nβδej
δ , then (f ×g)∗(ei
α×ej
β) =
P
γδ mαγnβδ(ei
γ ×ej
δ). The coefﬁcient
mαγ is the degree of the composition fαγ : Si→Xi/Xi−1→Zi/Zi−1→Si where the
ﬁrst and third maps are induced by characteristic maps for the cells ei
α and ei
γ , and
the middle map is induced by the cellular map f . The nβδ ’s are obtained similarly
from maps gβδ : Sj→Sj . For f ×g, the map (f ×g)αβ,γδ : Si+j→Si+j whose degree
is the coefﬁcient of ei
γ ×ej
δ in (f ×g)∗(ei
α×ej
β) is obtained from the product map
fαγ ×gβδ : Si×Sj→Si×Sj by collapsing the (i + j −1) skeleton of Si×Sj to a point.
In other words, (f ×g)αβ,γδ is the smash product map fαγ ∧gβδ .
What we need
to show is the formula deg(f ∧g) = deg(f ) deg(g) for basepoint-preserving maps
f : Si→Si and g : Sj→Sj .
Since f ∧g is the composition of f ∧11 and 11 ∧g, it sufﬁces to show that
deg(f ∧11) = deg(f ) and deg(11∧g) = deg(g). We do this by relating smash products
to suspension. The smash product X ∧S1 can be viewed as X×I/(X×∂I ∪{x0}×I),
so it is the quotient of the suspension SX obtained by collapsing the segment {x0}×I
to a point. (This quotient is also known as the reduced suspension ΣX .) The quotient
map SX→X ∧S1 induces an isomorphism on homology since it collapses an interval,
which is contractible, to a point. Taking X = Si , we then
have the commutative diagram at the right, so Sf and f ∧11
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−→
S
S
Sf
i
(
)
−−−−→
S
S
f
i
1
S
S
i
(
)
∧
∧
S
S
i
1
∧
1
1
have the same degree. Since suspension preserves degree
by Proposition 2.33, we conclude that deg(f ∧11) = deg(f ).
This is for 11 the identity on S1 , and by iteration we obtain the same result for 11 the
identity on Sj since Sj is the smash product of j copies of S1 . Similarly deg(11∧g) =
deg(g) since a permutation of coordinates in Si+j does not affect the degree of maps
Si+j→Si+j .
⊔⊓
Now to ﬁnish the proof of the proposition, let Φ : Ii→Xi and Ψ : Ij→Y j be char-
acteristic maps of cells ei
α ⊂X and ej
β ⊂Y . The restriction of Φ to ∂Ii is the attaching
map of ei
α . We may perform a preliminary homotopy of this attaching map ∂Ii→Xi−1
to make it cellular. There is no need to appeal to the cellular approximation theorem
to do this since a direct argument is easy, namely, ﬁrst deform the attaching map
so that it sends all but one face of Ii to a point, which is possible since the union
of these faces is contractible, then do a further deformation so that the image point
of this union of faces is a 0 cell. A homotopy of the attaching map ∂Ii→Xi−1 does
not affect the cellular boundary dei
α , since dei
α is determined by the induced map
Hi−1(∂Ii)→Hi−1(Xi−1)→Hi−1(Xi−1, Xi−2). So we may assume Φ is cellular, and like-
wise Ψ , hence also Φ×Ψ . We remind the reader that the map of cellular chain com-
plexes induced by a cellular map between CW complexes is a chain map, commuting
with the cellular boundary maps.
If ei is the i cell of Ii and ej the j cell of Ij , then Φ∗(ei) = ei
α , Ψ∗(ej) = ej
β ,

270
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
and (Φ×Ψ)∗(ei×ej) = ei
α×ej
β , hence
d(ei
α×ej
β) = d
 (Φ×Ψ)∗(ei×ej)

= (Φ×Ψ)∗d(ei×ej)
since (Φ×Ψ)∗is a chain map
= (Φ×Ψ)∗(dei×ej + (−1)iei×dej)
by the special case
= Φ∗(dei)×Ψ∗(ej) + (−1)iΦ∗(ei)×Ψ∗(dej)
by the lemma
= dΦ∗(ei)×Ψ∗(ej) + (−1)iΦ∗(ei)×dΨ∗(ej)
since Φ∗and Ψ∗are
chain maps
= dei
α×ej
β + (−1)iei
α×dej
β.
which completes the proof of the proposition.
⊔⊓
Example 3B.3. Consider X×Sk where we give Sk its usual CW structure with two
cells. The boundary formula in C∗(X×Sk) takes the form d(a×b) = da×b since
d = 0 in C∗(Sk). So the chain complex C∗(X×Sk) is just the direct sum of two
copies of the chain complex C∗(X), one of the copies having its dimension shifted
upward by k. Hence Hn(X×Sk; Z) ≈Hn(X; Z)⊕Hn−k(X; Z) for all i. In particular, we
see that all the homology classes in X×Sk are obtained from ‘products’ of homology
classes in X and Sk .
Example 3B.4. More subtle things can happen when X and Y both have torsion in
their homology. To take the simplest case, let X be S1 with a cell e2 attached by a
map S1→S1 of degree m, so H1(X; Z) ≈Zm and Hi(X; Z) = 0 for i > 1. Similarly,
let Y = S1 ∪e2 with an attaching map of degree n. Since X and Y have no homology
in dimension greater than 1, one might guess that X×Y would have no homology in
dimension greater than 2. To see whether this is true, we examine the cellular chain
complex for X×Y in dimensions 2, 3, and 4. This is Z→Z⊕Z→Z with generators
α, β, γ , δ corresponding to the four cells e2×e2 , e1×e2 , e2×e1 , and e1×e1 . By the
preceding proposition, the boundary maps are given by dα = mβ + nγ , dβ = −nδ,
dγ = mδ, and dδ = 0. Since d(kβ + ℓγ) = (ℓm −kn)δ, the homology class of δ has
order q = gcd(m, n), the greatest common divisor of m and n, and H2(X×Y; Z) ≈
Zq , generated by the ‘product’ of the generators of H1(X; Z) and H1(Y; Z). This is
what one might expect. However, there are also cellular cycles in dimension 3, the
multiples of (m/q)β + (n/q)γ , and the smallest such multiple which is a boundary
is q[(m/q)β + (n/q)γ] = mβ + nγ , so H3(X×Y; Z) ≈Zq .
Thus if q > 1, not all the homology of X×Y comes from products of homology
classes in X and Y . This phenomenon can be traced to H1(X; Z) and H1(Y; Z) having
elements of the same ﬁnite order q, namely the classes represented by (m/q)e1 for
X and (n/q)e1 for Y , which give rise to the 3 cycle (m/q)e1×e2 + e2×(n/q)e1 =
(m/q)β + (n/q)γ . As we shall see, it is the existence of torsion elements of the same
order in the homology of X and Y which prevents the homology of X×Y from being
just the product of the homology of X and Y in general.

Section 3.B.
The General K¨unneth Formula
271
This example generalizes immediately to higher dimensions, with X = Si ∪ei+1
and Y = Sj ∪ej+1 , the attaching maps having degrees m and n, respectively. Essen-
tially the same calculation shows that X×Y has both Hi+j and Hi+j+1 isomorphic to
Zq where q = gcd(m, n).
We should say a few words about why the cross product is independent of CW
structures. For this we will need a fact proved in the next chapter in Theorem 4.7, that
every map between CW complexes is homotopic to a cellular map. As we mentioned
earlier, a cellular map induces a chain map between cellular chain complexes. It is
easy to see from the equivalence between cellular and singular homology that the
map on cellular homology induced by a cellular map is the same as the map induced
on singular homology. Now suppose we have cellular maps f : X→Z and g : Y→W .
Then Lemma 3B.2 implies that we have a commutative diagram
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
X
Hi(
)
;
Z
Hi(
)
;
Z
Z
Y
Hj(
)
;
W
Y
W
Hj(
)
;
Z
Z
X
Hi j(
)
(
)
;
Z
Hi j(
)
;
Z
Z
∗
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
+
+
f
∗
g
×
f
∗
g
Now take Z and W to be the same spaces as X and Y but with different CW structures,
and let f and g be cellular maps homotopic to the identity. The vertical maps in the
diagram are then the identity, and commutativity of the diagram says that the cross
products deﬁned using the different CW structures coincide.
Cross product is obviously bilinear, or in other words, distributive. It is not hard
to check that it is also associative. What about commutativity? If T : X×Y→Y ×X
is transposition of the factors, then we can ask whether T∗(a×b) equals b×a. The
only effect transposing the factors has on the deﬁnition of cross product is in the
convention for orienting a product Ii×Ij by taking an ordered basis in the ﬁrst factor
followed by an ordered basis in the second factor. Switching the two factors can be
achieved by moving each of the i coordinates of Ii past each of the coordinates of
Ij . This is a total of ij transpositions of adjacent coordinates, each realizable by a
reﬂection, so a sign of (−1)ij is introduced. Thus the correct formula is T∗(a×b) =
(−1)ijb×a for a ∈Hi(X) and b ∈Hj(Y).
The Algebraic K¨unneth Formula
By adding together the various cross products we obtain a map
L
i
 Hi(X; Z)⊗Hn−i(Y; Z)
 -→Hn(X×Y; Z)
and it is natural to ask whether this is an isomorphism. Example 3B.4 above shows
that this is not always the case, though it is true in Example 3B.3. Our main goal
in what follows is to show that the map is always injective, and that its cokernel is
L
iTor
 Hi(X; Z), Hn−i−1(Y; Z)

. More generally, we consider other coefﬁcients besides
Z and show in particular that with ﬁeld coefﬁcients the map is an isomorphism.

272
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
For CW complexes X and Y , the relationship between the cellular chain com-
plexes C∗(X), C∗(Y), and C∗(X×Y) can be expressed nicely in terms of tensor prod-
ucts. Since the n cells of X×Y are the products of i cells of X with (n −i) cells of Y ,
we have Cn(X×Y) ≈
L
i
 Ci(X)⊗Cn−i(Y)

, with ei×ej corresponding to ei ⊗ej . Un-
der this identiﬁcation the boundary formula of Proposition 3B.1 becomes d(ei ⊗ej) =
dei ⊗ej + (−1)iei ⊗dej . Our task now is purely algebraic, to compute the homology
of the chain complex C∗(X×Y) from the homology of C∗(X) and C∗(Y).
Suppose we are given chain complexes C = {Cn} and C′ = {C′
n} of abelian
groups, or more generally R modules over a commutative ring R. The tensor product
chain complex C ⊗RC′ is then deﬁned by (C ⊗RC′)n =
L
i(Ci ⊗RC′
n−i), with boundary
maps given by ∂(c ⊗c′) = ∂c ⊗c′ + (−1)ic ⊗∂c′ for c ∈Ci and c′ ∈C′
n−i The sign
(−1)i guarantees that ∂2 = 0 in C ⊗RC′ , since
∂2(c ⊗c′) = ∂
 ∂c ⊗c′ + (−1)ic ⊗∂c′
= ∂2c ⊗c′ + (−1)i−1∂c ⊗∂c′ + (−1)i∂c ⊗∂c′ + (−1)ic ⊗∂2c′ = 0
From the boundary formula ∂(c ⊗c′) = ∂c ⊗c′ +(−1)ic ⊗∂c′ it follows that the tensor
product of cycles is a cycle, and the tensor product of a cycle and a boundary, in either
order, is a boundary, just as for the cross product deﬁned earlier. So there is induced a
natural map on homology groups Hi(C)⊗RHn−i(C′)→Hn(C ⊗RC′). Summing over i
then gives a map
L
i
 Hi(C)⊗RHn−i(C′)
→Hn(C ⊗RC′). This ﬁgures in the following
algebraic version of the K¨unneth Formula:
Theorem 3B.5. If R is a principal ideal domain and the R modules Ci are free, then
for each n there is a natural short exact sequence
0→
L
i
 Hi(C) ⊗RHn−i(C′)
→Hn(C ⊗RC′)→
L
i
 TorR(Hi(C), Hn−i−1(C′)
→0
and this sequence splits.
This is a generalization of the universal coefﬁcient theorem for homology, which
is the case that C′ consists of just the coefﬁcient group G in dimension zero. The
proof will also be a natural generalization of the proof of the universal coefﬁcient
theorem.
Proof: First we do the special case that the boundary maps in C are all zero, so
Hi(C) = Ci . In this case ∂(c ⊗c′) = (−1)ic ⊗∂c′ and the chain complex C ⊗RC′ is
simply the direct sum of the complexes Ci ⊗RC′ , each of which is a direct sum of copies
of C′ since Ci is free.
Hence Hn(Ci ⊗RC′) ≈Ci ⊗RHn−i(C′) = Hi(C)⊗RHn−i(C′).
Summing over i yields an isomorphism Hn(C ⊗RC′) ≈
L
i
 Hi(C)⊗RHn−i(C′)

, which
is the statement of the theorem since there are no Tor terms, Hi(C) = Ci being free.
In the general case, let Zi ⊂Ci and Bi ⊂Ci denote kernel and image of the
boundary homomorphisms for C .
These give subchain complexes Z and B of C
with trivial boundary maps.
We have a short exact sequence of chain complexes

Section 3.B.
The General K¨unneth Formula
273
0→Z→C→B→0 made up of the short exact sequences 0→Zi→Ci
∂-----→Bi−1→0
each of which splits since Bi−1 is free, being a submodule of Ci−1 which is free by
assumption.
Because of the splitting, when we tensor 0→Z→C→B→0 with C′
we obtain another short exact sequence of chain complexes, and hence a long exact
sequence in homology
··· -→Hn(Z ⊗RC′) -→Hn(C ⊗RC′) -→Hn−1(B ⊗RC′) -→Hn−1(Z ⊗RC′) -→···
where we have Hn−1(B ⊗RC′) instead of the expected Hn(B ⊗RC′) since ∂: C→B de-
creases dimension by one. Checking deﬁnitions, one sees that the ‘boundary’ map
Hn−1(B ⊗RC′)→Hn−1(Z ⊗RC′) in the preceding long exact sequence is just the map
induced by the natural map B ⊗RC′→Z ⊗RC′ coming from the inclusion B ⊂Z .
Since Z and B are chain complexes with trivial boundary maps, the special case
at the beginning of the proof converts the preceding exact sequence into
···
ιn-----→
L
i
 Zi⊗RHn−i(C′)
 -→Hn(C⊗RC′) -→
L
i
 Bi⊗RHn−i−1(C′)
 ιn−1
------------→
L
i
 Zi⊗RHn−i−1(C′)
 -→···
So we have short exact sequences
0 -→Coker ιn -→Hn(C ⊗RC′) -→Ker ιn−1 -→0
where Coker ιn =
L
i
 Zi ⊗RHn−i(C′)

/ Im ιn , and this equals
L
i
 Hi(C)⊗RHn−i(C′)

by Lemma 3A.1. It remains to identify Ker ιn−1 with
L
iTorR Hi(C), Hn−i(C′)

.
By the deﬁnition of Tor, tensoring the free resolution 0→Bi→Zi→Hi(C)→0
with Hn−i(C′) yields an exact sequence
0 -→TorR Hi(C), Hn−i(C′)
 -→Bi⊗RHn−i(C′) -→Zi⊗RHn−i(C′) -→
Hi(C)⊗RHn−i(C′) -→0
Hence, summing over i, Ker ιn =
L
iTorR Hi(C), Hn−i(C′)

.
Naturality should be obvious, and we leave it for the reader to ﬁll in the details.
We will show that the short exact sequence in the statement of the theorem splits
assuming that both C and C′ are free. This sufﬁces for our applications. For the
extra argument needed to show splitting when C′ is not free, see the exposition in
[Hilton-Stammbach].
The splitting is via a homomorphism Hn(C ⊗RC′)→
L
i
 Hi(C)⊗RHn−i(C′)

con-
structed in the following way. As already noted, the sequence 0→Zi→Ci→Bi−1→0
splits, so the quotient maps Zi→Hi(C) extend to homomorphisms Ci→Hi(C). Sim-
ilarly we obtain C′
j→Hj(C′) if C′ is free. Viewing {Hi(C)} and {Hj(C′)} as chain
complexes H(C) and H(C′) with trivial boundary maps, we thus have chain maps
C→H(C) and C′→H(C′), hence also C ⊗RC′→H(C)⊗RH(C′). The induced map on
homology for this last chain map is the desired splitting map since the chain complex
H(C)⊗RH(C′) equals its own homology, the boundary maps being trivial.
⊔⊓

274
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
The Topological K¨unneth Formula
Now we can apply the preceding algebra to obtain the topological statement we
are looking for:
Theorem 3B.6. If X and Y are CW complexes and R is a principal ideal domain,
then there are natural short exact sequences
0 -→
L
i
 Hi(X; R)⊗RHn−i(Y; R)
 -→Hn(X×Y; R) -→
L
iTorR Hi(X; R), Hn−i−1(Y; R)
 -→0
and these sequences split.
Naturality means that maps X→X′ and Y→Y ′ induce a map from the short
exact sequence for X×Y to the corresponding short exact sequence for X′×Y ′ , with
commuting squares. The splitting is not natural, however, as an exercise at the end
of this section demonstrates.
Proof: When dealing with products of CW complexes there is always the bothersome
fact that the compactly generated CW topology may not be the same as the product
topology. However, in the present context this is not a real problem. Since the two
topologies have the same compact sets, they have the same singular simplices, hence
the same singular homology groups.
Let C = C∗(X; R) and C′ = C∗(Y; R), the cellular chain complexes with coefﬁ-
cients in R. Then C ⊗RC′ = C∗(X×Y; R) by Proposition 3B.1, so the algebraic K¨unneth
formula gives the desired short exact sequences. Their naturality follows from natu-
rality in the algebraic K¨unneth formula, since we can homotope arbitrary maps X→X′
and Y→Y ′ to be cellular by Theorem 4.7, assuring that they induce chain maps of
cellular chain complexes.
⊔⊓
With ﬁeld coefﬁcients the K¨unneth formula simpliﬁes because the Tor terms are
always zero over a ﬁeld:
Corollary 3B.7. If F is a ﬁeld and X and Y are CW complexes, then the cross product
map h :
L
i
 Hi(X; F)⊗FHn−i(Y; F)
 -→Hn(X×Y; F) is an isomorphism for all n. ⊔⊓
There is also a relative version of the K¨unneth formula for CW pairs (X, A) and
(Y, B). This is a split short exact sequence
0 -→
L
i
 Hi(X, A; R)⊗RHn−i(Y, B; R)
 -→Hn(X×Y, A×Y ∪X×B; R) -→
L
iTorR Hi(X, A; R), Hn−i−1(Y, B; R)
 -→0
for R a principal ideal domain. This too follows from the algebraic K¨unneth formula
since the isomorphism of cellular chain complexes C∗(X×Y) ≈C∗(X)⊗C∗(Y) passes
down to a quotient isomorphism
C∗(X×Y)/C∗(A×Y ∪X×B) ≈C∗(X)/C∗(A)⊗C∗(Y)/C∗(B)

Section 3.B.
The General K¨unneth Formula
275
since bases for these three relative cellular chain complexes correspond bijectively
with the cells of (X −A)×(Y −B), X −A, and Y −B , respectively.
As a special case, suppose A and B are basepoints x0 ∈X and y0 ∈Y . Then
the subcomplex A×Y ∪X×B can be identiﬁed with the wedge sum X ∨Y and the
quotient X×Y/X ∨Y is the smash product X ∧Y . Thus we have a reduced K¨unneth
formula
0 -→
L
i
  eHi(X; R)⊗R eHn−i(Y; R)
 -→eHn(X ∧Y; R) -→
L
iTorR  eHi(X; R), eHn−i−1(Y; R)
 -→0
If we take Y = Sk for example, then X ∧Sk is the k fold reduced suspension of X ,
and we obtain isomorphisms eHn(X; Z) ≈eHn+k(X ∧Sk; Z). More generally, by taking
Y to be a Moore space M(G, k) and then applying the universal coefﬁcient theorem
we obtain:
Corollary 3B.2. There are natural isomorphisms eHn(X; G) ≈eHn+k(X ∧M(G, k); Z)
for all CW complexes X and abelian groups G.
⊔⊓
This says that homology with arbitrary coefﬁcients is obtainable from homology
with Z coefﬁcients by a geometric construction as well as by the algebra of tensor
products. For general homology theories this formula can be used as a deﬁnition of
homology with coefﬁcients.
The K¨unneth formula and the universal coefﬁcient theorem can be combined to
give a more concise formula Hn(X×Y; G) ≈
L
i Hi
 X; Hn−i(Y; G)

, at least when G =
Z.
In fact, with a little more algebra one can show that this formula is valid for
arbitrary coefﬁcient groups G; see [Hilton-Wylie p.227] or [Spanier, p. 235]. However
the naturality of this isomorphism is problematical since it uses the splittings in the
K¨unneth formulas and universal coefﬁcient theorems.
One might wonder about a cohomology version of the K¨unneth formula. Tak-
ing coefﬁcients in a ﬁeld F and using the natural isomorphism Hom(A⊗B, C) ≈
Hom
 A, Hom(B, C)

, the K¨unneth formula for homology and the universal coefﬁcient
theorem give isomorphisms
Hn(X×Y; F) ≈HomF(Hn(X×Y; F), F) ≈
L
iHomF(Hi(X; F)⊗Hn−i(Y; F), F)
≈
L
iHomF
 Hi(X; F), HomF(Hn−i(Y; F), F)

≈
L
iHomF
 Hi(X; F), Hn−i(Y; F)

≈
L
iHi X; Hn−i(Y; F)

More generally, there are isomorphisms Hn(X×Y; G) ≈
L
i Hi X; Hn−i(Y; G)

for any
coefﬁcient group G; see [Hilton-Wylie p.227]. However, in practice it usually sufﬁces
to apply the K¨unneth formula for homology and the universal coefﬁcient theorem for
cohomology separately. Also, Theorem 3.15 shows that with stronger hypotheses one
can draw stronger conclusions using cup products.

276
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
The Simplicial Cross Product
Let us sketch how the cross product Hm(X; R)⊗Hn(Y; R)→Hm+n(X×Y; R) can
be deﬁned directly in terms of singular homology. What one wants is a cross prod-
uct at the level of singular chains, Cm(X; R)⊗Cn(Y; R)→Cm+n(X×Y; R). If we are
given singular simplices f : ∆m→X and g : ∆n→Y , then we have the product map
f ×g : ∆m×∆n→X×Y , and the idea is to subdivide ∆m×∆n into simplices of dimen-
sion m +n and then take the sum of the restrictions of f ×g to these simplices, with
appropriate signs.
In the special cases that m or n is 1 we have already seen how to subdivide
∆m×∆n into simplices when we constructed prism operators in §2.1. The general-
ization to ∆m×∆n is not completely obvious, however. Label the vertices of ∆m as
v0, v1, ··· , vm and the vertices of ∆n as w0, w1, ··· , wn . Think of the pairs (i, j) with
0 ≤i ≤m and 0 ≤j ≤n as the vertices of an m×n rectangular grid in R2 . Let σ
be a path formed by a sequence of m + n horizontal and vertical edges in this grid
starting at (0, 0) and ending at (m, n), always moving either to the right or upward.
To such a path σ we associate a linear map ℓσ : ∆m+n→∆m×∆n sending the kth
vertex of ∆m+n to (vik, wjk) where (ik, jk) is the kth vertex of the edgepath σ . Then
we deﬁne a simplicial cross product
Cm(X; R)⊗Cn(Y; R)
×-----→Cm+n(X×Y; R)
by the formula
f ×g =
X
σ
(−1)|σ|(f ×g)ℓσ
where |σ| is the number of squares in the grid lying below the path σ . Note that
the symbol ‘ × ’ means different things on the two sides of the equation. From this
deﬁnition it is a calculation to show that ∂(f ×g) = ∂f ×g+(−1)mf ×∂g. This implies
that the cross product of two cycles is a cycle, and the cross product of a cycle and a
boundary is a boundary, so there is an induced cross product in singular homology.
One can see that the images of the maps ℓσ give a simplicial structure on ∆m×∆n
in the following way. We can view ∆m as the subspace of Rm deﬁned by the inequal-
ities 0 ≤x1 ≤··· ≤xm ≤1, with the vertex vi as the point having coordinates
m −i zeroes followed by i ones.
Similarly we have ∆n ⊂Rn with coordinates
0 ≤y1 ≤··· ≤yn ≤1.
The product ∆m×∆n then consists of (m + n) tuples
(x1, ··· , xm, y1, ··· , yn) satisfying both sets of inequalities. The combined inequal-
ities 0 ≤x1 ≤··· ≤xm ≤y1 ≤··· ≤yn ≤1 deﬁne a simplex ∆m+n in ∆m×∆n ,
and every other point of ∆m×∆n satisﬁes a similar set of inequalities obtained from
0 ≤x1 ≤··· ≤xm ≤y1 ≤··· ≤yn ≤1 by a permutation of the variables ‘shufﬂing’
the yj ’s into the xi ’s. Each such shufﬂe corresponds to an edgepath σ consisting
of a rightward edge for each xi and an upward edge for each yj in the shufﬂed se-
quence. Thus we have ∆m×∆n expressed as the union of simplices ∆m+n
σ
indexed

Section 3.B.
The General K¨unneth Formula
277
by the edgepaths σ . One can check that these simplices ﬁt together nicely to form
a ∆complex structure on ∆m×∆n , which is also a simplicial complex structure. See
[Eilenberg-Steenrod, p.68]. In fact this construction is sufﬁciently natural to make the
product of any two ∆complexes into a ∆complex.
The Cohomology Cross Product
In §3.2 we deﬁned a cross product
Hk(X; R)×Hℓ(Y; R)
×------------→Hk+ℓ(X×Y; R)
in terms of the cup product. Let us now describe the alternative approach in which
this cross product is deﬁned directly via cellular cohomology, and then cup product
is deﬁned in terms of this cross product.
The cellular deﬁnition of cohomology cross product is very much like the deﬁni-
tion in homology. Given CW complexes X and Y , deﬁne a cross product of cellular
cochains ϕ ∈Ck(X; R) and ψ ∈Cℓ(Y; R) by setting
(ϕ×ψ)(ek
α×eℓ
β) = ϕ(ek
α)ψ(eℓ
β)
and letting ϕ×ψ take the value 0 on (k+ℓ) cells of X×Y which are not the product
of a k cell of X with an ℓcell of Y . Another way of saying this is to use the convention
that a cellular cochain in Ck(X; R) takes the value 0 on cells of dimension different
from k, and then we can let (ϕ×ψ)(em
α ×en
β) = ϕ(em
α )ψ(en
β) for all m and n.
The cellular coboundary formula δ(ϕ×ψ) = δϕ×ψ + (−1)kϕ×δψ for cellular
cochains ϕ ∈Ck(X; R) and ψ ∈Cℓ(Y; R) follows easily from the corresponding
boundary formula in Proposition 3B.1, namely
δ(ϕ×ψ)(em
α ×en
β) = (ϕ×ψ)
 ∂(em
α ×en
β)

= (ϕ×ψ)(∂em
α ×en
β + (−1)mem
α ×∂en
β)
= δϕ(em
α )ψ(en
β) + (−1)mϕ(em
α )δψ(en
β)
= (δϕ×ψ + (−1)kϕ×δψ)(em
α ×en
β)
where the coefﬁcient (−1)m in the next-to-last line can be replaced by (−1)k since
ϕ(em
α ) = 0 unless k = m. From the formula δ(ϕ×ψ) = δϕ×ψ + (−1)kϕ×δψ
it follows just as for homology and for cup product that there is an induced cross
product in cellular cohomology.
To show this agrees with the earlier deﬁnition, we can ﬁrst reduce to the case that
X has trivial (k −1) skeleton and Y has trivial (ℓ−1) skeleton via the commutative
diagram
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−→
X
H
k(
)
;
X
H
k(
)
;
R
R
Y
H
ℓ(
)
;
Y
Y
H
ℓ(
)
;
R
R
X
H
k ℓ(
)
;
H
k ℓ(
)
;
R
R
×
×
×
×
×
×
+
+
-
k 1
-
ℓ 1
X/
X
-
k 1
X/
Y/
Y
-
ℓ 1
Y/

278
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
The left-hand vertical map is surjective, so by commutativity, if the two deﬁnitions
of cross product agree in the upper row, they agree in the lower row. Next, assuming
Xk−1 and Y ℓ−1 are trivial, consider the commutative diagram
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
X
H
k(
)
;
X
H
k
k
k
(
)
;
R
R
Y
H
ℓ(
)
;
Y
Y
Y
H
ℓ
ℓ
ℓ
(
)
;
R
R
X
H
k ℓ(
)
;
X
H
k ℓ(
)
;
R
R
×
×
×
×
×
×
+
+
The vertical maps here are injective, Xk×Y ℓbeing the (k + ℓ) skeleton of X×Y , so
it sufﬁces to see that the two deﬁnitions agree in the lower row. We have Xk =
W
α Sk
α
and Y ℓ=
W
β Sℓ
β , so by restriction to these wedge summands we are reduced ﬁnally to
the case of a product Sk
α×Sℓ
β . In this case we showed in Theorem 3.15 that the cross
product in question is the multiplication map R×R→R, with the original deﬁnition
of cross product. The same is obviously true using the cellular cross product. (There
is a small question of signs here, having to do with choices of orientations for cells.
We leave it for the reader to sort this out as an exercise.)
To relate cross product to cup product we use the diagonal map ∆: X→X×X ,
x , (x, x). If we are given a deﬁnition of cross product, we can deﬁne cup product
as the composition
Hk(X; R)×Hℓ(X; R)
×-----→Hk+ℓ(X×X; R)
∆∗-----→Hk+ℓ(X; R)
This agrees with the original deﬁnition of cup product since we have ∆∗(a×b) =
∆∗ p∗
1 (a) ⌣p∗
2 (b)

= ∆∗ p∗
1 (a)
 ⌣∆∗ p∗
2 (b)

= a ⌣b, as both compositions p1∆
and p2∆are the identity map of X .
Unfortunately, the deﬁnition of cellular cross product cannot be combined with
∆to give a deﬁnition of cup product at the level of cellular cochains. This is because
∆is not a cellular map, so it does not induce a map of cellular cochains. It is possible
to homotope ∆to a cellular map by Theorem 4.7, but this involves arbitrary choices.
For example, the diagonal of a square can be pushed across either adjacent triangle. In
particular cases one might hope to understand the geometry well enough to compute
an explicit cellular approximation to the diagonal map, but usually other techniques
for computing cup products are preferable.
The cohomology cross product satisﬁes the same commutativity relation as for
homology, namely T ∗(a×b) = (−1)kℓb×a for T : X×Y→Y ×X the transposition
map, a ∈Hk(Y; R), and b ∈Hℓ(X; R).
The proof is the same as for homology.
Taking X = Y and noting that ∆T = ∆, we obtain a new proof of the commutativity
property of cup product.
Exercises
1. Compute the groups Hn(RP2×RP2; G) and Hn(RP2×RP2; G) for G = Z and Z2 via
the cellular chain and cochain complexes.

Section 3.C.
H-Spaces and Hopf Algebras
279
2. Let C and C′ be chain complexes, and let I be the chain complex consisting of Z in
dimension 1 and Z×Z in dimension 0, with the boundary map taking a generator e
in dimension 1 to the difference v1 −v0 of generators vi of the two Z’s in dimension
0. Show that a chain map f : I ⊗C→C′ is precisely the same as a chain homotopy
between the two chain maps fi : C→C′ , c,f (vi ⊗c), i = 0, 1. [The chain homotopy
is h(c) = f (e ⊗c).]
3. Show that the splitting in the topological K¨unneth formula cannot be natural by con-
sidering the map f ×11 : M(Zm, n)×M(Zm, n)→Sn+1×M(Zm, n) where f collapses
the n skeleton of M(Zm, n) = Sn ∪en+1 to a point.
4. Show that the cross product of fundamental classes for closed R orientable mani-
folds M and N is a fundamental class for M×N .
5. Show that slant products
Hn(X×Y; R)×Hj(Y; R) -→Hn−j(Y; R),
(ei×ej, ϕ) , ϕ(ej)ei
Hn(X×Y; R)×Hj(Y; R) -→Hn−j(Y; R),
(ϕ, ej) ,
 ei , ϕ(ei×ej)

can be deﬁned via the indicated cellular formulas. [These ‘products’ are in some ways
more like division than multiplication, and this is reﬂected in the common notation
a/b for them, or a\b when the order of the factors is reversed. The ﬁrst of the two
slant products is related to cap product in the same way that the cohomology cross
product is related to cup product.]
Of the three axioms for a group, the least subtle seems to be the existence of
an identity element. We shall see in this section that when topology is added to the
picture, the identity axiom becomes much more potent. To give a name to the objects
we will be considering, deﬁne a space X to be an H–space, ‘H’ standing for ‘Hopf,’ if
there is a continuous multiplication map µ : X×X→X and an ‘identity’ element e ∈X
such that the two maps x , µ(x, e) and x , µ(e, x) are homotopic to the identity
through maps (X, e)→(X, e). In particular, this implies µ(e, e) = e.
In terms of generality, this deﬁnition represents something of a middle ground.
One could loosen the deﬁnition by dropping the condition that the homotopies pre-
serve the basepoint e, or one could strengthen it by requiring that e be a strict identity,
without any homotopies. An exercise at the end of the section is to show the three
possible deﬁnitions are equivalent if X is a CW complex. An advantage of allowing
homotopies in the deﬁnition is that a space homotopy equivalent in the basepointed

280
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
sense to an H–space is again an H–space.
Imposing basepoint conditions is fairly
standard in homotopy theory, and is usually not a serious restriction.
The most classical examples of H–spaces are in fact topological groups, that is,
spaces X with a group structure such that both the multiplication map X×X→X
and the inversion map X→X , x , x−1 , are continuous. For example, the group
GLn(R) of invertible n×n matrices with real entries is a topological group when
topologized as a subspace of the n2 dimensional vector space Mn(R) of all n×n
matrices over R. It is an open subspace since the invertible matrices are those with
nonzero determinant, and the determinant function Mn(R)→R is continuous. Matrix
multiplication is certainly continuous, being deﬁned by simple algebraic formulas, and
it is not hard to see that matrix inversion is also continuous if one thinks for example
of the classical adjoint formula for the inverse matrix.
Likewise GLn(C) is a topological group, as is the quaternionic analog GLn(H),
though in the latter case one needs a slightly different justiﬁcation since determinants
of quaternionic matrices are not so well behaved. All these topological groups are
examples of Lie groups, which can be deﬁned as topological groups which are also
manifolds. Namely they are just open subspaces of Euclidean spaces. In particular,
they are noncompact, but they have the homotopy types of compact Lie groups called
O(n), U(n), and Sp(n), as we shall see in §3.D.
Among the simplest H–spaces from a topological viewpoint are the unit spheres
S1 in C, S3 in the quaternions H, and S7 in the octonions O. These are H–spaces
since the multiplications in these division algebras are continuous, being deﬁned by
polynomial formulas, and are norm-preserving, |ab| = |a||b|, hence restrict to multi-
plications on the unit spheres, and the identity element of the division algebra lies in
the unit sphere in each case. Both S1 and S3 are Lie groups since the multiplications
in C and H are associative and inverses exist since aa = |a|2 = 1 if |a| = 1. How-
ever, S7 is not a group since multiplication of octonions is not associative. Of course
S0 = {±1} is also a topological group, trivially. A famous theorem of J.F.Adams as-
serts that S0 , S1 , S3 , and S7 are the only spheres which are H–spaces; see §4.B for a
fuller discussion.
Let us describe now some associative H–spaces where inverses fail to exist. Multi-
plication of polynomials provides an H–space structure on CP∞in the following way.
A nonzero polynomial a0 + a1z + ··· + anzn with coefﬁcients ai ∈C corresponds
to a point (a0, ··· , an, 0, ···) ∈C∞−{0}. Multiplication of two such polynomials
determines a multiplication C∞−{0}×C∞−{0}→C∞−{0} which is associative, com-
mutative, and has an identity element (1, 0, ···).
Since C is commutative we can
factor out by scalar multiplication by nonzero constants and get an induced product
CP∞×CP∞→CP∞with the same properties. Thus CP∞is an associative, commutative
H–space with a strict identity. Instead of factoring out by all nonzero scalars, we could
factor out only by scalars of the form ρe2πik/q with ρ an arbitrary positive real, k an

Section 3.C.
H-Spaces and Hopf Algebras
281
arbitrary integer, and q a ﬁxed positive integer. The quotient of C∞−{0} under this
identiﬁcation, an inﬁnite-dimensional lens space L∞with π1(L∞) ≈Zq , is therefore
also an associative, commutative H–space. This includes RP∞in particular.
The spaces J(X) deﬁned in §3.2 are also H–spaces, with the multiplication given
by (x1, ··· , xm)(y1, ··· , yn) = (x1, ··· , xm, y1, ··· , yn), which is associative and has
an identity element (e) where e is the basepoint of X . One could describe J(X)
as ‘the free associative H–space generated by X .’ There is also a commutative ana-
log of J(X) called the inﬁnite symmetric product SP(X) deﬁned in the following
way. Let SPn(X) be the quotient space of the n fold product Xn obtained by iden-
tifying all n tuples (x1, ··· , xn) which differ only by a permutation of their coordi-
nates. The inclusion Xn>Xn+1 , (x1, ··· , xn),(x1, ··· , xn, e) induces an inclusion
SPn(X) > SPn+1 , and SP(X) is deﬁned to be the union of this increasing sequence
of SPn(X)’s, with the weak topology. Alternatively, SP(X) is the quotient of J(X)
obtained by identifying points which differ only by permutation of coordinates. The
H–space structure on J(X) induces an H–space structure on SP(X) which is commu-
tative in addition to being associative and having a strict identity. The spaces SP(X)
are studied in more detail in §4.K.
The goal of this section will be to describe the extra structure which the multi-
plication in an H–space gives to its homology and cohomology. This is of particular
interest since many of the most important spaces in algebraic topology turn out to be
H–spaces.
Hopf Algebras
Let us look at cohomology ﬁrst. Choosing a commutative ring R as coefﬁcient
ring, we can regard the cohomology ring H∗(X; R) of a space X as an algebra over R
rather than merely a ring. Suppose X is an H–space satisfying two conditions:
(1) X is path-connected, hence H0(X; R) ≈R.
(2) Hn(X; R) is a ﬁnitely generated free R module for each n, so the cross product
H∗(X; R)⊗RH∗(X; R)→H∗(X×X; R) is an isomorphism.
Let µ : X×X→X be the multiplication map and i1, i2 : X→X×X the two inclusions
x , (x, e) and x , (e, x) where e ∈X is the identity element.
The following
commutative diagram deﬁnes maps ∆and Pj for j = 1, 2:
−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
X
H (
)
;R
X
H (
)
;
X
R
X
H (
)
;R
×
×
∗
∗
∗
X
H (
)
;R
X
H (
)
;R
R
P
∗
∗
∗
∗
⊗
ij
j
∆
µ
≈
The maps ∆and Pj are algebra homomorphisms since µ∗and i∗
j are algebra homo-
morphisms, being induced by maps of spaces. The map Pj is projection onto the jth
factor, i.e., P1(α ⊗1) = α and P1(α ⊗β) = 0 if β has positive dimension, and similarly
for P2 . The H–space property says that µij ≃11, so Pj∆= 11. This means that ∆(α)

282
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
for α ∈Hn(X; R), n > 0, has the special form ∆(α) = α ⊗1+1 ⊗α+
P
0<i<n α′
i ⊗α′′
n−i
where α′
j, α′′
j ∈Hj(X; R).
We can summarize this situation by saying that H∗(X; R) is a Hopf algebra, that
is, a graded algebra A =
L
n≥0 An over a commutative base ring R, for which
(1) there is an identity element 1 ∈A0 such that the map R→A0 , r , r · 1, is an
isomorphism (in this case one says A is connected); and
(2) there is a diagonal or coproduct ∆: A→A⊗A which is a homomorphism of
graded algebras satisfying ∆(α) = α ⊗1 + 1 ⊗α +
P
0<i<n α′
i ⊗α′′
n−i for α ∈An ,
n > 0, and α′
j, α′′
j ∈Aj .
Here and in what follows we take ⊗to mean ⊗R . The multiplication in A⊗A is given
by the standard formula (α ⊗β)(γ ⊗δ) = (−1)jk(αγ ⊗βδ) where β ∈Aj and γ ∈Ak .
For a general Hopf algebra the multiplication is not assumed to be either associative
or commutative (in the graded sense), though in the example of H∗(X; R) for X an
H–space the algebra structure is of course associative and commutative.
Example 3C.1. One of the simplest Hopf algebras is a polynomial ring R[α]. The
coproduct ∆(α) must equal α ⊗1 + 1 ⊗α since the only elements of R[α] of lower
dimension than α are the elements of R in dimension zero, so the terms α′
i and α′′
n−i
in the coproduct formula ∆(α) = α ⊗1 + 1 ⊗α +
P
0<i<n α′
i ⊗α′′
n−i must be zero. The
requirement that ∆be an algebra homomorphism then determines ∆completely. To
describe ∆explicitly we distinguish two cases. If the dimension of α is even or if 2 = 0
in R, then the multiplication in R[α]⊗R[α] is strictly commutative and ∆(αn) =
(α ⊗1 + 1 ⊗α)n =
P
i

n
i

αi ⊗αn−i . In the opposite case that α is odd-dimensional,
then ∆(α2) = (α ⊗1 + 1 ⊗α)2 = α2 ⊗1 + 1 ⊗α2 since (α ⊗1)(1 ⊗α) = α ⊗α and
(1 ⊗α)(α ⊗1) = −α ⊗α if α has odd dimension.
Thus if we set β = α2 , then β
is even-dimensional and we have ∆(α2n) = ∆(βn) = (β ⊗1+1 ⊗β)n =
P
i

n
i

βi ⊗βn−i
and ∆(α2n+1) = ∆(αβn) = ∆(α)∆(βn) =
P
i

n
i

αβi ⊗βn−i +
P
i

n
i

βi ⊗αβn−i .
Example 3C.2. The exterior algebra ΛR[α] on an odd-dimensional generator α is a
Hopf algebra, with ∆(α) = α ⊗1+1 ⊗α. To verify that ∆is an algebra homomorphism
we must check that ∆(α2) = ∆(α)2 , or in other words, since α2 = 0, we need to see
that ∆(α)2 = 0. As in the preceding example we have ∆(α)2 = (α ⊗1 + 1 ⊗α)2 =
α2 ⊗1+1 ⊗α2 , so ∆(α)2 is indeed 0. Note that if α were even-dimensional we would
instead have ∆(α)2 = α2 ⊗1 + 2α ⊗α + 1 ⊗α2 , which would be 0 in ΛR[α]⊗ΛR[α]
only if 2 = 0 in R.
An element α of a Hopf algebra is called primitive if ∆(α) = α ⊗1+1 ⊗α. As the
preceding examples illustrate, if a Hopf algebra is generated as an algebra by primitive
elements, then the coproduct ∆is uniquely determined by the multiplication. This
happens in a number of interesting special cases, but certainly not in general, as we
shall see.

Section 3.C.
H-Spaces and Hopf Algebras
283
The existence of the coproduct in a Hopf algebra turns out to restrict the multi-
plicative structure considerably. Here is an important example illustrating this:
Example 3C.3. Suppose that the truncated polynomial algebra F[α]/(αn) over a ﬁeld
F is a Hopf algebra. Then α is primitive, just as it is in F[α], so if we assume either
that α is even-dimensional or that F has characteristic 2, then the relation αn = 0
yields an equation
0 = ∆(αn) = αn ⊗1 + 1 ⊗αn +
X
0<i<n

n
i

αi ⊗αn−i =
X
0<i<n

n
i

αi ⊗αn−i
which implies

n
i

= 0 in F for each i in the range 0 < i < n. This is impossible if
F has characteristic 0, and if the characteristic of F is p > 0 then it happens only
when n is a power of p. For p = 2 this was shown in the proof of Theorem 3.19, and
the argument given there works just as well for odd primes. Conversely, it is easy to
check that if F has characteristic p then F[α]/(αpi) is a Hopf algebra, assuming still
that α is even-dimensional if p is odd.
The characteristic 0 case of this result implies that CPn is not an H–space for
ﬁnite n, in contrast with CP∞which is an H–space as we saw earlier. Similarly, taking
F = Z2 , we deduce that RPn can be an H–space only if n + 1 is a power of 2. Indeed,
RP1 = S1/ ± 1, RP3 = S3/ ± 1, and RP7 = S7/ ± 1 have quotient H–space structures
from S1 , S3 and S7 since −1 commutes with all elements of S1 , S3 , or S7 . However,
these are the only cases when RPn is an H–space since by an exercise at the end of
this section the universal cover of an H–space is an H–space, and S1 , S3 , and S7 are
the only spheres which are H–spaces, by the theorem of J.F.Adams mentioned earlier
in this section.
It is an easy exercise to check that the tensor product of Hopf algebras is again a
Hopf algebra, with the coproduct ∆(α ⊗β) = ∆(α) ⊗∆(β). So the preceding examples
yield many other Hopf algebras, tensor products of polynomial, truncated polynomial,
and exterior algebras on any number of generators. The following theorem of Hopf is
a partial converse:
Theorem 3C.4. If A is a commutative, associative Hopf algebra over a ﬁeld F of
characteristic 0, and An is ﬁnite-dimensional over F for each n, then A is isomor-
phic as an algebra to the tensor product of an exterior algebra on odd-dimensional
generators and a polynomial algebra on even-dimensional generators.
There is an analogous theorem of Borel when F is a ﬁnite ﬁeld of characteris-
tic p. In this case A is again isomorphic to a tensor product of single-generator Hopf
algebras, of one of the following types:
(a) F[α], with α even-dimensional if p ≠2.
(b) ΛF[α] with α odd-dimensional.
(c) F[α]/(αpi), with α even-dimensional if p ≠2.

284
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
For a proof see [Borel] or [Kane].
Proof of 3C.4: Since An is ﬁnitely-generated over F for each n, we may choose
algebra generators x1, x2, ··· for A with xi ∈A|xi| and |xi| ≤|xi+1| for all i. Let
An be the subalgebra generated by x1, ··· , xn . This is a sub Hopf algebra of A, i.e.,
∆(An) ⊂An ⊗An , since ∆(xi) involves only xi and terms of smaller dimension. We
may assume xn does not lie in An−1 . Since A is associative and commutative, there is
a natural surjection An−1 ⊗F[xn]→An if |xn| is even, or An−1 ⊗ΛF[xn]→An if |xn|
is odd. By induction on n it will sufﬁce to prove these surjections are injective. Thus
in the two cases we must rule out nontrivial relations
P
i αixi
n = 0 and α0+α1xn = 0,
respectively, with coefﬁcients αi ∈An−1 .
Let I be the ideal in An generated by x2
n and the positive-dimensional elements of
An−1 , so I consists of the polynomials
P
i αixi
n with coefﬁcients αi ∈An−1 , the ﬁrst
two coefﬁcients α0 and α1 having trivial components in A0 . Note that xn ̸∈I since
elements of I having dimension |xn| must lie in An−1 . Consider the composition
An
∆-----→An ⊗An
q-----→An ⊗(An/I)
with q the natural quotient map. By the deﬁnition of I , this composition q∆sends
α ∈An−1 to α ⊗1 and xn to xn ⊗1 + 1 ⊗xn where xn is the image of xn in An/I .
In case |xn| is even, applying q∆to a nontrivial relation
P
i αixi
n = 0 gives
0 =
P
i(αi ⊗1)(xn ⊗1 + 1 ⊗xn)i =
 P
i αixi
n

⊗1 +
P
i iαixi−1
n
⊗xn
Since
P
i αixi
n = 0, this implies that
P
i iαixi−1
n
⊗xn is zero in the tensor product
An ⊗(An/I), hence
P
i iαixi−1
n
= 0 since xn ̸∈I implies xn ≠0.
The relation
P
i iαixi−1
n
= 0 has lower degree than the original relation, and is not the trivial rela-
tion since F has characteristic 0, αi ≠0 implying iαi ≠0 if i > 0. Since we could
assume the original relation had minimum degree, we have reached a contradiction.
The case |xn| odd is similar. Applying q∆to a relation α0 + α1xn = 0 gives
0 = α0 ⊗1+(α1 ⊗1)(xn ⊗1+1 ⊗xn) = (α0+α1xn) ⊗1+α1 ⊗xn . Since α0+α1xn = 0,
we get α1 ⊗xn = 0, which implies α1 = 0 and hence α0 = 0.
⊔⊓
The structure of Hopf algebras over Z is much more complicated than over a
ﬁeld. Here is an example which is still fairly simple.
Example 3C.5. We showed in Proposition 3.21 that the H–space J(Sn) for n even
has H∗(J(Sn); Z) a divided polynomial algebra, the algebra ΓZ[α] with additive gen-
erators αi in dimension 2i and multiplication given by αk
1 = k!αk , hence αiαj =

i+j
i

αi+j . The coproduct in ΓZ[α] is uniquely determined by the multiplicative struc-
ture since ∆(αk
1) = (α1 ⊗1+1 ⊗α1)k =
P
i

k
i

αi
1 ⊗αk−i
1
, which implies that ∆(αk
1/k!) =
P
i(αi
1/i!) ⊗(αk−i
1
/(k −i)!), i.e., ∆(αk) =
P
i αi ⊗αk−i . Thus the coproduct has a sim-
pler description than the product.

Section 3.C.
H-Spaces and Hopf Algebras
285
It is interesting to see what happens to the divided polynomial algebra ΓZ[α]
when we change to ﬁeld coefﬁcients. Clearly ΓQ[α] is the same as Q[α]. In contrast
with this, ΓZp[α], with multiplication deﬁned by αiαj =

i+j
i

αi+j , happens to be
isomorphic as an algebra to the inﬁnite tensor product
N
i≥0 Zp[αpi]/(αp
pi), as we
will show in a moment. However, as Hopf algebras these two objects are different.
Namely, the coproduct in ΓZp[α] is deﬁned by ∆(αk) =
P
i αi ⊗αk−i , so αpi is not
primitive in ΓZp[α], though it is primitive in
N
i≥0 Zp[αpi]/(αp
pi).
Now let us show that there is an algebra isomorphism
ΓZp[α] ≈
N
i≥0 Zp[αpi]/(αp
pi)
Since ΓZp[α] = ΓZ[α]⊗Zp , this is equivalent to:
(∗)
The element αn0
1 αn1
p ··· αnk
pk in ΓZ[α] is divisible by p iff ni ≥p for some i.
The product αn0
1 αn1
p ··· αnk
pk equals mαn for n = n0 + n1p + ··· + nkpk and some
integer m. The question is whether p divides m. We will show:
(∗∗)
αnαpk is divisible by p iff nk = p −1, assuming that ni < p for each i.
This implies (∗) by an inductive argument in which we build up the product in (∗)
by repeated multiplication on the right by terms αpi .
To prove (∗∗) we recall that αnαpk =

n+pk
n

αn+pk . The mod p value of this
binomial coefﬁcient can be computed using Lemma 3C.6 below. Assuming that ni < p
for each i and that nk+1 < p, the p adic representations of n+pk and n differ only
in the coefﬁcient of pk , so mod p we have

n+pk
n

=

nk+1
nk

= nk +1. This conclusion
also holds if nk +1 = p, when the p adic representations of n+pk and n differ also
in the coefﬁcient of pk+1 . The statement (∗∗) then follows.
Lemma 3C.6. If p is a prime, then

n
k

≡
Q
i

ni
ki

mod p where n =
P
i nipi and
k =
P
i kipi are the p adic representations of n and k, with 0 ≤ni < p and
0 ≤ki < p.
Here the convention is that

n
k

= 0 if n < k, and

n
0

= 1 for all n ≥0.
Proof: In Zp[x] there is an identity (1 + x)p = 1 + xp since p clearly divides

p
k

=
p!/k!(p −k)! for 0 < k < p. By induction it follows that (1 + x)pi = 1 + xpi . Hence
if n =
P
i nipi is the p adic representation of n then:
(1 + x)n = (1 + x)n0(1 + xp)n1(1 + xp2)n2 ···
=
h
1 +

n0
1

x +

n0
2

x2 + ··· +

n0
p−1

xp−1i
×
h
1 +

n1
1

xp +

n1
2

x2p + ··· +

n1
p−1

x(p−1)pi
×
h
1 +

n2
1

xp2 +

n2
2

x2p2 + ··· +

n2
p−1

x(p−1)p2i
× ···
When this is multiplied out, one sees that no terms combine, and the coefﬁcient of
xk is just
Q
i

ni
ki

where k =
P
i kipi is the p adic representation of k.
⊔⊓

286
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
Pontryagin Product
Another special feature of H–spaces is that their homology groups have a prod-
uct operation, called the Pontryagin product. For an H–space X with multiplication
µ : X×X→X , this is the composition
H∗(X; R)⊗H∗(X; R)
×-----→H∗(X×X; R)
µ∗-----→H∗(X; R)
where × is the cross product deﬁned in §3.B. Thus the Pontryagin product consists
of bilinear maps Hi(X; R)×Hj(X; R)→Hi+j(X; R). Unlike cup product, the Pontrya-
gin product is not in general associative unless the multiplication µ is associative
or at least associative up to homotopy, in the sense that the maps X×X×X→X ,
(x, y, z) , µ(x, µ(y, z)) and (x, y, z) , µ(µ(x, y), z) are homotopic. Fortunately
most H–spaces one meets in practice satisfy this associativity property. Nor is the
Pontryagin product generally commutative, even in the graded sense, unless µ is
commutative or homotopy-commutative, which is relatively rare for H–spaces. We
will give examples shortly where the Pontryagin product is not commutative.
In case X is a CW complex and µ is a cellular map the Pontryagin product can be
computed using cellular homology via the cellular chain map
Ci(X; R)×Cj(X; R)
×-----→Ci+j(X×X; R)
µ∗-----→Ci+j(X; R)
where × sends generators corresponding to cells ei and ej to the generator corre-
sponding to the product cell ei×ej , and then µ∗is applied to this product cell.
Example 3C.7. Let us compute the Pontryagin product for J(Sn). Here there is one
cell ein for each i ≥0, and µ takes the product cell ein×ejn homeomorphically onto
the cell e(i+j)n . This means that H∗(J(Sn); Z) is simply the polynomial ring Z[x]
on an n dimensional generator x . This holds for n odd as well as for n even, so
the Pontryagin product need not satisfy the same general commutativity relation as
cup product. In this example the Pontryagin product structure is simpler than the cup
product structure, though for some H–spaces it is the other way round. In applications
it is often convenient to have the choice of which product structure to use.
This calculation immediately generalizes to J(X) where X is any connected CW
complex whose cellular boundary maps are all trivial. The cellular boundary maps in
the product Xm of m copies of X are then trivial by induction on m using Propo-
sition 3B.1, and therefore the cellular boundary maps in J(X) are all trivial since the
quotient map Xm→Jm(X) is cellular and each cell of Jm(X) is the homeomorphic
image of a cell of Xm . Thus H∗(J(X); Z) is free with additive basis the products
en1 × ··· ×enk of positive-dimensional cells of X , and the multiplicative structure
is that of polynomials in noncommuting variables corresponding to the positive-
dimensional cells of X .
Another way to describe H∗(J(X); Z) in this example is as the tensor algebra
T eH∗(X; Z), where for a graded R module M which is trivial in dimension zero, like

Section 3.C.
H-Spaces and Hopf Algebras
287
the reduced homology of a path-connected space, the tensor algebra TM is deﬁned
in the following way. Additively, TM is the direct sum of the n fold tensor prod-
ucts of M with itself for all n ≥1, together with a copy of R in dimension zero.
The multiplication in TM is the obvious one coming from tensor product and scalar
multiplication.
Generalizing the preceding example, we have:
Proposition 3C.8. If X is a connected CW complex with H∗(X; R) a free R module,
then H∗(J(X); R) is isomorphic to the tensor algebra T eH∗(X; R).
Proof: With coefﬁcients in R, let ϕ : T eH∗(X)→H∗
 J(X)

be the homomorphism
whose restriction to the n fold tensor product eH∗(X)⊗n is the composition
eH∗(X)⊗n > H∗(X)⊗n
×-----→H∗(Xn) -→H∗
 Jn(X)
 -→H∗
 J(X)

where the next-to-last map is induced by the quotient map Xn→Jn(X). It is clear that
ϕ is a ring homomorphism since the product in J(X) is induced from the natural map
Xm×Xn→Xm+n . To show ϕ is an isomorphism, consider the following commutative
diagram of short exact sequences:
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
n
−−−−−→
X
0
0
H
n
(
)
∼
∗
X
H
T
(
)
∼
∗
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
0
−−−−−→
n 1
X
H
T
(
)
∼
∗
⊗
−−−−−→
X
0
H
n
(
)
∼
∗
∧
−−−−−→
X
Jn(
))
H (
∗
−−−−−→
X
J
(
))
H (
∗
-
n 1
-
≈
ϕ
ϕ
×
In the upper row, Tm eH∗(X) denotes the direct sum of the products
eH∗(X)⊗k for
k ≤m, so this row is exact. The second row is the homology exact sequence for
the pair
 Jn(X), Jn−1(X)

, with quotient Jn(X)/Jn−1(X) the n fold smash product
X∧n . This long exact sequence breaks up into short exact sequences as indicated, by
commutativity of the right-hand square and the fact that the right-hand vertical map
is an isomorphism by the K¨unneth formula, using the hypothesis that H∗(X) is free
over the given coefﬁcient ring. By induction on n and the ﬁve-lemma we deduce from
the diagram that ϕ : Tn eH∗(X)→H∗
 Jn(X)

is an isomorphism for all n.
Passing
to the direct limit as n goes to ∞, this implies that ϕ : T eH∗(X)→H∗
 J(X)

is an
isomorphism since in any given dimension Tn eH∗(X) is independent of n when n is
sufﬁciently large, and the same is true of H∗
 Jn(X)

by the second row of the diagram
above.
⊔⊓
This calculation can be paraphrased as saying that ‘the homology of the free H–
space generated by a space with free homology is the free algebra generated by the
homology of the space.’
Dual Hopf Algebras
There is a close connection between the Pontryagin product in homology and
the Hopf algebra structure on cohomology. Suppose that X is an H–space such that,

288
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
with coefﬁcients in a ﬁeld R, the vector spaces Hn(X; R) are ﬁnite-dimensional for
all n.
Alternatively, we could take R = Z and assume Hn(X; Z) is ﬁnitely gener-
ated and free for all n. In either case we have Hn(X; R) = HomR(Hn(X; R), R), and
as a consequence the Pontryagin product H∗(X; R)⊗H∗(X; R)→H∗(X; R) and the
coproduct ∆: H∗(X; R)→H∗(X; R)⊗H∗(X; R) are dual to each other, both being in-
duced by the H–space product µ : X×X→X . Therefore the coproduct in cohomol-
ogy determines the Pontryagin product in homology, and vice versa.
Speciﬁcally,
the component ∆ij : Hi+j(X; R)→Hi(X; R)⊗Hj(X; R) of ∆is dual to the product
Hi(X; R)⊗Hj(X; R)→Hi+j(X; R).
Example 3C.9. Consider J(Sn) with n even, so H∗(J(Sn); Z) is the divided poly-
nomial algebra ΓZ[α]. In Example 3C.5 we derived the coproduct formula ∆(αk) =
P
i αi ⊗αk−i . Thus ∆ij takes αi+j to αi ⊗αj , so if xi is the generator of Hin(J(Sn); Z)
dual to αi , then xixj = xi+j . This says that H∗(J(Sn); Z) is the polynomial ring Z[x].
We showed this in Example 3C.7 using the cell structure of J(Sn), but the present
proof deduces it purely algebraically from the cup product structure.
Now we wish to show that the relation between H∗(X; R) and H∗(X; R) is per-
fectly symmetric: they are dual Hopf algebras. This is a purely algebraic fact:
Proposition 3C.10. Let A be a Hopf algebra over R which is a ﬁnitely-generated
free R module in each dimension. Then the product π : A⊗A→A and coproduct
∆: A→A⊗A have duals π∗: A∗→A∗⊗A∗and ∆∗: A∗⊗A∗→A∗which give A∗
the structure of a Hopf algebra.
Proof: This will be apparent if we reinterpret the Hopf algebra structure on A for-
mally as a pair of graded R module homomorphisms π : A⊗A→A and ∆: A→A⊗A
together with an element 1 ∈A0 satisfying:
(1) The two compositions A
iℓ-----→A⊗A
π-----→A and A
ir-----→A⊗A
π-----→A are the identity,
where iℓ(a) = a ⊗1 and ir (a) = 1 ⊗a. This says that 1 is a two-sided identity
for the multiplication in A.
(2) The two compositions A
∆-----→A⊗A
pℓ-----→A and A
∆-----→A⊗A
pr-----→A are the identity,
where pℓ(a ⊗1) = a, pℓ(a ⊗b) = 0 if b ∈Aj with j > 0, pr(1 ⊗a) = a, and
pr(a ⊗b) = 0 if a ∈Aj with j > 0. This is just the coproduct formula ∆(a) =
a ⊗1 + 1 ⊗a +
P
0<i<n a′
i ⊗a′′
n−i .
(3) The diagram at the right commutes, where
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−→
A
A
A⊗
⊗
⊗
A
A⊗
A
⊗
A
⊗
−−−−−→
A
A⊗
A
⊗
A
⊗
A
A⊗
∆
∆∆
τ
π
π
π
τ(a ⊗b ⊗c ⊗d) = (−1)ija ⊗c ⊗b ⊗d for
b ∈Ai , c ∈Aj . This is the condition that
∆is an algebra homomorphism since if we follow an element a ⊗b ∈Am ⊗An
across the top of the diagram we get ∆(ab), while via the lower route we get ﬁrst
∆(a) ⊗∆(b) =
 P
i a′
i ⊗a′′
m−i

⊗ P
j b′
j ⊗b′′
n−j

, then after applying τ and π ⊗π
this becomes
P
i,j(−1)(m−i)ja′
ib′
j ⊗a′′
m−ib′′
n−j =
 P
i a′
i ⊗a′′
m−i
 P
j b′
j ⊗b′′
n−j

,
which is ∆(a)∆(b).

Section 3.C.
H-Spaces and Hopf Algebras
289
Condition (1) for A dualizes to (2) for A∗, and similarly (2) for A dualizes to (1) for
A∗. Condition (3) for A dualizes to (3) for A∗.
⊔⊓
Example 3C.11. Let us compute the dual of a polynomial algebra R[x]. Suppose
ﬁrst that x has even dimension. Then ∆(xn) = (x ⊗1 + 1 ⊗x)n =
P
i

n
i

xi ⊗xn−i ,
so if αi is dual to xi , the term

n
i

xi ⊗xn−i in ∆(xn) gives the product relation
αiαn−i =

n
i

αn . This is the rule for multiplication in a divided polynomial algebra,
so the dual of R[x] is ΓR[α] if the dimension of x is even. This also holds if 2 = 0
in R, since the even-dimensionality of x was used only to deduce that R[x]⊗R[x]
is strictly commutative.
In case x is odd-dimensional, then as we saw in Example 3C.1, if we set y = x2 ,
we have ∆(yn) = (y ⊗1 + 1 ⊗y)n =
P
i

n
i

yi ⊗yn−i and ∆(xyn) = ∆(x)∆(yn) =
P
i

n
i

xyi ⊗yn−i+
P
i

n
i

yi ⊗xyn−i . These formulas for ∆say that the dual of R[x]
is ΛR[α]⊗ΓR[β] where α is dual to x and β is dual to y .
This algebra allows us to deduce the cup product structure on H∗(J(Sn); R) from
the geometric calculation H∗(J(Sn); R) ≈R[x] in Example 3C.7. As another applica-
tion, recall from earlier in this section that RP∞and CP∞are H–spaces, so from their
cup product structures we can conclude that the Pontryagin rings H∗(RP∞; Z2) and
H∗(CP∞; Z) are divided polynomial algebras.
In these examples the Hopf algebra is generated as an algebra by primitive ele-
ments, so the product determines the coproduct and hence the dual algebra. This is
not true in general, however. For example, we have seen that the Hopf algebra ΓZp[α]
is isomorphic as an algebra to
N
i≥0 Zp[αpi]/(αp
pi), but if we regard the latter tensor
product as the tensor product of the Hopf algebras Zp[αpi]/(αp
pi) then the elements
αpi are primitive, though they are not primitive in ΓZp[α] for i > 0. In fact, the Hopf
algebra
N
i≥0 Zp[αpi]/(αp
pi) is its own dual, according to one of the exercises below,
but the dual of ΓZp[α] is Zp[α].
Exercises
1. Suppose that X is a CW complex with basepoint e ∈X a 0 cell. Show that X is an
H–space if there is a map µ : X×X→X such that the maps X→X , x , µ(x, e) and
x, µ(e, x), are homotopic to the identity. [Sometimes this is taken as the deﬁnition
of an H–space, rather than the more restrictive condition in the deﬁnition we have
given.] With the same hypotheses, show also that µ can be homotoped so that e is a
strict two-sided identity.
2. Show that a retract of an H–space is an H–space if it contains the identity element.
3. Show that if X is an H–space such that the set of path components of X is a group
with respect to the multiplication induced by the H–space structure, then all the path
components of X are homotopy equivalent.

290
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
4. Show that an H–space or topological group structure on a path-connected, locally
path-connected space can be lifted to such a structure on its universal cover. [For
the group SO(n) considered in the next section, the universal cover for n > 2 is a
2 sheeted cover, a group called Spin(n).]
5. Show that if (X, e) is an H–space then π1(X, e) is abelian. [Compare the usual
composition f g of loops with the product µ
 f (t), g(t)

coming from the H–space
multiplication µ.]
6.
Show that Sn is an H–space iff the attaching map of the 2n cell of J2(Sn) is
homotopically trivial.
7. What are the primitive elements of the Hopf algebra Zp[x] for p prime?
8. Show that the tensor product of two Hopf algebras is a Hopf algebra.
9. Apply the theorems of Hopf and Borel to show that a ﬁnite CW complex H–space
X such that eH∗(X; Z) ≠0 has Euler characteristic χ(X) = 0.
10. Let X be a path-connected H–space with H∗(X; R) free and ﬁnitely-generated
in each dimension.
For maps f , g : X→X , the product f g : X→X is deﬁned by
(fg)(x) = f (x)g(x), using the H–space product.
(a) Show that (f g)∗(α) = f ∗(α) + g∗(α) for primitive elements α ∈H∗(X; R).
(b) Deduce that the kth power map x , xk induces the map α , kα on primitive
elements α. In particular the quaternionic kth power map S3→S3 has degree
k.
(c) Show that every polynomial anxnbn + ··· + a1xb1 + a0 with coefﬁcients in H
has a root in H if n > 0. [See Theorem 1.8.]
11. If T n is the n dimensional torus, the product of n circles, show that the Pontrya-
gin ring H∗(T n; Z) is the exterior algebra ΛZ[x1, ··· , xn] on one-dimensional gener-
ators xi .
12. Compute the Pontryagin product structure in H∗(L; Zp) where L is an inﬁnite-
dimensional lens space S∞/Zp , for p an odd prime, using the coproduct in H∗(L; Zp).
13. Verify that the Hopf algebras ΛR[α] and Zp[α]/(αp) are self-dual.
14. Show that the coproduct in the Hopf algebra H∗(X; R) dual to H∗(X; R) is induced
by the diagonal map X→X×X , x , (x, x).
15. Suppose that X is a path-connected H–space such that H∗(X; Z) is free and ﬁnitely
generated in each dimension, and H∗(X; Q) is a polynomial ring Q[α]. Show that the
Pontryagin ring H∗(X; Z) is commutative and associative, with a structure uniquely
determined by the ring H∗(X; Z).
16. Classify algebraically the Hopf algebras A over Z such that An is free for each n
and A⊗Q ≈Q[α]. In particular, determine which Hopf algebras A⊗Zp arise from
such A’s.

Section 3.D.
The Cohomology of SO(n)
291
After the general discussion of homological and cohomological properties of H–
spaces in the preceding section, we turn now to a family of quite interesting and
subtle examples, the orthogonal groups O(n). We will compute their homology and
cohomology by constructing very nice CW structures on them, and the results illus-
trate the general structure theorems of the last section quite well. After dealing with
the orthogonal groups we then describe the straightforward generalization to Stiefel
manifolds, which are also fairly basic objects in algebraic and geometric topology.
The orthogonal group O(n) can be deﬁned as the group of isometries of Rn
which ﬁx the origin. Equivalently, this is the group of n×n matrices A with entries
in R such that AAt = I where At is the transpose of A. From this viewpoint, O(n) is
topologized as a subspace of Rn2 , with coordinates the n2 entries of an n×n matrix.
Since the columns of a matrix in O(n) are unit vectors, O(n) can also be regarded
as a subspace of the product of n copies of Sn−1 . It is a closed subspace since the
conditions that columns be orthogonal are deﬁned by polynomial equations. Hence
O(n) is compact. The map O(n)×O(n)→O(n) given by matrix multiplication is
continuous since it is deﬁned by polynomials. The inversion map A , A−1 = At is
clearly continuous, so O(n) is a topological group, and in particular an H–space.
The determinant map O(n)→{±1} is a surjective homomorphism, so its kernel
SO(n), the ‘special orthogonal group,’ is a subgroup of index two. The two cosets
SO(n) and O(n)−SO(n) are homeomorphic to each other since for ﬁxed B ∈O(n)−
SO(n), the maps A,AB and A,AB−1 are inverse homeomorphisms between these
two cosets. As we shall see below, SO(n) is path-connected, so it can be described
as the identity component of O(n), the component containing the identity matrix.
The group O(n) is a subgroup of GLn(R), the ‘general linear group’ of all invert-
ible n×n matrices with entries in R, discussed near the beginning of §3C. The Gram-
Schmidt orthogonalization process applied to the columns of matrices in GLn(R) pro-
vides a retraction r : GLn(R)→O(n), continuity of r being evident from the explicit
formulas for the Gram-Schmidt process. By inserting appropriate scalar factors into
these formulas it is easy to see that O(n) is in fact a deformation retract of GLn(R).
Using a bit more linear algebra, namely the polar decomposition, it is possible to show
that GLn(R) is actually homeomorphic to O(n)×Rk for k = n(n + 1)/2.
The topological structure of SO(n) for small values of n can be described in
terms of more familiar spaces:
— SO(1) is a point.
— SO(2), the rotations of R2 , is both homeomorphic and isomorphic as a group to
S1 , thought of as the unit complex numbers.
— SO(3) is homeomorphic to RP3 . To see this, let ϕ : D3→SO(3) send a nonzero
vector x to the rotation through angle |x|π about the axis formed by the line

292
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
through the origin in the direction of x . An orientation convention such as the
‘right-hand rule’ is needed to make this unambiguous. By continuity, ϕ then
sends 0 to the identity.
Antipodal points of S2 = ∂D3 are sent to the same
rotation through angle π , so ϕ induces a map ϕ : RP3→SO(3), regarding RP3
as D3 with antipodal boundary points identiﬁed. The map ϕ is clearly injective
since the axis of a nontrivial rotation is uniquely determined as its ﬁxed point
set, and ϕ is surjective since by easy linear algebra each non-identity element
of SO(3) is a rotation about some axis. It follows that ϕ is a homeomorphism
RP3 ≈SO(3).
— One can go one step further and show that SO(4) is homeomorphic to S3×SO(3).
Identifying R4 with the quaternions H and S3 with the group of unit quaternions,
the quaternion multiplication v , vw for ﬁxed w ∈S3 deﬁnes an isometry
ρw ∈O(4) since |vw| = |v||w| = |v| if |w| = 1. Points of O(4) are 4 tuples
(v1, ··· , v4) of orthonormal vectors vi ∈H = R4 , and O(3) can be viewed as
the subspace with v1 = 1. A homeomorphism S3×O(3)→O(4) is deﬁned by
sending
 v, (1, v2, v3, v4)

to (v, v2v, v3v, v4v) = ρv(1, v2, v3, v4), with inverse
given by (v, v2, v3, v4),
 v, (1, v2v−1, v3v−1, v4v−1)

=
 v, ρv−1(v, v2, v3, v4)

.
Restricting to identity components gives a homeomorphism S3×SO(3) ≈SO(4).
This is not a group isomorphism, however. It can be shown, though we will not
digress to do so here, that the homomorphism ψ : S3×S3→SO(4) sending a pair
(u, v) of unit quaternions to the isometry w , uwv−1 of H is surjective with
kernel Z2 = {±(1, 1)}, and that ψ is a covering space projection, representing
S3×S3 as a 2 sheeted cover of SO(4), the universal cover. Restricting ψ to the
diagonal S3 = {(u, u)} ⊂S3×S3 gives the universal cover S3→SO(3), so SO(3)
is isomorphic to the quotient group of S3 by the normal subgroup {±1}.
Using octonions one can construct in the same way a homeomorphism S7×SO(7) ≈
SO(8). But in all other cases SO(n) is only a ‘twisted product’ of SO(n −1) and
Sn−1 ; see Example 4.54 and the discussion following Corollary 4D.3.
Cell Structure
Our ﬁrst task is to construct a CW structure on SO(n). This will come with a very
nice cellular map ρ : RPn−1×RPn−2× ··· ×RP1→SO(n). To simplify notation we will
write P i for RPi .
For a nonzero vector v ∈Rn let r(v) ∈O(n) be the reﬂection across the hy-
perplane through the origin orthogonal to v , so that r(v) = −v and r(w) = w if
w is orthogonal to v . Let ρ(v) = r(v)r(e1) ∈SO(n) where e1 = (1, 0, ··· , 0), the
ﬁrst standard basis vector of Rn . Since ρ(v) depends only on the line spanned by
v , ρ deﬁnes a map P n−1→SO(n). This map is injective since it is the composition
of v , r(v), which is obviously an injection of P n into O(n) −SO(n), with the
homeomorphism of O(n) −SO(n) ≈SO(n) given by right-multiplication by r(e1).

Section 3.D.
The Cohomology of SO(n)
293
Since ρ is injective and P n is compact Hausdorff, we may think of ρ as embedding
P n−1 as a subspace of SO(n).
More generally, for a sequence I = (i1, ··· , im) with each ij < n, a map ρ : P I =
P i1 × ··· ×P im→SO(n) is deﬁned by ρ(v1, ··· , vm) = ρ(v1) ··· ρ(vm), composing
the rotations ρ(vj). Let ϕi : Di→P i be a characteristic map for the i dimensional
cell of P i , identifying antipodal points of ∂Di , and let ϕI : DI→P I be the product of
these maps, a characteristic map for the top-dimensional cell of P I . Let us call the
sequence I = (i1, ··· , im) admissible if n > i1 > ··· > im > 0 or if it is the sequence
consisting of a single 0.
Proposition 3D.1. The maps ρϕI : DI→SO(n), as I ranges over all the admissible
sequences, are the characteristic maps of a CW structure on SO(n) for which the
map ρ : P n−1×P n−2× ··· ×P 1→SO(n) is cellular.
Thus there is a single 0 cell e0 = {11}, so SO(n) is path-connected. The other
cells eI = ei1 ··· eim are products, via the group operation in SO(n), of the cells
ei ⊂P n−1 ⊂SO(n).
Proof: To obtain the CW structure there are three things to show:
(1) For each decreasing sequence I , ρϕI is a homeomorphism from the interior of
DI onto its image.
(2) The resulting image cells eI are all disjoint and cover SO(n).
(3) For each eI , ρϕI(∂DI) is contained in a union of cells of lower dimension than eI .
To begin the veriﬁcation of these properties, deﬁne p : SO(n)→Sn−1 by evaluation at
the vector en = (0, ··· , 0, 1), so p(α) = α(en). Isometries in P n−2 ⊂P n−1 ⊂SO(n)
ﬁx en , so p(P n−2) = {en}. We claim that p is a homeomorphism from P n−1 −P n−2
onto Sn−1−{en}. This can be seen as follows. Thinking of a point in P n as a vector v ,
the map p takes this to ρ(v)(en) = r(v)r(e1)(en) = r(v)(en)
since en is in the hyperplane orthogonal to e1 . From the pic-
v
e n
e n
p(v)
θ
θ
θ
-
ture it is then clear that p simply stretches the lower half of
each meridian circle in Sn−1 onto the whole meridian circle,
doubling the angle up from the south pole, so P n−1 −P n−2 ,
represented by vectors whose last coordinate is negative, is
taken homeomorphically onto Sn−1 −{en}.
The next statement is that the map
h :
 P n−1×SO(n −1), P n−2×SO(n −1)
→
 SO(n), SO(n −1)

,
h(v, α) = ρ(v)α
is a homeomorphism from (P n−1 −P n−2)×SO(n −1) onto SO(n) −SO(n −1). Here
we view SO(n −1) as the subgroup of SO(n) ﬁxing the vector en . To construct an
inverse to this homeomorphism, let β ∈SO(n)−SO(n−1) be given. Then β(en) ≠en
so by the preceding paragraph there is a unique vβ ∈P n−1 −P n−2 with ρ(vβ)(en) =
β(en), and vβ depends continuously on β since β(en) does. The composition αβ =

294
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
ρ(vβ)−1β then ﬁxes en , hence lies in SO(n −1). Since ρ(vβ)αβ = β, the map β ,
(vβ, αβ) is an inverse to h on SO(n) −SO(n −1).
Statements (1) and (2) can now be proved by induction on n. The map ρ takes
P n−2 to SO(n −1), so we may assume inductively that the maps ρϕI for I ranging
over admissible sequences with ﬁrst term i1 < n −1 are the characteristic maps for a
CW structure on SO(n−1), with cells the corresponding products eI . The admissible
sequences I with i1 = n −1 then give disjoint cells eI covering SO(n) −SO(n −1)
by what was shown in the previous paragraph. So (1) and (2) hold for SO(n).
To prove (3) it sufﬁces to show there is an inclusion P iP i ⊂P iP i−1 in SO(n)
since for an admissible sequence I , the map ρ : P I→SO(n) takes the boundary of
the top-dimensional cell of P I to the image of products P J with J obtained from
I by decreasing one term ij by 1, yielding a sequence which is admissible except
perhaps for having two successive terms equal. As a preliminary to showing P iP i ⊂
P iP i−1 , observe that for α ∈O(n) we have r
 α(v)

= αr(v)α−1 . Hence ρ(v)ρ(w) =
r(v)r(e1)r(w)r(e1) = r(v)r(w′) where w′ = r(e1)w . Thus to show P iP i ⊂P iP i−1
it sufﬁces to ﬁnd for each pair v, w ∈Ri+1 a pair x ∈Ri+1 , y ∈Ri with r(v)r(w) =
r(x)r(y).
Let V ⊂Ri+1 be a 2 dimensional subspace containing v and w . Since V ∩Ri is
at least 1 dimensional, we can choose a unit vector y ∈V ∩Ri . Let α ∈O(i+1) take
V to R2 and y to e1 . Then the conjugate αr(v)r(w)α−1 = r
 α(v)

r
 α(w)

lies in
SO(2), hence has the form ρ(z) = r(z)r(e1) for some z ∈R2 (by statement (2) for
n = 2, for example). Therefore
r(v)r(w) = α−1r(z)r(e1)α = r
 α−1(z)

r
 α−1(e1)

= r(x)r(y)
for x = α−1(z) ∈Ri+1 and y ∈Ri .
It remains to show that ρ : P n−1×P n−2× ··· ×P 1→SO(n) is cellular. This follows
from the inclusions P iP i ⊂P iP i−1 derived above, together with another family of
inclusions P iP j ⊂P jP i for i < j . To prove the latter we have the formulas
ρ(v)ρ(w) = r(v)r(w′)
where w′ = r(e1)w, as earlier
= r(v)r(w′)r(v)r(v)
= r
 r(v)w′
r(v)
from r
 α(v)

= αr(v)α−1
= r
 r(v)r(e1)w

r(v) = r
 ρ(v)w

r(v)
= ρ
 ρ(v)w

ρ(v′)
where v′ = r(e1)v, hence v = r(e1)v′.
Thus if v ∈Ri+1 and w ∈Rj+1 with i < j then ρ(v)w ∈Rj+1 and the product
ρ(v)ρ(w) in P iP j equals the product ρ
 ρ(v)w

ρ(v′) which lies in P jP i .
⊔⊓
Mod 2 Homology and Cohomology
The fact that each cell of SO(n) is the homeomorphic image of a cell in P implies
that the cellular chain map induced by ρ : P n−1×P n−2× ··· ×P 1→SO(n) is surjective.

Section 3.D.
The Cohomology of SO(n)
295
It follows that with Z2 coefﬁcients the cellular boundary maps for SO(n) are all trivial
since this is true in P i hence in P n−1×P n−2× ··· ×P 1 by Proposition 3B.1.
Thus
H∗(SO(n); Z2) has a Z2 summand for each cell of SO(n). One can rephrase this as
saying that there are isomorphisms Hi(SO(n); Z2) ≈Hi(S1×S2× ··· ×Sn−1; Z2) for
all i since this product of spheres also has cells in one-to-one correspondence with
admissible sequences. The full structure of the Z2 homology and cohomology rings
is given by:
Theorem 3D.2.
(a) H∗(SO(n); Z2) ≈
N
i odd Z2[βi]/(βpi
i ) where |βi| = i and pi is the smallest
power of 2 such that |βpi
i | ≥n.
(b) The Pontryagin ring H∗(SO(n); Z2) is the exterior algebra ΛZ2[e1, ··· , en−1].
Here ei denotes the cellular homology class of the cell ei ⊂P n−1 ⊂SO(n), and
βi is the dual class to ei , represented by the cellular cochain assigning the value 1 to
the cell ei and 0 to all other i cells.
Proof: As we noted above, ρ induces a surjection on cellular chains. Since the cellular
boundary maps with Z2 coefﬁcients are trivial for both P n−1× ··· ×P 1 and SO(n),
it follows that ρ∗is surjective on H∗(−; Z2) and ρ∗is injective on H∗(−; Z2). We
know that H∗(P n−1× ··· ×P 1; Z2) is the polynomial ring Z2[α1, ··· , αn−1] truncated
by the relations αi+1
i
= 0. For βi ∈Hi(SO(n); Z2) the dual class to ei , we have
ρ∗(βi) =
P
j αi
j , the class assigning 1 to each i cell in a factor P j of P n−1× ··· ×P 1
and 0 to all other i cells, which are products of lower-dimensional cells and hence
map to cells in SO(n) disjoint from ei .
First we will show that the monomials βI = βi1 ··· βim corresponding to admissi-
ble sequences I are linearly independent in H∗(SO(n); Z2), hence are a vector space
basis. Since ρ∗is injective, we may identify each βi with its image
P
j αi
j in the trun-
cated polynomial ring Z2[α1, ··· , αn−1]/(α2
1, ··· , αn
n−1).
Suppose we have a linear
relation
P
I bIβI = 0 with I ranging over the admissible monomials. If β1 appears in
this relation, write the relation in the form xβ1+y = 0 where x and y do not involve
β1 . Since α1 occurs only in the term β1 of xβ1 + y , where it has exponent 1, we
have xβ1 + y = xα1 + z where neither x nor z involve α1 . The relation xα1 + z = 0
in Z2[α1, ··· , αn−1]/(α2
1, ··· , αn
n−1) then implies x = 0. Thus we may assume the
original relation does not involve β1 . Now we repeat the argument for β2 . Write the
relation in the form xβ2+y = 0 where neither x nor y involve β2 or β1 . The variable
α2 now occurs only in the term β2 of xβ2 + y , where it has exponent 2, so we have
xβ2 +y = xα2
2 +z where x and z do not involve α1 or α2 . Then xα2
2 +z = 0 implies
x = 0 and we have a relation involving neither β1 nor β2 . Continuing inductively, we
eventually deduce that all coefﬁcients bI in the original relation
P
I bIβI = 0 must be
zero.

296
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
Observe now that β2
i = β2i if 2i < n and β2
i = 0 if 2i ≥n, since
 P
j αi
j
2 =
P
j α2i
j . The quotient Q of the algebra Z2[β1, β2, ···] by the relations β2
i = β2i and
βj = 0 for j ≥n then maps onto H∗(SO(n); Z2) This map Q→H∗(SO(n); Z2) is also
injective since the relations deﬁning Q allow every element of Q to be represented
as a linear combination of admissible monomials βI , and the admissible monomials
are linearly independent in H∗(SO(n); Z2). The algebra Q can also be described as
the tensor product in statement (a) of the theorem since the relations β2
i = β2i allow
admissible monomials to be written uniquely as monomials in powers of the βi ’s with
i odd, and the relation βj = 0 for j ≥n becomes βipi = βpi
i
= 0 where j = ipi with
i odd and pi a power of 2. For a given i, this relation holds iff ipi ≥n, or in other
words, iff |βpi
i | ≥n. This ﬁnishes the proof of (a).
For part (b), note ﬁrst that the group multiplication SO(n)×SO(n)→SO(n) is
cellular in view of the inclusions P iP i ⊂P iP i−1 and P iP j ⊂P jP i for i < j .
So
we can compute Pontryagin products at the cellular level. We know that there is at
least an additive isomorphism H∗(SO(n); Z2) ≈ΛZ2[e1, ··· , en−1] since the products
eI = ei1 ··· eim with I admissible form a basis for H∗(SO(n); Z2).
The inclusion
P iP i ⊂P iP i−1 then implies that the Pontryagin product (ei)2 is 0. It remains only to
see the commutativity relation eiej = ejei . The inclusion P iP j ⊂P jP i for i < j was
obtained from the formula ρ(v)ρ(w) = ρ(ρ(v)w)ρ(v′) for v ∈Ri+1 , w ∈Rj+1 ,
and v′ = r(e1)v . The map f : P i×P j→P j×P i , f (v, w) = (ρ(v)w, v′), is a homeo-
morphism since it is the composition of homeomorphisms (v, w) , (v, ρ(v)w) ,
(v′, ρ(v)w), (ρ(v)w, v′). The ﬁrst of these maps takes ei×ej homeomorphically
onto itself since ρ(v)(ej) = ej if i < j . Obviously the second map also takes ei×ej
homeomorphically onto itself, while the third map simply transposes the two fac-
tors. Thus f restricts to a homeomorphism from ei×ej onto ej×ei , and therefore
eiej = ejei in H∗(SO(n); Z2).
⊔⊓
The cup product and Pontryagin product structures in this theorem may seem at
ﬁrst glance to be unrelated, but in fact the relationship is fairly direct. As we saw in the
previous section, the dual of a polynomial algebra Z2[x] is a divided polynomial al-
gebra ΓZ2[α], and with Z2 coefﬁcients the latter is an exterior algebra ΛZ2[α0, α1, ···]
where |αi| = 2i|x|. If we truncate the polynomial algebra by a relation x2n = 0,
then this just eliminates the generators αi for i ≥n. In view of this, if it were the
case that the generators βi for the algebra H∗(SO(n); Z2) happened to be primitive,
then H∗(SO(n); Z2) would be isomorphic as a Hopf algebra to the tensor product of
the single-generator Hopf algebras Z2[βi]/(βpi
i ), i = 1, 3, ···, hence the dual algebra
H∗(SO(n); Z2) would be the tensor product of the corresponding truncated divided
polynomial algebras, in other words an exterior algebra as just explained. This is in
fact the structure of H∗(SO(n); Z2), so since the Pontryagin product in H∗(SO(n); Z2)
determines the coproduct in H∗(SO(n); Z2) uniquely, it follows that the βi ’s must

Section 3.D.
The Cohomology of SO(n)
297
indeed be primitive.
It is not difﬁcult to give a direct argument that each βi is primitive. The coprod-
uct ∆: H∗(SO(n); Z2)→H∗(SO(n); Z2)⊗H∗(SO(n); Z2) is induced by the group mul-
tiplication µ : SO(n)×SO(n)→SO(n). We need to show that the value of ∆(βi) on
eI ⊗eJ , which we denote ⟨∆(βi), eI ⊗eJ⟩, is the same as the value ⟨βi ⊗1+1 ⊗βi, eI ⊗eJ⟩
for all cells eI and eJ whose dimensions add up to i.
Since ∆= µ∗, we have
⟨∆(βi), eI ⊗eJ⟩= ⟨βi, µ∗(eI ⊗eJ)⟩. Because µ is the multiplication map, µ(eI ×eJ)
is contained in P IP J , and if we use the relations P jP j ⊂P jP j−1 and P jP k ⊂P kP j for
j < k to rearrange the factors P j of P IP J so that their dimensions are in decreasing
order, then the only way we will end up with a term P i is if we start with P IP J equal
to P iP 0 or P 0P i . Thus ⟨βi, µ∗(eI ⊗eJ)⟩= 0 unless eI ⊗eJ equals ei ⊗e0 or e0 ⊗ei .
Hence ∆(βi) contains no other terms besides βi ⊗1 + 1 ⊗βi , and βi is primitive.
Integer Homology and Cohomology
Since there are homeomorphisms SO(3) ≈RP3 and SO(4) ≈S3×RP3 , we see
that the homology and cohomology of SO(n) with Z coefﬁcients are not going to
be completely simple. The additive structures however turn out to be not a whole
lot more complicated than in these two cases.
In particular one has a qualitative
statement:
Proposition 3D.3. H∗(SO(n); Z) is a direct sum of Z’s and Z2 ’s.
Proof: We compute the cellular chain complex of SO(n), showing that it splits as a
tensor product of simpler complexes. For a cell ei ⊂P n−1 ⊂SO(n) the cellular bound-
ary dei is 2ei−1 for even i > 0 and 0 for odd i. To compute the cellular boundary of
a cell ei1 ··· eim we can pull it back to a cell ei1 × ··· ×eim of P n−1× ··· ×P 1 whose
cellular boundary, by Proposition 3B.1, is
P
j(−1)σjei1 × ··· ×deij × ··· ×eim where
σj = i1 + ··· + ij−1 . Hence d(ei1 ··· eim) =
P
j(−1)σjei1 ··· deij ··· eim where it is un-
derstood that ei1 ··· deij ··· eim is zero if ij = ij+1 + 1 since P ij−1P ij−1 ⊂P ij−1P ij−2 ,
in a lower-dimensional skeleton.
Now to split the cellular chain complex C∗
 SO(n)

as a tensor product of smaller
chain complexes, let C2i be the subcomplex of C∗
 SO(n)

with basis the cells e0 ,
e2i , e2i−1 , and e2ie2i−1 .
This is a subcomplex since de2i−1 = 0, de2i = 2e2i−1 ,
and, in P 2i×P 2i−1 , d(e2i×e2i−1) = de2i×e2i−1 + e2i×de2i−1 = 2e2i−1×e2i−1 , hence
d(e2ie2i−1) = 0 since P 2i−1P 2i−1 ⊂P 2i−1P 2i−2 .
The claim is that there are chain
complex isomorphisms
C∗
 SO(2k + 1)

≈C2⊗C4⊗··· ⊗C2k
C∗
 SO(2k + 2)

≈C2⊗C4⊗··· ⊗C2k⊗C2k+1
where C2k+1 has basis e0 and e2k+1 . Certainly these isomorphisms hold for the chain
groups themselves, so it is only a matter of checking that the boundary maps agree.

298
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
For the case of C∗
 SO(2k + 1)

this can be seen by induction on k, as the reader can
easily verify. In similar fashion the case of C∗
 SO(2k + 2)

reduces to the ﬁrst case.
Since H∗(C2i) consists of Z’s in dimensions 0 and 4i −1 and a Z2 in dimension
2i −1, while H∗(C2k+1) consists of Z’s in dimensions 0 and 2k + 1, we conclude
from the algebraic K¨unneth formula that H∗(SO(n); Z) is a direct sum of Z’s and
Z2 ’s.
⊔⊓
Note that the calculation shows that SO(2k) and SO(2k −1)×S2k−1 have iso-
morphic homology groups in all dimensions.
In view of the preceding proposition, one can get rather complete information
about H∗(SO(n); Z) by considering the natural maps to H∗(SO(n); Z2) and to the
quotient of H∗(SO(n); Z) by its torsion subgroup. Let us denote this quotient by
Hf ree
∗
(SO(n); Z). The same strategy applies equally well to cohomology, and the uni-
versal coefﬁcient theorem gives an isomorphism H∗
free(SO(n); Z) ≈Hfree
∗
(SO(n); Z).
The proof of the proposition shows that the additive structure of Hfree
∗
(SO(n); Z)
is fairly simple:
Hf ree
∗
(SO(2k + 1); Z) ≈H∗(S3×S7× ··· ×S4k−1)
Hf ree
∗
(SO(2k + 2); Z) ≈H∗(S3×S7× ··· ×S4k−1×S2k+1)
The multiplicative structure is also as simple as it could be:
Proposition 3D.4. The Pontryagin ring Hfree
∗
(SO(n); Z) is an exterior algebra,
Hf ree
∗
(SO(2k + 1); Z) ≈ΛZ[a3, a7, ··· , a4k−1]
Hf ree
∗
(SO(2k + 2); Z) ≈ΛZ[a3, a7, ··· , a4k−1, a2k+1]
where subscripts denote dimension. The generators ai are primitive, so the dual
Hopf algebra H∗
f ree(SO(n); Z) is an exterior algebra on the dual generators αi .
Proof: As in the case of Z2 coefﬁcients we can work at the level of cellular chains
since the multiplication in SO(n) is cellular. Consider ﬁrst the case n = 2k + 1.
Let Ei be the cycle e2ie2i−1 generating a Z summand of H∗(SO(n); Z). By what we
have shown above, the products Ei1 ··· Eim with i1 > ··· > im form an additive
basis for Hf ree
∗
(SO(n); Z), so we need only verify that the multiplication is as in
an exterior algebra on the classes Ei . The map f in the proof of Proposition 3D.2
gives a homeomorphism ei×ej ≈ej×ei if i < j , and this homeomorphism has local
degree (−1)ij+1 since it is the composition (v, w) , (v, ρ(v)w) , (v′, ρ(v)w) ,
(ρ(v)w, v′) of homeomorphisms with local degrees +1, −1, and (−1)ij . Applying
this four times to commute EiEj = e2ie2i−1e2je2j−1 to EjEi = e2je2j−1e2ie2i−1 , three
of the four application give a sign of −1 and the fourth gives a +1, so we conclude
that EiEj = −EjEi if i < j . When i = j we have (Ei)2 = 0 since e2ie2i−1e2ie2i−1 =
e2ie2ie2i−1e2i−1 , which lies in a lower-dimensional skeleton because of the relation
P 2iP 2i ⊂P 2iP 2i−1 .

Section 3.D.
The Cohomology of SO(n)
299
Thus we have shown that H∗(SO(2k + 1); Z) contains ΛZ[E1, ··· , Ek] as a sub-
algebra. The same reasoning shows that H∗(SO(2k + 2); Z) contains the subalgebra
ΛZ[E1, ··· , Ek, e2k+1]. These exterior subalgebras account for all the nontorsion in
H∗(SO(n); Z), so the product structure in Hfree
∗
(SO(n); Z) is as stated.
Now we show that the generators Ei and e2k+1 are primitive in Hfree
∗
(SO(n); Z).
Looking at the formula for the boundary maps in the cellular chain complex of SO(n),
we see that this chain complex is the direct sum of the subcomplexes C(m) with
basis the m fold products ei1 ··· eim with i1 > ··· > im > 0. We allow m = 0 here,
with C(0) having basis the 0 cell of SO(n). The direct sum C(0)⊕··· ⊕C(m) is
the cellular chain complex of the subcomplex of SO(n) consisting of cells which are
products of m or fewer cells ei . In particular, taking m = 2 we have a subcomplex
X ⊂SO(n) whose homology, mod torsion, consists of the Z in dimension zero and
the Z’s generated by the cells Ei , together with the cell e2k+1 when n = 2k + 2. The
inclusion X > SO(n) induces a commutative diagram
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
X
H
free(
)
;Z
∗
X
H
free(
)
;Z
∗
X
H
free(
)
;Z
∗
⊗
−−−−−→
SO
H
n
free(
(
)
);Z
∗
SO
H
n
free(
(
)
);Z
∗
SO
H
n
free(
(
)
);Z
∗
⊗
∆
∆
where the lower ∆is the coproduct in Hfree
∗
(SO(n); Z) and the upper ∆is its ana-
log for X , coming from the diagonal map X→X×X and the K¨unneth formula. The
classes Ei in the lower left group pull back to elements we label eEi in the upper left
group. Since these have odd dimension and Hfree
∗
(X; Z) vanishes in even positive
dimensions, the images ∆( eEi) can have no components a ⊗b with both a and b
positive-dimensional. The same is therefore true for ∆(Ei) by commutativity of the
diagram, so the classes Ei are primitive. This argument also works for e2k+1 when
n = 2k + 2.
Since the exterior algebra generators of Hfree
∗
(SO(n); Z) are primitive, this alge-
bra splits as a Hopf algebra into a tensor product of single-generator exterior algebras
ΛZ[ai]. The dual Hopf algebra H∗
free(SO(n); Z) therefore splits as the tensor prod-
uct of the dual exterior algebras ΛZ[αi], hence H∗
free(SO(n); Z) is also an exterior
algebra.
⊔⊓
The exact ring structure of H∗(SO(n); Z) can be deduced from these results
via Bockstein homomorphisms, as we show in Example 3E.7, though the process is
somewhat laborious and the answer not very neat.
Stiefel Manifolds
Consider the Stiefel manifold Vn,k , whose points are the k tuples of orthonormal
vectors in Rn , i.e., orthonormal k frames. Thus Vn,k is a subset of the product of k
copies of Sn−1 , and it is given the subspace topology. As special cases, Vn,n = O(n)
and Vn,1 = Sn−1 . Also, Vn,2 can be identiﬁed with the space of unit tangent vectors to

300
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
Sn−1 since a vector v at the point x ∈Sn−1 is tangent to Sn−1 iff it is orthogonal to
x . We can also identify Vn,n−1 with SO(n) since there is a unique way of extending
an orthonormal (n −1) frame to a positively oriented orthonormal n frame.
There is a natural projection p : O(n)→Vn,k sending α ∈O(n) to the k frame
consisting of the last k columns of α, which are the images under α of the last k
standard basis vectors in Rn . This projection is onto, and the pre-images of points are
precisely the cosets αO(n −k) where we embed O(n −k) in O(n) as the orthogonal
transformations of the ﬁrst n −k coordinates of Rn . Thus Vn,k can be viewed as the
space O(n)/O(n −k) of such cosets, with the quotient topology from O(n). This is
the same as the previously-deﬁned topology on Vn,k since the projection O(n)→Vn,k
is a surjection of compact Hausdorff spaces.
When k < n the projection p : SO(n)→Vn,k is surjective, and Vn,k can also be
viewed as the coset space SO(n)/SO(n−k). We can use this to induce a CW structure
on Vn,k from the CW structure on SO(n). The cells are the sets of cosets of the form
eISO(n −k) = ei1 ··· eimSO(n −k) for n > i1 > ··· > im ≥n −k, together with the
coset SO(n −k) itself as a 0 cell of Vn,k . These sets of cosets are unions of cells of
SO(n) since SO(n−k) consists of the cells eJ = ej1 ··· ejℓwith n−k > j1 > ··· > jℓ.
This implies that Vn,k is the disjoint union of its cells, and the boundary of each cell
is contained in cells of lower dimension, so we do have a CW structure.
Since the projection SO(n)→Vn,k is a cellular map, the structure of the cellular
chain complex of Vn,k can easily be deduced from that of SO(n). For example, the
cellular chain complex of V2k+1,2 is just the complex C2k deﬁned earlier, while for
V2k,2 the cellular boundary maps are all trivial. Hence:
Hi(V2k+1,2; Z) =



Z
for i = 0, 4k −1
Z2
for i = 2k −1
0
otherwise
Hi(V2k,2; Z) =

Z
for i = 0, 2k −2, 2k −1, 4k −3
0
otherwise
Thus SO(n) has the same homology and cohomology groups as the product space
V3,2×V5,2× ··· ×V2k+1,2 when n = 2k + 1, or as this product cross S2k+1 when
n = 2k + 2. However, our calculations show that SO(n) is distinguished from these
products by its cup product structure with Z2 coefﬁcients, at least when n ≥5, since
β4
1 is nonzero in H4(SO(n); Z2) if n ≥5, while for the product spaces the nontrivial
element of H1(−; Z2) must lie in the factor V3,2 , and H4(V3,2; Z2) = 0. When n = 4
we have SO(4) homeomorphic to SO(3)×S3 = V3,2×S3 as we noted at the beginning
of this section. Also SO(3) = V3,2 and SO(2) = S1 .
Exercises
1. Compute the Pontryagin ring structure in H∗(SO(5); Z).

Section 3.E.
Bockstein Homomorphisms
301
Homology and cohomology with coefﬁcients in a ﬁeld, particularly Zp with p
prime, often have more structure and are easier to compute than with Z coefﬁcients.
Of course, passing from Z to Zp coefﬁcients can involve a certain loss of information,
a blurring of ﬁner distinctions.
For example, a Zpn in integer homology becomes
a pair of Zp ’s in Zp homology or cohomology, so the exponent n is lost with Zp
coefﬁcients. In this section we introduce Bockstein homomorphisms, which in many
interesting cases allow one to recover Z coefﬁcient information from Zp coefﬁcients.
Bockstein homomorphisms also provide a small piece of extra internal structure to
Zp homology or cohomology itself which can be quite useful.
We will concentrate on cohomology in order to have cup products available,
but the basic constructions work equally well for homology. If we take a short ex-
act sequence 0→G→H→K→0 of abelian groups and apply the covariant functor
Hom(Cn(X), −), we obtain
0 -→Cn(X; G) -→Cn(X; H) -→Cn(X; K) -→0
which is exact since Cn(X) is free. Letting n vary, we have a short exact sequence of
chain complexes, so there is an associated long exact sequence
··· -→Hn(X; G) -→Hn(X; H) -→Hn(X; K) -→Hn+1(X; G) -→···
whose ‘boundary’ map Hn(X; K)→Hn+1(X; G) is called a Bockstein homomorphism.
We shall be interested primarily in the Bockstein β : Hn(X; Zm)→Hn+1(X; Zm)
associated to the coefﬁcient sequence 0 -→Zm
m-----→Zm2 -→Zm -→0, especially when
m is prime, but for the moment we do not need this assumption. Closely related to β
is the Bockstein eβ : Hn(X; Zm)→Hn+1(X; Z) associated to 0 -→Z
m-----→Z -→Zm -→0.
From the natural map of the latter short exact sequence onto the former one, we ob-
tain the relationship β = ρ eβ where ρ : H∗(X; Z)→H∗(X; Zm) is the homomorphism
induced by the projection Z→Zm , reducing coefﬁcients mod m. Thus we have a
commutative triangle in the following diagram, whose upper row is the exact sequence
containing eβ.
−−−−−→
X
H
m
n(
)
;
β
β
Z
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−→
X
H
(
)
;Z
∼
ρ
−−−−−→
X
H
n(
)
;Z
m
m
Z
ρ
n 1
+
X
H
(
)
;Z
n 1
+
X
H
(
)
;
n 1
+
Example 3E.1. Let X be a K(Zm, 1), for example RP∞when m = 2 or an inﬁnite-
dimensional lens space with fundamental group Zm for arbitrary m. From the homol-
ogy calculations in §2.2 and the universal coefﬁcient theorem we have Hn(X; Zm) ≈

302
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
Zm for all n. Let us show that β : Hn(X; Zm)→Hn+1(X; Zm) is an isomorphism for n
odd, and zero for n even. When n is odd the vertical map ρ in the preceding diagram
is surjective for the space X we are considering, as is eβ since the map m is trivial, so
β is surjective, hence an isomorphism. On the other hand, when n is even the ﬁrst
map ρ in the diagram is surjective, so eβ = 0 by exactness, hence β = 0.
A useful property of β is that it satisﬁes the derivation property
(∗)
β(a ⌣b) = β(a) ⌣b + (−1)|a|a ⌣β(b)
which comes from the corresponding formula for ordinary coboundary. Namely, let
ϕ and ψ be Zm cocycles representing a and b, and let eϕ and eψ be lifts of these to
Zm2 cochains. Concretely, one can view ϕ and ψ as functions on singular simplices
with values in {0, 1, ··· , m −1}, and then eϕ and eψ can be taken to be the same
functions, but with {0, 1, ··· , m −1} regarded as a subset of Zm2 . Then δ eϕ = mη
and δ eψ = mµ for Zp cocycles η and µ representing β(a) and β(b). Taking cup
products, eϕ ⌣eψ is a Zm2 cochain lifting the Zm cocycle ϕ ⌣ψ, and
δ( eϕ ⌣eψ) = δ eϕ ⌣eψ ± eϕ ⌣δ eψ = mη ⌣eψ ± eϕ ⌣mµ = m
 η ⌣ψ ± ϕ ⌣µ

where the sign ± is (−1)|a| . Hence η ⌣ψ + (−1)|a|ϕ ⌣µ represents β(a ⌣b), giving
the formula (∗).
Example 3E.2: Cup Products in Lens Spaces. The cup product structure for lens
spaces was computed in Example 3.40 using Poincar´e duality, but using Bocksteins
we can deduce it from the cup product structure in CP∞, which was computed in
Theorem 3.11 without Poincar´e duality. Consider ﬁrst the inﬁnite-dimensional lens
space L = S∞/Zm where Zm acts on S∞, the unit sphere in C∞, by scalar multiplica-
tion. Thus the action is generated by the rotation v , e2πi/mv . The quotient map
S∞→CP∞factors through L, so we have a projection L→CP∞. Looking at the cell
structure on L described in Example 2.43, we see that each even-dimensional cell of L
projects homeomorphically onto the corresponding cell of CP∞. Namely, the 2n cell
of L is the homeomorphic image of the 2n cell in S2n+1 ⊂Cn+1 formed by the points
cos θ(z1, ··· , zn, 0) + sin θ(0, ··· , 0, 1) with
P
i z2
i = 1 and 0 < θ ≤π , and the same
is true for the 2n cell of CP∞. From cellular cohomology it then follows that the
map L→CP∞induces isomorphisms on even-dimensional cohomology with Zm co-
efﬁcients. Since H∗(CP∞; Zm) is a polynomial ring, we deduce that if y ∈H2(L; Zm)
is a generator, then yk generates H2k(L; Zm) for all k.
By Example 3E.1 there is a generator x ∈H1(L; Zm) with β(x) = y . The prod-
uct formula (∗) gives β(xyk) = β(x)yk −xβ(yk) = yk+1 .
Thus β takes xyk
to a generator, hence xyk must be a generator of H2k+1(L; Zm). This completely
determines the cup product structure in H∗(L; Zm) if m is odd since the commu-
tativity property of cup product implies that x2 = 0 in this case. The result is that
H∗(L; Zm) ≈ΛZm[x]⊗Zm[y] for odd m. When m is even this statement needs to

Section 3.E.
Bockstein Homomorphisms
303
be modiﬁed slightly by inserting the relation that x2 is the unique element of order
2 in H2(L; Zm) ≈Zm , as we showed in Example 3.9 by an explicit calculation in the
2 skeleton of L.
The cup product structure in ﬁnite-dimensional lens spaces follows from this
since a ﬁnite-dimensional lens space embeds as a skeleton in an inﬁnite-dimensional
lens space, and the homotopy type of an inﬁnite-dimensional lens space is determined
by its fundamental group since it is a K(π, 1). It follows that the cup product struc-
ture on a lens space S2n+1/Zm with Zm coefﬁcients is obtained from the preceding
calculation by truncating via the relation yn+1 = 0.
The relation β = ρ eβ implies that β2 = ρ eβρ eβ = 0 since eβρ = 0 in the long exact
sequence containing eβ. Because β2 = 0, the groups Hn(X; Zm) form a chain com-
plex with the Bocksteins β as the ‘boundary’ maps. We can then form the associated
‘Bockstein cohomology groups’ Ker β/ Im β, which we denote by BHn(X; Zm) in di-
mension n. The most interesting case is when m is a prime p, so we shall assume
this from now on.
Proposition 3E.3. If Hn(X; Z) is ﬁnitely generated for all n, then the Bockstein co-
homology groups BHn(X; Zp) are determined by the following rules:
(a) Each Z summand of Hn(X; Z) contributes a Zp summand to BHn(X; Zp).
(b) Each Zpk summand of Hn(X; Z) with k > 1 contributes Zp summands to both
BHn−1(X; Zp) and BHn(X; Zp).
(c) A Zp summand of Hn(X; Z) gives Zp summands of Hn−1(X; Zp) and Hn(X; Zp)
with β an isomorphism between these two summands, hence there is no contri-
bution to BH∗(X; Zp).
Proof: We will use the algebraic notion of minimal chain complexes. Suppose that C
is a chain complex of free abelian groups for which the homology groups Hn(C) are
ﬁnitely generated for each n. Choose a splitting of each Hn(C) as a direct sum of
cyclic groups. There are countably many of these cyclic groups, so we can list them
as G1, G2, ··· where Gi is a summand of Hni(C). For each Gi choose a generator
gi and deﬁne a corresponding chain complex M(gi) by the following prescription. If
gi has inﬁnite order, let M(gi) consist of just a Z in dimension ni , with generator
zi , while if gi has order k, let M(gi) consist of Z’s in dimensions ni and ni + 1,
generated by xi and yi respectively, with ∂yi = kxi . Let M be the direct sum of the
chain complexes M(gi). Deﬁne a chain map σ : M→C by sending zi and xi to cycles
ζi and ξi representing the corresponding homology classes gi , and yi to a chain ηi
with ∂ηi = kξi .
The chain map σ induces an isomorphism on homology, hence
also on cohomology with any coefﬁcients by Corollary 3.4. The dual cochain complex
M∗obtained by applying Hom(−, Z) splits as the direct sum of the dual complexes
M∗(gi). So in cohomology with Z coefﬁcients the dual basis element z∗
i
generates
a Z summand in dimension ni , while y∗
i
generates a Zk summand in dimension

304
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
ni + 1 since δx∗
i = ky∗
i . With Zp coefﬁcients, p prime, z∗
i gives a Zp summand of
Hni(M; Zp), while x∗
i and y∗
i give Zp summands of Hni(M; Zp) and Hni+1(M; Zp) if
p divides k and otherwise they give nothing.
The map σ induces an isomorphism between the associated Bockstein long exact
sequences of cohomology groups, with commuting squares, so we can use M∗to
compute β and eβ, and we can do the calculation separately on each summand M∗(gi).
Obviously β and eβ are zero on y∗
i
and z∗
i . When p divides k we have the class
x∗
i
∈Hni(M; Zp), and from the deﬁnition of Bockstein homomorphisms it follows
that eβ(x∗
i ) = (k/p)y∗
i
∈Hni+1(M; Z) and β(x∗
i ) = (k/p)y∗
i
∈Hni+1(M; Zp). The
latter element is nonzero iff k is not divisible by p2 .
⊔⊓
Corollary 3E.4. In the situation of the preceding proposition, H∗(X; Z) contains no
elements of order p2 iff the dimension of BHn(X; Zp) as a vector space over Zp
equals the rank of Hn(X; Z) for all n. In this case ρ : H∗(X; Z)→H∗(X; Zp) is injec-
tive on the p torsion, and the image of this p torsion under ρ is equal to Im β.
Proof: The ﬁrst statement is evident from the proposition. The injectivity of ρ on
p torsion is in fact equivalent to there being no elements of order p2 . The equality
Im ρ = Im β follows from the fact that Im β = ρ(Im eβ) = ρ(Ker m) in the commutative
diagram near the beginning of this section, and the fact that for m = p the kernel of
m is exactly the p torsion when there are no elements of order p2 .
⊔⊓
Example 3E.5. Let us use Bocksteins to compute H∗(RP∞×RP∞; Z). This could in-
stead be done by ﬁrst computing the homology via the general K¨unneth formula, then
applying the universal coefﬁcient theorem, but with Bocksteins we will only need the
simpler K¨unneth formula for ﬁeld coefﬁcients in Theorem 3.15.
The cup product
structure in H∗(RP∞×RP∞; Z) will also be easy to determine via Bocksteins.
Since eH∗(RP∞; Zp) = 0 for p an odd prime, we can apply Theorem 3.15 to de-
duce that eH∗(RP∞×RP∞; Zp) = 0, so eH∗(RP∞×RP∞; Z) consists entirely of elements
of order a power of 2. From Example 3E.1 we know that in H∗(RP∞; Z2) ≈Z2[x] we
have β(x2k−1) = x2k and β(x2k) = 0. In H∗(RP∞×RP∞; Z2) ≈Z2[x, y] we can then
compute β via the product formula β(xmyn) =
(βxm)yn + xm(βyn). The answer can be repre-
sented graphically by the ﬁgure to the right. Here
x
x
1
1
y
y
2
2
y 3
y 4
y 5
y 6
x3
x 4 x5
x6
the dot, diamond, or circle in the (m, n) posi-
tion represents the monomial xmyn and line seg-
ments indicate nontrivial Bocksteins. For exam-
ple, the lower left square records the formulas
β(xy) = x2y + xy2 , β(x2y) = x2y2 = β(xy2),
and β(x2y2) = 0. Thus in this square we see that
Ker β = Im β, with generators the ‘diagonal’ sum

Section 3.E.
Bockstein Homomorphisms
305
x2y + xy2 and x2y2 . The same thing happens in all the other squares, so it is ap-
parent that Ker β = Im β except for the zero-dimensional class ‘1.’ By the preceding
corollary this says that all nontrivial elements of
eH∗(RP∞×RP∞; Z) have order 2.
Furthermore, Im β consists of the subring Z2[x2, y2], indicated by the circles in the
ﬁgure, together with the multiples of x2y +xy2 by elements of Z2[x2, y2]. It follows
that there is a ring isomorphism
H∗(RP∞×RP∞; Z) ≈Z[λ, µ, ν]/(2λ, 2µ, 2ν, ν2 + λ2µ + λµ2)
where ρ(λ) = x2 , ρ(µ) = y2 , ρ(ν) = x2y +xy2 , and the relation ν2 +λ2µ +λµ2 = 0
holds since (x2y + xy2)2 = x4y2 + x2y4 .
This calculation illustrates the general principle that cup product structures with
Z coefﬁcients tend to be considerably messier than with ﬁeld coefﬁcients. If one com-
putes H∗(RP∞×RP∞×RP∞; Z) by the same technique one can see even more striking
evidence of this.
Example 3E.6. Let us use Bocksteins to show the existence of ﬁnite CW complexes
X1 , X2, and Y such that the rings H∗(X1; Z) and H∗(X2; Z) are isomorphic but the
rings H∗(X1×Y; Z) and H∗(X2×Y; Z) are not. According to Theorem 3.15 this can
happen only if all three of X1 , X2 , and Y have torsion in their Z cohomology. The
space X1 is obtained from S2×S2 by attaching a 3 cell e3 to the second S2 factor
by a map of degree 2. Thus X1 has a CW structure with cells e0 , e2
1 , e2
2 , e3 , e4 with
e3 attached to the 2 sphere e0 ∪e2
2 . The space X2 is obtained from S2 ∨S2 ∨S4 by
attaching a 3 cell to the second S2 summand by a map of degree 2, so it has a CW
structure with the same collection of ﬁve cells, the only difference being that in X2
the 4 cell is attached trivially. For the space Y we choose a Moore space M(Z2, 2),
with three cells which we label f 0 , f 2 , f 3 , the last cell being attached by a map of
degree 2.
From cellular cohomology we see that both H∗(X1; Z) and H∗(X2; Z) consist of
Z’s in dimensions 0, 2, 4 and a Z2 in dimension 3. In both cases all cup products of
positive-dimensional classes are zero since for dimension reasons the only possible
nontrivial product is the square of the two-dimensional class, but this is zero as one
sees by restricting to the subcomplex S2×S2 or S2 ∨S2 ∨S4 . For the space Y we
have H∗(Y; Z) consisting of a Z in dimension 0 and a Z2 in dimension 3, so the cup
product structure here is trivial as well.
With Z2 coefﬁcients the cellular cochain complexes for Xi , Y , and Xi×Y are
all trivial, so we can identify the cells with a basis for Z2 cohomology. In Xi and Y
the only nontrivial Z2 Bocksteins are β(e2
2) = e3 and β(f 2) = f 3 . The Bocksteins
in Xi×Y can then be computed using the product formula for β, which applies to
cross product as well as cup product since cross product is deﬁned in terms of cup
product.
The results are shown in the following table, where an arrow denotes a
nontrivial Bockstein.

306
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
e0
f 0
1
×
e2
f 0
×
2
e2
f 0
×
e0
f 2
×
e3
f 0
×
e0
f 3
×
e4
f 0
×
1
e2
2
e2
2
e2
f 2
×
f 2
×
1
e2
f 3
×
e3
f 2
×
f 3
×
e4
f 2
×
e3
f 3
×
e4
f 3
×
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
The two arrows from e2
2×f 2 mean that β(e2
2×f 2) = e3×f 2 + e2
2×f 3 . It is evident
that BH∗(Xi×Y; Z2) consists of Z2 ’s in dimensions 0, 2, and 4, so Proposition 3E.3
implies that the nontorsion in H∗(Xi×Y; Z) consists of Z’s in these dimensions. Fur-
thermore, by Corollary 3E.4 the 2 torsion in H∗(Xi×Y; Z) corresponds to the image
of β and consists of Z2×Z2 ’s in dimensions 3 and 5 together with Z2 ’s in dimensions
6 and 7. In particular, there is a Z2 corresponding to e3×f 2+e2
2×f 3 in dimension 5.
There is no p torsion for odd primes p since H∗(Xi×Y; Zp) ≈H∗(Xi; Zp)⊗H∗(Y; Zp)
is nonzero only in even dimensions.
We can see now that with Z coefﬁcients, the cup product H2×H5→H7 is nontriv-
ial for X1×Y but trivial for X2×Y . For in H∗(Xi×Y; Z2) we have, using the relation
(a×b) ⌣(c×d) = (a ⌣c)×(b ⌣d) which follows immediately from the deﬁnition of
cross product,
(1) e2
1×f 0 ⌣e2
1×f 3 = (e2
1 ⌣e2
1)×(f 0 ⌣f 3) = 0 since e2
1 ⌣e2
1 = 0
(2) e2
1×f 0 ⌣(e3×f 2 + e2
2×f 3) = (e2
1 ⌣e3)×(f 0 ⌣f 2) + (e2
1 ⌣e2
2)×(f 0 ⌣f 3) =
(e2
1 ⌣e2
2)×f 3 since e2
1 ⌣e3 = 0
and in H7(Xi×Y; Z2) ≈H7(Xi×Y; Z) we have (e2
1 ⌣e2
2)×f 3 = e4×f 3 ≠0 for i = 1
but (e2
1 ⌣e2
2)×f 3 = 0×f 3 = 0 for i = 2.
Thus the cohomology ring of a product space is not always determined by the
cohomology rings of the factors.
Example 3E.7. Bockstein homomorphisms can be used to get a more complete pic-
ture of the structure of H∗(SO(n); Z) than we obtained in the preceding section.
Continuing the notation employed there, we know from the calculation for RP∞in
Example 3E.1 that β
 P
j α2i−1
j

=
P
j α2i
j
and β
 P
j α2i
j

= 0, hence β(β2i−1) = β2i
and β(β2i) = 0. Taking the case n = 5 as an example, we have H∗(SO(5); Z2) ≈
Z2[β1, β3]/(β8
1, β2
3), and the upper part of the table below shows the nontrivial Bock-
steins. Once again two arrows from an element mean ‘sum,’ e.g., β(β1β3) = β(β1)β3+
β1β(β3) = β2β3 +β1β4 = β2
1β3 +β5
1 . This allows the calculation of Hi(SO(5); Z) mod-
ulo odd torsion, with the results indicated in the remainder of the table, where the
vertical arrows denote the map ρ. To see there is no odd torsion we must quote
Proposition 3D.3.

Section 3.E.
Bockstein Homomorphisms
307
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
0
Z
Z
0
1
1
x
x
y
y z
xy
β1
β1
2
β1
2
2
2
x 2
x 3
y 2
2
2
2
2
2
β1
3
β1
β3
3
β3
β1
β1
β3
β3
2
β1β3
2
β1
5
β1β3
3
β1β3
4
β1β3
5
β1β3
6
β1 β3
6
β1β3
7
β1 β3
7
β1
4
β1
4
β1
5
β1
6
β1
6
β1
7
−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
−→
−→
−→
−−−→
×
=
y3
x 3y
yz
=
,
−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
−
−
−
→
−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
+
+
β1 β3
4
β1
7
β1
7
+
It is interesting that the generator y ∈H3(SO(5); Z) ≈Z has y2 nontrivial, since
this implies that the ring structures of H∗(SO(5); Z) and H∗(RP7×S3; Z) are not
isomorphic, even though the cohomology groups and the Z2 cohomology rings of
these two spaces are the same. An exercise at the end of the section is to show that
in fact SO(5) is not homotopy equivalent to the product of any two CW complexes
with nontrivial cohomology.
A natural way to describe H∗(SO(5); Z) would be as a quotient of a free graded-
commutative associative algebra F[x, y, z] over Z with generators x , y , z in di-
mensions 2, 3, 7. Elements of F[x, y, z] are representable as polynomials p(x, y, z),
subject only to the relations imposed by graded-commutativity. In particular, since
y and z are odd-dimensional, yz = −zy , and y2 and z2 are nonzero elements of
order 2 in F[x, y, z]. Any monomial containing y2 or z2 as a factor also has order
2. In these terms, the calculation of H∗(SO(5); Z) can be written:
H∗(SO(5); Z) ≈F[x, y, z]/(2x, x4, y4, z2, xz, x3 −y2)
The next ﬁgure shows the nontrivial Bocksteins for H∗(SO(7); Z2). Here the num-
bers across the top indicate dimension, stopping with 21, the dimension of SO(7).
The labels on the dots refer to the basis of products of distinct βi ’s, e.g., the dot
labelled 135 is β1β3β5 .
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
∅
1
2
3
4
14
123
12
13
23
24
124
34
134
234
1234
35
36
45
46
5
6
16
26
15
25
125
126
136
245
135
246
145
236
235
146
56
156
236
356
456
2356
1256
1356 1456 2456
12356
12456
13456
23456
123456
3456
12346
12345
2345
2346
1346
1345
1246
1245
1235
1236
345
346
The left-right symmetry of the ﬁgure displays Poincar´e duality quite graphically. Note
that the corresponding diagram for SO(5), drawn in a slightly different way from

308
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
the preceding ﬁgure, occurs in the upper left corner as the subdiagram with labels 1
through 4. This subdiagram too has the symmetry of Poincar´e duality.
From the diagram one can with some effort work out the cup product structure
in H∗(SO(7); Z), but the answer is rather complicated, just as the diagram is:
F[x, y, z, v, w]/(2x, 2v, x4, y4, z2, v2, w2,xz, vz, vw, y2w, x3y2v,
y2z −x3v, xw −y2v −x3v)
where x , y , z, v , w have dimensions 2,3,7,7,11, respectively. It is curious that the
relation x3 = y2 in H∗(SO(5); Z) no longer holds in H∗(SO(7); Z).
Exercises
1. Show that H∗(K(Zm, 1); Zk) is isomorphic as a ring to H∗(K(Zm, 1); Zm)⊗Zk if k
divides m. In particular, if m/k is even this is ΛZk[x]⊗Zk[y].
2.
In this problem we will derive one half of the classiﬁcation of lens spaces up
to homotopy equivalence, by showing that if Lm(ℓ1, ··· , ℓn) ≃Lm(ℓ′
1, ··· , ℓ′
n) then
ℓ1 ··· ℓn ≡±ℓ′
1 ··· ℓ′
nkn mod m for some integer k. The converse is an exercise for
§4.1.
(a) Let L = Lm(ℓ1, ··· , ℓn) and let Z∗
m be the multiplicative group of invertible ele-
ments of Zm . Deﬁne t ∈Z∗
m by the equation xyn−1 = tz where x is a generator
of H1(L; Zm), y = β(x), and z ∈H2n−1(L; Zm) is the image of a generator of
H2n−1(L; Z). Show that the image τ(L) of t in the quotient group Z∗
m/±(Z∗
m)n
depends only on the homotopy type of L.
(b) Given nonzero integers k1, ··· , kn , deﬁne a map ef : S2n−1→S2n−1 by reiθ ,
reikjθ in the jth coordinate of Cn . Show:
(i)
ef has degree k1 ··· kn .
(ii)
ef induces a quotient map f : L→L′ for L′ = Lm(ℓ′
1, ··· , ℓ′
n) provided that
kjℓj ≡ℓ′
j mod m for each j .
(iii) f induces an isomorphism on π1 , hence on H1(−; Zm).
(iv) f has degree k1 ··· kn , i.e., f∗is multiplication by k1 ··· kn on H2n−1(−; Z).
(c) Using the f in (b), show that τ(L) = k1 ··· knτ(L′).
(d) Deduce that if Lm(ℓ1, ··· , ℓn) ≃Lm(ℓ′
1, ··· , ℓ′
n), then ℓ1 ··· ℓn ≡±ℓ′
1 ··· ℓ′
nkn
modm for some integer k.
3.
Let X be the smash product of k copies of a Moore space M(Zp, n) with p
prime.
Compute the Bockstein homomorphisms in H∗(X; Zp) and use this to de-
scribe H∗(X; Z).
4. Using the cup product structure in H∗(SO(5); Z), show that SO(5) is not homotopy
equivalent to the product of any two CW complexes with nontrivial cohomology.

Section 3.F.
Limits
309
It often happens that one has a CW complex X expressed as a union of an increas-
ing sequence of subcomplexes X0 ⊂X1 ⊂X2 ⊂···. For example, Xi could be the
i skeleton of X , or the Xi ’s could be ﬁnite complexes whose union is X . In situations
of this sort, Proposition 3.32 says that Hn(X; G) is the direct limit lim
--→Hn(Xi; G).
Our goal in this section is to show this holds more generally for any homology the-
ory, and to derive the corresponding formula for cohomology theories, which is a bit
more complicated even for ordinary cohomology with Z coefﬁcients. For ordinary
homology and cohomology the results apply somewhat more generally than just to
CW complexes, since if a space X is the union of an increasing sequence of subspaces
Xi with the property that each compact set in X is contained in some Xi , then the
singular complex of X is the union of the singular complexes of the Xi ’s, and so this
gives a reduction to the CW case.
Let us begin by recalling that the direct limit lim
--→Gi of a sequence of homomor-
phisms of abelian groups
G1
α1
------------→G2
α2
------------→G3 -→···
is deﬁned to be the quotient of the direct sum
L
i Gi by the subgroup of elements of
the form (g1, g2 −α1(g1), g3 −α2(g2), ···). It is easy to see from this deﬁnition that
every element of lim
--→Gi is represented by an element gi ∈Gi for some i, and two
such representatives gi ∈Gi and gj ∈Gj deﬁne the same element of lim
--→Gi iff they
have the same image in some Gk under the appropriate composition of αℓ’s. In case
all the αi ’s are injective and are viewed as inclusions of subgroups, then lim
--→Gi is
just
S
i Gi .
Example 3F.1. For a prime p, consider the sequence Z
p-----→Z
p-----→Z -→··· with all
maps multiplication by p. Then lim
--→Gi can be identiﬁed with the subgroup Z[1/p]
of Q consisting of rational numbers with denominator a power of p. More generally,
we can realize any subgroup of Q as the direct limit of a sequence Z -→Z -→Z -→···
with an appropriate choice of maps. For example, if the nth map is multiplication by
n, then the direct limit is Q itself.
Example 3F.2. The sequence of injections Zp
p-----→Zp2
p-----→Zp3 -→···, with p prime,
has direct limit a group which we may call Zp∞. This is isomorphic to Z[1/p]/Z, the
subgroup of Q/Z represented by fractions with denominator a power of p. In fact
Q/Z is isomorphic to the direct sum of the subgroups Z[1/p]/Z ≈Zp∞for all primes
p. It is not hard to determine all the subgroups of Q/Z and see that each one can
be realized as a direct limit of ﬁnite cyclic groups with injective maps between them.
Conversely, every such direct limit is isomorphic to a subgroup of Q/Z.

310
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
We can realize these algebraic examples topologically by the following construc-
tion. The mapping telescope of a sequence of maps
X0
f0-----→X1
f1-----→X2 -→···
is the union of the mapping cylinders Mfi with the copies of Xi in Mfi and Mfi−1
identiﬁed for all i. Thus the mapping telescope is the quotient space of the disjoint
union
`
i (Xi×[i, i + 1]) in which each point (xi, i + 1) ∈Xi×[i, i + 1] is identiﬁed
with (fi(xi), i + 1) ∈Xi+1×[i + 1, i + 2].
X0
X1
X2
X3
X4
In the mapping telescope T , let Ti be the union of the ﬁrst i mapping cylinders.
This deformation retracts onto Xi by deformation retracting each mapping cylinder
onto its right end in turn. If the maps fi are cellular, each mapping cylinder is a CW
complex and the telescope T is the increasing union of the subcomplexes Ti ≃Xi .
Then Proposition 3.32, or Theorem 3F.8 below, implies that Hn(T; G) ≈lim
--→Hn(Xi; G).
Example 3F.3. Suppose each fi is a map Sn→Sn of degree p for a ﬁxed prime p.
Then Hn(T) is the direct limit of the sequence Z
p-----→Z
p-----→Z -→··· considered in
Example 3F.1 above, and eHk(T) = 0 for k ≠n, so T is a Moore space M(Z[1/p], n).
Example 3F.4. In the preceding example, if we attach a cell en+1 to the ﬁrst Sn in
T via the identity map of Sn , we obtain a Moore space M(Zp∞, n) since the space
X = T ∪en+1 can be regarded as the direct limit of its subspaces Xi = Ti ∪en+1 ,
which are M(Zpi, n)’s, and the inclusion Xi ⊂Xi+1 induces the inclusion Zpi ⊂Zpi+1
on Hn .
Generalizing these two examples, if fi : Sn→Sn has degree di then by suitable
choice of the di ’s we may obtain Moore spaces M(G, n) for any subgroup G of Q or
Q/Z.
The behavior of cohomology groups is more complicated. If X is the increasing
union of subcomplexes Xi , then the cohomology groups Hn(Xi; G), for ﬁxed n and
G, form a sequence of homomorphisms
··· -→G2
α2-----→G1
α1-----→G0
Given such a sequence of group homomorphisms, the inverse limit lim
←-- Gi is deﬁned
to be the subgroup of
Q
iGi consisting of sequences (gi) with αi(gi) = gi−1 for all i.
There is a natural map λ : Hn(X; G)→lim
←-- Hn(Xi; G) sending an element of Hn(X; G)

Section 3.F.
Limits
311
to its sequence of images in Hn(Xi; G) under the maps Hn(X; G)→Hn(Xi; G) induced
by inclusion. One might hope that λ is an isomorphism, but this is not true in general,
as we shall see. However, for some choices of G it is:
Proposition 3F.5. If the CW complex X is the union of an increasing sequence of sub-
complexes Xi and if G is one of the ﬁelds Q or Zp , then λ : Hn(X; G)→lim
←-- Hn(Xi; G)
is an isomorphism for all n.
Proof: First we have an easy algebraic fact: Given a sequence of homomorphisms
of abelian groups G1
α1-----→G2
α2-----→G3 -→···, then Hom(lim
--→Gi, G) = lim
←-- Hom(Gi, G)
for any G. Namely, it follows from the deﬁnition of lim
--→Gi that a homomorphism
ϕ : lim
--→Gi→G is the same thing as a sequence of homomorphisms ϕi : Gi→G with
ϕi = ϕi+1αi for all i. Such a sequence (ϕi) is exactly an element of lim
←-- Hom(Gi, G).
Now if G is a ﬁeld Q or Zp we have
Hn(X; G) = Hom(Hn(X; G), G)
= Hom(lim
--→Hn(Xi; G), G)
= lim
←-- Hom(Hn(Xi; G), G)
= lim
←-- Hn(Xi; G)
⊔⊓
Let us analyze what happens for cohomology with an arbitrary coefﬁcient group,
or more generally for any cohomology theory. Given a sequence of homomorphisms
of abelian groups
··· -→G2
α2-----→G1
α1-----→G0
deﬁne a map δ :
Q
iGi→
Q
iGi by δ(··· , gi, ···) = (··· , gi −αi+1(gi+1), ···), so that
lim
←-- Gi is the kernel of δ. Denoting the cokernel of δ by lim
←--
1Gi , we have then an
exact sequence
0 -→lim
←-- Gi -→
Q
iGi
δ-----→
Q
iGi -→lim
←--
1Gi -→0
This may be compared with the corresponding situation for the direct limit of a se-
quence G1
α1
------------→G2
α2
------------→G3 -→···. Here one has a short exact sequence
0 -→
L
i Gi
δ-----→
L
i Gi -→lim
--→Gi -→0
where δ(··· , gi, ···) = (··· , gi −αi−1(gi−1), ···), hence δ is injective. So there is no
lim
--→
1Gi .
A few simple observations:
— If all the αi ’s are isomorphisms then lim
←-- Gi ≈G1 and lim
←--
1Gi = 0.
In fact,
lim
←--
1Gi = 0 if each αi is surjective, for to realize a given element (hi) ∈
Q
iGi as
δ(gi) we can take g1 = 0, then solve α2(g2) = −h1 , α3(g3) = g2 −h2 , etc.
— If all the αi ’s are zero then lim
←-- Gi = lim
←--
1Gi = 0.

312
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
— Deleting a ﬁnite number of terms from the end of the sequence ···→G1→G0
does not affect lim
←-- Gi or lim
←--
1Gi . More generally, lim
←-- Gi and lim
←--
1Gi are un-
changed if we replace the sequence ···→G1→G0 by a subsequence, with the
appropriate compositions of αj ’s as the maps between the Gi ’s in the subse-
quence.
Example 3F.6. Consider the sequence of natural surjections ···→Zp3→Zp2→Zp
with p a prime. The inverse limit of this sequence is a famous object in number theory,
called the p adic integers. Our notation for it will be bZp . It is actually a commutative
ring, not just a group, since the projections Zpi+1→Zpi are ring homomorphisms, but
we shall only be interested in the additive group structure. Elements of bZp are inﬁnite
sequences (··· , a2, a1) with ai ∈Zpi such that ai is the mod pi reduction of ai+1 .
For each choice of ai there are exactly p choices for ai+1 , so bZp is uncountable.
There is a natural inclusion Z ⊂bZp as the constant sequences ai = n ∈Z.
There is another way of looking at bZp . An element of bZp has a unique represen-
tation as a sequence (··· , a2, a1) of integers ai with 0 ≤ai < pi for each i. We
can write each ai uniquely in the form bi−1pi−1 + ··· + b1p + b0 with 0 ≤bj < p.
The fact that ai+1 reduces mod pi to ai means that the numbers bj depend only
on the element (··· , a2, a1) ∈bZp , so we can view the elements of bZp as the ‘base p
inﬁnite numbers’ ··· b1b0 with 0 ≤bi < p for all i, with the familiar rule for addition
in base p notation. From this viewpoint, the subgroup Z ⊂bZp consists of the ﬁnite
expressions bn ··· b1b0 . It is also clear from this representation of bZp that bZp is
torsionfree.
Since the maps Zpi+1→Zpi are surjective, lim
←--
1Zpi = 0. The next example shows
how p adic integers can also give rise to a nonvanishing lim
←--
1 term.
Example 3F.7. Consider the sequence ··· -→Z
p-----→Z
p-----→Z for p prime. In this case
the inverse limit is zero since a nonzero integer can only be divided by p ﬁnitely often.
The lim
←--
1 term is the cokernel of the map δ :
Q
∞Z→
Q
∞Z given by δ(y1, y2, ···) =
(y1 −py2, y2 −py3, ···). We claim that the map bZp/Z→Coker δ sending a p adic
number ··· b1b0 as in the preceding Example to (b0, b1, ···) is an isomorphism. To
see this, note that the image of δ consists of the sums y1(1, 0, ···)+y2(−p, 1, 0, ···)+
y3(0, −p, 1, 0, ···)+···. The terms after y1(1, 0, ···) give exactly the relations which
hold among the p adic numbers ··· b1b0 , and in particular allow one to reduce an
arbitrary sequence (b0, b1, ···) to a unique sequence with 0 ≤bi < p for all i. And
the term y1(1, 0, ···) accounts for the subgroup Z ⊂bZp .
We come now to the main result of this section:

Section 3.F.
Limits
313
Theorem 3F.8. For a CW complex X which is the union of an increasing sequence
of subcomplexes X0 ⊂X1 ⊂··· there is an exact sequence
0 -→lim
←--
1hn−1(Xi) -→hn(X)
λ-----→lim
←-- hn(Xi) -→0
where h∗is any reduced or unreduced cohomology theory. For any homology theory
h∗, reduced or unreduced, the natural maps lim
--→hn(Xi)→hn(X) are isomorphisms.
Proof: Let T be the mapping telescope of the sequence of inclusions X0>X1>···.
This is a subcomplex of X×[0, ∞) when [0, ∞) is given the CW structure with the
integer points as 0 cells. We have T ≃X since T is a deformation retract of X×[0, ∞),
as we showed in the proof of Lemma 2.34 in the special case that Xi is the i skeleton
of X , but the argument works just as well for arbitrary subcomplexes Xi .
Let T1 ⊂T be the subcomplex which is the union of the products Xi×[i, i + 1]
for i odd, and let T2 be the corresponding union for i even. Thus T1 ∩T2 =
`
i Xi and
T1 ∪T2 = T . For an unreduced cohomology theory h∗we have then a Mayer-Vietoris
sequence
−→
−→
−→
−→
T
h
1
h
n
h
n
n
n
(
)
-
n 1
T
h
2
(
)
-
n 1
⊕
T
h
1
(
)
T
h
2
(
)
⊕
T
h
1
(
T
(
-
n 1
T2)
)
∩
−−−−−→
−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
X
h
i
i
h
n
(
)
-
n 1
X
(
)
T1
(
T2)
∩
∏
X
h
i
i
(
)
-
n 1
∏
X
h
i
i
(
)
n
∏
X
h
i
i
(
)
n
∏
≈
≈
≈
≈
≈
ϕ
ϕ
The maps ϕ making the diagram commute are given by the formula ϕ(··· , gi, ···) =
(··· , (−1)i−1(gi −ρ(gi+1)), ···), the ρ’s being the appropriate restriction maps. This
differs from δ only in the sign of its even coordinates, so if we change the isomor-
phism hk(T1 ∩T2) ≈
Q
ihk(Xi) by inserting a minus sign in the even coordinates, we
can replace ϕ by δ in the second row of the diagram. This row then yields a short ex-
act sequence 0→Coker δ→Hn(X; G)→Ker δ→0, ﬁnishing the proof for unreduced
cohomology.
The same argument works for reduced cohomology if we use the reduced tele-
scope obtained from T by collapsing {x0}×[0, ∞) to a point, for x0 a basepoint
0 cell of X0 . Then T1 ∩T2 =
W
i Xi rather than
`
i Xi , and the rest of the argument
goes through unchanged. The proof also applies for homology theories, with direct
products replaced by direct sums in the second row of the diagram. As we noted
earlier, Ker δ = 0 in the direct limit case, and Coker δ = lim
--→.
⊔⊓
Now we consider the earlier Examples 3F.3 and 3F.4 from the viewpoint of coho-
mology.
Example 3F.9. Consider the mapping telescope T =
S
i Ti from Example 3F.3. The
inclusions T1 > T2 > ··· induce on Hn(−; Z) the sequence ··· -→Z
p-----→Z in Exam-
ple 3F.7. From the theorem we deduce that Hn+1(T; Z) ≈bZp/Z and eHk(T; Z) = 0 for
k ≠n+1. This is a somewhat curious state of affairs. The CW complex T is the union
of subcomplexes Ti each having cohomology consisting only of a Z in dimension n,
but T itself has no cohomology in dimension n and instead a huge uncountable group

314
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
bZp/Z in dimension n + 1. This contrasts sharply with what happens for homology,
where the groups Hn(Ti) ≈Z ﬁt together nicely to give Hn(T) ≈Z[1/p].
Example 3F.10. A more reasonable behavior is exhibited if we consider the space
X = M(Zp∞, n) in Example 3F.4 expressed as the union of its subspaces Xi . By the
universal coefﬁcient theorem, the reduced cohomology of Xi with Z coefﬁcients con-
sists of a Zpi = Ext(Zpi, Z) in dimension n + 1. The inclusion Xi ⊂Xi+1 induces the
inclusion Zpi ⊂Zpi+1 on Hn , and on Ext this induced map is a surjection Zpi+1→Zpi
as one can see by looking at the diagram of free resolutions
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
p
p
p
p
i
i
Z
−−−−−→
Z
−−−−−→
Z
0
0
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
p
pi 1
i 1
Z
−−−−−→
Z
−−−−−→
Z
0
0
+
+
1
1
The right-hand vertical map is the inclusion Zpi > Zpi+1 . When we apply Hom(−, Z)
to this diagram we get
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
p
p
p
i
i Z
−−−−−→
Z
0
−−−−−→
pi 1
i 1
0
+
+
1
1
Ext(
)
,
p
Z
Z
Ext(
)
,
Z
Z
Hom(
)
,
Z
Z
Hom(
)
,
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
Z
Z
Hom(
)
,
Z
Z
Hom(
)
,
and the left-hand vertical map is a surjection since the middle one is. Thus the se-
quence ···→Hn+1(X2; Z)→Hn+1(X1; Z) is the sequence in Example 3F.6, and we de-
duce that Hn+1(X; Z) ≈bZp , the p adic integers, and eHk(X; Z) = 0 for k ≠n + 1.
This example can be related to the preceding one. If we view X as the mapping
cone of the inclusion Sn>T of the ﬁrst Sn , then the long exact sequences of homol-
ogy and cohomology groups for the pair (T, Sn) reduce to
n
−→
−→
X
0
0
Hn(
)
−→
T
Hn(
)
−→
S
Hn(
)
n
n
−→
−→
T
0
0
H
(
)
−→
X
H
(
)
−→
S
H (
)
n 1
+
n 1
+
==
Z
==
==
Z
==
Z[1/p
p
]
==
Z
p
==
Z
∞
/
b
p
Z
Z
b
From these examples and the universal coefﬁcient theorem we obtain isomor-
phisms Ext(Zp∞, Z) ≈bZp and Ext(Z[1/p], Z) ≈bZp/Z.
These can also be derived
directly from the deﬁnition of Ext. A free resolution of Zp∞is
0 -→Z∞
ϕ-----→Z∞-→Zp∞-→0
where Z∞is the direct sum of an inﬁnite number of Z’s, the sequences (x1, x2, ···)
of integers all but ﬁnitely many of which are zero, and ϕ sends (x1, x2, ···) to
(px1 −x2, px2 −x3, ···). We can view ϕ as the linear map corresponding to the inﬁ-
nite matrix with p’s on the diagonal, −1’s just above the diagonal, and 0’s everywhere
else. Clearly Ker ϕ = 0 since integers cannot be divided by p inﬁnitely often. The im-
age of ϕ is generated by the vectors (p, 0, ···), (−1, p, 0, ···), (0, −1, p, 0, ···), ··· so

Section 3.F.
Limits
315
Coker ϕ ≈Zp∞. Dualizing by taking Hom(−, Z), we have Hom(Z∞, Z) the inﬁnite di-
rect product of Z’s, and ϕ∗(y1, y2, ···) = (py1, py2−y1, py3−y2, ···), correspond-
ing to the transpose of the matrix of ϕ. By deﬁnition, Ext(Zp∞, Z) = Coker ϕ∗. The
image of ϕ∗consists of the inﬁnite sums y1(p, −1, 0 ···) + y2(0, p, −1, 0, ···) + ···,
so Coker ϕ∗can be identiﬁed with bZp by rewriting a sequence (z1, z2, ···) as the
p adic number ··· z2z1 .
The calculation Ext(Z[1/p], Z) ≈bZp/Z is quite similar.
A free resolution of
Z[1/p] can be obtained from the free resolution of Zp∞by deleting the ﬁrst col-
umn of the matrix of ϕ and, for convenience, changing sign.
This gives the for-
mula ϕ(x1, x2, ···) = (x1, x2 −px1, x3 −px2, ···), with the image of ϕ gener-
ated by the elements (1, −p, 0, ···), (0, 1, −p, 0, ···), ···. The dual map ϕ∗is given
by ϕ∗(y1, y2, ···) = (y1 −py2, y2 −py3, ···) with image the sums y1(1, 0 ···) +
y2(−p, 1, 0, ···) + y3(0, −p, 1, 0, ···) + ···, so Ext(Z[1/p], Z) = Coker ϕ∗≈bZp/Z.
Note that ϕ∗is exactly the map δ in Example 3F.7.
It is interesting to note also that the map ϕ : Z∞→Z∞in the two cases Zp∞and
Z[1/p] is precisely the cellular boundary map Hn+1(Xn+1, Xn)→Hn(Xn, Xn−1) for
the Moore space M(Zp∞, n) or M(Z[1/p], n), n > 1, constructed earlier as the map-
ping telescope of the sequence of degree p maps Sn→Sn→···, with a cell en+1
attached to the ﬁrst Sn in the case of Zp∞.
Exercises
1. Given maps fi : Xi→Xi+1 for integers i < 0, show that the ‘reverse mapping tele-
scope’ obtained by glueing together the mapping cylinders of the fi ’s in the obvious
way deformation retracts onto X0 . Similarly, if maps fi : Xi→Xi+1 are given for all
i ∈Z, show that the resulting ‘double mapping telescope’ deformation retracts onto
any of the ordinary mapping telescopes contained in it, the union of the mapping
cylinders of the fi ’s for i greater than a given number n.
2. Show that lim
←--
1Gi = 0 if the sequence ··· -→G2
α2-----→G1
α1-----→G0 satisﬁes the Mittag-
Lefﬂer condition that for each i the images of the maps Gi+n→Gi are independent
of n for sufﬁciently large n.

316
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
The functors Hom and Ext behave fairly simply for ﬁnitely generated groups,
when cohomology and homology are essentially the same except for a dimension shift
in the torsion. But matters are more complicated in the nonﬁnitely-generated case. A
useful tool for getting a handle on this complication is the following:
Proposition 3G.1. Given an abelian group G and a short exact sequence of abelian
groups 0→A→B→C→0, there are exact sequences
0→Hom(G, A)→Hom(G, B)→Hom(G, C)→Ext(G, A)→Ext(G, B)→Ext(G, C)→0
0→Hom(C, G)→Hom(B, G)→Hom(A, G)→Ext(C, G)→Ext(B, G)→Ext(A, G)→0
Proof: A free resolution 0→F1→F0→G→0 gives rise to a commutative diagram
Hom
A
0
0
F1
(
)
,
−−−−→Hom
B
F1
(
)
,
−−−−→Hom
C
F1
(
)
,
−−−→
−−−→
Hom
A
0
0
F0
(
)
,
−−−−→Hom
B
F0
(
)
,
−−−−→Hom
C
F0
(
)
,
−−−→
−−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
Since F0 and F1 are free, the two rows are exact, as they are simply direct products
of copies of the exact sequence 0→A→B→C→0, in view of the general fact that
Hom(
L
iGi, H) =
Q
iHom(Gi, H). Enlarging the diagram by zeros above and below,
it becomes a short exact sequence of chain complexes, and the associated long exact
sequence of homology groups is the ﬁrst of the two six-term exact sequences of the
proposition.
To obtain the other exact sequence we shall
construct a commutative diagram as at the right,
where the columns are free resolutions and the
−−→
−−→
−−−→
−−−→F
′
1
−−−→
F
0
0
−−→
′′−−−→
F
1
1
−−→
−−→
−−−→
−−−→F
′
0
−−−→
F
0
0
−−→
′′−−−→
F
0
0
−−→
−−→
−−−→
−−−→A
−−−→
B
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−−→
C
rows are exact. To start, let F0→A and F′′
0 →C
be surjections from free abelian groups onto A
and C . Then let F′
0 = F0⊕F′′
0 , with the obvious
maps in the second row, inclusion and projec-
tion.
The map F′
0→B is deﬁned on the sum-
mand F0 to make the lower left square commute, and on the summand F′′
0 it is de-
ﬁned by sending basis elements of F′′
0
to elements of B mapping to the images of
these basis elements in C , so the lower right square commutes also. Now we have
the bottom two rows of the diagram, and we can regard these two rows as a short
exact sequence of two-term chain complexes. The associated long exact sequence of
homology groups has six terms, the ﬁrst three being the kernels of the three vertical
maps to A, B , and C , and the last three being the cokernels of these maps. Since
the vertical maps to A and C are surjective, the fourth and sixth of the six homology
groups vanish, hence also the ﬁfth, which says the vertical map to B is surjective. The

Section 3.G.
More About Ext
317
ﬁrst three of the original six homology groups form a short exact sequence, and we
let this be the top row of the diagram, formed by the kernels of the vertical maps to
A, B , and C . These kernels are subgroups of free abelian groups, hence are also free.
Thus the three columns are free resolutions. The upper two squares automatically
commute, so the construction of the diagram is complete.
The ﬁrst two rows of the diagram split by freeness, so applying Hom(−, G) yields
a diagram
Hom
G
0
0
F1
(
)
,
−−−−−→Hom
G
F1
(
)
,
−−−−−→Hom
G
F1
(
)
,
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
Hom
G
0
0
F0
(
)
,
−−−−−→Hom
G
F0
(
)
,
−−−−−→Hom
G
F0
(
)
,
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
′
′
′′
′′
with exact rows. Again viewing this as a short exact sequence of chain complexes,
the associated long exact sequence of homology groups is the second six-term exact
sequence in the statement of the proposition.
⊔⊓
The second sequence in the proposition says in particular that an injection A→B
induces a surjection Ext(B, C)→Ext(A, C) for any C . For example, if A has torsion,
this says Ext(A, Z) is nonzero since it maps onto Ext(Zn, Z) ≈Zn for some n > 1.
The calculation Ext(Zp∞, Z) ≈bZp in the preceding section shows that torsion in A
does not necessarily yield torsion in Ext(A, Z), however.
Also useful are the formulas
Ext(
L
i Ai, B) ≈
Q
iExt(Ai, B)
Ext(A,
L
i Bi) ≈
L
i Ext(A, Bi)
whose proof we leave as exercises.
For example, since Q/Z =
L
p Zp∞we obtain
Ext(Q/Z, Z) ≈
Q
p bZp from the calculation Ext(Zp∞, Z) ≈bZp . Then from the exact
sequence 0→Z→Q→Q/Z→0 we get Ext(Q, Z) ≈(
Q
p bZp)/Z using the second exact
sequence in the proposition.
In these examples the groups Ext(A, Z) are rather large, and this is part of a
general pattern:
Proposition 3G.2. If A is not ﬁnitely generated then either Hom(A, Z) or Ext(A, Z)
is uncountable. Hence if Hn(X; Z) is not ﬁnitely generated, then either Hn(X; Z) or
Hn+1(X; Z) is uncountable.
Both possibilities can occur, e.g., Hom(
L
∞Z, Z) ≈
Q
∞Z and Ext(Zp∞, Z) ≈bZp .
This proposition has some interesting consequences. First, it implies that if a
space X has eH∗(X; Z) = 0, then eH∗(X; Z) = 0, since the case of ﬁnitely generated
homology groups follows from our earlier results. And second, it says that one cannot
always construct a space X with prescribed cohomology groups Hn(X; Z), unlike
the situation for homology. For example there is no space whose only nonvanishing
eHn(X; Z) is a countable nonﬁnitely-generated group such as Q or Q/Z. Even in the
ﬁnitely generated case the dimension n = 1 is somewhat special since the group
H1(X; Z) ≈Hom(H1(X), Z) is always torsionfree.

318
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
Proof: Consider the map A
p-----→A, a, pa, multiplication by the positive integer p.
Denote the kernel, image, and cokernel of this map by pA, pA, and Ap , respectively.
The short exact sequences 0→pA→A→pA→0 and 0→pA→A→Ap→0 give two
six-term exact sequences involving Hom(−, Z) and Ext(−, Z). The parts of these exact
sequences we need are
0 -→Hom(pA, Z)
≈-----→Hom(A, Z) -→Hom(pA, Z) = 0
Hom(pA, Z) -→Ext(Ap, Z) -→Ext(A, Z)
where the term Hom(pA, Z) in the ﬁrst sequence is zero since pA is a torsion group.
Now let p be a prime, so Ap is a vector space over Zp . If this vector space is
inﬁnite-dimensional, it is an inﬁnite direct sum of Zp ’s, and Ext(Ap, Z) is the direct
product of an inﬁnite numbers of Zp ’s, hence uncountable.
Exactness of the sec-
ond sequence above then implies that one of the two adjacent terms Ext(A, Z) and
Hom(pA, Z) ≈Hom(A, Z) must be uncountable, so we are done when Ap is inﬁnite.
At the other extreme is the possibility that Ap = 0. This means that A = pA,
so every element of A is divisible by p. Hence if A is nontrivial, it then contains a
subgroup isomorphic to either Z[1/p] or Zp∞. We have seen that Ext(Z[1/p], Z) ≈
bZp/Z and Ext(Zp∞, Z) ≈bZp , an uncountable group in either case. An inclusion B >
A induces a surjection Ext(A, Z)→Ext(B, Z) as we noted earlier, so it follows that
Ext(A, Z) is uncountable when Ap = 0 and A ≠0.
The remaining case that Ap is a ﬁnite direct sum of Zp ’s will be reduced to
the case Ap = 0.
Choose ﬁnitely many elements of A whose images in Ap are
a set of generators, and let B ⊂A be the subgroup generated by these elements.
Thus the map Bp→Ap induced by the inclusion B > A is surjective.
The func-
tor A , Ap is the same as A , A⊗Zp , so exactness of B→A→A/B→0 implies
exactness of Bp→Ap→(A/B)p→0, and hence (A/B)p = 0.
If A is not ﬁnitely
generated, A/B is nonzero, so the preceding case implies that Ext(A/B, Z) is un-
countable.
This implies that Ext(A, Z) is also uncountable via the exact sequence
Hom(B, Z)→Ext(A/B, Z)→Ext(A, Z), since Hom(B, Z) is ﬁnitely generated and there-
fore countable.
⊔⊓
From this proposition one might conjecture that cohomology groups with Z co-
efﬁcients are either ﬁnitely generated or uncountable.
As was explained in §3.1, the functor Ext generalizes to a sequence of functors
Extn
R for modules over a ring R. In this generality the six-term sequences of Proposi-
tion 3G.1 become long exact sequences of Extn
R groups associated to short exact se-
quences of R modules. These are derived in a similar fashion, by constructing short
exact sequences of free resolutions. There are also analogous long exact sequences
for the functors TorR
n , specializing to six-term sequences when R = Z. These six-
term sequences are perhaps less useful than their Ext analogs however, since Tor is

Section 3.H.
Transfer Homomorphisms
319
less mysterious than Ext for nonﬁnitely-generated groups, as it respects direct limits,
according to an exercise for §3.A.
Exercises
1. Show that Ext(A, Q) = 0 for all A. [Consider the homology with Q coefﬁcients of
a Moore space M(A, n).]
2. An abelian group G is deﬁned to be divisible if the map G
n-----→G, g , ng, is
surjective for all n > 1. Show that a group is divisible iff it is a quotient of a direct
sum of Q’s. Deduce from the previous problem that if G is divisble then Ext(A, G) = 0
for all A.
3. Show that Ext(A, Z) is isomorphic to the cokernel of Hom(A, Q)→Hom(A, Q/Z),
the map induced by the quotient map Q→Q/Z. Use this to get another proof that
Ext(Zp∞, Z) ≈bZp for p prime.
4. Show that Ext(Zp∞, Zp) ≈Zp .
5. Show that for a short exact sequence of abelian groups 0→A→B→C→0, a Moore
space M(C, n) can be realized as a quotient M(B, n)/M(A, n). Applying the long exact
sequence of cohomology for the pair
 M(B, n), M(A, n)

with any coefﬁcient group
G, deduce an exact sequence
0→Hom(C, G)→Hom(B, G)→Hom(A, G)→Ext(C, G)→Ext(B, G)→Ext(A, G)→0
6. Show that for a Moore space M(G, n) the Bockstein long exact sequence in cohomol-
ogy associated to the short exact sequence of coefﬁcient groups 0→A→B→C→0
reduces to an exact sequence
0→Hom(G, A)→Hom(G, B)→Hom(G, C)→Ext(G, A)→Ext(G, B)→Ext(G, C)→0
7. For an abelian group A let p : A→A be multiplication by p, and let pA = Ker p,
pA = Im p, and Ap = Coker p as in the proof of Proposition 3G.2. Show that the six-
term exact sequences involving Hom(−, Z) and Ext(−, Z) associated to the short exact
sequences 0→pA→A→pA→0 and 0→pA→A→Ap→0 can be spliced together
to yield the exact sequence across the top of the diagram
Hom
Z
0
pA
(
)
,
Ext
Z
pA
(
)
,
−−−→
Hom
Z
pA
(
)
,
Hom
Z
A
0
0
0
(
)
,
−−−→
−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−→
Ext
Z
Ap
p
p
(
)
,
−−−→Ext
Z
A
(
)
,
−−−−→
Ext
Z
A
(
)
,
−−−→
Ext
Z
A
(
)
,
−−−→
≈
where the map labelled ‘p’ is multiplication by p. Use this to show
(a) Ext(A, Z) is divisible iff A is torsionfree.
(b) Ext(A, Z) is torsionfree if A is divisible, and the converse holds if Hom(A, Z) = 0.

320
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
There is a simple construction called ‘transfer’ which gives very useful informa-
tion about homology and cohomology of ﬁnite-sheeted covering spaces. After giving
the deﬁnition and proving a few elementary properties, we will use the transfer to
construct a number of examples of spaces whose Zp cohomology is a polynomial
ring.
Let π : eX→X be an n sheeted covering space, for some ﬁnite n. In addition
to the induced map on singular chains π♯: Ck( eX)→Ck(X) there is also a homomor-
phism in the opposite direction τ : Ck(X)→Ck( eX) which assigns to a singular simplex
σ : ∆k→X the sum of the n distinct lifts eσ : ∆k→eX . This is obviously a chain map,
commuting with boundary homomorphisms, so it induces transfer homomorphisms
τ∗: Hk(X; G)→Hk( eX; G) and τ∗: Hk( eX; G)→Hk(X; G) for any coefﬁcient group G.
We focus on cohomology in what follows, but similar statements hold for homology
as well.
The composition π♯τ is clearly multiplication by n, hence τ∗π∗= n.
This
has the consequence that the kernel of π∗: Hk(X; G)→Hk( eX; G) consists of torsion
elements of order dividing n, since π∗(α) = 0 implies τ∗π∗(α) = nα = 0. Thus
the cohomology of eX must be ‘larger’ than that of X except possibly for torsion of
order dividing n. This can be a genuine exception as one sees from the examples
of Sm covering RPm and, when m is odd, lens spaces. More generally, if Sm→X
is any n sheeted covering space, then the relation τ∗π∗= n implies that eH∗(X; Z)
consists entirely of torsion elements of order dividing n, apart from a possible Z
in dimension m.
(Since X is a closed manifold, its homology groups are ﬁnitely
generated by Corollaries A.8 and A.9 in the Appendix.)
By studying the other composition π∗τ∗we will prove:
Proposition 3H.1. Let π : eX→X be an n sheeted covering space deﬁned by an ac-
tion of a group Γ on eX . Then with coefﬁcients in a ﬁeld F whose characteristic is 0
or a prime not dividing n, the map π∗: Hk(X; F)→Hk( eX; F) is injective with image
the subgroup H∗( eX; F)Γ consisting of classes α such that γ∗(α) = α for all γ ∈Γ .
Proof: We have already seen that elements of the kernel of π∗have ﬁnite order
dividing n, so π∗is injective for the coefﬁcient ﬁelds we are considering here. It
remains to describe the image of π∗. Note ﬁrst that τπ♯sends a singular simplex
∆k→eX to the sum of all its images under the Γ action. Hence π∗τ∗(α) =
P
γ∈Γ γ∗(α)
for α ∈Hk(X; F). If α is ﬁxed under the action of Γ on Hk( eX; F), the sum
P
γ∈Γ γ∗(α)
equals nα, so if the coefﬁcient ﬁeld F has characteristic 0 or a prime not dividing n,
we can write α = π∗τ∗(α/n) and thus α lies in the image of π∗. Conversely, since
πγ = π for all γ ∈Γ , we have γ∗π∗(α) = π∗(α) for all α, and so the image of π∗
is contained in H∗( eX; F)Γ .
⊔⊓

Section 3.H.
Transfer Homomorphisms
321
Example 3H.2. Let X = S1 ∨Sk , k > 1, with eX the n sheeted cover corresponding to
the index n subgroup of π1(X) ≈Z. Thus eX is a circle with n k spheres attached at
equally-spaced points. The deck transformation group Zn acts by rotating the circle,
permuting the spheres cyclically. Hence for any coefﬁcient group G, the invariant
cohomology H∗( eX; G)Zn is all of H0 and H1 , plus a copy of G in dimension k, the
cellular cohomology classes assigning the same element of G to each of the k spheres.
Thus Hi( eX; G)Zn is exactly the image of π∗for i = 0 and k, while the image of π∗
in dimension 1 is the subgroup nH1( eX; G), and whether this equals H1( eX; G)Zn or
not depends on G. For G = Q or Zp with p not dividing n, we have equality, but not
for G = Z or Zp with p dividing n. In this last case the map π∗is not injective on
H1 .
Spaces with Polynomial mod p Cohomology
An interesting special case of the general problem of realizing graded commuta-
tive rings as cup product rings of spaces is the case of polynomial rings Zp[x1, ··· , xn]
over the coefﬁcient ﬁeld Zp , p prime. The basic question here is, which sets of num-
bers d1, ··· , dn are realizable as the dimensions |xi| of the generators xi ? From §3.2
we have the examples of products of CP∞’s and HP∞’s with di ’s equal to 2 or 4, for
arbitrary p, and when p = 2 we can also take RP∞’s with di ’s equal to 1.
As an illustration of transfer homomorphisms we shall now construct some ex-
amples with larger di ’s. In the case of polynomials in one variable the method gives
examples which turn out to realize everything that can be realized. But for two or
more variables, more sophisticated techniques are necessary to realize all the realiz-
able cases; see the end of this section for further remarks on this.
The construction can be outlined as follows. Start with a space Y already known
to have polynomial cohomology H∗(Y; Zp) = Zp[y1, ··· , yn], and suppose there is
an action of a ﬁnite group Γ on Y . A simple trick called the Borel construction shows
that without loss of generality we may assume the action is free, deﬁning a covering
space Y→Y/Γ . Then by Proposition 3H.1 above, if p does not divide the order of Γ ,
H∗(Y/Γ; Zp) is isomorphic to the subring of Zp[y1, ··· , yn] consisting of polynomials
which are invariant under the induced action of Γ on H∗(Y; Zp). And in some cases
this subring is itself a polynomial ring.
For example if Y is the product of n copies of CP∞and the symmetric group
Γ = Σn acts on Y by permuting the factors, so the induced action on H∗(Y; Zp) ≈
Zp[y1, ··· , yn] permutes the yi ’s, then by a standard theorem in algebra the invariant
polynomials form a polynomial ring Zp[σ1, ··· , σn] where σi is the ith elementary
symmetric polynomial, the sum of all products of i distinct yj ’s, so σi is a polynomial
of degree i. The order of Γ is n! so the condition that p not divide the order of Γ
amounts to p > n. Thus we realize the polynomial ring Zp[x1, ··· , xn] with |xi| = 2i,
provided that p > n. Actually, this example is less than optimal since there happens
to be another space, the Grassmann manifold of n dimensional linear subspaces of

322
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
C∞, whose cohomology with any coefﬁcient ring R is R[x1, ··· , xn] with |xi| = 2i,
as we show in §4.D, so the restriction p > n is not really necessary.
To get further examples the idea is to replace CP∞by a space with the same
Zp cohomology but with ‘more symmetry,’ allowing for larger groups Γ to act. The
constructions will be made using K(π, 1) spaces, which were introduced in §1.B. For
a group π we constructed there a ∆complex Bπ with contractible universal cover
Eπ .
The construction is functorial: A homomorphism ϕ : π→π′ induces a map
Bϕ : Bπ→Bπ′ , Bϕ([g1| ··· |gn]) = [ϕ(g1)| ··· |ϕ(gn)], satisfying the functor prop-
erties B(ϕψ) = BϕBψ and B11 = 11. In particular, if Γ is a group of automorphisms
of π , then Γ acts on Bπ .
The other ingredient we shall need is the Borel construction, which converts an
action of a group Γ on a space Y into a free action of Γ on a homotopy equivalent
space Y ′ . Namely, take Y ′ = Y ×EΓ with the diagonal action of Γ , γ(y, z) = (γy, γz)
where Γ acts on EΓ as deck transformations. The diagonal action is free, in fact a
covering space action, since this is true for the action in the second coordinate. The
orbit space of this diagonal action is denoted Y × Γ EΓ .
Example 3H.3.
Let π = Zp and let Γ be the full automorphism group Aut(Zp).
Automorphisms of Zp have the form x , mx for (m, p) = 1, so Γ is the multi-
plicative group of invertible elements in the ﬁeld Zp . By elementary ﬁeld theory this
is a cyclic group, of order p −1. The preceding constructions then give a covering
space K(Zp, 1)→K(Zp, 1)/Γ with H∗(K(Zp, 1)/Γ; Zp) ≈H∗(K(Zp, 1); Zp)Γ . We may
assume we are in the nontrivial case p > 2. From the calculation of the cup product
structure of lens spaces in Example 3.40 or Example 3E.2 we have H∗(K(Zp, 1); Zp) ≈
ΛZp[α]⊗Zp[β] with |α| = 1 and |β| = 2, and we need to ﬁgure out how Γ acts on
this cohomology ring.
Let γ ∈Γ be a generator, say γ(x) = mx . The induced action of γ on π1K(Zp, 1)
is also multiplication by m since we have taken K(Zp, 1) = BZp×EΓ and γ takes an
edge-loop [g] in BZp to [γ(g)] = [mg]. Hence γ acts on H1(K(Zp, 1); Z) by multi-
plication by m. It follows that γ(α) = mα and γ(β) = mβ since H1(K(Zp, 1); Zp) ≈
Hom(H1(K(Zp, 1)), Zp) and H2(K(Zp, 1); Zp) ≈Ext(H1(K(Zp, 1)), Zp), and it is a gen-
eral fact, following easily from the deﬁnitions, that multiplication by an integer m in
an abelian group H induces multiplication by m in Hom(H, G) and Ext(H, G).
Thus γ(βk) = mkβk and γ(αβk) = mk+1αβk .
Since m was chosen to be a
generator of the multiplicative group of invertible elements of Zp , it follows that the
only elements of H∗(K(Zp, 1); Zp) ﬁxed by γ , hence by Γ , are the scalar multiples of
βi(p−1) and αβi(p−1)−1 . Thus H∗(K(Zp, 1); Zp)Γ = ΛZp[αβp−2]⊗Zp[βp−1], so we have
produced a space whose Zp cohomology ring is ΛZp[x2p−3]⊗Zp[y2p−2], subscripts
indicating dimension.
Example 3H.4. As an easy generalization of the preceding example, replace the group

Section 3.H.
Transfer Homomorphisms
323
Γ there by a subgroup of Aut(Zp) of order d, where d is any divisor of p −1. The
new Γ is generated by the automorphism x , m(p−1)/dx , and the same analysis
shows that we obtain a space with Zp cohomology ΛZp[x2d−1]⊗Zp[y2d], subscripts
again denoting dimension. For a given choice of d the condition that d divides p −1
says p ≡1 mod d, which is satisﬁed by inﬁnitely many p’s, according to a classical
theorem of Dirichlet.
Example 3H.5. The two preceding examples can be modiﬁed so as to eliminate the
exterior algebra factors. We shall do this by replacing Zp by Zp∞, the union of the
increasing sequence Zp ⊂Zp2 ⊂Zp3 ⊂···.
The ﬁrst step is to show that H∗(K(Zp∞, 1); Zp) ≈Zp[β] with |β| = 2. We know
that eH∗(K(Zpi, 1); Z) consists of Zpi ’s in odd dimensions. The inclusion Zpi > Zpi+1
induces a map K(Zpi, 1)→K(Zpi+1, 1) unique up to homotopy, and we can take this
map to be a p sheeted covering space since the covering space of a K(Zpi+1, 1) cor-
responding to the unique index p subgroup of its fundamental group is a K(Zpi, 1).
The homology transfer formula π∗τ∗= p shows that the image of the induced map
Hn(K(Zpi, 1); Z)→Hn(K(Zpi+1, 1); Z) for n odd contains the multiples of p, hence
this map is the inclusion Zpi > Zpi+1 . We can then use the universal coefﬁcient the-
orem to compute the induced map H∗(K(Zpi+1, 1); Zp)→H∗(K(Zpi, 1); Zp). Namely,
the inclusion Zpi > Zpi+1 induces the trivial map Hom(Zpi+1, Zp)→Hom(Zpi, Zp), so
on odd-dimensional cohomology the induced map is trivial. On the other hand, from
the diagram of free resolutions
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−→
p
p
p
p
i
i
Z
−−−−−→
Z
−−−−→
Z
0
0
−−−−−→
−−−−→
p
pi 1
i 1
Z
−−−−−→
Z
−−−−→
Z
0
0
+
+
1
1
it follows that the map Ext(Zpi+1, Zp)→Ext(Zpi, Zp) ˚inducedby Zpi > Zpi+1 is an
isomorphism. Hence Hn(K(Zpi+1, 1); Zp)→Hn(K(Zpi, 1); Zp) is an isomorphism for
n even. Since Zp∞is the union of the increasing sequence of subgroups Zpi , the space
BZp∞is the union of the increasing sequence of subcomplexes BZpi . We can therefore
apply Proposition 3F.5 to conclude that H∗(K(Zp∞, 1); Zp) is zero in odd dimensions,
while in even dimensions the map H∗(K(Zp∞, 1); Zp)→H∗(K(Zp, 1); Zp) induced by
the inclusion Zp > Zp∞is an isomorphism.
Thus H∗(K(Zp∞, 1); Zp) ≈Zp[β] as
claimed.
Next we show that the map Aut(Zp∞)→Aut(Zp) obtained by restriction to the
subgroup Zp ⊂Zp∞is a split surjection. Automorphisms of Zpi are the maps x,mx
for (m, p) = 1, so the restriction map Aut(Zpi+1)→Aut(Zpi) is surjective.
Since
Aut(Zp∞) = lim
←-- Aut(Zpi), the restriction map Aut(Zp∞)→Aut(Zp) is also surjec-
tive. The order of Aut(Zpi), the multiplicative group of invertible elements of Zpi , is
pi −pi−1 = pi−1(p −1) and p −1 is relatively prime to pi−1 , so the abelian group
Aut(Zpi) contains a subgroup of order p −1. This subgroup maps onto the cyclic

324
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
group Aut(Zp) of the same order, so Aut(Zpi)→Aut(Zp) is a split surjection, hence
also Aut(Zp∞)→Aut(Zp).
Thus we have an action of Γ = Aut(Zp) on BZp∞extending its natural action
on BZp .
The Borel construction then gives an inclusion BZp× Γ EΓ > BZp∞× Γ EΓ
inducing an isomorphism of H∗(BZp∞× Γ EΓ; Zp) onto the even-dimensional part of
H∗(BZp× Γ EΓ; Zp), a polynomial algebra Zp[y2p−2]. Similarly, if d is any divisor of
p −1, then taking Γ to be the subgroup of Aut(Zp) of order d yields a space with
Zp cohomology the polynomial ring Zp[y2d].
Example 3H.6. Now we enlarge the preceding example by taking products and bring-
ing in the permutation group to produce a space with Zp cohomology the polyno-
mial ring Zp[y2d, y4d, ··· , y2nd] where d is any divisor of p −1 and p > n. Let
X be the product of n copies of BZp∞and let Γ be the group of homeomorphisms
of X generated by permutations of the factors together with the actions of Zd in
each factor, constructed in the preceding example.
We can view Γ as a group of
n×n matrices with entries in Zp , the matrices obtained by replacing some of the
1’s in a permutation matrix by elements of Zp of multiplicative order a divisor of d.
Thus there is a split short exact sequence 0→(Zd)n→Γ→Σn→0, and the order of
Γ is dnn!. The product space X has H∗(X; Zp) ≈Zp[β1, ··· , βn] with |βi| = 2, so
H∗(X× Γ EΓ; Zp) ≈Zp[β1, ··· , βn]Γ provided that p does not divide the order of Γ , i.e.,
p > n. For a polynomial to be invariant under the Zd action in each factor it must be a
polynomial in the powers βd
i , and to be invariant under permutations of the variables
it must be a symmetric polynomial in these powers. Since symmetric polynomials are
exactly the polynomials in the elementary symmetric functions, the polynomials in
the βi ’s invariant under Γ form a polynomial ring Zp[y2d, y4d, ··· , y2nd] with y2k
the sum of all products of k distinct powers βd
i .
Example 3H.7. As a further variant on the preceding example, choose a divisor q of
d and replace Γ by its subgroup consisting of matrices for which the product of the
qth powers of the nonzero entries is 1. This has the effect of enlarging the ring of
polynomials invariant under the action, and in fact it can be shown that the invariant
polynomials form a polynomial ring Zp[y2d, y4d, ··· , y2(n−1)d, y2nq], with the last
generator y2nd replaced by y2nq =
Q
iβq
i . For example, if n = 2 and q = 1 we obtain
Zp[y4, y2d] with y4 = β1β2 and y2d = βd
1 + βd
2 . The group Γ in this case happens to
be isomorphic to the dihedral group of order 2d.
General Remarks
The problem of realizing graded polynomial rings Zp[y] in one variable as cup
product rings of spaces was discussed in §3.2, and Example 3H.5 provides the re-
maining examples, showing that |y| can be any even divisor of 2(p −1). In more
variables the problem of realizing Zp[y1, ··· , yn] with speciﬁed dimensions |yi| is
more difﬁcult, but has been solved for odd primes p. Here is a sketch of the answer.

Section 3.H.
Transfer Homomorphisms
325
Assuming that p is odd, the dimensions |yi| are even. Call the number di =
|yi|/2 the degree of yi .
In the examples above this was in fact the degree of yi
as a polynomial in the 2 dimensional classes βj invariant under the action of Γ .
It was proved in [Dwyer-Miller-Wilkerson] that every realizable polynomial algebra
Zp[y1, ··· , yn] is the ring of invariant polynomials Zp[β1, ··· , βn]Γ for an action of
some ﬁnite group Γ on Zp[β1, ··· , βn], where |βi| = 2. The basic examples, whose
products yield all realizable polynomial algebras, can be divided into two categories.
First there are classifying spaces of Lie groups, each of which realizes a polynomial
algebra for all but ﬁnitely many primes p. These are listed in the following table.
Lie group
degrees
primes
S1
1
all
SU(n)
2, 3, ··· , n
all
Sp(n)
2, 4, ··· , 2n
all
SO(2k)
2, 4, ··· , 2k −2, k
p > 2
G2
2, 6
p > 2
F4
2, 6, 8, 12
p > 3
E6
2, 5, 6, 8, 9, 12
p > 3
E7
2, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14
p > 3
E8
2, 8, 12, 14, 18, 20, 24, 30
p > 5
The remaining examples have to be constructed by hand.
They form two inﬁnite
families plus 30 sporadic exceptions, as shown in the table on the next page. The
ﬁrst row of the table is the examples we have constructed, though our construction
needed the extra condition that p not divide the order of the group Γ . For all entries
in both tables the order of Γ , the group such that Zp[y1, ··· , yn] = Zp[β1, ··· , βn]Γ ,
turns out to equal the product of the degrees. When p does not divide this order, the
method we used for the ﬁrst row can also be applied to give examples for all the other
rows. In some cases the congruence conditions on p, which are needed in order for Γ
to be a subgroup of Aut(Zn
p) = GLn(Zp), automatically imply that p does not divide
the order of Γ . But when this is not the case a different construction of a space with
the desired cohomology is needed. To ﬁnd out more about this the reader can begin
by consulting [Kane] and [Notbohm].
For the prime 2 the realization problem is still not completely solved. The known
examples are listed in the short table at the right,
where again we give only the irreducible examples,
Lie group
degrees
O(1)
1
SO(n)
2, 3, ··· , n
SU(n)
4, 6, ··· , 2n
Sp(n)
4, 8, ··· , 4n
—
8, 12, 14, 15
which generate others by taking products. All but the
last entry in the table arise from classifying spaces of
Lie groups, as described in §4D. The construction for
the last entry is in [Dwyer-Wilkerson].

326
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
degrees
primes
d, 2d, ··· , (n −1)d, nq with q |d
p ≡1 mod d
2, d
p ≡−1 mod d
4, 6
p ≡1 mod 3
6, 12
p ≡1 mod 3
4, 12
p ≡1 mod 12
12, 12
p ≡1 mod 12
8, 12
p ≡1 mod 4
8, 24
p ≡1 mod 8
12, 24
p ≡1 mod 12
24, 24
p ≡1 mod 24
6, 8
p ≡1, 3 mod 8
8, 12
p ≡1 mod 8
6, 24
p ≡1, 19 mod 24
12, 24
p ≡1 mod 24
20, 30
p ≡1 mod 5
20, 60
p ≡1 mod 20
30, 60
p ≡1 mod 15
60, 60
p ≡1 mod 60
12, 30
p ≡1, 4 mod 15
12, 60
p ≡1, 49 mod 60
12, 20
p ≡1, 9 mod 20
2, 6, 10
p ≡1, 4 mod 5
4, 6, 14
p ≡1, 2, 4 mod 7
6, 9, 12
p ≡1 mod 3
6, 12, 18
p ≡1 mod 3
6, 12, 30
p ≡1, 4 mod 15
4, 8, 12, 20
p ≡1 mod 4
2, 12, 20, 30
p ≡1, 4 mod 5
8, 12, 20, 24
p ≡1 mod 4
12, 18, 24, 30
p ≡1 mod 3
4, 6, 10, 12, 18
p ≡1 mod 3
6, 12, 18, 24, 30, 42
p ≡1 mod 3

Section 3.I.
Local Coefﬁcients
327
Homology and cohomology with local coefﬁcients are fancier versions of ordinary
homology and cohomology which can be deﬁned for nonsimply-connected spaces.
In various situations these more reﬁned homology and cohomology theories arise
naturally and inevitably. For example, the only way to extend Poincar´e duality with
Z coefﬁcients to non-orientable manifolds is to use local coefﬁcients. In the overall
scheme of algebraic topology, however, the role played by local coefﬁcients is fairly
small. Local coefﬁcients bring an extra level of complication which one tries to avoid
when possible. With this in mind, the goal of the exposition below will not be to give
a detailed development but rather just to sketch the main ideas, leaving the technical
details for the interested reader to ﬁll in.
The plan for this section is ﬁrst to give the quick algebraic deﬁnition of homology
and cohomology with local coefﬁcients, and then to reinterpret this deﬁnition more
geometrically in a way which looks more like ordinary homology and cohomology.
The reinterpretation also allows the familiar properties of homology and cohomology
to be extended to the local coefﬁcient case with very little effort.
Local Coefﬁcients via Modules
Let X be a path-connected space having a universal cover eX and fundamental
group π , so that X is the quotient of eX by the action of π by deck transforma-
tions ex , γ
ex for γ ∈π and ex ∈eX . The action of π on eX induces an action of
π on the group Cn( eX) of singular n chains in eX , by sending a singular n simplex
σ : ∆n→eX to the composition ∆n
σ-----→eX
γ-----→eX . The action of π on Cn( eX) makes
Cn( eX) a module over the group ring Z[π], which consists of the ﬁnite formal sums
P
i miγi with mi ∈Z and γi ∈π , with the natural addition
P
i miγi +
P
i niγi =
P
i (mi + ni)γi and multiplication
 P
i miγi
 P
j njγj

=
P
i,j minjγiγj . The bound-
ary maps ∂: Cn( eX)→Cn−1( eX) are Z[π] module homomorphisms since the action of
π on these groups comes from an action on eX .
If M is an arbitrary module over Z[π], we would like to deﬁne Cn(X; M) to be
Cn( eX)⊗Z[π]M , but for tensor products over a noncommutative ring one has to be a
little careful with left and right module structures. In general, if R is a ring, possibly
noncommutative, one deﬁnes the tensor product A⊗RB of a right R module A and a
left R module B to be the abelian group with generators a ⊗b for a ∈A and b ∈B ,
subject to the distributivity and associativity relations
(i) (a1 + a2) ⊗b = a1 ⊗b + a2 ⊗b and a ⊗(b1 + b2) = a ⊗b1 + a ⊗b2
(ii) ar ⊗b = a ⊗rb
In case R = Z[π], a left Z[π] module A can be regarded as a right Z[π] module
by setting aγ = γ−1a for γ ∈π . So the tensor product of two left Z[π] modules

328
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
A and B is deﬁned, and the relation aγ ⊗b = a ⊗γb becomes γ−1a ⊗b = a ⊗γb, or
equivalently a′ ⊗b = γa′ ⊗γb where a′ = γ−1a. Thus tensoring over Z[π] has the
effect of factoring out the action of π . To simplify notation we shall write A⊗Z[π]B
as A⊗π B , emphasizing the fact that the essential part of a Z[π] module structure is
the action of π .
In particular, Cn( eX)⊗π M is deﬁned if M is a left Z[π] module. These chain
groups Cn(X; M) = Cn( eX)⊗π M form a chain complex with the boundary maps ∂⊗11,
and the homology groups of this chain complex are by deﬁnition the homology groups
with local coefﬁcients, denoted Hn(X; M).
For cohomology one can set Cn(X; M) = HomZ[π](Cn( eX), M), the Z[π] module
homomorphisms Cn( eX)→M , and these groups Cn(X; M) form a cochain complex
whose cohomology groups Hn(X; M) are the cohomology groups with local coefﬁ-
cients.
Example 3I.1. Let us check that when M is a trivial Z[π] module, with γm = m for
all γ ∈π and m ∈M , then Hn(X; M) is just ordinary homology with coefﬁcients in
the abelian group M . A singular n simplex σ : ∆n→X has various lifts eσ : ∆n→eX
which form an orbit of the action of π on Cn( eX). In Cn( eX)⊗π M all these lifts are iden-
tiﬁed via the relation eσ ⊗m = γ eσ ⊗γm = γ eσ ⊗m. Thus we can identify Cn( eX)⊗π M
with Cn(X)⊗M , the chain group denoted Cn(X; M) in ordinary homology theory, so
Hn(X; M) reduces to ordinary homology with coefﬁcients in M . The analogous state-
ment for cohomology is also true since elements of HomZ[π](Cn( eX), M) are functions
from singular n simplices eσ : ∆n→eX to M taking the same value on all elements of
a π orbit since the action of π on M is trivial, so HomZ[π](Cn( eX), M) is identiﬁable
with Hom(Cn(X), M), ordinary cochains with coefﬁcients in M .
Example 3I.2. Suppose we take M = Z[π], viewed as a module over itself via its
ring structure. For a ring R with identity element, A⊗RR is naturally isomorphic
to A via the correspondence a ⊗r , ar .
So we have a natural identiﬁcation of
Cn( eX)⊗π Z[π] with Cn( eX), hence an isomorphism Hn(X; Z[π]) ≈Hn( eX). Gener-
alizing this, let X′→X be the cover corresponding to a subgroup π′ ⊂π .
Then
the free abelian group Z[π/π′] with basis the cosets γπ′ is a Z[π] module and
Cn( eX)⊗Z[π]Z[π/π′] ≈Cn(X′), so Hn(X; Z[π/π′]) ≈Hn(X′). More generally, if A is
an abelian group then A[π/π′] is a Z[π] module and Hn(X; A[π/π′]) ≈Hn(X′; A).
So homology of covering spaces is a special case of homology with local coefﬁcients.
The corresponding assertions for cohomology are not true, however, as we shall see
later in the section.
For a Z[π] module M , let π′ be the kernel of the homomorphism ρ : π→Aut(M)
deﬁning the module structure, given by ρ(γ)(m) = γm, where Aut(M) is the group
of automorphisms of the abelian group M . If X′→X is the cover corresponding to

Section 3.I.
Local Coefﬁcients
329
the normal subgroup π′ of π , then Cn( eX)⊗π M ≈Cn(X′)⊗π M ≈Cn(X′)⊗Z[π/π′]M .
This gives a more efﬁcient description of Hn(X; M).
Example 3I.3. As a special case, suppose that we take M = Z, so Aut(Z) ≈Z2 = {±1}.
For a nontrivial Z[π] module structure on M , π′ is a subgroup of index 2 and X′→X
is a 2 sheeted covering space. If τ is the nontrivial deck transformation of X′ , let
C+
n(X′) = {α ∈Cn(X′) | τ♯(α) = α} and C−
n(X′) = {α ∈Cn(X′) | τ♯(α) = −α}. It
follows easily that C±
n(X′) has basis the chains σ ± τσ for σ : ∆n→X′ , and we have
a short exact sequences
0 -→C−
n(X′) > Cn(X′)
Σ-----→C+
n(X′) -→0
0 -→C+
n(X′) > Cn(X′)
∆-----→C−
n(X′) -→0
where Σ(α) = α+τ♯(α) and ∆(α) = α−τ♯(α). The homomorphism Cn(X)→C+
n(X′)
sending a singular simplex in X to the sum of its two lifts to X′ is an isomorphism.
The quotient map Cn(X′)→Cn(X′)⊗π Z has kernel C+
n(X′), so the second short ex-
act sequence gives an isomorphism C−
n(X′) ≈Cn(X′)⊗π Z. These isomorphisms are
isomorphisms of chain complexes and the short exact sequences are short exact se-
quence of chain complexes, so from the ﬁrst short exact sequence we get a long exact
sequence of homology groups
··· -→Hn(X; eZ) -→Hn(X′)
p∗-----→Hn(X) -→Hn−1(X; eZ) -→···
where the symbol eZ indicates local coefﬁcients in the module Z and p∗is induced
by the covering projection p : X′→X .
Let us apply this exact sequence when X is a non-orientable n manifold M which
is closed and connected. We shall use terminology and notation from §3.3. We can
view Z as a Z[π1M] module by letting a loop γ in M act on Z by multiplication
by +1 or −1 according to whether γ preserves or reverses local orientations of M .
The double cover X′→X is then the 2 sheeted cover f
M→M with f
M orientable. The
non-orientability of M implies that Hn(M) = 0, and of course Hn+1(M) = 0, so the
exact sequence above gives Hn(M; eZ) ≈Hn(f
M) ≈Z. This can be interpreted as saying
that by taking homology with local coefﬁcients we obtain a fundamental class for a
non-orientable manifold.
Local Coefﬁcients via Bundles of Groups
Now we wish to reinterpret homology and cohomology with local coefﬁcients in
more geometric terms, making it look more like ordinary homology and cohomology.
Let us ﬁrst deﬁne a special kind of covering space with extra algebraic structure.
A bundle of groups is a map p : E→X together with a group structure on each subset
p−1(x), such that all these groups p−1(x) are isomorphic to a ﬁxed group G in the
following special way: Each point of X has a neighborhood U for which there exists
a homeomorphism hU : p−1(U)→U ×G taking each p−1(x) to {x}×G by a group

330
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
isomorphism. Since G is given the discrete topology, the projection p is a covering
space. Borrowing terminology from the theory of ﬁber bundles, the subsets p−1(x)
are called the ﬁbers of p : E→X , and one speaks of E as a bundle of groups with ﬁber
G. If we modiﬁed the deﬁnition by replacing ‘group’ with ‘vector space’ throughout,
we would have the more commonly encountered notion of a vector bundle; see [VBKT].
Trivial examples are provided by products E = X×G. Nontrivial examples we
have considered are the covering spaces MZ→M of non-orientable manifolds M de-
ﬁned in §3.3. Here the group G is the homology coefﬁcient group Z, though one could
equally well deﬁne a bundle of groups MG→M for any abelian coefﬁcient group G.
Homology groups of X with coefﬁcients in a bundle E of abelian groups may
be deﬁned as follows. Consider ﬁnite sums
P
i niσi where each σi : ∆n→X is a sin-
gular n simplex in X and ni : ∆n→E is a lifting of σi .
The sum of two lifts ni
and mi of the same σi is deﬁned by (ni + mi)(s) = ni(s) + mi(s), and is also a
lift of σi . In this way the ﬁnite sums
P
i niσi form an abelian group Cn(X; E), pro-
vided we allow the deletion of terms niσi when ni is the zero-valued lift. A bound-
ary homomorphism ∂: Cn(X; E)→Cn−1(X; E) is deﬁned by the formula ∂
 P
i niσi

=
P
i,j(−1)jniσi ||[v0, ··· , bvj, ··· , vn] where ‘ni ’ in the right side of the equation means
the restricted lifting ni ||[v0, ··· , bvj, ··· , vn]. The proof that the usual boundary ho-
momorphism ∂satisﬁes ∂2 = 0 applies equally well in the present context, so the
groups Cn(X; E) form a chain complex, and we denote the homology groups of this
chain complex by Hn(X; E).
In case E is the product bundle X×G, lifts ni are simply elements of G, so
Hn(X; E) = Hn(X; G), ordinary homology. In the general case, lifts ni : ∆n→E are
uniquely determined by their value at one point s ∈∆n , and these values can be
speciﬁed arbitrarily since ∆n is simply-connected, so the ni ’s can be thought of as
elements of p−1(σi(s)), a group isomorphic to G. However if E is not a product,
there is no canonical isomorphism between different ﬁbers p−1(x) so one cannot
identify Hn(X; E) with ordinary homology.
An alternative approach would be to take the coefﬁcients ni to be elements of
the ﬁber group over a speciﬁc point of σi(∆n), say σi(v0). However, with such a
deﬁnition the formula for the boundary operator ∂becomes more complicated since
there is no point of ∆n which lies in all the faces.
Our task now is to relate the homology groups Hn(X; E) to homology groups with
coefﬁcients in a module, as deﬁned earlier. In §1.3 we described how covering spaces
of X with a given ﬁber F can be classiﬁed in terms of actions of π1(X) on F , assum-
ing X is path-connected and has the local properties guaranteeing the existence of a
universal cover. It is easy to check that covering spaces which are bundles of groups
with ﬁber a group G are equivalent to actions of π1(X) on G by automorphisms of G,
that is, homomorphisms from π1(X) to Aut(G), the group of automorphisms of G.
For example, for the bundle MZ→M the action of a loop γ on the ﬁber Z is

Section 3.I.
Local Coefﬁcients
331
multiplication by ±1 according to whether γ preserves or reverses orientation in M ,
i.e., whether γ lifts to a closed loop in the orientable double cover f
M→M or not. As
another example, the action of π1(X) on itself by inner automorphisms corresponds
to a bundle of groups p : E→X with ﬁbers p−1(x) = π1(X, x). This example is rather
similar in spirit to the examples MZ→M .
In both cases one has a functor which
associates a group to each point of a space, and all the groups at different points are
isomorphic, but not canonically so. Different choices of isomorphisms are obtained
by choosing different paths between two points, and loops give rise to an action of
π1 on the ﬁbers.
In the case of bundles of groups p : E→X whose ﬁber G is abelian, an action of
π1(X) on G by automorphims is the same as a Z[π1X] module structure on G.
Proposition 3I.4. If X is a path-connected space having a universal covering space,
then the groups Hn(X; E) are naturally isomorphic to the homology groups Hn(X; G)
with local coefﬁcients in the Z[π] module G associated to E , where π = π1(X).
Proof: As noted earlier, a bundle of groups E→X with ﬁber G is equivalent to
an action of π on G. In more explicit terms this means that if eX is the universal
cover of X , then E is identiﬁable with the quotient of eX×G by the diagonal action
of π , γ( ex, g) = (γ ex, γg) where the action in the ﬁrst coordinate is by deck trans-
formations of eX . For a chain
P
i niσi ∈Cn(X; E), the coefﬁcient ni gives a lift of
σi to E , and ni in turn has various lifts to eX×G.
Thus we have natural surjec-
tions Cn( eX×G)→Cn(E)→Cn(X; E) expressing each of these groups as a quotient of
the preceding one. More precisely, identifying Cn( eX×G) with Cn( eX)⊗Z[G] in the
obvious way, then Cn(E) is the quotient of Cn( eX)⊗Z[G] under the identiﬁcations
eσ ⊗g ∼γ
eσ ⊗γ g. This quotient is the tensor product Cn( eX)⊗π Z[G]. To pass to
the quotient Cn(X; E) of Cn(E) = Cn( eX)⊗π Z[G] we need to take into account the
sum operation in Cn(X; E), addition of lifts ni : ∆n→E . This means that in sums
eσ ⊗g1 + eσ ⊗g2 = eσ ⊗(g1 + g2), the term g1 + g2 should be interpreted not in Z[G]
but in the natural quotient G of Z[G]. Hence Cn(X; E) is identiﬁed with the quo-
tient Cn( eX)⊗π G of Cn( eX)⊗π Z[G]. This natural identiﬁcation commutes with the
boundary homomorphisms, so the homology groups are also identiﬁed.
⊔⊓
More generally, if X has a number of path components Xα with universal covers
eXα , then Cn(X; E) =
L
α
 Cn( eXα)⊗Z[π1(Xα)]G

, so Hn(X; E) splits accordingly as a
direct sum of the local coefﬁcient homology groups for the path components Xα .
We turn now to the question of whether homology with local coefﬁcients satisﬁes
axioms similar to those for ordinary homology. The main novelty is with the behav-
ior of induced homomorphisms. In order for a map f : X→X′ to induce a map on
homology with local coefﬁcients we must have bundles of groups E→X and E′→X′
which are related in some way. The natural assumption to make is that there is a

332
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
commutative diagram as at the right, such that ef restricts to a ho-
−−→
−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
E
p
f
f
p
X
X
E ′
′
′
∼
momorphism in each ﬁber.
With this hypothesis there is then a
chain homomorphism f♯: Cn(X; E)→Cn(X′; E′) obtained by com-
posing singular simplices with f and their lifts with ef , hence there
is an induced homomorphism f∗: Hn(X; E)→Hn(X′; E′). The ﬁbers of E and E′ need
not be isomorphic groups, so in the case of trivial bundles this construction special-
izes to Bockstein homomorphisms. To avoid this extra complication we shall consider
only the case that ef restricts to an isomorphism on each ﬁber. With this condition, a
commutative diagram as above will be called a bundle map.
Here is a method for constructing bundle maps. Starting with a map f : X→X′
and a bundle of groups p′ : E′→X′ , let
E = { (x, e′) ∈X×E′ | f (x) = p′(e′) }.
This ﬁts into a commutative diagram as above if we deﬁne p(x, e′) = x and ef (x, e′) =
e′ . In particular, the ﬁber p−1(x) consists of pairs (x, e′) with p′(e′) = f (x), so ef
is a bijection of this ﬁber with the ﬁber of E′→X′ over f (x). We use this bijection
to give p−1(x) a group structure. To check that p : E→X is a bundle of groups, let
h′ : (p′)−1(U′)→U′×G be an isomorphism as in the deﬁnition of a bundle of groups.
Deﬁne h : p−1(U)→U ×G over U = f −1(U′) by h(x, e′) = (x, h′
2(e′)) where h′
2 is
the second coordinate of h′ . An inverse for h is (x, g) ∈(x, (h′)−1(f (x), g)), and h
is clearly an isomorphism on each ﬁber. Thus p : E→X is a bundle of groups, called
the pullback of E′→X′ via f , or the induced bundle. The notation f ∗(E′) is often
used for the pullback bundle.
Given any bundle map E→E′ as in the diagram above, it is routine to check
that the map E→f ∗(E′), e , (p(e), ef (e)), is an isomorphism of bundles over X ,
so the pullback construction produces all bundle maps.
Thus we see one reason
why homology with local coefﬁcients is somewhat complicated: Hn(X; E) is really a
functor of two variables, covariant in X and contravariant in E .
Viewing bundles of groups over X as Z[π1X] modules, the pullback construc-
tion corresponds to making a Z[π1X′] module into a Z[π1X] module by deﬁning
γg = f∗(γ)g for f∗: π1(X)→π1(X′). This follows easily from the deﬁnitions. In
particular, this implies that homotopic maps f0, f1 : X→X′ induce isomorphic pull-
back bundles f ∗
0 (E′), f ∗
1 (E′). Hence the map f∗: Hn(X; E)→Hn(X′; E′) induced by
a bundle map depends only on the homotopy class of f .
Generalizing the deﬁnition of Hn(X; E) to pairs (X, A) is straightforward, starting
with the deﬁnition of Hn(X, A; E) as the nth homology group of the chain complex
of quotients Cn(X; E)/Cn(A; E) where p : E→X becomes a bundle of groups over A
by restriction to p−1(A). Associated to the pair (X, A) there is then a long exact
sequence of homology groups with local coefﬁcients in the bundle E . The excision
property is proved just as for ordinary homology, via iterated barycentric subdivision.

Section 3.I.
Local Coefﬁcients
333
The ﬁnal axiom for homology, involving disjoint unions, extends trivially to homology
with local coefﬁcients. Simplicial and cellular homology also extend without difﬁculty
to the case of local coefﬁcients, as do the proofs that these forms of homology agree
with singular homology for ∆complexes and CW complexes, respectively. We leave
the veriﬁcations of all these statements to the energetic reader.
Now we turn to cohomology. One might try deﬁning Hn(X; E) by simply dual-
izing, taking Hom(Cn(X), E), but this makes no sense since E is not a group. In-
stead, the cochain group Cn(X; E) is deﬁned to consist of all functions ϕ assigning
to each singular simplex σ : ∆n→X a lift ϕ(σ) : ∆n→E . In case E is the product
X×G, this amounts to assigning an element of G to each σ , so this deﬁnition gen-
eralizes ordinary cohomology. Coboundary maps δ : Cn(X; E)→Cn+1(X; E) are de-
ﬁned just as with ordinary cohomology, and satisfy δ2 = 0, so we have cohomology
groups Hn(X; E), and in the relative case, Hn(X, A; E), deﬁned via relative cochains
Cn(X, A; E) = Ker
 Cn(X; E)→Cn(A; E)

.
For a path-connected space X with universal cover eX and fundamental group
π , we can identify Hn(X; E) with Hn(X; G), cohomology with local coefﬁcients in the
Z[π] module G corresponding to E , by identifying Cn(X; E) with HomZ[π](Cn( eX), G)
in the following way. An element ϕ ∈CnX; E) assigns to each σ : ∆n→X a lift to E .
Regarding E as the quotient of eX×G under the diagonal action of π , a lift of σ to
E is the same as an orbit of a lift to eX×G. Such an orbit is a function f assigning to
each lift eσ : ∆n→eX an element f ( eσ) ∈G such that f (γ eσ) = γf ( eσ) for all γ ∈G,
i.e., an element of HomZ[π](Cn( eX), G).
The basic properties of ordinary cohomology in §3.1 extend without great dif-
ﬁculty to cohomology groups with local coefﬁcients.
In order to deﬁne the map
f ∗: Hn(X′; E′)→Hn(X; E) induced by a bundle map as before, it sufﬁces to observe
that a singular simplex σ : ∆n→X and a lift eσ ′ : ∆n→E′ of f σ deﬁne a lift eσ =
(σ, eσ ′) : ∆n→f ∗(E) of σ . To show that f ≃g implies f ∗= g∗requires some mod-
iﬁcation of the proof of the corresponding result for ordinary cohomology in §3.1,
which proceeded by dualizing the proof for homology. In the local coefﬁcient case
one constructs a chain homotopy P ∗satisfying g♯−f ♯= P ∗δ+δP ∗directly from the
subdivision of ∆n×I used in the proof of the homology result. Similar remarks apply
to proving excision and Mayer-Vietoris sequences for cohomology with local coefﬁ-
cients. To prove the equivalence of simplicial and cellular cohomology with singular
cohomology in the local coefﬁcient context, one should use the telescope argument
from the proof of Lemma 2.34 to show that Hn(Xk; E) ≈Hn(X; E) for k > n. Once
again details will be left to the reader.
The difference between homology with local coefﬁcients and cohomology with lo-
cal coefﬁcients is illuminated by comparing the following proposition with our earlier
identiﬁcation of H∗(X; Z[π1X]) with the ordinary homology of the universal cover
of X .

334
Chapter 3.
Cohomology
Proposition 3I.5. If X is a ﬁnite CW complex with universal cover eX and fundamen-
tal group π , then for all n, Hn(X; Z[π]) is isomorphic to Hn
c ( eX; Z), cohomology of
eX with compact supports and ordinary integer coefﬁcients.
For example, consider the the n dimensional torus T n , the product of n circles,
with fundamental group π = Zn and universal cover Rn . We have Hi(T n; Z[π]) ≈
Hi(Rn), which is zero except for a Z in dimension 0, but Hi(T n; Z[π]) ≈Hi
c(Rn)
vanishes except for a Z in dimension n, as we saw in Example 3.33.
To prove the proposition we shall use a few general facts about cohomology
with compact supports.
One signiﬁcant difference between ordinary cohomology
and cohomology with compact supports is in induced maps.
A map f : X→Y in-
duces f ♯: Cn
c (Y; G)→Cn
c (X; G) and hence f ∗: Hn
c (Y; G)→Hn
c (X; G) provided that f
is proper: the preimage f −1(K) of each compact set K in Y is compact in X . Thus
if ϕ ∈Cn(Y; G) vanishes on chains in Y −K then f ♯(ϕ) ∈Cn(X; G) vanishes on
chains in X −f −1(K). Further, to guarantee that f ≃g implies f ∗= g∗we should
restrict attention to homotopies which are proper as maps X×I→Y . Relative groups
Hn
c (X, A; G) are deﬁned when A is a closed subset of X , which guarantees that the
inclusion A > X is a proper map. With these constraints the basic theory of §3.1
translates without difﬁculty to cohomology with compact supports.
In particular, for a locally compact CW complex X one can compute H∗
c (X; G)
using ﬁnite cellular cochains, the cellular cochains vanishing on all but ﬁnitely many
cells. Namely, to compute Hn
c (Xn, Xn−1; G) using excision one ﬁrst has to identify
this group with Hn
c (Xn, N(Xn−1); G) where N(Xn−1) is a closed neighborhood of
Xn−1 in Xn obtained by deleting an open n disk from the interior of each n cell. If
X is locally compact, the obvious deformation retraction of N(Xn−1) onto Xn−1 is
a proper homotopy equivalence, hence via long exact sequences and the ﬁve-lemma
we obtain isomorphisms Hn
c (Xn, Xn−1; G) ≈Hn
c (Xn, N(Xn−1); G), and by excision the
latter group can be identiﬁed with the ﬁnite cochains.
Proof of 3I.5: As noted above, we can compute H∗
c ( eX; Z) using the groups Cn
f ( eX; Z)
of ﬁnite cellular cochains ϕ : Cn→Z, where Cn = Hn( eXn, eXn−1). Giving eX the CW
structure lifting that on X , then since X is compact, ﬁnite cellular cochains are ex-
actly homomorphisms ϕ : Cn→Z such that for each cell en of eX , ϕ(γen) is nonzero
for only ﬁnitely many covering transformations γ ∈π .
Such a ϕ determines a
Z[π] homomorphism
bϕ : Cn→Z[π] deﬁned by
bϕ(en) =
P
γ ϕ(γ−1en)γ; this is a
Z[π] homomorphism since if we replace the summation index γ in the right side of
ϕ(ηen) =
P
γ ϕ(γ−1ηen)γ by ηγ , we get
P
γ ϕ(γ−1en)ηγ . The function ϕ , bϕ
deﬁnes a homomorphism Cn
f ( eX; Z)→HomZ[π](Cn, Z[π]) which is injective since ϕ
is recoverable from
bϕ as the coefﬁcient of γ = 1.
Furthermore, this homomor-
phism is surjective since a Z[π] homomorphism ψ : M→Z[π] has the form ψ(x) =
P
γ ψγ(x)γ with ψγ ∈HomZ(M, Z) satisfying ψγ(x) = ψ1(γ−1x), so ψ1 determines

Section 3.I.
Local Coefﬁcients
335
ψ. The isomorphisms Cn
f ( eX; Z) ≈HomZ[π](Cn, Z[π]) are isomorphisms of cochain
complexes, so the respective cohomology groups Hn
c ( eX; Z) and Hn(X; Z[π]) are iso-
morphic.
⊔⊓
Cup and cap product work easily with local coefﬁcients in a bundle of rings, the
latter concept being deﬁned in the obvious way.
The cap product can be used to
extend Poincar´e duality to non-orientable manifolds M , using local coefﬁcients in MZ
or more generally MR for a ring R:
Theorem 3I.6. For an arbitrary closed n manifold M there is a fundamental class
[M] ∈Hn(M; MR) such that [M]⌢: Hk(M; MR)→Hn−k(M; MR) is an isomorphism
for all k.
With the deﬁnitions we have given the proof is essentially the same as in §3.3, so
we shall not stop to give details here.
Exercises
1. Compute H∗(S1; E) and H∗(S1; E) for E→S1 the nontrivial bundle with ﬁber Z.
2. Compute the homology groups with local coefﬁcients Hn(M; MZ) for a closed non-
orientable surface M .
3. Let B(X; G) be the set of isomorphism classes of bundles of groups E→X with
ﬁber G, and let E0→BAut(G) be the bundle corresponding to the ‘identity’ action
ρ : Aut(G)→Aut(G). Show that the map [X, BAut(G)]→B(X, G), [f ] , f ∗(E0), is
a bijection if X is a CW complex, where [X, Y] denotes the set of homotopy classes
of maps X→Y .
4. Show that if ﬁnite connected CW complexes X and Y are homotopy equivalent,
then their universal covers eX and eY are proper homotopy equivalent.
5. If X is a ﬁnite nonsimply-connected graph, show that Hn(X; Z[π1X]) is zero un-
less n = 1, when it is the direct sum of a countably inﬁnite number of Z’s. [Use
Proposition 3I.5 and compute Hn
c ( eX) as lim
--→Hn( eX, eX −Ti) for a suitable sequence of
ﬁnite subtrees T1 ⊂T2 ⊂··· of eX with
S
i Ti = eX .]
6. Show that homology groups Hℓf
n (X; G) can be deﬁned using locally ﬁnite chains,
which are formal sums
P
σ gσ σ of singular simplices σ : ∆n→X with coefﬁcients
gσ ∈G, such that each x ∈X has a neighborhood meeting the images of only ﬁnitely
many σ ’s with gσ ≠0. Develop this homology theory far enough to show that for
a locally compact CW complex X , Hℓf
n (X; G) can be computed using inﬁnite cellular
chains
P
α gαen
α .


Homotopy theory begins with the homotopy groups πn(X), which are the nat-
ural higher-dimensional analogs of the fundamental group. These higher homotopy
groups have certain formal similarities with homology groups. For example, πn(X)
turns out to be always abelian for n ≥2, and there are relative homotopy groups
which ﬁt into a long exact sequence just like the long exact sequence of homology
groups. However, the higher homotopy groups are much harder to compute than
either homology groups or the fundamental group, due to the fact that neither the
excision property for homology nor van Kampen’s theorem for π1 holds for higher
homotopy groups.
In spite of these computational difﬁculties, homotopy groups are of great theo-
retical signiﬁcance. One reason for this is Whitehead’s theorem that a map between
CW complexes which induces isomorphisms on all homotopy groups is a homotopy
equivalence. The stronger statement that two CW complexes with isomorphic homo-
topy groups are homotopy equivalent is usually false, however. One of the rare cases
when a CW complex does have its homotopy type uniquely determined by its homo-
topy groups is when it has just a single nontrivial homotopy group. Such spaces,
known as Eilenberg-MacLane spaces, turn out to play a fundamental role in algebraic
topology for a variety of reasons. Perhaps the most important is their close connec-
tion with cohomology: Cohomology classes in a CW complex correspond bijectively
with homotopy classes of maps from the complex into an Eilenberg-MacLane space.
Thus cohomology has a strictly homotopy-theoretic interpretation, and there is an
analogous but more subtle homotopy-theoretic interpretation of homology, explained
in §4.F.

338
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
A more elementary and direct connection between homotopy and homology is
the Hurewicz theorem, asserting that the ﬁrst nonzero homotopy group πn(X) of a
simply-connected space X is isomorphic to the ﬁrst nonzero homology group eHn(X).
This result, along with its relative version, is one of the cornerstones of algebraic
topology.
Though the excision property does not always hold for homotopy groups, in some
important special cases there is a range of dimensions in which it does hold. This leads
to the idea of ‘stable homotopy groups,’ the beginning of ‘stable homotopy theory.’
Perhaps the major unsolved problem in algebraic topology is the computation of the
stable homotopy groups of spheres. Near the end of §4.2 we give some tables of
known calculations which give a clear indication of the complexity of the problem.
Included in §4.2 is a brief introduction to ﬁber bundles, which generalize cover-
ing spaces and play a somewhat analogous role for higher homotopy groups. It would
easily be possible to devote a whole book to the subject of ﬁber bundles, even the
special case of vector bundles, but here we use ﬁber bundles only to provide a few ba-
sic examples and to motivate their more ﬂexible homotopy-theoretic generalization,
ﬁbrations, which play a large role in §4.3. Among other things, ﬁbrations allow one
to describe, in theory at least, how the homotopy type of an arbitrary CW complex
is built up from its homotopy groups by an inductive procedure of forming ‘twisted
products’ of Eilenberg-MacLane spaces. This is the notion of a Postnikov tower. In
favorable cases, including all simply-connected CW complexes, the data which deter-
mines a homotopy type can also be described, as a sequence of cohomology classes. If
these are all zero, one has a product of Eilenberg-MacLane spaces, and otherwise not.
Unfortunately these are cohomology classes in rather complicated spaces in general,
so this is not a practical way of classifying homotopy types, but it is useful for various
more theoretical purposes.
This chapter is arranged so that it begins with purely homotopy-theoretic notions,
largely independent of homology and cohomology theory, whose roles gradually in-
crease in later sections of the chapter. It should therefore be possible to read a good
portion of this chapter immediately after reading Chapter 1, with just an occasional
glimpse at Chapter 2 for algebraic deﬁnitions, particularly the notion of an exact se-
quence which is just as important in homotopy theory as in homology and cohomology
theory.

Section 4.1.
Homotopy Groups
339
Perhaps the simplest noncontractible spaces are spheres, so to get a glimpse of the
subtlety inherent in homotopy groups let us look at some of the known calculations
of the groups πi(Sn) shown in the table below, extracted from [Toda62].
πi(Sn)
i -→
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
n
1
Z
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
↓
2
0
Z
Z
Z2
Z2
Z12
Z2
Z2
Z3
Z15
Z2
Z2× Z2
3
0
0
Z
Z2
Z2
Z12
Z2
Z2
Z3
Z15
Z2
Z2× Z2
4
0
0
0
Z
Z2
Z2
Z × Z12
Z2× Z2
Z2× Z2
Z24× Z3
Z15
Z2
5
0
0
0
0
Z
Z2
Z2
Z24
Z2
Z2
Z2
Z30
6
0
0
0
0
0
Z
Z2
Z2
Z24
0
Z
Z2
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
Z
Z2
Z2
Z24
0
0
8
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Z
Z2
Z2
Z24
0
This is an intriguing mixture of pattern and chaos. The most obvious feature is large
region of zeros below the diagonal, suggesting that πi(Sn) = 0 for all i < n. This is in
fact not hard to prove, and will be shown in Corollary 4.8. There is also the sequence
of zeros in the ﬁrst row, suggesting that πi(S1) = 0 for all i > 1. This is even easier
to prove, and will follow from Proposition 4.1.
The coincidences in the second and third rows can hardly be overlooked, and in
fact are the case n = 1 of isomorphisms πi(S2n) ≈πi−1(S2n−1)×πi(S4n−1) which
hold for n = 1, 2, 4 and all i. The case n = 2 says that each entry in the fourth row
is the product of the entry diagonally above it to the left and the entry three units
below it. Actually, these isomorphisms hold for all n if one factors out 2 torsion —
elements of order a power of 2 — as we will show in [SSAT].
The next regular feature in the table is the sequence of Z’s down the diagonal. This
is an illustration of the Hurewicz theorem, which asserts that for a simply-connected
space X , the ﬁrst nonzero homotopy group πn(X) is isomorphic to the ﬁrst nonzero
homology group Hn(X).
What else is notable about the table? One may observe that all the groups above
the diagonal are ﬁnite except for π3(S2), π7(S4), and π11(S6). In §4.C we use cup
products in cohomology to show that π4k−1(S2k) contains a Z direct summand for
all k ≥1. It is a theorem of Serre which will be proved in [SSAT] that πi(Sn) is ﬁnite
for i > n except for π4k−1(S2k), which is the direct sum of Z with a ﬁnite group. So
all the complexity of the homotopy groups of spheres resides in ﬁnite abelian groups.
The problem thus reduces to computing the p torsion in πi(Sn) for each prime p.

340
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
An especially interesting feature of the table which might not be quite obvi-
ous from the relatively small sample shown is that along each diagonal, the groups
πn+k(Sn) with k ﬁxed and varying n eventually become independent of n for large
enough n. This ‘stability’ property will be proved in §4.2, where we give more exten-
sive tables of these stable homotopy groups of spheres.
Deﬁnitions and Basic Constructions
Let In be the n dimensional unit cube, the product of n copies of the interval
[0, 1]. The boundary ∂In of In is the subspace consisting of points with at least one
coordinate equal to 0 or 1. For a space X with basepoint x0 ∈X , deﬁne πn(X, x0)
to be the set of homotopy classes of maps f : (In, ∂In)→(X, x0), where homotopies
ft are also required to satisfy ft(∂In) = x0 . The deﬁnition extends to the case n = 0
by taking I0 to be a point and ∂I0 to be empty, so π0(X, x0) is just the set of path-
components of X .
When n ≥2, a sum operation in πn(X, x0), generalizing the composition opera-
tion in π1 , is deﬁned by:
(f + g)(s1, s2, ··· , sn) =
 f (2s1, s2, ··· , sn),
s1 ∈[0, 1/2]
g(2s1 −1, s2, ··· , sn),
s1 ∈[1/2, 1]
It is evident that this sum is well-deﬁned on homotopy classes. Since only the ﬁrst
coordinate is involved in the sum operation, the same arguments as for π1 show that
πn(X, x0) is a group, with identity element the constant map sending In to x0 and
with inverses given by −f (s1, s2, ··· , sn) = f (1 −s1, s2, ··· , sn).
The additive notation for the group operation is used because πn(X, x0) is abelian
for n ≥2. Namely, f +g ≃g +f via the homotopy indicated in the following ﬁgures.
f
g
f
g
f
g
f
g
≃
≃
f
g
≃
≃
The homotopy begins by shrinking the domains of f and g to smaller subcubes of
In , with the region outside these subcubes mapping to the basepoint. After this has
been done, there is room to slide the two subcubes around anywhere in In as long
as they stay disjoint, so if n ≥2 they can be slid past each other, interchanging their
positions. Then to ﬁnish the homotopy, the domains of f and g can be enlarged
back to their original size. If one likes, the whole process can be done using just the
coordinates s1 and s2 , keeping the other coordinates ﬁxed.
Maps (In, ∂In)→(X, x0) are the same as maps of the quotient In/∂In = Sn to X
taking the basepoint s0 = ∂In/∂In to x0 . This means that we can also view πn(X, x0)
as homotopy classes of maps (Sn, s0)→(X, x0), where homotopies are through maps
(Sn, s0)→(X, x0). In this interpretation of πn(X, x0), the sum f + g is the composi-

Section 4.1.
Homotopy Groups
341
tion Sn
c-----→Sn ∨Sn
f ∨g
------------→X where c collapses the equator Sn−1 ⊂Sn to a point and
we choose the basepoint s0 to lie in this Sn−1 .
X
g
f
c
We will show next that if X is path-connected, different choices of the basepoint
x0 always produce isomorphic groups πn(X, x0), just as for π1 , so one is justiﬁed in
writing πn(X) for πn(X, x0) in these cases. Given a path γ : I→X from x0 = γ(0)
to another basepoint x1 = γ(1), we may associate to each map
f : (In, ∂In)→(X, x1) a new map γf : (In, ∂In)→(X, x0) by shrink-
ing the domain of f to a smaller concentric cube in In , then in-
serting the path γ on each radial segment in the shell between this
smaller cube and ∂In .
f
Note that when n = 1, γf according to this deﬁnition is the composition of three
paths: γ , f , and the inverse of γ . So to be consistent, a notation different from ‘γf ’
should really be used when n = 1. However, since we are mainly interested in the
cases n > 1, we leave it to the reader to make the necessary notational changes when
n = 1.
It is clear that a homotopy of γ or f through maps ﬁxing ∂I or ∂In , respectively,
yields a homotopy of γf through maps (In, ∂In)→(X, x0). Further basic properties
are:
(1) γ(f + g) ≃γf + γg
(2) (γη)f ≃γ(ηf )
(3) 1f ≃f where 1 denotes the constant path.
The homotopies in (2) and (3) are obvious. For (1), we may ﬁrst deform f and g to be
constant on the right and left halves of In , respectively, then we excise a progressively
wider symmetric middle slab of γf + γg until it becomes γ(f + g):
f
f
f
g
g
g
x1
x1 x1 
x1
≃
≃
An explicit formula for this homotopy is
ht(s1, ··· , sn) = γ(f + 0)
 (1 −t)s1, s2, ··· , sn

+ γ(0 + g)
 (1 −t)s1 + t, s2, ··· , sn

for 0 ≤t ≤1/2. The second plus sign makes sense since γ(f +0)
 (1−t), s2, ··· , sn

=
γ(0 + g)
 t, s2, ··· , sn

for 0 ≤t ≤1/2. Since h0 = γ(f + 0) + γ(0 + g) and h1/2 =
γ(f + g), we have γ(f + g) ≃γ(f + 0) + γ(0 + g) ≃γf + γg.

342
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
If we deﬁne a change-of-basepoint transformation βγ : πn(X, x1)→πn(X, x0) by
βγ([f ]) = [γf ], then (1) shows that βγ is a homomorphism, while (2) and (3) im-
ply that βγ is an isomorphism with inverse βγ where γ is the inverse path of γ ,
γ(s) = γ(1 −s). Thus if X is path-connected, different choices of basepoint x0 yield
isomorphic groups πn(X, x0), which may then be written simply as πn(X).
Now let us restrict attention to loops γ at the basepoint x0 . Since βγη = βγβη , the
association [γ] , βγ deﬁnes a homomorphism from π1(X, x0) to Aut(πn(X, x0)),
the group of automorphisms of πn(X, x0). This is called the action of π1 on πn ,
each element of π1 acting as an automorphism [f ] , [γf ] of πn . When n = 1
this is the action of π1 on itself by inner automorphisms. When n > 1, the action
makes the abelian group πn(X, x0) into a module over the group ring Z[π1(X, x0)].
Elements of Z[π1] are ﬁnite sums
P
i niγi with ni ∈Z and γi ∈π1 , multiplication
being deﬁned by distributivity and the multiplication in π1 . The module structure on
πn is given by
 P
i niγi

α =
P
i ni(γiα) for α ∈πn . For brevity one sometimes says
πn is a π1 module rather than a Z[π1] module.
In the literature, a space with trivial π1 action on πn is called ‘n simple,’ and
‘simple’ means ‘n simple for all n.’ It would be nice to have more descriptive terms
for these properties. In this book we will call a space abelian if it has trivial action
of π1 on all homotopy groups πn , since when n = 1 this is the condition that π1
be abelian. This terminology is consistent with a long-established usage of the term
‘nilpotent’ to refer to spaces with nilpotent π1 and nilpotent action of π1 on all higher
homotopy groups; see [Hilton-Mislin-Roitberg].
We next observe that πn is a functor. Namely, a map ϕ : (X, x0)→(Y, y0) in-
duces ϕ∗: πn(X, x0)→πn(Y, y0) deﬁned by ϕ∗([f ]) = [ϕf ]. It is immediate from
the deﬁnitions that ϕ∗is well-deﬁned and a homomorphism for n ≥1. The func-
tor properties (ϕψ)∗= ϕ∗ψ∗and 11∗= 11 are also evident, as is the fact that if
ϕt : (X, x0)→(Y, y0) is a homotopy then ϕ0∗= ϕ1∗.
In particular, a homotopy equivalence (X, x0) ≃(Y, y0) in the basepointed sense
induces isomorphisms on all homotopy groups πn . This is true even if basepoints are
not required to be stationary during homotopies. We showed this for π1 in Proposi-
tion 1.18, and the generalization to higher n’s is an exercise at the end of this section.
Homotopy groups behave very nicely with respect to covering spaces:
Proposition 4.1. A covering space projection p : ( eX, ex0)→(X, x0) induces isomor-
phisms p∗: πn( eX, ex0)→πn(X, x0) for all n ≥2.
Proof: For surjectivity of p∗we apply the lifting criterion in Proposition 1.33, which
implies that every map (Sn, s0)→(X, x0) lifts to ( eX, ex0) provided that n ≥2 so that
Sn is simply-connected. Injectivity of p∗is immediate from the covering homotopy
property, just as in Proposition 1.31 which treated the case n = 1.
⊔⊓

Section 4.1.
Homotopy Groups
343
In particular, πn(X, x0) = 0 for n ≥2 whenever X has a contractible universal
cover.
This applies for example to S1 , so we obtain the ﬁrst row of the table of
homotopy groups of spheres shown earlier. More generally, the n dimensional torus
T n , the product of n circles, has universal cover Rn , so πi(T n) = 0 for i > 1. This is
in marked contrast to the homology groups Hi(T n) which are nonzero for all i ≤n.
Spaces with πn = 0 for all n ≥2 are sometimes called aspherical.
The behavior of homotopy groups with respect to products is very simple:
Proposition 4.2. For a product
Q
αXα of an arbitrary collection of path-connected
spaces Xα there are isomorphisms πn
 Q
αXα

≈
Q
απn(Xα) for all n.
Proof: A map f : Y→
Q
αXα is the same thing as a collection of maps fα : Y→Xα .
Taking Y to be Sn and Sn×I gives the result.
⊔⊓
Very useful generalizations of the homotopy groups πn(X, x0) are the relative
homotopy groups πn(X, A, x0) for a pair (X, A) with a basepoint x0 ∈A. To deﬁne
these, regard In−1 as the face of In with the last coordinate sn = 0 and let Jn−1 be the
closure of ∂In −In−1 , the union of the remaining faces of In . Then πn(X, A, x0) for
n ≥1 is deﬁned to be the set of homotopy classes of maps (In, ∂In, Jn−1)→(X, A, x0),
with homotopies through maps of the same form. There does not seem to be a com-
pletely satisfactory way of deﬁning π0(X, A, x0), so we shall leave this undeﬁned (but
see the exercises for one possible deﬁnition). Note that πn(X, x0, x0) = πn(X, x0), so
absolute homotopy groups are a special case of relative homotopy groups.
A sum operation is deﬁned in πn(X, A, x0) by the same formulas as for πn(X, x0),
except that the coordinate sn now plays a special role and is no longer available for
the sum operation. Thus πn(X, A, x0) is a group for n ≥2, and this group is abelian
for n ≥3. For n = 1 we have I1 = [0, 1], I0 = {0}, and J0 = {1}, so π1(X, A, x0)
is the set of homotopy classes of paths in X from a varying point in A to the ﬁxed
basepoint x0 ∈A. In general this is not a group in any natural way.
Just as elements of πn(X, x0) can be regarded as homotopy classes of maps
(Sn, s0)→(X, x0), there is an alternative deﬁnition of πn(X, A, x0) as the set of ho-
motopy classes of maps (Dn, Sn−1, s0)→(X, A, x0), since collapsing Jn−1 to a point
converts (In, ∂In, Jn−1) into (Dn, Sn−1, s0). From this viewpoint, addition is done via
the map c : Dn→Dn ∨Dn collapsing Dn−1 ⊂Dn to a point.
A map ϕ : (X, A, x0)→(Y, B, y0) induces maps ϕ∗: πn(X, A, x0)→πn(Y, B, y0)
which are homomorphisms for n ≥2 and have properties analogous to those in the
absolute case: (ϕψ)∗= ϕ∗ψ∗, 11∗= 11, and ϕ∗= ψ∗if ϕ ≃ψ through maps
(X, A, x0)→(Y, B, y0).
Probably the most useful feature of the relative groups πn(X, A, x0) is that they
ﬁt into a long exact sequence
··· -→πn(A, x0)
i-----→πn(X, x0)
j-----→πn(X, A, x0)
∂-----→πn−1(A, x0) -→··· -→π0(X, x0)

344
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
Here i is induced by inclusion and j comes from regarding a map (In, ∂In)→(X, x0)
as a map (In, ∂In, Jn−1)→(X, A, x0). The ‘boundary’ map ∂comes from restricting
maps (In, ∂In, Jn−1)→(X, A, x0) to In−1 . All three maps i, j , and ∂are clearly ho-
momorphisms when group structures are deﬁned in domain and range.
Theorem 4.3. This sequence is exact.
Near the end of the sequence, where group structures are not deﬁned, exactness
still makes sense: The image of one map is the kernel of the next, i.e., those elements
mapping to the homotopy class of the constant map.
Our proof of this theorem will use the following general observation: A map
f : (In, ∂In, Jn−1)→(X, A, x0) represents zero in πn(X, A, x0) iff it is homotopic rel
∂In to a map with image contained in A. For if we have such a homotopy to a map
g, then [f ] = [g] in πn(X, A, x0), and [g] = 0 via the homotopy obtained by com-
posing g with a deformation retraction of In onto Jn−1 . Conversely, if [f ] = 0 via a
homotopy F : In+1→X , then by restricting F to a family of n disks in In+1 starting
with In and ending with Jn , all these disks having the same boundary, then we get a
homotopy from f to a map into A, stationary on ∂In .
Proof: With just about the same effort we can derive the long exact sequence of a
triple (X, A, B, x0) with x0 ∈B ⊂A ⊂X :
··· -→πn(A, B, x0)
i-----→πn(X, B, x0)
j-----→πn(X, A, x0)
∂-----→πn−1(A, B, x0) -→···
-→π1(X, A, x0)
When B = x0 this reduces to the exact sequence for the pair (X, A, x0), though the
latter sequence continues on two more steps to π0(X, x0). Exactness at these last two
steps we leave as a simple exercise.
Exactness at πn(X, B, x0): First note that the composition ji is zero since every map
(In, ∂In, Jn−1)→(A, B, x0) represents zero in πn(X, A, x0) by the remarks preceding
the proof. To see that Ker j ⊂Im i, let f : (In, ∂In, Jn−1)→(X, B, x0) represent zero
in πn(X, A, x0). Then f is homotopic rel ∂In to a map with image in A, hence the
class [f ] ∈πn(X, B, x0) is in the image of i.
Exactness at πn(X, A, x0): The composition ∂j is zero since the restriction of a
map (In, ∂In, Jn−1)→(X, B, x0) to In−1 has image lying in B , and hence represents
zero in πn−1(A, B, x0). Conversely, suppose the restriction
of f : (In, ∂In, Jn−1)→(X, A, x0) to In−1 represents zero in
πn−1(A, B, x0), so there is a homotopy F from f ||In−1 to a
map with image in B , rel ∂In−1 . We can tack F onto f to get
a new map f1 : (In, ∂In, Jn−1)→(X, B, x0) which, as a map
(In, ∂In, Jn−1)→(X, A, x0), is homotopic to f by the homo-
topy which tacks on increasingly longer initial segments of F .
So [f ] = [f1] ∈Im j .
f
F
x0
x0
x0
0
x
x0
A
B

Section 4.1.
Homotopy Groups
345
Exactness at πn(A, B, x0): The composition i∂is zero since the restriction of a map
f : (In+1, ∂In+1, Jn)→(X, A, x0) to In is homotopic rel ∂In to a constant map via
f itself. The converse is trivial if B is a point, since a nullhomotopy ft : (In, ∂In)→(X, x0)
of f0 : (In, ∂In)→(A, x0) gives a map F : (In+1, ∂In+1, Jn)→(X, A, x0) with ∂([F]) =
[f0]. Thus the proof is ﬁnished in this case. For a general B , let F be a nullhomo-
topy of f : (In, ∂In, Jn−1)→(A, B, x0) through maps (In, ∂In, Jn−1)→(X, B, x0), and
let g be the restriction of F to In−1×I , as in the ﬁrst of the two pictures below.
Reparametrizing the nth and (n + 1)st coor-
dinates as shown in the second picture, we see
that f with g tacked on is in the image of ∂.
But as we noted in the preceding paragraph,
tacking g onto f gives the same element of
πn(A, B, x0).
⊔⊓
f
g
g
f
x0
x0
x0
x0
x0
Example 4.4. Let CX be the cone on a path-connected space X , so CX is the quo-
tient space of X×I obtained by collapsing X×{0} to a point. We can view X as the
subspace X×{1} ⊂CX . Since CX is contractible, the long exact sequence of homo-
topy groups gives isomorphisms πn(CX, X, x0) ≈πn−1(X, x0). Taking n = 2, we
can thus realize any group G, abelian or not, as a relative π2 by choosing X to have
π1(X) ≈G.
The long exact sequence of homotopy groups is clearly natural: A map of triples
(X, A, B, x0)→(X′, A′, B′, x′
0) induces a map between the associated long exact se-
quences, with commuting squares.
A
x0
x0
x0
γ
γ
x1
x1
x1
f
There are change-of-basepoint isomorphisms βγ for rela-
tive homotopy groups analogous to those in the abolute case.
One starts with a path γ in A ⊂X from x0 to x1 , and this in-
duces βγ : πn(X, A, x1)→πn(X, A, x0), βγ[f ] = [γf ], where
γf is deﬁned as in the picture. The basic properties of these
relative βγ ’s parallel closely those developed earlier in the absolute case. However,
even though absolute homotopy groups πn(X, x0) are the special case of relative
groups πn(X, A, x0) in which A = {x0}, the relative βγ ’s do not specialize to the
absolute βγ ’s. So separate proofs must be given in the two cases. But the proofs are
quite similar, so we leave this to the exercises.
By means of the isomorphisms βγ we see that the group πn(X, A, x0) is indepen-
dent of x0 when A is path-connected, so this group is often abbreviated to πn(X, A).
Restricting to loops at the basepoint, the association γ , βγ deﬁnes an action
of π1(A, x0) on πn(X, A, x0), analogous to the action of π1(X, x0) on πn(X, x0) in
the absolute case. In fact, it is clear from the deﬁnitions that π1(A, x0) acts on the
whole long exact sequence of homotopy groups for (X, A, x0), the action commuting
with the various maps in the sequence.

346
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
A space X with basepoint x0 is called n connected if πi(X, x0) = 0 for i ≤n.
Thus 0 connected means path-connected and 1 connected means simply-connected.
Since n connected implies 0 connected, the choice of the basepoint x0 is not signif-
icant. The condition of being n connected can be expressed without mention of a
basepoint since it is an easy exercise to check that the following three conditions are
equivalent.
(1) Every map Si→X is homotopic to a constant map.
(2) Every map Si→X extends to a map Di+1→X .
(3) πi(X, x0) = 0 for all x0 ∈X .
Thus X is n connected if any one of these three conditions holds for all i ≤n.
Similarly, in the relative case it is not hard to see that the following four conditions
are equivalent, for i > 0:
(1) Every map (Di, ∂Di)→(X, A) is homotopic rel ∂Di to a map Di→A.
(2) Every map (Di, ∂Di)→(X, A) is homotopic through such maps to a map Di→A.
(3) Every map (Di, ∂Di)→(X, A) is homotopic through such maps to a constant map
Di→A.
(4) πi(X, A, x0) = 0 for all x0 ∈A.
When i = 0 we did not deﬁne the relative π0 , and (1)-(3) are trivially equivalent since
D0 is a point and ∂D0 is empty. The pair (X, A) is called n connected if (1)-(4) hold
for all 0 < i ≤n and (1)-(3) hold for i = 0. Note that X is n connected iff (X, x0) is
n connected for some x0 , hence for all x0 .
Whitehead’s Theorem
Since CW complexes are built using attaching maps whose domains are spheres,
it is perhaps not too surprising that homotopy groups of CW complexes carry a lot of
information. Whitehead’s theorem makes this explicit:
Theorem 4.5. If a map f : X→Y between connected CW complexes induces isomor-
phisms f∗: πn(X)→πn(Y) for all n, then f is a homotopy equivalence. In case f is
the inclusion of a subcomplex X > Y , the conclusion is stronger: X is a deformation
retract of Y .
The proof will follow rather easily from a more technical result which is useful in
a number of other contexts as well:
Lemma 4.6. Let (X, A) be a CW pair and let (Y, B) be any pair with B ≠∅. For
each n such that X −A has cells of dimension n, assume that πn(Y, B, y0) = 0 for
all y0 ∈B . Then every map f : (X, A)→(Y, B) is homotopic rel A to a map X→B .
When n = 0 the condition ‘π0(Y, B, y0) = 0 for all y0 ∈B ’ is to be regarded as
saying that (Y, B) is 0 connected.

Section 4.1.
Homotopy Groups
347
Proof: Assume inductively that f has already been homotoped to take the skeleton
Xk−1 to B . If Φ is the characteristic map of a cell ek of X −A, the composition
fΦ : (Dk, ∂Dk)→(Y, B) can be homotoped into B rel ∂Dk in view of the hypothesis
that πk(Y, B) = 0 if k > 0, or (Y, B) is 0 connected if k = 0. This homotopy of f Φ
induces a homotopy of f on the quotient space Xk−1 ∪ek of Xk−1 ⨿Dk , a homotopy
rel Xk−1 . Doing this for all k cells of X −A simultaneously, and taking the constant
homotopy on A, we obtain a homotopy of f ||Xk∪A to a map into B . By the homotopy
extension property in Proposition 0.15, this homotopy extends to a homotopy deﬁned
on all of X , and the induction step is completed.
Finitely many applications of the induction step ﬁnish the proof if the cells of
X −A are of bounded dimension. In the general case we perform the homotopy of
the induction step during the t interval [1 −1/2k, 1 −1/2k+1]. Any ﬁnite skeleton
Xk is eventually stationary under these homotopies, hence we have a well-deﬁned
homotopy ft , t ∈[0, 1], with f1(X) ⊂B .
⊔⊓
Proof of Whitehead’s Theorem: In the special case that f is the inclusion of a sub-
complex, consider the long exact sequence of homotopy groups for the pair (Y, X).
Since f induces isomorphisms on all homotopy groups, the relative groups πn(Y, X)
are zero. Applying the lemma to the identity map (Y, X)→(Y, X) then yields a de-
formation retraction of Y onto X .
The general case can be proved using mapping cylinders. Recall that the mapping
cylinder Mf of a map f : X→Y is the quotient space of the disjoint union of X×I
and Y under the identiﬁcation (x, 1) ∼f (x). Thus Mf contains both X = X×{0}
and Y as subspaces, and Mf deformation retracts onto Y . The map f becomes the
composition of the inclusion X>Mf with the retraction Mf→Y . Since this retraction
is a homotopy equivalence, it sufﬁces to show that Mf deformation retracts onto X if
f induces isomorphisms on homotopy groups, i.e., if the relative groups πn(Mf , X)
are all zero.
If the map f happens to be cellular, taking the n skeleton of X to the n skeleton
of Y for all n, then (Mf , X) is a CW pair and so we are done by the ﬁrst paragraph
of the proof. If f is not cellular, we can either appeal to Theorem 4.7 which says that
f is homotopic to a cellular map, or we can use the following argument which avoids
Theorem 4.7. First apply the preceding lemma to obtain a homotopy rel X of the
inclusion (X ∪Y, X)>(Mf , X) to a map into X . Since the pair (Mf , X ∪Y) obviously
satisﬁes the homotopy extension property, this homotopy extends to a homotopy
from the identity map of Mf to a map g : Mf→Mf taking X∪Y into X . Then apply the
lemma again to the composition (X×I ⨿Y, X×∂I ⨿Y) -→(Mf , X ∪Y)
g-----→(Mf , X)
to ﬁnish the construction of a deformation retraction of Mf onto X .
⊔⊓
Whitehead’s theorem does not say that two CW complexes X and Y with iso-
morphic homotopy groups are homotopy equivalent, since there is a big difference

348
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
between saying that X and Y have isomorphic homotopy groups and that there is
a map X→Y inducing isomorphisms on homotopy groups. For example, consider
X = RP2 and Y = S2×RP∞. These both have fundamental group Z2 , and Proposi-
tion 4.1 implies that their higher homotopy groups are isomorphic since their univer-
sal covers S2 and S2×S∞are homotopy equivalent, S∞being contractible. But RP2
and S2×RP∞are not homotopy equivalent since their homology groups are vastly dif-
ferent, S2×RP∞having nonvanishing homology in inﬁnitely many dimensions since
it retracts onto RP∞. Another pair of non-homotopy-equivalent CW complexes with
isomorphic homotopy groups is S2 and S3×CP∞, as we shall see in Example 4.50.
Cellular Approximation
Suppose one wanted to prove that πn(Sk) = 0 for n < k. One would then start
with a map f : (In, ∂In)→(Sk, x0). If this were not surjective, there would be a point
p ∈Sk disjoint from f (In), and since Sk −{p} is homeomorphic to Rk , it deforma-
tion retracts onto x0 , so composing this deformation retraction with f would give
a homotopy of f to a constant map, rel ∂In . Thus we would be done if there were
no surjective maps In→Sk if n < k. However, such maps do exist, though they take
some work to construct. For example, if n = 1 there are a number of well-known con-
structions of ‘space-ﬁlling curves’ which the reader may have seen. Maps which are
locally well-behaved, such as piecewise-linear or differentiable maps, cannot exhibit
such strange dimension-raising behavior, so one would like to show that arbitrary
maps can be homotoped to maps with some local regularity like piecewise-linearity.
This will be the technical core of the proof of the following Cellular Approximation
Theorem which gives a very useful general statement to the effect that maps between
CW complexes can always be homotoped to eliminate any dimension-raising pathol-
ogy.
Theorem 4.7. Every map f : X→Y of CW complexes is homotopic to a cellular map,
i.e., one for which f (Xn) ⊂Y n for all n. If f is already cellular on a subcomplex
A ⊂X , the homotopy may be taken to be stationary on A.
Corollary 4.8. πn(Sk) = 0 for n < k.
Proof: If Sn and Sk are given their usual CW structures, with the 0 cells as basepoints,
then every basepoint-preserving map Sn→Sk can be homotoped, ﬁxing the basepoint,
to be cellular, and hence constant if n < k.
⊔⊓
One can think of cellular approximation as an analog for CW complexes of sim-
plicial approximation for simplicial complexes, Theorem 2C.1, since simplicial maps
are cellular. However, simplicial maps are much more rigid than cellular maps, which
perhaps accounts for why subdivision of the domain is required for simplicial approx-
imation but not for cellular approximation.

Section 4.1.
Homotopy Groups
349
Proof of 4.7: Suppose inductively that f : X→Y is already cellular on the skeleton
Xn−1 , and let en be an n cell of X . Since en has compact closure in X , f (en) has
compact closure in Y , hence meets only ﬁnitely many cells of Y . Let ek ⊂Y be a
cell of highest dimension meeting f (en). We may assume k > n, otherwise f is
already cellular on en . We will show below that it is possible to deform f ||Xn−1 ∪en ,
staying ﬁxed on Xn−1 , so that f (en) misses some point p ∈ek . Then we can deform
f ||Xn−1 ∪en rel Xn−1 so that f (en) misses the whole cell ek by composing with a
deformation retraction of Y k −{p} onto Y k −ek . By ﬁnitely many iterations of this
process we eventually make f (en) miss all cells of dimension greater than n. Do-
ing this for all n cells, staying ﬁxed on n cells in A where f is already cellular, we
obtain a homotopy of f ||Xn rel Xn−1 ∪An to a cellular map. The induction step is
then completed by appealing to the homotopy extension property in Proposition 0.15
to extend this homotopy, together with the constant homotopy on A, to a homotopy
deﬁned on all of X . Letting n go to ∞, the resulting possibly inﬁnite string of homo-
topies can be realized as a single homotopy by performing the nth homotopy during
the t interval [1 −1/2n, 1 −1/2n+1]. This makes sense since each point of X lies in
some Xn , which is eventually stationary in the inﬁnite chain of homotopies.
To ﬁll in the missing step in this argument we will use the following technical
statement:
Lemma 4.9. Let f : In→Z be a map, where Z is obtained from a subspace W by
attaching a cell ek . Then f is homotopic rel f −1(W) to a map f1 for which there
is a simplex ∆k ⊂ek with f −1
1 (∆k) a union (possibly empty) of ﬁnitely many convex
polyhedra, on each of which f1 is the restriction of a linear surjection Rn→Rk .
Here a convex polyhedron in In ⊂Rn is any subspace which can be obtained as
the intersection of a ﬁnite number of half-spaces deﬁned by linear inequalities of the
form
P
i aixi ≤b.
Before proving the lemma, let us see how it ﬁnishes the proof of the cellular
approximation theorem. Composing the given map f : Xn−1 ∪en→Y k with a char-
acteristic map In→X for en , we obtain a map f as in the lemma, with Z = Y k and
W = Y k −ek . The homotopy given by the lemma is ﬁxed on ∂In , hence induces a
homotopy ft of f ||Xn−1 ∪en ﬁxed on Xn−1 . If k > n, there are no surjective linear
maps Rn→Rk , so f −1
1 (∆k) must be empty, and we can choose p to be any point
of ∆k .
⊔⊓
Proof of 4.9: Identifying ek with Rk , let B1, B2 ⊂ek be the closed balls of radius 1
and 2 centered at the origin. Since f −1(B2) is closed and therefore compact in In , it
follows that f is uniformly continuous on f −1(B2). Thus there exists ε > 0 such that
|x −y| < ε implies |f (x) −f (y)| < 1/2 for all x, y ∈f −1(B2). Subdivide the interval
I so that the induced subdivision of In into cubes has each cube lying in a ball of
diameter less than ε. Let K1 be the union of all the closed cubes meeting f −1(B1),

350
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
and let K2 be the union of all the closed cubes meeting K1 . Then f −1(B1) ⊂K1 ⊂
K2 ⊂f −1(B2), the last inclusion holding since points of f (K2) have distance less than
1/2 from f (K1) and points of f (K1) have distance less than 1/2 from B1 .
K
K
1
K1
f
2
B
B
1
2
f
1
_
(
)
(
)
K2
f (
)
B1
f
1
_
(
)
B2
We can view K2 as a CW complex whose i cells are i dimensional open cubes, the
interiors of the i dimensional faces of the k dimensional cubes of K2 for i ≤k. The
barycentric subdivision of this cubical cell structure is a simplicial complex structure
on K2 whose vertices are the center points of the cells. One can build this simplicial
structure inductively over skeleta of the cubical cell structure, the induction step being
to cone off the simplicial structure on the boundary of each cubical cell to the center
point of the cell.
Let g : K2→ek = Rk be the map which equals f on all vertices of simplices of
the subdivision, and is linear on each simplex. Deﬁne a homotopy ft : K2→ek by the
formula (1−tϕ)f +(tϕ)g where ϕ : K2→[0, 1] is a map which is 0 on the frontier of
K2 and 1 on K1 . Thus f0 = f and f1 ||K1 = g||K1 . Since ft is the constant homotopy
on the frontier of K2 , we may extend ft to be the constant homotopy of f on the rest
of In .
Each simplex σ of the subdivision of K2 is mapped by f into a ball Bσ of ra-
dius 1/2. Since Bσ is convex, g also maps σ into Bσ , and therefore so does f1 . If σ
is not contained in K1 , then Bσ meets the exterior of B1 and hence is disjoint from
0, the center of B1 . Since there are only ﬁnitely many σ ’s, there is a neighborhood
N of 0 in ek disjoint from f1(σ) for all σ not contained in K1 , hence f −1
1 (N) ⊂K1
since f1 = f outside K2 .
For a simplex ∆k ⊂N , the preimage f −1
1 (∆k) ⊂K1 is the union of its intersections
with simplices σ of K1 , and each such intersection is a convex polyhedron since it
is the intersection of σ with the convex polyhedron L−1
σ (∆k) where Lσ : Rn→Rk is
the linear map restricting to g on σ .
(Recall that f1 = g on K1 .)
To ﬁnish the
proof it therefore sufﬁces to choose ∆k to be disjoint from the images of all the
nonsurjective Lσ ’s, which is certainly possible since these images consist of ﬁnitely
many hyperplanes of dimension less than k.
⊔⊓
Example 4.10: Cellular Approximation for Pairs. Every map f : (X, A)→(Y, B) of
CW pairs can be deformed through maps (X, A)→(Y, B) to a cellular map.
This

Section 4.1.
Homotopy Groups
351
follows from the theorem by ﬁrst deforming the restriction f : A→B to be cellular,
then extending this to a homotopy of f on all of X , then deforming the resulting map
to be cellular staying ﬁxed on A. As a further reﬁnement, the homotopy of f can be
taken to be stationary on any subcomplex of X where f is already cellular.
An easy consequence of this is:
Corollary 4.11. A CW pair (X, A) is n connected if all the cells in X −A have
dimension greater than n. In particular the pair (X, Xn) is n connected, hence the
inclusion Xn > X induces isomorphisms on πi for i < n and a surjection on πn .
Proof: Applying cellular approximation to maps (Di, ∂Di)→(X, A) with i ≤n gives
the ﬁrst statement. The last statement comes from the long exact sequence of the
pair (X, Xn).
⊔⊓
CW Approximation
A map f : X→Y is called a weak homotopy equivalence if it induces isomor-
phisms πn(X, x0)→πn
 Y, f(x0)

for all n ≥0 and all choices of basepoint x0 .
Whitehead’s theorem can be restated as saying that a weak homotopy equivalence
between CW complexes is a homotopy equivalence. It follows easily that this holds
also for spaces homotopy equivalent to CW complexes. In general, however, weak
homotopy equivalence is strictly weaker than homotopy equivalence. For example,
there exist noncontractible spaces whose homotopy groups are all trivial, such as the
‘quasi-circle’ according to an exercise at the end of this section, and for such spaces a
map to a point is a weak homotopy equivalence which is not a homotopy equivalence.
We will show below that for every space X there is a CW complex Z and a weak
homotopy equivalence f : Z→X . Such a map f : Z→X is called a CW approximation
to X . We will also show that a weak homotopy equivalence induces isomorphisms
on all homology and cohomology groups, so CW approximations allow many general
statements in algebraic topology to be reduced to the case of CW complexes, where
one can often make cell-by-cell arguments.
We can extend the notion of CW approximation in two directions by relativizing
and introducing an auxiliary parameter n ≥0 in the following way. Given a pair
(X, A) where the subspace A ⊂X is a nonempty CW complex, we can ask for an
n connected CW pair (Z, A) and a map f : Z→X with f ||A the identity, such that
f∗: πi(Z)→πi(X) is an isomorphism for i > n and an injection for i = n, for all
choices of basepoint. In this situation we call f : (Z, A)→(X, A) an n connected CW
model for (X, A). This specializes to the notion of a CW approximation by taking
n = 0 and letting A consist of one point in each path-component of X .
For an n connected CW model f : (Z, A)→(X, A), the complex Z has the same
homotopy groups as A in dimensions less than n and the same homotopy groups as

352
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
X in dimensions greater than n. In the critical dimension n, the maps A> Z
f-----→X
induce a composition πn(A)→πn(Z)→πn(X) factoring the map πn(A)→πn(X) as
the composition of a surjection followed by an injection, just as any group homomor-
phism ϕ : G→H can be factored (uniquely) as a surjection ϕ : G→Im ϕ followed by
an injection Im ϕ > H . One can think of Z as a sort of homotopy-theoretic hybrid
of A and X . As n increases, the hybrid looks more and more like A, and less and
less like X .
Proposition 4.12. For every pair (X, A) with A a nonempty CW complex there exist
n connected CW models f : (Z, A)→(X, A) for all n ≥0, and these models can be
chosen to have the additional property that Z is obtained from A by attaching cells
of dimension greater than n.
Note that the condition that Z −A consists of cells of dimension greater than n
automatically implies that (Z, A) is n connected, by cellular approximation.
Proof: We will construct Z as a union of subcomplexes A = Zn ⊂Zn+1 ⊂··· with Zk
obtained from Zk−1 by attaching k cells. Suppose inductively that we have already
constructed Zk and a map f : Zk→X restricting to the identity on A and such that
the induced map on πi is an injection for n ≤i < k and a surjection for n < i ≤k,
with respect to a choice of basepoint xγ in each component Aγ of A. The induction
begins with k = n and Zn = A, when these conditions are vacuous.
For the induction step, ﬁrst choose cellular maps ϕα : Sk→Zk representing gen-
erators for the kernel of f∗: πk(Zk, xγ)→πk(X, f (xγ)), for all γ . Attach cells ek+1
α
to Zk via these maps ϕα , and call the resulting complex Yk . Since the compositions
fϕα are nullhomotopic, we can extend f to be deﬁned on Yk . The induced map
f∗: πk(Yk)→πk(X) is injective since each element of the kernel is represented by a
cellular map, with image in Zk , and such maps are nullhomotopic in Yk by construc-
tion. (When k = 0 the construction needs to be done differently since π0 has no
group structure. Instead, we form Y0 by attaching 1 cells joining all pairs of 0-cells
of A lying in the same component of X .)
Next, choose maps ψβ : Sk+1→X generating πk+1(X, f (xγ)) for all γ , and let
Zk+1 be the wedge sum of Yk with spheres Sk+1
β
, at the appropriate basepoints
xγ .
Extend f to a map deﬁned on Zk+1 by letting it equal ψβ on Sk+1
β
, hence
f∗: πk+1(Zk+1, xγ)→πk+1(X, f(xγ)) is surjective. The inclusion Yk > Zk+1 = Yk ∨β
Sk+1
β
induces an isomorphism on πk (surjectivity comes from cellular approximation
and injectivity from a retraction of Zk+1 onto Yk ) so f∗: πk(Zk+1, xγ)→πk(X, f (xγ))
is still injective. Also, the induced maps f∗: πi(Zk+1)→πi(X) for i < k are the same
as f∗: πi(Zk)→πi(X) since the (k+1) cells we have attached have no effect on these
lower homotopy groups. This completes the induction step.
Since the maps f∗: πi(Z, xγ)→πi(X, f (xγ)) depend only on the (i+1) skeleton
of Z , they are isomorphisms for all i > n and injective for i = n. This holds in fact

Section 4.1.
Homotopy Groups
353
for all basepoints in Z , not just the xγ ’s, since every point in Z is joined by a path
to a point in A and hence to some xγ .
⊔⊓
Example 4.13. When X is path-connected and A is a point, the construction of a 0-
connected CW model for (X, A) gives a CW approximation to X with a single 0 cell and
all higher cells attached by basepoint-preserving maps. In particular, any connected
CW complex is homotopy equivalent to a CW complex with these properties.
Example 4.14. One can also apply the proposition to obtain a CW approximation to
an arbitrary pair (X, X0). First construct a CW approximation f0 : Z0→X0 , then form
a 0 connected CW model (Z, Z0)→(M, Z0) where M is the mapping cylinder of the
composition of f0 with the inclusion X0 > X . Composing the map Z→M with the
retraction of M onto X , we obtain an extension of f0 to a CW approximation f : Z→X .
It follows from the ﬁve-lemma that the map (Z, Z0)→(X, X0) induces isomorphisms
on relative as well as absolute homotopy groups.
Here is a rather different application of the preceding proposition, giving a more
geometric interpretation to n connectedness:
Corollary 4.15. If (X, A) is an n connected CW pair then there exists a CW pair
(Z, A) ≃(X, A) rel A such that all cells of Z −A have dimension greater than n.
Proof: An n connected CW approximation f : (Z, A)→(X, A) given by the preceding
proposition will do the trick. First we check that f induces isomorphisms πi(Z) ≈
πi(X) for all i. This is true for i > n by deﬁnition, and for i < n it holds since both
inclusions A>Z and A>X induce isomorphisms on these lower homotopy groups.
For i = n, f induces an injection on πn by deﬁnition, and since the inclusion A>X
induces a surjection on πn , so does f via the composition πn(A)→πn(Z)→πn(X).
Since f induces isomorphisms on all homotopy groups, it is a homotopy equiv-
alence. To see that this is a homotopy equivalence rel A we could quote Proposi-
tion 0.18, but here is an alternative argument. Form a quotient space W of the map-
ping cylinder Mf by collapsing each segment {a}×I to a point, for a ∈A. Assuming
f has been made cellular, W is a CW complex containing X and Z as subcomplexes,
and W deformation retracts to X just as Mf does. Also, πi(W, Z) = 0 for all i since
f induces isomorphisms on all homotopy groups, so W deformation retracts onto Z .
These two deformation retractions of W onto X and Z are stationary on A, hence
give a homotopy equivalence X ≃Z rel A.
⊔⊓
Mapping properties of CW models are the subject of the next proposition.

354
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
Proposition 4.16. Suppose given a map g : (X, A)→(X′, A′) with an n connected
CW model f : (Z, A)→(X, A) and an n′ connected CW model f ′ : (Z′, A′)→(X′, A′).
Then if n ≥n′ there is a map h : Z→Z′ restricting to g on A such
that the diagram at the right is commutative up to homotopy rel A.
−−→
−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
Z
Z
X
X
′
′
′
f
h
g
f
Furthermore, such an h is unique up to homotopy rel A.
Proof: By the preceding corollary we may assume all cells of Z −A have dimension
greater than n. Let W be the quotient space of the mapping cylinder of f ′ obtained
by collapsing each line segment {a′}×I to a point, for a′ ∈A′ . We can think of W
as a relative mapping cylinder, and like the ordinary mapping cylinder, W contains
copies of Z′ and X′ , the latter as a deformation retract. The assumption that (Z′, A′)
is an n′ connected CW model for (X′, A′) implies that the relative groups πi(W, Z′)
are zero for all i > n′ .
Via the inclusion X′ > W we can view gf as a map Z→W . As a map of pairs
(Z, A)→(W, Z′), gf is homotopic rel A to a map h with image in Z′ , by Lemma 4.6
and the hypothesis n ≥n′ . This proves the ﬁrst assertion. For the second, suppose
h0 and h1 are two maps Z→Z′ whose compositions with f ′ are homotopic to gf rel
A. Thus if we regard h0 and h1 as maps to W , they are homotopic rel A. Such a
homotopy gives a map (Z×I, Z×∂I ∪A×I)→(W, Z′), and by Lemma 4.6 again this
map can be deformed rel Z×∂I ∪A×I to a map with image in Z′ , which gives the
desired homotopy h0 ≃h1 rel A.
⊔⊓
Corollary 4.17. An n connected CW model for (X, A) is unique up to homotopy
equivalence rel A. In particular, CW approximations to spaces are unique up to ho-
motopy equivalence.
Proof: Given two n connected CW models Z and Z′ , then applying the proposition
with g the identity map of (X, A) yields maps Z→Z′ and Z′→Z with the composi-
tions of these two maps in either order homotopic to the identity rel A.
⊔⊓
Taking n = n′ in the proposition, we obtain also a functoriality property for
n connected CW models. For example, a map X→X′ induces a map of CW approxi-
mations Z→Z′ , which is unique up to homotopy.
Letting n varying, and letting (Zn, A) be an n connected CW
model for (X, A), then the proposition gives a tower of CW models as
shown in the diagram with commutative triangles on the left and
homotopy-commutative triangles on the right. We can make the
−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
A
Z
X
0
Z1
Z2
...
triangles on the right strictly commutative by replacing the
maps Zn→X by the compositions through Z0 .
Example 4.18: Whitehead towers . If we take X to be an arbitrary CW complex with
the subspace A a point, then the resulting tower of n connected CW models amounts

Section 4.1.
Homotopy Groups
355
to a sequence of maps
···→Z2→Z1→Z0→X
with Zn n connected and the map Zn→X inducing an isomorphism on all homotopy
groups πi with i > n. The space Z0 is path-connected and homotopy equivalent
to the component of X containing A, so one may as well assume Z0 equals this
component. The next space Z1 is simply-connected, and the map Z1→X has the
homotopy properties of the universal cover of the component Z0 of X . For larger
values of n one can by analogy view the map Zn→X as an ‘n connected cover’ of
X .
For n > 1 these do not seem to arise so frequently in nature as in the case
n = 1. A rare exception is the Hopf map S3→S2 deﬁned in Example 4.44, which is a
2 connected cover.
Example 4.19: Postnikov towers. Let X be a CW complex, which we may as well take
to be connected. Then the tower of n connected CW models for the pair (CX, X),
with CX the cone on X , is called a Postnikov tower for X . Relabeling the
space Zn as Xn−1 , the Postnikov tower gives the commutative diagram at
the right, where the induced map πi(X)→πi(Xn) is an isomorphism for
i ≤n and πi(Xn) = 0 for i > n.
One can regard the spaces Xn as
truncations of X which provide successively better approximations to
X as n increases. Postnikov towers turn out to be quite powerful
tools for proving general theorems, and we will study them further in
§4.3.
−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
X
X1
X2
X3
...
Now let us show that CW approximations behave well with respect to homology
and cohomology:
Proposition 4.20. A weak homotopy equivalence f : X→Y induces isomorphisms
f∗: Hn(X; G)→Hn(Y; G) and f ∗: Hn(Y; G)→Hn(X; G) for all n and all coefﬁcient
groups G.
Proof: By the universal coefﬁcient theorems it sufﬁces to prove the result for homol-
ogy with Z coefﬁcients. Furthermore, replacing Y by the mapping cylinder Mf and
looking at the long exact sequences of homology and homotopy groups for (Mf , X),
we see that it sufﬁces to show:
(∗)
If a pair of path-connected spaces (Z, X) has πi(Z, X) = 0 for i ≤n, then
Hi(Z, X; Z) = 0 for i ≤n.
Let α =
P
j njσj be a relative cycle representing an element of Hk(Z, X; Z), for sin-
gular k simplices σj : ∆k→Z . Build a ﬁnite ∆complex K from a disjoint union of
k simplices, one for each σj , by identifying all (k −1) dimensional faces of these
k simplices for which the corresponding restrictions of the σj ’s are equal. Thus the
σj ’s induce a map σ : K→Z . Since α is a relative cycle, ∂α is a chain in X . Let

356
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
L ⊂K be the subcomplex consisting of (k −1)-simplices corresponding to the sin-
gular (k −1) simplices in ∂α, so σ(L) ⊂X . The chain α is the image under the
chain map σ♯of a chain eα in K , with ∂eα a chain in L. In relative homology we then
have σ∗[ eα] = [α]. If we assume πi(Z, X) = 0 for i ≤k, then σ : (K, L)→(Z, X) is
homotopic rel L to a map with image in X , by Lemma 4.6. Hence σ∗[ eα] is in the
image of the map Hk(X, X; Z)→Hk(Z, X; Z), and since Hk(X, X; Z) = 0 we conclude
that σ∗[ eα] = 0, hence [α] = 0.
⊔⊓
CW approximations can be used to reduce many statements about general spaces
to the special case of CW complexes. For example, the cup product version of the
K¨unneth formula in Theorem 3.15, asserting that H∗(X×Y; R) ≈H∗(X; R)⊗H∗(Y; R)
under certain conditions, can now be extended to non-CW spaces since if X and Y
are CW approximations to spaces Z and W , respectively, then X×Y , with the CW
topology, is a CW approximation to Z×W . (Changing the product topology to the CW
topology on X×Y has no effect on homotopy groups since these two topologies have
the same compact sets.) Similarly, the general K¨unneth formula for homology in §3.B
holds for arbitrary products X×Y .
The condition for a map Y→Z to be a weak homotopy equivalence involves only
maps of spheres into Y and Z , but in fact weak homotopy equivalences Y→Z behave
nicely with respect to maps of arbitrary CW complexes into Y and Z , not just spheres.
The following proposition gives a precise statement, using the notations [X, Y] for
the set of homotopy classes of maps X→Y and ⟨X, Y⟩for the set of basepoint-
preserving-homotopy classes of basepoint-preserving maps X→Y .
(The notation
⟨X, Y⟩is not standard, but is intended to suggest ‘pointed homotopy classes.’)
Proposition 4.21. A weak homotopy equivalence f : Y -→Z induces bijections
[X, Y]→[X, Z] and ⟨X, Y⟩→⟨X, Z⟩for all CW complexes X .
Proof: Consider ﬁrst [X, Y]→[X, Z]. We may assume f is an inclusion by replacing
Z by the mapping cylinder Mf as usual.
The groups πn(Z, Y, y0) are then zero
for all n and all basepoints y0 ∈Y , so Lemma 4.6 implies that any map X→Z
can be homotoped to have image in Y . This gives surjectivity of [X, Y]→[X, Z]. A
relative version of this argument shows injectivity since we can deform a homotopy
(X×I, X×∂I)→(Z, Y) to have image in Y .
In the case of ⟨X, Y⟩→⟨X, Z⟩the same argument applies if Mf is replaced by the
reduced mapping cylinder, the quotient of Mf obtained by collapsing the segment
{y0}×I to a point, for y0 the basepoint of Y . This collapsed segment then serves
as the common basepoint of Y , Z , and the reduced mapping cylinder. The reduced
mapping cylinder deformation retracts to Z just as the unreduced one does, but with
the advantage that the basepoint does not move.
⊔⊓

Section 4.1.
Homotopy Groups
357
Exercises
1. Suppose a sum f +′g of maps f , g : (In, ∂In)→(X, x0) is deﬁned using a coordinate
of In other than the ﬁrst coordinate as in the usual sum f + g. Verify the formula
(f + g) +′ (h + k) = (f +′ h) + (g +′ k), and deduce that f +′ k ≃f + k so the two
sums agree on πn(X, x0), and also that g +′ h ≃h + g so the addition is abelian.
2. Show that if ϕ : X→Y is a homotopy equivalence, then the induced homomor-
phisms ϕ∗: πn(X, x0)→πn(Y, ϕ(x0)) are isomorphisms for all n. [The case n = 1
is Proposition 1.18.]
3.
For an H–space (X, x0) with multiplication µ : X×X→X , show that the group
operation in πn(X, x0) can also be deﬁned by the rule (f + g)(x) = µ
 f (x), g(x)

.
4.
Let p : eX→X be the universal cover of a path-connected space X .
Show that
under the isomorphism πn(X) ≈πn( eX), which holds for n ≥2, the action of
π1(X) on πn(X) corresponds to the action of π1(X) on πn( eX) induced by the ac-
tion of π1(X) on eX as deck transformations. More precisely, prove a formula like
γp∗(α) = p∗
 βeγ(γ∗(α))

where γ ∈π1(X, x0), α ∈πn( eX, ex0), and γ∗denotes the
homomorphism induced by the action of γ on eX .
5. For a pair (X, A) of path-connected spaces, show that π1(X, A, x0) can be identiﬁed
in a natural way with the set of cosets αH of the subgroup H ⊂π1(X, x0) represented
by loops in A at x0 .
6. If p : ( eX, eA, ex0)→(X, A, x0) is a covering space with eA = p−1(A), show that the
map p∗: πn( eX, eA, ex0)→πn(X, A, x0) is an isomorphism for all n > 1.
7. Extend the results proved near the beginning of this section for the change-of-
basepoint maps βγ for absolute homotopy groups to the case of relative homotopy
groups.
8. Suppose we deﬁne π0(X, A, x0) to be the quotient set π0(X, x0)/π0(A, x0), so
that the long exact sequence of homotopy groups for the pair (X, A) extends to
···→π0(X, x0)→π0(X, A, x0)→0.
(a) Show that with this extension, the ﬁve-lemma holds for the map of long exact
sequences induced by a map (X, A, x0)→(Y, B, y0), in the following form: Each
map between the two sequences is a bijection if the two adjacent maps on each
side of the given map are bijections for all choices of x0 .
(b) Show that the long exact sequence of a triple (X, A, B, x0) can be extended only to
the term π0(A, B, x0) in general, and that the ﬁve-lemma holds for this extension.
9. Show the ‘quasi-circle’ described in an exercise in §1.3 has trivial homotopy groups
but is not contractible, hence does not have the homotopy type of a CW complex.
10. Show that a CW complex is contractible if it is the union of an increasing sequence
of subcomplexes X1 ⊂X2 ⊂··· such that each Xi is contractible in Xi+1 , i.e., the
inclusion Xi > Xi+1 is nullhomotopic.
This applies for example to S∞, or more
generally to the inﬁnite suspension S∞X of any CW complex X .

358
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
11. Show that an n connected, n dimensional CW complex is contractible.
12. Given a CW pair (X, A) and a map f : A→Y with Y path-connected, show that
there is an extension of f to a map X→Y provided that πn(Y) = 0 for all n such
that X −A has cells of dimension n+1. Deduce that a CW complex retracts onto any
contractible subcomplex.
13. Use cellular approximation to show that the n skeletons of homotopy equivalent
CW complexes without cells of dimension n + 1 are also homotopy equivalent.
14. Show every map f : Sn→Sn is homotopic to a multiple of the identity map by the
following steps.
(a) Use Lemma 4.9 (or simplicial approximation, Theorem 2C.1) to reduce to the case
that there exists a point q ∈Sn with f −1(q) = {p1, ··· , pk} and f is an invertible
linear map near each pi .
(b) For f as in (b), consider the composition gf where g : Sn→Sn collapses the
complement of a small ball about q to the basepoint.
Use this to reduce (a)
further to the case k = 1.
(c) Finish the argument by showing that an invertible n×n matrix can be joined by
a path of such matrices to either the identity matrix or the matrix of a reﬂection.
(Use Gaussian elimination, for example.)
15. Show that if X and Y are CW complexes with X m connected and Y n connected,
then (X×Y, X ∨Y) is (m + n + 1) connected, as is the smash product X ∧Y .
16. Give an example of a weak homotopy equivalence X→Y for which there does not
exist a weak homotopy equivalence Y→X .
17. Consider the equivalence relation ‘≃w ’ generated by weak homotopy equivalence:
X ≃w Y if there are spaces X = X1, X2, ··· , Xn = Y with weak homotopy equivalences
Xi→Xi+1 or Xi←Xi+1 for each i. Show that X ≃w Y iff X and Y have a common
CW approximation.
18. Show that [X, Y] is ﬁnite if X is a ﬁnite connected CW complex and πi(Y) is
ﬁnite for i ≤dim X .
19. For this problem it is convenient to use the notation Xn for the nth stage in a
Postnikov tower for X and Xm for an (m−1) connected covering of X , where X is a
connected CW complex. Show that (Xn)m ≃(Xm)n , so the notation
−−→
−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
X
X
X
X
n
m
m
n
Xn
m is unambiguous. Thus πi(Xn
m) ≈πi(X) for m ≤i ≤n and all
other homotopy groups of Xn
m are zero.
20. Show that a path-connected space X is homotopy equivalent to a CW complex with
countably many cells iff πn(X) is countable for all n. [Use the results on simplicial
approximations to maps and spaces in §2.C.]
21. If f : X→Y is a map with X and Y homotopy equivalent to CW complexes, show
that the pair (Mf , X) is homotopy equivalent to a CW pair, where Mf is the mapping
cylinder. Deduce that the mapping cone Cf has the homotopy type of a CW complex.

Section 4.2.
Elementary Methods of Calculation
359
We have not yet computed any nonzero homotopy groups πn(X) with n ≥2. In
Chapter 1 we used two main methods for computing fundamental groups: van Kam-
pen’s theorem and covering spaces. In the present section we will study the higher-
dimensional analogs of these: the excision theorem for homotopy groups, and ﬁber
bundles. Both of these are quite a bit weaker than their fundamental group analogs, in
that they do not directly compute homotopy groups but only give relations between
the homotopy groups of different spaces. Their applicability is thus more limited,
but sufﬁces for a number of interesting calculations, such as πn(Sn) and more gener-
ally the Hurewicz theorem relating the ﬁrst nonzero homotopy and homology groups
of a space. Another noteworthy application is the Freudenthal Suspension Theorem,
which leads to stable homotopy groups and in fact the whole subject of stable homo-
topy theory.
Excision for Homotopy Groups
What makes homotopy groups so much harder to compute than homology groups
is the failure of the excision property. However, there is a certain dimension range,
depending on connectivities, in which excision does hold for homotopy groups:
Theorem 4.22. Let X be a CW complex which is the union of subcomplexes A and B
whose intersection C = A∩B is path-connected. If (A, C) is m connected and (B, C)
is n connected, m, n ≥1, then the map πi(A, C)→πi(X, B) induced by inclusion is
an isomorphism for i < m + n and a surjection for i = m + n.
This yields the Freudenthal suspension theorem:
Corollary 4.23. The suspension map πi(Sn)→πi+1(Sn+1) is an isomorphism for
i < 2n −1 and a surjection for i = 2n −1.
More generally this holds for the
suspension πi(X)→πi+1(SX) whenever X is an (n −1) connected CW complex.
Proof: Decompose the suspension SX as the union of two cones C+X and C−X
intersecting in a copy of X . The suspension map is the same as the map
πi(X) ≈πi+1(C+X, X) -→πi+1(SX, C−X) ≈πi+1(SX)
where the two isomorphisms come from long exact sequences of pairs and the middle
map is induced by inclusion. From the long exact sequence of the pair (C±X, X) we
see that this pair is n connected if X is (n −1) connected. The preceding theorem
then says that the middle map is an isomorphism for i + 1 < 2n and surjective for
i + 1 = 2n.
⊔⊓

360
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
Corollary 4.24. πn(Sn) ≈Z, generated by the identity map, for all n ≥1.
In
particular, the degree map πn(Sn)→Z is an isomorphism.
Proof: From the preceding corollary we know that in the suspension sequence
π1(S1)→π2(S2)→π3(S3)→···
the ﬁrst map is surjective and all the subsequent maps are isomorphisms.
Since
π1(S1) is Z generated by the identity map, it follows that πn(Sn) for n ≥2 is a
ﬁnite or inﬁnite cyclic group independent of n, generated by the identity map. The
fact that this cyclic group is inﬁnite can be deduced from homology theory since
there exist basepoint-preserving maps Sn→Sn of arbitrary degree, and degree is a
homotopy invariant. Alternatively, if one want to avoid appealing to homology theory
one can use the Hopf bundle S1→S3→S2 described in Example 4.44, whose long
exact sequence of homotopy groups gives an isomorphism π1(S1) ≈π2(S2).
The degree map πn(Sn)→Z is an isomorphism since the the map z , zk of S1
has degree k, as do its iterated suspensions.
⊔⊓
Proof of 4.22: We proceed by proving successively more general cases. The ﬁrst case
contains the heart of the argument, and sufﬁces for the calculation of πn(Sn).
Case 1: A is obtained from C by attaching cells em+1
α
and B is obtained from C by
attaching a cell en+1 . To show surjectivity of πi(A, C)→πi(X, B) we start with a map
f : (Ii, ∂Ii, Ji−1)→(X, B, x0). The image of f is compact and therefore meets only
ﬁnitely many of these cells em+1
α
and en+1 . By repeated applications of Lemma 4.9
we may homotope f , through maps (Ii, ∂Ii, Ji−1)→(X, B, x0), so that the preimages
f −1(∆m+1
α
) and f −1(∆n+1) of simplices in em+1
α
and en+1 are ﬁnite unions of convex
polyhedra, on each of which f is the restriction of a linear surjection from Ri onto
Rm+1 or Rn+1 .
Claim: If i ≤m + n, then there exist points pα ∈∆m+1
α
, q ∈∆n+1 , and a map
ϕ : Ii−1→[0, 1) such that:
(a) f −1(q) lies below the graph of ϕ in Ii−1×I = Ii .
(b) f −1(pα) lies above the graph of ϕ for each α.
(c) ϕ = 0 on ∂Ii−1 .
I
I
i 1
f
1 q
graph of
_
(
)
f
1 p
_
(
)
α
_
ϕ
Granting this, let ft be a homotopy of f excising the region under the graph of ϕ
by restricting f to the region above the graph of tϕ for 0 ≤t ≤1. By (b), ft(Ii−1)

Section 4.2.
Elementary Methods of Calculation
361
is disjoint from pα for all t and α, and by (a), f1(Ii) is disjoint from q. This means
that in the commutative diagram
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−→
i
π (
)
C
,
A
i
π (
)
,
X
{q}
−−−−−→
i
π (
)
B
,
X
−
X
{q}
}
{p
−
−∪α
α
i
π (
)
,
X X
}
{p
−∪α
α
≈
≈
the given element [f ] in the upper-right group, when regarded as an element of the
lower-right group, is equal to the element [f1] in the image of the lower horizontal
map. Since the vertical maps are isomorphisms, this proves the surjectivity statement.
Now we prove the Claim. For any q ∈∆n+1 , f −1(q) is a ﬁnite union of convex
polyhedra of dimension ≤i −n −1 since f −1(∆n+1) is a ﬁnite union of convex
polyhedra on each of which f is the restriction of a linear surjection Ri→Rn+1 .
We wish to choose the points pα ∈∆m+1
α
so that not only is f −1(q) disjoint from
f −1(pα) for each α, but also so that f −1(q) and f −1(pα) have disjoint images under
the projection π : Ii→Ii−1 . This is equivalent to saying that f −1(pα) is disjoint from
T = π−1 π(f −1(q))

, the union of all segments {x}×I meeting f −1(q). This set T is
a ﬁnite union of convex polyhedra of dimension ≤i−n since f −1(q) is a ﬁnite union
of convex polyhedra of dimension ≤i −n −1. Since linear maps cannot increase
dimension, f (T) ∩∆m+1
α
is also a ﬁnite union of convex polyhedra of dimension
≤i −n. Thus if m + 1 > i −n, there is a point pα ∈∆m+1
α
not in f (T). This gives
f −1(pα)∩T = ∅if i ≤m+n. Hence we can choose a neighborhood U of π
 f −1(q)

in Ii−1 disjoint from π
 f −1(pα)

for all α. Then there exists ϕ : Ii−1→[0, 1) having
support in U , with f −1(q) lying under the graph of ϕ. This veriﬁes the Claim, and
so ﬁnishes the proof of surjectivity in Case 1.
For injectivity in Case 1 the argument is very similar.
Suppose we have two
maps f0, f1 : (Ii, ∂Ii, Ji−1)→(A, C, x0) representing elements of πi(A, C, x0) having
the same image in πi(X, B, x0). Thus there is a homotopy from f0 to f1 in the form
of a map f : (Ii, ∂Ii, Ji−1)×[0, 1]→(X, B, x0). After a preliminary deformation of f ,
we construct a function ϕ : Ii−1×I→[0, 1) separating f −1(q) from the sets f −1(pα)
as before. This allows us to excise f −1(q) from the domain of f , from which it follows
that f0 and f1 represent the same element of πi(A, C, x0). Since Ii×I now plays the
role of Ii , the dimension i is replaced by i+1 and the dimension restriction i ≤m+n
becomes i + 1 ≤m + n, or i < m + n.
Case 2: A is obtained from C by attaching (m + 1) cells as in Case 1, and B is
obtained from C by attaching cells of dimension ≥n + 1. To show surjectivity of
πi(A, C)→πi(X, B), consider a map f : (Ii, ∂Ii, Ji−1)→(X, B, x0) representing an ele-
ment of πi(X, B). The image of f is compact, meeting only ﬁnitely many cells, and by
repeated applications of Case 1 we can push f off the cells of B −C one at a time, in
order of decreasing dimension. Injectivity is similar, taking f to be a nullhomotopy
(Ii, ∂Ii, Ji−1)×[0, 1]→(X, B, x0) of an element of the kernel of πi(A, C)→πi(X, B).

362
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
Case 3: A is obtained from C by attaching cells of dimension ≥m + 1 and B is as in
Case 2. We may assume all cells of A −C have dimension ≤m + n + 1 since higher-
dimensional cells have no effect on πi for i ≤m + n, by cellular approximation. Let
Ak ⊂A be the union of C with the cells of A of dimension ≤k and let Xk = Ak ∪B .
We prove the result for πi(Ak, C)→πi(Xk, B) by induction on k. The induction starts
with k = m + 1 which is Case 2. For the induction step consider the commutative
diagram formed by the exact sequences of the triples (Ak, Ak−1, C) and (Xk, Xk−1, B):
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
i
k
π (
)
C
,
A
A
π
(
)
,
i 1
+
-
k 1
A
-
k 1
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
k
π
(
C
,
A
A
π (
)
)
,
i
-
k 1
-
k 1
A
-
i 1
i
π (
)
C
,
Ak
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
i
k
π (
)
B
,
X
X
π
(
)
,
i 1
+
-
k 1
X
-
k 1
k
π
(
B
,
X
X
π (
)
)
,
i
-
k 1
-
k 1
X
-
i 1
i
π (
)
B
,
Xk
When i < m + n the ﬁrst and fourth vertical maps are isomorphisms by Case 2, while
by induction the second and ﬁfth maps are isomorphisms, so the middle map is an
isomorphism by the ﬁve-lemma. Similarly, when i = m + n the second and fourth
maps are surjective and the ﬁfth map is injective, which is enough to imply the middle
map is surjective by one half of the ﬁve-lemma.
After these special cases we can now easily deal with the general case. The con-
nectivity assumptions on the pairs (A, C) and (B, C) imply by Corollary 4.15 that they
are homotopy equivalent to pairs (A′, C) and (B′, C) as in Case 3, via homotopy equiv-
alences ﬁxed on C , so these homotopy equivalences ﬁt together to give a homotopy
equivalence A ∪B ≃A′ ∪B′ . Thus the general case reduces to Case 3.
⊔⊓
Example 4.25. We show that for n ≥2, πn(
W
α Sn
α) is free abelian with basis the ho-
motopy classes of the inclusions Sn
α >
W
α Sn
α . Suppose ﬁrst that there are only ﬁnitely
many summands Sn
α . We can regard
W
α Sn
α as the n skeleton of the product
Q
αSn
α ,
where Sn
α is given its usual CW structure and
Q
αSn
α has the product CW structure.
Since
Q
αSn
α has cells only in dimensions a multiple of n, the pair (
Q
αSn
α,
W
α Sn
α) is
(2n −1) connected. Hence from the long exact sequence of homotopy groups for
this pair we see that the inclusion
W
α Sn
α >
Q
αSn
α induces an isomorphism on πn if
n ≥2. By Proposition 4.2 we have πn(
Q
αSn
α) ≈
L
α πn(Sn
α), a free abelian group with
basis the inclusions Sn
α >
Q
αSn
α , so the same is true for
W
α Sn
α . This takes care of the
case of ﬁnitely many Sn
α ’s.
To reduce the case of inﬁnitely many summands Sn
α to the ﬁnite case, consider the
homomorphism Φ :
L
α πn(Sn
α)→πn(
W
α Sn
α) induced by the inclusions Sn
α >
W
α Sn
α .
Then Φ is surjective since any map f : Sn→
W
α Sn
α has compact image contained in
the wedge sum of ﬁnitely many Sn
α ’s, so by the ﬁnite case already proved, [f ] is in
the image of Φ. Similarly, a nullhomotopy of f has compact image contained in a
ﬁnite wedge sum of Sn
α ’s, so the ﬁnite case also implies that Φ is injective.
Example 4.26. Let us show that πn(S1 ∨Sn) for n ≥2 is free abelian on a countably
inﬁnite number of generators. By Proposition 4.1 we may compute πi(S1 ∨Sn) for

Section 4.2.
Elementary Methods of Calculation
363
i ≥2 by passing to the universal cover eX→X where X = S1 ∨Sn . Since eX consists
of a copy of R with a sphere Sn
k attached at each integer point k ∈R, we have
eX ≃
W
k Sn
k .
The preceding Example 4.25 says that πn(
W
k Sn
k ) is free abelian with
basis represented by the inclusions of the wedge summands, so a basis for πn( eX) is
represented by maps which lift the maps obtained from the inclusion Sn > X by the
action of the various elements of π1(X) ≈Z. Thus πn(X) is a free Z[π1(X)] module
on a single basis element, the homotopy class of the inclusion Sn > X . Writing a
generator of π1(X) as t , the group ring Z[π1(X)] becomes Z[t, t−1], the Laurent
polynomials in t and t−1 with Z coefﬁcients, and we have πn(X) ≈Z[t, t−1].
This example shows that the homotopy groups of a ﬁnite CW complex need not
be ﬁnitely generated, in contrast to the homology groups. However, if we restrict
attention to spaces with trivial action of π1 on all πn ’s, then a theorem of Serre,
proved in [SSAT], says that the homotopy groups of such a space are ﬁnitely generated
iff the homology groups are ﬁnitely generated.
In this example, πn(S1 ∨Sn) is ﬁnitely generated as a Z[π1] module, but there
are ﬁnite CW complexes where even this fails. In fact this happens already for π3(S1∨
S2), according to an exercise at the end of this section. In §4.A we construct more
complicated examples for all πn with n > 1, in particular for π2 .
A useful tool for more complicated calculations is the following general result:
Proposition 4.27. If a CW pair (X, A) is r connected, r ≥1, and A is s connected,
s ≥0, then the map πi(X, A)→πi(X/A) induced by the quotient map X→X/A is
an isomorphism for i ≤r + s and a surjection for i = r + s + 1.
Proof: Consider X ∪CA, the complex obtained from X by attaching a cone CA
along A ⊂X . Since CA is a contractible subcomplex of X ∪CA, the quotient map
X ∪CA→(X ∪CA)/CA = X/A is a homotopy equivalence by Proposition 0.16 So we
have a commutative diagram
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
i X
π (
)
A
X
πi (
)
,
CA CA
,
∪
i X
π (
)
CA
∪
i X
π (
)
CA CA
∪
/
i X
π (
)
A
/
=
≈
≈
where the vertical isomorphism comes from a long exact sequence. Now apply the
excision theorem to the ﬁrst map in the diagram, using the fact that (CA, A) is
(s + 1) connected if A is s connected, which comes from the exact sequence for the
pair (CA, A).
⊔⊓
Example 4.28. Suppose X is obtained from a wedge of spheres
W
α Sn
α by attaching
cells en+1
β
via basepoint-preserving maps ϕβ : Sn→
W
α Sn
α , with n ≥2. By cellular
approximation we know that πi(X) = 0 for i < n, and we shall show that πn(X) is
the quotient of the free abelian group πn
 W
α Sn
α

≈
L
α Z by the subgroup generated

364
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
by the classes [ϕβ]. Any subgroup can be realized in this way, by choosing maps
ϕβ to represent a set of generators for the subgroup, so it follows that every abelian
group can be realized as πn(X) for such a space X =
 W
α Sn
α
 S
β en+1
β
. This is the
higher-dimensional analog of the construction in Corollary 1.28 of a 2 dimensional
CW complex with prescribed fundamental group.
To see that πn(X) is as claimed, consider the following portion of the long exact
sequence of the pair (X,
W
α Sn
α):
πn+1(X,
W
α Sn
α)
∂-----→πn(
W
α Sn
α) -→πn(X) -→0
The quotient X/
W
α Sn
α is a wedge of spheres Sn+1
β
, so the preceding proposition and
Example 4.25 imply that πn+1(X,
W
α Sn
α) is free with basis the characteristic maps of
the cells en+1
β
. The boundary map ∂takes these to the classes [ϕβ], and the result
follows.
Eilenberg-MacLane Spaces
A space X having just one nontrivial homotopy group πn(X) ≈G is called an
Eilenberg-MacLane space, or more concisely, a K(G, n). The case n = 1 was con-
sidered in §1.B, where the condition that πi(X) = 0 for i > 1 was replaced by the
condition that X have a contractible universal cover, which is equivalent for spaces
which have a universal cover of the homotopy type of a CW complex.
We can build a CW complex K(G, n) for arbitrary G and n, assuming G is abelian
if n > 1, in the following way. To begin, let Xn+1 be an (n−1) connected CW complex
of dimension n + 1 such that πn(X) ≈G, as was constructed in Example 4.28 above
when n > 1 and in Corollary 1.28 when n = 1. Enlarge Xn+1 to a complex Xn+2 by
attaching (n + 2) cells via maps representing some set of generators of πn+1(Xn+1).
Since (Xn+2, Xn+1) is (n + 1) connected we have an exact sequence
πn+2(Xn+2, Xn+1)
∂-----→πn+1(Xn+1)→πn+1(Xn+2)→0→···
···→0→πi(Xn+1)→πi(Xn+2)→0→···
The map ∂is surjective by construction, so πn+1(Xn+2) = 0, and the later terms
in the exact sequence show that πi(Xn+2) ≈πi(Xn+1) for i ≤n. Now repeat this
construction inductively, at the kth stage attaching (n+k+1) cells to Xn+k to create a
complex Xn+k+1 with trivial πn+k without changing the lower homotopy groups. The
union of this increasing sequence of CW complexes is then a K(G, n). (Alternatively,
we could just say that the nth stage of a Postnikov tower for Xn+1 is a K(G, n); see
Example 4.19.)
By taking products of K(G, n)’s for varying n we can then realize any sequence
of groups Gn , abelian for n > 1, as the homotopy groups πn of a space.
A fair number of K(G, 1)’s arise naturally in a variety of contexts, and a few of
these are mentioned in §1.B. By contrast, naturally-occurring K(G, n)’s for n ≥2
are rare. It seems the only real example is CP∞, which is a K(Z, 2) as we shall see

Section 4.2.
Elementary Methods of Calculation
365
in Example 4.49. One could of course trivially generalize this example by taking a
product of CP∞’s to get a K(G, 2) with G a product of Z’s.
Actually there is a fairly natural construction of a K(Z, n) for arbitrary n, the
inﬁnite symmetric product SP(Sn) deﬁned in §3.C. In §4.K we prove that the functor
SP has the surprising property of converting homology groups into homotopy groups,
namely πi
 SP(X)

≈Hi(X; Z) for all i > 0 and all connected CW complexes X . Taking
X to be a sphere, we deduce that SP(Sn) is a K(Z, n). More generally, SP
 M(G, n)

is a K(G, n) for each Moore space M(G, n).
Having shown the existence of K(G, n)’s, we now consider the uniqueness ques-
tion, which has the nicest possible answer:
Proposition 4.29. The homotopy type of a CW complex K(G, n) is uniquely deter-
mined by G and n.
The proof will be based on a more technical statement:
Lemma 4.30. Let X be a CW complex of the form
 W
α Sn
α
 S
β en+1
β
for some n ≥1.
Then for every homomorphism ψ : πn(X)→πn(Y) with Y path-connected there ex-
ists a map f : X→Y with f∗= ψ.
Proof: To begin, let f send the natural basepoint of
W
α Sn
α to a chosen basepoint
y0 ∈Y . Extend f over each sphere Sn
α via a map representing ψ([iα]) where iα
is the inclusion Sn
α > X . Thus for the map f : Xn→Y constructed so far we have
f∗([iα]) = ψ([iα]) for all α, hence f∗([ϕ]) = ψ([ϕ]) for all basepoint-preserving
maps ϕ : Sn→Xn since the iα ’s generate πn(Xn). To extend f over a cell en+1
β
all
we need is that the composition of the attaching map ϕβ : Sn→Xn for this cell with f
be nullhomotopic in Y . But this composition f ϕβ represents f∗([ϕβ]) = ψ([ϕβ]),
and ψ([ϕβ]) = 0 because [ϕβ] is zero in πn(X) since ϕβ is nullhomotopic in X via
the characteristic map of en+1
β
. Thus we obtain an extension f : X→Y . By cellular
approximation, the elements [iα] generate πn(X) since they generate πn(Xn). Hence
f∗= ψ on πn(X).
⊔⊓
Proof of 4.29: Suppose K and K′ are K(G, n) CW complexes. Since homotopy equiv-
alence is an equivalence relation, there is no loss of generality if we assume K is a
particular K(G, n), namely one constructed from a space X as in the lemma by at-
taching cells of dimension n + 2 and greater. By the lemma there is a map f : X→K′
inducing an isomorphism on πn . To extend this f over K we proceed inductively,
ﬁrst extending over the (n + 2) cells, then the (n + 3) cells, etc. For a cell en+2 for
example, the composition of its attaching map with f is nullhomotopic in K′ since
πn+1(K′) = 0, so f extends over this cell. And similarly for the higher-dimensional
cells. The resulting f : K→K′ is a homotopy equivalence since it induces isomor-
phisms on all homotopy groups, πn being the only nontrivial one.
⊔⊓

366
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
The Hurewicz Theorem
Using the calculations of homotopy groups done above we can easily prove the
simplest and most often used cases of the Hurewicz theorem:
Theorem 4.31. If a space X is (n −1) connected, n ≥2, then eHi(X) = 0 for i < n
and πn(X) ≈Hn(X). If a pair (X, A) is (n −1) connected, n ≥2, with A simply-
connected and nonempty, then Hi(X, A) = 0 for i < n and πn(X, A) ≈Hn(X, A).
Thus the ﬁrst nonzero homotopy and homology groups of a simply-connected
space occur in the same dimension and are isomorphic. One cannot expect any nice
relationship between πi(X) and Hi(X) beyond this. For example, Sn has trivial ho-
mology groups above dimension n but many nontrivial homotopy groups in this range
when n ≥2. In the other direction, Eilenberg-MacLane spaces such as CP∞have trivial
higher homotopy groups but many nontrivial homology groups.
The theorem can often be used to compute π2(X) if X is a path-connected space
which is nice enough to have a universal cover. For if eX is the universal cover, then
π2(X) ≈π2( eX) and the latter group is isomorphic to H2( eX) by the Hurewicz theorem.
So if one can understand eX well enough to compute H2( eX), one can compute π2(X).
In the part of the theorem dealing with relative groups, notice that the hypotheses
imply that X must be simply-connected as well as A, since the pair (X, A) is at least
1 connected. There is a more general version of the Hurewicz theorem which allows
A and X to be nonsimply-connected, but this requires πn(X, A) to be replaced by a
certain quotient group; see Theorem 4.36 below.
Proof: We may assume X is a CW complex and (X, A) is a CW pair by taking CW
approximations to X and (X, A).
For CW pairs the relative case then reduces to
the absolute case since πi(X, A) ≈πi(X/A) for i ≤n by Proposition 4.27, while
Hi(X, A) ≈eHi(X/A) for all i by Proposition 2.22.
In the absolute case we can apply Corollary 4.15 to replace X by a homotopy
equivalent CW complex with (n −1) skeleton a point, hence eHi(X) = 0 for i < n.
To show that πn(X) ≈Hn(X), we can further simplify by throwing away cells of
dimension greater than n + 1 since these have no effect on πn or Hn .
Thus X
has the form
 W
α Sn
α
 S
β en+1
β
. We may assume the attaching maps ϕβ of the cells
en+1
β
are basepoint-preserving since this is what the proof of Corollary 4.15 gives.
Example 4.28 then applies to compute πn(X) as the quotient of
L
α Z by the sub-
group generated by the [ϕβ]’s. If one computes eHn(X) via cellular homology one
gets the same calculation identically.
This is because the cellular boundary map
Hn+1(Xn+1, Xn)→Hn(Xn, Xn−1) is determined by the degrees of the compositions
qαϕβ where qα collapses all n cells except en
α to a point, and the isomorphism
πn(Sn) ≈Z in Corollary 4.24 is given by degree.
⊔⊓

Section 4.2.
Elementary Methods of Calculation
367
Since homology groups are usually more computable than homotopy groups, the
following version of Whitehead’s theorem is often easier to apply.
Corollary 4.32. A map f : X→Y between simply-connected CW complexes is a ho-
motopy equivalence if the induced maps f∗: Hn(X)→Hn(Y) are isomorphisms for
all n.
Proof: After replacing Y by the mapping cylinder Mf we may take f to be an inclusion
X > Y . Since X and Y are simply-connected we have π1(Y, X) = 0. The relative
Hurewicz theorem then says that the ﬁrst nonzero πn(Y, X) is isomorphic to the ﬁrst
nonzero Hn(Y, X). All the groups Hn(Y, X) are zero from the long exact sequence
of homology, so all the groups πn(Y, X) also vanish. This means that the inclusion
X > Y induces isomorphisms on all homotopy groups, and therefore this inclusion
is a homotopy equivalence.
⊔⊓
Example 4.33: Uniqueness of Moore spaces. Let us show that the homotopy type of
a CW complex Moore space M(G, n) is uniquely determined by G and n if n > 1, so
M(G, n) is simply-connected. Let X be an M(G, n) as constructed in Example 2.40 by
attaching (n + 1) cells to a wedge sum of n spheres, and let Y be any other M(G, n)
CW complex. By Lemma 4.30 there is a map f : X→Y inducing an isomorphism on
πn . If we can show that f also induces an isomorphism on Hn , then the preceding
corollary will imply the result.
One way to show that f induces an isomorphism on Hn would be to use a more
reﬁned version of the Hurewicz theorem giving an isomorphism between πn and
Hn which is natural with respect to maps between spaces, as in Theorem 4.36 below.
However, here is a direct argument which avoids naturality questions. For the mapping
cylinder Mf we know that πi(Mf , X) = 0 for i ≤n. If this held also for i = n + 1
then the relative Hurewicz theorem would say that Hi(Mf , X) = 0 for i ≤n + 1 and
hence that f∗would be an isomorphism on Hn . To make this argument work, let
us temporarily enlarge Y by attaching (n + 2) cells to make πn+1 zero. The new
mapping cylinder Mf then has πn+1(Mf , X) = 0 from the long exact sequence of the
pair. So for the enlarged Y the map f induces an isomorphism on Hn . But attaching
(n + 2) cells has no effect on Hn , so the original f : X→Y had to be an isomorphism
on Hn .
It is certainly possible for a map of nonsimply-connected spaces to induce isomor-
phisms on all homology groups but not on homotopy groups. Nonsimply-connected
acyclic spaces, for which the inclusion of a point induces an isomorphism on ho-
mology, exhibit this phenomenon in its purest form. Perhaps the simplest nontrivial
acyclic space is the 2 dimensional complex constructed in Example 2.38 with funda-
mental group ⟨a, b | a5 = b3 = (ab)2 ⟩of order 120.

368
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
It is also possible for a map between spaces with abelian fundamental groups to
induce isomorphisms on homology but not on higher homotopy groups, as the next
example shows.
Example 4.34. We construct a space X = (S1 ∨Sn) ∪en+1 , for arbitrary n > 1, such
that the inclusion S1 > X induces an isomorphism on all homology groups and on
πi for i < n, but not on πn . From Example 4.26 we have πn(S1 ∨Sn) ≈Z[t, t−1].
Let X be obtained from S1 ∨Sn by attaching a cell en+1 via a map Sn→S1 ∨Sn
corresponding to 2t −1 ∈Z[t, t−1]. By looking in the universal cover we see that
πn(X) ≈Z[t, t−1]/(2t −1), where (2t −1) denotes the ideal in Z[t, t−1] generated by
2t −1. Note that setting t = 1/2 embeds Z[t, t−1]/(2t −1) in Q as the subring Z[1/2]
consisting of rationals with denominator a power of 2. From the long exact sequence
of homotopy groups for the (n −1) connected pair (X, S1) we see that the inclusion
S1>X induces an isomorphism on πi for i < n. The fact that this inclusion also in-
duces isomorphisms on all homology groups can be deduced from cellular homology.
The key point is that the cellular boundary map Hn+1(Xn+1, Xn)→Hn(Xn, Xn−1) is an
isomorphism since the degree of the composition of the attaching map Sn→S1 ∨Sn
of en+1 with the collapse S1 ∨Sn→Sn is 2 −1 = 1.
This example relies heavily on the nontriviality of the action of π1(X) on πn(X),
so one might ask whether the simple-connectivity assumption in Corollary 4.32 can
be weakened to trivial action of π1 on all πn ’s. This is indeed the case, as we will
show in Proposition 4.72.
The form of the Hurewicz theorem given above asserts merely the existence of an
isomorphism between homotopy and homology groups, but one might want a more
precise statement which says that a particular map is an isomorphism. In fact, there
are always natural maps from homotopy groups to homology groups, deﬁned in the
following way. Thinking of πn(X, A, x0) for n > 0 as homotopy classes of maps
f : (Dn, ∂Dn, s0)→(X, A, x0), the Hurewicz map h : πn(X, A, x0)→Hn(X, A) is de-
ﬁned by h([f ]) = f∗(α) where α is a ﬁxed generator of Hn(Dn, ∂Dn) ≈Z and
f∗: Hn(Dn, ∂Dn)→Hn(X, A) is induced by f . If we have a homotopy f ≃g through
maps (Dn, ∂Dn, s0)→(X, A, x0), or even through maps (Dn, ∂Dn)→(X, A) not pre-
serving the basepoint, then f∗= g∗so h is well-deﬁned.
Proposition 4.35. The Hurewicz map h : πn(X, A, x0)→Hn(X, A) is a homomor-
phism, assuming n > 1 so that πn(X, A, x0) is a group.
Proof: It sufﬁces to show that for maps f , g : (Dn, ∂Dn)→(X, A), the induced maps
on homology satisfy (f + g)∗= f∗+ g∗, for if this is the case then h([f + g]) =
(f + g)∗(α) = f∗(α) + g∗(α) = h([f ]) + h([g]). Our proof that (f + g)∗= f∗+ g∗
will in fact work for any homology theory.

Section 4.2.
Elementary Methods of Calculation
369
Let c : Dn→Dn ∨Dn be the map collapsing the equatorial Dn−1 to a point, and
let q1, q2 : Dn ∨Dn→Dn be the quotient maps onto the two summands, collapsing
the other summand to a point. We then have a diagram
(
)
∨
∨
∨
−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−→
⊕
⊕
∗
∗
∗
c
f
g
q
q
1
∗
2
≈
D
H (
)
n
n
D
n
, ∂
D
H (
)
n
n
D
n
, ∂
D
H (
)
n
n
D
n
,∂
X
H (
)
n
A
,
D
H (
)
n
n
D
n
D
n
, ∂
D
n
∂
The map q1∗⊕q2∗is an isomorphism with inverse i1∗+ i2∗where i1 and i2 are the
inclusions of the two summands Dn > Dn ∨Dn . Since q1c and q2c are homotopic
to the identity through maps (Dn, ∂Dn)→(Dn, ∂Dn), the composition (q1∗⊕q2∗)c∗
is the diagonal map x, (x, x). From the equalities (f ∨g)i1 = f and (f ∨g)i2 = g
we deduce that (f ∨g)∗(i1∗+i2∗) sends (x, 0) to f∗(x) and (0, x) to g∗(x), hence
(x, x) to f∗(x) + g∗(x).
Thus the composition across the top of the diagram is
x, f∗(x) + g∗(x). On the other hand, f + g = (f ∨g)c , so this composition is also
(f + g)∗.
⊔⊓
There is also an absolute Hurewicz map h : πn(X, x0)→Hn(X) deﬁned in a sim-
ilar way by setting h([f ]) = f∗(α) for f : (Sn, s0)→(X, x0) and α a generator of
Hn(Sn). For example, if X = Sn then f∗(α) is (deg f )α by the deﬁnition of degree,
so we can view h in this case as the degree map πn(Sn)→Z, which we know is an
isomorphism by Corollary 4.24.
An easy deﬁnition-check which we leave to the reader shows that the absolute
Hurewicz map ﬁts with the relative one to form a commutative diagram
h
h
h
h
-
n 1
...
...
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
A
A
H (
)
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
X
Hn
n
n
(
)
X
H (
)
,
−−−−−−−→
A
H
(
)
-
n 1
...
...
−−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−−→
A
A
(
)
X
n
n
(
)
,
,
−−−→
A
(
)
π
π
π
0
x
X
(
)
n
,
π
0
x
,
0
x
,
0
x
Taking A = {x0}, the absolute h becomes a special case of the relative h. In particular
the absolute h is also a homomorphism, at least when n > 1. This is also true when
n = 1 by an obvious modiﬁcation of the argument given above.
Another elementary property of Hurewicz maps is
that they are natural, i.e., a map f : (X, x0)→(Y, y0)
h
−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
n
n
X
H (
)
−−−→
X
(
)
n
,
π
0
x
h
−−−−−→
Y
H (
)
Y
(
)
n
,
π
0
y
f∗
f∗
induces a commutative diagram as at the right, and
similarly in the relative case.
It is easy to construct nontrivial elements of the kernel of the Hurewicz homo-
morphism h : πn(X, x0)→Hn(X) if π1(X, x0) acts nontrivially on πn(X, x0), namely
elements of the form [γ][f ]−[f ]. This is because γf and f , viewed as maps Sn→X ,
are homotopic if we do not require the basepoint to be ﬁxed during the homotopy, so
(γf )∗(α) = f∗(α) for α a generator of Hn(Sn).

370
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
Similarly in the relative case the kernel of h : πn(X, A, x0)→Hn(X, A) contains
the elements of the form [γ][f ] −[f ] for [γ] ∈π1(A, x0). This shows that the
hypothesis π1(A, x0) = 0 in the relative form of the Hurewicz theorem proved earlier
cannot be dropped. For example, the pair (S1 ∨Sn, S1) is (n −1) connected, but
πn(S1 ∨Sn, S1) ≈Z[t, t−1] is much larger than Hn(S1 ∨Sn, S1) ≈Z.
To get around this problem, deﬁne π′
n(X, A, x0) to be the quotient group of
πn(X, A, x0) obtained by factoring out the subgroup generated by all elements of
the form [γ][f ] −[f ], or the normal subgroup generated by such elements in the
case n = 2 when π2(X, A, x0) may not be abelian. Thus h induces a quotient homo-
morphism h′ : π′
n(X, A, x0)→Hn(X, A).
We can now state the Hurewicz theorem in its general form:
Theorem 4.36. If (X, A) is an (n −1) connected pair of path-connected spaces
with n ≥2 and A ≠∅, then h′ : π′
n(X, A, x0)→Hn(X, A) is an isomorphism and
Hi(X, A) = 0 for i < n.
Note that this statement includes the absolute form of the theorem by taking A
to be the basepoint. Before starting the proof of this general Hurewicz theorem we
have a preliminary step:
Lemma 4.37. If X is a connected CW complex to which cells en
α are attached for
a ﬁxed n ≥2, forming a CW complex W = X
S
α en
α , then πn(W, X) is a free
π1(X) module with basis the homotopy classes of the characteristic maps Φα of the
cells en
α , provided that the map π1(X)→π1(W) induced by inclusion is an isomor-
phism. In particular, this is always the case if n ≥3. In the general n = 2 case,
π2(W, X) is generated by the classes of the characteristic maps of the cells e2
α to-
gether with their images under the action of π1(X).
If the characteristic maps Φα : (Dn, ∂Dn)→(W, X) do not take a basepoint s0 ∈
∂Dn to the basepoint x0 ∈X , then they will deﬁne elements of πn(W, X, x0) only
after we choose change-of-basepoint paths from the points Φα(s0) to x0 .
Differ-
ent choices of such paths yield elements of πn(W, X, x0) related by the action of
π1(X, x0), so the basis for πn(W, X, x0) is well-deﬁned up to multiplication by in-
vertible elements of Z[π1(X)].
The situation when n = 2 and the map π1(X)→π1(W) is not an isomorphism is
more complicated because the relative π2 can be nonabelian in this case. Whitehead
analyzed what happens here and showed that π2(W, X) has the structure of a ‘free
crossed π1(X) module.’ See [Hog-Angeloni,Metzler,Sieradski].
Proof: Since W/X =
W
α Sn
α , we have πn(W, X) ≈πn(
W
α Sn
α) when X is simply-
connected, by Proposition 4.27.
The conclusion of the lemma in this case is then
immediate from Example 4.25.

Section 4.2.
Elementary Methods of Calculation
371
When X is not simply-connected but the inclusion X>W induces an isomorphism
on π1 , then the universal cover of W is obtained from the universal cover of X by
attaching n cells lifting the cells en
α . If we choose one such lift een
α of en
α , then all
the other lifts are the images γeen
α of een
α under the deck transformations γ ∈π1(X).
The special case proved in the preceding paragraph shows that the relative πn for the
universal cover is the free abelian group with basis corresponding to the cells γ een
α . By
the relative version of Proposition 4.1, the projection of the universal cover of W onto
W induces an isomorphism on relative πn ’s, so πn(W, X) is free abelian with basis
the classes [γen
α] as γ ranges over π1(X), or in other words the free π1(X) module
with basis the cells en
α .
It remains to consider the n = 2 case in general. Since both of the pairs (W, X1)
and (X1 S
α e2
α, X1) are 1 connected, the homotopy excision theorem implies that the
map π2(X1 S
α e2
α, X1)→π2(W, X) is surjective, reducing us to the case that X is
1 dimensional. We may also assume the 2 cells e2
α are attached along loops pass-
ing through the basepoint 0 cell x0 , since this can be achieved by homotopy of the
attaching maps, which does not affect the homotopy type of the pair (W, X).
In the closure of each 2 cell e2
α choose an embedded disk D2
α which contains
x0 but is otherwise contained entirely in the interior of e2
α .
Let Y = X
S
α D2
α =
X
W
α D2
α and let Z = W −
S
α int(D2
α), so Y and Z are 2 dimensional CW complexes
with a common 1 skeleton Y 1 = Z1 = Y ∩Z = X
W
α ∂D2
α . The inclusion (W, X) >
(W, Z) is a homotopy equivalence of pairs.
Homotopy excision gives a surjection
π2(Y, Y 1)→π2(W, Z). The universal cover eY of Y is obtained from the universal
cover eX of X by taking the wedge sum with lifts eD2
αβ of the disks D2
α . Hence we have
isomorphisms
π2(Y, Y 1) ≈π2( eY, eY 1)
where eY 1 is the 1 skeleton of eY
≈π2(
W
αβ eD2
αβ,
W
αβ ∂eD2
αβ)
since eX is contractible
≈π1(
W
αβ ∂eD2
αβ)
since
W
αβ eD2
αβ is contractible
This last group is free with basis the loops ∂eD2
αβ , so the inclusions eD2
αβ >
W
αβ eD2
αβ
form a basis for π2(
W
αβ eD2
αβ,
W
αβ ∂eD2
αβ). This implies that π2(Y, Y 1) is generated by
the inclusions D2
α > Y and their images under the action of loops in X . The same is
true for π2(W, Z) via the surjection π2(Y, Y 1)→π2(W, Z). Using the isomorphism
π2(W, Z) ≈π2(W, X), we conclude that π2(W, X) is generated by the characteristic
maps of the cells e2
α and their images under the action of π1(X).
⊔⊓
Proof of the general Hurewicz Theorem: As in the earlier form of the theorem we
may assume (X, A) is a CW pair such that the cells of X −A have dimension ≥n.
We ﬁrst prove the theorem assuming that π1(A)→π1(X) is an isomorphism.
This is always the case if n ≥3, so this case will ﬁnish the proof except when n = 2.

372
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
We may assume also that X = Xn+1 since higher-dimensional cells have no effect on
πn or Hn . Consider the commutative diagram:
h
h
h
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
A
0
−−−−−→
X
Hn
n
n
(
)
X
H (
)
,
A
A,
−−−−−−−→
∪
n
X
X
H
(
)
A
,
∪
n 1
+
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
A
0
X
πn
n
n
(
)
X
π (
)
,
A
A,
−−−−−−−→
∪
n
X
X
π
(
)
A
,
∪
n 1
+
i∗
∂
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
A
0
X
πn
n
n
(
)
X
π (
)
,
A
A,
−−−−−−−→
∪
n
X
X
π
(
)
A
,
∪
n 1
+
i∗
∂
′
′
′
′
′
′
′
′
The ﬁrst and third rows are exact sequences for the triple (X, Xn ∪A, A). The left-
hand h′ is an isomorphism since by the preceding lemma, πn+1(X, Xn ∪A) is a
free π1 module with basis the characteristic maps of the (n + 1) cells of X −A,
so π′
n+1(X, Xn ∪A) is a free abelian group with the same basis, and Hn+1(X, Xn ∪A)
is also free with basis the (n + 1) cells of X −A. Similarly, the lemma implies that
the middle h′ is an isomorphism since the assumption that π1(A)→π1(X) is an
isomorphism implies that π1(A)→π1(Xn ∪A) is injective, hence an isomorphism if
n ≥2.
A simple diagram-chase now shows that the right-hand h′ is an isomorphism.
Namely, surjectivity follows since Hn(Xn ∪A, A)→Hn(X, A) is surjective and the
middle h′ is an isomorphism. For injectivity, take an element x ∈π′
n(X, A) with
h′(x) = 0. The map i′
∗is surjective since i∗is, so x = i′
∗(y) for some element
y ∈π′
n(Xn ∪A, A). Since the ﬁrst two maps h′ are isomorphisms and the bottom
row is exact, there is a z ∈π′
n+1(X, Xn ∪A) with ∂′(z) = y . Hence x = 0 since
i∗∂= 0 implies i′
∗∂′ = 0.
It remains to prove the theorem when n = 2 and π1(A)→π1(X) is not an isomor-
phism. The proof above will apply once we show that the middle h′ in the preceding
diagram is an isomorphism. The preceding lemma implies that π′
2(X2 ∪A, A) is gen-
erated by characteristic maps of the 2 cells of X −A. The images of these generators
under h′ form a basis for H2(X2 ∪A, A). Thus h′ is a homomorphism from a group
which is abelian — by the lemma below — to a free abelian group taking a set of
generators to a basis, hence h′ is an isomorphism.
⊔⊓
Lemma 4.38. For any (X, A, x0), the formula a + b −a = (∂a)b holds for all
a, b ∈π2(X, A, x0), where ∂: π2(X, A, x0)→π1(A, x0) is the usual boundary map
and (∂a)b denotes the action of ∂a on b. Hence π′
2(X, A, x0) is abelian.
Here the ‘+’ and ‘−’ in a + b −a refer to the group operation in the nonabelian
group π2(X, A, x0).
Proof: The formula is obtained by constructing a homotopy from a + b −a to (∂a)b
as in the following pictures:
⊔⊓

Section 4.2.
Elementary Methods of Calculation
373
a
a
a
b
b
b
b
a
a
a
x0
∂a
∂a
∂a
∂a
∂a
∂a
_
_
_
The Plus Construction
There are quite a few situations in algebraic topology where having a nontriv-
ial fundamental group complicates matters considerably. We shall next describe a
construction which in certain circumstances allows one to modify a space so as to
eliminate its fundamental group, or at least simplify it, without affecting homology
or cohomology. Here is the simplest case:
Proposition 4.39. Let X be a connected CW complex with H1(X) = 0. Then there is
a simply-connected CW complex X+ and a map X→X+ inducing isomorphisms on
all homology groups.
Proof: Choose loops ϕα : S1→X1 generating π1(X) and use these to attach cells e2
α
to X to form a simply-connected CW complex X′ . For the pair (X′, X) the homology
exact sequence
0 -→H2(X) -→H2(X′) -→H2(X′, X) -→0 = H1(X)
splits since H2(X′, X) is free with basis the cells e2
α . Thus we have H2(X′) ≈H2(X) ⊕
H2(X′, X). Since X′ is simply-connected, the Hurewicz theorem gives an isomorphism
H2(X′) ≈π2(X′), and so we may represent the generators [e2
α] of the summand
H2(X′, X) by maps ψα : S2→X′ . We may assume these are cellular maps, and then
use them to attach cells e3
α to X′ forming a simply-connected CW complex X+ , with
the inclusion X > X+ an isomorphism on all homology groups.
⊔⊓
In the preceding proposition, the condition H1(X) = 0 means that π1(X) is equal
to its commutator subgroup, i.e., π1(X) is a perfect group. Suppose more generally
that X is a connected CW complex and H ⊂π1(X) is a perfect subgroup. Let p : eX→X
be the covering space corresponding to H , so π1( eX) ≈H is perfect, hence H1( eX) = 0.
From the previous proposition we get an inclusion eX> eX+ . Let X+ be obtained from
the disjoint union of eX+ and the mapping cylinder Mp by identifying the copies of eX
in these two spaces. Thus we have the commutative diagram
of inclusion maps shown at the right. From the van Kampen
−→
−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
X
M
X
X
X
p
+
+
∼
∼
≃
theorem, the induced map π1(X)→π1(X+) is surjective with
kernel the normal subgroup generated by H . Further, since
X+/Mp is homeomorphic to eX+/ eX we have H∗(X+, Mp) = H∗( eX+, eX) = 0, so the
map X→X+ induces an isomorphism on homology.

374
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
This construction X→X+ , killing a perfect subgroup of π1(X) while preserving
homology, is known as the Quillen plus construction. In some of the main applica-
tions X is a K(G, 1) where G has perfect commutator subgroup, so the map X→X+
abelianizes π1 while preserving homology. The space X+ need no longer be a K(π, 1),
and in fact its homotopy groups can be quite interesting. The most striking example
is G = Σ∞, the inﬁnite symmetric group consisting of permutations of 1, 2, ··· ﬁxing
all but ﬁnitely many n’s, with commutator subgroup the inﬁnite alternating group
A∞which is perfect. In this case a famous theorem of Barrett-Kahn-Priddy says that
the homotopy groups πi(K(Σ∞, 1)+) are the stable homotopy groups of spheres!
There are limits, however, on which subgroups of π1(X) can be killed without
affecting the homology of X . For example, for X = S1 ∨S1 it is impossible to kill the
commutator subgroup of π1(X) while preserving homology. In fact, by Exercise 23 at
the end of this section every space with fundamental group Z×Z must have nontrivial
H2 .
Fiber Bundles
A ‘short exact sequence of spaces’ A > X→X/A gives rise to a long exact se-
quence of homology groups, but not to a long exact sequence of homotopy groups due
to the failure of excision. However, there is a different sort of ‘short exact sequence
of spaces’ which does give a long exact sequence of homotopy groups. This sort of
short exact sequence F -→E
p-----→B , called a ﬁber bundle, is distinguished from the
type A > X→X/A in that it has more homogeneity: All the subspaces p−1(b) ⊂E ,
which are called ﬁbers, are homeomorphic. For example, we could have E = F ×B with
p : E→B the projection. Fiber bundles can be thought of as ‘twisted products.’ Famil-
iar examples are the M¨obius band, which is a ‘twisted annulus’ with line segments as
ﬁbers, and the Klein bottle, which is a ‘twisted torus’ with circles as ﬁbers.
The topological homogeneity of all the ﬁbers of a ﬁber bundle is rather like the
algebraic homogeneity in a short exact sequence of groups 0→K -→G
p-----→H→0
where the ‘ﬁbers’ p−1(h) are the cosets of K in G. In a few ﬁber bundles F→E→B
the space E is actually a group, F is a subgroup (though seldom a normal subgroup),
and B is the space of left or right cosets. One of the nicest such examples is the Hopf
bundle S1→S3→S2 where S3 is the group of quaternions of unit norm and S1 is
the subgroup of unit complex numbers. For this bundle, the long exact sequence of
homotopy groups takes the form
··· -→πi(S1) -→πi(S3) -→πi(S2) -→πi−1(S1) -→πi−1(S3) -→···
In particular, the exact sequence gives an isomorphism π2(S2) ≈π1(S1) since the
two adjacent terms π2(S3) and π1(S3) are zero by cellular approximation. Thus we
have a direct homotopy-theoretic proof that π2(S2) ≈Z. Also, since πi(S1) = 0 for
i > 1 by Proposition 4.1, the exact sequence implies that there are isomorphisms

Section 4.2.
Elementary Methods of Calculation
375
πi(S3) ≈πi(S2) for all i ≥3, so in particular π3(S2) ≈π3(S3), and by Corollary 4.24
the latter group is Z.
After these preliminary remarks, let us begin by deﬁning the property which leads
to a long exact sequence of homotopy groups. A map p : E→B is said to have the
homotopy lifting property with respect to a space X if, given a homotopy gt : X→B
and a map eg0 : X→E which lifts g0 , i.e., p eg0 = g0 , then there exists a homotopy
egt : X→E lifting gt . From a formal point of view, this can be regarded as a special
case of the lift extension property for a pair (Z, A), which asserts that every map
Z→B has a lift Z→E extending a given lift deﬁned on the subspace A ⊂Z . The case
(Z, A) = (X×I, X×{0}) is the homotopy lifting property.
A ﬁbration is a map p : E→B having the homotopy lifting property with respect
to all spaces X . This is stronger than what is needed to get a long exact sequence:
Theorem 4.40. Suppose p : E→B has the homotopy lifting property with respect to
disks Dk for all k ≥0. Choose basepoints b0 ∈B and x0 ∈F = p−1(b0). Then
the map p∗: πn(E, F, x0)→πn(B, b0) is an isomorphism for all n ≥1. Hence if B is
path-connected there is a long exact sequence
···→πn(F, x0)→πn(E, x0)
p∗-----→πn(B, b0)→πn−1(F, x0)→···→π0(E, x0)→0
The proof will use a relative form of the homotopy lifting property. The map
p : E→B is said to have the homotopy lifting property for a pair (X, A) if each ho-
motopy ft : X→B lifts to a homotopy egt : X→E starting with a given lift eg0 and
extending a given lift egt : A→E . In other words, the homotopy lifting property for
(X, A) is the lift extension property for (X×I, X×{0} ∪A×I).
Observe that the homotopy lifting property for Dk is equivalent to the homotopy
lifting property for (Dk, ∂Dk) since the pairs (Dk×I, Dk×{0}) and (Dk×I, Dk×{0}∪
∂Dk×I) are homeomorphic. This implies that the homotopy lifting property for disks
is equivalent to the homotopy lifting property for all CW pairs (X, A). For by induction
over the skeleta of X it sufﬁces to construct a lifting egt one cell of X −A at a time.
Composing with the characteristic map Φ : Dk→X of a cell then reduces us to the
case (X, A) = (Dk, ∂Dk).
Proof: First we show that p∗is onto. Represent an element of πn(B, b0) by a map
f : (In, ∂In)→(B, b0). The constant map to x0 provides a lift of f to E over the sub-
space Jn−1 ⊂In , so the relative homotopy lifting property for (In−1, ∂In−1) extends
this to a lift ef : In→E with ef (∂In) ⊂F since f (∂In) = b0 . Then ef represents an
element of πn(E, F, x0) with p∗([ ef ]) = [f ].
Injectivity of p∗is similar.
Given
ef0, ef1 : (In, ∂In, Jn−1)→(E, F, x0) such that
p∗([ ef0]) = p∗([ ef1]), let G : (In×I, ∂In×I)→(B, b0) be a homotopy from p ef0 to p ef1 .
We have a partial lift eG given by ef0 on In×{0}, ef1 on In×{1}, and the constant
map to x0 on Jn−1×I . The relative homotopy lifting property extends this to a lift

376
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
eG : In×I→E , giving a homotopy eft : (In, ∂In, Jn−1)→(E, F, x0) from ef0 to ef1 . So p∗
is injective.
To obtain the last statement of the theorem we plug πn(B, b0) in for πn(E, F, x0)
in the long exact sequence for the pair (E, F).
The map πn(E, x0)→πn(E, F, x0)
in the exact sequence then becomes the composition πn(E, x0)→πn(E, F, x0)
p∗-----→
πn(B, b0), which is just p∗: πn(E, x0)→πn(B, b0). The 0 at the end of the long exact
sequence, i.e., surjectivity of π0(F, x0)→π0(E, x0), comes from the hypothesis that
B is path-connected, since a path in E from an arbitrary point x ∈E to F can be
obtained by lifting a path in B from p(x) to b0 .
⊔⊓
A ﬁber bundle structure on a space E , with ﬁber F , consists of a projection
map p : E→B such that each point of B has a neighborhood U for which there is a
homeomorphism h : p−1(U)→U ×F making the diagram at
−−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−→
U
U
U
F
(
)
p
h
p
×
- 1
the right commute, where the unlabelled map is projection
onto the ﬁrst factor. Commutativity of the diagram means that
h carries each ﬁber Fb = p−1(b) homeomorphically onto the
copy {b}×F of F . Thus the ﬁbers Fb are arranged locally as in the product B×F ,
though not necessarily globally. An h as above is called a local trivialization of the
bundle.
Since the ﬁrst coordinate of h is just p, h is determined by its second
coordinate, a map p−1(U)→F which is a homeomorphism on each ﬁber Fb .
The ﬁber bundle structure is determined by the projection map p : E→B , but to
indicate what the ﬁber is we sometimes write a ﬁber bundle as F→E→B , a ‘short
exact sequence of spaces.’ The space B is called the base space of the bundle, and E
is the total space.
Example 4.41. A ﬁber bundle with ﬁber a discrete space is a covering space. Con-
versely, a covering space whose ﬁbers all have the same cardinality, for example a
covering space over a connected base space, is a ﬁber bundle with discrete ﬁber.
Example 4.42. One of the simplest nontrivial ﬁber bundles is the M¨obius band, which
is a bundle over S1 with ﬁber an interval. Speciﬁcally, take E to be the quotient of
I×[−1, 1] under the identiﬁcations (0, v) ∼(1, −v), with p : E→S1 induced by the
projection I×[−1, 1]→I , so the ﬁber is [−1, 1]. Glueing two copies of E together
by the identity map between their boundary circles produces a Klein bottle, a bundle
over S1 with ﬁber S1 .
Example 4.43. Projective spaces yield interesting ﬁber bundles. In the real case we
have the familiar covering spaces Sn→RPn with ﬁber S0 . Over the complex num-
bers the analog of this is a ﬁber bundle S1→S2n+1→CPn . Here S2n+1 is the unit
sphere in Cn+1 and CPn is viewed as the quotient space of S2n+1 under the equiv-
alence relation (z0, ··· , zn) ∼λ(z0, ··· , zn) for λ ∈S1 , the unit circle in C. The
projection p : S2n+1→CPn sends (z0, ··· , zn) to its equivalence class [z0, ··· , zn],

Section 4.2.
Elementary Methods of Calculation
377
so the ﬁbers are copies of S1 . To see that the local triviality condition for ﬁber bun-
dles is satisﬁed, let Ui ⊂CPn be the open set of equivalence classes [z0, ··· , zn]
with zi ≠0. Deﬁne hi : p−1(Ui)→Ui×S1 by hi(z0, ··· , zn) = ([z0, ··· , zn], zi/|zi|).
This takes ﬁbers to ﬁbers, and is a homeomorphism since its inverse is the map
([z0, ··· , zn], λ) , λ|zi|z−1
i (z0, ··· , zn), as one checks by calculation.
The construction of the bundle S1→S2n+1→CPn also works when n = ∞, so
there is a ﬁber bundle S1→S∞→CP∞.
Example 4.44. The case n = 1 is particularly interesting since CP1 = S2 and the
bundle becomes S1→S3→S2 with ﬁber, total space, and base all spheres. This is
known as the Hopf bundle, and is of a low enough dimension to be seen explicitly.
The projection S3→S2 can be taken to be (z0, z1), z0/z1 ∈C ∪{∞} = S2 . In polar
coordinates we have p(r0eiθ0, r1eiθ1) = (r0/r1)ei(θ0−θ1) where r 2
0 + r 2
1 = 1. For a
ﬁxed ratio ρ = r0/r1 ∈(0, ∞) the angles θ0 and θ1 vary independently over S1 , so
the points (r0eiθ0, r1eiθ1) form a torus Tρ ⊂S3 . Letting ρ vary, these disjoint tori
Tρ ﬁll up S3 , if we include the limiting cases T0 and T∞where the radii r0 and r1
are zero, making the tori T0 and T∞degenerate to circles. These two circles are the
unit circles in the two C factors of C2 , so under stereographic projection of S3 from
the point (0, 1) onto R3 they correspond to the unit circle in the xy plane and the
z axis. The concentric tori Tρ are then arranged as in the ﬁgure.
Each torus Tρ is a union of circle ﬁbers, the pairs (θ0, θ1) with θ0 −θ1 ﬁxed. These
ﬁber circles have slope 1 on the torus, winding around once longitudinally and once
meridionally. As ρ goes to 0 or ∞these ﬁbers approach the circles T0 and T∞, which
are also ﬁbers.
Example 4.45. The ﬁeld C can be replaced by the quaternions H, and the preceding
formulas yield ﬁber bundles S3→S4n+3→HPn over quaternionic projective space
HPn . Here the ﬁber S3 is the unit quaternions, and S4n+3 is the unit sphere in Hn+1 .
Taking n = 1 gives a second Hopf bundle S3→S7→S4 = HP1 .

378
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
Example 4.46. There is another Hopf bundle S7→S15→S8 , whose deﬁnition uses
the nonassociative 8 dimensional algebra O of Cayley octonions.
Elements of O
are pairs of quaternions (a1, a2) with multiplication deﬁned by (a1, a2)(b1, b2) =
(a1b1 −b2a2, a2b1 + b2a1). Regarding S15 as the unit sphere in the 16 dimensional
vector space O2 , the projection map p : S15→S8 = O ∪{∞} is (z0, z1), z0z−1
1 , just
as for the other Hopf bundles, but a little care is needed to show this is a ﬁber bundle
with ﬁber S7 , the unit octonions. Let U0 and U1 be the complements of ∞and 0 in
the base space O ∪{∞}. Deﬁne hi : p−1(Ui)→Ui×S7 and gi : Ui×S7→p−1(Ui) by
h0(z0, z1) = (z0z−1
1 , z1/|z1|),
g0(z, w) = (zw, w)/|(zw, w)|
h1(z0, z1) = (z0z−1
1 , z0/|z0|),
g1(z, w) = (w, z−1w)/|(w, z−1w)|
If one assumes the known fact that any subalgebra of O generated by two elements
is associative, then it is a simple matter to check that gi and hi are inverse home-
omorphisms, so we have a ﬁber bundle S7→S15→S8 . Actually, the calculation that
gi and hi are inverses needs only the following more elementary facts about octo-
nions z, w , where the conjugate z of z = (a1, a2) is deﬁned by the expected formula
z = (a1, −a2):
(1) R ⊂O as the pairs (r, 0) with r ∈R, and rz = zr for all z ∈O.
(2) |z|2 = zz = zz, hence z−1 = z/|z|2 .
(3) |zw| = |z||w|.
(4) zw = w z, hence (zw)−1 = w−1z−1 .
(5) z(zw) = (zz)w and (zw)w = z(ww), hence z(z−1w) = w and (zw)w−1 = z.
These facts can be checked by somewhat tedious direct calculation, though more
elegant derivations can be found in Chapter 8 of [Ebbinghaus].
There is an octonion ‘projective plane’ OP2 , obtained by attaching a cell e16 to
S8 via the Hopf map S15→S8 , just as CP2 and HP2 are obtained from the other Hopf
maps. However, there is no octonion analog of RPn , CPn , and HPn for n > 2 since
associativity of multiplication is needed for the relation (z0, ··· , zn) ∼λ(z0, ··· , zn)
to be an equivalence relation.
There are no ﬁber bundles with ﬁber, total space, and base space spheres of other
dimensions than in these Hopf bundle examples. This is discussed in an exercise for
§4.D, which reduces the question to the famous ‘Hopf invariant one’ problem.
Since ﬁber bundles are a generalization of covering spaces, it is natural to ask
whether the covering homotopy property holds for ﬁber bundles. As one can readily
see by looking at simple examples like the product bundle I×I→I , lifted homotopies
are generally not unique, as they are for covering spaces. But the existence of lifted
homotopies does hold in fair generality.
For example, a theorem of Huebsch and
Hurewicz, proved in [Spanier, Chapter 2.7], says that ﬁber bundles over paracompact
base spaces are ﬁbrations, i.e., have the homotopy lifting property for all spaces. An
easier result which sufﬁces for many purposes in homotopy theory is:

Section 4.2.
Elementary Methods of Calculation
379
Proposition 4.47. A ﬁber bundle p : E→B has the homotopy lifting property with
respect to all CW pairs (X, A).
Proof: As noted earlier, the homotopy lifting property for CW pairs is equivalent
to the homotopy lifting property for disks, or equivalently, cubes. Let G : In×I→B ,
G(x, t) = gt(x), be a homotopy we wish to lift, starting with a given lift eg0 of g0 .
Choose an open cover {Uα} of B with local trivializations hα : p−1(Uα)→Uα×F . Us-
ing compactness of In×I , we may choose points 0 = t1 < t2 < ··· < tk+1 = 1
partitioning I into subintervals Ij = [tj, tj+1] so that each of the resulting subcubes
Ij1 × ··· ×Ijn+1 of In×I is mapped by G into a single Uα . The subcubes Ij1 × ··· ×Ijn
of In give a CW structure on In , and we may assume by induction on n that egt has
already been constructed over the (n −1) skeleton of this CW structure. To extend
this egt over a cube Ij1 × ··· ×Ijn we may proceed in stages, ﬁrst constructing egt for
t in the interval I1 , then for t in I2 , etc. This in effect reduces us to the case that
no subdivision of In×I is necessary, so G maps all of In×I to a single Uα . Then we
have eG(In×{0} ∪∂In×I) ⊂p−1(Uα), and composing eG with the local trivialization
hα reduces us to the case of a product bundle Uα×F . In this case the ﬁrst coordinate
of a lift egt is just the given gt , so only the second coordinate needs to be constructed.
This can be obtained as a composition In×I→In×{0} ∪∂In×I→F where the ﬁrst
map is a retraction and the second map is what we are given.
⊔⊓
Example 4.48. Applying this theorem to a covering space p : E→B with E and B
path-connected, and discrete ﬁber F , the resulting long exact sequence of homotopy
groups yields Proposition 4.1 that p∗: πn(E)→πn(B) is an isomorphism for n ≥2.
We also obtain a short exact sequence 0→π1(E)→π1(B)→π0(F)→0, consistent
with the covering space theory facts that p∗: π1(E)→π1(B) is injective and that the
ﬁber F can be identiﬁed, via path-lifting, with the set of cosets of p∗π1(E) in π1(B).
Example 4.49. From the bundle S1→S∞→CP∞we obtain πi(CP∞) ≈πi−1(S1) for
all i since S∞is contractible. Thus CP∞is a K(Z, 2). In similar fashion the bundle
S3→S∞→HP∞gives πi(HP∞) ≈πi−1(S3) for all i, but these homotopy groups are
far more complicated than for CP∞and S1 . In particular, HP∞is not a K(Z, 3).
Example 4.50. The long exact sequence for the Hopf bundle S1→S3→S2 gives iso-
morphisms π2(S2) ≈π1(S1) and πn(S3) ≈πn(S2) for all n ≥3, as we noted near
the beginning of this section.
From this example and the preceding one we see that S2 and S3×CP∞are simply-
connected CW complexes with isomorphic homotopy groups, though they are not
homotopy equivalent since they have quite different homology groups.
Example 4.51: Whitehead Products. We compute π3(
W
α S2
α), showing that it is free
abelian with basis consisting of the Hopf maps S3→S2
α ⊂
W
α S2
α together with the

380
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
attaching maps S3→S2
α ∨S2
β ⊂
W
α S2
α of the cells e2
α×e2
β in the products S2
α×S2
β for
all unordered pairs α ≠β.
Suppose ﬁrst that there are only ﬁnitely many summands S2
α . For a ﬁnite prod-
uct
Q
αXα of path-connected spaces, the map πn(
W
α Xα)→πn(
Q
αXα) induced by
inclusion is surjective since the group πn(
Q
αXα) ≈
L
α πn(Xα) is generated by the
subgroups πn(Xα). Thus the long exact sequence of homotopy groups for the pair
(
Q
αXα,
W
α Xα) breaks up into short exact sequences
0 -→πn+1(
Q
αXα,
W
α Xα) -→πn(
W
α Xα) -→πn(
Q
αXα) -→0
These short exact sequences split since the inclusions Xα >
W
α Xα induce maps
πn(Xα)→πn(
W
α Xα) and hence a splitting homomorphism
L
α πn(Xα)→πn(
W
α Xα).
Taking Xα = S2
α and n = 3, we get an isomorphism
π3(
W
α S2
α) ≈π4(
Q
αS2
α,
W
α S2
α) ⊕
 L
α π3(S2
α)

The factor
L
α π3(S2
α) is free with basis the Hopf maps S3→S2
α by the preceding ex-
ample. For the other factor we have π4(
Q
αS2
α,
W
α S2
α) ≈π4(
Q
αS2
α/
W
α S2
α) by Proposi-
tion 4.27. The quotient
Q
αS2
α/
W
α S2
α has 5 skeleton a wedge of spheres S4
αβ for α ≠β,
so π4(
Q
αS2
α/
W
α S2
α) ≈π4(
W
αβ S4
αβ) is free with basis the inclusions S4
αβ >
W
αβ S4
αβ .
Hence π4(
Q
αS2
α,
W
α S2
α) is free with basis the characteristic maps of the 4 cells e2
α×e2
β .
Via the injection ∂: π4(
Q
αS2
α,
W
α S2
α)→π3(
W
α S2
α) this means that the attaching maps
of the cells e2
α×e2
β form a basis for the summand Im ∂of π3(
W
α S2
α). This ﬁnishes the
proof for the case of ﬁnitely many summands S2
α . The case of inﬁnitely many S2
α ’s
follows immediately since any map S3→
W
α S2
α has compact image, lying in a ﬁnite
union of summands, and similarly for any homotopy between such maps.
The maps S3→S2
α ∨S2
β in this example are expressible in terms of a product in
homotopy groups called the Whitehead product, deﬁned as follows. Given basepoint-
preserving maps f : Sk→X and g : Sℓ→X , let [f , g] : Sk+ℓ−1→X be the composition
Sk+ℓ−1 -→Sk ∨Sℓf ∨g
------------→X where the ﬁrst map is the attaching map of the (k + ℓ) cell
of Sk×Sℓwith its usual CW structure. Since homotopies of f or g give rise to ho-
motopies of [f , g], we have a well-deﬁned product πk(X)×πℓ(X)→πk+ℓ−1(X). The
notation [f , g] is used since for k = ℓ= 1 this is just the commutator product in
π1(X). Similarly, it is an exercise to show that when k = 1 and ℓ> 1, [f , g] is the
difference between g and its image under the π1 action of f .
In these terms the map S3→S2
α ∨S2
β in the preceding example is the Whitehead
product [iα, iβ] of the two inclusions of S2 into the wedge sum as the summands
S2
α and S2
β . Another example of a Whitehead product which we have encountered
previously is [11, 11] : S2n−1→Sn , which is the attaching map of the 2n cell of the
space J(Sn) considered in §3.2.
The calculation of π3(
W
α S2
α) is the ﬁrst nontrivial case of a more general theorem
of Hilton calculating all the homotopy groups of any wedge sum of spheres in terms

Section 4.2.
Elementary Methods of Calculation
381
of homotopy groups of spheres, using Whitehead products. A further generalization
by Milnor extends this to wedge sums of suspensions of arbitrary connected CW com-
plexes. See [G.Whitehead] for an exposition of these results and further information
on Whitehead products.
Example 4.52: Stiefel and Grassmann Manifolds. The ﬁber bundles with total space
a sphere and base space a projective space considered above are in fact just the cases
n = 1 of a broader family of ﬁber bundles in each of the real, complex, and quater-
nionic cases:
O(n) -→Vn(Rk) -→Gn(Rk)
O(n) -→Vn(R∞) -→Gn(R∞)
U(n) -→Vn(Ck) -→Gn(Ck)
U(n) -→Vn(C∞) -→Gn(C∞)
Sp(n) -→Vn(Hk) -→Gn(Hk)
Sp(n) -→Vn(H∞) -→Gn(H∞)
Taking the real case ﬁrst, the Stiefel manifold Vn(Rk) is the space of n frames in
Rk , i.e., n tuples of orthonormal vectors in Rk . This is topologized as a subspace of
the product of n copies of the unit sphere in Rk . The Grassmann manifold Gn(Rk)
is the space of n dimensional vector subspaces of Rk . There is a natural surjection
p : Vn(Rk)→Gn(Rk) sending an n frame to the subspace it spans, and Gn(Rk) is
topologized as a quotient space of Vn(Rk) via this projection. The ﬁbers of the map
p are the spaces of n frames in a ﬁxed n plane in Rk and so are homeomorphic
to Vn(Rn). An n frame in Rn is the same as an orthogonal n×n matrix, regarding
the columns of the matrix as an n frame, so the ﬁber can also be described as the
orthogonal group O(n). There is no difﬁculty in allowing k = ∞in these deﬁnitions,
and in fact Vn(R∞) =
S
k Vn(Rk) and Gn(R∞) =
S
k Gn(Rk).
The complex and quaternionic Stiefel manifolds and Grassmann manifolds are
deﬁned in the same way using the usual Hermitian inner products in Ck and Hk . The
unitary group U(n) consists of n×n matrices whoses columns form orthonormal
bases for Cn , and the symplectic group is the quaternionic analog of this.
We should explain why the various projection maps Vn→Gn are ﬁber bundles.
Let us take the real case for concreteness, though the argument is the same in all cases.
If we ﬁx an n plane P ∈Gn(Rk) and choose an orthonormal basis for P , then we ob-
tain continuously-varying orthonormal bases for all n planes P ′ in a neighborhood
U of P by projecting the basis for P orthogonally onto P ′ to obtain a nonorthonor-
mal basis for P ′ , then applying the Gram-Schmidt process to this basis to make it
orthonormal. The formulas for the Gram-Schmidt process show that it is continuous.
Having orthonormal bases for all n planes in U , we can use these to identify these
n planes with Rn , hence n frames in these n planes are identiﬁed with n frames in
Rn , and so p−1(U) is identiﬁed with U ×Vn(Rn). This argument works for k = ∞as
well as for ﬁnite k.
In the case n = 1 the total spaces V1 are spheres, which are highly connected,
and the same is true in general:

382
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
— Vn(Rk) is (k −n −1) connected.
— Vn(Ck) is (2k −2n) connected.
— Vn(Hk) is (4k −4n + 2) connected.
— Vn(R∞), Vn(C∞), and Vn(H∞) are contractible.
The ﬁrst three statements will be proved in the next example. For the last statement
the argument is the same in the three cases, so let us consider the real case. Deﬁne a
homotopy ht : R∞→R∞by ht(x1, x2, ···) = (1−t)(x1, x2, ···)+t(0, x1, x2, ···). This
is linear for each t , and its kernel is easily checked to be trivial. So if we apply ht to an
n frame we get an n tuple of independent vectors which can be made orthonormal
by the Gram-Schmidt formulas. Thus we have a deformation retraction, in the weak
sense, of Vn(R∞) onto the subspace of n frames with ﬁrst coordinate zero. Iterating
this n times, we deform into the subspace of n frames with ﬁrst n coordinates zero.
For such an n frame (v1, ··· , vn) deﬁne a homotopy (1−t)(v1, ··· , vn)+t(e1, ··· , en)
where ei is the ith standard basis vector in R∞. This homotopy preserves linear
independence, so after applying Gram-Schmidt again, we have a deformation through
n frames, which ﬁnishes the construction of a contraction of Vn(R∞).
Since Vn(R∞) is contractible, we obtain isomorphisms πiO(n) ≈πi+1Gn(R∞)
for all i and n, and similarly in the complex and quaternionic cases.
Example 4.53. For m < n ≤k there are ﬁber bundles
Vn−m(Rk−m) -→Vn(Rk)
p-----→Vm(Rk)
where the projection p sends an n frame onto the m frame formed by its ﬁrst m
vectors, so the ﬁber consists of (n −m) frames in the (k −m) plane orthogonal to a
given m frame. Local trivializations can be constructed as follows. For an m frame F ,
choose an orthonormal basis for the (k−m) plane orthogonal to F . This determines
orthonormal bases for the (k −m) planes orthogonal to all nearby m frames by
orthogonal projection and Gram-Schmidt, as in the preceding Example 4.52.
This
allows us to identify these (k −m) planes with Rk−m , and in particular the ﬁbers
near p−1(F) are identiﬁed with Vn−m(Rk−m), giving a local trivialization.
There are analogous bundles in the complex and quaternionic cases as well, with
local triviality shown in the same way.
Taking m = 1, we have bundles Vn−1(Rk−1)→Vn(Rk)→Sk−1 whose associated
long exact sequence of homotopy groups allows us deduce that Vn(Rk) is (k −n −
1) connected by induction on n. In the complex and quaternionic cases the same
argument yields the other connectivity statements in Example 4.52.
Taking k = n we obtain ﬁber bundles O(k −m)→O(k)→Vm(Rk). The ﬁbers
are in fact just the cosets αO(k −m) for α ∈O(k), where O(k −m) is regarded
as the subgroup of O(k) ﬁxing the ﬁrst m standard basis vectors. So we see that
Vm(Rk) is identiﬁable with the coset space O(k)/O(k −m), or in other words the
orbit space for the free action of O(k−m) on O(k) by right-multiplication. In similar

Section 4.2.
Elementary Methods of Calculation
383
fashion one can see that Gm(Rk) is the coset space O(k)/
 O(m)×O(k −m)

where
the subgroup O(m)×O(k −m) ⊂O(k) consists of the orthogonal transformations
taking the m plane spanned by the ﬁrst m standard basis vectors to itself.
The
corresponding observations apply also in the complex and quaternionic cases, with
the unitary and symplectic groups.
Example 4.54: Bott Periodicity. Specializing the preceding example further by taking
m = 1 and k = n we obtain bundles
O(n −1) -→O(n)
p-----→Sn−1
U(n −1) -→U(n)
p-----→S2n−1
Sp(n −1) -→Sp(n)
p-----→S4n−1
The map p can be described as evaluation of an orthogonal, unitary, or symplectic
transformation on a ﬁxed unit vector. These bundles show that computing homotopy
groups of O(n), U(n), and Sp(n) should be at least as difﬁcult as computing ho-
motopy groups of spheres. For example, if one knew the homotopy groups of O(n)
and O(n−1), one could very nearly compute the homotopy groups of Sn−1 from the
long exact sequence for the ﬁrst bundle.
However, the bundles above do imply a very interesting stability property. In
the real case, the inclusion O(n −1) > O(n) induces an isomorphism on πi for
i < n−2, from the long exact sequence of the ﬁrst bundle. Hence the groups πiO(n)
are independent of n if n is sufﬁciently large, and the same is true for the groups
πiU(n) and πiSp(n) via the other two bundles. One of the most surprising results
in all of algebraic topology is the Bott Periodicity Theorem which asserts that these
stable groups repeat periodically, with a period of eight for O and Sp and a period
of two for U . Their values are given in the following table:
i mod 8
0
1
2
3
4
5
6 7
πiO(n)
Z2
Z2
0
Z
0
0
0
Z
πiU(n)
0
Z
0
Z
0
Z
0
Z
πiSp(n)
0
0
0
Z
Z2
Z2
0
Z
Stable Homotopy Groups
We showed in Corollary 4.23 that for an n connected CW complex X , the sus-
pension map πi(X)→πi+1(SX) is an isomorphism for i < 2n + 1. In particular this
holds for i ≤n so SX is (n + 1) connected. This implies that in the sequence of
iterated suspensions
πi(X) -→πi+1(SX) -→πi+2(S2X) -→···
all maps are eventually isomorphisms, even without any connectivity assumption on
X itself. The resulting stable homotopy group is denoted πs
i (X).

384
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
An especially interesting case is the group πs
i (S0), which equals πi+n(Sn) for
n > i + 1. This stable homotopy group is often abbreviated to πs
i and called the
stable i stem. It is a theorem of Serre which we prove in [SSAT] that πs
i is always
ﬁnite for i > 0.
These stable homotopy groups of spheres are among the most fundamental ob-
jects in topology, and much effort has gone into their calculation. At the present time,
complete calculations are known only for i up to around 60 or so. Here is a table for
i ≤19, taken from [Toda62]:
i
0
1
2
3
4 5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
πs
i
Z
Z2
Z2
Z24 0 0 Z2
Z240
Z2× Z2
Z2× Z2× Z2
Z6
Z504
0
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
Z3
Z2× Z2
Z480× Z2
Z2× Z2
Z2× Z2× Z2× Z2
Z8× Z2
Z264× Z2
Patterns in this apparent chaos begin to emerge only when one projects πs
i onto its
p components, the quotient groups obtained by factoring out all elements of order
relatively prime to the prime p. For i > 0 the p component pπs
i is of course iso-
morphic to the subgroup of πs
i consisting of elements of order a power of p, but the
quotient viewpoint is in some ways preferable.
The ﬁgure below is a schematic diagram of the 2 components of πs
i for i ≤60.
A vertical chain of n dots in the ith column represents a Z2n summand of πs
i . The
bottom dot of such a chain denotes a generator of this summand, and the vertical
segments denote multiplication by 2, so the second dot up is twice a generator, the
next dot is four times a generator, and so on. The three generators η, ν , and σ in
dimensions 1, 3, and 7 are represented by the Hopf bundle maps S3→S2 , S7→S4 ,
S15→S8 deﬁned in Examples 4.44, 4.45, and 4.46.
1  3    7    11   15   19   23   27   31   35   39   43   47   51   55   59    
η
ν
σ
ν 2
2
σ
η
η
2
3
ν 3
σ 3
The horizontal and diagonal lines in the diagram provide some information about
compositions of maps between spheres. Namely, there are products πs
i ×πs
j→πs
i+j
deﬁned by compositions Si+j+k→Sj+k→Sk , and these pass down to product in the

Section 4.2.
Elementary Methods of Calculation
385
various p components. As we show in Proposition 4.55 below, this product is com-
mutative up to a sign depending on dimension.
Compositions with suspensions of the Hopf maps η and ν are often nontrivial,
and such compositions are indicated in the diagram by segments extending 1 or 3
units to the right, diagonally for η and horizontally for ν . Thus for example we see
the relation η3 = 4ν in 2πs
3 . Remember that 2πs
3 ≈Z8 is a quotient of πs
3 ≈Z24 ,
where the actual relation is η3 = 12ν since 2η = 0 implies 2η3 = 0, so η3 is the
unique element of order two in this Z24 .
Across the bottom of the diagram there is a repeated pattern of pairs of ‘teeth.’
This pattern continues to inﬁnity, though with the spikes in dimensions 8k−1 not all
of the same height, namely, the spike in dimension 2m(2n + 1) −1 has height m + 1.
In the upper part of the diagram, however, there is considerably less regularity, and
this complexity seems to persist in higher dimensions as well.
The next diagram shows the 3 components of πs
i for i ≤100, and the increase in
regularity is quite noticeable. Here vertical segments denote multiplication by 3 and
the other solid segments denote composition with elements α1 ∈3πs
3 and β1 ∈3πs
10 .
The meaning of the dotted lines will be explained below. The most regular part of the
diagram is the ‘triadic ruler’ across the bottom. This continues in the same pattern
forever, with spikes of height m + 1 in dimension 4k −1 for 3m the highest power
of 3 dividing 4k. Looking back at the p = 2 diagram, one can see that the vertical
sections of the ‘teeth’ form a ‘dyadic ruler.’
β
α1
1
β2
2
β3
β5
γ2
β6
β3/
3
β6/
2
β6/
β2
2
3  7  11  15  19  23  27  31  35  39  43  47  51  55  59  63  67  71  75  79  83  87  91  95  99  103
Even more regularity appears with larger primes, beginning with the case p = 5
shown in the next diagram. Again one has the inﬁnite ruler, this time a ‘pentadic’
ruler, but there is also much regularity in the rest of the diagram.

386
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
39
79
119
159
199
239
279
319
359
399
439
479
519
559
599
639 679
719
759
799
839
879
919
959
999
?
?
?
?
1
2
3
4
5
5/2
5/3
5/4
10/2
10/3
10/4
15/2
15/3
15/4
20/2
20/3
20/4
2·19
2·9
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
2
10/5
15/5
20/5
2·14
2·4
γ
The four dots with question marks below them near the right edge of the diagram
are hypothetical: the calculations in [Ravenel] do not decide whether these potential
elements of 5πs
i for i = 932, 933, 970, and 971 actually exist.
These diagrams are drawn from tables in [Kochman] and [Kochman-Mahowald]
for p = 2, and [Ravenel] for p = 3, 5.
For each p there is a similar inﬁnite ‘p adic ruler,’ corresponding to cyclic sub-
groups of order pm+1 in pπs
2j(p−1)−1 for all j , where pm is the highest power of p
dividing j . These subgroups are the p components of a certain cyclic subgroup of
πs
4k−1 known as Im J , the image of a homomorphism J : π4k−1(O)→πs
4k−1 . There are
also Z2 subgroups of πs
i for i = 8k, 8k + 1 which comprise Im J in these dimen-
sions. In the diagram of 2πs
i these are the parts of the teeth connected to the spike
in dimension 8k −1. The J homomorphism will be studied in some detail in [VBKT].
There are a few other known inﬁnite families in πs
∗, notably a family of elements
βn ∈pπs
2(p2−1)n−2p for p ≥5 and a family γn ∈pπs
2(p3−1)n−2p2−2p+1 for p ≥7. The
βn ’s appear in the diagram for p = 5 as generators for the ‘combs’ along the upward
diagonal, except when n is a multiple of 5 and the comb is generated by β2βn−1
rather than βn . The element γ2 generates the long comb starting in dimension 437,
but γ3 = 0. The element γ4 in dimension 933 is one of the question marks. The
theory behind these families βn and γn and possible generalizations, as explained in
[Ravenel], is one of the more esoteric branches of algebraic topology.
In πs
∗there are many compositions which are zero. One can get some idea of
this from the diagrams above, where all sequences of edges break off after a short
time. As a special instance of the vanishing of products, the commutativity formula
in Proposition 4.55 below implies that the square of an odd-dimensional element of

Section 4.2.
Elementary Methods of Calculation
387
odd order is zero. Much more generally, a theorem of Nishida says that every positive-
dimensional element α ∈πs
∗is nilpotent, i.e., αn = 0 for some n. For example, for
the element β1 ∈5πs
38 the smallest such n is 18.
The widespread vanishing of products in πs
∗can be seen as limiting their use-
fulness in describing the structure of πs
∗. But it can also be used to construct new
elements of πs
∗. Suppose one has maps W
f-----→X
g-----→Y
h-----→Z such that the com-
positions gf and hg are both homotopic to constant maps. A nullhomotopy of gf
gives an extension of gf to a map F : CW→Y , and a nullhomotopy of hg gives an
extension of hg to a map G : CX→Z . Regarding the suspension SW as the union
of two cones CW , deﬁne the Toda bracket ⟨f , g, h⟩: SW→Z to be the composition
G(Cf ) on one cone and hF on the other.
f
g
h
Cf
G
F
The map ⟨f , g, h⟩is not uniquely determined by f , g, and h since it depends on
the choices of the nullhomotopies. In the case of πs
∗, the various choices of ⟨f , g, h⟩
range over a coset of a certain subgroup, described in an exercise at the end of the
section.
There are also higher-order Toda brackets ⟨f1, ··· , fn⟩deﬁned in somewhat sim-
ilar fashion. The dotted lines in the diagrams of 3πs
∗and 5πs
∗join an element x
to a bracket element ⟨α1, ··· , α1, x⟩.
Most of the unlabelled elements above the
rulers in all three diagrams are obtained from the labelled elements by compositions
and brackets. For example, in 2πs
∗the 8 dimensional element is ⟨ν, η, ν⟩and the
14 dimensional elements are σ 2 and ⟨ν, ⟨ν, η, ν⟩, 2, η⟩.
Proposition 4.55. The composition product induces a graded ring structure on πs
∗=
L
i πs
i satisfying the commutativity relation αβ = (−1)ijβα for α ∈πs
i and β ∈πs
j .
Proof: Only distributivity and commutativity need to be checked. One distributivity
law is easy: Given f , g : Si+j+k→Sj+k and h : Sj+k→Sk , then h(f + g) = hf + hg
since both expressions equal hf and hg on the two hemispheres of Si+j+k . The
other distributivity law will follow from this one and the commutativity relation.
To prove the commutativity relation it will be convenient to express suspension
in terms of smash product. The smash product Sn ∧S1 can be regarded as the quo-
tient space of Sn×I with Sn×∂I ∪{x0}×I collapsed to a point. This is the same
as the quotient of the suspension Sn+1 of Sn obtained by collapsing to a point the
suspension of x0 . Collapsing this arc in Sn+1 to a point again yields Sn+1 , so we
obtain in this way a homeomorphism identifying Sn ∧S1 with Sn+1 . Under this iden-

388
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
tiﬁcation the suspension Sf of a basepoint-preserving map f : Sn→Sn becomes the
smash product f ∧11 : Sn ∧S1→Sn ∧S1 . By iteration, the k fold suspension Skf then
corresponds to f ∧11 : Sn ∧Sk→Sn ∧Sk .
Now we verify the commutativity relation. Let f : Si+k→Sk and g : Sj+k→Sk be
given. We may assume k is even. Consider the commutative diagram below, where σ
−→
−→
−−−−−→Sk
Sk
σ
τ
∧
S
S k
∧
j k
+
−−−−−→S
g
k
Sk
∧
∧
g∧
S
Sj k
∧
+
k
−−−−−→
f∧
S
Sj k
∧
+
i k
+
1
1
1
1
1
1
and τ transpose the two factors. Think-
ing of Sj+k and Sk as smash products
of circles, σ is the composition of k(j + k) transpo-
sitions of adjacent circle factors. Such a transposition
has degree −1 since it is realized as a reﬂection of the S2 = S1 ∧S1 involved. Hence
σ has degree (−1)k(j+k) , which is +1 since k is even. Thus σ is homotopic to the
identity. Similarly, τ is homotopic to the identity. Hence f ∧g = (11 ∧g)(f ∧11) is
homotopic to the composition (g ∧11)(f ∧11), which is stably equivalent to the com-
position gf . Symmetrically, f g is stably homotopic to g ∧f . So it sufﬁces to show
f ∧g ≃(−1)ijg∧f . This we do by the commutative dia-
gram at the right, where σ and τ are again the transpo-
−→
−→
−−−−−→Sk
Sk
σ
τ
∧
S
Si k
∧
+
j k
+
−−−−−→S
f
g
k
Sk
∧
∧
g
f
∧
S
Sj k
∧
+
i k
+
sitions of the two factors. As before, τ is homotopic to
the identity, but now σ has degree (−1)(i+k)(j+k) , which
equals (−1)ij since k is even. The composition (g∧f )σ is homotopic to (−1)ij(g∧f )
since additive inverses in homotopy groups are obtained by pre-composing with a re-
ﬂection, and a reﬂection has degree −1. Thus from the commutativity of the diagram
we obtain the desired relation f ∧g ≃(−1)ijg ∧f .
⊔⊓
Exercises
1. Use homotopy groups to show there is no retraction RPn→RPk if n > k > 0.
2. Show the action of π1(RPn) on πn(RPn) ≈Z is trivial for n odd and nontrivial for
n even.
3. Let X be obtained from a lens space of dimension 2n + 1 by deleting a point.
Compute π2n(X) as a module over Z[π1(X)].
4. Let X ⊂Rn+1 be the union of the inﬁnite sequence of spheres Sn
k of radius 1/k and
center (1/k, 0, ··· , 0). Show that πi(X) = 0 for i < n and construct a homomorphism
from πn(X) onto the direct product (not the direct sum) of the groups πn(Sn
k ) ≈Z.
[Is this surjection an isomorphism if n > 1?]
5. Let f : S2
α ∨S2
β→S2
α ∨S2
β be the identity map on the S2
α summand and the sum
S2
α +S2
β on the S2
β summand. Let X be the mapping torus of f , i.e., the quotient space
of (S2
α ∨S2
β)×I under the identiﬁcations (x, 0) ∼(f (x), 1). The mapping torus of
the restriction of f to S2
α forms a subspace A = S1×S2
α ⊂X . Show that the maps
π2(A)→π2(X)→π2(X, A) form a short exact sequence 0→Z→Z ⊕Z→Z→0, and

Section 4.2.
Elementary Methods of Calculation
389
compute the action of π1(A) = Z on these three groups. In particular, show the action
of π1(A) is trivial on π2(A) and π2(X, A) but is nontrivial on π2(X).
6. Show the relative form of the Hurewicz theorem in dimension n implies the abso-
lute form in dimension n −1 by considering the pair (CX, X) where CX is the cone
on X .
7.
Construct a CW complex X with prescribed homotopy groups πi(X) and pre-
scribed actions of π1(X) on the πi(X)’s, by building X as a union of subcomplexes
X1 ⊂X1 ⊂X2 ⊂X2 ⊂··· where Xn is obtained from Xn−1 by attaching n cells
to realize prescribed generators for πn , and Xn is obtained from Xn by attaching
(n + 1) cells to realize prescribed relations for πn . (When n > 1 these can be gener-
ators and relations for πn as a π1 module.)
8. Show the suspension of an acyclic CW complex is contractible.
9. Show that a map between simply-connected CW complexes is a homotopy equiva-
lence if its mapping cone is contractible. Use the preceding exercise to give an example
where this fails in the nonsimply-connected case.
10. Let the CW complex X be obtained from S1 ∨Sn , n ≥2, by attaching a cell
en+1 by a map representing the polynomial p(t) ∈Z[t, t−1] ≈πn(S1 ∨Sn), so
πn(X) ≈Z[t, t−1]/
 p(t)

.
Show π′
n(X) is cyclic and compute its order in terms
of p(t). Give examples showing that the group πn(X) can be ﬁnitely generated or
not, independently of whether π′
n(X) is ﬁnite or inﬁnite.
11. Let X be a connected CW complex with 1 skeleton X1 . Show that π2(X, X1) ≈
π2(X)×K where K the kernel of π1(X1)→π1(X), a free group.
Also, show that
π′
2(X, X1) ≈π′
2(X)×K′ where K′ denotes the quotient of K obtained by factoring
out the conjugation action of π1(X1). Note that K′ is abelian.
12. Show that a map f : X→Y of connected CW complexes is a homotopy equivalence
if it induces an isomorphism on π1 and if a lift ef : eX→eY to the universal covers in-
duces an isomorphism on homology. [The latter condition can be restated in terms of
homology with local coefﬁcients as saying that f∗: H∗(X; Z[π1X])→H∗(Y; Z[π1Y])
is an isomorphism; see §3.I.]
13. Show that a map between connected n dimensional CW complexes is a homotopy
equivalence if it induces an isomorphism on πi for i ≤n. [Pass to universal covers
and use homology.]
14. If an n dimensional CW complex X contains a subcomplex Y homotopy equiva-
lent to Sn , show that the map πn(Y)→πn(X) induced by inclusion is injective. [Hint:
Hurewicz]
15. Show that a closed simply-connected 3 manifold is homotopy equivalent to S3 .
[Use Poincar´e duality, and also the fact that closed manifolds are homotopy equivalent
to CW complexes, from Corollary A.12 in the Appendix. The much stronger statement

390
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
that a closed simply-connected 3 manifold is homeomorphic to S3 is still unproved.
This is the Poincar´e conjecture, surely the most famous open problem in topology.
The higher-dimensional analog, that a closed n manifold homotopy equivalent to Sn
is homeomorphic to Sn , has been proved for all n ≥4, one of the major successes of
manifold theory.]
16. Show that the closed surfaces with inﬁnite fundamental group are K(π, 1)’s by
showing that their universal covers are contractible, via the Hurewicz theorem and
results of §3.3.
17. Show that if X is an (n −1) connected CW complex and Y is a path-connected
space with πi(Y) = 0 for i > n, then the map ⟨X, Y⟩→Hom
 πn(X), πn(Y)

, [f ] ,
f∗, is a bijection. Deduce that CW complex K(G, n)’s are uniquely determined, up to
homotopy type, by G and n.
18. If X and Y are simply-connected CW complexes such that eHi(X) and
eHj(Y)
are ﬁnite and of relatively prime orders for all pairs (i, j), show that the inclusion
X ∨Y >X×Y is a homotopy equivalence and X ∧Y is contractible. [Use the K¨unneth
formula.]
19. If X is a K(G, 1) CW complex, show that πn(Xn) is free abelian for n ≥2.
20. Let G be a group and X a simply-connected space. Show that for the product
K(G, 1)×X the action of π1 on πn is trivial for all n > 1.
21. Given a sequence of CW complexes K(Gn, n), n = 1, 2, ···, let Xn be the CW
product of the ﬁrst n of these complexes, and let X be the CW complex which is the
union of subcomplexes Xn via the inclusions Xn−1 ⊂Xn as the subcomplex with nth
coordinate a basepoint 0 cell of K(Gn, n). Show πn(X) ≈Gn for all n.
22. Show that Hn+1(K(G, n); Z) = 0 if n > 1. [Build a K(G, n) from a Moore space
M(G, n) by attaching cells of dimension > n + 1.]
23.
Extend the Hurewicz theorem by showing that if X is an (n −1) connected
CW complex, then the Hurewicz homomorphism h : πn+1(X)→Hn+1(X) is surjective
when n > 1, and when n = 1 show there is an isomorphism H2(X)/h
 π2(X)

≈
H2
 K(π1(X), 1)

. [Build a K(πn(X), n) from X by attaching cells of dimension n + 2
and greater, and then consider the homology sequence of the pair (Y, X) where Y
is X with the (n + 2) cells of K(πn(X), n) attached.
Note that the image of the
boundary map Hn+2(Y, X)→Hn(X) coincides with the image of h, and Hn+1(Y) ≈
Hn+1
 K(πn(X), n)

. The previous exercise is needed for the case n > 1.]
24. Show there is a Moore space M(G, 1) with π1
 M(G, 1)

≈G iff H2(K(G, 1); Z) = 0.
[Use the preceding problem.
Build such an M(G, 1) from the 2 skeleton K2 of a
K(G, 1) by attaching 3 cells according to a basis for the free group H2(K2; Z).] In
particular, there is no M(Zn, 1) with fundamental group Zn , free abelian of rank n,
if n ≥2.

Section 4.2.
Elementary Methods of Calculation
391
25. Let X be a CW complex with πi(X) = 0 for 1 < i < n for some n ≥2. Show that
Hn(X)/h
 πn(X)

≈Hn
 K(π1(X), 1)

, where h is the Hurewicz homomorphism.
26. Generalizing the example of RP2 and S2×RP∞, show that if X is a connected
ﬁnite-dimensional CW complex with universal cover eX , then X and eX×K(π1(X), 1)
have isomorphic homotopy groups but are not homotopy equivalent if π1(X) contains
elements of ﬁnite order.
27. From Lemma 4.38 deduce that the image of the map π2(X, x0)→π2(X, A, x0) lies
in the center of π2(X, A, x0).
28. Show that the group Zp×Zp with p prime cannot act freely on any sphere Sn ,
by ﬁlling in details of the following argument. Such an action would deﬁne a covering
space Sn→M with M a closed manifold. When n > 1, build a K(Zp×Zp, 1) from
M by attaching a single (n + 1) cell and then cells of higher dimension.
Deduce
that Hn+1(K(Zp×Zp, 1); Zp) is Zp or 0, a contradiction. (The case n = 1 is more
elementary.)
29. Finish the homotopy classiﬁcation of lens spaces which was begun in exercise 2
of §3.E by showing that two lens spaces Lm(ℓ1, ··· , ℓn) and Lm(ℓ′
1, ··· , ℓ′
n) are ho-
motopy equivalent if ℓ1 ··· ℓn ≡±knℓ′
1 ··· ℓ′
n mod m for some integer k, via the
following steps:
(a) Reduce to the case k = 1 by showing that Lm(ℓ′
1, ··· , ℓ′
n) = Lm(kℓ′
1, ··· , kℓ′
n) if
k is relatively prime to m. [Rechoose the generator of the Zm action on S2n−1 .]
(b) Let f : L→L′ be a map constructed as in part (b) of the exercise in §3.E. Construct
a map g : L→L′ as a composition L -→L ∨S2n−1 -→L ∨S2n−1 -→L′ where the
ﬁrst map collapses the boundary of a small ball to a point, the second map is the
wedge of the identity on L and a map of some degree d on S2n−1 , and the third
map is f on L and the projection S2n−1→L′ on S2n−1 . Show that g has degree
k1 ··· kn + dm, i.e., g induces multiplication by k1 ··· kn + dm on H2n−1(−; Z).
[Show ﬁrst that a lift of g to the universal cover S2n−1 has this degree.]
(c) If ℓ1 ··· ℓn ≡±ℓ′
1 ··· ℓ′
n mod m, choose d so that k1 ··· kn +dm = ±1 and show
this implies that g induces an isomorphism on all homotopy groups, hence is a
homotopy equivalence. [For πi with i > 1, consider a lift of g to the universal
cover.]
30. Let E be a subspace of (−1, 1)×(−1, 1) obtained by deleting a subspace X of
{0}×(−1, 1). For which X is the projection E→(−1, 1), (x, y) , x a ﬁber bundle?
31. For a ﬁber bundle F→E→B such that the inclusion F>E is homotopic to a con-
stant map, show that the long exact sequence of homotopy groups breaks up into split
short exact sequences, giving isomorphisms πn(B) ≈πn(E) ⊕πn−1(F). In particular,
for the Hopf bundles S3→S7→S4 and S7→S15→S8 this yields isomorphisms
πn(S4) ≈πn(S7) ⊕πn−1(S3)
and
πn(S8) ≈πn(S15) ⊕πn−1(S7)
for all n.

392
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
32. Show that if Sk→Sm→Sn is a ﬁber bundle, then k = n −1 and m = 2n −1.
[Look at the long exact sequence of homotopy groups.]
33. Show that if there were ﬁber bundles Sn−1→S2n−1→Sn for all n, then the groups
πi(Sn) would be ﬁnitely generated free abelian groups computable by induction, and
nonzero for i ≥n ≥2.
34. Let p : S3→S2 be the Hopf bundle and let q : T 3→S3 be the quotient map which
collapses the complement of a ball in the 3 dimensional torus T 3 = S1×S1×S1 to
a point. Show that pq : T 3→S2 induces the trivial map on π∗and eH∗, yet is not
homotopic to a constant map.
35. For basepoint-preserving maps f : S1→X and g : Sn→X with n > 1, show that
the Whitehead product [f , g] is ±(g −f g), where f g denotes the action of f on g.
36. Show that all Whitehead products in a path-connected H–space are trivial.
37.
Show that π3(S1 ∨S2) is not ﬁnitely generated as a module over Z[π1(S1 ∨
S2)] by considering Whitehead products in the universal cover, using the results in
Example 4.51. Generalize this to πi+j−1(S1 ∨Si ∨Sj) for i, j > 1.
38. Show that the indeterminacy of a Toda bracket ⟨f , g, h⟩with f ∈πs
i , g ∈πs
j ,
h ∈πs
k is the subgroup f πs
j+k+1 + h πs
i+j+1 of πs
i+j+k+1 .
The Hurewicz theorem gives a connection between homology groups and homo-
topy groups, and so, indirectly, a connection between cohomology and homotopy
groups. But there is a more direct connection of a quite different sort. We will show
that for every CW complex X there is a natural bijection between Hn(X; G) and the set
⟨X, K(G, n)⟩of basepoint-preserving homotopy classes of maps from X to a K(G, n).
We will also deﬁne a natural group structure on ⟨X, K(G, n)⟩which makes the bijec-
tion with Hn(X; G) a group isomorphism. That there should be any connection at
all between cohomology and homotopy classes of maps is the ﬁrst surprise here, and
the second is that Eilenberg-MacLane spaces are involved, since their deﬁnition is en-
tirely in terms of homotopy groups, which on the face of it have nothing to do with
cohomology.
After proving this basic isomorphism Hn(X; G) ≈⟨X, K(G, n)⟩and describing a
few of its immediate applications, the later parts of this section aim toward a further
study of Postnikov towers, which were introduced brieﬂy in §4.1. These provide a

Section 4.3.
Connections with Cohomology
393
general theoretical method for realizing an arbitrary CW complex as a sort of twisted
product of Eilenberg-MacLane spaces, up to homotopy equivalence. The most geo-
metric interpretation of the phrase ‘twisted product’ is the notion of ﬁber bundle
introduced in the previous section, but here we need the more homotopy-theoretic
notion of a ﬁbration, so before we begin the discussion of Postnikov towers we ﬁrst
take a few pages to present some basic constructions and results about ﬁbrations.
As we shall see, Postnikov towers can be expressed as sequences of ﬁbrations
with ﬁbers Eilenberg-MacLane spaces, so we can again expect close connections with
cohomology. One such connection is the notion of ‘k invariants’ which describe, at
least in principle, how Postnikov towers for a broad class of spaces are determined by
a sequence of cohomology classes. As another application of these ideas, we describe
at the end of the section a technique for breaking up basic extension and lifting prob-
lems in homotopy theory into a succession of smaller problems whose solutions are
equivalent to the vanishing of certain cohomology classes. This technique goes under
the somewhat grandiose title of Obstruction Theory, though it is really quite a simple
idea when expressed in terms of Postnikov towers.
The Homotopy Construction of Cohomology
The main result of this subsection is the following fundamental relationship be-
tween singular cohomology and Eilenberg-MacLane spaces:
Theorem 4.56. There are natural bijections T : ⟨X, K(G, n)⟩→Hn(X; G) for all CW
complexes X and all n > 0, with G any abelian group. Such a T has the form
T([f ]) = f ∗(α) for some α ∈Hn(K(G, n); G).
In the course of the proof we will deﬁne a natural group structure on ⟨X, K(G, n)⟩
such that the transformation T is an isomorphism.
A class α ∈Hn(K(G, n); G) with the property stated in the theorem is called a
fundamental class. The proof of the theorem will yield an explicit fundamental class,
namely the element of Hn(K(G, n); G) ≈Hom(Hn(K; Z), G) given by the inverse of
the Hurewicz isomorphism G = πn(K(G, n))→Hn(K; Z). Concretely, if we choose
K(G, n) to be a CW complex with (n −1) skeleton a point, then a fundamental class
is represented by the cellular cochain assigning to each n cell of K(G, n) the element
of πn(K(G, n)) deﬁned by a characteristic map for the n cell.
For connected CW complexes X the theorem also holds with ⟨X, K(G, n)⟩re-
placed by [X, K(G, n)], the nonbasepoint-preserving homotopy classes. This is easy
to see when n > 1 since every map X→K(G, n) can be homotoped to be basepoint-
preserving, and every homotopy between basepoint-preserving maps can be homo-
toped to be basepoint-preserving if the target space K(G, n) is simply-connected.
When n = 1 the equality [X, K(G, n)] = ⟨X, K(G, n)⟩is an exercise for §4.A, using
the assumption that G is abelian.

394
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
It is possible to give a direct, bare-hands proof of the theorem, but we shall take
a different approach, one which has the advantage of placing the result in its natural
context via general machinery that turns out to be quite useful other places as well.
The two main steps will be the following assertions.
(1) The functors hn(X) = ⟨X, K(G, n)⟩deﬁne a reduced cohomology theory on the
category of basepointed CW complexes.
(2) If a reduced cohomology theory h∗deﬁned on CW complexes has coefﬁcient
groups hn(S0) which are zero for n ≠0, then there are natural isomorphisms
hn(X) ≈eHn(X; h0(S0)) for all CW complexes X and all n.
Towards proving (1) we will study a more general question: When does a sequence
of spaces Kn deﬁne a cohomology theory by setting hn(X) = ⟨X, Kn⟩? Note that this
will be a reduced cohomology theory since ⟨X, Kn⟩is trivial when X is a point.
The ﬁrst question to address is putting a group structure on the set ⟨X, K⟩. This
requires that either X or K have some special structure. When X = Sn we have
⟨Sn, K⟩= πn(K), which has a group structure when n > 0. The deﬁnition of this
group structure works more generally whenever Sn is replaced by a suspension SX ,
the idea being to deﬁne the sum of maps f , g : SX→K as the composition SX→SX ∨
SX→K where the ﬁrst map collapses an ‘equatorial’ X ⊂SX to a point and the second
map consists of f and g on the two summands. However, for this to make sense we
must be talking about basepoint-preserving maps, and there is a problem with where
to choose the basepoint in SX . If x0 is a basepoint of X , the basepoint of SX should
be somewhere along the segment {x0}×I ⊂SX , most likely either an endpoint or the
midpoint, but no single choice of such a basepoint gives a well-deﬁned sum. The sum
would be well-deﬁned if we restricted attention to maps sending the whole segment
{x0}×I to the basepoint. This is equivalent to considering basepoint-preserving maps
ΣX→K where ΣX = SX/({x0}×I) and the image of {x0}×I in ΣX is taken to be
the basepoint. If X is a CW complex with x0 a 0 cell, the quotient map SX→ΣX
is a homotopy equivalence since it collapses a contractible subcomplex of SX to a
point, so we can identify ⟨SX, K⟩with ⟨ΣX, K⟩. The space ΣX is called the reduced
suspension of X when we want to distinguish it from the ordinary suspension SX .
It is easy to check that ⟨ΣX, K⟩is a group with respect to the sum deﬁned above,
inverses being obtained by reﬂecting the I coordinate in the suspension. However,
what we would really like to have is a group structure on ⟨X, K⟩arising from a special
structure on K rather than on X . This can be obtained using the following basic
observation:
Adjoint Relation.
⟨ΣX, K⟩= ⟨X, ΩK⟩where ΩK is the space of loops in K at its
chosen basepoint, and the constant loop is taken as the basepoint of ΩK .
The space ΩK , called the loopspace of K , is topologized as a subspace of the space KI
of all maps I→K , where KI is given the compact-open topology; see the Appendix for

Section 4.3.
Connections with Cohomology
395
the deﬁnition and basic properties of this topology. The adjoint relation ⟨ΣX, K⟩=
⟨X, ΩK⟩holds because basepoint-preserving maps ΣX→K are exactly the same as
basepoint-preserving maps X→ΩK , the correspondence being given by associating to
f : ΣX→K the family of loops obtained by restricting f to the images of the segments
{x}×I in ΣX .
Taking X = Sn in the adjoint relation, we see that πn+1(K) = πn(ΩK) for all
n ≥0. Thus passing from a space to its loopspace has the effect of shifting homotopy
groups down a dimension. For example, ΩK(G, n) is a K(G, n−1). This fact will turn
out to be important in what follows.
Note that the association X , ΩX is a functor: A basepoint-preserving map
f : X→Y induces a map Ωf : ΩX→ΩY by composition with f . A homotopy f ≃g
induces a homotopy Ωf ≃Ωg, so it follows formally that X ≃Y implies ΩX ≃ΩY .
It is a theorem of [Milnor 59] that the loopspace of a CW complex has the homo-
topy type of a CW complex. This may be a bit surprising since loopspaces are usually
quite large spaces, though of course CW complexes can be quite large too, in terms of
the number of cells. However, what often happens in practice is that if a CW complex
X has only ﬁnitely many cells in each dimension, then ΩX is homotopy equivalent
to a CW complex with the same property. We will see explicitly how this happens for
X = Sn in §4.I.
Composition of loops deﬁnes a map ΩK×ΩK→ΩK , and this gives a sum oper-
ation in ⟨X, ΩK⟩by setting (f + g)(x) = f (x) g(x), the composition of the loops
f(x) and g(x). Under the adjoint relation this is the same as the sum in ⟨ΣX, K⟩
deﬁned previously. If we take the composition of loops as the sum operation then it
is perhaps somewhat easier to see that ⟨X, ΩK⟩is a group since the same reasoning
which shows that π1(K) is a group can be applied.
Since cohomology groups are abelian, we would like the group ⟨X, ΩK⟩to be
abelian. This can be achieved by iterating the operation of forming loopspaces. One
has a double loopspace Ω2K = Ω(ΩK) and inductively an n fold loopspace ΩnK =
Ω(Ωn−1K). The evident bijection KY ×Z ≈(KY )Z is a homeomorphism for locally
compact Hausdorff spaces Y and Z , as shown in Proposition A.16 in the Appendix,
and from this it follows by induction that ΩnK can be regarded as the space of maps
In→K sending ∂In to the basepoint. Taking n = 2, we see that the argument that
π2(K) is abelian shows more generally that ⟨X, Ω2K⟩is an abelian group. Iterating
the adjoint relation gives ⟨ΣnX, K⟩= ⟨X, ΩnK⟩, so this is an abelian group for all
n ≥2.
Thus for a sequence of spaces Kn to deﬁne a cohomology theory hn(X) = ⟨X, Kn⟩
we have been led to the assumption that each Kn should be a loopspace and in fact
a double loopspace. Actually we do not need Kn to be literally a loopspace since it
would sufﬁce for it to be homotopy equivalent to a loopspace, as ⟨X, Kn⟩depends
only on the homotopy type of Kn . In fact it would sufﬁce to have just a weak homo-

396
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
topy equivalence Kn→ΩLn for some space Ln since this would induce a bijection
⟨X, Kn⟩= ⟨X, ΩLn⟩by Proposition 4.21. In the special case that Kn = K(G, n) for all
n, we can take Ln = Kn+1 = K(G, n + 1) by the earlier observation that ΩK(G, n + 1)
is a K(G, n). Thus if we take the K(G, n)’s to be CW complexes, the map Kn→ΩKn+1
is just a CW approximation K(G, n)→ΩK(G, n + 1).
There is another reason why we should look for weak homotopy equivalences
Kn→ΩKn+1 .
For a reduced cohomology theory hn(X) there are natural isomor-
phisms hn(X) ≈hn+1(ΣX) coming from the long exact sequence of the pair (CX, X)
with CX the cone on X , so if we have hn(X) = ⟨X, Kn⟩for all n then the iso-
morphism hn(X) ≈hn+1(ΣX) translates into a bijection ⟨X, Kn⟩≈⟨ΣX, Kn+1⟩=
⟨X, ΩKn+1⟩and the most natural thing would be for this to come from a weak equiv-
alence Kn→ΩKn+1 . Note also that weak equivalences of this form would give also
weak equivalences Kn→ΩKn+1→Ω2Kn+2 and so we would automatically obtain an
abelian group structure on ⟨X, Kn⟩≈⟨X, Ω2Kn+2⟩.
These observations lead to the following deﬁnition. An Ωspectrum is a sequence
of CW complexes K1, K2, ··· together with weak homotopy equivalences Kn→ΩKn+1
for all n. By using the theorem of Milnor mentioned above it would be possible to
replace ‘weak homotopy equivalence’ by ‘homotopy equivalence’ in this deﬁnition.
However it does not noticeably simplify matters to do this, except perhaps psycho-
logically.
Notice that if we discard a ﬁnite number of spaces Kn from the beginning of
an Ωspectrum K1, K2, ···, then these omitted terms can be reconstructed from the
remaining Kn ’s since each Kn determines Kn−1 as a CW approximation to ΩKn . So
it is not important that the sequence start with K1 . By the same token, this allows us
to extend the sequence of Kn ’s to all negative values of n. This is signiﬁcant because
a general cohomology theory hn(X) need not vanish for negative n.
Theorem 4.57. For an Ωspectrum {Kn}, the functors X , hn(X) = ⟨X, Kn⟩, n ∈
Z, deﬁne a reduced cohomology theory on the category of basepointed CW complexes
and basepoint-preserving maps.
Rather amazingly, the converse is also true: Every reduced cohomology theory
on CW complexes arises from an Ωspectrum in this way. This is the Brown Repre-
sentability Theorem which will be proved in §4.E.
A space Kn in an Ωspectrum is sometimes called an inﬁnite loopspace since
there are weak homotopy equivalences Kn→ΩKn+1→Ω2Kn+2→···. A number of
important spaces in algebraic topology turn out to be inﬁnite loopspaces. Besides
Eilenberg-MacLane spaces, two other examples are the inﬁnite-dimensional orthogo-
nal and unitary groups O and U , for which there are weak homotopy equivalences
O→Ω8O and U→Ω2U by a strong form of the Bott periodicity theorem, as we will
show in [VBKT]. So O and U give periodic Ωspectra, hence periodic cohomology the-

Section 4.3.
Connections with Cohomology
397
ories known as real and complex K–theory. For a more in-depth introduction to the
theory of inﬁnite loopspaces, the book [Adams 78] can be much recommended.
Proof: Two of the three axioms for a cohomology theory, the homotopy axiom and
the wedge sum axiom, are quite easy to check. For the homotopy axiom, a basepoint-
preserving map f : X→Y induces f ∗: ⟨Y, Kn⟩→⟨X, Kn⟩by composition, (Y→Kn),
(X→Y→Kn). Clearly f ∗depends only on the basepoint-preserving homotopy class
of f , and it is obvious that f ∗is a homomorphism if we replace Kn by ΩKn+1 and
use the composition of loops to deﬁne the group structure. The wedge sum axiom
holds since in the realm of basepoint-preserving maps, a map
W
α Xα→Kn is the same
as a collection of maps Xα→Kn .
The bulk of the proof then involves associating a long exact sequence to a CW
pair (X, A). As a ﬁrst step we build the following diagram:
A
A
CA
X
X
X
>
A
SA
SX
A
X
>
>
>
>
∪
CA
CX
X ∪
∪
(
)
CA
CX
C
X ∪
∪
∪
((
)
CA
X ∪
(
)
)
==
==
X/
−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
≃
≃
≃
⊂
( )
1
The ﬁrst row is obtained from the inclusion A > X by iterating the rule, ‘attach a
cone on the preceding subspace,’ as shown in the pictures above this row. The three
downward arrows are quotient maps collapsing the most recently attached cone to a
point. Since cones are contractible, these downward maps are homotopy equivalences.
The second and third of them have homotopy inverses the evident inclusion maps,
indicated by the upward arrows. In the lower row of the diagram the maps are the
obvious ones, except for the map X/A→SX which is the composition of a homotopy
inverse of the quotient map X∪CA→X/A followed by the maps X∪CA→(X∪CA)∪
CX→SA. Thus the square containing this map commutes up to homotopy. It is easy
to check that the same is true of the right-hand square as well.
The whole construction can now be repeated with SA> SX in place of A> X ,
then with double suspensions, etc. The resulting inﬁnite sequence can be written in
either of the following two forms:
A→X→X ∪CA→SA→SX→S(X ∪CA)→S2A→S2X→···
A→X→X/A→SA→SX→SX/SA→S2A→S2X→···
In the ﬁrst version we use the obvious equality SX ∪CSA = S(X ∪CA). The ﬁrst
version has the advantage that the map X∪CA→SA is easily described and canonical,
whereas in the second version the corresponding map X/A→SA is only deﬁned up
to homotopy since it depends on choosing a homotopy inverse to the quotient map
X ∪CA→X/A. The second version does have the advantage of conciseness, however.

398
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
When basepoints are important it is generally more convenient to use reduced
cones and reduced suspensions, obtained from ordinary cones and suspensions by
collapsing the segment {x0}×I where x0 is the basepoint. The image point of this
segment in the reduced cone or suspension then serves as a natural basepoint in the
quotient. Assuming x0 is a 0 cell, these collapses of {x0}×I are homotopy equiva-
lences. Using reduced cones and suspensions in the preceding construction yields a
sequence
(2)
A > X→X/A→ΣA > ΣX→Σ(X/A)→Σ2A > Σ2X→···
where we identify ΣX/ΣA with Σ(X/A), and all the later maps in the sequence are sus-
pensions of the ﬁrst three maps. This sequence, or its unreduced version, is called the
coﬁbration sequence or Puppe sequence of the pair (X, A). It has an evident natu-
rality property, namely, a map (X, A)→(Y, B) induces a map between the coﬁbration
sequences of these two pairs, with homotopy-commutative squares:
B
ΣB
B
Y
Y/
B
B
Y/
−−−→
−−−→
Σ
−−−→
−−−→
ΣY
−−−→
Σ
−−−→
−−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
(
)
2
...
A
ΣA
A
X
X/
A
A
X/
−−−→
−−−→
Σ
−−−→
−−−→
ΣX
−−−→
Σ
−−−→
−−−→
(
)
2
...
Taking basepoint-preserving homotopy classes of maps from the spaces in (2) to
a ﬁxed space K gives a sequence
(3)
⟨A, K⟩←⟨X, K⟩←⟨X/A, K⟩←⟨ΣA, K⟩←⟨ΣX, K⟩←···
whose maps are deﬁned by composition with those in (2), e.g., ⟨X, K⟩→⟨A, K⟩sends
a map X→K to A→X→K . The sets in (3) are groups starting with ⟨ΣA, K⟩, and
abelian groups from ⟨Σ2A, K⟩onward. It is easy to see that the maps between these
groups are homomorphisms since the maps in (2) are suspensions from ΣA→ΣX
onward. In general the ﬁrst three terms of (3) are only sets with distinguished ‘zero’
elements, the constant maps.
A key observation is that the sequence (3) is exact. To see this, note ﬁrst that the
diagram (1) shows that, up to homotopy equivalence, each term in (2) is obtained from
its two predecessors by the same procedure of forming a mapping cone, so it sufﬁces
to show that ⟨A, K⟩←⟨X, K⟩←⟨X ∪CA, K⟩is exact. A map f : X→K goes to zero in
⟨A, K⟩iff its restriction to A is nullhomotopic, ﬁxing basepoint. This is equivalent to
f extending to a map X ∪CA→K .
If we have a weak homotopy equivalence K→ΩL for some space L, then the
sequence (3) can then be continued three steps to the left via a commutative diagram:
−−→
−−→
−−→
A
X/
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
A
X/
Σ(
)
...
A K
⟨
,
′⟩
X K
⟨
,
′⟩
K
⟨
,
′⟩
ΣA K
⟨
,
′⟩
−−→
ΣX K
⟨
,
′⟩
K
⟨
,
′⟩
−−→
−−→
A
X/
...
A ΩK
⟨
,
′⟩
X ΩK
⟨
,
′⟩
−−→
ΩK
⟨
,
′⟩
−−→
−−→
A
X/
...
A K
⟨
,
⟩
−−→
X K
⟨
,
⟩
K
⟨
,
⟩
≈
≈
≈
−−→
−−→
−−→
≈
≈
≈

Section 4.3.
Connections with Cohomology
399
Thus if we have a sequence of spaces Kn together with weak homotopy equivalences
Kn→ΩKn+1 , we can extend the sequence (3) to the left indeﬁnitely, producing a long
exact sequence
(4)
···←⟨A, Kn⟩←⟨X, Kn⟩←⟨X/A, Kn⟩←⟨A, Kn−1⟩←⟨X, Kn−1⟩←···
All the terms here are abelian groups and the maps homomorphisms. Furthermore,
this long exact sequence is natural with respect to maps (X, A)→(Y, B) since coﬁbra-
tion sequences are natural.
⊔⊓
There is no essential difference between cohomology theories on basepointed
CW complexes and cohomology theories on nonbasepointed CW complexes. Given a
reduced basepointed cohomology theory eh∗, one gets an unreduced theory by setting
hn(X, A) = ehn(X/A), where X/∅= X+ , the union of X with a disjoint basepoint.
This is a nonbasepointed theory since an arbitrary map X→Y induces a basepoint-
preserving map X+→Y+ . Furthermore, a nonbasepointed unreduced theory h∗gives
a nonbasepointed reduced theory by setting ehn(X) = Coker
 hn(pt)→hn(X)

, where
the map is induced by the constant map X→pt . One could also give an argument
using suspension, which is always an isomorphism for reduced theories, and which
takes one from the nonbasepointed to the basepointed category.
Theorem 4.58. If h∗is an unreduced cohomology theory on the category of CW
pairs and hn(point) = 0 for n ≠0, then there are natural isomorphisms hn(X, A) ≈
Hn X, A; h0(point)

for all CW pairs (X, A) and all n. The same is true for homology
theories.
Proof: The cases of homology and cohomology are for the most part quite similar, so
for the sake of deﬁniteness let us ﬁrst consider homology. For CW complexes, relative
homology groups reduce to absolute groups, so it sufﬁces to deal with the latter. For
a CW complex X we can deﬁne cellular homology groups in the h∗theory just as for
ordinary homology, via the chain complex
···→hn(Xn, Xn−1)
dn-----→hn−1(Xn−1, Xn−2)→···
Just as for ordinary homology, the homology groups of this chain complex are iso-
morphic to the groups hn(X). The main thing to verify now is that this cellular chain
complex in the h∗theory is isomorphic to the cellular chain complex in ordinary
homology with coefﬁcients in the group G = h0(point). Certainly the cellular chain
groups in the two cases are isomorphic, being direct sums of copies of G with one
copy for each cell, so one only has to check that the cellular boundary maps are the
same. The calculation of cellular boundary maps dn in terms of degrees of certain
maps between spheres when n > 1 works equally well for the homology theory h∗,
where ‘degree’ now means degree with respect to the h∗theory, so what is needed is
the fact that a map Sn→Sn of degree m in the usual sense induces multiplication

400
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
by m on hn(Sn) ≈G. This is obviously true for degrees 0 and 1, represented by a
constant map and the identity map. Since πn(Sn) ≈Z, every map Sn→Sn is homo-
topic to some multiple of the identity, so the general case will follow if we know that
degree in the h∗theory is additive with respect to the sum operation in πn(Sn). This
is a special case of the following more general assertion:
Lemma 4.59. If a functor h from basepointed CW complexes to abelian groups sat-
isﬁes the homotopy and wedge axioms, then for any two basepoint-preserving maps
f , g : ΣX→K , we have (f +g)∗= f∗+g∗if h is covariant, and (f +g)∗= f ∗+g∗
if h is contravariant.
Proof: The map f + g is the composition ΣX
c-----→ΣX ∨ΣX
f∨g
------------------→K where c is the
quotient map collapsing an equatorial copy of X . In the covariant case consider the
diagram
ΣX
h(
)
ΣX
h(
)
ΣX
h(
)
K
h(
)
ΣX
ΣX
h(
(
)
)
∨
∨
−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−→
⊕
⊕
∗
∗
∗
c
f
g
i1
∗
i2
≈
where i1, i2 : ΣX > ΣX ∨ΣX are the inclusions. Let q1, q2 : ΣX ∨ΣX -→ΣX be the
quotient maps restricting to the identity on the summand indicated by the subscript
and collapsing the other summand to a point. Then q1∗⊕q2∗is an inverse to i1∗⊕i2∗
since qjik is the identity map for j = k and the constant map for j ≠k.
An element x in the left-hand group h(ΣX) in the diagram is sent by the compo-
sition (q1∗⊕q2∗)c∗to the element (x, x) in the lower group h(ΣX)⊕h(ΣX) since
q1c and q2c are homotopic to the identity. The composition (f ∨g)∗(i1∗⊕i2∗) sends
(x, 0) to f∗(x) and (0, y) to g∗(y) since (f ∨g)i1 = f and (f ∨g)i2 = g. Hence
(x, y) is sent to f∗(x) + g∗(y). Combining these facts, we see that the composition
across the top of the diagram is x , f∗(x) + g∗(x). But this composition is also
(f + g)∗since f + g = (f ∨g)c . This ﬁnishes the proof in the covariant case.
The contravariant case is very similar, using the corresponding diagram with ar-
rows reversed. The inverse of i∗
1 ⊕i∗
2 is q∗
1 ⊕q∗
2 by the same reasoning. An element
u in the right-hand group h(K) maps to the element (f ∗(u), g∗(u)) in the lower
group h(ΣX)⊕h(ΣX) since (f ∨g)i1 = f and (f ∨g)i2 = g. An element (x, 0) in
the lower group in the diagram maps to the element x in the left-hand group since
q1c is homotopic to the identity, and similarly (0, y) maps to y , hence (x, y) maps
to x +y in the left-hand group. We conclude that u ∈h(K) maps by the composition
across the top of the diagram to f ∗(u) + g∗(u) in h(ΣX). But this composition is
(f + g)∗by deﬁnition.
⊔⊓
It is not really necessary to treat the cellular boundary map d1 from 1 chains
to 0 chains since one can always pass from X to ΣX , suspension being a natural

Section 4.3.
Connections with Cohomology
401
isomorphism in any homology theory, and for the reduced suspension ΣX the cellular
boundary map d1 is trivial since ΣX has only one 0 cell.
Since the cellular chain complexes for h∗(X) and H∗(X; G) are isomorphic, we
obtain isomorphisms hn(X) ≈Hn(X; G) for all n. To see that these isomorphisms
are natural with respect to maps f : X→Y we may ﬁrst deform such a map f to be
cellular. Then f takes each pair (Xn, Xn−1) to the pair (Y n, Y n−1), hence f induces
a chain map of cellular chain complexes in the h∗theory, as well as for H∗(−; G). To
compute these chain maps we may pass to the quotient maps Xn/Xn−1→Y n/Y n−1 .
These are maps of the form
W
α Sn
α→
W
β Sn
β , so the induced maps f∗on hn are de-
termined by their component maps f∗: Sn
α→Sn
β . This is exactly the same situation
as with the cellular boundary maps before, where we saw that the degree of a map
Sn→Sn determines the induced map on hn . We conclude that the cellular chain
map induced by f in the h∗theory agrees exactly with the cellular chain map for
H∗(−; G). This implies that the isomorphism between the two theories is natural.
The situation for cohomology is quite similar, but there is one point in the ar-
gument where a few more words are needed. For cohomology theories the cellular
cochain groups are the direct product, rather than the direct sum, of copies of the
coefﬁcient group G = h0(point), with one copy per cell. This means that when there
are inﬁnitely many cells in a given dimension, it is not automatically true that the
cellular coboundary maps are uniquely determined by how they map factors of one
direct product to factors of the other direct product. To be precise, consider the cel-
lular coboundary map dn : hn(Xn, Xn−1)→hn+1(Xn+1, Xn). Decomposing the latter
group as a product of copies of G for the (n + 1) cells, we see that dn is determined
by the maps hn(Xn/Xn−1)→hn(Sn
α) associated to the attaching maps ϕα of the cells
en+1
α
. The thing to observe is that since ϕα has compact image, meeting only ﬁnitely
many n cells, this map hn(Xn/Xn−1)→hn(Sn
α) is ﬁnitely-supported in the sense that
there is a splitting of the domain into a product of ﬁnitely many factors and a product
of the remaining possibly inﬁnite number of factors, such that the map is zero on the
latter product. Finitely-supported maps have the good property that they are deter-
mined by their restrictions to the G factors of hn(Xn/Xn−1). From this we deduce,
using the lemma, that the cellular coboundary maps in the h∗theory agree with those
in ordinary cohomology with G coefﬁcients. This extra argument is also needed to
prove naturality of the isomorphisms hn(X) ≈Hn(X; G).
⊔⊓
Proof of Theorem 4.56: The functors hn(X) = ⟨X, K(G, n)⟩deﬁne a reduced co-
homology theory, and the coefﬁcient groups hn(Si) = πi(K(G, n)) are the same as
eHn(Si; G), so Theorem 4.58, translated into reduced cohomology, gives natural iso-
morphisms T : ⟨X, K(G, n)⟩→eHn(X; G) for all CW complexes X .
It remains to see that T([f ]) = f ∗(α) for some α ∈eHn(K(G, n); G), independent
of f . This is purely formal: Take α = T(11) for 11 the identity map of K(G, n), and

402
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
then naturality gives T([f ]) = T(f ∗(11)) = f ∗T(11) = f ∗(α), where the ﬁrst f ∗here
refers to induced homomorphisms for the functor hn , which means composition with
f .
⊔⊓
The fundamental class α = T(11) can be made more explicit if we choose for
K(G, n) a CW complex K with (n −1) skeleton a point. Denoting ⟨X, K(G, n)⟩by
hn(X), then we have
hn(K) ≈hn(Kn+1) ≈Ker d : hn(Kn)→hn+1(Kn+1, Kn)
The map d is the cellular coboundary in h∗cohomology since we have hn(Kn) =
hn(Kn, Kn−1), as Kn−1 is a point and h∗is a reduced theory.
The isomorphism
of hn(K) with Ker d is given by restriction of maps K→K to Kn , so the element
11 ∈hn(K) which deﬁnes the fundamental class T(11) corresponds to the inclusion
Kn>K , viewed as an element of hn(Kn). As a cellular cocycle this element assigns to
each n cell of K the element of the coefﬁcient group G = πn(K) given by the inclusion
of the closure of this cell into K . This means that the fundamental class α ∈Hn(K; G)
is represented by the cellular cocycle assigning to each n cell the element of πn(K)
given by a characteristic map for the cell.
By naturality of T it follows that for a cellular map f : X→K , the corresponding
element of Hn(X; G) is represented by the cellular cocycle sending each n cell of X to
the element of G = πn(K) represented by the composition of f with a characteristic
map for the cell.
The natural isomorphism Hn(X; G) ≈⟨X, K(G, n)⟩leads to a basic principle
which reappears a number of times in algebraic topology, the idea that the occurence
or nonoccurence of a certain phenomenon is governed by what happens in a single
special case, the universal example. To illustrate, let us prove the following special
fact:
(∗)
For all spaces X the map H1(X; Z)→H2(X; Z), α , α2 , is identically zero.
By taking a CW approximation to X we are reduced to the case that X is a CW complex.
Then every element of H1(X; Z) has the form f ∗(α) for some f : X→K(Z, 1), with α
a fundamental class in H1(K(Z, 1); Z), further reducing us to verifying the result for
this single α, the ‘universal example.’ For this α we have α2 = 0 since S1 is a K(Z, 1)
and H2(S1; Z) = 0.
Does (∗) generalize? It certainly does not hold if we replace the coefﬁcient ring Z
by Z2 since H∗(RP∞; Z2) = Z2[x]. Indeed, the example of RP∞shows more generally
that the fundamental class α ∈Hn(K(Z2, n); Z2) generates a polynomial subalgebra
Z2[α] ⊂H∗(K(Z2, n); Z2) for each n ≥1, since there is a map f : RP∞→K(Z2, n)
with f ∗(α) = xn and all the powers of xn are nonzero, hence also all the powers
of α. By the same reasoning, the example of CP∞shows that the fundamental class

Section 4.3.
Connections with Cohomology
403
α ∈H2n(K(Z, 2n); Z) generates a polynomial subalgebra Z[α] in H∗(K(Z, 2n); Z).
As we shall see in [SSAT], H∗(K(Z, 2n); Z)/torsion is exactly this polynomial algebra
Z[α].
A little more subtle is the question of identifying the subalgebra of H∗(K(Z, n); Z)
generated by the fundamental class α for odd n ≥3. By the commutativity prop-
erty of cup products we know that α2 is either zero or of order two. To see that
α2 is nonzero it sufﬁces to ﬁnd a single space X with an element γ ∈Hn(X; Z)
such that γ2 ≠0. The ﬁrst place to look might be RP∞, but its cohomology with Z
coefﬁcients is concentrated in even dimensions. Instead, consider X = RP∞×RP∞.
This has Z2 cohomology Z2[x, y] and Example 3E.5 shows that its Z cohomology
is the Z2[x2, y2] submodule generated by 1 and x2y + xy2 , except in dimension
zero of course, where 1 generates a Z rather than a Z2 . In particular we can take
z = x2k(x2y + xy2) for any k ≥0, and then all powers zm are nonzero since we are
inside the polynomial ring Z2[x, y]. It follows that the subalgebra of H∗(K(Z, n); Z)
generated by α is Z[α]/(2α2) for odd n ≥3.
These examples lead one to wonder just how complicated the cohomology of
K(G, n)’s is. If one works directly from the general construction of a K(G, n) one
doesn’t get very far. Consider the case G = Z for example. Here one would start with
Sn and attach (n+2) cells to kill πn+1(Sn). Since πn+1(Sn) happens to be cyclic, only
one (n + 2) cell is needed. To continue, one would have to compute generators for
πn+2 of the resulting space Sn ∪en+2 , use these to attach (n+3) cells, then compute
the resulting πn+3 , etc. When n = 2 this procedure happens to work out very neatly,
and the resulting K(Z, 2) is CP∞with its usual CW structure having one cell in each
even dimension, according to an exercise at the end of the section. However, for larger
n it quickly becomes impractical to make this procedure explicit since homotopy
groups are so hard to compute. One can get some idea of the difﬁculties of the next
case n = 3 by considering the homology groups of K(Z, 3).
Using techniques in
[SSAT], the groups Hi(K(Z, 3); Z) for 0 ≤i ≤12 can be computed to be:
Z, 0, 0, Z, 0, Z2, 0, Z3, Z2, Z2, Z3, Z10, Z2
To get this sequence of homology groups would require quite a few cells, and the
situation only gets worse in higher dimensions, where the homology groups are not
always cyclic.
Indeed, one might guess that computing the homology groups of K(Z, n)’s would
be of the same order of difﬁculty as computing the homotopy groups of spheres, but
by some miracle this is not the case. The calculations are indeed complicated, but
they were completely done by Serre and Cartan in the 1950’s, not just for K(Z, n)’s,
but for all K(G, n)’s with G ﬁnitely generated abelian. For example, H∗(K(Z, 3); Z2)
is the polynomial algebra Z2[x3, x5, x9, x17, x33, ···] with generators of dimensions
2i + 1, indicated by the subscripts. And in general, for G ﬁnitely generated abelian,

404
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
H∗(K(G, n); Zp) is a polynomial algebra on generators of speciﬁed dimensions if p
is 2, while for p an odd prime one gets the tensor product of a polynomial ring
on generators of speciﬁed even dimensions and an exterior algebra on generators of
speciﬁed odd dimensions. With Z coefﬁcients the description of the cohomology is
not nearly so neat, however. We will study these questions in some detail in [SSAT].
There is a good reason for being interested in the cohomology of K(G, n)’s, aris-
ing from the equivalence Hn(X; G) ≈⟨X, K(G, n)⟩. Taking Z coefﬁcients for simplic-
ity, an element of Hm(K(Z, n); Z) corresponds to a map θ : K(Z, n)→K(Z, m). We
can compose θ with any map f : X→K(Z, n) to get a map θf : X→K(Z, m). Letting
f vary and keeping θ ﬁxed, this gives a function Hn(X; Z)→Hm(X; Z), depending
only on θ. This is the idea of cohomology operations , which we study in more detail
in §4.L.
The equivalence Hn(X; G) ≈⟨X, K(G, n)⟩also leads to a new viewpoint toward
cup products. Taking G to be a ring R, and setting Kn = K(R, n), then if we are given
maps f : X→Km and g : Y→Kn we can deﬁne the cross product of the corresponding
cohomology classes as the composition
X×Y
f ×g
------------→Km×Kn -→Km ∧Kn
µ-----→Km+n
where the middle map is the quotient map and µ can be deﬁned in the following
way. The space Km ∧Kn is (m + n −1) connected, so by the Hurewicz theorem and
the K¨unneth formula for reduced homology we have isomorphisms πm+n(Km∧Kn) ≈
Hm+n(Km∧Kn) ≈Hm(Km)⊗Hn(Kn) ≈R⊗R. There is then a map µ : Km∧Kn→Km+n
inducing the multiplication map R⊗R→R on πm+n , which can be constructed di-
rectly using Lemma 4.30. Alternatively, we can use the isomorphism Hm+n(Km ∧
Kn; R) ≈Hom(Hm+n(Km ∧Kn), R) and let µ be the map corresponding to the coho-
mology class given by the multiplication homomorphism R⊗R→R.
The case R = Z is particularly simple since we can take Km to have Sm as its (m+
1) skeleton, and similarly for Kn , so Km ∧Kn has Sm ∧Sn as its (m+n+1) skeleton
and we can obtain µ by extending the inclusion Sm ∧Sn = Sm+n > Km+n .
It is not hard to prove the basic properties of cup product using this deﬁnition,
and in particular the commutativity property becomes somewhat more transparent
from this viewpoint. For example, when R = Z, commutativity just comes down to
the fact that the map Sm ∧Sn→Sn ∧Sm switching the factors has degree (−1)mn
when regarded as a map of Sm+n .
Fibrations
Recall from §4.2 that a ﬁbration is a map p : E→B having the homotopy lifting
property with respect to all spaces. In a ﬁber bundle all the ﬁbers are homeomorphic
by deﬁnition. For ﬁbrations there is a weaker result:

Section 4.3.
Connections with Cohomology
405
Proposition 4.60. For a ﬁbration p : E→B , the ﬁbers Fb = p−1(b) over each path
component of B are all homotopy equivalent.
Proof: A path γ : I→B can be viewed as a homotopy of the projection Fγ(0)→B , with
Fγ(0) mapping to the point γ(t) at time t . The homotopy lifting property then gives
a homotopy Lγ,t : Fγ(0)→Fγ(t) ⊂E starting with Lγ,0 the identity map of Fγ(0) and
ending with a map Lγ = Lγ,1 : Fγ(0)→Fγ(1). The association γ , Lγ has the following
basic properties:
(a) If γ ≃γ′ rel ∂I , then Lγ ≃Lγ‘ . In particular the homotopy class of Lγ is inde-
pendent of the choice of lifting.
(b) For a composition γη of paths, the composition LηLγ can be chosen for Lγη .
To see the ﬁrst of these, suppose γ(s, t) is a homotopy from γ(t) to γ′(t), (s, t) ∈
I×I , and we are given lifts Lγ,t and Lγ‘,t .
Deﬁne Lγ,s,t:Fγ(0)→Fγ(s,t) for (s, t) ∈
I×{0} ∪∂I×I , by Lγ,0,t = Lγ,t , Lγ,1,t = Lγ‘,t , and Lγ,s,0 = 11. The homotopy lifting
property allows us to extend Lγ,s,t to be deﬁned for all (s, t) ∈I×I since the pair
(I×I, I×{0} ∪∂I×I) is homeomorphic to the pair (I×I, I×{0}). The resulting Lγ,s,1
is a homotopy from Lγ to Lγ‘ , verifying (a). Property (b) holds since we can let Lγη,t
be Lγ,2t for 0 ≤t ≤1/2 and Lη,2t−1Lγ for 1/2 ≤t ≤1.
From (a) and (b) it follows that Lγ is a homotopy equivalence with homotopy
inverse Lγ , where γ is the inverse path of γ .
⊔⊓
There is a simple but extremely useful way to turn arbitrary mappings into ﬁ-
brations. Given a map f : A→B , let Ef be the space of pairs (a, γ) where a ∈A
and γ : I→B is a path in B with γ(0) = f (a). We topologize Ef as a subspace of
A×BI , where BI is the space of mappings I→B with the compact-open topology; see
the Appendix for the deﬁnition and basic properties of this topology, in particular
Proposition A.14 which we will be using shortly.
Proposition 4.61. For Ef = { (a, γ) ∈A×BI | γ(0) = f (a) } associated to f : A→B ,
the map p : Ef→B , p(a, γ) = γ(1), is a ﬁbration.
Proof: Continuity of p follows from (a) of Proposition A.14 in the Appendix which
says that the evaluation map BI ×I→B , (γ, s) , γ(s), is continuous, hence also its
restriction to BI ×{1}.
Let a homotopy gt : X→B and a lift eg0 : X→Ef of g0 be given. Write eg0(x) =
(h(x), γx) for h : X→A and γx : I→B . Deﬁne a lift egt : X→Ef by egt(x) = (h(x), γx
g[0,t](x)), the second coordinate being the path γx followed by the path traced out
by gs(x) for 0 ≤s ≤t . This composition of paths is deﬁned since g0(x) = γx(1).
Continuity of egt as a map X×I→Ef ⊂A×BI follows from (b) of Proposition A.14 in
the Appendix which implies that continuity of a map X×I→A×BI is equivalent to
continuity of the associated map X×I×I→A×B .
⊔⊓

406
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
For a map f : A→B , we can regard A as the subspace of Ef consisting of pairs
(a, γ) with γ the constant path at f (a), and Ef deformation retracts onto this sub-
space by restricting all the paths γ to shorter and shorter initial segments. Thus an
arbitrary map f : A→B factors as A>Ef→B , the composition of a homotopy equiv-
alence and a ﬁbration. The ﬁber Ff of Ef→B is called the homotopy ﬁber of f . It
consists of all pairs (a, γ) with a ∈A and γ a path in B from f (a) to a basepoint
b0 ∈B .
If f : A→B is the inclusion of a subspace, then Ef is the space of paths in B
starting at points of A. In this case a map (Ii+1, ∂Ii+1, Ji)→(B, A, x0) is the same as
a map (Ii, ∂Ii)→(Ff , γ0) where γ0 is the constant path at x0 and Ff is the ﬁber of
Ef over x0 . This means that πi+1(B, A, x0) can be identiﬁed with πi(Ff , γ0), hence
the long exact sequences of homotopy groups of the pair (B, A) and of the ﬁbration
Ef→B can be identiﬁed.
An important special case is when f is the inclusion of the basepoint b0 into
B . Then Ef is the space PB of paths in B starting at b0 , and p : PB→B sends each
path to its endpoint. The ﬁber p−1(b0) is the loopspaceΩB consisting of all loops in B
based at b0 . Since PB is contractible by progressively truncating paths, the long exact
sequence of homotopy groups for the path ﬁbration PB→B yields another proof that
πn(X, x0) ≈πn−1(ΩX, x0) for all n.
As we mentioned in the discussion of loopspaces earlier in this section, it is a
theorem of [Milnor 59] that the loopspace of a CW complex is homotopy equivalent
to a CW complex. More generally, this paper proves that the homotopy ﬁber of an
arbitrary map between CW complexes has the homotopy type of a CW complex. One
can usually avoid quoting these results by using CW approximations, though it is
reassuring to know they are available if needed, or if one doesn’t want to bother with
CW approximations.
We have seen that loopspaces occur as ﬁbers of ﬁbrations PB→B with con-
tractible total space PB . Conversely:
Proposition 4.62. If F→E→B is a ﬁbration or ﬁber bundle with E contractible,
then there is a weak homotopy equivalence F→ΩB .
Proof: If we compose a contraction of E with the projection p : E→B then we have
for each point x ∈E a path in B from p(x) to a basepoint. This yields a map E→Ep
whose composition with the usual map Ep→B is p. By restriction this gives a map
F→ΩB , and the long exact sequence of homotopy groups for F→E→B maps to the
long exact sequence for ΩB→Ep→B . Since E and Ep are contractible, the ﬁve-lemma
implies that the map F→ΩB is a weak homotopy equivalence.
⊔⊓
Examples arising from ﬁber bundles constructed earlier in this section are O(n) ≃
ΩGn(R∞), U(n) ≃ΩGn(C∞), and Sp(n) ≃ΩGn(H∞). In particular, taking n = 1
in the latter two examples, we have S1 ≃ΩCP∞again and also S3 ≃ΩHP∞. Note

Section 4.3.
Connections with Cohomology
407
that in each of these examples it is a topological group which is homotopy equivalent
to a loopspace. In [Milnor 56] this is shown to hold in general: For each topological
group G there is a ﬁber bundle G→EG→BG with EG contractible, hence by the
proposition there is a weak equivalence G ≃ΩBG. There is also a converse statement:
The loopspace of a CW complex is homotopy equivalent to a topological group.
The relationship between X and ΩX has been much studied, particularly the case
that ΩX has the homotopy type of a ﬁnite CW complex, which is of special interest
because of the examples of the classical Lie groups such as O(n), U(n), and Sp(n).
See [Kane] for an introduction to this subject.
Let us return now to the general discussion of pathspace ﬁbrations. If the ﬁbration
construction f , Ef is applied to a map p : E→B which is already a ﬁbration, one
might expect the resulting ﬁbration Ep→B to be in some way equivalent to the original
E→B . The natural notion of equivalence for ﬁbrations is deﬁned as follows. Given
ﬁbrations p1 : E1→B and p2 : E2→B , a map f : E1→E2 is called ﬁber-preserving if
p1 = p2f , or in other words, f (p−1
1 (b)) ⊂p−1
2 (b) for all b ∈B . A ﬁber-preserving
map f : E1→E2 is a ﬁber homotopy equivalence if there is a ﬁber-preserving map
g : E2→E1 such that both compositions f g and gf are homotopic to the identity
through ﬁber-preserving maps. Thus a ﬁber homotopy equivalence can be thought of
as a family of homotopy equivalences between corresponding ﬁbers of E1 and E2 .
Proposition 4.63. If p : E→B is a ﬁbration, then the inclusion E > Ep is a ﬁber
homotopy equivalence. In particular, the homotopy ﬁber of p is homotopy equivalent
to the actual ﬁber p−1(b0).
Proof: We apply the homotopy lifting property to the homotopy gt : Ep→B , gt(e, γ) =
γ(t), with initial lift eg0 : Ep→E , eg0(e, γ) = e. The lifting egt : Ep→E is then the ﬁrst
coordinate of a homotopy ht : Ep→Ep whose second coordinate is the restriction of
the paths γ to the interval [t, 1]. Since the endpoints of the paths γ are unchanged,
ht is ﬁber-preserving. We have h0 = 11, h1(Ep) ⊂E , and ht(E) ⊂E for all t . If we let
i denote the inclusion E > Ep , then ih1 ≃11 via ht and h1i ≃11 via ht ||E , so i is a
ﬁber homotopy equivalence.
⊔⊓
The process of turning maps into ﬁbrations can be iterated in the following way.
Given a ﬁbration p : E→B with ﬁber F = p−1(b0), we construct a diagram of the
following form:
−−−−−→
E
F
−−−−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−−→
F
−−−−−→
F
B
B
Ω
E
Ω
p
Ωp
i
j
p
i
−−−−−→
−−−−−→Fj
...
...
≃
≃
≃
The homotopy ﬁber Fp of p consists of pairs (e, γ) with e ∈E and γ a path in B
from p(e) to b0 , and the map i is the projection (e, γ),e. The inclusion F>Fp is a

408
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
homotopy equivalence by the preceding proposition. The map i : Fp→E is evidently a
ﬁbration, and its ﬁber over a basepoint e0 ∈F can be identiﬁed with ΩB . Its homotopy
ﬁber Fi consists of pairs (γ, η) where η is a path in E ending at e0 and γ is a path in
B from p(η(0)) to b0 . The inclusion of the actual ﬁber ΩB into the homotopy ﬁber
Fi is again a homotopy equivalence, and now there is a retraction Fi→ΩB sending
(γ, η) to the loop obtained by composing the inverse path of pγ with η. Repeating
these constructions for the ﬁbration j : Fi→Fp , produces the rest of the diagram.
Thus we produce a sequence
···→Ω2B→ΩF→ΩE→ΩB→F→E→B
where any two consecutive maps form a ﬁbration, up to homotopy equivalence, and
all the maps to the left of ΩB are obtained by applying the functor Ωto the later
maps. The long exact sequence of homotopy groups for any ﬁbration in the sequence
coincides with the long exact sequence for F→E→B , as the reader can check.
Given a ﬁbration p : E→B and a map f : A→B , there is a pullback or induced
ﬁbration f ∗(E)→A obtained by setting f ∗(E) = {(a, e) ∈A×E ||f (a) = p(e)}, with
the projections of f ∗(E) onto A and E giving a commutative
diagram as shown.
The homotopy lifting property holds for
−→
−→
−−−−→
−−−−−→
E
A
B
E
(
)
∗
f
f
p
f ∗(E)→A since a homotopy gt : X→A gives the ﬁrst coordi-
nate of a lift egt : X→f ∗(E), the second coordinate being a lifting
to E of the composed homotopy f gt .
As a special case, if E→B is the path ﬁbration PB→B , then f ∗(PB) consists of
the pairs (a, γ) ∈A×PB with γ a path in B from the basepoint to f (a), so f ∗(PB)
is just the homotopy ﬁber of f .
Proposition 4.64. Given a ﬁbration p : E→B and a homotopy ft : A→B , the pull-
back ﬁbrations f ∗
0 (E)→A and f ∗
1 (E)→A are ﬁber homotopy equivalent.
Proof: Let F : A×I→B be the homotopy ft . The ﬁbration F∗(E)→A×I contains
f ∗
0 (E) and f ∗
1 (E) over A×{0} and A×{1}. So it sufﬁces to prove the following: For
a ﬁbration p : E→B×I , the restricted ﬁbrations Es = p−1(B×{s})→B are all ﬁber
homotopy equivalent for s ∈[0, 1].
To prove this assertion the idea is to imitate the construction of the homotopy
equivalences Lγ in the proof of Proposition 4.60.
A path γ : [0, 1]→I gives rise
to a ﬁber-preserving map Lγ : Eγ(0)→Eγ(1) by lifting the homotopy gt : Eγ(0)→B×I ,
gt(x) = (p(x), γ(t)), starting with the inclusion Eγ(0) > E . As before, one shows
the two basic properties (a) and (b), noting that in (a) the homotopy Lγ ≃Lγ‘ is ﬁber-
preserving since it is obtained by lifting a homotopy ht : Eγ(0)×[0, 1]→B×I of the
form ht(x, u) = (p(x), −). From (a) and (b) it follows that Lγ is a ﬁber homotopy
equivalence with inverse Lγ .
⊔⊓

Section 4.3.
Connections with Cohomology
409
A consequence of the proposition is that a ﬁbration E→B over a contractible
base is ﬁber homotopy equivalent to a product ﬁbration B×F→B , since the identity
map B→B pulls back E to itself while a constant map B→B pulls back E to the
product B×F . More generally, the proposition implies that the set of ﬁber-homotopy
equivalence classes of ﬁbrations over a ﬁxed base B depends only on the homotopy
type of B .
Postnikov Towers
Using ﬁbrations we shall now describe a general procedure for ‘factoring’ an ar-
bitrary CW complex X into Eilenberg-MacLane spaces K(πn(X), n). Conversely, with
the assumption that π1(X) acts trivially on the higher homotopy groups πn(X), we
describe the data specifying how to reconstruct X , up to homotopy equivalence, from
its factors K(πn(X), n), i.e., from its homotopy groups.
In Example 4.19 we deﬁned a Postnikov tower for a path-connected CW
complex X to be a commutative diagram as at the right, where:
−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−→
−→
−→
X
X1
X2
X3
...
(1) The map X→Xn induces an isomorphism on πi for i ≤n.
(2) πi(Xn) = 0 for i > n.
As we saw in Example 4.19, every connected CW complex X has
a Postnikov tower, and this is unique up to homotopy equivalence
by Corollary 4.17. If we convert the map Xn→Xn−1 into a ﬁbration, its ﬁber is a
K(πnX, n), as is apparent from a glance at the long exact sequence of homotopy
groups for the ﬁbration. Doing this for each n in succession, starting with X2→X1
and working upward, we thus obtain a diagram as above but satisfying, in addition to
(1) and (2), the condition
(3) The map Xn→Xn−1 is a ﬁbration with ﬁber a K(πnX, n).
Converting the maps Xn→Xn−1 into ﬁbrations may make the triangles in the diagram
commute only up to homotopy, but strict commutativity can be restored by applying
the homotopy lifting property to each ﬁbration in succession.
For many purposes, a CW complex X can be replaced by one of the stages Xn in
a Postnikov tower for X , for example if one is interested in homotopy or homology
groups in only a ﬁnite range of dimensions. However, to determine the full homotopy
type of X from its Postnikov tower, some sort of limit process is needed.
Let us
investigate this question is somewhat greater generality.
Given a sequence of maps ···→X2→X1 , deﬁne their inverse limit lim
←-- Xn to be
the subspace of the product
Q
nXn consisting of sequences of points xn ∈Xn with
xn mapping to xn−1 under the map Xn→Xn−1 . The corresponding algebraic notion
is the inverse limit lim
←-- Xn of a sequence of group homomorphisms ···→G2→G1 ,
which is the subgroup of
Q
nGn consisting of sequences of elements gn ∈Gn with
gn mapping to gn−1 under the homomorphism Gn→Gn−1 .

410
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
Proposition 4.65. For every sequence of ﬁbrations ···→X2→X1 the natural map
λ : πi(lim
←-- Xn)→lim
←-- πi(Xn) is surjective. To guarantee that λ is injective it sufﬁces
to assume that the maps πi+1(Xn)→πi+1(Xn−1) are surjective for n sufﬁciently
large.
Proof: Represent an element of lim
←-- πi(Xn) by maps fn : (Si, s0)→(Xn, xn). Since
the projection pn : Xn→Xn−1 takes [fn] to [fn−1], by applying the homotopy lifting
property for the pair (Si, s0) we can homotope fn , ﬁxing s0 , so that pnfn = fn−1 .
Doing this inductively for n = 2, 3, ···, we get pnfn = fn−1 for all n simultaneously,
which gives surjectivity of λ.
For injectivity, note ﬁrst that inverse limits are unaffected by throwing away
a ﬁnite number of terms at the end of the sequence of spaces or groups, so we
may assume the maps πi+1(Xn)→πi+1(Xn−1) are surjective for all n. Given a map
f : Si→lim
←-- Xn , suppose we have nullhomotopies Fn : Di+1→Xn of the coordinate
functions fn : Si→Xn of f . We have pnFn = Fn−1 on Si , so pnFn and Fn−1 are the
restrictions to the two hemispheres of Si+1 of a map gn−1 : Si+1→Xn−1 . If the map
πi+1(Xn)→πi+1(Xn−1) is surjective, we can rechoose Fn so that the new gn−1 is null-
homotopic, i.e., so that pnFn ≃Fn−1 rel Si . Applying the homotopy lifting property
for (Di+1, Si), we can make pnFn = Fn−1 . Doing this inductively for n = 2, 3, ··· we
see that f : Si→lim
←-- Xn is nullhomotopic and λ is injective.
⊔⊓
One might wish to have a description of the kernel of λ in the case of an arbitrary
sequence of ﬁbrations ···→X2→X1 , though for our present purposes this question
is not relevant. In fact, Ker λ is naturally isomorphic to lim
←--
1πi+1(Xn), where lim
←--
1 is
the functor deﬁned in §3.F. Namely, given f : Si→lim
←-- Xn determining an element of
Ker λ, then the sequence of maps gn : Si+1→Xn constructed above gives an element
of
Q
nπi+1(Xn), well-deﬁned up to the choice of the nullhomotopies Fn . Any new
choice of Fn is obtained by adding a map Gn : Si+1→Xn to Fn . The effect of this is to
change gn to gn+Gn and gn−1 to gn−1−pnGn . Since lim
←--
1πi+1(Xn) is the quotient of
Q
nπi+1(Xn) under exactly these identiﬁcations, we get Ker λ ≈lim
←--
1πi+1(Xn). Thus
for each i > 0 there is a natural exact sequence
0 -→lim
←--
1πi+1(Xn) -→πi(lim
←-- Xn) -→lim
←-- πi(Xn) -→0
The proposition says that the lim
←--
1 term vanishes if the maps πi+1(Xn)→πi+1(Xn−1)
are surjective for sufﬁciently large n.
Returning to Postnikov towers, we have:
Corollary 4.66. For the Postnikov tower of a connected CW complex X the natural
map X→lim
←-- Xn is a weak homotopy equivalence, so X is a CW approximation to
lim
←-- Xn .

Section 4.3.
Connections with Cohomology
411
Proof: The composition πi(X) -→πi(lim
←-- Xn)
λ-----→lim
←-- πi(Xn) is an isomorphism
since πi(X)→πi(Xn) is an isomorphism for large n.
⊔⊓
Having seen how to decompose a space X into the terms in its Postnikov tower,
we consider now the inverse process of building a Postnikov tower, starting with X1
as a K(π, 1) and inductively constructing Xn from Xn−1 . It would be very nice if the
ﬁbration K(π, n)→Xn→Xn−1 could be extended another term to the right, to form
a ﬁbration sequence
K(π, n)→Xn→Xn−1→K(π, n + 1)
for this would say that Xn is the homotopy ﬁber of a map Xn−1→K(π, n + 1), and
homotopy classes of such maps are in one-to-one correspondence with elements of
Hn+1(Xn−1; π) by Theorem 4.56. Note that the last term K(π, n + 1) in the ﬁbration
sequence above cannot be anything else but a K(π, n + 1) since its loopspace must
be homotopy equivalent to the ﬁrst term in the sequence, a K(π, n).
In general, a ﬁbration F→E→B is called principal if there is a commutative
diagram
−−→
−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
E
F
−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
F
E
B
B
′
′
B′
′
Ω
where the second row is a ﬁbration sequence and the vertical maps are weak homotopy
equivalences.
Thus if all the ﬁbrations in a Postnikov tower for X
happen to be principal, we have a diagram as at
the right, where each Xn+1 is, up to weak ho-
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−−−−−−→
X
K
1
X2
X3
...
X,
π2
(
)
3
K
X,
π1
(
)
1
k1
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−→
K
X,
π3
(
)
4
K
X,
π2
(
)
2
k2
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−→
K
X,
π4
(
)
5
K
X,
π3
(
)
3
k3
=
motopy equivalence, the homotopy ﬁber of the
map kn : Xn→K(πn+1, n + 2). The map kn is
equivalent to a class in Hn+2 Xn; πn+1(K)

called
the nth k invariant of X . These classes specify
how to construct X inductively from Eilenberg-MacLane spaces. For example, if all
the kn ’s are zero, X is just the product of the spaces K(πnX, n), and in the general
case X can be viewed as a sort of ‘twisted product’ of K(πnX, n)’s. To actually build
a space X from its k invariants is usually too unwieldy a procedure to be carried out
in practice, but as a theoretical tool this procedure can be quite useful. The next result
tells us when this tool is available:
Theorem 4.67. A connected CW complex X has a Postnikov tower of principal ﬁbra-
tions iff π1(X) acts trivially on πn(X) for all n > 1.
Notice that in the deﬁnition of a principal ﬁbration, the map F→ΩB′ automati-
cally exists and is a homotopy weak equivalence once one has the right-hand square of
the commutative diagram with its vertical maps weak homotopy equivalences. Thus
the question of whether a ﬁbration is principal can be rephrased in the following

412
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
way: Given a map A→X , which one can always replace by an equivalent ﬁbration
if one likes, does there exist a ﬁbration F→E→B and a commu-
tative square as displayed, with the vertical maps weak homotopy
−−→
−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
A
F
E
X
equivalences? By replacing A and X with CW approximations and
converting the resulting map A→X into an inclusion via the usual mapping cylin-
der trick, the question becomes whether a CW pair (X, A) is equivalent to a ﬁbration
pair (E, F), i.e., whether there is a ﬁbration F→E→B and a map (X, A)→(E, F) for
which both X→E and A→F are weak homotopy equivalences. In general the an-
swer will rarely be yes, since the homotopy ﬁber of A > X would have to have the
weak homotopy type of a loopspace, which is a rather severe restriction. However,
in the situation of Postnikov towers, the homotopy ﬁber is a K(π, n) with π abelian
since n ≥2, so it is a loopspace. But there is another requirement: The action of
π1(A) on πn(X, A) must be trivial for all n ≥1. This is equivalent to the action of
π1(F) on πn(E, F) being trivial, which is always the case in a ﬁbration since under
the isomorphism p∗: πn(E, F)→πn(B, x0) an element γα −α, with γ ∈π1(F) and
α ∈πn(E, F), maps to p∗(γ)p∗(α) −p∗(α) which is zero since p∗(γ) lies in the
trivial group π1(x0).
The relative group πn(X, A) is always isomorphic to πn−1 of the homotopy ﬁber
of the inclusion A> X , so in the case at hand when the homotopy ﬁber is a K(π, n),
the only nontrivial relative homotopy group is πn+1(X, A) ≈π .
In this case the
necessary condition of trivial action is also sufﬁcient:
Lemma 4.68. Let (X, A) be a CW pair with both X and A connected, such that the
homotopy ﬁber of the inclusion A > X is a K(π, n), n ≥1. Then there exists a ﬁ-
bration F→E→B and a map (X, A)→(E, F) inducing weak homotopy equivalences
X→E and A→F iff the action of π1(A) on πn+1(X, A) is trivial.
Proof: It remains only to prove the ‘if’ implication.
As we noted just before the
statement of the lemma, the groups πi(X, A) are zero except for πn+1(X, A) ≈π .
If the action of π1(A) on πn+1(X, A) is trivial, the relative Hurewicz theorem gives
an isomorphism πn+1(X, A) ≈Hn+1(X, A).
Since (X, A) is n connected, we may
assume A contains the n skeleton of X , so X/A is n connected and the absolute
Hurewicz theorem gives πn+1(X/A) ≈Hn+1(X/A). Hence the quotient map X→X/A
induces an isomorphism πn+1(X, A) ≈πn+1(X/A) since the analogous statement for
homology is certainly true.
Since πn+1(X/A) ≈π , we can build a K(π, n + 1) from X/A by attaching cells
of dimension n + 3 and greater. This leads to a the
commutative diagram at the right, where the vertical
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−−→−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
−−−−→
A
F
E
X
A
K(
)
,
X/
π n 1
k
k
k
+
≃
maps are inclusions and the lower row is obtained by
converting the map k into a ﬁbration. The map A→Fk
is a weak homotopy equivalence by the ﬁve-lemma applied to the map between the

Section 4.3.
Connections with Cohomology
413
long exact sequences of homotopy groups for the pairs (X, A) and (Ek, Fk), since
the only nontrivial relative groups are πn+1 , both of which map isomorphically to
πn+1(K(π, n + 1)).
⊔⊓
Proof of 4.67: In view of the lemma, all that needs to be done is identify the action of
π1(X) on πn(X) with the action of π1(Xn) on πn+1(Xn−1, Xn) for n ≥2, thinking
of the map Xn→Xn−1 as an inclusion. From the exact sequence
0 = πn+1(Xn−1) -→πn+1(Xn−1, Xn)
∂-----→πn(Xn) -→πn(Xn−1) = 0
we have an isomorphism πn+1(Xn−1, Xn) ≈πn(Xn) respecting the action of π1(Xn).
And the map X→Xn induces isomorphisms on π1 and πn , so we are done.
⊔⊓
Let us describe now a natural generalization of Postnikov towers, in which one
starts with a map f : X→Y between path-connected spaces rather than just a space
X . A Moore-Postnikov tower for f is a commutative diagram as
−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
X
Z
Y
1
Z2
Z3
...
shown at the right, with each composition X→Zn→Y homotopic
to f , and such that:
(1)
The map X→Zn induces an isomorphism on πi for
i < n and a surjection for i = n.
(2)
The map Zn→Y induces an isomorphism on πi for
i > n and an injection for i = n.
(3)
The map Zn+1→Zn is a ﬁbration with ﬁber a K(πnF, n) where F is the homo-
topy ﬁber of f .
A Moore-Postnikov tower specializes to a Postnikov tower by taking Y to be a point
and then setting Xn = Zn+1 , discarding the space Z1 which has trivial homotopy
groups.
Theorem 4.69. Every map f : X→Y between connected CW complexes has a Moore-
Postnikov tower, which is unique up to homotopy equivalence. A Moore-Postnikov
tower of principal ﬁbrations exists iff π1(X) acts trivially on πn(Mf , X) for all n > 1,
where Mf is the mapping cylinder of f .
Proof: The existence and uniqueness of a diagram satisfying (1) and (2) and commu-
tative at least up to homotopy follows from Propositions 4.12 and 4.16 applied to the
pair (Mf , X) with Mf the mapping cylinder of f . Having such a diagram, we proceed
as in the earlier case of Postnikov towers, replacing each map Zn→Zn−1 by a homo-
topy equivalent ﬁbration, starting with Z2→Z1 and working upward, then applying
the homotopy lifting property to make all the triangles in the left half of the tower
strictly commutative. After these steps the triangles in the right half of the diagram
commute up to homotopy, and to make them strictly commute we can just replace
each map to Y by the composition through Z1 .

414
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
To see that the ﬁbers of the maps Zn+1→Zn are Eilenberg-MacLane spaces as
in condition (3), consider two successive levels of the tower.
We may arrange that the maps X→Zn+1→Zn→Y are in-
−−
−−−−−−→
−−
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−→
X
Y
Zn 1
Zn
+
clusions by taking mapping cylinders, ﬁrst of X→Zn+1 , then
of the new Zn+1→Zn , and then of the new Zn→Y . From the left-hand triangle we
see that Zn+1→Zn induces an isomorphism on πi for i < n and a surjection for
i = n, hence πi(Zn, Zn+1) = 0 for i < n + 1.
Similarly, the other triangle gives
πi(Zn, Zn+1) = 0 for i > n + 1. To show that πn+1(Zn, Zn+1) ≈πn+1(Y, X) we use
the following diagram:
π
X
X
n 1(
)
+
π
Y
n 1(
)
+
π
X
n(
)
π
Y
n(
)
π
Y
n 1(
)
+
,
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
π
Z
Z
n 1(
)
+
n 1
+
π
Y
n 1(
)
+
π
Z
n(
)
π
Y
n(
)
π
Y
n 1(
)
+
n 1
+
n 1
+
,
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
π
Z
Z
n 1(
)
+
n 1
+
π
Z
n 1(
)
+
π
Z
n
n
n
(
)
π
Z
n
n
(
)
π
Z
n 1(
)
+
n 1
+
n 1
+
,
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
=
=
=
=
≈
≈
The upper-right vertical map is injective and the lower-left vertical map is surjective,
so the ﬁve-lemma implies the two middle vertical maps are isomorphisms.
Since
the homotopy ﬁber of an inclusion A > B has πi equal to πi+1(B, A), we see that
condition (3) is satisﬁed.
The statement about a tower of principal ﬁbrations can be obtained as an appli-
cation of Lemma 4.68. As we saw in the previous paragraph, there are isomorphisms
πn+1(Y, X) ≈πn+1(Zn, Zn+1), and these respect the action of π1(X) ≈π1(Zn+1), so
Lemma 4.68 gives the result.
⊔⊓
Besides the case that Y is a point, which yields Postnikov towers, another inter-
esting special case of Moore-Postnikov towers is when X is a point. In this case the
space Zn is an n connected covering of Y , as in Example 4.18. As an example, the
Hopf map S3→S2 exhibits S3 as a 2 connected covering of S2 . This is one of the
rare naturally-occurring n connected coverings with n > 1.
The n connected covering of Y can also be obtained as the homotopy ﬁber of the
nth stage Y→Yn of a Postnikov tower for Y . The tower of n connected coverings of
Y can be built by iterating this construction:
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−−−−−→
Z
Y
K
Y,
π1
1
−−−−−−→
−−−−−→Z2
(
)
1
K
Y,
π2
(
)
2
K
Y,
π3
(
)
3
...
Here Zn is the homotopy ﬁber of the map Zn−1→K(πnY, n) which is the ﬁrst non-
trivial stage in a Postnikov tower for Zn−1 . In particular this shows one has a tower
of principal ﬁbrations.

Section 4.3.
Connections with Cohomology
415
Obstruction Theory
Many questions in algebraic topology can be phrased in one of the following two
forms:
The Extension Problem. Given a CW pair (W, A) and a map
A→X , does this extend to a map W→X ?
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
>
A
W
X
The Lifting Problem.
Given a ﬁbration X→Y and a map
W→Y , is there a lift W→X ?
−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
W
Y
X
These two problems can be combined into a single problem:
The Relative Lifting Problem. Given a CW pair (W, A), a ﬁbra-
tion X→Y , and a map W→Y , does there exist a lift W→X
extending a given lift on A?
−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
>
A
W
Y
X
Besides reducing to the absolute lifting problem when A = ∅, this includes the ex-
tension problem by taking Y to be a point.
For example, the familiar homotopy extension property is a special case of the
extension problem, and the homotopy lifting property is a special case of the relative
lifting problem.
The term ‘obstruction theory’ refers to a procedure for deﬁning a sequence of
cohomology classes which are the obstructions to ﬁnding a solution to the extension,
lifting, or relative lifting problem. In the most favorable cases these obstructions lie in
cohomology groups which are all zero, so the problem has a solution. But even when
the obstructions are nonzero it can be very useful to have the problem expressed in
cohomological terms.
There are two ways of developing obstruction theory, which produce essentially
the same result in the end. In the more elementary approach one tries to construct
the extension or lifting one cell of W at a time, proceeding inductively over skeleta of
W . This approach has an appealing directness, but the technical details of working at
the level of cochains are perhaps a little tedious. Instead, we shall use a slightly more
sophisticated approach in which the theory becomes an almost trivial application
of Postnikov towers for the extension problem, and Moore-Postnikov towers for the
lifting problems. (The skeletal viewpoint is explained in [VBKT], where it is useful in
the study of characteristic classes of vector bundles.)
Let us consider the extension problem ﬁrst, where we wish to extend a map A→X
to the larger complex W . Suppose that X has a Postnikov tower of principal ﬁbrations.
Then we have a commutative diagram as shown below, where we have enlarged the

416
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
tower by adjoining the space X0 , which is just a point, at the
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−−−−→
>
A
W
X
−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
X
K
1
X0
X2
X3
...
−−−−−−−−−−−−→
X,
π2
(
)
3
k1
−−−−−−−→K
X,
π3
(
)
4
k2
−−−−−−−→K
X,
π4
(
)
5
k3
−−−−−−−→K
X,
π1
(
)
2
k0
bottom. The map X1→X0 is then a ﬁbration, and to say it is
principal says that X1 , which in any case is a K(π1X, 1),
is the loopspace of K(π1X, 2), hence π1(X) must be
abelian. Conversely, if π1(X) is abelian and acts triv-
ially on all the higher homotopy groups of X ,
then there is an extended Postnikov tower of
principal ﬁbrations as shown.
Our strategy will be to try to lift the constant map W→X0 to maps W→Xn for
n = 1, 2, ··· in succession, extending the given maps A→Xn . If we succeed in ﬁnding
all these lifts W→Xn it will then be easy to construct the desired extension W→X .
For the inductive step we have a com-
mutative diagram as at the right. Since Xn
−−→
−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
>
A
W
X −−−−−−−→
X
K
K
PK
X,
π
(
)
=
n
n
n 1
+
-
n 1
is the pullback, its points are pairs consist-
ing of a point in Xn−1 and a path from its image in K to the basepoint. A lift W→Xn
therefore amounts to a nullhomotopy of the composition W→Xn−1→K . We already
have such a lift deﬁned on A, hence a nullhomotopy of A→K , and we want a nullho-
motopy of W→K extending this nullhomotopy on A.
The map W→K together with the nullhomotopy on A gives a map W ∪CA→K ,
where CA is the cone on A.
Since K is a K(πnX, n + 1), the map W ∪CA→K
determines an obstruction class ωn ∈Hn+1(W ∪CA; πnX) ≈Hn+1(W, A; πnX).
Proposition 4.70. A lift W→Xn extending the given A→Xn exists iff ωn = 0.
Proof: We need to show that the map W ∪CA→K extends to a map CW→K iff
ωn = 0, i.e., W ∪CA→K is homotopic to a constant map.
Suppose that gt : W ∪CA→K is such a homotopy. The constant map g1 then
extends to the constant map g1 : CW→K , so by the homotopy extension property for
the pair (CW, W ∪CA), applied to the reversed homotopy g1−t , we have a homotopy
gt : CW→K extending the previous homotopy gt : W ∪CA→K . The map g0 : CW→K
then extends the given map W ∪CA→K .
Conversely, if we have an extension CW→K , then this is nullhomotopic since the
cone CW is contractible, and we may restrict such a nullhomotopy to W ∪CA.
⊔⊓
If we succeed in extending the lifts A→Xn to lifts W→Xn for all n, then we
obtain a map W→lim
←-- Xn extending the given A→X→lim
←-- Xn . Let M be the map-
ping cylinder of X→lim
←-- Xn . Since the restriction of W→lim
←-- Xn ⊂M to A factors
through X , this gives a homotopy of this restriction to the map A→X ⊂M . Ex-
tend this to a homotopy of W→M , producing a map (W, A)→(M, X). Since the map
X→lim
←-- Xn is a weak homotopy equivalence, πi(M, X) = 0 for all i, so by Lemma 4.6
the map (W, A)→(M, X) can be homotoped to a map W→X extending the given
A→X , and we have solved the extension problem.

Section 4.3.
Connections with Cohomology
417
Thus if it happens that at each stage of the inductive process of constructing
lifts W→Xn the obstruction ωn ∈Hn+1(W, A; πnX) vanishes, then the extension
problem has a solution. In particular, this yields:
Corollary 4.71. If X is a connected abelian CW complex and (W, A) is a CW pair
such that Hn+1(W, A; πnX) = 0 for all n, then every map A→X can be extended to
a map W→X .
⊔⊓
This is a considerable improvement on the more elementary result that extensions
exist if πn(X) = 0 for all n such that W −A has cells of dimension n + 1, which is
an exercise for §4.1.
We can apply the Hurewicz theorem and obstruction theory to extend the homol-
ogy version of Whitehead’s theorem to CW complexes with trivial action of π1 on all
homotopy groups:
Proposition 4.72. If X and Y are connected abelian CW complexes, then a map
f : X→Y which induces isomorphisms on all homology groups is a homotopy equiv-
alence.
Proof: Taking the mapping cylinder of f reduces us to the case of an inclusion X>Y
of a subcomplex. The key point then is to see that π1(X) acts trivially on πn(Y, X)
for all n, since if this is true, then the relative Hurewicz theorem will imply that
πn(Y, X) = 0 for all n, so X→Y will be a weak homotopy equivalence.
The as-
sumptions guarantee that π1(X)→π1(Y) is an isomorphism, so we know at least
that π1(Y, X) = 0.
We use obstruction theory to construct a retraction Y→X , i.e., to extend the
identity map X→X to a map Y→X . To apply the theory we need π1(X) acting
trivially on πn(X), which holds by hypothesis. Since the inclusion X > Y induces
isomorphisms on homology, we have H∗(Y, X) = 0, hence Hn+1(Y, X; πn(X)) = 0
for all n by the universal coefﬁcient theorem. So there are no obstructions, and a
retraction Y→X exists. This implies that the maps πn(Y)→πn(Y, X) are onto, so
trivial action of π1(X) on πn(Y) implies trivial action on πn(Y, X) by naturality of
the action.
⊔⊓
The generalization of the preceding analysis of the extension problem to the rela-
tive lifting problem is straightforward. Assuming the ﬁbration p : X→Y in the state-
ment of the lifting problem has a Moore-Postnikov tower of
principal ﬁbrations, we have the diagram shown at the right.
The ﬁrst step is to lift the map W→Y to Z1 , extending the
given lift on A. We may take Z1 to be the cov-
−−→
−−→
−−→
−−−−−→
>
A
W
X
−−
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
Z
K
1
Y
Z2
...
−−−−−−−−−−−−→
F,
π1
(
)
2
−−−−−−−→K
F,
π2
(
)
3
p
ering space of Y corresponding to the subgroup
p∗(π1(X)) of π1(Y), so covering space theory

418
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
tells us when we can lift W→Y to Z1 , and the unique lifting property for covering
spaces can be used to see whether a lift can be chosen to agree with the lift on A given
by the diagram; this could only be a problem when A has more than one component.
Having a lift to Z1 , the analysis proceeds exactly as before. One encounters a
sequence of obstructions ωn ∈Hn+1(W, A; πnF), assuming π1F is abelian in the
case n = 1, and a lift to X exists, extending the given lift on A, if each successive ωn
is zero.
One can ask the converse question: If a lift exists, must the obstructions ωn
all be zero?
Since Proposition 4.70 is an ‘if and only if’ statement, one might ex-
pect the answer to be yes, but upon closer inspection the matter becomes less clear.
The difﬁculty is that, even if at some stage the obstruction ωn is zero, so a lift to
Zn+1 exists, there may be many choices of such a lift, and different choices could
lead to different ωn+1 ’s, some zero and others nonzero. Examples of such ambi-
guities are not hard to produce, both for the lifting and the extension problem, and
the ambiguities only become worse with each subsequent choice of a lift. So it is
only in rather special circumstances that one can say
that there are well-deﬁned obstructions. A simple
case is when πi(F) = 0 for i < n, so the Moore-
Postnikov factorization begins with Zn
as in the diagram to the right.
In this
−−→
−−→
−
−
→
−−−−−→
>
A
W
X
−−
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
Z
Y
Z
Z
...
−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→K
F,
π
(
)
p
=
n 1
n
n
+
n 1
+
n 2
n 1
+
n 2
+
+
K
F,
π
(
)
n 2
+
K
F,
π
(
)
n 3
+
case the composition across the bottom
of the diagram gives a well-deﬁned primary obstruction ωn ∈Hn+1(W, A; πnF).
Exercises
1.
Show there is a map RP∞→CP∞= K(Z, 2) which induces the trivial map on
eH∗(−; Z) but a nontrivial map on eH∗(−; Z). How is this consistent with the universal
coefﬁcient theorem?
2. Show that the group structure on S1 (multiplication in C restricted to the unit circle)
induces a group structure on ⟨X, S1⟩, such that the bijection ⟨X, S1⟩→H1(X; Z) of
Theorem 4.56 is an isomorphism.
3. Suppose that a CW complex X contains a subcomplex S1 such that the inclusion
S1 > X induces an injection H1(S1; Z)→H1(X; Z) with image a direct summand of
H1(X; Z). Show that S1 is a retract of X .
4. Given abelian groups G and H and CW complexes K(G, n) and K(H, n), show
that the map ⟨K(G, n), K(H, n)⟩→Hom(G, H) sending a homotopy class [f ] to the
induced homomorphism f∗: πn(K(G, n))→πn(K(H, n)) is a bijection.
5. Show that [X, Sn] ≈Hn(X; Z) if X is an n dimensional CW complex. [Build a
K(Z, n) from Sn by attaching cells of dimension ≥n + 2.]
6. For an abelian group G, Theorem 4.56 gives a map µ : K(G, n)×K(G, n)→K(G, n)
with µ∗(α) = α ⊗1 + 1 ⊗α where α is a fundamental class for K(G, n). Show that µ

Section 4.3.
Connections with Cohomology
419
deﬁnes an H–space structure on K(G, n) which is, up to homotopy, commutative and
associative. Show also that the H–space multiplication µ is unique up to homotopy.
7. Using an H–space multiplication µ on K(G, n), deﬁne an addition in ⟨X, K(G, n)⟩
by [f ] + [g] = [µ(f , g)] and show that under the bijection Hn(X; G) ≈⟨X, K(G, n)⟩
this addition corresponds to the usual addition in cohomology.
8. Show that a map p : E→B is a ﬁbration iff the map π : EI→Ep , π(γ) = (γ(0), pγ),
has a section, i.e., a map s : Ep→EI such that ps = 11.
9. Show that a linear projection of a 2 simplex onto one of its edges is a ﬁbration but
not a ﬁber bundle.
10. Given a ﬁbration F→E→B , use the homotopy lifting property to deﬁne an action
of π1(E) on πn(F), i.e., a homomorphism π1(E)→Aut
 πn(F)

, such that the compo-
sition π1(F)→π1(E)→Aut
 πn(F)

is the usual action of π1(F) on πn(F). Deduce
that if π1(E) = 0, then the action of π1(F) on πn(F) is trivial.
11. Show that if p : E→B is a ﬁbration, then its ﬁber F is homo-
−−→
−−→
−−−−→
−−−−−→
PB
E
B
PB
(
)
∗
p
p
topy equivalent to the space p∗(PB) in the pullback of the path
space ﬁbration PB→B , as in the diagram to the right.
12. Show that for homotopic maps f , g : A→B the ﬁbrations Ef→B and Eg→B are
ﬁber homotopy equivalent.
13. Given a map f : A→B and a deformation retraction in the weak sense of A onto a
subspace A′ , with i : A′→A the inclusion, show that the ﬁbrations Ef→B and Efi→B
are ﬁber homotopy equivalent.
14. If the ﬁbration p : E→B is a homotopic equivalence, show that p is a ﬁber homo-
topy equivalence of E with the trivial ﬁbration 11 : B→B .
15. Show that a map f : X→Y of connected CW complexes is a homotopy equivalence
if it induces an isomorphism on π1 and its homotopy ﬁber Ff has eH∗(Ff ; Z) = 0.
16. Show that ΩX is an H–space with the multiplication given by composition of
loops.
17. Show that a ﬁbration sequence ···→ΩB→F→E→B induces a long exact se-
quence ···→⟨X, ΩB⟩→⟨X, F⟩→⟨X, E⟩→⟨X, B⟩, with groups and group homomor-
phisms except for the last three terms, and abelian groups except for the last six
terms.
18. Given a ﬁbration F -→E
p-----→B , deﬁne a natural action of ΩB on the homotopy
ﬁber Fp and use this to show that exactness at ⟨X, F⟩in the long exact sequence in
the preceding problem can be improved to the statement that two elements of ⟨X, F⟩
have the same image in ⟨X, E⟩iff they are in the same orbit of the induced action of
⟨X, ΩB⟩on ⟨X, F⟩.
19. For a space B , let F(B) denote the set of ﬁber homotopy equivalence classes of
ﬁbrations E→B . Let S(B) denote the set of equivalence classes of maps f : A→B

420
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
where f1 : A1→B is equivalent to f2 : A2→B if there exists a homotopy equivalence
g : A1→A2 such that f1 ≃f2g. Show the natural map F(B)→S(B) is a bijection, and
show that a homotopy equivalence h : B1→B2 induces bijections S(B1)→S(B2) and
F(B1)→F(B2).
20. Show that a map f : X→Y between connected CW complexes factors as a com-
position X→Zn→Y where the ﬁrst map induces isomorphisms on πi for i ≤n and
the second map induces isomorphisms on πi for i ≥n+1. [Does this data determine
the homotopy type of Zn ?]
21.
Show that by applying the loopspace functor to a Postnikov tower for X one
obtains a Postnikov tower of principal ﬁbrations for ΩX .
22. Show that in the Postnikov tower of an H–space, all the spaces are H–spaces and
the maps are H–maps, commuting with the multiplication, up to homotopy.
23. Show that a principal ﬁbration ΩC -→E
p-----→B has a section (i.e., a map s : B→E
with ps = 11) iff E is ﬁber homotopy equivalent to the product ﬁbration ΩC×B .
24. Prove the following uniqueness result for the Quillen plus construction: Given
a connected CW complex X , if there is an abelian CW complex Y and a map X→Y
inducing an isomorphism H∗(X; Z) ≈H∗(Y; Z), then such a Y is unique up to ho-
motopy equivalence. [Apply Corollary 4.71 with W the mapping cylinder of one such
map X→Y .]
25. In the situation of the relative lifting problem, suppose one has two different lifts
W→X which agree on the subspace A ⊂W . Show that the obstructions to ﬁnding a
homotopy rel A between these two lifts lie in the groups Hn(W, A; πnF).

Section 4.A.
Basepoints and Homotopy
421
In this short section we will use the action of π1 on πn to describe the difference
between πn(X, x0) and the set of homotopy classes of maps Sn→X without con-
ditions on basepoints. More generally, we will compare the set ⟨Z, X⟩of basepoint-
preserving homotopy classes of maps (Z, z0)→(X, x0) with the set [Z, X] of unre-
stricted homotopy classes of maps Z→X , for Z any CW complex with basepoint z0
a 0 cell.
The ﬁrst step is to construct an action of π1(X, x0) on ⟨Z, X⟩.
Given a loop
γ in X based at x0 and a map f0 : (Z, z0)→(X, x0), then since we assume z0 is a
0 cell, the homotopy extension property implies that there is a homotopy fs : Z→X
of f0 such that fs(z0) is the loop γ . We might try to deﬁne an action of π1(X, x0)
on ⟨Z, X⟩by [γ][f0] = [f1], but this deﬁnition encounters a small problem when
we compose loops. For if η is another loop at x0 , then by applying the homotopy
extension property a second time we get a homotopy of f1 restricting to η on x0 ,
and the two homotopies together give the relation
 [γ][η]

[f0] = [η]
 [γ][f0]

, in
view of our convention that the product γη means ﬁrst γ , then η. This is not quite
the relation we want, but the problem is easily corrected by letting the action be an
action on the right rather than on the left. Thus we set [f0][γ] = [f1], and then
[f0]
 [γ][η]

=
 [f0][γ]

[η].
Let us check that this right action is well-deﬁned. Suppose we start with maps
f0, g0 : (Z, z0)→(X, x0) representing the same class in ⟨Z, X⟩, together with homo-
topies fs and gs of f0 and g0 such that fs(z0) and gs(z0) are homotopic loops.
These various homotopies deﬁne a map H : Z×I×∂I ∪Z×{0}×I ∪{z0}×I×I -→X
which is fs on Z×I×{0}, gs on Z×I×{1}, the basepoint-preserving homotopy from
f0 to g0 on Z×{0}×I , and the homotopy from fs(z0) to gs(z0) on {z0}×I×I .
We would like to extend H over Z×I×I . The pair (I×I, I×∂I ∪{0}×I) is homeo-
morphic to (I×I, I×{0}), and via this homeomorphism we can view H as a map
Z×I×{0} ∪{z0}×I×I -→X , i.e., a map Z×I→X with a homotopy on the subcom-
plex {z0}×I . This means the homotopy extension property can be applied to produce
an extension of the original H to Z×I×I . Restricting this extended H to Z×{1}×I
gives a basepoint-preserving homotopy f1 ≃g1 , which shows that [f0][γ] is well-
deﬁned.
Note that in this argument we did not have to assume the homotopies fs and gs
were constructed by applying the homotopy extension property. Thus the argument
proves:

422
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
Proposition 4A.1. There is a right action of π1(X, x0) on ⟨Z, X⟩deﬁned by setting
[f0][γ] = [f1] whenever there exists a homotopy fs : Z→X from f0 to f1 such that
fs(z0) is the loop γ , or any loop homotopic to γ .
⊔⊓
It is easy to convert this right action into a left action, by deﬁning [γ][f0] =
[f0][γ]−1 .
This just amounts to choosing the homotopy fs so that fs(z0) is the
inverse path of γ .
When Z = Sn this is the same as the action of π1(X, x0) on πn(X, x0) since in
the original deﬁnition of γf in terms of maps (In, ∂In)→(X, x0), a homotopy from
γf to f is obtained by restricting γf to smaller and smaller concentric cubes, and
on the ‘basepoint’ ∂In this homotopy traces out the loop γ .
Proposition 4A.2. If (Z, z0) is a CW pair and X is a path-connected space, then
the natural map ⟨Z, X⟩→[Z, X] induces a bijection of the orbit set ⟨Z, X⟩/π1(X, x0)
onto [Z, X].
In particular, this implies that [Z, X] = ⟨Z, X⟩if X is simply-connected.
Proof: Since X is path-connected, every f : Z→X can be homotoped to take z0 to the
basepoint x0 , via homotopy extension, so the map ⟨Z, X⟩→[Z, X] is onto. If f0 and
f1 are basepoint-preserving maps which are homotopic via the homotopy fs : Z→X ,
then by deﬁnition [f1] = [f0][γ] for the loop γ(s) = fs(z0), so [f0] and [f1] are in
the same orbit under the action of π1(X, x0). Conversely, two basepoint-preserving
maps in the same orbit are obviously homotopic.
⊔⊓
Example 4A.3.
If X is an H–space with identity element x0 , then the action of
π1(X, x0) on ⟨Z, X⟩is always trivial. This is because, given a map f : (Z, z0)→(X, x0)
and a loop γ in X based at x0 , the multiplication in X allows us to deﬁne a homotopy
F(z, s) = f (z)γ(s) which starts and ends with a map which is homotopic, preserving
basepoint, to f , and such that the loop F(z0, s) is homotopic to γ(s).
The set of orbits of the π1 action on πn does not generally inherit a group struc-
ture from πn . For example, when n = 1 the orbits are just the conjugacy classes in π1 ,
and these form a group only when π1 is abelian, i.e., the conjugation action is trivial.
Basepoints are thus a necessary technical device for producing the group structure in
homotopy groups, though as we have shown, they can be ignored in simply-connected
spaces.
For a set of maps Sn→X to generate πn(X) as a module over Z[πn(X)] means
that all elements of πn(X) can be represented by sums of these maps along arbitrary
paths in X , where we allow reversing orientations to get negatives and repetitions to
get arbitrary integer multiples. Examples of ﬁnite CW complexes X for which πn(X)
is not ﬁnitely generated as a module over Z[πn(X)] were given in Exercise 37 in §4.2,
provided n ≥3. Finding such an example for n = 2 seems to be more difﬁcult. The

Section 4.A.
Basepoints and Homotopy
423
rest of this section will be devoted to a somewhat complicated construction which
does this, and is interesting for other reasons as well.
An Example of Nonﬁnite Generation
We will construct a ﬁnite CW complex having πn not ﬁnitely generated as a
Z[π1] module, for a given integer n ≥2. The complex will be a subcomplex of a
K(π, 1) having interesting homological properties: It is an (n + 1) dimensional CW
complex with Hn+1 nonﬁnitely generated, but its n skeleton is ﬁnite so Hi is ﬁnitely
generated for i ≤n and π is ﬁnitely presented if n > 1. The ﬁrst such example was
found in [Stallings] for n = 2. Our construction will be essentially the n dimensional
generalization of this, but described in a more geometric way as in [Bestvina-Brady],
which provides a general technique for constructing many examples of this sort.
To begin, let X be the product of n copies of S1 ∨S1 .
Since S1 ∨S1 is the
1 skeleton of the torus T 2 = S1×S1 in its usual CW structure, X can be regarded as
a subcomplex of the 2n dimensional torus T 2n , the product of 2n circles. Deﬁne
f : T 2n→S1 by f (θ1, ··· , θ2n) = θ1 + ··· + θ2n where the coordinates θi ∈S1 are
viewed as angles measured in radians. The space Z = X ∩f −1(0) will provide the
example we are looking for. As we will see, Z is a ﬁnite CW complex of dimension
n −1, with πn−1(Z) nonﬁnitely generated as a module over π1(Z) if n ≥3. We will
also see that πi(Z) = 0 for 1 < i < n −1.
The induced homomorphism f∗: π1(T 2n)→π1(S1) = Z sends each generator
coming from an S1 factor to 1. Let eT 2n→T 2n be the covering space corresponding
to the kernel of f∗. This is a normal covering space since it corresponds to a normal
subgroup, and the deck transformation group is Z. The subcomplex of eT 2n projecting
to X is a normal covering space eX→X with the same group of deck transformations
Z. Since π1(X) is the product of n free groups on two generators, eX is the covering
space of X corresponding to the kernel of the homomorphism π1(X)→Z sending
each of the two generators of each free factor to 1. Since X is a K(π, 1), so is eX . For
example, when n = 1, eX is the union of two helices on the inﬁnite cylinder eT 2 :
The map f lifts to a map ef : eT 2n→R, and Z lifts homeomorphically to a subspace
Z ⊂eX , namely ef −1(0) ∩eX . We will show:
(∗)
eX is homotopy equivalent to a space Y obtained from Z by attaching an inﬁnite
sequence of n cells.
Assuming this is true, it follows that Hn(Y) is not ﬁnitely generated since in the
exact sequence Hn(Z)→Hn(Y)→Hn(Y, Z)→Hn−1(Z) the ﬁrst term is zero and the
last term is ﬁnitely generated, Z being a ﬁnite CW complex of dimension n −1,
while the third term is an inﬁnite sum of Z’s, one for each n cell of Y . If πn−1(Z)
were ﬁnitely generated as a π1(Z) module, then by attaching ﬁnitely many n cells to

424
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
Z we could make it (n −1) connected since it is already (n −2) connected as the
(n −1) skeleton of the K(π, 1) Y . Then by attaching cells of dimension greater than
n we could build a K(π, 1) with ﬁnite n skeleton. But this contradicts the fact that
Hn(Y) is not ﬁnitely generated.
To begin the veriﬁcation of (∗), consider the torus T m . The standard cell struc-
ture on T m lifts to a cubical cell structure on the universal cover Rm , with vertices
the integer lattice points Zm . The function f lifts to a linear projection L : Rm→R,
L(x1, ··· , xm) = x1 + ··· + xm .
The planes in L−1(Z) cut the cubes of Rm into
convex polyhedra which we call slabs. There are m slabs in each
m dimensional cube. The boundary of a slab in L−1[i, i + 1] con-
sists of lateral faces which are slabs for lower dimensional cubes,
together with a lower face in L−1(i) and an upper face in L−1(i+1).
In each cube there are two exceptional slabs whose lower or upper
face degenerates to a point. These are the slabs containing the vertices of the cube
where L has its maximum and minimum values. A slab deformation retracts onto the
union of its lower and lateral faces, provided that the slab has an upper face which is
not just a point. Slabs of the latter type are m simplices, and we will refer to them as
cones in what follows. These are the slabs containing the vertex of a cube on which L
takes its maximal value. The lateral faces of a cone are also cones, of lower dimension.
The slabs, together with their various lower-dimensional faces, give a CW struc-
ture on Rm with the planes of L−1(Z) as subcomplexes. These structures are pre-
served by the deck transformations of the cover Rm→T m so there is an induced CW
structure in the quotient T m , with f −1(0) as a subcomplex.
If X is any subcomplex of T m in its original cubical cell structure, then the slab
CW structure on T m restricts to a CW structure on X . In particular, we obtain a CW
structure on Z = X ∩f −1(0). Likewise we get a lifted CW structure on the cover
eX ⊂eT m . Let eX[i, j] = eX ∩ef −1[i, j]. The deformation retractions of non-cone slabs
onto their lateral and lower faces give rise to a deformation retraction of eX[i, i + 1]
onto eX[i] ∪Ci where Ci consists of all the cones in eX[i, i + 1]. These cones are
attached along their lower faces, and they all have the same vertex in eX[i + 1], so Ci
is itself a cone in the usual sense, attached to eX[i] along its base.
For the particular X we are interested in, we claim that each Ci is an n disk
attached along its boundary sphere.
When n = 1 this is evident from the earlier
picture of eX as the union of two helices on a cylinder. For larger n we argue by
induction. Passing from n to n + 1 replaces X by two copies of X×S1 intersecting
in X , one copy for each of the additional S1 factors of T 2n+2 . Replacing X by X×S1
changes Ci to its join with a point in the base of the new Ci . Doing this twice produces
the suspension of Ci attached along the suspension of the base.
By the same argument eX[−i −1, −i] deformation retracts onto eX[−i] with an
n cell attached.
We build the space Y and a homotopy equivalence g : Y→eX by

Section 4.A.
Basepoints and Homotopy
425
an inductive procedure, starting with Y0 = Z . Assuming that Yi and a homotopy
equivalence gi : Yi→eX[−i, i] have already been deﬁned, we form Yi+1 by attaching
two n cells by the maps obtained from the attaching maps of the two n cells in
eX[−i −1, i + 1] −eX[−i.i] by composing with a homotopy inverse to gi . This allows
gi to be extended to a homotopy equivalence gi+1 : Yi+1→eX[−i−1, i+1]. Taking the
union over i gives g : Y→eX . One can check this is a homotopy equivalence by seeing
that it induces isomorphisms on all homotopy groups, using the standard direct limit
argument. This ﬁnishes the veriﬁcation of (∗).
It is interesting to try to see what the complex Z looks like when n = 3, so
Z is 2 dimensional and has π2 nonﬁnitely generated over Z[π1(Z)]. In this case
X is the product of three S1 ∨S1 ’s, so X is the union of the eight 3 tori obtained
by choosing one of the two S1 summands in each S1 ∨S1 factor. We denote these
3 tori S1
±×S1
±×S1
± . Viewing each of these 3 tori as the cube in the previous ﬁgure
with opposite faces identiﬁed, we see that Z is the union of the eight 2-tori formed
by the two sloping triangles in each cube. Two of these 2 tori intersect along a circle
when the correponding 3 tori of X intersect along a 2 torus. This happens when the
triples of ±’s for the two 3 tori differ in exactly one entry. The pattern of intersection
of the eight 2 tori of Z can thus be described combinatorially via the 1 skeleton of
the cube, with vertices (±1, ±1, ±1). There is a torus of Z for each vertex of the cube,
and two tori intesect along a circle when the corresponding vertices of the cube are
the endpoints of an edge of the cube. All eight tori contain the single 0 cell of Z .
To obtain a model of Z itself, consider a regular octahedron inscribed in the
cube with vertices (±1, ±1, ±1). If we identify each pair of
opposite edges of the octahedron, each pair of opposite tri-
angular faces becomes a torus. However, there are only four
pairs of opposite faces, so we get only four tori this way, not
eight. To correct this problem, regard each triangular face
of the octagon as two copies of the same triangle, distin-
guished from each other by a choice of normal direction, an
arrow attached to the triangle pointing either inside the octahedron or outside it, that
is, either toward the nearest vertex of the surrounding cube or toward the opposite
vertex of the cube. Then each pair of opposite triangles of the octahedron having
normal vectors pointing toward the same vertex of the cube determines a torus, when
opposite edges are identiﬁed as before. Each edge of the original octahedron is also
replaced by two edges oriented either toward the interior or exterior of the octahe-
dron. The vertices of the octahedron may be left unduplicated since they will all be
identiﬁed to a single point anyway. With this scheme, the two tori corresponding to
the vertices at the ends of an edge of the cube then intersect along a circle, as they
should, and other pairs of tori intersect only at the 0 cell of Z .
This model of Z has the advantage of displaying the symmetry group of the cube,

426
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
a group of order 48, as a symmetry group of Z , corresponding to the symmetries of
X permuting the three S1 ∨S1 factors and the two S1 ’s of each S1 ∨S1 . Undoubtedly
Z would be very pretty to look at if we lived in a space with enough dimensions to
see all of it at one glance.
It might be interesting to see an explicit set of maps S2→Z generating π2(Z)
as a Z[π1] module. One also wonders whether there are simpler examples of these
nonﬁnite generation properties than the ones given here.
Exercises
1. Show directly that if X is a topological group with identity element x0 , then any two
maps f , g : (Z, z0)→(X, x0) which are homotopic are homotopic through basepoint-
preserving maps.
2. Show that under the map ⟨X, Y⟩→Hom
 πn(X, x0), πn(Y, y0)

, [f ] , f∗, the ac-
tion of π1(Y, y0) on ⟨X, Y⟩corresponds to composing with the action on πn(Y, y0),
i.e., (γf )∗= βγf∗.
Deduce a bijection of [X, K(π, 1)] with the set of orbits of
Hom(π1(X), π) under composition with inner automorphisms of π . In particular,
if π is abelian then [X, K(π, 1)] = ⟨X, K(π, 1)⟩= Hom(π1(X), π).
3. For a space X let Aut(X) denote the group of homotopy classes of homotopy
equivalences X→X . Show that for a CW complex K(π, 1), Aut
 K(π, 1)

is isomor-
phic to the group of outer automorphisms of π , that is, automorphisms modulo inner
automorphisms.
4. With the notation of the preceding problem, show that Aut(
W
n Sk) ≈GLn(Z) for
k > 1, where
W
n Sk denotes the wedge sum of n copies of Sk and GLn(Z) is the
group of n×n matrices with entries in Z having an inverse matrix of the same form.
[GLn(Z) is the automorphism group of Zn ≈πk(
W
n Sk) ≈Hk(
W
n Sk).]
The remaining exercises refer to the spaces constructed in the latter part of this
section.
5.
Compute the homology groups of the complex Z in the case n = 3, so Z is
2 dimensional.
6. Letting eXn denote the n dimensional complex eX , show that eXn can be obtained
inductively from eXn−1 as the union of two copies of the mapping torus of the gener-
ating deck transformation eXn−1→eXn−1 , with copies of eXn−1 in these two mapping
tori identiﬁed. Thus there is a ﬁber bundle eXn→S1 ∨S1 with ﬁber eXn−1 .
7. Use the preceding problem to ﬁnd a presentation for π1( eXn), and show this pre-
sentation reduces to a ﬁnite presentation if n > 2 and a presentation with a ﬁnite
number of generators if n = 2. In the latter case, deduce that π1( eX2) has no ﬁnite
presentation from the fact that H2( eX2) is not ﬁnitely generated.

Section 4.B.
The Hopf Invariant
427
In §2.2 we used homology to distinguish different homotopy classes of maps
Sn→Sn via the notion of degree. Using cup product it is possible to do something
similar for maps S2n−1→Sn .
In general, given a map f : Sm→Sn with m ≥n, we can form a CW complex Cf
by attaching a cell em+1 to Sn via f . The homotopy type of Cf depends only on the
homotopy class of f , by Proposition 0.17. Thus for maps f , g : Sm→Sn , any invariant
of homotopy type which distinguishes Cf from Cg will show that f is not homotopic
to g. For example, if m = n and f has degree d, then from the cellular chain com-
plex of Cf we see that Hn(Cf ) ≈Z|d| , so the homology of Cf detects the degree of f ,
up to sign. When m > n, however, the homology of Cf consists of Z’s in dimensions
0, n, and m + 1, independent of f . The same is true of cohomology groups, but
cup products have a chance of being nontrivial in H∗(Cf ) when m = 2n −1. In this
case, if we choose generators α ∈Hn(Cf ) and β ∈H2n(Cf ), then the multiplicative
structure of H∗(Cf ) is determined by a relation α2 = H(f)β for an integer H(f)
called the Hopf invariant of f . The sign of H(f) depends on the choice of the gener-
ator β, but this can be speciﬁed by requiring β to correspond to a ﬁxed generator of
H2n(D2n, ∂D2n) under the map H2n(Cf ) ≈H2n(Cf , Sn)→H2n(D2n, ∂D2n) induced
by the characteristic map of the cell e2n , which is determined by f . We can then
change the sign of H(f ) by composing f with a reﬂection of S2n−1 , of degree −1. If
f ≃g, then under the homotopy equivalence Cf ≃Cg the chosen generators β for
H2n(Cf ) and H2n(Cg) correspond, so H(f) depends only on the homotopy class of
f .
If f is a constant map then Cf = Sn ∨S2n and H(f) = 0 since Cf retracts
onto Sn . Also, H(f ) is always zero for odd n since in this case α2 = −α2 by the
commutativity property of cup product, hence α2 = 0.
Three basic examples of maps with nonzero Hopf invariant are the maps deﬁning
the three Hopf bundles in Examples 4.44, 4.45, and 4.46.
The ﬁrst of these Hopf
mapsis the attaching map f : S3→S2 for the 4 cell of CP 2 . This has H(f) = 1 since
H∗(CP2; Z) ≈Z[α]/(α3) by Theorem 3.11. Similarly, HP2 gives rise to a map S7→S4
of Hopf invariant 1. In the case of the octonionic projective plane OP2 , which is built
from the map S15→S8 deﬁned in Example 4.46, we can deduce that H∗(OP2; Z) ≈
Z[α]/(α3) either from Poincar´e duality as in Example 3.39 or from the Gysin sequence
as in Exercise 5 for §4.D.
It is a fundamental theorem of Adams that a map f : S2n−1→Sn of Hopf invari-
ant 1 exists only when n = 2, 4, 8.
This has a number of very interesting conse-
quences, for example:
1. Rn is a division algebra only for n = 1, 2, 4, 8.
2. Sn is an H–space only for n = 0, 1, 3, 7.

428
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
3. Sn has n linearly independent tangent vector ﬁelds only for n = 0, 1, 3, 7.
4. The only ﬁber bundles Sp→Sq→Sr occur when (p, q, r) = (0, 1, 1), (1, 3, 2),
(3, 7, 4), and (7, 15, 8).
In each case the problem easily reduces to Adams’ theorem. A full discussion of all
this, and a proof of Adams’ theorem, is given in [VBKT].
Though maps of Hopf invariant 1 are rare, there are maps S2n−1→Sn of Hopf
invariant 2 for all even n. Namely, consider the space J2(Sn) constructed in §3.2.
This has a CW structure with three cells, of dimensions 0, n, and 2n, so J2(Sn) has
the form Cf for some f : S2n−1→Sn . We showed that if n is even, the square of a
generator of Hn(J2(Sn); Z) is twice a generator of H2n(J2(Sn); Z), so H(f) = ±2.
From this example we can get maps of any even Hopf invariant when n is even
via the following fact.
Proposition 4B.1. The map π2n−1(Sn)→Z deﬁned by the Hopf invariant is a ho-
momorphism.
Corollary 4B.2. π2n−1(Sn) contains a Z direct summand when n is even.
Proof: When n is even we have a surjective homomorphism from the abelian group
π2n−1(Sn) onto an inﬁnite cyclic group.
⊔⊓
Proof of 4B.1: Given two maps f , g : S2n−1→Sn , let us compare Cf+g with the space
Cf ∨g obtained from Sn by attaching two 2n cells via f and g. There is a natural
quotient map q : Cf +g→Cf ∨g collapsing the equatorial disk of the 2n cell of Cf+g
to a point. The induced cellular chain map q∗sends e2n
f+g to e2n
f
+ e2n
g . In coho-
mology this implies that q∗(βf ) = q∗(βg) = βf+g where βf , βg , and βf+g are
the cohomology classes dual to the 2n cells. Letting αf+g and αf∨g be the coho-
mology classes corresponding to the n cells, we have q∗(αf∨g) = αf+g since q
is a homeomorphism on the n cells.
By restricting to the subspaces Cf and Cg
of Cf ∨g we see that α2
f ∨g = H(f)βf + H(g)βg .
Therefore α2
f+g = q∗(α2
f∨g) =
H(f )q∗(βf ) + H(g)q∗(βg) =
 H(f) + H(g)

βf+g .
⊔⊓
Exercises
1. Show that the Hopf invariant of a composition S2n−1
f-----→S2n−1
g-----→Sn is given by
H(gf ) = (deg f )H(g), and for a composition S2n−1
f-----→Sn
g-----→Sn the Hopf invariant
satisﬁes H(gf ) = (deg g)2H(f ).
2. Show that if Sk -→Sm
p-----→Sn is a ﬁber bundle, then m = 2n −1, k = n −1, and, if
n > 1, the Hopf invariant of p is ±1. [Show that Cp is a manifold and apply Poincar´e
duality.]

Section 4.C.
Minimal Cell Structures
429
We can apply the homology version of Whitehead’s theorem, Corollary 4.32, to
show that a simply-connected CW complex with ﬁnitely-generated homology groups
is always homotopy equivalent to a CW complex having the minimum number of cells
consistent with its homology, namely, one n cell for each Z summand of Hn , and a
pair of cells of dimension n and n + 1 for each Zk summand of Hn .
Proposition 4C.1. Given a simply-connected CW complex X and a decomposition
of each of its homology groups Hn(X) as a direct sum of cyclic groups with speci-
ﬁed generators, then there is a CW complex Z and a cellular homotopy equivalence
f : Z→X such that each cell of Z is either:
(a) a ‘generator’ n cell en
α , which is a cycle in cellular homology mapped by f to
a cellular cycle representing the speciﬁed generator α of one of the cyclic sum-
mands of Hn(X); or
(b) a ‘relator’ (n + 1) cell en+1
α
, with cellular boundary equal to a multiple of the
generator n cell en
α , in the case that α has ﬁnite order.
In the nonsimply-connected case this result can easily be false, counterexamples
being provided by acyclic spaces and the space X = S1 ∨Sn ∪en+1 constructed in
Example 4.34, which has the same homology as S1 but which must have cells of
dimension greater than 1 in order to have πn nontrivial.
Proof: We build Z inductively over skeleta, starting with Z1 a point since X is simply-
connected. For the inductive step, suppose we have constructed f : Zn→X inducing
an isomorphism on Hi for i < n and a surjection on Hn . For the mapping cylinder
Mf we then have Hi(Mf , Zn) = 0 for i ≤n and Hn+1(Mf , Zn) ≈πn+1(Mf , Zn) by the
Hurewicz theorem. Part of the exact sequence in homology for (Mf , Zn) is contained
in the following diagram:
n
X
Hn 1(
)
X
Hn(
)
+
n 1(
)
+
M
Hn 1(
)
+
π
f
M
Z
Hn 1(
)
n
Z
Hn(
H
0
n(
)
)
+
n 1
+
f
Mf
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
,
n
Hn 1(
)
+
Z
Z
n 1
+
Z
n 1
+
Z
Hn 1(
)
n
Z
Hn(
H
0
n(
)
)
+
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
,
n
M
Z
f ,
==
≈
≈
≈
By induction we know the map Hn(Zn)→Hn(Mf ) ≈Hn(X) exactly, namely, Zn has
generator n cells, which are cellular cycles mapping to the given generators of Hn(X),
and relator n cells which do not contribute to Hn(Zn). Thus Hn(Zn) is free with
basis the generator n cells, and the kernel of Hn(Zn)→Hn(X) is free with basis given
by certain multiples of some of the generator n cells. Choose ‘relator’ elements ρi ∈
Hn+1(Mf , Zn) mapping to this basis for the kernel, and let the ‘generator’ elements
γi ∈Hn+1(Mf , Zn) be the images of the chosen generators of Hn+1(Mf ) ≈Hn+1(X).

430
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
Via the Hurewicz isomorphism Hn+1(Mf , Zn) ≈πn+1(Mf , Zn), the homology
classes ρi and γi are represented by maps ri, gi : (Dn+1, Sn)→(Mf , Zn). We form
Zn+1 from Zn by attaching (n + 1) cells via the restrictions of the maps ri and
gi to Sn . The maps ri and gi themselves then give an extension of the inclusion
Zn>Mf to a map Zn+1→Mf , whose composition with the retraction Mf→X is the
extended map f : Zn+1→X . This gives us the lower row of the preceding diagram,
with commutative squares. By construction, the subgroup of Hn+1(Zn+1, Zn) gener-
ated by the relator (n + 1) cells maps injectively to Hn(Zn), with image the kernel
of Hn(Zn)→Hn(X), so f∗: Hn(Zn+1)→Hn(X) is an isomorphism. The elements of
Hn+1(Zn+1, Zn) represented by the generator (n+1) cells map to the γi ’s, hence map
to zero in Hn(Zn), so by exactness of the second row these generator (n + 1) cells
are cellular cycles representing elements of Hn+1(Zn+1) mapped by f∗to the given
generators of Hn+1(X). In particular, f∗: Hn+1(Zn+1)→Hn+1(X) is surjective, and
the induction step is ﬁnished.
Doing this for all n, we produce a CW complex Z and a map f : Z→X with the
desired properties.
⊔⊓
Example 4C.2. Suppose X is a simply-connected CW complex such that for some
n ≥2,
eHi(X) is



ﬁnitely generated for i = n
ﬁnitely generated and free for i = n + 1
0 for i ≠n, n + 1.
Then the proposition says that X is homotopy equivalent to a CW complex Z ob-
tained from a wedge sum of n spheres by attaching (n + 1) cells.
The attaching
maps of these cells are determined up to homotopy by the cellular boundary map
Hn+1(Zn+1, Zn)→Hn(Zn) since πn(Zn) ≈Hn(Zn). So the attaching maps are either
trivial, in the case of generator (n + 1) cells, or they represent some multiple of an
inclusion of one of the wedge summands, in the case of a relator (n + 1) cell. Hence
Z is the wedge sum of spheres Sn and Sn+1 together with Moore spaces M(Zm, n)
of the form Sn ∪en+1 . In particular, the homotopy type of X is uniquely determined
by its homology groups.
Proposition 4C.3. Let X be a simply-connected space homotopy equivalent to a CW
complex, such that the only nontrivial reduced homology groups of X are H2(X) ≈
Zm and H4(X) ≈Z. Then the homotopy type of X is uniquely determined by the
cup product ring H∗(X; Z). In particular, this applies to any simply-connected closed
4 manifold.
Proof: By the previous proposition we may assume X is a complex Xϕ obtained from
a wedge sum
W
j S2
j of m 2 spheres S2
j by attaching a cell e4 via a map ϕ : S3→
W
j S2
j .
As shown in Example 4.51, π3(
W
j S2
j ) is free with basis the Hopf maps ηj : S3→S2
j and
the Whitehead products [ij, ik], j < k, where ij is the inclusion S2
j >
W
j S2
j . Since

Section 4.C.
Minimal Cell Structures
431
a homotopy of ϕ does not change the homotopy type of Xϕ , we may assume ϕ is
a linear combination
P
j ajηj +
P
j<k ajk[ij, ik]. We need to see how the coefﬁcients
aj and ajk determine the cup product H2(X; Z)×H2(X; Z)→H4(X; Z).
This cup product can be represented by an m×m symmetric matrix (bjk) where
the cup product of the cohomology classes dual to the jth and kth 2-cells is bjk
times the class dual to the 4 cell. We claim that bjk = ajk for j < k and bjj = aj .
If ϕ is one of the generators ηi or [ij, ik] this is clear, since if ϕ = ηj then Xϕ is
the wedge sum of CP2 with m −1 2 spheres, while if ϕ = [ij, ik] then Xϕ is the
wedge sum of S2
j ×S2
k with m −2 2 spheres. The claim is also true when ϕ is −ηj
or −[ij, ik] since changing the sign of ϕ amounts to composing ϕ with a reﬂection
of S3 , and this changes the generator of H4(Xϕ; Z) to its negative. The general case
now follows by induction from the assertion that the matrix (bjk) for Xϕ+ψ is the
sum of the corresponding matrices for Xϕ and Xψ . This assertion can be proved as
follows. By attaching two 4 cells to
W
j S2
j by ϕ and ψ we obtain a complex Xϕ,ψ
which we can view as Xϕ ∪Xψ . There is a quotient map q : Xϕ+ψ -→Xϕ,ψ which is a
homeomorphism on the 2 skeleton and collapses the closure of an equatorial 3 disk
in the 4 cell of Xϕ+ψ to a point. The induced map q∗: H4(Xϕ,ψ)→H4(Xϕ+ψ) sends
each of the two generators corresponding to the 4 cells of Xϕ,ψ to a generator, and
the assertion follows.
Now suppose Xϕ and Xψ have isomorphic cup product rings. This means bases
for H∗(Xϕ; Z) and H∗(Xψ; Z) can be chosen so that the matrices specifying the cup
product H2×H2→H4 with respect to these bases are the same. The preceding propo-
sition says that any choice of basis can be realized as the dual basis to a cell structure
on a CW complex homotopy equivalent to the given complex. Therefore we may as-
sume the matrices (bjk) for Xϕ and Xψ are the same. By what we have shown in
the preceding paragraph, this means ϕ and ψ are homotopic, hence Xϕ and Xψ are
homotopy equivalent.
For the statement about simply-connected closed 4 manifolds, Corollaries A.8
and A.9 and Proposition A.11 in the Appendix say that such a manifold M has the ho-
motopy type of a CW complex with ﬁnitely generated homology groups. Then Poincar´e
duality and the universal coefﬁcient theorem imply that the only nontrivial homology
groups Hi(M) are Z for i = 0, 4 and Zm for i = 2, for some m ≥0.
⊔⊓
This result and the example preceding it are special cases of a homotopy classi-
ﬁcation by Whitehead of simply-connected CW complexes with positive-dimensional
cells in three adjacent dimensions n, n+1, and n+2; see [Baues] for a full treatment
of this.

432
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
While the homotopy groups of a ﬁber bundle ﬁt into a nice long exact sequence,
the situation for homology and cohomology is much more complicated. The K¨unneth
formula shows that there are some subtleties even for a product bundle, and the
general case requires the machinery of spectral sequences, developed in [SSAT]. In this
section we will describe a few special sorts of ﬁber bundles where more elementary
techniques sufﬁce, and apply these results to calculate the cohomology rings of some
important spaces closely related to Lie groups.
In particular we ﬁnd a number of
spaces with exterior and polynomial cohomology rings, the nicest possible structures.
The Leray-Hirsch Theorem
This theorem will be the basis for all the other results in this section. It gives
hypotheses sufﬁcient to guarantee that a ﬁber bundle has cohomology very much like
that of a product bundle.
Theorem 4D.1. Let F -→E
p-----→B be a ﬁber bundle such that, for some commutative
coefﬁcient ring R:
(a) Hn(F; R) is a ﬁnitely generated free R module for each n.
(b) There exist classes cj ∈Hkj(E; R) whose restrictions i∗(cj) form a basis for
H∗(F; R) in each ﬁber F , where i : F→E is the inclusion.
Then the map Φ : H∗(B; R)⊗RH∗(F; R)→H∗(E; R),
P
ij bi ⊗i∗(cj),
P
ij p∗(bi)⌣cj ,
is an isomorphism.
In other words, H∗(E; R) is a free H∗(B; R) module with basis {cj}, where we
view H∗(E; R) as a module over the ring H∗(B; R) by deﬁning scalar multiplication
by bc = p∗(b) ⌣c for b ∈H∗(B; R) and c ∈H∗(E; R).
In the case of a product E = B×F with H∗(F; R) free over R, we can pull back
a basis for H∗(F; R) via the projection E→F to obtain the classes cj .
Thus the
Leray-Hirsch theorem generalizes the version of the K¨unneth formula involving cup
products, Theorem 3.15, at least as far as the additive structure and the module struc-
ture over H∗(B; R) are concerned. However, the Leray-Hirsch theorem does not assert
that the isomorphism H∗(E; R) ≈H∗(B; R)⊗RH∗(F; R) is a ring isomorphism, and in
fact this need not be true, as we shall see by an example later.
An example of a bundle where the classes cj do not exist is the Hopf bundle
S1→S3→S2 , since H∗(S3) ̸≈H∗(S2)⊗H∗(S1).
Proof: We ﬁrst prove the result for ﬁnite-dimensional CW complexes B by induction
on their dimension. The case that B is 0 dimensional is trivial. For the induction step,

Section 4.D.
Cohomology of Fiber Bundles
433
suppose B has dimension n, and let B′ ⊂B be the subspace obtained by deleting a
point xα from the interior of each n cell en
α of B . Let E′ = p−1(B′). Then we have a
commutative diagram, with coefﬁcients in R understood:
B
R
B
H (
)
)−−−−−→
−−→
−−−−−→
,
∗
F
H (
∗
′
′
⊗
B
R
H (
)
)
∗
F
H (
∗
⊗
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
B
R
H (
)
)
∗
F
H (
∗
⊗
...
E E
H (
)
−−−−−→
,
∗
′
E
E
H (
)
−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−→
∗
H (
)
∗
′
...
...
...
Φ
−−→
Φ
−−→
Φ
The map Φ on the left is deﬁned exactly as in the absolute case, using the relative cup
product H∗(E, E′)⊗RH∗(E)→H∗(E, E′). The ﬁrst row of the diagram is exact since
tensoring with a free module preserves exactness. The second row is of course exact
also. The commutativity of the diagram follows from the evident naturality of Φ in the
case of the two squares shown. For the other square involving coboundary maps, if we
start with an element b ⊗i∗(cj) ∈H∗(B′)⊗RH∗(F) and map this horizontally we get
δb ⊗i∗(cj) which maps vertically to p∗(δb)⌣cj , whereas if we ﬁrst map vertically we
get p∗(b)⌣cj which maps horizontally to δ(p∗(b)⌣cj) = δp∗(b)⌣cj = p∗(δb)⌣cj
since δcj = 0.
The space B′ deformation retracts onto the skeleton Bn−1 , and the following
lemma implies that the inclusion p−1(Bn−1) > E′ is a weak homotopy equivalence,
hence induces an isomorphism on all cohomology groups:
Lemma 4D.2. Given a ﬁber bundle p : E→B and a subspace A ⊂B such that (B, A)
is k connected, then
 E, p−1(A)

is also k connected.
Proof: For a map g : (Di, ∂Di)→
 E, p−1(A)

with i ≤k, there is by hypothesis a
homotopy ft : (Di, ∂Di)→(B, A) of f0 = pg to a map f1 with image in A. The ho-
motopy lifting property then gives a homotopy gt : (Di, ∂Di)→
 E, p−1(A)

of g to a
map with image in p−1(A).
⊔⊓
The theorem for ﬁnite-dimensional B will now follow by induction on n and the
ﬁve-lemma once we show that the left-hand Φ in the diagram (∗) is an isomorphism.
By the ﬁber bundle property there are open disk neighborhoods Uα ⊂en
α of the
points xα such that the bundle is a product over each Uα .
Let U =
S
α Uα and
let U′ = U ∩B′ .
By excision we have H∗(B, B′) ≈H∗(U, U′), and H∗(E, E′) ≈
H∗ p−1(U), p−1(U′)

.
This gives a reduction to the problem of showing that the
map Φ : H∗(U, U′)⊗RH∗(F)→H∗(U ×F, U′×F) is an isomorphism. For this we can
either appeal to the relative K¨unneth formula in Theorem 3.20 or we can argue again
by induction, applying the ﬁve-lemma to the diagram (∗) with (B, B′) replaced by
(U, U′), induction implying that the theorem holds for U and U′ since they defor-
mation retract onto complexes of dimensions 0 and n −1, respectively, and by the
lemma we can restrict to the bundles over these complexes.
Next there is the case that B is an inﬁnite-dimensional CW complex. Since (B, Bn)
is n connected, the lemma implies that the same is true of
 E, p−1(Bn)

. Hence in

434
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
the commutative diagram at the right
B
R
H (
)
)
∗
F
H (
∗
⊗
−−−−−→
B
R
H (
)
)
∗
F
H (
∗
⊗
E
B
p
H (
) −−−−−−−−−−−−→
∗
H (
(
))
∗
−−→
Φ
−−→
Φ
n
n
- 1
the horizontal maps are isomorphisms
below dimension n. Then the fact that the
right-hand Φ is an isomorphism, as we have
already shown, implies that the left-hand Φ is an isomorphism below dimension n.
Since n is arbitrary, this gives the theorem for all CW complexes B .
To extend to the case of arbitrary base spaces B we need the notion of a pull-
back bundle which is used quite frequently in bundle theory. Given a ﬁber bundle
p : E→B and a map f : A→B , let f ∗(E) = {(a, e) ∈A×E
 f (a) = p(e)}, so there
is a commutative diagram as at the right, where the two maps
E
E
f
f
(
)
∗
−−−−−→
A
B
p
−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−→
−−→
from f ∗(E) are (a, e) , a and (a, e) , e. It is a simple ex-
ercise to verify that the projection f ∗(E)→A is a ﬁber bundle
with the same ﬁber as E→B . (A local trivialization of E→B
over U ⊂B gives rise to a local trivialization of f ∗(E)→A over f −1(U).)
Now for a non-CW base space B , let f : A→B be a CW approximation. The map
f ∗(E)→E then induces an isomorphism on homotopy groups by the ﬁve-lemma ap-
plied to the long exact sequences of homotopy groups for the two bundles E→B and
f ∗(E)→A with ﬁber F . Hence f ∗(E)→E is also an isomorphism on cohomology.
The classes cj pull back to classes in H∗(f ∗(E); R) which still restrict to a basis in
each ﬁber, and so the naturality of Φ reduces the theorem for E→B to the case of
f ∗(E)→A.
⊔⊓
Corollary 4D.3.
(a) H∗(U(n); Z) ≈ΛZ[x1, x3, ··· , x2n−1], the exterior algebra on generators xi of
odd dimension i.
(b) H∗(SU(n); Z) ≈ΛZ[x3, x5, ··· , x2n−1].
(c) H∗(Sp(n); Z) ≈ΛZ[x3, x7, ··· , x4n−1].
This rather simple structure is in marked contrast with the cohomology of O(n)
and SO(n) which is considerably more complicated, as shown in §3.D.
Proof: For (a), assume inductively that the result holds for U(n −1). By consider-
ing the bundle U(n −1)→U(n)→S2n−1 we see that the pair
 U(n), U(n −1)

is
(2n −2) connected, so Hi(U(n); Z)→Hi(U(n −1); Z) is onto for i ≤2n −3 and
the classes x1, ··· , x2n−3 ∈H∗(U(n −1); Z) given by induction are the restrictions
of classes c1, ··· , c2n−3 ∈H∗(U(n); Z).
The products of distinct xi ’s form a ba-
sis for H∗(U(n −1); Z) ≈ΛZ[x1, ··· , x2n−3], and these products are restrictions of
the corresponding products of ci ’s, so the Leray-Hirsch theorem applies, yielding
H∗(U(n); Z) ≈H∗(U(n −1); Z)⊗H∗(S2n−1; Z). In view of the commutativity prop-
erty of cup product, this tensor product is the exterior algebra on odd-dimensional
generators x1, ··· , x2n−1 .

Section 4.D.
Cohomology of Fiber Bundles
435
The same proof works for Sp(n) using the bundle Sp(n −1)→Sp(n)→S4n−1 .
In the case of SU(n) one uses the bundle SU(n −1)→SU(n)→S2n−1 . Since SU(1)
is the trivial group, the bundle SU(1)→SU(2)→S3 shows that SU(2) = S3 , so the
ﬁrst generator is x3 .
⊔⊓
It is illuminating to look more closely at how the homology and cohomology of
O(n), U(n), and Sp(n) are related to their bundle structures. For U(n) one has the
sequence of bundles
U 2
( )
U 1
( )
S
−−→
3
5
S 1
>
U 3
( )
S
−−→
2
2
>
U n 1
(
)
S
−−→
>
> ...
...
-
-
n 3
U n
(
)
S
−−→
>
-
n 1
=
If all these were product bundles, U(n) would be homeomorphic to the product
S1×S3× ··· ×S2n−1 . In actuality the bundles are nontrivial, but the homology and
cohomology of U(n) are the same as for this product of spheres, including the cup
product structure. For Sp(n) the situation is quite similar, with the corresponding
product of spheres S3×S7× ··· ×S4n−1 . For O(n) the corresponding sequence of
bundles is:
O 2
( )
O 1
( )
S
−−→
1
S 0
>
O 3
( )
S
−−→
2
>
O n 1
(
)
S
−−→
>
> ...
...
-
-
n 2
O n
(
)
S
−−→
>
-
n 1
=
The calculations in §3.D show that H∗(O(n); Z2) ≈H∗(S0×S1× ··· ×Sn−1; Z2), but
with Z coefﬁcients this no longer holds. Instead, consider the coarser sequence of
bundles
O 3
( )
(
)
O 1
( )
V
−−→
3
2
S 0
>
O 5
( )
−−→
2
2
>
O 2k 1
(
)
−−→
>
> ...
...
-
-
k 1
O 2k
(
)
S
−−→
>
-
k 1
=
R
(
)
)
V
5
2 R
(
V2 R
where the last bundle O(2k)→S2k−1 is omitted if n = 2k −1. As we remarked at
the end of §3.D in the case of SO(n), O(n) has the same integral homology and
cohomology groups as if these bundles were products, but the cup product structure
for O(n) with Z2 coefﬁcients is not the same as in this product.
Cohomology of Grassmannians
Here is an important application of the Leray-Hirsch theorem, generalizing the
calculation of the cohomology rings of projective spaces:
Theorem 4D.4. If Gn(C∞) is the Grassmann manifold of n dimensional vector sub-
spaces of C∞, then H∗(Gn(C∞); Z) is a polynomial ring Z[c1, ··· , cn] on generators
ci of dimension 2i. Similarly, H∗(Gn(R∞); Z2) is a polynomial ring Z2[w1, ··· , wn]
on generators wi of dimension i, and H∗(Gn(H∞); Z) ≈Z[q1, ··· , qn] with qi of
dimension 4i.

436
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
The plan of the proof is to apply the Leray-Hirsch theorem to a ﬁber bundle
F -→E
p-----→Gn(C∞) where E has the same cohomology ring as the product of n copies
of CP∞, a polynomial ring Z[x1, ··· , xn] with each xi 2 dimensional. The induced
map p∗: H∗(Gn(C∞); Z)→H∗(E; Z) will be injective, and we will show its image con-
sists of the symmetric polynomials in Z[x1, ··· , xn], the polynomials invariant under
permutations of the variables xi . It is a classical theorem in algebra that the sym-
metric polynomials themselves form a polynomial ring Z[σ1, ··· , σn] where σi is a
certain symmetric polynomial of degree i, namely the sum of all products of i dis-
tinct xj ’s. This gives the result for Gn(C∞), and the same argument will also apply
in the real and quaternionic cases.
Proof: Deﬁne an n ﬂag in Ck to be an ordered n tuple of orthogonal one-dimensional
vector subspaces of Ck . Equivalently, an n ﬂag could be deﬁned to be a chain of vector
subspaces V1 ⊂··· ⊂Vn of Ck where Vi has dimension i. Why either of these objects
should be called a ‘ﬂag’ is not exactly clear, but that is the traditional name. The set
of all n ﬂags in Ck forms a subspace Fn(Ck) of the product of n copies of CP k−1 .
There is a natural ﬁber bundle
Fn(Cn) -→Fn(Ck)
p-----→Gn(Ck)
where p sends an n tuple of orthogonal lines to the n plane they span. The local
triviality property can be veriﬁed just as was done for the analogous Stiefel bundle
Vn(Cn)→Vn(Ck)→Gn(Ck) in Example 4.52. The case k = ∞is covered by the same
argument, and this case will be the bundle F→E→Gn(C∞) alluded to in the para-
graph preceding the proof.
The ﬁrst step in the proof is to show that H∗(Fn(C∞); Z) ≈Z[x1, ··· , xn] where
xi is the pullback of a generator of H2(CP∞; Z) under the map Fn(C∞)→CP∞pro-
jecting an n ﬂag onto its ith line. This can be seen by considering the ﬁber bundle
CP∞-→Fn(C∞)
p-----→Fn−1(C∞)
where p projects an n ﬂag onto the (n−1) ﬂag obtained by ignoring its last line. The
local triviality property can be veriﬁed by the argument in Example 4.53. The Leray-
Hirsch theorem applies since the powers of xn restrict to a basis for H∗(CP∞; Z)
in the ﬁbers CP∞, each ﬁber being the space of lines in a vector subspace C∞of
the standard C∞. The elements xi for i < n are the pullbacks via p of similarly-
deﬁned elements of H∗(Fn−1(C∞); Z). By induction the latter ring is a polynomial
ring on these similarly-deﬁned elements. From the Leray-Hirsch theorem we conclude
that the products of powers of the xi ’s for 1 ≤i ≤n form an additive basis for
H∗(Fn(C∞); Z), hence this ring is the polynomial ring on the xi ’s.
There is a corresponding result for Fn(Ck), that H∗(Fn(Ck); Z) is free with basis
the monomials xi1
1 ··· xin
n with ij ≤k −j for each j . This is proved in exactly the
same way, using induction on n and the ﬁber bundle CPk−n→Fn(Ck)→Fn−1(Ck).

Section 4.D.
Cohomology of Fiber Bundles
437
After these preliminaries we can start the main argument, using the ﬁber bundle
Fn(Cn) -→Fn(C∞)
p-----→Gn(C∞).
The preceding calculations show that the Leray-
Hirsch theorem applies, so H∗(Fn(C∞); Z) is a free module over H∗(Gn(C∞); Z) with
basis the monomials xi1
1 ··· xin
n with ij ≤n −j for each j . In particular, since 1 is
among the basis elements, the homomorphism p∗is injective and its image is a direct
summand of H∗(Fn(C∞); Z). It remains to show that the image of p∗is exactly the
symmetric polynomials.
To show that the image of p∗is contained in the symmetric polynomials, consider
a map π : Fn(C∞)→Fn(C∞) permuting the lines in each n ﬂag according to a given
permutation of the numbers 1, ··· , n. The induced map π∗on H∗(Fn(C∞); Z) ≈
Z[x1, ··· , xn] is the corresponding permutation of the variables xi . Since permuting
the lines in an n ﬂag has no effect on the n plane they span, we have pπ = p, hence
π∗p∗= p∗, which says that polynomials in the image of p∗are invariant under
permutations of the variables.
As remarked earlier, the symmetric polynomials in Z[x1, ··· , xn] form a poly-
nomial ring Z[σ1, ··· , σn] where σi has degree i. We have shown that the image of
p∗is a direct summand, so to show that p∗maps onto the symmetric polynomials
it will sufﬁce to show that the graded rings H∗(Gn(C∞); Z) and Z[σ1, ··· , σn] have
the same rank in each dimension, where the rank of a ﬁnitely generated free abelian
group is the number of Z summands.
For a graded free Z module A =
L
i Ai , deﬁne its Poincar´e series to be the formal
power series pA(t) =
P
i aiti where ai is the rank of Ai , which we assume to be ﬁnite
for all i. The basic formula we need is that pA⊗B(t) = pA(t) pB(t), which is immediate
from the deﬁnition of the graded tensor product.
In the case at hand all nonzero cohomology is in even dimensions, so let us sim-
plify notation by taking Ai to be the 2i dimensional cohomology of the space in
question. Since the Poincar´e series of Z[x] is
P
i ti = (1 −t)−1 , the Poincar´e series of
H∗(Fn(C∞); Z) is (1 −t)−n . For H∗(Fn(Cn); Z) the Poincar´e series is
(1 + t)(1 + t + t2) ··· (1 + t + ··· + tn−1) =
n
Y
i=1
1 −ti
1 −t = (1 −t)−n
n
Y
i=1
(1 −ti)
From the additive isomorphism H∗(Fn(C∞); Z) ≈H∗(Gn(C∞); Z)⊗H∗(Fn(Cn); Z) we
see that the Poincar´e series p(t) of H∗(Gn(C∞); Z) satisﬁes
p(t)(1 −t)−n
n
Y
i=1
(1 −ti) = (1 −t)−n
and hence
p(t) =
n
Y
i=1
(1 −ti)−1
This is exactly the Poincar´e series of Z[σ1, ··· , σn] since σi has degree i. As noted
before, this implies that the image of p∗is all the symmetric polynomials.
This ﬁnishes the proof for Gn(C∞).
The same arguments apply in the other
two cases, using Z2 coefﬁcients throughout in the real case and replacing ‘rank’ by
‘dimension’ for Z2 vector spaces.
⊔⊓

438
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
These calculations show that the isomorphism H∗(E; R) ≈H∗(B; R)⊗RH∗(F; R)
of the Leray-Hirsch theorem is not generally a ring isomorphism, for if it were, then the
polynomial ring H∗(Fn(C∞); Z) would contain a copy of H∗(Fn(Cn); Z) as a subring,
but in the latter ring every positive-dimensional element is nilpotent — some power
of the element is zero — while in a polynomial ring there are no nilpotent elements.
The Gysin Sequence
Besides the Leray-Hirsch theorem which deals with ﬁber bundles which are coho-
mologically like products, there is another special class of ﬁber bundles which per-
mit an elementary analysis of their cohomology structure. These are ﬁber bundles
Sn−1 -→E
p-----→B satisfying an orientability hypothesis which will always hold if B is
simply-connected or if we take cohomology with Z2 coefﬁcients. For such bundles we
will show there is an exact sequence, called the Gysin sequence,
··· -→Hi−n(B; R)
⌣e
-----------------→Hi(B; R)
p∗
------------→Hi(E; R) -→Hi−n+1(B; R) -→···
where e is a certain ‘Euler class’ in Hn(B; R).
Since Hi(B; R) = 0 for i < 0, the
initial portion of the Gysin sequence gives isomorphisms p∗: Hi(B; R)
≈-----→Hi(E; R)
for i < n −1, and the more interesting part of the sequence begins
0 -→Hn−1(B; R)
p∗
------------→Hn−1(E; R) -→H0(B; R) ⌣e
--------------→Hn(B; R)
p∗
------------→Hn(E; R) -→···
In the case of a product bundle E = Sn−1×B there is a section, a map s : B→E with
ps = 11, so the Gysin sequence breaks up into split short exact sequences
0 -→Hi(B; R)
p∗
------------→Hi(Sn−1×B; R) -→Hi−n+1(B; R) -→0
which agrees with the K¨unneth formula H∗(Sn−1×B; R) ≈H∗(Sn−1; R)⊗H∗(B; R).
The splitting holds whenever the bundle has a section, even if it is not a product.
For example, consider the bundle Sn−1→V2(Rn+1)
p-----→Sn . Points of V2(Rn+1)
are pairs (v1, v2) of orthogonal unit vectors in Rn+1 , and p(v1, v2) = v1 . If we think
of v1 as a point of Sn and v2 as a unit vector tangent to Sn at v1 , then V2(Rn+1)
is exactly the bundle of unit tangent vectors to Sn .
A section of this bundle is a
ﬁeld of unit tangent vectors to Sn , and such a vector ﬁeld exists iff n is odd by
Theorem 2.28. The fact that the Gysin sequence splits when there is a section then
says that V2(Rn+1) has the same cohomology as the product Sn−1×Sn if n is odd, at
least when n > 1 so that the base space Sn is simply-connected and the orientability
hypothesis is satisﬁed. When n is even, the calculations at the end of §3.D show that
H∗(V2(Rn+1); Z) consists of Z’s in dimensions 0 and 2n −1 and a Z2 in dimension
n. The latter group appears in the Gysin sequence as
)
)
)
(
(
(V
S
H
2
2
R
n 1
+
n
n
H
n
)
(S
n
H
1
)
(S
0
H
n −−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
e
=
=
Z
=
Z
=
Z
0

Section 4.D.
Cohomology of Fiber Bundles
439
hence the Euler class e must be twice a generator of Hn(Sn) in the case that n is
even. When n is odd it must be zero in order for the Gysin sequence to split.
This example illustrates the theorem in Differential Topology which explains why
the Euler class has this name: The Euler class of the unit tangent bundle of a closed
orientable smooth n manifold M is equal to the Euler characteristic χ(M) times a
generator of Hn(M; Z).
Whenever a bundle Sn−1→E
p-----→B has a section, the Euler class e must be zero
from exactness of H0(B)
⌣e
------------→Hn(B)
p∗-----→Hn(E) since p∗is injective if there is a
section. Thus the Euler class can be viewed as an obstruction to the existence of a
section — if it is nonzero, there can be no section. This qualitative statement can be
made more precise by bringing in the machinery of obstruction theory; see [Milnor-
Stasheff] or [VBKT].
Before deriving the Gysin sequence let us look at some examples of how it can be
used to compute cup products.
Example 4D.5. Consider a bundle Sn−1 -→E
p-----→B with E contractible, for exam-
ple the bundle S1→S∞→CP∞or its real or quaternionic analogues. The long exact
sequence of homotopy groups for the bundle shows that B is (n −1) connected.
Thus if n > 1, B is simply-connected and we have a Gysin sequence for cohomology
with Z coefﬁcients. For n = 1 we take Z2 coefﬁcients. If n > 1 then since E is
contractible, the Gysin sequence implies that Hi(B; Z) = 0 for 0 < i < n and that
⌣e : Hi(B; Z)→Hi+n(B; Z) is an isomorphism for i ≥0. It follows that H∗(B; Z) is
the polynomial ring Z[e]. When n = 1 the map p∗: Hn−1(B; Z2)→Hn−1(E; Z2) in the
Gysin sequence is surjective, so we see that ⌣e : Hi(B; Z2)→Hi+n(B; Z2) is again an
isomorphism for all i ≥0, and hence H∗(B; Z2) ≈Z2[e]. Thus the Gysin sequence
gives a new derivation of the cup product structure in projective spaces. Also, since
polynomial rings Z[e] are realizable as H∗(X; Z) only when e has dimension 2 or 4,
as we show in Corollary 4L.10, we can conclude that there exist bundles Sn−1→E→B
with E contractible only when n is 1, 2, or 4.
Example 4D.6.
For the Grassmann manifold Gn = Gn(R∞) we have π1(Gn) ≈
π0O(n) ≈Z2 , so the universal cover of Gn gives a bundle S0→eGn→Gn . One can
view eGn as the space of oriented n planes in R∞, which is obviously a 2 sheeted
covering space of Gn , hence the universal cover since it is path-connected, being the
quotient Vn(R∞)/SO(n) of the contracible space Vn(R∞). A portion of the Gysin
sequence for the bundle S0→eGn→Gn is H0(Gn; Z2) ⌣e
------------→H1(Gn; Z2) -→H1( eGn; Z2).
This last group is zero since
eGn is simply-connected, and H1(Gn; Z2) ≈Z2 since
H∗(Gn; Z2) ≈Z2[w1, ··· , wn] as we showed earlier in this section, so e = w1 and
the map ⌣e : H∗(Gn; Z2)→H∗(Gn; Z2) is injective. The Gysin sequence then breaks
up into short exact sequences 0→Hi(Gn; Z2) ⌣e
------------→Hi+1(Gn; Z2)→Hi+1( eGn; Z2)→0,
from which it follows that H∗( eGn; Z2) is the quotient ring Z2[w1, ··· , wn]/(w1) ≈

440
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
Z2[w2, ··· , wn].
Example 4D.7. The complex analogue of the bundle in the preceding example is a bun-
dle S1→eGn(C∞)→Gn(C∞) with eGn(C∞) 2 connected. This can be constructed in the
following way. There is a determinant homomorphism U(n)→S1 with kernel SU(n),
the unitary matrices of determinant 1, so S1 is the coset space U(n)/SU(n), and by
restricting the action of U(n) on Vn(C∞)
to SU(n) we obtain the second row of the
commutative diagram at the right. The
)
(
V
)
(
SU n
)
(
U n
n C
∞
−−−−−−−−−→
)
(
Gn C
∞
)
(
G
S
n C
∞
)
(
Vn C
∞
−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−→
−→
==
1
/
second row is a ﬁber bundle by the usual
argument of choosing continuously-varying orthonormal bases in n planes near a
given n plane. One sees that the space eGn(C∞) = Vn(C∞)/SU(n) is 2 connected
by looking at the relevant portion of the diagram of homotopy groups associated to
these two bundles:
)
(
U n
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−→
==
)
π1(
)
Gn
π2(
0
0
)
Gn
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
π1(
)
S
π1
1
(
∼
)
Gn
π2(
)
G
0
0
n
π2(∼
∂
∂
≈
≈
The second vertical map is an isomorphism since S1 embeds in U(n) as the subgroup
U(1). Since the boundary map in the upper row is an isomorphism, so also is the
boundary map in the lower row, and then exactness implies that eGn is 2 connected.
The Gysin sequence for S1→eGn(C∞)→Gn(C∞) can be analyzed just as in the
preceding example. Part of the sequence is H0(Gn; Z) ⌣e
------------→H2(Gn; Z) -→H2( eGn; Z),
and this last group is zero since eGn is 2 connected, so e must be a generator of
H2(Gn; Z) ≈Z.
Since H∗(Gn; Z) is a polynomial algebra Z[c1, ··· , cn], we must
have e = ±c1 , so the map ⌣e : H∗(Gn; Z)→H∗(Gn; Z) is injective, the Gysin se-
quence breaks up into short exact sequences, and H∗( eGn; Z) is the quotient ring
Z[c1, ··· , cn]/(c1) ≈Z[c2, ··· , cn].
The spaces eGn in the last two examples are often denoted BSO(n) and BSU(n),
expressing the fact that they are related to the groups SO(n) and SU(n) via bundles
SO(n)→Vn(R∞)→BSO(n) and SU(n)→Vn(C∞)→BSU(n) with contractible total
spaces Vn . There is no quaternion analogue of BSO(n) and BSU(n) since for n = 2
this would give a space with cohomology ring Z[x] on an 8 dimensional generator,
which is impossible by Corollary 4L.10.
Now we turn to the derivation of the Gysin sequence, which follows a rather
roundabout route:
(1) Deduce a relative version of the Leray-Hirsch theorem from the absolute case.
(2) Specialize this to the case of bundles with ﬁber a disk, yielding a basic result
called the Thom isomorphism.
(3) Show this applies to all orientable disk bundles.

Section 4.D.
Cohomology of Fiber Bundles
441
(4) Deduce the Gysin sequence by plugging the Thom isomorphism into the long
exact sequence of cohomology groups for the pair consisting of a disk bundle
and its boundary sphere bundle.
(1) A ﬁber bundle pair consists of a ﬁber bundle p : E→B with ﬁber F , together with
a subspace E′ ⊂E such that p||E′ is a bundle with ﬁber a subspace F′ ⊂F , and
moreover, near each ﬁber of E there is a local trivialization of E which restricts to a
local trivialization of E′ . For example, if E→B is a bundle with ﬁber Dn and E′ ⊂E is
the union of the boundary spheres of the ﬁbers, then (E, E′) is a ﬁber bundle pair; local
trivializations of E restrict to local trivializations of E′ since homeomorphisms of Dn
must preserve boundary, boundary and interior points of Dn being distinguished by
the local homology groups Hn(Dn, Dn −{x}; Z).
Theorem 4D.8. Suppose that (F, F′)→(E, E′)
p-----→B is a ﬁber bundle pair such that
H∗(F, F′; R) is a free R module, ﬁnitely generated in each dimension. If there exist
classes cj ∈H∗(E, E′; R) whose restrictions form a basis for H∗(F, F′; R) in each
ﬁber, then H∗(E, E′; R), as a module over H∗(B; R), is free with basis {cj}.
The module structure is deﬁned just as in the absolute case by bc = p∗(b) ⌣c ,
but now we use the relative cup product H∗(E; R)×H∗(E, E′; R)→H∗(E, E′; R).
Proof: Construct a bundle bE→B from E by attaching the mapping cylinder M of
p : E′→B to E by identifying the subspaces E′ ⊂E and E′ ⊂M . Thus the ﬁbers
bF of bE are obtained from the ﬁbers F by attaching cones CF′ on the subspaces
F′ ⊂F . Regarding B as the subspace of bE at one end of the mapping cylinder M , we
have H∗( bE, M; R) ≈H∗( bE −B, M −B; R) ≈H∗(E, E′; R) via excision and the obvious
deformation retraction of bE −B onto E . The long exact sequence of a triple gives
H∗( bE, M; R) ≈H∗( bE, B; R) since M deformation retracts to B . All these isomorphisms
are H∗(B; R) module isomorphisms. Since B is a retract of bE via the bundle projection
bE→B , we have a splitting H∗( bE; R) ≈H∗( bE, B; R)
L
H∗(B; R) as H∗(B; R) modules.
Let bcj ∈H∗( bE; R) correspond to cj ∈H∗(E, E′; R) ≈H∗( bE, B; R) in this splitting.
The classes bcj together with 1 restrict to a basis for H∗( bF; R) in each ﬁber bF =
F ∪CF′ , so the absolute form of the Leray-Hirsch theorem implies that H∗( bE; R) is
a free H∗(B; R) module with basis {1, bcj}. It follows that {cj} is a basis for the free
H∗(B; R) module H∗(E, E′; R).
⊔⊓
(2) Now we specialize to the case of a ﬁber bundle pair (Dn, Sn−1) -→(E, E′)
p-----→B .
An element c ∈Hn(E, E′; R) which restricts in each ﬁber (Dn, Sn−1) to a generator of
Hn(Dn, Sn−1; R) ≈R is called a Thom class for the bundle. We are mainly interested
in the cases R = Z and Z2 , but R could be any commutative ring with identity, in which
case a ‘generator’ is an element with a multiplicative inverse, so all elements of R are
multiples of the generator. A Thom class with Z coefﬁcients gives rise to a Thom class

442
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
with any other coefﬁcent ring R under the homomorphism Hn(E, E′; Z)→Hn(E, E′; R)
induced by the homomorphism Z→R sending 1 to the identity element of R.
Corollary 4D.9. If the disk bundle (Dn, Sn−1) -→(E, E′)
p-----→B has a Thom class
c ∈Hn(E, E′; R), then the map Φ : Hi(B; R)→Hi+n(E, E′; R), Φ(b) = p∗(b) ⌣c , is
an isomorphism for all i ≥0, and Hi(E, E′; R) = 0 for i < n.
⊔⊓
The isomorphism Φ is called the Thom isomorphism. The corollary can be made
into a statement about absolute cohomology by deﬁning the Thom space T(E) to be
the quotient E/E′ . Each disk ﬁber Dn of E becomes a sphere Sn in T(E), and all
these spheres coming from different ﬁbers are disjoint except for the common base-
point x0 = E′/E′ . A Thom class can be regarded as an element of Hn(T(E), x0; R) ≈
Hn(T(E); R) which restricts to a generator of Hn(Sn; R) in each ‘ﬁber’ Sn in T(E),
and the Thom isomorphism becomes Hi(B; R) ≈
eHn+i(T(E); R).
For example if
E is the product bundle B×Dn then T(E) is the n fold reduced suspension ΣnB
and the Thom isomorphism specializes to the suspension isomorphism Hi(B; R) ≈
eHn+i(ΣnB; R) given by the reduced cross product in §3.2.
(3) The major remaining step in the derivation of the Gysin sequence is to relate the
existence of a Thom class for a disk bundle Dn→E→B to orientability of the bun-
dle. First we deﬁne orientability for a sphere bundle Sn−1→E′→B . In the proof of
Proposition 4.60 we described a procedure for lifting paths γ in B to homotopy equiv-
alences Lγ between the ﬁbers above the endpoints of γ . We did this for ﬁbrations
rather than ﬁber bundles, but the method applies equally well to ﬁber bundles whose
ﬁber is a CW complex since the homotopy lifting property was used only for the ﬁber
and for the product of the ﬁber with I . In particular, if γ is a loop in B then Lγ is
a homotopy equivalence from the ﬁber Sn−1 over the basepoint of γ to itself, and
we deﬁne the sphere bundle E′ to be orientable if Lγ induces the identity map on
Hn−1(Sn−1; Z) for each loop γ in B .
For example, the Klein bottle, regarded as a bundle over S1 with ﬁber S1 , is
non-orientable since as we follow a path looping once around the base circle, the cor-
responding ﬁber circles sweep out the full Klein bottle, ending up where they started
but with orientation reversed. The same reasoning shows that the torus, viewed as
a circle bundle over S1 , is orientable. More generally, any sphere bundle which is a
product is orientable since the maps Lγ can be taken to be the identity for all loops γ .
Also, sphere bundles over simply-connected base spaces are orientable since γ ≃η
implies Lγ ≃Lη , hence all Lγ ’s are homotopic to the identity when all loops γ are
nullhomotopic..
One could deﬁne orientability for a disk bundle Dn→E→B by relativizing the
previous deﬁnition, constructing lifts Lγ which are homotopy equivalences of the
ﬁber pairs (Dn, Sn−1). However, since Hn(Dn, Sn−1; Z) is canonically isomorphic to
Hn−1(Sn−1; Z) via the coboundary map in the long exact sequence of the pair, it is

Section 4.D.
Cohomology of Fiber Bundles
443
simpler and amounts to the same thing just to deﬁne E to be orientable if its boundary
sphere subbundle E′ is orientable.
Theorem 4D.10. Every disk bundle has a Thom class with Z2 coefﬁcients, and ori-
entable disk bundles have Thom classes with Z coefﬁcients.
An exercise at the end of the section is to show that the converse of the last
statement is also true: A disk bundle with a Z coefﬁcient Thom class is orientable.
Proof: We will show that if the disk bundle Dn→E→B is orientable and B is path-
connected, then for cohomology with Z coefﬁcients the following is true:
(∗)
The restriction map Hi(E, E′)→Hi(Dn
x, Sn−1
x
) is an isomorphism for all ﬁbers
Dn
x , x ∈B , and for all i ≤n.
Similarly, for Z2 coefﬁcients our proof will show that (∗) holds without any ori-
entability hypothesis. Hence in both cases a generator of Hn(E, E′) ≈Hn(Dn
x, Sn−1
x
)
is a Thom class.
For an orientable disk bundle over a path-connected base, choosing an isomor-
phism Hn(Dn
x, Sn−1
x
) ≈Z for one ﬁber Dn
x determines such isomorphisms for all
ﬁbers since the isomorphisms L∗
γ depend only on the endpoints of γ . Having made
such a choice, then if (∗) is true we have an isomorphism Hn(E, E′) ≈Z which re-
stricts to the chosen isomorphism Hn(Dn
x, Sn−1
x
) ≈Z for all ﬁbers. We will use this
preferred isomorphism Hn(E, E′) ≈Z in the inductive proof of (∗) given below. In
the case of Z2 coefﬁcients, there can be only one isomorphism of a group with Z2 so
no choices are necessary and orientability is irrelevant. We will prove (∗) in the Z
coefﬁcient case, leaving it to the reader to replace all Z’s in the proof by Z2 ’s to obtain
a proof in the Z2 case.
Suppose ﬁrst that B is a connected CW complex of ﬁnite dimension k. Let U ⊂B
be the subspace obtained by deleting one point from the interior of each k cell of B ,
and let V ⊂B be the union of the open k cells. Thus B = U ∪V . For a subspace
A ⊂B let EA→A and E′
A→A be the disk and sphere bundles obtained by taking the
subspaces of E and E′ projecting to A. Consider the following portion of a Mayer-
Vietoris sequence:
Hn(E, E′) -→Hn(EU, E′
U)
L
Hn(EV, E′
V)
Ψ------------→Hn(EU∩V, E′
U∩V)
The ﬁrst map is injective since the preceding term in the sequence is zero by induction
on k, since U ∩V deformation retracts onto a disjoint union of (k −1) spheres
and we can apply Lemma 4D.2 to replace EU∩V by the part of E over this union
of (k −1) spheres. By exactness we then have an isomorphism Hn(E, E′) ≈Ker Ψ .
Similarly, by Lemma 4D.2 and induction each of the terms Hn(EU, E′
U), Hn(EV, E′
V),
and Hn(EU∩V, E′
U∩V) is a product of Z’s, with one Z factor for each component of the
spaces involved, projection onto the Z factor being given by restriction to any ﬁber in

444
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
the component. Elements of Ker Ψ are pairs (α, β) ∈Hn(EU, E′
U)
L
Hn(EV, E′
V) having
the same restriction to Hn(EU∩V, E′
U∩V). Since B is connected, this means that all the
Z coordinates of α and β in the previous direct product decompositions must be
equal, since between any two components of U or V one can interpolate a ﬁnite
sequence of components of U and V alternately, each component in the sequence
having nontrivial intersection with its neighbors. Thus Ker Ψ is a copy of Z, with
restriction to a ﬁber being the isomorphism Hn(E, E′) ≈Z.
To ﬁnish proving (∗) for ﬁnite-dimensional B it remains to see that Hi(E, E′) = 0
for i < n, but this follows immediately by looking at an earlier stage of the Mayer-
Vietoris sequence, where the two terms adjacent to Hi(E, E′) vanish by induction.
Proving (∗) for an inﬁnite-dimensional CW complex B reduces to the ﬁnite di-
mensional case as in the Leray-Hirsch theorem since we are only interested in coho-
mology in a ﬁnite range of dimensions, through dimension n. To handle the case
of a non-CW base space B we can reduce to the CW case by pulling back over a CW
approximation to B , again as in the Leray-Hirsch theorem, applying the ﬁve-lemma
to say that the pullback bundle has isomorphic homotopy groups, hence isomorphic
absolute and relative cohomology groups. From the deﬁnition of the pullback bundle
it is immediate that the pullback of an orientable sphere bundle is orientable, so the
case of a CW base implies the general case.
⊔⊓
(4) Now we can derive the Gysin sequence for a sphere bundle Sn−1→E
p-----→B . Con-
sider the mapping cylinder Mp , which is a disk bundle Dn→Mp
p-----→B with E as its
boundary sphere bundle. Assuming that a Thom class c ∈Hn(Mp, E; R) exists, as is
the case if E is orientable or if R = Z2 , then the long exact sequence of cohomology
groups for the pair (Mp, E) gives the ﬁrst row of the following commutative diagram,
with R coefﬁcients implicit:
M
E
H (
)
−−→
,
H (
)
−−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−→
...
...
−−→
−−→
Φ
−−→
Φ
i
i
E
H (
) −−−−−→
i
p
M
E
H
(
)
,
i 1
p
Mp
j
+
+
B
H
(
)
−−−→
H (
)
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−→
...
...
i n
i
E
H (
) −−−−−→
i
B
p
e
-
B
H
(
)
i n 1
-
∗
∗
p∗
==
≈
≈
≈
The maps Φ are the Thom isomorphism, and the vertical map p∗is an isomorphism
since Mp deformation retracts onto B . The Euler class e ∈Hn(B; R) is deﬁned to be
(p∗)−1j∗(c), c being a Thom class. The square containing the map ⌣e commutes
since for b ∈Hi−n(B) we have j∗Φ(b) = j∗(p∗(b) ⌣c) = p∗(b) ⌣j∗(c), which
equals p∗(b ⌣e) = p∗(b) ⌣p∗(e) since p∗(e) = j∗(c). Another way of deﬁning e
is as the class corresponding to c ⌣c under the Thom isomorphism, since Φ(e) =
p∗(e) ⌣c = j∗(c) ⌣c = c ⌣c .
Finally, the lower row of the diagram is by deﬁnition the Gysin sequence.
⊔⊓
To conclude this section we will use the following rather specialized application

Section 4.D.
Cohomology of Fiber Bundles
445
of the Gysin sequence to compute a few more examples of spaces with polynomial
cohomology.
Corollary 4D.11. Suppose that S2k−1 -→E
p-----→B is an orientable sphere bundle such
that H∗(E; R) is a polynomial ring R[x1, ··· , xℓ] on even-dimensional generators
xi . Then H∗(B; R) = R[y1, ··· , yℓ, e] where e is the Euler class of the bundle and
p∗(yi) = xi for each i.
Proof: Consider the three terms Hi(B; R)
⌣e
------------→Hi+2k(B; R) -→Hi+2k(E; R) of the
Gysin sequence. If i is odd, the third term is zero since E has no odd-dimensional
cohomology. Hence the map ⌣e is surjective, and by induction on dimension this
implies that H∗(B; R) is zero in odd dimensions. This means the Gysin sequence
reduces to short exact sequences
0 -→H2i(B; R)
⌣e
-----------------→H2i+2k(B; R)
p∗
------------→H2i+2k(E; R) -→0
Since p∗is surjective, we can choose elements yj ∈H∗(B; R) with p∗(yj) = xj . It
remains to check that H∗(B; R) = R[y1, ··· , yℓ, e], which is elementary algebra: Given
b ∈H∗(B; R), p∗(b) must be a polynomial f (x1, ··· , xℓ), so b −f (y1, ··· , yn) is in
the kernel of p∗and exactness gives an equation b −f (y1, ··· , yn) = b′ ⌣e for some
b′ ∈H∗(B; R). Since b′ has lower dimension than b, we may assume by induction that
b′ is a polynomial in y1, ··· , yℓ, e. Hence b = f (y1, ··· , yn)+b′ ⌣e is also a polyno-
mial in y1, ··· , yℓ, e. Thus the natural map R[y1, ··· , yℓ, e]→H∗(B; R) is surjective.
To see that it is injective, suppose there is a polynomial relation f (y1, ··· , yℓ, e) = 0 in
H∗(B; R). Applying p∗, we get f (x1, ··· , xℓ, 0) = 0 since p∗(yi) = xi and p∗(e) = 0
from the short exact sequence. The relation f (x1, ··· , xℓ, 0) = 0 takes place in the
polynomial ring R[x1, ··· , xℓ], so f (y1, ··· , yℓ, 0) = 0 in R[y1, ··· , yℓ, e], hence
f(y1, ··· , yℓ, e) must be divisible by e, say f = ge for some polynomial g. The
relation f (y1, ··· , yℓ, e) = 0 in H∗(B; R) then has the form g(y1, ··· , yℓ, e) ⌣e = 0.
Since ⌣e is injective, this gives a polynomial relation g(y1, ··· , yℓ, e) = 0 with g hav-
ing lower degree than f . By induction we deduce that g must be the zero polynomial,
hence also f .
⊔⊓
Example 4D.12.
Let us apply this to give another proof that H∗(Gn(C∞); Z) is a
polynomial ring Z[c1, ··· , cn] with |ci| = 2i. We use two ﬁber bundles:
S2n−1 -→E -→Gn(C∞)
and
S∞-→E -→Gn−1(C∞)
The total space E in both cases is the space of pairs (P, v) where P is an n plane in
C∞and v is a unit vector in P . In the ﬁrst bundle the map E→Gn(C∞) is (P, v),P ,
with ﬁber S2n−1 , and for the second bundle the map E→Gn−1(C∞) sends (P, v) to
the (n −1) plane in P orthogonal to v , with ﬁber S∞, all the unit vectors in C∞
orthogonal to a given (n −1) plane. Local triviality for the two bundles is veriﬁed in

446
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
the usual way. Since S∞is contractible, the map E→Gn−1(C∞) induces isomorphisms
on all homotopy groups, hence also on all cohomology groups. By induction on n we
then have H∗(E; Z) ≈Z[c1, ··· , cn−1]. The ﬁrst bundle is orientable since Gn(C∞) is
simply-connected, so the corollary gives H∗(Gn(C∞); Z) ≈Z[c1, ··· , cn] with cn = e.
The same argument works in the quaternionic case. For a version of this argument
in the real case see [VBKT].
Before giving our next example, let us observe that the Gysin sequence with a
ﬁxed coefﬁcient ring R is valid for any orientable ﬁber bundle F -→E
p¨-----→B whose
ﬁber is a CW complex F with H∗(F; R) ≈H∗(Sn−1; R). Orientability is deﬁned just
as before in terms of induced maps L∗
γ : Hn−1(F; R)→Hn−1(F; R). No changes are
needed in the derivation of the Gysin sequence to get this more general case, if the
associated ‘disk’ bundle is again taken to be the mapping cylinder CF→Mp→B .
Example 4D.13. We have computed the cohomology of eGn(R∞) with Z2 coefﬁcients,
ﬁnding it to be a polynomial ring on generators in dimensions 2 through n, and now
we compute the cohomology with Zp coefﬁcients for p an odd prime. The answer
will again be a polynomial algebra, but this time on even-dimensional generators,
depending on the parity of n. Consider ﬁrst the case that n is odd, say n = 2k + 1.
There are two ﬁber bundles
V2(R2k+1) -→E -→eG2k+1(R∞)
and
V2(R∞) -→E -→eG2k−1(R∞)
where E is the space of triples (P, v1, v2) with P an oriented (2k + 1) plane in R∞
and v1 and v2 two orthogonal unit vectors in P . The projection map in the ﬁrst
bundle is (P, v1, v2), P , and for the second bundle the projection sends (P, v1, v2)
to the oriented (2k −1) plane in P orthogonal to v1 and v2 , with the orientation
speciﬁed by saying for example that v1, v2 followed by a positively-oriented basis
for the orthogonal (2k −1) plane is a positively-oriented basis for P . Both bundles
are orientable since their base spaces eGn(R∞) are simply-connected, from the bundle
SO(n)→Vn(R∞)→eGn(R∞).
The ﬁber V2(R∞) of the second bundle is contractible, so E has the same coho-
mology as eG2k−1(R∞). The ﬁber of the ﬁrst bundle has the same Zp cohomology as
S4k−1 if p is odd, by the calculation at the end of §3.D. So if we assume inductively
that H∗( eG2k−1(R∞); Zp) ≈Zp[p1, ··· , pk−1] with |pi| = 4i, then Corollary 4D.11
above implies that H∗( eG2k+1(R∞); Zp) ≈Zp[p1, ··· , pk] where pk = e has dimension
4k. The induction can start with eG1(R∞) which is just S∞since an oriented line in
R∞contains a unique unit vector in the positive direction.
To handle the case of eGn(R∞) with n = 2k even, we proceed just as in Exam-
ple 4D.12, considering the bundles
S2k−1 -→E -→eG2k(R∞)
and
S∞-→E -→eG2k−1(R∞)

Section 4.D.
Cohomology of Fiber Bundles
447
By the case n odd we have H∗( eG2k−1(R∞); Zp) ≈Zp[p1, ··· , pk−1] with |pi| = 4i, so
the corollary implies that H∗( eG2k(R∞); Zp) is a polynomial ring on these generators
and also a generator in dimension 2k.
Summarizing, for p an odd prime we have shown:
H∗( eG2k+1(R∞); Zp) ≈Zp[p1, ··· , pk]
H∗( eG2k(R∞); Zp) ≈Zp[p1, ··· , pk−1, e]
|pi| = 4i, |e| = 2k
The same result holds also with Q coefﬁcients. In fact, our proof applies for any
coefﬁcient ring in which 2 has a multiplicative inverse, since all that is needed is that
H∗(V2(R2k+1); R) ≈H∗(S4k−1; R). For a calculation of the cohomology of eGn(R∞)
with Z coefﬁcients, see [VBKT]. It turns out that all torsion elements have order 2,
and modulo this torsion the integral cohomology is again a polynomial ring on the
generators pi and e. Similar results hold also for the cohomology of the unoriented
Grassmann manifold Gn(R∞), but with the generator e replaced by pk when n is
even.
Exercises
1.
For the ﬂag space Fn(Cn) show that H∗(Fn(Cn); Z) ≈Z[x1, ..., xn]/(σ1, ..., σn)
where σi is the ith elementary symmetric polynomial.
2.
Apply the Leray-Hirsch theorem to the bundle S1→S∞/Zp→CP∞to compute
H∗(K(Zp, 1); Zp) from H∗(CP∞; Zp).
3. Use the Leray-Hirsch theorem as in Corollary 4D.3 to compute H∗(Vn(Ck); Z) ≈
ΛZ[x2k−2n+1, x2k−2n+3, ··· , x2k−1] and similarly in the quaternionic case.
4. Use the Gysin sequence to compute the cohomology of bundles Sn−1→E→Sk with
k ≠n.
5. Use the Gysin sequence to show that for a ﬁber bundle Sk→Sm
p-----→Sn we must
have k = n −1 and m = 2n −1. Then use the Thom isomorphism to show that the
Hopf invariant of p must be ±1. [Hence n = 1, 2, 4, 8 by Adams’ theorem.]
6. Show that if M is a manifold of dimension 2n for which there exists a ﬁber bundle
S1→S2n+1→M , then M is simply-connected and H∗(M; Z) ≈H∗(CPn; Z) as rings.
Conversely, if M is simply-connected and H∗(M; Z) ≈H∗(CPn; Z) as rings, show there
is a bundle S1→E→M where E ≃S2n+1 . [When n > 1 there are examples where M
is not homeomorphic to CPn .]
7. Show that if a disk bundle Dn→E→B has a Thom class with Z coefﬁcients, then
it is orientable.
8. Show that the inclusion T n > U(n) of the n torus of diagonal matrices is homo-
topic to the map T n→U(1) > U(n) sending an n tuple of unit complex numbers
(z1, ··· , zn) to the 1×1 matrix (z1 ··· zn). Do the same for the diagonal subgroup of
Sp(n). [Hint: Diagonal matrices in U(n) are compositions of scalar multiplication in
n lines in Cn , and CPn−1 is connected.]

448
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
9. Fill in the details of the following argument to show that every n×n matrix A with
entries in H has an eigenvalue in H. (The usual argument over C involving roots of the
characteristic polynomial does not work due to the lack of a good quaternionic deter-
minant function.) For t ∈[0, 1] and λ ∈S3 ⊂H, consider the matrix tλI + (1 −t)A.
If A has no eigenvalues, this is invertible for all t .
Thus the map S3→GLn(H),
λ , λI , is nullhomotopic. But by the preceding problem and exercise 10(b) in §3.C,
this map represents n times a generator of π3GLn(H).
In Theorem 4.57 in §4.3 we showed that Ωspectra deﬁne cohomology theories,
and now we will prove the converse statement that all cohomology theories on the
CW category arise in this way from Ωspectra.
Theorem 4E.1. Every reduced cohomology theory on the category of basepointed
CW complexes and basepoint-preserving maps has the form hn(X) = ⟨X, Kn⟩for
some Ωspectrum {Kn}.
We will also see that the spaces Kn are unique up to homotopy equivalence.
This theorem gives another proof that ordinary cohomology is representable as
maps into Eilenberg-MacLane spaces, since for the spaces Kn in an Ωspectrum rep-
resenting eH∗(−; G) we have πi(Kn) = ⟨Si, Kn⟩= eHn(Si; R), so Kn is a K(G, n).
Before getting into the proof of the theorem let us observe that coﬁbration se-
quences, as constructed in §4.3, allow us to recast the deﬁnition of a reduced coho-
mology theory in a slightly more concise form: A reduced cohomology theory on the
category C whose objects are CW complexes with a chosen basepoint 0 cell and whose
morphisms are basepoint-preserving maps, is a sequence of functors hn , n ∈Z, from
C to abelian groups, together with natural isomorphisms hn(X) ≈hn+1(ΣX) for all
X in C , such that the following axioms hold for each hn :
(i) If f ≃g : X→Y in the basepointed sense, then f ∗= g∗: hn(Y)→hn(X).
(ii) For each inclusion A>X in C the sequence hn(X/A)→hn(X)→hn(A) is exact.
(iii) For a wedge sum X =
W
α Xα with inclusions iα : Xα > X , the product map
Q
αi∗
α : hn(X)→
Q
αhn(Xα) is an isomorphism.
To see that these axioms sufﬁce to deﬁne a cohomology theory, the main thing to
note is that the coﬁbration sequence A→X→X/A→ΣA→··· allows us to construct
the long exact sequence of a pair, just as we did in the case of the functors hn(X) =

Section 4.E.
The Brown Representability Theorem
449
⟨X, Kn⟩. In the converse direction, if we have natural long exact sequences of pairs,
then by applying these to pairs of the form (CX, X) we get natural isomorphisms
hn(X) ≈hn+1(ΣX). Note that these natural isomorphisms coming from coboundary
maps of pairs (CX, X) uniquely determine the coboundary maps for all pairs (X, A)
via the diagram at the right, where the maps from
A
h (
)
n
h
n 1(
)
+
CA/A
h
n 1(
)
+
CX/A
h
n 1(
)
+
X/A
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−→
≈
hn(A) are coboundary maps of pairs, and the dia-
gram commutes by naturality of these coboundary
maps. The isomorphism comes from a deforma-
tion retraction of CX onto CA. It is easy to check that these processes for converting
one deﬁnition of a cohomology theory into the other are inverses of each other.
The greater part of the work in proving that cohomology theories are repre-
sentable by Ωspectra will be in realizing a single functor hn of a cohomology the-
ory as ⟨−, Kn⟩for some space Kn . So let us consider what properties the functor
h(X) = ⟨X, K⟩has, where K is a ﬁxed space with basepoint. First of all, it is a con-
travariant functor from the category of basepointed CW complexes to the category of
pointed sets, i.e., sets with a distinguished element, the homotopy class of the con-
stant map in the present case. Morphisms in the category of pointed sets are maps
preserving the distinguished element. We have already seen in §4.3 that h(X) satisﬁes
the three axioms (i)-(iii). A further property is the following Mayer-Vietoris axiom:
Suppose the CW complex X is the union of subcomplexes A and B containing
the basepoint. Then if a ∈h(A) and b ∈h(B) restrict to the same element of
h(A ∩B), there exists an element x ∈h(X) whose restrictions to A and B are the
given elements a and b.
Here and in what follows we use the term ‘restriction’ to mean the map induced by
inclusion. In the case that h(X) = ⟨X, K⟩, this axiom is an immediate consequence of
the homotopy extension property. The functors hn in any cohomology theory also
satisfy this axiom since there are Mayer-Vietoris exact sequences in any cohomology
theory, as we observed in §2.3 in the analogous setting of homology theories.
Theorem 4E.2. If h is a contravariant functor from the category of connected base-
pointed CW complexes to the category of pointed sets, satisfying the homotopy ax-
iom (i), the Mayer-Vietoris axiom, and the wedge axiom (iii), then there exists a
connected CW complex K and an element u ∈h(K) such that the transformation
Tu : ⟨X, K⟩→h(X), Tu(f ) = f ∗(u), is a bijection for all X .
Such a pair (K, u) is called universal for the functor h. It is automatic from
the deﬁnition that the space K in a universal pair (K, u) is unique up to homo-
topy equivalence.
For if (K′, u′) is also universal for h, then, using the notation
f : (K, u)→(K′, u′) to mean f : K→K′ with f ∗(u′) = u, universality implies that
there are maps f : (K, u)→(K′, u′) and g : (K′, u′)→(K, u) which are unique up to

450
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
homotopy, likewise the compositions gf : (K, u)→(K, u) and f g : (K′, u′)→(K′, u′)
are unique up to homotopy, hence are homotopic to the identity maps.
Before starting the proof of this theorem we make two preliminary comments on
the axioms.
(1) The wedge axiom implies that h(point) is trivial — just use the fact that for any
X we have X ∨point = X , so the map h(X)×h(point)→h(X) induced by inclusion
of the ﬁrst summand is a bijection, but this map is the projection (a, b) , a, hence
h(point) must have only one element.
(2) Axioms (i), (iii), and the Mayer-Vietoris axiom imply axiom (ii). Namely, (ii) is equiv-
alent to exactness of h(A)←h(X)←h(X ∪CA), where CA is the reduced cone since
we are in the basepointed category. The inclusion Im ⊂Ker holds since the composi-
tion A→X ∪CA is nullhomotopic, so the induced map factors through h(point) = 0.
To obtain the opposite inclusion Ker ⊂Im, decompose X ∪CA into two subspaces
Y and Z by cutting along a copy of A halfway up the cone CA, so Y is a smaller
copy of CA and Z is the reduced mapping cylinder of the inclusion A > X . Given
an element x ∈h(X), this extends to an element z ∈h(Z) since Z deformation
retracts to X . If x restricts to the trivial element of h(A), then z restricts to the
trivial element of h(Y ∩Z). The latter element extends to the trivial element of h(Y),
so the Mayer-Vietoris axiom implies there is an element of h(X ∪CA) restricting to
z in h(Z) and hence to x in h(X).
The bulk of the proof of the theorem will be contained in two lemmas. To state
the ﬁrst, consider pairs (K, u) with K a basepointed connected CW complex and
u ∈h(K), where h satisﬁes the hypotheses of the theorem. Call such a pair (K, u)
n universal if the map Tu : πi(K)→h(Si), Tu(f ) = f ∗(u), is surjective for i ≤n
and has trivial kernel for i < n. Note that having a trivial kernel may not be the same
as being injective since we are not dealing with homomorphisms of groups here. Call
(K, u) π∗universal if it is n universal for all n.
Lemma 4E.3. Given any pair (Z, z) with Z a connected CW complex and z ∈h(Z),
there exists a π∗univeral pair (K, u) with Z a subcomplex of K and u||Z = z.
Proof: We construct K from Z by an inductive process of attaching cells. To begin, let
K1 = Z
W
α S1
α where α ranges over the elements of h(S1). By the wedge axiom there
exists u1 ∈h(K1) restricting to z on Z and α on S1
α , hence (K1, u1) is 1 universal.
For the inductive step, suppose we have already constructed (Kn, un) with un
n universal, Z ⊂Kn , and un ||Z = z. Represent each element α in the kernel of
Tun : πn(Kn)→h(Sn) by a map fα : Sn→Kn . Let f =
W
α fα :
W
α Sn
α→Kn . The reduced
mapping cylinder Mf deformation retracts to Kn , so we can regard un as an element
of h(Mf ), and this element restricts to the trivial element of h(
W
α Sn
α) by the deﬁnition
of f . The exactness property of h then implies that for the reduced mapping cone

Section 4.E.
The Brown Representability Theorem
451
Cf = Mf /
W
α Sn
α there is an element w ∈h(Cf ) restricting to un on Kn . Note that Cf
is obtained from Kn by attaching cells en+1
α
by the maps fα . To ﬁnish the construction
of Kn+1 , set Kn+1 = Cf
W
β Sn+1
β
where β ranges over h(Sn+1). By the wedge axiom
again, there exists un+1 ∈h(Kn+1) restricting to w on Cf and β on Sn+1
β
.
To see that (Kn+1, un+1) is (n+1) universal, consider the commutative diagram
at the right. Since Kn+1 is obtained from Kn by attaching
Kn 1
+
+
u n 1
K
πi
n
(
)
S
h
i
(
)
πi(
)
−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
Tu n
T
(n + 1) cells, the upper map is an isomorphism for i < n
and a surjection for i = n. By induction the map Tun has
trivial kernel for i < n and is surjective for i ≤n, so the same
is true for Tun+1 . The kernel of Tun+1 is trivial for i = n since an element of this
kernel pulls back to Ker Tn ⊂πn(Kn), by surjectivity of the upper map when i = n,
and we attached cells to Kn by maps representing all elements of Ker Tn . And lastly,
Tun+1 is surjective for i = n + 1 by construction.
Now let K =
S
n Kn . We apply a mapping telescope argument as in the proofs of
Lemma 2.34 and Theorem 3F.8 to show there is an element u ∈h(K) restricting to
un on Kn , for all n. The mapping telescope of the inclusions K1 > K2 > ··· is the
subcomplex T =
S
i Ki×[i, i+1] of K×[1, ∞). We take ‘ × ’ to be the reduced product
here, with basepoint × interval collapsed to a point. The natural projection T→K is a
homotopy equivalence since K×[1, ∞) deformation retracts onto T , as we showed in
the proof of Lemma 2.34. Let A ⊂T be the union of the subcomplexes Ki×[i, i+1] for
i odd and let B be the corresponding union for i even. Thus A∪B = T , A∩B =
W
i Ki ,
A ≃
W
i K2i−1 , and B ≃
W
i K2i . By the wedge axiom there exist a ∈h(A) and b ∈h(B)
restricting to ui on each Ki . Then using the fact that ui+1 ||Ki = ui , the Mayer-Vietoris
axiom implies that a and b are the restrictions of an element t ∈h(T). Under the
isomorphism h(T) ≈h(K), t corresponds to an element u ∈h(K) restricting to un
on Kn for all n.
To verify that (K, u) is π∗universal, consider the
commutative diagram shown at the right. For n > i + 1
K
πi
n
(
)
S
h
i
(
)
K
πi(
)
−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
Tu n
Tu
the upper map is an isomorphism and Tun is surjective with
trivial kernel, so the same is true of Tu .
⊔⊓
Lemma 4E.4. Suppose we are given: (i) a π∗universal pair (K, u), (ii) a basepointed
CW pair (X, A) with an element x ∈h(X), and (iii) a map f : A→K with f ∗(u) =
x ||A. Then there exists g : X→K extending f with g∗(u) = x .
Schematically, this is saying that the diagonal arrow in
the diagram at the right always exists, where the map i is
inclusion.
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−→
a
A
(
)
,
u
K
(
)
,
x
X
(
)
,
−−−→
f
g
i
Proof: Replacing K by the reduced mapping cylinder of f reduces us to the case
that f is the inclusion of a subcomplex. Let Z be the union of X and K with the
two copies of A identiﬁed. By the Mayer-Vietoris axiom, there exists z ∈h(Z) with

452
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
z||X = x and z||K = u. By the previous lemma, we can embed (Z, z) in a π∗universal
pair (K′, u′). The inclusion (K, u)> (K′, u′) induces an isomorphism on homotopy
groups since both u and u′ are π∗universal, so K′ deformation retracts onto K .
This deformation retraction induces a homotopy rel A of the inclusion X > K′ to a
map g : X→K . The relation g∗(u) = x holds since u′ ||K = u and u′ ||X = x .
⊔⊓
Proof of Theorem 4E.2: It sufﬁces to show that a π∗universal pair (K, u) is univer-
sal. Applying the preceding lemma with A a point shows that Tu : ⟨X, K⟩→h(X) is
surjective. To show injectivity, suppose Tu(f0) = Tu(f1), i.e., f ∗
0 (u) = f ∗
1 (u). We
apply the preceding lemma with (X×I, X×∂I) playing the role of (X, A), using the
maps f0 and f1 on X×∂I and taking x to be p∗f ∗
0 (u) = p∗f ∗
1 (u) where p is the
projection X×I→X . Here X×I should be the reduced product, with basepoint ×I
collapsed to a point. The lemma then gives a homotopy from f0 to f1 .
⊔⊓
Proof of Theorem 4E.1: Since suspension is an isomorphism in any reduced coho-
mology theory, and the suspension of any CW complex is connected, it sufﬁces to
restrict attention to connected CW complexes. Each functor hn satisﬁes the homo-
topy, wedge, and Mayer-Vietoris axioms, as we noted earlier, so the preceding theorem
gives CW complexes Kn with hn(X) = ⟨X, Kn⟩. It remains to show that the natu-
ral isomorphisms hn(X) ≈hn+1(ΣX) correspond to weak homotopy equivalences
Kn→ΩKn+1 . The natural isomorphism hn(X) ≈hn+1(ΣX) corresponds to a nat-
ural bijection ⟨X, Kn⟩≈⟨ΣX, Kn+1⟩= ⟨X, ΩKn+1⟩which we call Φ. The naturality
of this bijection gives, for any map f : X→Kn , a
commutative diagram as at the right. Let εn =
Kn
Kn
−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
,
⟨
⟩
K
Kn,
⟨
⟩
Kn
X,
⟨
⟩
n 1
+
Ω
K
X,
⟨
⟩
n 1
+
Ω
−−−→
Φ
−−−→
Φ
f ∗
f ∗
Φ(11) : Kn→ΩKn+1 .
Then using commutativity
we have Φ(f ) = Φf ∗(11) = f ∗Φ(11) = f ∗(εn) =
εnf , which says that the map Φ : ⟨X, Kn⟩→⟨X, ΩKn+1⟩is composition with εn . Since
Φ is a bijection, if we take X to be Si , we see that εn induces an isomorphism on πi
for all i, so εn is a weak homotopy equivalence and we have an Ωspectrum.
There is one ﬁnal thing to verify, that the bijection hn(X) = ⟨X, Kn⟩is a group
isomorphism, where ⟨X, Kn⟩has the group structure which comes from identifying
it with ⟨X, ΩKn+1⟩= ⟨ΣX, Kn+1⟩. Via the natural isomorphism hn(X) ≈hn+1(ΣX)
this is equivalent to showing the bijection hn+1(ΣX) = ⟨ΣX, Kn+1⟩preserves group
structure. For maps f , g : ΣX→K , the relation Tu(f + g) = Tu(f ) + Tu(g) means
(f +g)∗(u) = f ∗(u)+g∗(u), and this holds since (f +g)∗= f ∗+g∗: h(K)→h(ΣX)
by Lemma 4.59.
⊔⊓

Section 4.F.
Spectra and Homology Theories
453
We have seen in §4.3 and the preceding section how cohomology theories have a
homotopy-theoretic interpretation in terms of Ωspectra, and it is natural to inquire
whether there is a corresponding description of homology theories. In this case we
do not already have a homotopy-theoretic description of ordinary homology to serve
as a starting point. But there is another homology theory we have encountered which
does have a very homotopy-theoretic ﬂavor:
Proposition 4F.1. Stable homotopy groups πs
n(X) deﬁne a reduced homology theory
on the category of basepointed CW complexes and basepoint-preserving maps.
Proof: In the preceding section we reformulated the axioms for a cohomology theory
so that the exactness axiom asserts just the exactness of hn(X/A)→hn(X)→hn(A)
for CW pairs (X, A). In order to derive long exact sequences, the reformulated axioms
require also that natural suspension isomorphisms hn(X) ≈hn+1(ΣX) be speciﬁed
as part of the cohomology theory. The analogous reformulation of the axioms for a
homology theory is valid as well, by the same argument, and we shall use this in what
follows.
For stable homotopy groups, suspension isomorphisms πs
n(X) ≈πs
n+1(ΣX) are
automatic, so it remains to verify the three axioms. The homotopy axiom is appar-
ent. The exactness of a sequence πs
n(A)→πs
n(X)→πs
n(X/A) follows from exactness
of πn(A)→πn(X)→πn(X, A) together with the isomorphism πn(X, A) ≈πn(X/A)
which holds under connectivity assumptions which are achieved after sufﬁciently
many suspensions. The wedge sum axiom πs
n(
W
α Xα) ≈
L
απs
n(Xα) reduces to the
case of ﬁnitely many summands by the usual compactness argument, and the case of
ﬁnitely many summands reduces to the case of two summands by induction. Then we
have isomorphisms πn+i(ΣiX ∨ΣiY) ≈πn+i(ΣiX×ΣiY) ≈πn+i(ΣiX)
L
πn+i(ΣiY),
the ﬁrst of these isomorphisms holding when n + i < 2i −1, or i > n + 1, since
ΣiX ∨ΣiY is the (2i−1) skeleton of ΣiX×ΣiY . Passing to the limit over increasing i,
we get the desired isomorphism πs
n(X ∨Y) ≈πs
n(X)
L
πs
n(Y).
⊔⊓
A modest generalization of the homology theory deﬁned by stable homotopy
groups is to deﬁne hn(X) = πs
n(X ∧K) for a ﬁxed complex K . That this is a homology
theory reduces to the case of stable homotopy groups themselves by basic properties
of smash product:
— hn(X) ≈hn+1(ΣX) since Σ(X ∧K) = (ΣX) ∧K , both spaces being S1 ∧X ∧K .
— The exactness axiom holds since (X ∧K)/(A∧K) = (X/A)∧K , both spaces being
quotients of X×K with A×K ∪X×{k0} collapsed to a point.
— The wedge axiom follows from distributivity: (
W
α Xα) ∧K =
W
α (Xα ∧K).

454
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
The coefﬁcients of this homology theory are hn(S0) = πs
n(S0 ∧K) = πs
n(K). Sup-
pose for example that K is an Eilenberg-MacLane space K(G, n). Because K(G, n) is
(n −1) connected, its stable homotopy groups are the same as its unstable homo-
topy groups below dimension 2n. Thus if we shift dimensions by deﬁning hi(X) =
πs
i+n
 X ∧K(G, n)

we obtain a homology theory whose coefﬁcient groups below di-
mension n are the same as ordinary homology with coefﬁcients in G. It follows as
in Theorem 4.58 that this homology theory agrees with ordinary homology for CW
complexes of dimension less than n or perhaps n −1.
This dimension restriction could be removed if there were a ‘stable Eilenberg-
MacLane space’ whose stable homotopy groups were zero except in one dimension.
However, this is a lot to ask for, so instead one seeks to form a limit of the groups
πs
i+n
 X ∧K(G, n)

as n goes to inﬁnity. The spaces K(G, n) for varying n are related
by weak homotopy equivalences K(G, n)→ΩK(G, n+1). Since suspension plays such
a large role in the current discussion, let us consider instead the corresponding map
ΣK(G, n)→K(G, n + 1), or to write this more concisely, ΣKn→Kn+1 This induces a
map πs
i+n(X ∧Kn) = πs
i+n+1(X ∧ΣKn)→πs
i+n+1(X ∧Kn+1). Via these maps, it then
makes sense to consider the direct limit as n goes to inﬁnity, the group hi(X) =
lim
--→πs
i+n(X ∧Kn). This gives a homology theory since direct limits preserve exact
sequences so the exactness axiom holds, and direct limits preserve isomorphisms
so the suspension isomorphism and the wedge axiom hold. The coefﬁcient groups
of this homology theory are the same as for ordinary homology with G coefﬁcients
since hi(S0) = lim
--→πs
i+n(Kn) is zero unless i = 0, when it is G. Hence this homology
theory coincides with ordinary homology by Theorem 4.58.
To place this result in its natural generality, deﬁne a spectrum to be a sequence
of CW complexes Kn together with basepoint-preserving maps ΣKn→Kn+1 .
This
generalizes the notion of an Ωspectrum, where the maps ΣKn→Kn+1 come from
weak homotopy equivalences Kn→ΩKn+1 . Another obvious family of examples is
suspension spectra, where one starts with an arbitrary CW complex X and deﬁnes
Kn = ΣnX with ΣKn→Kn+1 the identity map.
The homotopy groups of a spectrum K are deﬁned to be πi(K) = lim
--→πi+n(Kn)
where the direct limit is computed using the compositions
πi+n(Kn)
Σ-----→πi+n+1(ΣKn)→πi+n+1(Kn+1),
the latter map being induced by the given map ΣKn→Kn+1 .
Thus in the case of
the suspension spectrum of a space X , the homotopy groups of the spectrum are
the same as the stable homotopy groups of X . For a general spectrum K we could
also describe πi(K) as lim
--→πs
i+n(Kn) since the composition πi+n(Kn)→πi+n+j(Kn+j)
factors through πi+n+j(ΣjKn). So the homotopy groups of a spectrum are ‘stable
homotopy groups’ essentially by deﬁnition.
Returning now to the context of homology theories, if we are given a spectrum

Section 4.F.
Spectra and Homology Theories
455
K and a CW complex X , then we have a spectrum X ∧K with (X ∧K)n = X ∧Kn ,
using the obvious maps Σ(X ∧Kn) = X ∧ΣKn→X ∧Kn+1 . The groups πi(X ∧K)
are the groups lim
--→πs
i+n(Kn) considered earlier in the case of an Eilenberg-MacLane
spectrum, and the arguments given there show:
Proposition 4F.2. For a spectrum K , the groups hi(X) = πi(X ∧K) form a reduced
homology theory. When K is the Eilenberg-MacLane sprectrum Kn = K(G, n) this
homology theory is ordinary homology, so πi(X ∧K) ≈eHi(X; G).
⊔⊓
It is also possible to associate a cohomology theory to an arbitrary spectrum K
by setting hi(X) = lim
--→⟨ΣnX, Kn+i⟩, the direct limit with respect to the compositions
⟨ΣnX, Kn+i⟩
Σ-----→⟨Σn+1X, ΣKn+i⟩→⟨Σn+1X, Kn+i+1⟩
Veriﬁcation of the axioms is an exercise using the techniques employed above. Some
of the more important cohomology theories such as the various cobordism theories
are usually deﬁned in this way, as cohomology theories associated to spectra. Another
example is stable cohomotopy groups πi
s(X) = lim
--→⟨ΣnX, Sn+i⟩, the cohomology
theory associated to the sphere spectrum S = {Sn}.
By the results in the preceding section, each cohomology theory corresponds to
an Ωspectrum, so it follows that there is a natural way of associating an Ωspectrum
to each spectrum, and this is not hard to describe explicitly. Given a spectrum K ,
the associated Ωspectrum K′ has K′
n = lim
--→ΩiKn+i , the mapping telescope of the
sequence Kn→ΩKn+1→Ω2Kn+2→···. This is an Ωspectrum via weak equivalences
K′
n = lim
--→ΩiKn+i ≃lim
--→Ωi+1Kn+i+1 -→Ωlim
--→ΩiKn+i+1 = ΩK′
n+1
Here the ﬁrst homotopy equivalence comes from deleting the ﬁrst term of the se-
quence Kn→ΩKn+1→Ω2Kn+2→···, and the other displayed map is a weak equiva-
lence as a special case of an exercise at the end of the section. Strictly speaking, we
should let K′
n be a CW approximation to the mapping telescope lim
--→ΩiKn+i in order
to obtain a spectrum consisting of CW complexes, in accordance with our deﬁnition
of spectrum.
In case one starts with a suspension spectrum Kn = ΣnK it is not necessary to
take mapping telescopes, one can just set K′
n =
S
i ΩiΣi+nK , the union with respect to
the natural inclusions ΩiΣiX ⊂Ωi+1Σi+1X for X = ΣnK . This union is often denoted
Ω∞Σ∞X , or more brieﬂy QX . Thus Q is a functor converting stable homotopy groups
into ordinary homotopy groups: πi(QX) = πs
i (X).
It follows routinely from the deﬁnitions that the homology theory deﬁned by a
spectrum is the same as the homology theory deﬁned by the associated Ωspectrum,
and likewise for cohomology.
One may ask whether every homology theory is deﬁned by a spectrum, as we
showed for cohomology.
The answer is yes if one replaces the wedge axiom by a

456
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
stronger direct limit axiom: hi(X) = lim
--→hi(Xα), the direct limit over the ﬁnite sub-
complexes Xα of X . The homology theory deﬁned by a spectrum satisﬁes this axiom,
and for the converse see [Adams71].
Spectra have become the preferred language for describing many stable phenom-
ena in algebraic topology. The increased ﬂexibility of spectra is not without its price,
however, since a number of concepts which are elementary for spaces become quite
a bit more subtle for spectra, such as the proper deﬁnition of a map between spectra,
or the smash product of two spectra. For the reader who wants to learn more about
this language a good starting point is [Adams74].
Exercises
1. Assuming the ﬁrst two axioms for a homology theory on the CW category, show
that the direct limit axiom implies the wedge sum axiom. Show that the converse also
holds for countable CW complexes.
2. For CW complexes X and Y consider the suspension sequence
⟨X, Y⟩
Σ-----→⟨ΣX, ΣY⟩
Σ-----→⟨Σ2X, Σ2Y⟩-----→···
Show that if X is a ﬁnite complex, these maps eventually become isomorphisms. [Use
induction on the number of cells of X and the ﬁve-lemma.]
3. Show that for any sequence Z1→Z2→···, the natural map lim
--→ΩZn→Ωlim
--→Zn
is a weak homotopy equivalence, where the direct limits mean mapping telescopes.
Many of the spaces one studies in algebraic topology are built by gluing together
simpler spaces. In this section we describe two general procedures for making such
constructions. The ﬁrst is fairly straightforward but also rather rigid, lacking some
homotopy invariance properties that an algebraic topologist would like to see. The sec-
ond type of gluing construction avoids these drawbacks by systematic use of mapping
cylinders. We have already seen many special cases of both types of constructions,
so it will be useful to have a general framework into which to ﬁt all these different
constructions.
A diagram of spaces consists of an oriented graph Γ , a space Xv for each vertex
v of Γ , and a map fe : Xv→Xw for each edge e of Γ from a vertex v to a vertex w , the
words ‘from’ and ‘to’ referring to the speciﬁed orientation of e. Commutativity of the

Section 4.G.
Gluing Constructions
457
diagram is not assumed. Denoting such a diagram of spaces simply by X , we deﬁne a
space
X to be the quotient of the disjoint union of all the spaces Xv associated to
vertices of Γ under the identiﬁcations x ∼fe(x) for all maps fe associated to edges
of Γ . Here are some examples:
— If the diagram of spaces has the simple form X0
f←------ A > X1 then
X is the
space X0 ⊔f X1 obtained from X0 by attaching X1 along A via f .
— A sequence of inclusions X1 > X1 > ··· determines a diagram of spaces X for
which
X is
S
i Xi with the weak topology, or in other words lim
--→Xi . This holds
more generally when the spaces Xi are indexed by any directed set.
— From a cover U = {Xi} of a space X by subspaces Xi we can form a diagram of
spaces XU whose vertices are the nonempty ﬁnite intersections Xi1 ∩··· ∩Xin
with distinct indices ij , and whose edges are the various inclusions obtained by
omitting some of the subspaces in such an intersection, for example the inclusions
Xi ∩Xj > Xi . Then
XU equals X as a set, though possibly with a different
topology. If the cover is an open cover, or if X is a CW complex and the Xi ’s are
subcomplexes, then the topology will be the original topology on X .
— An action of a group G on a space X determines a diagram of spaces XG , with X
itself as the only space and with maps the homeomorphisms g : X→X , g ∈G,
given by the action. In this case
XG is the orbit space X/G.
— A ∆complex X can be viewed as a diagram of spaces X∆where each simplex
of X gives a vertex space Xv which is a simplex of the same dimension, and
the edge maps are the inclusions of faces into the simplices which contain them.
Then
X∆= X
It can very easily happen that for a diagram of spaces X the space
X is rather
useless because so much collapsing has occurred that little of the original diagram
remains. For example, consider a diagram X of the form X0←X0×X1→X1 whose
maps are the projections onto the two factors. In this case
X is simply a point.
To correct for problems like this, and to get a notion with nicer homotopy-theoretic
properties, we introduce the homotopy version of
X , which we shall denote ∆X .
Here we again start with the disjoint union of all the vertex spaces Xv , but instead of
passing to a quotient space of this disjoint union, we enlarge it by ﬁlling in a mapping
cylinder Mf for each map f of the diagram, identifying the two ends of this cylinder
with the appropriate Xv ’s. In the case of the projection diagram X0←X0×X1→X1 ,
the union of the two mapping cylinders is the same as the quotient of X0×X1×I with
X0×X1×{0} collapsed to X0 and X0×X1×{1} collapsed to X1 . Thus ∆X is the join
X0 ∗X1 , deﬁned in Chapter 0.
We have seen a number of other special cases of the construction ∆X . For a dia-
gram consisting of just one map f : X0→X1 one gets of course the mapping cylinder
Mf itself. For a diagram X0
f←------ X1
g-----→X2 one gets a space which is sometimes called
a double mapping cylinder. In case X2 is a point this is the mapping cone of f . When

458
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
the diagram has just one space and one map then one obtains the so-called mapping
torus. For a diagram consisting of two maps f , g : X0→X1 we constructed an exact
sequence of homology groups in Example 2.48. Mapping telescopes are the case of a
sequence of maps X0→X1→···. In §1.B we considered general diagrams in which
the spaces are K(G, 1)’s.
There is a natural generalization of ∆X in which one starts with a ∆complex
Γ and a diagram of spaces associated to the 1 skeleton of Γ such that the maps
corresponding to the edges of each n simplex of Γ , n > 1, form a commutative
diagram. We call this data a complex of spaces. If X is a complex of spaces, then for
each n simplex of Γ we have a sequence of maps X0
f1-----→X1 -→···
fn-----→Xn , and we
deﬁne the iterated mapping cylinder M(f1, ··· , fn) to be the usual mapping cylinder
for n = 1, and inductively for n > 1, the mapping cylinder of the composition of the
canonical projection M(f1, ··· , fn−1)→Xn−1 with fn . There is a natural projection
M(f1, ··· , fn)→∆n , and over each face of ∆n one has the iterated mapping cylinder
corresponding to the maps associated to the edges in this face. For example when
n = 2 one has the three mapping cylinders M(f1), M(f2), and M(f2f1) over the
three edges of ∆2 . All these iterated mapping cylinders over the various simplices
of Γ thus ﬁt together to form a space ∆X with a canonical projection ∆X→Γ . We
sometimes say that X or ∆X is based on Γ , or that Γ is the base of X or ∆X .
Some of our earlier examples of diagrams of spaces can be regarded in a natural
way as complexes of spaces:
— For a cover U = {Xi} of a space X the diagram of spaces XU whose vertices are
the ﬁnite intersections of Xi ’s and whose edges are inclusions is a complex of
spaces with n simplices the n fold inclusions. The base Γ for this complex of
spaces is the barycentric subdivision of the nerve of the cover. Recall from the
end of §3.3 that the nerve of a cover is the simplicial complex with n simplices
the nonempty (n + 1) fold intersections of sets in the cover.
— The diagram of spaces XG associated to an action of a group G on a space X
is a complex of spaces, with n simplices corresponding to n fold compositions
X
g1-----→X -----→···
gn-----→X . The base ∆complex Γ is the K(G, 1) called BG in §1.B.
This was the orbit space of a free action of G on a contractible ∆complex EG.
Checking through the deﬁnitions, one sees that the space ∆XG in this case can
be regarded as the quotient of X×EG under the diagonal action of G, g(x, y) =
(g(x), g(y)). This is the space we called the Borel construction in §3.H, with the
notation X× GEG.
By a map f : X→Y of complexes of spaces over the same base Γ we mean a
collection of maps fv : Xv→Yv for all the vertices of Γ , with commutative squares
over all edges of Γ . There is then an induced map ∆f : ∆X→∆Y .

Section 4.G.
Gluing Constructions
459
Proposition 4G.1. If all the maps fv making up a map of complexes of spaces
f : X→Y are homotopy equivalences, then so is the map ∆f : ∆X→∆Y .
Proof: The mapping cylinders M(fv) form a complex of spaces M(f) over the same
base Γ , and the space ∆M(f ) is the mapping cylinder M(∆f ).
This deformation
retracts onto ∆Y , so it will sufﬁce to show that it also deformation retracts onto ∆X .
Let Mn(∆f ) be the part of M(∆f ) lying over the n skeleton of Γ . We claim that
Mn(∆f ) ∪∆X deformation retracts onto Mn−1(∆f ) ∪∆X . It is enough to show this
when Γ = ∆n . In this case f is a map from X0→···→Xn to Y0→···→Yn . By
Corollary 0.20 it sufﬁces to show that the inclusion Mn−1(∆f ) ∪∆X > M(∆f ) is a
homotopy equivalence and the pair (M(∆f ), Mn−1(∆f )∪∆X) satisﬁes the homotopy
extension property. The latter assertion is evident from Example 0.15 since a mapping
cylinder neighborhood is easily constructed for this pair. For the other condition, note
that by induction on the dimension of Γ we may assume that Mn−1(∆f ) deformation
retracts onto the part of ∆X over ∂∆n . Also, the inclusion ∆X > M(∆f ) is a ho-
motopy equivalence since it is equivalent to the map Xn→Yn , which is a homotopy
equivalence by hypothesis. So Corollary 0.20 applies, and the claim that Mn(∆f )∪∆X
deformation retracts onto Mn−1(∆f ) ∪∆X is proved.
Letting n vary, the inﬁnite concatenation of these deformation retractions during
the t intervals [1/2n+1, 1/2n] gives a deformation retraction of M(∆f ) onto ∆X .
⊔⊓
There is a canonical map ∆X→
X induced by retracting each mapping cylinder
onto its target end. In some cases this is a homotopy equivalence, for example, for a
diagram X0←A> X1 where the pair (X1, A) has the homotopy extension property,
or for a sequence of inclusions X0> X1> ··· for which the pairs (Xn, Xn−1) satisfy
the homotopy extension property, by the argument involving mapping telescopes in
the proof of Lemma 2.34. However, without some conditions on the maps it need
not be true that ∆X→
X is a homotopy equivalence, as the earlier example of the
projections X0←X0×X1→X1 shows. And even with nice maps one need not have
∆X ≃
X , for example for the diagram consisting of the two spaces ∆0 and ∆1 and
two maps f0, f1 : ∆0→∆1 which happen to coincide.
Thus one can expect the map ∆X→
X to be a homotopy equivalence only in
special circumstances. Here is one such situation:
Proposition 4G.2. For XU the complex of spaces associated to an open cover U =
{Xi} of a paracompact space X , the map p : ∆XU→
XU = X is a homotopy equiv-
alence.
Proof: Another way of describing ∆XU is as the quotient space of the disjoint union
of all products Xi0 ∩··· ∩Xin ×∆n , as the subscripts range over sets of n + 1 distinct
indices and n ≥0, with the identiﬁcations over the faces of ∆n using inclusions

460
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
Xi0 ∩··· ∩Xin > Xi0 ∩··· ∩bXij ∩··· ∩Xin . From this viewpoint, points of ∆XU
in a given ‘ﬁber’ p−1(x) can be written as ﬁnite linear combinations
P
i tixi where
P
i ti = 1 and xi is x regarded as a point of Xi , for those Xi ’s which contain x .
Since X is paracompact there is a partition of unity subordinate to the cover
U.
This is a family of maps ϕα : X→[0, 1] satisfying three conditions: The sup-
port of each ϕα is contained in some Xi(α) , only ﬁnitely many ϕα ’s are nonzero
near each point of X , and
P
α ϕα = 1. Deﬁne a section s : X→∆XU of p by setting
s(x) =
P
α ϕα(x)xi(α) . The ﬁgure shows the case X = S1 with a
cover by two arcs, the heavy line indicating the image of s . In the
general case the section s embeds X as a retract of ∆XU , and it is a
deformation retract since points in ﬁbers p−1(x) can move linearly
along line segment to s(x).
⊔⊓
Corollary 4G.3. If U is an open cover of a paracompact space X such that every
nonempty intersection of ﬁnitely many sets in U is contractible, then X is homotopy
equivalent to the nerve NU.
Proof: The proposition gives a homotopy equivalence X ≃∆XU . Since the nonempty
ﬁnite intersections of sets in U are contractible, the earlier proposition implies that
the map ∆XU→Γ induced by sending each intersection to a point is a homotopy
equivalence. And Γ is the barycentric subdivision of NU.
⊔⊓
Let us conclude this section with few comments about terminology. For some
diagrams the space
X is the direct limit of the vertex spaces Xv with respect to the
edge maps fe . Following this cue, and for lack of a better alternative, the space
X
is often regarded as the direct limit for arbitrary diagrams, even ﬁnite ones, which
may seem a bit strange. It would be nice to have more suggestive terminology, such
as calling
X the ‘amalgamation’ or the ‘uniﬁcation’ of the diagram of spaces. To
convey this idea we have chosen the notation
X which suggests a sort of union.
If one views
X as a direct limit, then ∆X becomes a sort of homotopy direct
limit, though again it is tempting to look for more descriptive terminology, such as
calling ∆X the ‘span’ or ‘realization’ of X . For reasons which are explained in the
next section, direct limits are often called ‘colimits.’ This has given rise to the rather
awkward name of ‘hocolim’ for ∆X , short for ‘homotopy colimit.’ Rather than propa-
gating this mild barbarism we have chosen the notation ∆X , which at least gives a hint
that this space has something to do with simplices, as it does when X is a complex
of spaces.
Exercises
1. Show that for a sequence of maps X0
f1-----→X1
f2-----→···, the inﬁnite iterated mapping
cylinder M(f1, f2, ···), which is the union of the ﬁnite iterated mapping cylinders
M(f1, ··· , fn), deformation retracts onto the mapping telescope.

Section 4.H.
Eckmann-Hilton Duality
461
2. Show that if X is a complex of spaces in which all the maps are homeomorphisms,
then the projection ∆X→Γ is a ﬁber bundle.
3. For diagrams of spaces X and X′ based on oriented graphs Γ and Γ ′ , give two deﬁ-
nitions of a map X→X′ such that there are induced maps
X→
X′ and ∆X→∆X′ .
[In the ﬁrst case certain diagrams are required to commute, while in the second case
they need only commute up to homotopy.]
4. What is the nerve of the cover of a simplicial complex by the open stars of its
vertices? [See Lemma 2C.2.]
5. Show that Proposition 4G.2 and its corollary hold also for CW complexes and covers
by families of subcomplexes. [CW complexes are paracompact; see [VBKT].]
There is a very nice duality principle in homotopy theory, called Eckmann-Hilton
duality in its more reﬁned and systematic aspects, but which in its most basic form in-
volves the simple idea of reversing the direction of all arrows in a given construction.
For example, if in the deﬁnition of a ﬁbration as a map satisfying the homotopy lift-
ing property we reverse the direction of all the arrows, we obtain the dual notion of a
coﬁbration. This is a map i : A→B satisfying the following property: Given eg0 : B→X
and a homotopy gt : A→X such that eg0i = g0 , there exists a ho-
motopy egt : B→X such that egti = gt . In the special case that i is
−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−→
A
B
X
i
gt
g0
∼
the inclusion of a subspace, this is the homotopy extension prop-
erty, and the next proposition says that this is indeed the general
case. So a coﬁbration is the same as an inclusion satisfying the homotopy extension
property.
Proposition 4H.1. If i : A→B is a coﬁbration, then i is injective, and in fact a homeo-
morphism onto its image.
Proof: Consider the mapping cylinder Mi , the quotient of A×I ⨿B in which (a, 1) is
identiﬁed with i(a). Let gt : A→Mi be the homotopy mapping a ∈A to the image of
(a, 1 −t) ∈A×I in Mi , and let eg0 be the inclusion B> Mi . The coﬁbration property
gives egt : B→Mi with egti = gt . Restricting to a ﬁxed t > 0, this implies i is injective
since gt is. Furthermore, since gt is a homeomorphism onto its image A×{1 −t},
the relation egti = gt implies that the map g−1
t
egt : i(A)→A is a continuous inverse of
i : A→i(A).
⊔⊓

462
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
Many constructions for ﬁbrations have analogs for coﬁbrations, and vice versa.
For example, for an arbitrary map f : A→B the inclusion A > Mf is readily seen to
be a coﬁbration, so the analog of the factorization A> Ef→B of f into a homotopy
equivalence followed by a ﬁbration is the factorization A>Mf→B into a coﬁbration
followed by a homotopy equivalence. Even the deﬁnition of Mf is in some way dual
to the deﬁnition of Ef , since Ef can be deﬁned as a pullback and Mf can be deﬁned
as a dual ‘pushout:’
−−−−−→
−−−−→
−−→
−−→
A
M
A
I
B
f
×
−−−−−→
−−−−→
−−→
−−→
E
B
A
I
B
f
In general, the pushout of maps f : Z→X and g : Z→Y is deﬁned as the quotient
of X ⨿Y under the identiﬁcations f (z) ∼g(z). Thus the pushout is a quotient of
X ⨿Y , while the pullback of maps X→Z and Y→Z is a subobject of X×Y , so we
see here two instances of duality: a duality between disjoint union and product, and a
duality between subobjects and quotients. The ﬁrst of these is easily explained, since
a collection of maps Xα→X is equivalent to a map
`
αXα→X , while a collection of
maps X→Xα is equivalent to a map X→
Q
αXα . The notation
`
for the ‘coproduct’
was chosen to indicated that it is dual to
Q
. If we were dealing with basepointed
spaces and maps, the coproduct would be wedge sum.
In the category of abelian
groups the coproduct is direct sum.
The duality between subobjects and quotient objects is clear for abelian groups,
where subobjects are kernels and quotient objects cokernels. The strict topological
analog of a kernel is a ﬁber of a ﬁbration. Dually, the topological analog of a cokernel
is the coﬁber of a coﬁbration A > B , the quotient space B/A. In particular, making
an arbitrary map f : A→B into a coﬁbration A>Mf , the coﬁber is the mapping cone
Cf = Mf /(A×{0}).
In the earlier diagram showing Ef and Mf as pullback and pushout, there also
appears to be some sort of duality involving the terms A×I and BI . Thus we suspect
a duality between X×I and XI . And indeed, if we ignore topology and just think set-
theoretically, this is an instance of the familiar product/coproduct duality since the
product of copies of X indexed by I is XI , all functions I→X , while the coproduct
of copies of X indexed by I is X×I , the disjoint union of the sets X×{t} for t ∈I .
Switching back from the category of sets to the topological category, we can then view
XI as a ‘continuous product’ of copies of X and X×I as a ‘continuous coproduct.’
On a less abstract level, the fact that maps A×I→B are the same as maps A→BI
indicates a certain duality between A×I and BI .
This leads to a duality between
suspension and loopspace, since ΣA is a quotient of A×I and ΩB is a subspace
of BI . This duality is expressed in the adjoint relation ⟨ΣX, Y⟩= ⟨X, ΩY⟩from §4.3.
Combining this duality between Σ and Ωwith the duality between ﬁbers and coﬁbers,

Section 4.H.
Eckmann-Hilton Duality
463
we have a duality between the ﬁbration and coﬁbration sequences
···→ΩF→ΩE→ΩB→F→E→B
and
A→X→X/A→ΣA→ΣX→Σ(X/A)→···
which were developed in §4.3.
Pushout and pullback constructions can be generalized to arbitrary diagrams. In
the case of pushouts, this was done in §4.G where we associated a space
X to a dia-
gram of spaces X . This was the quotient of the coproduct
`
v Xv , with v ranging over
vertices of the diagram, under the identiﬁcations x ∼fe(x) for all maps fe associated
to edges e of the diagram. The dual construction
X would be the subspace of the
product
Q
v Xv consisting of tuples (xv) with fe(xv) = xw for all maps fe : Xv→Xw
in the diagram. Perhaps more useful in algebraic topology is the homotopy variant of
this notion obtained by dualizing the deﬁnition of ∆X in the previous section. This
is the space ∇X consisting of all choices of a point xv in each Xv and a path γe in
the target space of each edge map fe : Xv→Xw , with γe(0) = f (xv) and γe(1) = xw .
The subspace with all paths constant is
X . In the case of a diagram ···→X2→X1
such as a Postnikov tower this construction gives something slightly different from
simply turning each successive map into a ﬁbration via the usual pathspace construc-
tion, starting with X2→X1 and proceeding up the tower, as we did in §4.3. The latter
construction is rather the dual of an iterated mapping cylinder, involving spaces of
maps ∆n→Xv instead of simply pathspaces. One could use such mapping spaces to
generalize the deﬁnition of ∇X from diagrams of spaces to complexes of spaces.
As special cases of the constructions
X and
X we have direct limits and
inverse limits for diagrams X0→X1→··· and ···→X1→X0 , respectively.
Since
inverse limit is related to product and direct limit to coproduct, it is common practice
in some circles to use reverse logic and call inverse limit simply ‘limit’ and direct limit
‘colimit.’ The homotopy versions are then called ‘holim’ for ∇X and ‘hocolim’ for
∆X . This terminology is frequently used for more general diagrams as well.
Homotopy Groups with Coefﬁcients
At a somewhat deeper level there is a certain duality between homotopy groups
and cohomology, which one can see from the fact that cohomology groups are ho-
motopy classes of maps into a space with a single nonzero homotopy group, while
homotopy groups are homotopy classes of maps from a space with a single nonzero
cohomology group. There is a certain incompleteness in this duality, however, in that
the cohomology statement holds for an arbitrary coefﬁcient group but we have not
yet deﬁned homotopy groups with coefﬁcients. In view of the duality, one would be
tempted to deﬁne πn(X; G) to be the set of basepoint-preserving homotopy classes
of maps from the cohomology analog of a Moore space M(G, n), that is, a space Y

464
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
whose only nonzero cohomology group eHi(Y; Z) is G for i = n. However, such a
space does not exist for arbitrary G since we showed in §3.G that the cohomology
groups of a space are either all ﬁnitely generated or at least one is uncountable. So
for example a cohomology M(Q, n) does not exist.
As a ﬁrst approximation to πn(X; G) let use consider ⟨M(G, n), X⟩, the set of
basepoint-preserving homotopy classes of maps M(G, n)→X . To give this set a more
suggestive name, let us call it µn(X; G).
We should assume n > 1 to guarantee
that the homotopy type of M(G, n) is well-deﬁned, as shown in Example 4.33. For
n > 1, µn(X; G) is a group since we can choose M(G, n) to be the suspension of an
M(G, n −1). And if n > 2 then µn(X; G) is abelian since we can choose M(G, n) to
be a double suspension.
There is something like a universal coefﬁcient theorem for these groups µn(X; G):
Proposition 4H.2. For n > 1 there are natural short exact sequences
0 -→Ext(G, πn+1(X)) -→µn(X; G) -→Hom(G, πn(X)) -→0.
The similarity with the universal coefﬁcient theorem for cohomology is apparent,
but with a reversal of the variables in the Ext and Hom terms, reﬂecting the fact that
µn(X; G) is covariant as a functor of X and contravariant as a functor of G, just like
the Ext and Hom terms.
Proof: Let 0→R
i-----→F -→G→0 be a free resolution of G. The inclusion map i is
realized by a map M(R, n)→M(F, n), where M(R, n) and M(F, n) are wedges of Sn ’s
corresponding to bases for F and R. Converting this map into a coﬁbration via the
mapping cylinder, the coﬁber is an M(G, n), as one sees from the long exact sequence
of homology groups. As in §4.3, the coﬁbration sequence
M(R, n)→M(F, n)→M(G, n)→M(R, n + 1)→M(F, n + 1)
gives rise to the exact sequence across the top of the following diagram:
µ
X F
n 1(
)
+
;
−−−−−−−−→
−−−→
µ
X R
n 1(
)
+
;
F
(
)
,
−−−−→µ
X G
n(
)
;
−−−−→µ
X F
n(
)
;
µ
X R
n(
)
;
−−−−−−→
Hom
X
n 1(
)
+
π
R
(
)
,
Hom
X
n 1(
)
+
π
==
==
i∗
−−−→
F
(
)
,
Hom
X
n(
)
π
R
(
)
,
Hom
X
n(
)
π
==
==
i∗
The four outer terms of the exact sequence can be identiﬁed with the indicated Hom
terms since mapping a wedge sum of Sn ’s into X amounts to choosing an element of
πn(X) for each wedge summand. The kernel and cokernel of i∗are Hom(G, −) and
Ext(G, −) by deﬁnition, and so we obtain the short exact sequence we are looking for.
Naturality will be left for the reader to verify.
⊔⊓
Unlike in the universal coefﬁcient theorems for homology and cohomology, the
short exact sequence in this proposition does not split in general. For an example,
take G = Z2 and X = M(Z2, n) for n ≥2, where the identity map of M(Z2, n)

Section 4.H.
Eckmann-Hilton Duality
465
deﬁnes an element of µn(M(Z2, n); Z2) = ⟨M(Z2, n), M(Z2, n)⟩having order 4, as
we show in Example 4L.7, whereas the two outer terms in the short exact sequence
can only contain elements of order 2 since G = Z2 . This example shows also that
µn(X; Zm) need not be a module over Zm , as homology and cohomology groups with
Zm coefﬁcients are.
The proposition implies that the ﬁrst nonzero µi(Sn; Zm) is µn−1(Sn; Zm) = Zm ,
from the Ext term. This result would look more reasonable if we changed notation to
replace the subscript n −1 by n. So let us make the deﬁnition
πn(X; Zm) = ⟨M(Zm, n −1), X⟩= µn−1(X; Zm)
There are two good reasons to expect this to be the right deﬁnition. The ﬁrst is formal:
M(Zm, n −1) is a ‘cohomology M(Zm, n)’ since its only nontrivial cohomology group
eHi(M(Zm, n −1); Z) is Zm in dimension n. The second reason is more geometric:
Elements of πn(X; Zm) should be homotopy classes of ‘homotopy-theoretic cycles
mod m,’ meaning maps Dm→X whose boundary is not necessarily a constant map as
would be the case for πn(X), but rather whose boundary is m times a cycle Sn−1→X .
This is precisely what a map M(Zm, n −1)→X is if we choose M(Zm, n −1) to be
Sn−1 with a cell en attached by a map of degree m.
Besides the calculation πn(Sn; Zm) ≈Zm , the proposition also yields an isomor-
phism πn(M(Zm, n); Zm) ≈Ext(Zm, Zm) = Zm . Both these results are in fact special
cases of a Hurewicz-type theorem relating πn(X; Zm) and Hn(X; Zm), which is proved
in [Neisendorfer].
Along with Z and Zm , another extremely useful coeffcient group for homology
and cohomology is Q.
We pointed out above the difﬁculty that there is no coho-
mology analog of M(Q, n). The groups µn(X; Q) are also problematic. For example
the proposition gives µn−1(Sn; Q) ≈Ext(Q, Z), which is a somewhat complicated un-
countable group as we showed in §3.G. However, there is an alternative approach
which turns out to work rather well. One deﬁnes ‘rational homotopy groups’ sim-
ply as πn(X)⊗Q, analogous to the isomorphism Hn(X; Q) ≈Hn(X; Z)⊗Q from the
universal coefﬁcient theorem for homology. See [SSAT] for more on this.
Homology Decompositions
Eckmann-Hilton duality can be extremely helpful as an organizational principle,
reducing signiﬁcantly what one has to remember and providing valuable hints on how
to proceed in various situations. To illustrate, let us consider what would happen if
we dualized the notion of a Postnikov tower of principal ﬁbrations, where a space is
represented as an inverse limit of a sequence of ﬁbers of maps to Eilenberg-MacLane
spaces. In the dual representation, a space would be realized as a direct limit of a
sequence of coﬁbers of maps from Moore spaces. To describe this in more detail,
suppose we are given a sequence of abelian groups Gn , n ≥1, and we build a CW
complex X with Hn(X) ≈Gn for all n by constructing inductively an increasing

466
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
sequence of subcomplexes X1 ⊂X2 ⊂··· with Hi(Xn) ≈Gi for i ≤n and Hi(Xn) = 0
for i > n, where
(1) X1 is a Moore space M(G1, 1).
(2) Xn+1 is the mapping cone of a cellular map hn : M(Gn+1, n)→Xn such that the
induced map hn∗: Hn
 M(Gn+1, n)
→Hn(Xn) is trivial.
(3) X =
S
n Xn .
One sees inductively that Xn+1 has the desired homology groups by comparing the
long exact sequences of the pairs (Xn+1, Xn) and (CM, M) where M = M(Gn+1, n)
and CM is the cone M×I/M×{0}:
X
X
H
n
(
)
,
n 1
+
H
0
(
)
n 1
+
n 1
+
X
H
n
(
)
n
X
H
0
(
)
n
n
n 1
+
n 1
+
Xn 1
+ −−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
∂
M
CM
H
(
)
,
n 1
+
M
H (
)
n
G
−−−−−→
∂
≈
≈
≈
∗
h
The assumption that hn∗is trivial means that the boundary map in the upper row
is zero, hence Hn+1(Xn+1) ≈Gn+1 .
The other homology groups of Xn+1 are the
same as those of Xn since Hi(Xn+1, Xn) ≈Hi(CM, M) for all i by excision, and
Hi(CM, M) ≈eHi−1(M) since CM is contractible.
In case all the maps hn are trivial, X is the wedge sum of the Moore spaces
M(Gn, n) since in this case the mapping cone construction in (2) produces a wedge
sum with the suspension of M(Gn+1, n), a Moore space M(Gn+1, n + 1).
For a space Y , a homotopy equivalence f : X→Y where X is constructed as in
(1)-(3) is called a homology decomposition of Y .
Theorem 4H.3. Every simply-connected CW complex has a homology decomposition.
Proof: Given a simply-connected CW complex Y , let Gn = Hn(Y).
Suppose in-
ductively that we have constructed Xn via maps hi as in (2), together with a map
f : Xn→Y inducing an isomorphism on Hi for i ≤n. The induction can start with
X1 a point since Y is simply-connected. To construct Xn+1 we ﬁrst replace Y by
the mapping cylinder of f : Xn→Y , converting f into an inclusion. By the Hurewicz
theorem and the exact homology sequence of the pair (Y, Xn) we have πn+1(Y, Xn) ≈
Hn+1(Y, Xn) ≈Hn+1(Y) = Gn+1 .
We use this isomorphism to construct a map
hn : M(Gn+1, n)→Xn and an extension f : Xn+1→Y as follows.
The standard construction of an M(Gn+1, n) consists of a wedge of spheres Sn
α
corresponding to generators gα of Gn+1 , with cells en+1
β
attached according to cer-
tain linear combinations rβ =
P
α nαβgα which are zero in Gn+1 .
Under the iso-
morphism Gn+1 ≈πn+1(Y, Xn) each gα corresponds to a basepoint-preserving map
fα : (CSn, Sn)→(Y, Xn) where CSn is the cone on Sn . The restrictions of these fα ’s
to Sn deﬁne hn :
W
α Sn
α→Xn , and the maps fα : CSn→Y themselves give an exten-
sion of f : Xn→Y to the mapping cone of hn :
W
α Sn
α→Xn . Each relation rβ gives a
homotopy Fβ : (CSn, Sn)×I→(Y, Xn) from
P
α nαβfα to the constant map. We use

Section 4.H.
Eckmann-Hilton Duality
467
Fβ ||Sn×{0} to attach en+1
β
, and then Fβ ||Sn×I gives hn on en+1
β
and Fβ gives an
extension of f over the cone on en+1
β
.
This construction assures that f∗: Hn+1(Xn+1, Xn)→Hn+1(Y, Xn) is an isomor-
phism, so from the ﬁve-lemma applied to the long exact sequences of these pairs we
deduce that f∗: Hi(Xn+1)→Hi(Y) is an isomorphism for i ≤n + 1. This ﬁnishes the
induction step. We may assume the maps fα and Fβ are cellular, so X =
S
n Xn is
a CW complex with subcomplexes Xn . Since f : X→Y is a homology isomorphism
between simply-connected CW complexes, it is a homotopy equivalence.
⊔⊓
As an example, suppose that Y is a simply-connected CW complex having all its
homology groups free. Then the Moore spaces used in the construction of X can
be taken to be wedges of spheres, and so Xn is obtained from Xn−1 by attaching an
n cell for each Z summand of Hn(Y). The attaching maps may be taken to be cellular,
making X into a CW complex whose cellular chain complex has trivial boundary maps.
Similarly, ﬁnite cyclic summands of Hn(Y) can be realized by wedge summands of
the form Sn−1 ∪en in M(Hn(Y), n −1), contributing an n cell and an (n + 1) cell to
X . This is Proposition 4C.1, but the present result is stronger because it tells us that
a ﬁnite cyclic summand of Hn can be realized in one step by attaching the cone on a
Moore space M(Zk, n −1), rather than in two steps of attaching an n cell and then
an (n + 1) cell.
Exercises
1. Show that if A>X is a coﬁbration of compact Hausdorff spaces, then for any space
Y , the map Y X→Y A obtained by restriction of functions is a ﬁbration. [If A > X is
a coﬁbration, so is A×Y > X×Y for any space Y .]
2.
Consider a pushout diagram as at the right, where B ⊔f X
−−−−−→
−−−−→
A
B
X
X
B
f
f
>
>
⊔
is B with X attached along A via f . Show that if A > X is a
coﬁbration, so is B > B ⊔f X .
3. Deﬁne the dual of an iterated mapping cylinder precisely, in terms of maps from
∆n , and use this to give a deﬁnition of ∇X , the dual of ∆X , for X a complex of spaces.

468
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
It sometimes happens that suspending a space has the effect of simplifying its
homotopy type, as the suspension becomes homotopy equivalent to a wedge sum of
smaller spaces. Much of the interest in such stable splittings comes from the fact that
they provide a geometric explanation for algebraic splittings of homology and coho-
mology groups, as well as other algebraic invariants of spaces which are unaffected
by suspension such as the cohomology operations studied in §4.L.
The simplest example of a stable splitting is the torus S1×S1 , whose reduced
suspension Σ(S1×S1) is homotopy equivalent to S2 ∨S2 ∨S3 since Σ(S1×S1) is
S2 ∨S2 with a 3 cell attached by the suspension of the attaching map of the 2 cell
of the torus, but the latter attaching map is the commutator of the two inclusions
S1 > S1 , and the suspension of this commutator is trivial since it lies in the abelian
group π2(S2 ∨S2).
By an easy geometric argument we will prove more generally:
Proposition 4I.1. If X and Y are CW complexes, then Σ(X×Y) ≃ΣX∨ΣY ∨Σ(X∧Y).
For example, Σ(Sm×Sn) ≃Sm+1 ∨Sn+1 ∨Sm+n+1 . In view of the cup product
structure on H∗(Sm×Sn) there can be no such splitting of Sm×Sn before suspension.
Proof: Consider the join X ∗Y deﬁned in Chapter 0, consisting of all line segments
joining points in X to points in Y . For our present purposes it is convenient to use
the reduced version of the join, obtained by collapsing to a point the line segment
joining the basepoints x0 ∈X and y0 ∈Y . We will still denote this reduced join
by X ∗Y . Consider the space obtained from X ∗Y
by attaching reduced cones CX and CY to
the canonical copies of X and Y
at the two ends of X ∗Y . If we
CX
CY
X Y
∗
x0
y0
X
Y
collapse each of these cones to a point,
we get the reduced suspension Σ(X×Y).
Since each cone is contractible, collapsing the cones gives a homotopy equivalence
Σ(X×Y) ≃X ∗Y ∪CX ∪CY . Inside X ∗Y there are also cones x0 ∗Y and X ∗y0
intersecting in a point. Collapsing these cones converts X ∗Y into Σ(X ∧Y), and it
also converts X ∗Y ∪CX ∪CY into Σ(X ∧Y) ∨ΣX ∨ΣY .
⊔⊓
This result can be applied inductively to obtain splittings for suspensions of prod-
ucts of more than two spaces, using the fact that reduced suspension is smash product
with S1 , and smash product is associative and commutative. For example,
Σ(X×Y ×Z) ≃ΣX ∨ΣY ∨ΣZ ∨Σ(X ∧Y) ∨Σ(X ∧Z) ∨Σ(Y ∧Z) ∨Σ(X ∧Y ∧Z)

Section 4.I.
Stable Splittings of Spaces
469
Our next example involves the reduced product J(X) deﬁned in §3.2. An interest-
ing case is the space J(Sn) which has a CW structure of the form Sn ∪e2n ∪e3n ∪···.
All the cells ein for i > 1 are attached nontrivially since H∗(J(Sn); Q) is a polyno-
mial ring Q[x] for n even and a tensor product Q[x]⊗ΛQ[y] for n odd. However,
after we suspend to ΣJ(Sn), it is a rather surprising fact that all the attaching maps
become trivial:
Proposition 4I.2. ΣJ(Sn) ≃Sn+1 ∨S2n+1 ∨S3n+1 ∨···. More generally, if X is a
connected CW complex then ΣJ(X) ≃
W
n ΣX∧n where X∧n denotes the smash product
of n copies of X .
Proof: The space J(X) is the union of an increasing sequence of subcomplexes Jk(X)
with Jk(X) a quotient of the k fold product X ×k . The quotient Jk(X)/Jk−1(X) is X∧k .
Thus we have the commutative diagram on the left:
-
X
Jk 1(
) −−−−−→
X
X
Jk
k
(
) −−−−−→
∧
X
k
×
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−→
-
X
Jk 1(
)−−−−−→
−−−−−→
X
X
Jk
k
(
) −−−−−→
∧
X
k
×
−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−→
Σ
Σ
Σ
X
k
k
∧
Σ
Σ
s
By repeated application of the preceding proposition, ΣX∧k is a wedge summand
of ΣX ×k , up to homotopy equivalence. The proof shows moreover that there is a
map ΣX∧k→ΣX ×k such that the composition ΣX∧k→ΣX ×k→ΣX∧k is homotopic to
the identity. By composition with the quotient map X ×k→Jk(X) we obtain a map
sk : ΣX∧k→ΣJk(X) such that ΣX∧k
sk-----→ΣJk(X)→ΣX∧k is homotopic to the identity.
The map sk induces a splitting of the long exact sequence of homology groups
for the pair (ΣJk(X), ΣJk−1(X)). Hence the map i ∨sk : ΣJk−1(X) ∨ΣX∧k→ΣJk(X)
induces an isomorphism on homology, where i denotes the inclusion map. It follows
by induction that the map
Wn
k=1sk :
Wn
k=1ΣX∧k→Jn(X) induces an isomorphism on
homology, for all ﬁnite n. This implies the corresponding statement for n = ∞since
X∧n is (n −1) connected if X is connected. Thus we have a map
W
k ΣX∧k→ΣJ(X)
inducing an isomorphism on homology. By Whitehead’s theorem this map is a homo-
topy equivalence since the spaces are simply-connected CW complexes.
⊔⊓
For our ﬁnal example the stable splitting will be constructed using the group
structure on ⟨ΣX, Y⟩, the set of basepointed homotopy classes of maps ΣX→Y .
Proposition 4I.3. For any prime power pn the suspension ΣK(Zpn, 1) is homotopy
equivalent to a wedge sum X1∨···∨Xp−1 where Xi is a CW complex having eH∗(Xi; Z)
nonzero only in dimensions congruent to 2i mod 2p −2.
This result is best possible in a strong sense: No matter how many times any one
of the spaces Xi is suspended, it never becomes homotopy equivalent to a nontrivial
wedge sum. This will be shown in Example 4L.3 by studying cohomology operations

470
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
in H∗(K(Zpn, 1); Zp). There is also a somewhat simpler K–theoretic explanation for
this; see [VBKT].
Proof: Let K = K(Zpn, 1). The multiplicative group of nonzero elements in the ﬁeld
Zp is cyclic, so let the integer r represent a generator. By Proposition 1B.9 there is a
map f : K→K inducing multiplication by r on π1(K). We will need to know that f
induces multiplication by r i on H2i−1(K; Z) ≈Zpn , and this can be deduced as follows.
Via the natural isomorphism π1(K) ≈H1(K; Z) we know that f induces multiplication
by r on H1(K; Z). Via the universal coefﬁcient theorem, f also induces multiplication
by r on H1(K; Zpn and H2(K; Zpn . The cup product structure in H∗(K; Zpn then
implies that f induces multiplication by r i on H2i−1(K; Zpn , so by another application
of the universal coefﬁcient theorem we have the desired result.
For each integer j ≥0 let hj : ΣK→ΣK be the difference Σf −r j11, so hj in-
duces multiplication by r i −r j on H2i(ΣK; Z) ≈Zpn . By the choice of r we know
that p divides r i −r j iff i ≡j mod p −1. This means that the map induced by hj
on eH2i(ΣK; Z) has nontrivial kernel iff i ≡j mod p −1. Therefore the composition
mi = h1 ◦··· hi−1 ◦hi+1 ··· hp−1 induces an isomorphism on
eH∗(ΣK; Z) in dimen-
sions congruent to 2i mod 2p −2 and has a nontrivial kernel in other dimensions
where the homology group is nonzero. When there is a nontrivial kernel, some power
of mi will induce the zero map since we are dealing with homomorphisms Zpn→Zpn .
Let Xi be the mapping telescope of the sequence ΣK→ΣK→··· where each map
is mi . Since homology commutes with direct limits, the inclusion of the ﬁrst factor
ΣK>Xi induces an isomorphism on eH∗in dimensions congruent to 2i mod 2p −2,
and eH∗(Xi; Z) = 0 in all other dimensions. The sum of these inclusions is a map
ΣK→X1 ∨··· ∨Xp−1 inducing an isomorphism on all homology groups. Since these
complexes are simply-connected, the result follows by Whitehead’s theorem.
⊔⊓
The construction of the spaces Xi as mapping telescopes produces rather large
spaces, with inﬁnitely many cells in each dimension. However, by Proposition 4C.1
each Xi is homotopy equivalent to a CW complex with the minimum conﬁguration of
cells consistent with its homology, namely, a 0 cell and a k cell for each k congruent
to 2i or 2i + 1 mod 2p −2.
Stable splittings of K(G, 1)’s for ﬁnite groups G have been much studied and are
a complicated and subtle business. To take the simplest noncyclic example, Proposi-
tion 4I.1 implies that ΣK(Z2×Z2, 1) splits as the wedge sum of two copies of ΣK(Z2, 1)
and Σ
 K(Z2, 1) ∧K(Z2, 1)

, but the latter summand can be split further, according to
a result in [Harris-Kuhn] which says that for G the direct sum of k copies of Zpn ,
ΣK(G, 1) splits canonically as the wedge sum of pieces having exactly pk −1 distinct
homotopy types. Some of these summands occur more than once, as we see in the
case of Z2×Z2 .

Section 4.J.
The Loopspace of a Suspension
471
Exercises
1. If a connected CW complex X retracts onto a subcomplex A, show that ΣX ≃
ΣA ∨Σ(X/A). [One approach: show the map Σr + Σq : ΣX→ΣA ∨Σ(X/A) induces an
isomorphism on homology, where r : X→A is the retraction and q : X→X/A is the
quotient map.]
2. Using the K¨unneth formula, show that K(Zm×Zn, 1) ≃K(Zm, 1) ∨K(Zn, 1) if m
and n are relatively prime. Thus to determine stable splittings of K(Zn, 1) it sufﬁces
to do the case that n is a prime power, as in Proposition 4E.3.
3. Extending Proposition 4I.3, show that the (2k + 1) skeleton of the suspension of a
lens space with fundamental group of order pn is homotopy equivalent to the wedge
sum of the (2k + 1) skeleta of the spaces Xi , if these Xi ’s are chosen to have the
minimum number of cells in each dimension, as described in the remarks following
the proof.
Loopspaces appear at ﬁrst glance to be hopelessly complicated objects, but if one
is only interested in homotopy type, there are many cases when almost miraculous
simpliﬁcations occur. One of the nicest of these cases is the loopspace of a sphere.
We show in this section that ΩSn+1 has the weak homotopy type of the James re-
duced product J(Sn) introduced in §3.2, and more generally, that ΩΣX has the weak
homotopy type of J(X) for every connected CW complex X . If one wants, one can
strengthen ‘weak homotopy type’ to ‘homotopy type’ by quoting Milnor’s theorem,
mentioned in §4.3, that the loopspace of a CW complex has the homotopy type of a
CW complex.
Part of the interest in ΩΣX is its close connection with the suspension homomor-
phism πi(X)→πi+1(ΣX). We will use the weak homotopy equivalence of ΩΣX with
J(X) to give another proof that the suspension homomorphism is an isomorphism
in dimensions up to approximately double the connectivity of X . In addition, we will
obtain an exact sequence which measures the failure of the suspension map to be
an isomorphism in dimensions between double and triple the connectivity of X . An
easy application of this, together with results proved elsewhere in the book, will be to
compute πn+1(Sn) and πn+2(Sn) for all n.
As a rough ﬁrst approximation to ΩSn+1 there is a natural inclusion of Sn into
ΩSn+1 obtained by regarding Sn+1 as the reduced suspension ΣSn , the quotient

472
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
(Sn×I)/(Sn×∂I ∪{e}×I) where e is the basepoint of Sn , then associating to each
point x ∈Sn the loop λ(x) in ΣSn given by t , (x, t). The
ﬁgure shows what a few such loops look like. However, we
e
cannot expect this inclusion Sn > ΩSn+1 to be a homotopy
equivalence since ΩSn+1 is an H–space but Sn is only an H–
space when n = 1, 3, 7 by the theorem of Adams discussed in
§4.B. The simplest way to correct this deﬁciency in Sn would be
to replace it by the free H–space which it generates, i.e., the reduced product J(Sn).
Recall from §3.2 that a point in J(Sn) is a formal product x1 ··· xk of points xi ∈Sn ,
with the basepoint e acting as an identity element for the multiplication obtained by
juxtaposition of formal products. We would like to deﬁne a map λ : J(Sn)→ΩSn+1
by setting λ(x1 ··· xk) = λ(x1) ··· λ(xk), the product of the loops λ(xi). The only
difﬁculty is in the parametrization of this product, which needs to be adjusted so that
λ is continuous. The problem is that when some xi approaches the basepoint e ∈Sn ,
one wants the loop λ(xi) to disappear gradually from the product λ(x1) ··· λ(xk),
without disrupting the parametrization as simply deleting λ(e) would do. This can
be achieved by ﬁrst making the time it takes to traverse each loop λ(xi) equal to the
distance from xi to the basepoint of Sn , then normalizing the resulting product of
loops so that it takes unit time, giving a map I→ΣSn .
More generally, this same procedure deﬁnes a map λ : J(X)→ΩΣX for any con-
nected CW complex X , where ‘distance to the basepoint’ is replaced by any map
d : X→[0, 1] with d−1(0) = e, the basepoint of X .
Theorem 4J.1. The map λ : J(X)→ΩΣX is a weak homotopy equivalence for every
connected CW complex X .
Proof: The main step will be to compute the homology of ΩΣX . After this is done,
it will be easy to deduce that λ induces an isomorphism on homology using the cal-
culation of the homology of J(X) in Proposition 3C.8, and from this conclude that λ
is a weak homotopy equivalence. It will turn out to be sufﬁcient to consider homol-
ogy with coefﬁcients in a ﬁeld F . We know that H∗(J(X); F) is the tensor algebra
T eH∗(X; F) by Proposition 3C.8, so we want to show that H∗(ΩΣX; F) has this same
structure.
Let us write the reduced suspension Y = ΣX as the union of two reduced cones
Y+ = C+X and Y−= C−X intersecting in the equatorial X ⊂ΣX . Consider the path
ﬁbration p : PY→Y with ﬁber ΩY .
Let P+Y = p−1(Y+) and P−Y = p−1(Y−), so
P+Y consists of paths in Y starting at the basepoint and ending in Y+ , and similarly
for P−Y .
Then P+Y ∩P−Y is p−1(X), the paths from the basepoint to X .
Since
Y+ and Y−are deformation retracts of open neighborhoods U+ and U−in Y such
that U+ ∩U−deformation retracts onto Y+ ∩Y−= X , the homotopy lifting property
implies that P+Y , P−Y , and p+Y ∩P−Y are deformation retracts, in the weak sense,

Section 4.J.
The Loopspace of a Suspension
473
of open neighborhoods p−1(U+), p−1(U−), and p−1(U+) ∩p−1(U−), respectively.
Therefore there is a Mayer-Vietoris sequence in homology for the decomposition PY =
P+Y ∪P−Y . Taking reduced homology and using the fact that PY is contractible, this
gives an isomorphism
(i)
Φ : eH∗(P+Y ∩P−Y; F)
≈------------→eH∗(P+Y; F)
L eH∗(P−Y; F)
The two coordinates of Φ are induced by the inclusions, with a minus sign in one case,
but Φ will still be an isomorphism if this minus sign is eliminated, so we assume this
has been done.
We claim that the isomorphism Φ can be rewritten as an isomorphism
(ii)
Θ : eH∗(ΩY ×X; F)
≈------------→eH∗(ΩY; F)
L eH∗(ΩY; F)
To see this, we observe that the ﬁbration P+Y→Y+ is ﬁber-homotopically trivial. This
is true since the cone Y+ is contractible, but we shall need an explicit ﬁber homo-
topy equivalence P+Y ≃ΩY ×Y+ and this is easily constructed as follows. Deﬁne
f+ : P+Y→ΩY ×Y+ by f+(γ) = (γ
γ+
y, y) where y = γ(1) and γ+
y is the obvious
path in Y+ from y = (x, t) to the basepoint along the segment {x}×I . In the other
direction, deﬁne g+ : ΩY ×Y+→P+Y by g+(γ, y) = γ γ +
y where ‘bar’ denotes the in-
verse path. Then f+g+ and g+f+ are ﬁber-homotopic to the respective identity maps
since γ +
y
γ+
y and γ+
y γ +
y are homotopic to the constant paths.
In similar fashion the ﬁbration P−Y→Y−is ﬁber-homotopically trivial via maps
f−and g−. By restricting a ﬁber-homotopy trivialization of either P+Y or P−Y to
P+Y ∩P−Y , we see that the ﬁbration P+Y ∩P−Y is ﬁber-homotopy equivalent to the
product ΩY ×X . Let us do this using the ﬁber-homotopy trivialization of P−Y . The
groups in (i) can now be replaced by those in (ii). The map Φ has coordinates induced
by inclusion, and it follows that the corresponding map Θ in (ii) has coordinates
induced by the two maps ΩY ×X→ΩY , (γ, x) , γ λ(x) and (γ, x) , γ . Namely,
the ﬁrst coordinate of Θ is induced by f+g−||ΩY ×X followed by projection to ΩY ,
and the second coordinate is the same but with f−g−in place of f+g−.
Writing the two coordinates of Θ as Θ1 and Θ2 , the fact that Θ is an isomorphism
means that the restriction of Θ1 to the kernel of Θ2 is an isomorphism.
Via the
K¨unneth formula we can write eH∗(ΩY ×X; F) as
 H∗(ΩY; F)⊗eH∗(X; F)
L eH∗(ΩY; F)
where projection onto the latter summand is Θ2 . Hence Θ1 gives an isomorphism
from the ﬁrst summand H∗(ΩY; F)⊗eH∗(X; F) onto
eH∗(ΩY; F).
Since Θ1(γ, x) =
(γ λ(x)), this means that the composed map
H∗(ΩY; F)⊗eH∗(X; F)
11 ⊗λ∗
----------------------------→H∗(ΩY; F)⊗eH∗(ΩY; F) --------→eH∗(ΩY; F)
with the second map Pontryagin product, is an isomorphism. Now to ﬁnish the calcu-
lation of H∗(ΩY; F) as the tensor algebra T eH∗(X; F), we apply the following algebraic
lemma, with A = H∗(ΩY; F), V = eH∗(X; F), and i = λ∗.

474
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
Lemma 4J.2. Let A be a graded algebra over a ﬁeld F with A0 = F and let V be a
graded vector space over F with V0 = 0. Suppose we have a linear map i : V→A pre-
serving grading, such that the multiplication map µ : A⊗V→eA, µ(a ⊗v) = ai(v), is
an isomorphism. Then the canonical algebra homomorphism i : TV→A extending
the previous i is an isomorphism.
For example, if V is a one-dimensional vector space over F , as happens in the
case X = Sn , then this says that if the map A→eA given by right-multiplication by
an element a = i(v) is an isomorphism, then A is the polynomial algebra F[a]. The
general case can be viewed as the natural generalization of this to polynomials in any
number of noncommuting variables.
Proof: Since µ is an isomorphism, each element a ∈An with n > 0 can be written
uniquely in the form µ
 P
j aj ⊗vj

=
P
j aji(vj) for vj ∈V and aj ∈An(j) , with
n(j) < n since V0 = 0. By induction on n, aj = i(αj) for a unique αj ∈(TV)n(j) .
Thus a = i
 P
j αj ⊗vj

so i is surjective. Since these representations are unique, i
is also injective. The induction starts with the hypothesis that A0 = F , the scalars in
TV .
⊔⊓
Returning now to the proof of the theorem, we observe that λ is an H–map, i.e., the
two maps J(X)×J(X)→ΩΣX , (x, y) , λ(xy) and (x, y) , λ(x)λ(y), are homo-
topic since the loops λ(xy) and λ(x)λ(y) differ only in their parametrizations. Since
λ is an H–map, the maps X>J(X)
λ-----→ΩΣX induce the com-
mutative diagram at the right. We have shown that the
F
X
J
H
(
(
)
) ;
∗
∗
F
X
H (
)
;
∗
−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−→
ΩΣ
F
X
TH (
)
;
∗
∼
λ
downward map on the right is an isomorphism,
and the same is true of the one on the left by
the calculation of H∗(J(X); F) in Proposition 3C.8. Hence λ∗is an isomorphism. By
Corollary 3A.7 this is also true for Z coefﬁcients. When X is simply-connected, so are
J(X) and ΩΣX , so after taking a CW approximation to ΩΣX , Whitehead’s theorem
implies that λ is a weak homotopy equivalence. In the general case that X is only con-
nected, we obtain the same conclusion by applying the generalization of Whitehead’s
theorem to abelian spaces, Proposition 4.72, since J(X) and ΩΣX are H–spaces, hence
have trivial action of π1 on all homotopy groups.
⊔⊓
Using the natural identiﬁcation πi(ΩΣX) = πi+1(ΣX), the inclusion X > ΩΣX
induces the suspension map πi(X)→πi+1(ΣX). Since this inclusion factors through
J(X), we can identify the relative groups πi(ΩΣX, X) with πi(J(X), X).
If X is
n connected then the pair (J(X), X) is (2n + 1) connected since we can replace X
by a complex with n skeleton a point, and then the (2n + 1) skeleton of J(X) is
contained in X . Thus we have:
Corollary 4J.3. The suspension map πi(X)→πi+1(ΣX), for X an n connected CW
complex, is an isomorphism if i ≤2n and a surjection if i = 2n + 1.
⊔⊓

Section 4.J.
The Loopspace of a Suspension
475
In the case of a sphere we can describe what happens in the ﬁrst dimension when
suspension is not an isomorphism, namely the suspension π2n−1(Sn)→π2n(Sn+1)
which the corollary guarantees only to be a surjection. The CW structure on J(Sn)
consists of a single cell in each dimension a multiple of n, so from exactness of
π2n(J(Sn), Sn)
∂-----→π2n−1(Sn)
Σ-----→π2n(Sn+1) we see that the kernel of the suspension
π2n−1(Sn)→π2n(Sn+1) is generated by the attaching map of the 2n cell of J(Sn).
This attaching map is the Whitehead product [11, 11], as we noted in §4.2 when we
deﬁned Whitehead products following Example 4.51. When n is even, the Hopf in-
variant homomorphism π2n−1(Sn)→Z has the value ±2 on [11, 11], as we saw in §4.B.
If there is no map of Hopf invariant ±1, it follows that [11, 11] generates a Z summand
of π2n−1(Sn), and so the suspension homomorphism simply cancels this summand
from π2n−1(Sn). By Adams’ theorem, this is the situation for all even n except 2, 4,
and 8.
When n = 2 we have π3(S2) ≈Z generated by the Hopf map η with Hopf invari-
ant 1, so 2η = ±[11, 11], generating the kernel of the suspension, hence:
Corollary 4J.4. πn+1(Sn) is Z2 for n ≥3, generated by the suspension or iterated
suspension of the Hopf map.
⊔⊓
The situation for n = 4 and 8 is more subtle. We don’t have the tools available
here to do the actual calculation, but if we consult the table near the beginning of §4.1
we see that the suspension π7(S4)→π8(S5) is a map Z⊕Z12→Z24 . By our preceding
remarks we know this map is surjective with kernel generated by the single element
[11, 11].
Algebraically, what must be happening is that the coordinate of [11, 11] in
the Z summand is twice a generator, while the coordinate in the Z12 summand is a
generator. Thus a generator of the Z summand, which we may take to be the Hopf
map S7→S4 , suspends to a generator of the Z24 . For n = 8 the situation is entirely
similar, with the suspension π15(S8)→π16(S9) a homomorphism Z⊕Z120→Z240 .
We can also obtain some information about suspension somewhat beyond the
edge of the stable dimension range. Since Sn is (n −1) connected and (J(Sn), Sn)
is (2n −1) connected, we have isomorphisms πi(J(Sn), Sn) ≈πi(J(Sn)/Sn) for i ≤
3n −2 by Proposition 4.27. The group πi(J(Sn)/Sn) is isomorphic to πi(S2n) in the
same range i ≤3n −2 since J(Sn)/Sn has S2n as its (3n −1) skeleton. Thus the
terminal portion of the long exact sequence of the pair (J(Sn), Sn) starting with the
term π3n−2(Sn) can be written in the form
π3n−2(Sn)
Σ-----→π3n−1(Sn+1)→π3n−2(S2n)→π3n−3(Sn)
Σ-----→π3n−2(Sn+1)→···
This is known as the EHP sequence since its three maps were originally called E ,
H , and P .
(The German word for ‘suspension’ begins with ‘E,’ the ‘H’ refers to a
generalization of the Hopf invariant, and the ‘P’ denotes a connection with Whitehead
products; see [G.Whitehead] for more details.) Note that the terms πi(S2n) in the EHP

476
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
sequence are stable homotopy groups since i ≤3n −2. Thus we have the curious
situation that stable homotopy groups are measuring the instability of the groups
πi(Sn) in the range 2n −1 ≤i ≤3n −2, the so-called metastable range.
Specializing to the ﬁrst interesting case n = 2, the sequence becomes
S
(
)
4
2
2
π
−−−−−→
S
(
)
5
3
π
−−−−−→
S
(
)
4
4
π
−−−−−→
S
(
)
3
2
π
−−−−−→
S
0
(
)
4
3
π
−−−−−→
Σ
Σ
Z
≈
2
Z
≈
Z
≈
Z
≈
From the Hopf bundle S1→S3→S2 we have π4(S2) ≈π4(S3) ≈Z2 , with π4(S2) gen-
erated by the composition η(Ση) where η is the Hopf map S3→S2 . From exactness
of the latter part of the sequence we deduce that the map π4(S4)→π3(S2) is injective,
hence that the suspension π4(S2)→π5(S3) is surjective, so π5(S3) is either Z2 or 0.
From the general suspension theorem, the suspension π5(S3)→π6(S4) is surjective
as well, and the latter group is in the stable range. We show in Proposition 4L.11 that
the stable group πs
2 is nonzero, and so we conclude that πn+2(Sn) ≈Z2 for all n ≥2,
generated by the composition (Σn−2η)(Σn−1η).
We will see in [SSAT] that the EHP sequence extends all the way to the left to form
an inﬁnite exact sequence when n is odd, and when n is even a weaker statement
holds: The sequence extends after factoring out all odd torsion.
Replacing Sn by any (n −1) connected CW complex X , our derivation of the
ﬁnite EHP sequence generalizes immediately to give an exact sequence
π3n−2(X)
Σ-----→π3n−1(ΣX)→π3n−2(X ∧X)→π3n−3(X)
Σ-----→π3n−2(ΣX)→···
using the fact that J2(X)/X = X ∧X .
The generalization of the results of this section to ΩnΣnX turns out to be of some
importance in homotopy theory. In case we don’t get to this topic in [SSAT], the reader
can begin to learn about it by looking at [Carlsson-Milgram].
Exercises
1. Show that ΩΣX for a nonconnected CW complex X reduces to the connected case
by showing that each path-component of ΩΣX is homotopy equivalent to ΩΣ
 W
α Xα

where the Xα ’s are the components of X .

Section 4.K.
Symmetric Products and the Dold-Thom Theorem
477
In the preceding section we saw how the free monoid J(X) generated by a space
X ﬁts into homotopy theory, and in this section we take up its commutative analog,
the free abelian monoid generated by X . This is the inﬁnite symmetric product SP(X)
introduced brieﬂy in §3.C. The main result will be a theorem of [Dold-Thom] asserting
that π∗SP(X) ≈eH∗(X; Z) for all connected CW complexes X . In particular this yields
the surprising fact that SP(Sn) is a K(Z, n), and more generally that the functor SP
takes Moore spaces M(G, n) to Eilenberg-MacLane spaces K(G, n). This leads to the
general result that for all connected CW complexes X , SP(X) has the homotopy type
of a product of Eilenberg-MacLane spaces. In other words, the k invariants of SP(X)
are all trivial.
The proof of the Dold-Thom theorem will consist of showing that the homotopy
groups π∗SP(X) deﬁne a homology theory, then deducing that this must be ordinary
homology with Z coefﬁcients by computing the coefﬁcient groups π∗SP(Sn). A new
idea needed for the proof is the notion of a quasiﬁbration, generalizing ﬁbrations and
ﬁber bundles. Before proving the Dold-Thom theorem we will need to establish a few
basic facts about quasiﬁbrations, and in order to do this we will ﬁrst have to digress
to prove a certain fact about relative homotopy groups. Though this fact is essentially
elementary, we have not encountered it previously in the book, so let us begin with
this elementary topic.
A Mayer-Vietoris Property of Homotopy Groups
In this subsection we will be concerned exclusively with relative homotopy groups,
and it will be impossible to avoid the awkward fact that there is no really good way to
deﬁne the relative π0 . What we will do as a compromise is to take π0(X, A, x0) to be
the quotient set π0(X, x0)/π0(A, x0). This at least allows the long exact sequence of
homotopy groups for (X, A) to end with the terms
π0(A, x0)→π0(X, x0)→π0(X, A, x0)→0
An exercise for §4.1 shows that the ﬁve-lemma can be applied to the map of long
exact sequences induced by a map (X, A)→(Y, B), provided the basepoint is allowed
to vary. However, the long exact sequence of a triple cannot be extended through the
π0 terms with this deﬁnition, so one must proceed with some caution.
The excision theorem for homology involves a space X with subspaces A and B
such that X is the union of the interiors of A and B . In this situation we call (X; A, B)
an excisive triad. By a map f : (X; A, B)→(Y; C, D) we mean f : X→Y with f (A) ⊂C
and f (B) ⊂D.

478
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
Proposition 4K.1. Let f : (X; A, B)→(Y; C, D) be a map of excisive triads.
If the
induced maps πi(A, A ∩B)→πi(C, C ∩D) and πi(B, A ∩B)→πi(D, C ∩D) are
bijections for i < n and surjections for i = n, for all choices of basepoints, then the
same is true of the induced maps πi(X, A)→πi(Y, C). By symmetry the conclusion
holds also for the maps πi(X, B)→πi(Y, D).
The corresponding statement for homology is a trivial consequence of excision
which says that Hi(X, A) ≈Hi(B, A ∩B) and Hi(Y, C) ≈Hi(D, C ∩D), so it is not
necessary to assume anything about Hi(A, A ∩B) and Hi(C, C ∩D). With the failure
of excision for homotopy groups, however, it is not surprising that the assumption
on πi(A, A ∩B)→πi(C, C ∩D) cannot be dropped. An example is provided by the
quotient map f : D2→S2 collapsing ∂D2 to the north pole of S2 , with C and D the
northern and southern hemispheres of S2 , and A and B their pre-images under f .
Proof: First we will establish a general fact about relative homotopy groups. Con-
sider an inclusion (X, A) > (Y, C). We will show the following three conditions are
equivalent for each n ≥1:
(i) For all choices of basepoints the map πi(X, A)→πi(Y, C) induced by inclusion
is surjective for i = n and has trivial kernel for i = n −1.
X
Y
Y
A
A
C
C
C
(ii) Let ∂Dn be written as the union of hemispheres ∂+Dn and
∂−Dn intersecting in Sn−2 . Then every map
(Dn×{0} ∪∂+Dn×I, ∂−Dn×{0} ∪Sn−2×I) -→(Y, C)
taking (∂+Dn×{1}, Sn−2×{1}) to (X, A) extends to a map
(Dn×I, ∂−Dn×I)→(Y, C) taking (Dn×{1}, ∂−Dn×{1}) to
(X, A).
(iii) Condition (ii) with the added hypothesis that the restriction of the given map to
∂+Dn×I is independent of the I coordinate.
It is obvious that (ii) and (iii) are equivalent since the stronger hypothesis in (iii) can
always be achieved by composing with a homotopy of Dn×I which shrinks ∂+Dn×I
to ∂+Dn×{1}.
To see that (iii) implies (i), let f : (∂+Dn×{1}, Sn−2×{1})→(X, A) represent an
element of πn−1(X, A). If this is in the kernel of the map to πn−1(Y, C), then we get
an extension of f over Dn×{0} ∪∂+Dn×I , with the constant homotopy on ∂+Dn×I
and (Dn×{0}, ∂−Dn×{0}) mapping to (Y, C). Condition (iii) then gives an extension
over Dn×I , whose restriction to Dn×{1} shows that f is zero in πn−1(X, A), so
the kernel of πn−1(X, A)→πn−1(Y, C) is trivial. To check surjectivity of the map
πn(X, A)→πn(Y, C), represent an element of πn(Y, C) by a map f : Dn×{0}→Y
taking ∂−Dn×{0} to C and ∂+Dn×{0} to a chosen basepoint. Extend f over ∂+Dn×I
via the constant homotopy, then extend over Dn×I by applying (iii).
The result
is a homotopy of the given f to a map representing an element of the image of
πn(X, A)→πn(Y, C).

Section 4.K.
Symmetric Products and the Dold-Thom Theorem
479
X
Y
Y
A
A
C
C
A
X
x0
Now we show that (i) implies (ii). Given a map f as in the
hypothesis of (ii), the injectivity part of (i) gives an extension of f
over Dn×{1}. Choose a small disk En ⊂∂−Dn×I , shown shaded
in the ﬁgure, intersecting ∂−Dn×{1} in a hemisphere ∂+En of its
boundary. We may assume the extended f has a constant value
x0 ∈A on ∂+En . Viewing the extended f as representing an
element of πn(Y, C, x0), the surjectivity part of (i) then gives an extension of f over
Dn×I taking (En, ∂−En) to (X, A) and the rest of ∂−Dn×I to C . The argument is
ﬁnished by composing this extended f with a deformation of Dn×I pushing En into
Dn×{1}.
Having shown the equivalence of (i)-(iii), let us prove the proposition. We may
reduce to the case that the given f : (X; A, B)→(Y; C, D) is an inclusion by using map-
ping cylinders. One’s ﬁrst guess would be to replace (Y; C, D) by the triad of mapping
cylinders (Mf ; Mf |A, Mf |B), where we view f ||A as a map A→C and f ||B as a map
B→D. However, the triad (Mf ; Mf|A, Mf|B) need not be excisive, for example if X
consists of two points A and B and Y is a single point. To remedy this problem,
replace Mf |A by its union with f −1(C)×(1/2, 1) in Mf , and enlarge Mf|B similarly.
Now we prove the proposition for an inclusion (X; A, B) > (Y; C, D). The case
n = 0 is trivial from the deﬁnitions, so let us assume n ≥1. In view of the equivalence
of the conditions (i)-(iii) above, it sufﬁces to show that condition (ii) for the inclusions
(A, A ∩B) > (C, C ∩D) and (B, A ∩B) > (D, C ∩D) implies (iii) for the inclusion
(X, A)> (Y, C). Let a map f : Dn×{0} ∪∂+Dn×I→Y as in the hypothesis of (iii) be
given. The argument will involve subdivision of Dn into smaller disks, and for this it
is more convenient to use the cube In instead of Dn , so let us identify In with Dn in
such a way that ∂−Dn corresponds to the face In−1×{1}, which we denote by ∂−In ,
and ∂+Dn corresponds to the remaining faces of In , which we denote by ∂+In . Thus
we are given f on In×{0} taking ∂+In×{0} to X and ∂−In×{0} to C , and on ∂+In×I
we have the constant homotopy.
Since (Y; C, D) is an excisive triad, we can subdivide each of the I factors of
In×{0} into subintervals so that f takes each of the resulting n dimensional sub-
cubes of In×{0} into either C or D. The extension of f we construct will have the
following key property:
(∗)
If K is a one of the subcubes of In×{0}, or a lower-dimensional face of such a
cube, then the extension of f takes (K×I, K×{1}) to (C, A) or (D, B) when-
ever f takes K to C or D, respectively.
Initially we have f deﬁned on ∂+In×I with image in X , independent of the I co-
ordinate, and we may assume the condition (∗) holds here since we may assume
that A = X ∩C and B = X ∩D, these conditions holding for the mapping cylinder
construction employed earlier.
Consider the problem of extending f over K×I for K one of the subcubes. We

480
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
may assume that f has already been extended to ∂+K×I so that (∗) is satisﬁed, by
induction on n and on the sequence of subintervals of the last
coordinate of In×{0}. To extend f over K×I the ﬁrst two cases
to consider are that the given f takes (K, ∂−K) to (C, C ∩D) or
(D, C ∩D). Then by applying (ii) for the inclusion (A, A ∩B)>
(C, C ∩D) or (B, A ∩B) > (D, C ∩D) we may extend f over
K×I so that (∗) is still satisﬁed. If neither of the ﬁrst two cases
applies, then the given f takes (K, ∂−K) just to (C, C) or (D, D), and we can apply
(ii) trivially to construct the desired extension of f over K×I .
⊔⊓
Corollary 4K.2. Suppose given a map f : X→Y and open covers {Ui} of X and {Vi}
of Y with f (Ui) ⊂Vi for all i. If each restriction f : Ui→Vi and more generally each
f : Ui1∩···∩Uin→Vi1∩···∩Vin is a weak homotopy equivalence, then so is f : X→Y .
Proof: First let us do the case of covers by two sets. By the ﬁve-lemma, the hypothe-
ses imply that πn(Ui, U1 ∩U2)→πn(Vi, V1 ∩V2) is bijective for i = 1, 2, n ≥0,
and all choices of basepoints. The preceding proposition then implies that the maps
πn(X, U1)→πn(Y, V1) are isomorphisms. Hence by the ﬁve-lemma again, so are the
maps πn(X)→πn(Y).
By induction, the case of ﬁnite covers by k > 2 sets reduces to the case of covers
by two sets, by letting one of the two sets be the union of the ﬁrst k −1 of the given
sets and the other be the kth set. The case of inﬁnite covers reduces to the ﬁnite case
since for surjectivity of πn(X)→πn(Y), a map Sn→Y has compact image covered
by ﬁnitely many Vi ’s, and similarly for injectivity.
⊔⊓
Quasiﬁbrations
A map p : E→B with B path-connected is a quasiﬁbration if the induced map
p∗: πi(E, p−1(b), x0)→πi(B, b) is an isomorphism for all b ∈B , x0 ∈p−1(b), and
i ≥0. We have shown in Theorem 4.40 that ﬁber bundles and ﬁbrations have this
property for i > 0, as a consequence of the homotopy lifting property, and the same
reasoning applies for i = 0 since we assume B is path-connected.
For example, consider the natural projection Mf→I of the
mapping cylinder of a map f : X→Y . This projection will be a
quasiﬁbration iff f is a weak homotopy equivalence, since the
latter condition is equivalent to having πi
 Mf , p−1(b)

= 0 =
πi(I, b) for all i and all b ∈I . Note that if f is not surjective, there are paths in
I which do not lift to paths in Mf with a prescribed starting point, so p will not be a
ﬁbration in such cases.
An alternative condition for a map p : E→B to be a quasiﬁbration is that the
inclusion of each ﬁber p−1(b) into the homotopy ﬁber Fb of p over b is a weak
homotopy equivalence. Recall that Fb is the space of all pairs consisting of a point

Section 4.K.
Symmetric Products and the Dold-Thom Theorem
481
x ∈E and a path γ in B from p(x) to b. The actual ﬁber p−1(b) is included in Fb as
the pairs with x ∈p−1(b) and γ the constant path at x . One can see the equivalence
of the two deﬁnitions by considering the commu-
tative triangle at the right, where Fb→Ep→B is
E p
b
πi(
(
))
E
πi
p Fb
(
)
−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−→
−−−−→
,
,
B
πi
b
(
)
,
- 1
the usual path-ﬁbration construction applied to p. The
right-hand map in the diagram is an isomorphism for all
i ≥0, and the upper map will be an isomorphism for all i ≥0 iff the inclusion
p−1(b) > Fb is a weak equivalence since E ≃Ep .
Hence the two deﬁnitions are
equivalent.
Recall from Proposition 4.60 that all ﬁbers of a ﬁbration over a path-connected
base are homotopy equivalent. Since we are only considering quasiﬁbrations over
path-connected base spaces, this implies that all the ﬁbers of a quasiﬁbration have the
same weak homotopy type. Quasiﬁbrations over a base which is not path-connected
are considered in the exercises, but we will not need this generality in what follows.
The following technical lemma gives various conditions for recognizing that a
map is a quasiﬁbration, which will be needed in the proof of the Dold-Thom theorem.
Lemma 4K.3. A map p : E→B is a quasiﬁbration if any one of the following condi-
tions is satisﬁed:
(a) B can be decomposed as the union of open sets V1 and V2 such that each of
the restrictions p−1(V1)→V1 , p−1(V2)→V2 , and p−1(V1 ∩V2)→V1 ∩V2 is a
quasiﬁbration.
(b) B is the union of an increasing sequence of subspaces B1 ⊂B2 ⊂···, with the
direct limit topology, such that each restriction p−1(Bn)→Bn is a quasiﬁbration.
(c) There is a deformation Ft of E into a subspace E′ , covering a deformation Ft
of B into a subspace B′ , such that the restriction E′→B′ is a quasiﬁbration and
F1 : p−1(b)→p−1 F1(b)

is a weak homotopy equivalence for each b ∈B .
By a ‘deformation’ in (c) we mean a deformation retraction in the weak sense as
deﬁned in the exercises for Chapter 0, where the homotopy is not required to be the
identity on the subspace.
Proof: (a) To avoid some tedious details we will consider only the case that the ﬁbers
of p are path-connected, which will sufﬁce for our present purposes, leaving the
general case as an exercise for the reader. This hypothesis on ﬁbers guarantees that
all π0 ’s arising in the proof are trivial. In particular, by an exercise for §4.1 this allows
us to terminate long exact sequences of homotopy groups of triples with zeros in the
π0 positions.
Let U1 = p−1(V1) and U2 = p−1(V2). By applying the ﬁve lemma to the long exact
sequences of homotopy groups of the triples
 Uk, U1∩U2, p−1(b)

and (Vk, V1∩V2, b)
we deduce that the maps πi(Uk, U1 ∩U2)→πi(Vk, V1 ∩V2) are isomorphisms for
k = 1, 2 and all i. Then Proposition 4K.1 implies that the maps πi(E, U1)→πi(B, V1)

482
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
are isomorphisms. The hypothesis that the maps πi
 U1, p−1(b)
→πi(V1, b) are iso-
morphisms then implies via the ﬁve-lemma that the maps πi
 E, p−1(b)
→πi(B, b)
are isomorphisms.
(b) This is the standard compactness argument for direct limits. Every compact sub-
space of E lies in one of the subspaces En = p−1(Bn), so πi
 E, p−1(b)

is the direct
limit lim
--→πi
 En, p−1(b)

, hence the map πi
 E, p−1(b)
→πi(B, b) is an isomorphism
if each map πi
 En, p−1(b)
→πi(B, b) is an isomorphism.
(c)
Consider the commutative diagram
E p
b
(
(
)) −−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
,
B b
(
)
,
B
(
)
,
- 1
E
F
p
b
(
(
(
)))
,
- 1
1
′
′
−
−−−−−−−−−→E
F
p
b
(
(
(
)))
,
- 1
1
−
F b
( )
1
−
F1
F1
−
−−→
−−→
where the upper right map is inclusion. The composition across the top of the dia-
gram induces an isomorphism on relative homotopy groups via the ﬁve-lemma and
the hypothesis that F1 : p−1(b)→p−1 F1(b)

is a weak homotopy equivalence. Since
the inclusion E′ > E is a homotopy equivalence, the upper right map also induces
isomorphisms on relative homotopy groups. Hence the upper left map F1 induces
isomorphisms on relative homotopy groups. The lower map F1 is a homotopy equiv-
alence, so from commutativity of the diagram we deduce that the left-hand vertical
map induces isomorphisms on homotopy groups since this is true of the right-hand
vertical map by assumption.
⊔⊓
Symmetric Products
Let us recall the deﬁnition from §3.C. For a space X the n fold symmetric product
SPn(X) is the quotient space of the product of n copies of X obtained by factoring out
the action of the symmetric group permuting the factors. If we choose a basepoint
e ∈X , then there are inclusions SPn(X) > SPn+1(X) induced by (x1, ··· , xn) ,
(x1, ··· , xn, e), and SP(X) is deﬁned to be the union of this increasing sequence
of spaces, with the direct limit topology. Note that SPn is a homotopy functor: A
map f : X→Y induces f∗: SPn(X)→SPn(Y), and f ≃g implies f∗≃g∗. Hence
X ≃Y implies SPn(X) ≃SPn(Y). In similar fashion SP is a homotopy functor on the
category of basepointed spaces and basepoint-preserving homotopy classes of maps.
It follows that X ≃Y implies SP(X) ≃SP(Y) for connected CW complexes X and
Y since in this case requiring maps and homotopies to preserve basepoints does not
affect the relation of homotopy equivalence.
Example 4K.4.
An interesting special case is when X = S2 because in this case
SP(S2) can be identiﬁed with CP∞in the following way. We ﬁrst identify CPn with the
nonzero polynomials of degree at most n with coefﬁcients in C, modulo scalar mul-
tiplication, by letting a0 + ··· + anzn correspond to the line containing (a0, ··· , an).
The sphere S2 we view as C ∪{∞}, and then we deﬁne f : (S2)n→CPn by setting

Section 4.K.
Symmetric Products and the Dold-Thom Theorem
483
f(a1, ··· , an) = (z + a1) ··· (z + an) with factors z + ∞omitted, so in particular
f(∞, ··· , ∞) = 1. To check that f is continuous, suppose some ai approaches ∞,
say an , and all the other aj ’s are ﬁnite. Then if we write
(z + a1) ··· (z + an) =
zn + (a1 + ··· + an)zn−1 + ··· +
X
i1<···<ik
ai1 ··· aikzn−k + ··· + a1 ··· an
we see that, dividing through by an and letting an approach ∞, this polynomial
approaches zn−1 + (a1 + ··· + an−1)zn−2 + ··· + a1 ··· an−1 = (z + a1) ··· (z + an−1).
The same argument would apply if several ai ’s approach ∞simultaneously.
The value f (a1, ··· , an) is unchanged under permutation of the ai ’s, so there
is an induced map SPn(S2)→CPn which is a continuous bijection, hence a homeo-
morphism since both spaces are compact Hausdorff. Letting n go to ∞, we then get
a homeomorphism SP(S2) ≈CP∞.
The same argument can be used to show that SPn(S1) ≃S1 for all n, including
n = ∞. Namely, the argument shows that SPn(C −{0}) can be identiﬁed with the
polynomials zn + an−1zn−1 + ··· + a0 with a0 ≠0, or in other words with n tuples
(a0, ··· , an−1) ∈Cn with a0 ≠0, and this subspace of Cn deformation retracts onto
a circle.
The symmetric products of higher-dimensional spheres are more complicated,
though things are not so bad for the 2 fold symmetric product:
Example 4K.5. Let us show that SP2(Sn) is homeomorphic to the mapping cone of a
map ΣnRPn−1→Sn . Hence H∗(SP2(Sn)) ≈H∗(Sn)⊕eH∗(Σn+1RPn−1) from the long
exact sequence of homology groups for the pair (SP2(Sn), Sn), since SP2(Sn)/Sn is
Σn+1RPn−1 with no reduced homology below dimension n + 2.
If we view Sn as Dn/∂Dn , then SP2(Sn) becomes a certain quotient of Dn×Dn .
Viewing Dn×Dn as the cone on its boundary Dn×∂Dn∪∂Dn×Dn , the identiﬁcations
which produce SP2(Sn) respect the various concentric copies of this boundary which
ﬁll up the interior of Dn×Dn , so it sufﬁces to analyze the identiﬁcations in all these
copies of the boundary. The identiﬁcations on the boundary of Dn×Dn itself yield
Sn . This is clear since the identiﬁcation (x, y) ∼(y, x) converts Dn×∂Dn∪∂Dn×Dn
to Dn×∂Dn , and all points of ∂Dn are identiﬁed in Sn .
It remains to see that the identiﬁcations on each concentric copy of the boundary
in the interior of Dn×Dn produce ΣnRPn−1 . These identiﬁcations are just (x, y) ∼
(y, x). Denote by Z the quotient of Dn×∂Dn ∪∂Dn×Dn under these identiﬁcations.
This is the same as the quotient of Dn×∂Dn under the identiﬁcations (x, y) ∼(y, x)
for (x, y) ∈∂Dn×∂Dn .

484
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
Deﬁne f : Dn×RPn−1→Z by f (x, L) = (w, z) where w
and z are deﬁned as in the ﬁgure, that is, x is equidistant
from z ∈∂Dn and w ∈Dn along the line through x parallel
to L.
Note that if x happens to be the midpoint of the
x
z
w
z'
0
L
segment zz′ , then w = z′ and there is no way to distinguish
between w and z, but since f takes values in the quotient space Z , this is not a
problem. If x ∈∂Dn then w = z = x , independent of L. If x ∈Dn −∂Dn then
w ≠z, and conversely, given (w, z) ∈Dn×∂Dn with w ≠z there is a unique (x, L)
with f (x, L) = (w, z), namely x is the midpoint of the segment wz and L is the line
parallel to this segment. In view of these remarks, we see that Z is the quotient space
of Dn×RPn−1 under the identiﬁcations (x, L) ∼(x, L′) if x ∈∂Dn . This quotient is
precisely ΣnRPn−1 .
This example illustrates that passing from a CW structure on X to a CW structure
on SPn(X) or SP(X) is not at all straightforward. However, if X is a simplicial com-
plex there is a natural way of putting ∆complex structures on SPn(X) and SP(X),
as follows. A simplicial complex structure on X gives a CW structure on the prod-
uct of n copies of X , with cells n fold products of simplices. Such a product has
a canonical barycentric subdivision as a simplicial complex, with vertices the points
whose coordinates are barycenters of simplices of X . By induction over skeleta, this
just amounts to coning off a simplicial structure on the boundary of each product
cell. This simplicial structure on the product of n copies of X is in fact a ∆-complex
structure since the vertices of each of its simplices have a natural ordering given by
the dimensions of the cells of which they are barycenters. The action of the symmet-
ric group permuting coordinates respects this ∆complex structure, taking simplices
homeomorphically to simplices, preserving vertex-orderings, so there is an induced
∆complex structure on the quotient SPn(X). With the basepoint of X chosen to
be a vertex, SPn(X) is a subcomplex of SPn+1(X) so there is a natural ∆-complex
structure on the inﬁnite symmetric product SP(X) as well.
As usual with products, the CW topology on SPn(X) and SP(X) is in general
different from the topology arising from the original deﬁnition in terms of product
topologies, but one can check that the two topologies have the same compact sets,
so the distinction won’t matter for our present purposes. For deﬁniteness, we will
use the CW topology in what follows, which means restricting X to be a simplicial
complex. Since every CW complex is homotopy equivalent to a simplicial complex by
Theorem 2C.4, and SPn and SP are homotopy functors, there is no essential loss of
generality in restricting from CW complexes to simplicial complexes.
Here is the main result of this section, the Dold-Thom theorem:
Theorem 4K.6. The functor X , πiSP(X) for i ≥1 coincides with the functor
X , Hi(X; Z) on the category of basepointed connected CW complexes.

Section 4.K.
Symmetric Products and the Dold-Thom Theorem
485
In particular this says that SP(Sn) is a K(Z, n), and more generally that for a
Moore space M(G, n), SP(M(G, n)) is a K(G, n).
The fact that SP(X) is a commutative, associative H–space with a strict identity
element limits its weak homotopy type considerably:
Corollary 4K.7. A path-connected, commutative, associative H–space with a strict
identity element has the weak homotopy type of a product of Eilenberg-MacLane
spaces.
In particular, if X is a connected CW complex then SP(X) is path-connected and
has the weak homotopy type of
Q
nK(Hn(X), n). Thus the functor SP essentially
reduces to Eilenberg-MacLane spaces.
Proof: Let X be a path-connected, commutative, associative H–space with a strict
identity element, and let Gn = πn(X). By Lemma 4.30 there is a map M(Gn, n)→X
inducing an isomorphism on πn when n > 1 and an isomorphism on H1 when
n = 1.
We can take these maps to be basepoint-preserving, and then they com-
bine to give a map
W
n M(Gn, n)→X . The very special H–space structure on X al-
lows us to extend this to a homomorphism f : SP(
W
n M
 Gn, n)
→X .
In general,
SP(
W
α Xα) can be identiﬁed with
Q
αSP(Xα) where this is the ‘weak’ inﬁnite prod-
uct, the union of the ﬁnite products. This, together with the general fact that the map
πi(X)→πiSP(X) = Hi(X; Z) induced by the inclusion X = SP1(X) > SP(X) is the
Hurewicz homomorphism, as we will see at the end of the proof of the Dold-Thom the-
orem, implies that the map f induces an isomorphism on all homotopy groups. Thus
we have a weak homotopy equivalence
Q
nSP
 M(Gn, n)
→X , and as we noted above,
SP
 M(Gn, n)

is a K(Gn, n). Finally, since each factor SP
 M(Gn, n)

has only one
nontrivial homotopy group, the weak inﬁnite product has the same weak homotopy
type as the ordinary inﬁnite product.
⊔⊓
The main step in the proof of the theorem will be to show that for a simplicial
pair (X, A) with both X and A connected, there is a long exact sequence
···→πiSP(A)→πiSP(X)→πiSP(X/A)→πi−1SP(A)→···
This would follow if the maps SP(A)→SP(X)→SP(X/A) formed a ﬁber bundle or
ﬁbration. There is some reason to hope this would be true, because all the ﬁbers of
the projection SP(X)→SP(X/A) are homeomorphic to SP(A). In fact, in terms of
the H–space structure on SP(X) as the free abelian monoid generated by X , the ﬁbers
are exactly the cosets of the submonoid SP(A). The projection SP(X)→SP(X/A),
however, fails to have the homotopy lifting property, even the special case of lifting
paths. For if xt , t ∈[0, 1), is a path in X −A approaching a point x1 = a ∈A other
than the basepoint, then regarding xt as a path in SP(X/A), any lift to SP(X) would
have the form xtαt , αt ∈SP(A), ending at x1α1 = aα1 , a point of SP(A) which

486
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
is a multiple of a, so in particular there would be no lift ending at the basepoint of
SP(X).
What we will show is that the projection SP(X)→SP(X/A) has instead the weaker
structure of a quasiﬁbration which is still good enough to deduce a long exact se-
quence of homotopy groups.
Proof of 4K.6: As we have said, the main step will be to associate a long exact sequence
of homotopy groups to each simplicial pair (X, A) with X and A connected. This
will be the long exact sequence of homotopy groups coming from the quasiﬁbration
SP(A)→SP(X)→SP(X/A), so the major work will be in verifying the quasiﬁbration
property. Since SP is a homotopy functor, we are free to replace (X, A) by a homotopy
equivalent pair, so let us replace (X, A) by (M, A) where M is the mapping cylinder
of the inclusion A > X . This new pair, which we still call (X, A), has some slight
technical advantages, as we will see later in the proof.
To begin the proof that the projection p : SP(X)→SP(X/A) is a quasiﬁbration,
let Bn = SPn(X/A) and En = p−1(Bn). Thus En consists of those points in SP(X)
having at most n coordinates in X −A. By Lemma 4K.3(b) it sufﬁces to show that
p : En→Bn is a quasiﬁbration. The proof of the latter fact will be by induction on
n, starting with the trivial case n = 0 when B0 is a point. The induction step will
consist of showing that p is a quasiﬁbration over a neighborhood of Bn−1 and over
Bn −Bn−1 , then applying Lemma 4K.3(a). We ﬁrst tackle the problem of showing the
quasiﬁbration property over a neighborhood of Bn−1 .
Let ft : X→X be a homotopy of the identity map which deformation retracts a
neighborhood N of A onto A. Since we have replaced the original X by the mapping
cylinder of the inclusion A > X , we can take ft simply to slide points along the
segments {a}×I in the mapping cylinder, with N = A×[0, 1/2). Let U ⊂En consist
of those points having at least one coordinate in N , or in other words, products with
at least one factor in N . Thus U is a neighborhood of En−1 in En and p(U) is a
neighborhood of Bn−1 in Bn .
The homotopy ft induces a homotopy Ft : En→En whose restriction to U is a
deformation of U into En−1 , where by ‘deformation’ we mean ‘deformation retrac-
tion in the weak sense.’ Since ft is the identity on A, Ft is the lift of a homotopy
Ft : Bn→Bn which restricts to a deformation of U = p(U) into Bn−1 . We will deduce
that the projection U→U is a quasiﬁbration by using Lemma 4K.3(c). To apply this
to the case at hand we need to verify that F1 : p−1(b)→p−1 F1(b)

is a weak equiva-
lence for all b. Each point w ∈p−1(b) is a commuting product of points in X . Let
c
w be the subproduct whose factors are points in X −A, so we have w = c
wv for v
a product of points in A. Since f1 is the identity on A and F1 is a homomorphism,
we have F1(w) = F1(c
w)v , which can be written
Æ
F1(c
w)v′v with v′ also a product
of points in A. If we ﬁx c
w and let v vary over SP(A), we get all points of p−1(b)
exactly once, or in other words, we have p−1(b) expressed as the coset c
wSP(A).

Section 4.K.
Symmetric Products and the Dold-Thom Theorem
487
The map F1 , c
wv , Æ
F1(c
w)v′v , takes this coset to the coset Æ
F1(c
w)SP(A) by a map
which would be a homeomorphism if the factor v′ were not present. Since A is con-
nected, there is a path v′
t from v′ to the basepoint, and so by replacing v′ with v′
t
in the product Æ
F1(c
w)v′v we obtain a homotopy from F1 : p−1(b)→p−1 F1(b)

to a
homeomorphism, so this map is a homotopy equivalence, as desired.
It remains to see that p is a quasiﬁbration over Bn−Bn−1 and over the intersection
of this set with U . The argument will be the same in both cases.
Identifying Bn −Bn−1 with SPn(X −A), the projection p : En −En−1→Bn −Bn−1
is the same as the operator w , c
w . The inclusion SPn(X −A)> En −En−1 provides
a section for p : En −En−1→Bn −Bn−1 , so the induced homomorphism p∗: πi
 En −
En−1, p−1(b)
→πi(Bn −Bn−1, b) is surjective. To see that it is injective, represent an
element of its kernel by a map g : (Di, ∂Di)→
 En −En−1, p−1(b)

. A nullhomotopy of
pg gives a homotopy of g changing only its coordinates in X −A. This homotopy is
through maps (Di, ∂Di)→
 En−En−1, p−1(b)

, and ends with a map to p−1(b), so the
kernel of p∗is trivial. Thus the projection En−En−1→Bn−Bn−1 is a quasiﬁbration, at
least if Bn −Bn−1 is path-connected. But by replacing the original X with the mapping
cylinder of the inclusion A > X , we guarantee that X −A is path-connected since
it deformation retracts onto X . Hence the space Bn −Bn−1 = SPn(X −A) is also
path-connected.
This argument works equally well over any open subset of Bn −Bn−1 which is
path-connected, in particular over U ∩(Bn −Bn−1), so via Lemma 4K.3(a) this ﬁnishes
the proof that SP(A)→SP(X)→SP(X/A) is a quasiﬁbration.
Since the homotopy axiom is obvious, this gives us the ﬁrst two of the three ax-
ioms needed for the groups hi(X) = πiSP(X) to deﬁne a reduced homology theory.
There remains only the wedge sum axiom, hi(
W
α Xα) ≈
L
α hi(Xα), but this is im-
mediate from the evident fact that SP(
W
α Xα) =
Q
αSP(Xα), where this is the ‘weak’
product, the union of the products of ﬁnitely many factors.
The homology theory h∗(X) is deﬁned on the category of connected, basepointed
simplicial complexes, with basepoint-preserving maps. The coefﬁcients of this homol-
ogy theory, the groups hi(Sn), are the same as for ordinary homology with Z coefﬁ-
cients since we know this is true for n = 2 by the homeomorphism SP(S2) ≈CP∞,
and there are isomorphisms hi(X) ≈hi+1(ΣX) in any reduced homology theory.
If the homology theory h∗(X) were deﬁned on the category of all simplicial com-
plexes, without basepoints, then Theorem 4.58 would give natural isomorphisms
hi(X) ≈Hi(X; Z) for all X , and the proof would be complete. However, it is easy
to achieve this by deﬁning a new homology theory h′
i(X) = hi+1(ΣX), since the sus-
pension of an arbitrary complex is connected and the suspension of an arbitrary map
is basepoint-preserving, taking the basepoint to be one of the suspension points. Since
h′
i(X) is naturally isomorphic to hi(X) if X is connected, we are done.
⊔⊓

488
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
It is worth noting that the map πi(X)→πiSP(X) = Hi(X; Z) induced by the
inclusion X = SP1(X)> SP(X) is the Hurewicz homomorphism. For by deﬁnition of
the Hurewicz homomorphism and naturality this reduces to the case X = Si , where
the map SP1(Si) > SP(Si) induces on πi a homomorphism Z→Z, which one just
has to check is an isomorphism, the Hurewicz homomorphism being determined only
up to sign. The suspension isomorphism gives a further reduction to the case i = 1,
where the inclusion SP1(S1)> SP(S1) is a homotopy equivalence, hence induces an
isomorphism on π1 .
Exercises
1. Show that Corollary 4K.2 remains valid when X and Y are CW complexes and the
subspaces Ui and Vi are subcomplexes rather than open sets.
2. Show that a simplicial map f : K→L is a homotopy equivalence if f −1(x) is con-
tractible for all x ∈L. [Consider the cover of L by open stars of simplices and the
cover of K by the preimages of these open stars.]
3. Show that SPn(I) = ∆n .
4. Show that SP2(S1) is a M¨obius band, and that this is consistent with the description
of SP2(Sn) as a mapping cone given in Example 4K.5.
5. A map p : E→B with B not necessarily path-connected is deﬁned to be a quasiﬁ-
bration if the following equivalent conditions are satisﬁed.
(1) For all b ∈B and x0 ∈p−1(b), the map p∗: πi(E, p−1(b), x0)→πi(B, b) is an
isomorphism for i > 0 and π0(p−1(b), x0)→π0(E, x0)→π0(B, b) is exact.
(2) The inclusion of the ﬁber p−1(b) into the homotopy ﬁber Fb of p over b is a
weak homotopy equivalence for all b ∈B .
(3) The restriction of p over each path-component of B is a quasiﬁbration according
to the deﬁnition in this section.
Show these three conditions are equivalent, and prove Lemma 4K.3 for quasiﬁbrations
over non-pathconnected base spaces.
6. Let X be a complex of spaces over a ∆complex Γ , as deﬁned in §4.G. Show that
the natural projection ∆X→Γ is a quasiﬁbration if all the maps in X associated to
edges of Γ are weak homotopy equivalences.

Section 4.L.
Steenrod Squares and Powers
489
The main objects of study in this section are certain homomorphisms called Steen-
rod squares and Steenrod powers:
Sqi : Hn(X; Z2)→Hn+i(X; Z2)
P i : Hn(X; Zp)→Hn+2i(p−1)(X; Zp)
for odd primes p
The terms ‘squares’ and ‘powers’ arise from the fact that Sqi and P i are related to
the maps α,α2 and α,αp sending a cohomology class α to the 2 fold or p fold
cup product with itself. Unlike cup products, however, the operations Sqi and P i are
stable, i.e., invariant under suspension.
The operations Sqi generate an algebra A2 , called the Steenrod algebra, such
that H∗(X; Z2) is a module over A2 for every space X , and maps between spaces
induce homomorphisms of A2 modules. Similarly, for odd primes p, H∗(X; Zp) is a
module over a corresponding Steenrod algebra Ap generated by the P i ’s and Bock-
stein homomorphisms. Like the ring structure given by cup product, these module
structures impose strong constraints on spaces and maps between spaces. For exam-
ple, we will use them to show that there do not exist spaces X having cohomology
H∗(X; Z) a polynomial ring Z[α] unless α has dimension 2 or 4, where there are the
familiar examples of CP∞and HP∞.
This rather lengthy section is divided into two main parts. The ﬁrst part describes
the basic properties of Steenrod squares and powers and gives a number of examples
and applications. The second part is devoted to constructing the squares and powers
and showing they satisfy the basic properties listed in the ﬁrst part. More extensive
applications will be given in [SSAT] after spectral sequences have been introduced.
Most applications of Steenrod squares and powers do not depend on how these op-
erations are actually constructed, but only on their basic properties. This is similar
to the situation for ordinary homology and cohomology, where the axioms generally
sufﬁce for most applications. The construction of Steenrod squares and powers and
the veriﬁcation of their basic properties, or axioms, is rather interesting in its own
way, but does involve a certain amount of work, particularly for the Steenrod powers,
and this is why we delay the work until later in the section.
We begin with a few generalities. A cohomology operation is a transformation
Θ = ΘX : Hm(X; G)→Hn(X; H) deﬁned for all spaces X , with a ﬁxed choice of m, n,
G, and H , satisfying the naturality property that for
all maps f : X→Y there is a commuting diagram as
G
X
X
H
m(
)
;
H
X
H
n(
)
;
−−−−−−→
Θ
G
Y
Y
H
m(
)
;
H
Y
H
n(
)
;
−−−−−−→
Θ
−−−−−→
∗
f
−−−−−→
∗
f
shown at the right. For example, with coefﬁcients in
a ring R the transformation Hm(X; R)→Hmp(X; R),

490
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
α , αp , is a cohomology operation since f ∗(αp) = (f ∗(α))p . This example illus-
trates that cohomology operations need not be homomorphisms, though this one is
when R = Zp with p prime. Other examples of cohomology operations we have al-
ready encountered are provided by the Bockstein homomorphisms deﬁned in §3.E. As
a more trivial example, a homomorphism G→H induces change-of-coefﬁcient homo-
morphisms Hm(X; G)→Hm(X; H) which can be viewed as cohomology operations.
In spite of their rather general deﬁnition, cohomology operations can be described
in somewhat more concrete terms:
Proposition 4L.1. For ﬁxed m, n, G, and H there is a bijection between the set of
all cohomology operations Θ : Hm(X; G)→Hn(X; H) and Hn(K(G, m); H), deﬁned
by Θ , Θ(ι) where ι ∈Hm(K(G, m); G) is a fundamental class.
Proof: Via CW approximations to spaces, it sufﬁces to restrict attention to CW com-
plexes, so we can identify Hm(X; G) with [X, K(G, m)] as in Theorem 4.56. If an
element α ∈Hm(X; G) corresponds to a map ϕ : X→K(G.m), i.e., ϕ∗(ι) = α, then
Θ(α) = Θ(ϕ∗(ι)) = ϕ∗(Θ(ι)), so Θ is uniquely determined by Θ(ι). Thus Θ, Θ(ι)
is injective. For surjectivity, given an element α ∈Hn(K(G, m); H), corresponding
to a map θ : K(G, m)→K(H, n), then composing with θ deﬁnes a transformation
[X, K(G, m)]→[X, K(H, n)], i.e., Θ : Hm(X; G)→Hn(X; H), with Θ(ι) = α. The nat-
urality property for Θ amounts to associativity of the compositions
X
f-----→Y
ϕ-----→K(G, m)
θ-----→K(H, n)
and so Θ is a cohomology operation.
⊔⊓
A consequence of the proposition is that cohomology operations cannot decrease
dimension, since K(G, m) is (m −1) connected. Moreover, since Hm(K(G, m); H) ≈
Hom(G, H), it follows that the only cohomology operations which preserve dimension
are given by coefﬁcient homomorphisms.
The Steenrod squares Sqi : Hn(X; Z2)→Hn+i(X; Z2), i ≥0, will satisfy the fol-
lowing list of properties, beginning with naturality:
(1) Sqi(f ∗(α)) = f ∗(Sqi(α)) for f : X→Y .
(2) Sqi(α + β) = Sqi(α) + Sqi(β).
(3) Sqi(α ⌣β) =
P
j Sqj(α) ⌣Sqi−j(β) (the Cartan formula).
(4) Sqi(σ(α)) = σ(Sqi(α)) where σ : Hn(X; Z2)→Hn+1(ΣX; Z2) is the suspension
isomorphism given by reduced cross product with a generator of H1(S1; Z2).
(5) Sqi(α) = α2 if i = |α|, and Sqi(α) = 0 if i > |α|.
(6) Sq0 = 11, the identity.
(7) Sq1 is the Z2 Bockstein homomorphism β associated with the coefﬁcient se-
quence 0→Z2→Z4→Z2→0.

Section 4.L.
Steenrod Squares and Powers
491
The ﬁrst part of (5) says that the Steenrod squares extend the squaring operation
α , α2 , which has the nice feature of being a homomorphism with Z2 coefﬁcients.
Property (4) says that the Sqi ’s are stable operations, invariant under suspension. The
actual squaring operation α, α2 does not have this property since in a suspension
ΣX all cup products of positive-dimensional classes are zero, according to an exercise
for §3.2.
The fact that Steenrod squares are stable operations extending the cup product
square yields the following theorem, which implies that the stable homotopy groups
of spheres πs
1 , πs
3 , and πs
7 are nontrivial:
Theorem 4L.2. If f : S2n−1→Sn has Hopf invariant 1, then [f ] ∈πs
n−1 is nonzero,
i.e., the iterated suspensions Σkf : S2n+k−1→Sn+k are all homotopically nontrivial.
Proof: Associated to a map f : Sℓ→Sm is the mapping cone Cf = Sm ∪f eℓ+1 with f
as the attaching map of the cell eℓ+1 . Assuming f is basepoint-preserving, we have
the relation CΣf = ΣCf where Σ denotes reduced suspension.
If f : S2n−1→Sn has Hopf invariant 1, then by (5), Sqn : Hn(Cf ; Z2)→H2n(Cf ; Z2)
is nontrivial. By (4) the same is true for Sqn : Hn+k(ΣkCf ; Z2)→H2n+k(ΣkCf ; Z2) for
all k. If Σkf were homotopically trivial we would have a retraction r : ΣkCf→Sn+k ,
pulling a generator α ∈Hn+k(Sn+k; Z2) back to a generator r ∗(α) ∈Hn+k(ΣkCf ; Z2).
Then since Sqn(α) = 0 in H2n+k(Sn+k; Z2), property (1) would give Sqn(r ∗(α)) =
r ∗(Sqn(α)) = r ∗(0) = 0, a contradiction.
⊔⊓
The Steenrod power operations P i : Hn(X; Zp)→Hn+2i(p−1)(X; Zp) for p an odd
prime will satisfy analogous properties:
(1) P i(f ∗(α)) = f ∗(P i(α)) for f : X→Y .
(2) P i(α + β) = P i(α) + P i(β).
(3) P i(α ⌣β) =
P
j P j(α) ⌣P i−j(β) (the Cartan formula).
(4) P i(σ(α)) = σ(P i(α)) where σ : Hn(X; Zp)→Hn+1(ΣX; Zp) is the suspension iso-
morphism given by reduced cross product with a generator of H1(S1; Zp).
(5) P i(α) = αp if 2i = |α|, and P i(α) = 0 if 2i > |α|.
(6) P 0 = 11, the identity.
The germinal property P i(α) = αp in (5) can only be expected to hold for even-
dimensional classes α since for odd-dimensional α the commutativity property of
cup product implies that α2 = 0 with Zp coefﬁcients if p is odd, and then αp = 0
since α2 = 0. Note that the formula P i(α) = αp for |α| = 2i implies that P i raises
dimension by 2i(p −1), explaining the appearance of this number.
The Bockstein homomorphism β : Hn(X; Zp)→Hn+1(X; Zp) is not included as
one of the P i ’s, but this is mainly a matter of notational convenience. As we shall
see below, the operation Sq2i+1 is the same as the composition Sq1Sq2i = βSq2i , so
the Sq2i ’s can be regarded as the P i ’s for p = 2.

492
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
One might ask if there are elements of πs
∗detectable by Steenrod powers in the
same way that the Hopf maps are detected by Steenrod squares. The answer is yes for
the operation P 1 , as we show in Example 4L.6 below. It is a perhaps disappointing fact
that no other squares or powers besides Sq1 , Sq2 , Sq4 , Sq8 , and P 1 detect elements
of homotopy groups of spheres. (We include Sq1 in this list since for any p the mod
p Bockstein detects a map Sn→Sn of degree p.) We will prove this fact for certain
Sqi ’s and P i ’s later in this section. The general case is the ‘mod p Hopf invariant
one’ theorem, which will be proved in [VBKT].
The Cartan formulas can be put into a more concise form by deﬁning total Steen-
rod square and power operations by Sq = Sq0 + Sq1 + ··· and P = P 0 + P 1 + ···.
These act on H∗(X; Zp) since by property (5), only a ﬁnite number of Sqi ’s or P i ’s
can be nonzero on a given cohomology class.
The Cartan formulas then say that
Sq(α ⌣β) = Sq(α) ⌣Sq(β) and P(α ⌣β) = P(α) ⌣P(β), so Sq and P are ring
homomorphisms.
We can use Sq and P to compute how the operations Sqi and P i act in projective
spaces and lens spaces using the following general formulas:
(∗)
Sqi(αn) =

n
i

αn+i for α ∈H1(X; Z2)
P i(αn) =

n
i

αn+i(p−1) for α ∈H2(X; Zp)
To derive the ﬁrst formula, properties (5) and (6) give Sq(α) = α + α2 = α(1 + α)
so Sq(αn) = Sq(α)n = αn(1 + α)n =
P
i

n
i

αn+i hence Sqi(αn) =

n
i

αn+i . The
second formula is obtained in similar fashion: P(α) = α + αp = α(1 + αp−1) so
P(αn) = αn(1 + αp−1)n =
P
i

n
i

αn+i(p−1) .
In Lemma 3C.6 we described how binomial coefﬁcients can be computed modulo
a prime p:

m
n

≡
Q
i

mi
ni

mod p,
where m =
P
i mipi and n =
P
i nipi are the
p adic expansions of m and n.
Taking p = 2 for example, and considering the extreme cases of a dyadic expansion
consisting of a single 1 or all 1’s, we obtain
Sq(α2k) = α2k + α2k+1
Sq(α2k−1) = α2k−1 + α2k + α2k+1 + ··· + α2k+1−2
for α ∈H1(X; Z2). More generally, the coefﬁcients of Sq(αn) can be read off from
the (n + 1)st row of the mod 2 Pascal triangle, shown in the ﬁgure below, where dots
denote zeros.

Section 4.L.
Steenrod Squares and Powers
493
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Example 4L.3: Stable splittings. The formula (∗) tells us how to compute Steen-
rod squares for RP∞, hence also for any suspension of RP∞. The explicit formu-
las for Sq(α2k) and Sq(α2k−1) above show that all the powers of the generator
α ∈H1(RP∞; Z2) are tied together by Steenrod squares since the ﬁrst formula con-
nects α inductively to all the powers α2k and the second formula connects these
powers to all the other powers. This shows that no suspension ΣkRP∞has the ho-
motopy type of a wedge sum X ∨Y with both X and Y having nontrivial cohomol-
ogy. In the case of RP∞itself we could have deduced this from the ring structure of
H∗(RP∞; Z2) ≈Z2[α], but cup products become trivial in a suspension.
The same reasoning shows that CP∞and HP∞have no nontrivial stable split-
tings. The Z2 cohomology in these cases is again Z2[α], though with α no longer
1 dimensional. However, we still have Sq(α) = α + α2 since these spaces have no
nontrivial cohomology in the dimensions between α and α2 , so we have Sq2i(αn) =

n
i

αn+i in the complex case and Sq4i(αn) =

n
i

αn+i in the quaternionic case. Then
the arguments from the real case carry over using the operations Sq2i and Sq4i in
place of Sqi .
Suppose we consider the same question for K(Z3, 1) instead of RP∞.
Taking
cohomology with Z3 coefﬁcients, the Bockstein β is nonzero on odd-dimensional
classes in H∗(K(Z3, 1); Z3), thus tying them to the even-dimensional classes, so we
only need to see which even-dimensional classes are connected by P i ’s. The even-
dimensional part of H∗(K(Z3, 1); Z3) is a polynomial algebra Z3[α] with |α| = 2, so
we have P i(αn) =

n
i

αn+i(p−1) =

n
i

αn+4i by our earlier formula. Since P i raises
dimension by 4i when p = 3, there is no chance that all the even-dimensional co-
homology will be connected by the P i ’s. In fact, we showed in Proposition 4I.3 that
ΣK(Z3, 1) ≃X1 ∨X2 where X1 has the cohomology of ΣK(Z3, 1) in dimensions con-
gruent to 2 and 3 mod 4, while X2 has the remaining cohomology. Thus the best

494
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
one could hope would be that all the odd powers of α are connected by P i ’s and
likewise all the even powers are connected, since this would imply that neither X1
nor X2 splits nontrivially. This is indeed the case, as one sees by an examination of
the coefﬁcients in the formula P i(αn) =

n
i

αn+4i . The Pascal triangle mod 3 begins:
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
1
1
2
2
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
1
1
Here P(αn) is determined by the (n + 1)st row. For example the sixth row says that
P(α5) = α5 + 2α7 + α9 + α11 + 2α13 + α15 . A few moments’ thought shows that the
rows which compute P(αn) for n = k3m −1 have all nonzero entries, and these rows
together with the rows right after them sufﬁce to connect the powers of α in the
desired way, so X1 and X2 have no stable splittings. One can also see that although
Σ2X1 and X2 have isomorphic homology groups, they are not homotopy equivalent,
even stably, since the operations P i act differently in the two spaces, e.g., P 2 is trivial
on suspensions of α but not on suspensions of α2 .
The situation for K(Zp, 1) for larger primes p is entirely similar, with ΣK(Zp, 1)
splitting as a wedge of p −1 spaces. The same arguments work more generally for
K(Zpi, 1), though for i > 1 the usual Bockstein β is identically zero so one has to use
instead a Bockstein involving Zpi coefﬁcients. We leave the details of these arguments
as exercises.
Example 4L.4: Maps of HP∞.
We can use the operations P i together with a lit-
tle number theory to demonstrate an interesting distinction between HP∞and CP∞,
namely, we will show that if a map f : HP∞→HP∞has f ∗(γ) = dγ for γ a generator
of H4(HP∞; Z), then the integer d, which we call the degree of f , must be a square.
By constrast, since CP∞is a K(Z, 2), maps CP∞→CP∞exist carrying a generator
α ∈H2(CP∞; Z) onto any given multiple of itself. Explicitly, the map z , zd , z ∈C,
induces a map f of CP∞with f ∗(α) = dα, but commutativity of C is needed for this
construction so it does not extend to the quaternionic case.
We shall deduce the action of Steenrod powers on H∗(HP∞; Zp) from their ac-
tion on H∗(CP∞; Zp), given by the earlier formula (∗) which says that P i(αn) =

n
i

αn+i(p−1) for α a generator of H2(CP∞; Zp).
There is a natural quotient map
CP∞→HP∞arising from the deﬁnition of both spaces as quotients of S∞. This map
takes the 4 cell of CP∞homeomorphically onto the 4 cell of HP∞, so the induced
map on cohomology sends a generator γ ∈H4(HP∞; Zp) to α2 , hence γn to α2n .

Section 4.L.
Steenrod Squares and Powers
495
Thus the formula P i(α2n) =

2n
i

α2n+i(p−1) implies that P i(γn) =

2n
i

γn+i(p−1)/2 .
For example, P 1(γ) = 2γ(p+1)/2 .
Now let f : HP∞→HP∞be any map. Applying the formula P 1(γ) = 2γ(p+1)/2 in
two ways, we get
P 1f ∗(γ) = f ∗P 1(γ) = f ∗(2γ(p+1)/2) = 2d(p+1)/2γ(p+1)/2
and
P 1f ∗(γ) = P 1(dγ) = 2dγ(p+1)/2
Hence the degree d satisﬁes d(p+1)/2 ≡d mod p for all odd primes p. Thus either
d ≡0 mod p or d(p−1)/2 ≡1 mod p. In both cases d is a square mod p since the
congruence d(p−1)/2 ≡1 mod p is equivalent to d being a nonzero square mod p, the
multiplicative group of nonzero elements of the ﬁeld Zp being cyclic of order p −1.
The argument is completed by appealing to the number theory fact that an integer
which is a square mod p for all sufﬁciently large primes p must be a square. This can
be deduced from quadratic reciprocity and Dirichlet’s theorem on primes in arithmetic
progressions as follows. Suppose on the contrary that the result is false for the integer
d. Consider primes p not dividing d. Since the product of two squares in Zp is again
a square, we may assume that d is a product of distinct primes q1, ··· , qn , where one
of these ‘primes’ is allowed to be −1 if d is negative. In terms of the Legendre symbol
  d
p

which is deﬁned to be +1 if d is a square mod p and −1 otherwise, we have
d
p

=
q1
p

···
qn
p

The left side is +1 for all large p by hypothesis, so it will sufﬁce to see that p can be
chosen to give each term on the right an arbitrary preassigned value. The values of
  −1
p

and
  2
p

depend only on p mod 8, and the four combinations of values are real-
ized by the four residues 1, 3, 5, 7 mod 8. Having speciﬁed the value of p mod 8, the
quadratic reciprocity law then says that for odd primes q, specifying
  q
p

is equiva-
lent to specifying
  p
q

. Thus we need only choose p in the appropriate residue classes
mod 8 and mod qi for each odd qi . By the Chinese remainder theorem, this means
specifying p modulo 8 times a product of odd primes. Dirichlet’s theorem guarantees
that in fact inﬁnitely many primes p exist satisfying this congruence condition.
It is known that the integers which are realizable as degrees of maps HP∞→HP∞
are exactly the odd squares and zero. The construction of maps of odd square degree
will be given in [SSAT] using localization techniques, following [Sullivan]. Ruling out
nonzero even squares can be done using K–theory; see [Feder-Gitler], which also treats
maps HPn→HPn .
The preceding calculations can also be used to show that every map HPn→HPn
must have a ﬁxed point if n > 1.
For, taking p = 3, the element P 1(γ) lies in
H8(HPn; Z3) which is nonzero if n > 1, so, when the earlier argument is specialized
to the case p = 3, the congruence d(p+1)/2 ≡d mod p becomes d2 = d in Z3 , which
is satisﬁed only by 0 and 1 in Z3 . Hence f ∗: eH∗(HPn; Z3)→eH∗(HPn; Z3) is either

496
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
zero or the identity. In both cases the Lefschetz number λ(f ), which is the sum of
the traces of the maps f ∗: H4i(HPn; Z3)→H4i(HPn; Z3), is nonzero, so the Lefschetz
ﬁxed point theorem gives the result.
Example 4L.5: Vector ﬁelds on spheres. Let us now apply Steenrod squares to de-
termine the maximum number of orthonormal tangent vector ﬁelds on a sphere in
all cases except when the dimension of the sphere is congruent to −1 mod 16. The
ﬁrst step is to rephrase the question in terms of Stiefel manifolds. Recall from the
end of §3.D and Example 4.52 the space Vn,k of orthonormal k frames in Rn . Pro-
jection of a k frame onto its ﬁrst vector gives a map p : Vn,k→Sn−1 , and a section
for this projection, i.e., a map f : Sn−1→Vn,k such that pf = 11, is exactly a set of
k−1 orthonormal tangent vector ﬁelds v1, ··· , vk−1 on Sn−1 since f assigns to each
x ∈Sn−1 an orthonormal k frame (x, v1(x), ··· , vk−1(x)).
We described a cell structure on Vn,k at the end of §3.D, and we claim that the
(n −1) skeleton of this cell structure is RPn−1/RPn−k−1 if 2k −1 ≤n. The cells of
Vn,k were products ei1 × ··· ×eim with n > i1 > ··· > im ≥n −k, so the products
with a single factor account for all of the (2n −2k) skeleton, hence they account for
all of the (n −1) skeleton if n −1 ≤2n −2k, i.e., if 2k −1 ≤n. The cells which are
products with a single factor are the homeomorphic images of cells of RPn−1 under
a map RPn−1→SO(n)→SO(n)/SO(n −k) = Vn,k . This map collapses RPn−k−1 to a
point, so we get the desired conclusion that RPn−1/RPn−k−1 is the (n −1) skeleton
of Vn,k if 2k −1 ≤n.
Now suppose we have f : Sn−1→Vn,k such that pf = 11, as before. In partic-
ular, f ∗is surjective on Hn−1(−; Z2). If we deform f to a cellular map, with im-
age in the (n −1) skeleton, then by the preceding paragraph this will give a map
g : Sn−1→RPn−1/RPn−k−1 if 2k −1 ≤n, and this map will still induce a surjection,
hence an isomorphism, on Hn−1(−; Z2). If the number k happens to be such that

n−k
k−1

≡1 mod 2, then by the earlier formula (∗) the operation
Sqk−1 : Hn−k(RPn−1/RPn−k−1; Z2)→Hn−1(RPn−1/RPn−k−1; Z2)
will be nonzero, contradicting the existence of the map g since obviously the opera-
tion Sqk−1 : Hn−k(Sn−1; Z2)→Hn−1(Sn−1; Z2) is zero.
In order to guarantee that

n−k
k−1

≡1 mod 2, write n = 2r(2s + 1) and choose
k = 2r + 1. Assume for the moment that s ≥1. Then

n−k
k−1

=

2r+1s−1
2r

, and in view
of the rule for computing binomial coefﬁcients in Z2 , this is nonzero since the dyadic
expansion of 2r+1s −1 ends with a string of 1’s including a 1 in the single digit where
the expansion of 2r is nonzero. Note that the earlier condition 2k−1 ≤n is satisﬁed
since it becomes 2r+1 + 1 ≤2r+1s + 2r and we assume s ≥1.
Summarizing, we have shown that for n = 2r(2s + 1), the sphere Sn−1 cannot
have 2r orthonormal tangent vector ﬁelds, if s ≥1. This is also trivially true for s = 0
since Sn−1 cannot have n orthonormal tangent vector ﬁelds.

Section 4.L.
Steenrod Squares and Powers
497
It is easy to see that this result is best possible when r ≤3 by explicitly construct-
ing 2r −1 orthonormal tangent vector ﬁelds on Sn−1 when n = 2r m. When r = 1,
view Sn−1 as the unit sphere in Cm , and then x , ix deﬁnes a tangent vector ﬁeld
since the unit complex numbers 1 and i are orthogonal and multiplication by a unit
complex number is an isometry of C, so x and ix are orthogonal in each coordinate
of Cm , hence are orthogonal. When r = 2 the same construction works with H in
place of C, using the three maps x,ix , x,jx , and x,kx to deﬁne orthonormal
tangent vector ﬁelds on the unit sphere in Hm . When r = 3 we can follow the same
procedure with the octonions, constructing 7 orthonormal tangent vector ﬁelds to
the unit sphere in Om via an orthonormal basis 1, i, j, k, ··· for O.
The upper bound of 2r −1 for the number of orthonormal vector ﬁelds on Sn−1 is
not best possible in the remaining case that n ≡0 mod 16. The optimal upper bound
is obtained instead using K–theory; see [VBKT] or [Husemoller].
The construction
of the requisite number of vector ﬁelds is again algebraic, this time using Clifford
algebras.
Example 4L.6: A map of mod p Hopf invariant one. Let us describe a construction
for a map f : S2p→S3 such that in the mapping cone Cf = Sn ∪e2p+1 , the ﬁrst Steen-
rod power P 1 : H3(Cf ; Zp)→H2p+1(Cf ; Zp) is nonzero, hence f in nonzero in πs
2p−3 .
The construction starts with the fact that a generator of H2(K(Zp, 1); Zp) has nontriv-
ial pth power, so the operation P 1 : H2(K(Zp, 1); Zp)→H2p(K(Zp, 1); Zp) is nontrivial
by property (5). This remains true after we suspend to ΣK(Zp, 1), and we showed in
Proposition 4I.3 that ΣK(Zp, 1) has the homotopy type of a wedge of CW complexes
Xi , 1 ≤i ≤p−1, with eH∗(Xi; Z) consisting only of a Zp in each dimension congruent
to 2i mod 2p −2. We are interested here in the space X = X1 , which has nontriv-
ial Zp cohomology in dimensions 2, 3, 2p, 2p + 1, ···. Since X is, up to homotopy,
a wedge summand of ΣK(Zp, 1), the operation P 1 : H3(X; Zp)→H2p+1(X; Zp) is non-
trivial. Since X is simply-connected, the construction in §4.C shows that we may take
X to have (2p + 1) skeleton of the form S2 ∪e3 ∪e2p ∪e2p+1 . In fact, using the no-
tion of homology decomposition in §4.H, we can take this skeleton to be the reduced
mapping cone Cg of a map of Moore spaces g : M(Zp, 2p −1)→M(Zp, 2). The quo-
tient Cg/S2 is the reduced mapping cone of the composition h : M(Zp, 2p −1)
g-----→
M(Zp, 2)→M(Zp, 2)/S2 = S3 .
The restriction h||S2p−1 represents an element of
π2p−1(S3) which is either trivial or has order p since this restriction extends over
the 2p cell of M(Zp, 2p −1) which is attached by a map S2p−1→S2p−1 of degree p.
In fact, h||S2p−1 is nullhomotopic since, as we will see in [SSAT] using the Serre spec-
tral sequence, πi(S3) contains no elements of order p for i ≤2p −1. This implies
that the space Ch = Cg/S2 is homotopy equivalent to a CW complex Y obtained from
S3∨S2p by attaching a cell e2p+1 . The quotient Y/S2p then has the form S3∪e2p+1 , so
it is the mapping cone of a map f : S2p→S3 . By construction there is a map Cg→Cf
inducing an isomorphism on Zp cohomology in dimensions 3 and 2p + 1, so the

498
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
operation P 1 is nontrivial in H∗(Cf ; Zp) since this was true for Cg which was the
(2p + 1) skeleton of X .
Example 4L.7: Moore spaces. Let us use the operation Sq2 to show that for n ≥2,
the identity map of M(Z2, n) has order 4 in the group of basepoint-preserving homo-
topy classes of maps M(Z2, n)→M(Z2, n), with addition deﬁned via the suspension
structure on M(Z2, n) = ΣM(Z2, n −1). According to Proposition 4H.2, this group is
the middle term of a short exact sequence, the remaining terms of which contain only
elements of order 2. Hence if the identity map of M(Z2, n) has order 4, this short
exact sequence cannot split.
In view of the short exact sequence just referred to, it will sufﬁce to show that
twice the identity map of M(Z2, n) is not nullhomotopic. If twice the identity were
nullhomotopic, then the mapping cone C of this map would have the homotopy type
of M(Z2, n)∨ΣM(Z2, n). This would force Sq2 : Hn(C; Z2)→Hn+2(C; Z2) to be trivial
since the source and target groups would come from the two different wedge sum-
mands.
However, we will now show that this Sq2 operation is nontrivial.
Twice
the identity map of M(Z2, n) can be regarded as the smash product of the degree
2 map S1→S1 , z , z2 , with the identity map of M(Z2, n −1). If we smash the
coﬁbration sequence S1→S1→RP2 for this degree 2 map with M(Z2, n −1) we get
the coﬁber sequence M(Z2, n)→M(Z2, n)→C , in view of the identity (X/A) ∧Y =
(X ∧Y)/(A ∧Y).
This means we can view C as RP2 ∧M(Z2, n −1).
The Car-
tan formula applied to exterior cup product (or cross product) gives Sq2(α×β) =
Sq0α×Sq2β + Sq1α×Sq1β + Sq2α×Sq0β. This holds for smash products as well as
ordinary products, by naturality. Taking α to be a generator of H1(RP2; Z2) and β a
generator of Hn−1(M(Z2, n −1); Z2), we have Sq2α = 0 = Sq2β, but Sq1α and Sq1β
are nonzero since Sq1 is the Bockstein. By the K¨unneth formula, Sq1α×Sq1β then
generates Hn+2(RP2 ∧M(Z2, n −1); Z2) and we are done.
Ad´em Relations and the Steenrod Algebra
When Steenrod squares or powers are composed, the compositions satisfy certain
relations, unfortunately rather complicated, known as Ad´em relations:
SqaSqb =
X
j

b−j−1
a−2j

Sqa+b−jSqj
if a < 2b
P aP b =
X
j
(−1)a+j
(p−1)(b−j)−1
a−pj

P a+b−jP j
if a < pb
P aβP b =
X
j
(−1)a+j
(p−1)(b−j)
a−pj

βP a+b−jP j
−
X
j
(−1)a+j
(p−1)(b−j)−1
a−pj−1

P a+b−jβP j
if a ≤pb
By convention, the binomial coefﬁcient

m
n

is taken to be zero if m or n is negative
or if m < n. Also

m
0

= 1 for m ≥0.

Section 4.L.
Steenrod Squares and Powers
499
For example, taking a = 1 in the Ad´em relation for the Steenrod squares we have
Sq1Sqb = (b −1)Sqb+1 , so Sq1Sq2i = Sq2i+1 and Sq1Sq2i+1 = 0. The relations
Sq1Sq2i = Sq2i+1 and Sq1 = β explain the earlier comment that Sq2i is the analog
of P i for p = 2.
The Steenrod algebra A2 is deﬁned to be the algebra over Z2 which is the quo-
tient of the algebra of polynomials in the noncommuting variables Sq1, Sq2, ··· by
the two-sided ideal generated by the Ad´em relations, i.e., by the polynomials given
by the differences between the left and right sides of the Ad´em relations. In similar
fashion, Ap for odd p is deﬁned to be the algebra over Zp formed by polynomials in
the noncommuting variables β, P 1, P 2, ··· modulo the Ad´em relations and the relation
β2 = 0. Thus for every space X , H∗(X; Zp) is a module over Ap , for all primes p.
The Steenrod algebra is a graded algebra, the elements of degree k being those which
map Hn(X; Zp) to Hn+k(X; Zp) for all n.
The next proposition implies that A2 is generated as an algebra by the elements
Sq2k , while Ap for p odd is generated by β and the elements P pk .
Proposition 4L.8. If i is not a power of 2, there is a relation Sqi =
P
0<j<i ajSqi−jSqj
with coefﬁcients aj ∈Z2 .
Similarly, if i is not a power of p there is a relation
P i =
P
0<j<i ajP i−jP j with aj ∈Zp .
Proof: The argument is the same for p = 2 and p odd, so we describe the latter case.
The idea is to write i as the sum a + b of integers a > 0 and b > 0 with a < pb,
such that the coefﬁcient of the j = 0 term in the Ad´em relation for P aP b is nonzero.
Then one can solve this relation for P a+b = P i .
Let the p adic representation of i be i = i0 + i1p + ··· + ikpk with ik ≠0.
Let b = pk and a = i −pk , so b > 0 and a > 0 if i is not a power of p. The
claim is that

(p−1)b−1
a

is nonzero in Zp . The p adic expansion of (p −1)b −1 =
(pk+1 −1)−pk is (p −1)+(p −1)p +···+(p −2)pk , and for a the p adic expansion
is i0 + i1p + ··· + (ik −1)pk . Hence

(p−1)b−1
a

≡

p−1
i0

···

p−2
ik−1

and in each factor
of the latter product the numerator is nonzero in Zp so the product is nonzero in Zp .
When p = 2 the last factor is omitted, and the product is still nonzero in Z2 .
⊔⊓
This proposition says that most of the Sqi ’s and P i ’s are decomposable, where an
element a of a graded algebra such as Ap is decomposable if it can be expressed in
the form
P
i aibi with each ai and bi having lower degree than a. The operation Sq2k
is indecomposable since for α a generator of H1(RP∞; Z2) we saw that Sq2k(α2k) =
α2k+1 but Sqi(α2k) = 0 for 0 < i < 2k . Similarly P pk is indecomposable since if
α ∈H2(CP∞; Zp) is a generator then P pk(αpk) = αpk+1 but P i(αpk) = 0 for 0 < i < pk
and also β(αpk) = 0.
Here is an application of the preceding proposition:

500
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
Theorem 4L.9. Suppose H∗(X; Zp) is the polynomial algebra Zp[α] on a generator
α of dimension n, possibly truncated by the relation αm = 0 for m > p. Then if
p = 2, n must be a power of 2, and if p is an odd prime, n must be of the form pkℓ
where ℓis an even divisor of 2(p −1).
As we mentioned in §3.2, there is a stronger theorem that n must be 1, 2, 4, or
8 when p = 2, and n must be an even divisor of 2(p −1) when p is an odd prime.
We also gave examples showing the necessity of the hypothesis m > p in the case of
a truncated polynomial algebra.
Proof: In the case p = 2, Sqn(α) = α2 ≠0. If n is not a power of 2 then Sqn
decomposes into compositions Sqn−jSqj with 0 < j < n. Such compositions must
be zero since they pass through the group Hn+j(X; Z2) which is zero for 0 < j < n.
For odd p, the fact that α2 is nonzero implies that n is even, say n = 2k. Then
P k(α) = αp ≠0. Since P k can be expressed in terms of P pi ’s, some P pi must be
nonzero in H∗(X; Zp). This implies that 2pi(p −1), the amount by which P pi raises
dimension, must be a multiple of n since H∗(X; Zp) is concentrated in dimensions
which are multiples of n. Since n divides 2pi(p −1), it must be a power of p times
a divisor of 2(p −1), and this divisor must be even since n is even and p is odd.
⊔⊓
Corollary 4L.10. If H∗(X; Z) is a polynomial algebra Z[α], possibly truncated by
αm = 0 with m > 3, then |α| = 2 or 4.
Proof: Passing from Z to Z2 coefﬁcients, the theorem implies that |α| is a power
of 2, and taking Z3 coefﬁcients we see that |α| is a power of 3 times a divisor of
2(3 −1) = 4.
⊔⊓
In particular, the octonionic projective plane OP2 , constructed in Example 4.46
by attaching a 16 cell to S8 via the Hopf map S15→S8 , does not generalize to an
octonionic projective n space OPn with n ≥3.
In a similar vein, decomposability implies that if an element of πs
∗is detected
by a Sqi or P i then i must be a power of 2 for Sqi and a power of p for P i . For
if Sqi is decomposable, then the map Sqi : Hn(Cf : Z2)→Hn+i(Cf ; Z2) must be trivial
since it is a sum of compositions which pass through trivial cohomology groups, and
similarly for P i .
Interestingly enough, the Ad´em relations can also be used in a positive way to
detect elements of πs
∗, as the proof of the following result will show.
Proposition 4L.11. If η ∈πs
1 is represented by the Hopf map S3→S2 , then η2 is
nonzero in πs
2 . Similarly, the other two Hopf maps represent elements ν ∈πs
3 and
σ ∈πs
7 whose squares are nontrivial in πs
6 and πs
14 .
Proof: Let η : Sn+1→Sn be a suspension of the Hopf map, with mapping cone Cη
obtained from Sn by attaching a cell en+2 via η. Letting C and S denote unreduced

Section 4.L.
Steenrod Squares and Powers
501
cone and suspension, we have then the following diagram where Φ is the characteristic
map of the cell en+2 .
S
Sη
C S
S
η
η
S
n
C
e
n 2
+
n 2
+
n 2
+
(
)
C Sη
(
)
C S
n 2
+
(
)
C S
n 1
+
n 1
+
(
)
Φ
If we assume that the composition (Sη)η is nullhomotopic, then there is an exten-
sion of this composition over the lower cone C(Sn+2).
The diagram then gives a
map Sn+3 = S(Sn+2)→Cη which we use to attach a cell en+4 to Cη , forming a space
X . Since Cη is the (n + 2) skeleton of X , the map Sq2 : Hn(X; Z2)→Hn+2(X; Z2)
is an isomorphism.
The quotient X/Sn is CS2η and the projection X→X/Sn in-
duces an isomorphism on Hn+2 and Hn+4 , so Sq2 : Hn+2(X; Z2)→Hn+4(X; Z2) is an
isomorphism. Thus the composition Sq2Sq2 : Hn(X; Z2)→Hn+4(X; Z2) is an isomor-
phism. But this is impossible in view of the Ad´em relation Sq2Sq2 = Sq3Sq1 , since
Sq1 : Hn(X; Z2)→Hn+1(X; Z2) = 0 is trivial.
The same argument shows that ν2 and σ 2 are nontrivial using the relations
Sq4Sq4 = Sq7Sq1 + Sq6Sq2 and Sq8Sq8 = Sq15Sq1 + Sq14Sq2 + Sq12Sq4 .
⊔⊓
This line of reasoning does not work for odd primes and the element α ∈πs
2p−3
detected by P 1 since the Ad´em relation for P 1P 1 is P 1P 1 = 2P 2 , which is not helpful.
And in fact α2 = 0 by the commutativity property of the product in πs
∗.
When dealing with A2 it is often convenient to abbreviate notation by writing a
monomial Sqi1Sqi2 ··· as SqI where I is the ﬁnite sequence of non-negative integers
i1, i2, ···. Call SqI admissible if no Ad´em relation can be applied to it, i.e., if ij ≥2ij+1
for all j . The Ad´em relations imply that every monomial SqI can be written as a sum
of admissible monomials. For if SqI is not admissible, it contains a pair SqaSqb to
which the Ad´em relation can be applied, yielding a sum of terms SqJ for which J > I
with respect to the lexicographic ordering on ﬁnite sequences of integers. These SqJ ’s
have the same degree i1 + ··· + ik as SqI , and since the number of monomials SqI
of a ﬁxed degree is ﬁnite, successive applications of the Ad´em relations eventually
reduce any SqI to a sum of admissible monomials.
For odd p, elements of Ap are linear combinations of monomials βε1P i1βε2P i2 ···
with each εj = 0 or 1.
Such a monomial is admissible if ij ≥εj+1 + pij+1 for
all j , which again means that no Ad´em relation can be applied to it. As with A2 , the
Ad´em relations sufﬁce to reduce every monomial to a linear combination of admissible
monomials, by the same argument as before but now using the lexicographic ordering
on tuples (ε1 + pi1, ε2 + pi2, ···).

502
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
Deﬁne the excess of the admissible monomial SqI to be
P
j(ij −2ij+1), the
amount by which SqI exceeds being admissible. For odd p one might expect the ex-
cess of an admissible monomial βε1P i1βε2P i2 ··· to be deﬁned as
P
j(ij−pij+1−εj+1),
but instead it is deﬁned to be
P
j(2ij −2pij+1 −εj+1), for reasons which will become
clear below.
As we explained at the beginning of this section, cohomology operations corre-
spond to elements in the cohomology of Eilenberg-MacLane spaces. Here is a rather
important theorem which will be proved in [SSAT] since the proof makes heavy use of
spectral sequences:
Theorem. For each prime p, H∗(K(Zp, n); Zp) is the free commutative algebra on
the generators Θ(ιn) where ιn ∈Hn(K(Zp, n); Zp) is a generator and Θ ranges over
all admissible monomials of excess less than n.
Here ‘free commutative algebra’ means ‘polynomial algebra’ when p = 2 and
‘polynomial algebra on even-dimensional generators tensor exterior algebra on odd-
dimensional generators’ when p is odd. We will say something about the rationale
behind the ‘excess less than n’ condition in a moment.
For example, in the cases n = 1, 2 we have:
K(Z2, 1) :
Z2[ι]
K(Zp, 1) :
ΛZp[ι]⊗Zp[βι]
K(Z2, 2) :
Z2[ι, Sq1ι, Sq2Sq1ι, Sq4Sq2Sq1ι, ···]
K(Zp, 2) :
Zp[ι, βP 1βι, βP pP 1βι, βP p2P pP 1βι, ···]
⊗ΛZp[βι, P 1βι, P pP 1βι, P p2P pP 1βι, ···]
The theorem says in particular that the admissible monomials in Ap are linearly
independent, hence form a basis. For if some linear combination of admissible mono-
mials were zero, then it would be zero when applied to the class ιn , but if we choose n
larger than the excess of each monomial in the linear combination, this would contra-
dict the freeness of the algebra H∗(K(Zp, n); Zp). (For a proof of linear independence
using more elementary techniques see [Steenrod-Epstein].) Even though the multi-
plicative structure of the Steenrod algebra is rather complicated, the Ad´em relations
provide a way of performing calculations algorithmically by sytematically reducing all
products to sums of admissible monomials.
Another consequence of the theorem is that all cohomology operations with Zp
coefﬁcients are polynomials in the Sqi ’s when p = 2 and polynomials in the P i ’s and
β when p is odd, in view of Proposition 4L.1. We can also conclude that Ap consists
precisely of all the Zp cohomology operations which are stable, i.e., commute with
suspension. For consider the map ΣK(Zp, n)→K(Zp, n + 1) which pulls ιn+1 back to
the suspension of ιn . This map induces an isomorphism on homotopy groups πi for
i ≤2n and a surjection for i = 2n + 1 by Corollary 4.23, hence the same is true for

Section 4.L.
Steenrod Squares and Powers
503
homology and cohomology. Letting n go to inﬁnity, the limit lim
←-- eH∗(K(Zp, n); Zp)
then exists in a strong sense. On the one hand, this limit is exactly the stable opera-
tions by Proposition 4K.1 and the deﬁnition of a stable operation. On the other hand,
the preceding theorem implies that this limit is Ap since it says that all elements of
H∗(K(Zp, n); Zp) below dimension 2n are uniquely expressible as sums of admissible
monomials applied to ιn .
Now let us explain why the condition ‘excess less than n’ in the theorem is natural.
For a monomial SqI = Sqi1Sqi2 ··· the deﬁnition of the excess e(I) can be rewritten as
an equation i1 = e(I) + i2 + i3 + ···. Thus if e(I) > n, we have i1 > |Sqi2Sqi3 ··· (ιn)|
hence SqI(ιn) = 0. And if e(I) = n then SqI(ιn) = (Sqi2Sqi3 ··· (ιn))2 and either
Sqi2Sqi3 ··· has excess less than n or it has excess equal to n and we can repeat
the process to write Sqi2Sqi3 ··· (ιn) = (Sqi3 ··· (ιn))2 , etc., eventually obtaining an
equation SqI(ιn) =
 SqJ(ιn)
2k
with e(J) < n, so that SqI(ιn) is already in the
algebra generated by the elements SqJ(ιn) with e(J) < n. The situation for odd p
is similar. For an admissible monomial P I = βε1P i1βε2P i2 ··· the deﬁnition of excess
gives 2i1 = e(I)+ε2 +2(p −1)i2 +···, so if e(I) > n we must have P I(ιn) = 0, and if
e(I) = n then either P I(ιn) is a power
 P J(ιn)
pk
with e(J) < n, or, if P I begins with
β, then P I(ιn) = β
 (P J(ιn))pk
= 0 by the formula β(xm) = mxm−1β(x), which is
valid when |x| is even, as we may assume is the case here, otherwise (P J(ιn))pk = 0
by commutativity of cup product.
There is another set of relations among Steenrod squares equivalent to the Ad´em
relations and somewhat easier to remember:
X
j

k
j

Sq2n−k−j−1Sqn+j = 0
When k = 0 this is simply the relation Sq2n−1Sqn = 0, and the cases k > 0 are
obtained from this via Pascal’s triangle. For example, from the relation Sq7Sq4 = 0
we derive the further relations:
Sq7Sq4
= 0
Sq6Sq4 + Sq7Sq3
= 0
Sq5Sq4
+
Sq7Sq2
= 0
Sq4Sq4 + Sq5Sq3 + Sq6Sq2 + Sq7Sq1
= 0
Sq3Sq4
+
Sq7Sq0
= 0
Sq2Sq4 + Sq3Sq3
+
Sq6Sq0
= 0
Sq1Sq4
+
Sq3Sq2
+
Sq5Sq0
= 0
Sq0Sq4 + Sq1Sq3 + Sq2Sq2 + Sq3Sq1 + Sq4Sq0
= 0
These relations are not in simplest possible form. For example, Sq5Sq3 = 0 in the
fourth row and Sq3Sq2 = 0 in the seventh row, instances of Sq2n−1Sqn = 0. For
Steenrod powers there are similar relations
P
j

k
j

P pn−k−j−1P n+j = 0 derived from

504
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
the basic relation P pn−1P n = 0. We leave it to the interested reader to show that these
relations follow from the Ad´em relations.
Constructing the Squares and Powers
Now we turn to the construction of the Steenrod squares and powers, and the
proof of their basic properties including the Ad´em relations. As will be seen, this
all hinges on the fact that cohomology is maps into Eilenberg-MacLane spaces. The
case p = 2 is in some ways simpler than the case p odd, so in the ﬁrst part of
the development we will specialize p to 2 whenever there is a signiﬁcant difference
between the two cases.
For a space X with basepoint x0 , let X∧p denote the smash product X ∧··· ∧X
of p copies of X . There is a map T : X∧p→X∧p , T(x1, ··· , xp) = (x2, ··· , xp, x1),
permuting the factors cyclically. When p = 2 this is just the transposition (x1, x2),
(x2, x1). The map T generates an action of Zp on X∧p . There is also the standard
action of Zp on S∞viewed as the union of the unit spheres S2n−1 in Cn , a generator
of Zp rotating each C factor through an angle 2π/p, with quotient space an inﬁnite-
dimensional lens space L∞, or RP∞when p = 2. On the product S∞×X∧p there
is then the diagonal action g(s, x) = (g(s), g(x)) for g ∈Zp .
Let Γ(X) denote
the orbit space (S∞×X∧p)/Zp of this diagonal action. This is the same as the Borel
construction S∞× ZpX∧p described in §3.H. The projection S∞×X∧p→S∞induces a
projection π : Γ(X)→L∞with π−1(z) = X∧p for all z ∈L∞since the action of Zp
on S∞is free. This projection Γ(X)→L∞is in fact a ﬁber bundle, though we shall
not need this fact and so we leave the proof as an exercise. The Zp action on X∧p
ﬁxes the basepoint x0 ∈X∧p , hence the inclusion S∞×{x0} > S∞×X∧p induces an
inclusion L∞> Γ(X). The composition L∞> Γ(X)→L∞is the identity, so in ﬁber
bundle terminology this subspace L∞⊂Γ(X) is a section of the bundle. Let Λ(X)
denote the quotient Γ(X)/L∞obtained by collapsing the section L∞to a point. Note
that the ﬁbers X∧p in Γ(X) are still embedded in the quotient Λ(X) since each ﬁber
meets the section L∞in a single point.
If we replace S∞by S1 in these deﬁnition, we get subspaces Γ 1(X) ⊂Γ(X) and
Λ1(X) ⊂Λ(X). All these spaces have natural CW structures if X is a CW complex
having x0 as a 0 cell. Namely, L∞is given its standard CW structure with one cell in
each dimension. This is lifted to a CW structure on S∞with p cells in each dimen-
sion, and then T freely permutes the product cells of S∞×X∧p so there is induced
a quotient CW structure on Γ(X). The section L∞⊂Γ(X) is a subcomplex, so the
quotient Λ(X) inherits a CW structure from Γ(X). For example, if the n skeleton of
X is Sn with its usual CW structure, then the pn skeleton of Λ(X) is Spn with its
usual CW structure.
We remark also that Γ , Γ 1 , Λ, and Λ1 are functors: A map f : (X, x0)→(Y, y0)
induces maps Γ(f ) : Γ(X)→Γ(Y), etc., in the evident way.

Section 4.L.
Steenrod Squares and Powers
505
For brevity we write H∗(−; Zp) simply as H∗(−). For n > 0 let Kn denote a CW
complex K(Zp, n) with (n−1) skeleton a point and n skeleton Sn . Let ι ∈Hn(Kn) be
the canonical fundamental class described in the discussion following Theorem 4.56.
It will be notationally convenient to regard an element α ∈Hn(X) also as a map
α : X→Kn such that α∗(ι) = α. Here we are assuming X is a CW complex.
From §3.2 we have a reduced p fold cross product eH∗(X)⊗p→eH∗(X∧p) where
eH∗(X)⊗p denotes the p fold tensor product of eH∗(X) with itself. In particular, for
each α ∈Hn(X), n > 0, we have its p fold cross product α⊗p ∈eH∗(X∧p). Our ﬁrst
task will be construct an element λ(α) ∈Hpn(Λ(X)) restricting to α⊗p in each ﬁber
X∧p ⊂Λ(X). By naturality it will sufﬁce to construct λ(ι) ∈Hpn(Λ(Kn)).
Let us see that T ∗(ι⊗p) = ι⊗p . In terms of maps K∧p
n →Kpn , this says the com-
position ι⊗p T is homotopic to ι⊗p , preserving basepoints. Such a homotopy can be
constructed as follows. The pn skeleton of K∧p
n
is (Sn)∧p = Spn , with T permuting
the factors cyclically. Thinking of Sn as (S1)∧n , the permutation T is a product of
(p −1)n transpositions of adjacent factors, so has degree (−1)(p−1)n . If p is odd,
this degree is +1, so the restriction of T to this skeleton is homotopic to the identity,
hence ι⊗p T is homotopic to ι⊗p on this skeleton. This conclusion also holds when
p = 2, signs being irrelevant in this case since we are dealing with maps S2n→K2n
and π2n(K2n) = Z2 . Having a homotopy ι⊗p T ≃ι⊗p on the pn skeleton, there are no
obstructions to extending the homotopy over all higher-dimensional cells ei×(0, 1)
since πi(Kpn) = 0 for i > pn.
The homotopy ι⊗p T ≃ι⊗p : K∧p
n →Kpn deﬁnes a map Γ 1(Kn)→Kpn since Γ 1(X)
is the quotient of I×X∧p under the identiﬁcations (0, x) ∼(1, T(x)). The homo-
topy is basepoint-preserving, so the map Γ 1(Kn)→Kpn passes down to a quotient
map λ1 : Λ1(Kn)→Kpn . Since Kn is obtained from Sn by attaching cells of dimen-
sion greater than n, Λ(Kn) is obtained from Λ1(Kn) by attaching cells of dimen-
sion greater than pn + 1. There are then no obstructions to extending λ1 to a map
λ : Λ(Kn)→Kpn since πi(Kpn) = 0 for i > pn.
By construction, the restriction of λ to each ﬁber K∧p
n
is homotopic to ι⊗p . Note
that this property determines λ uniquely up to homotopy since the restriction map
Hpn(Λ(Kn))→Hpn(K∧p
n ) is injective, the pn skeleton of Λ(Kn) being contained in
K∧p
n . We shall have occasion to use this argument again in the proof, so we refer to it
as the ‘uniqueness argument.’
For any α ∈Hn(X) let λ(α) be the composition Λ(X)
Λ(α)
-----→Λ(Kn)
λ-----→Kpn . This
restricts to α⊗p in each ﬁber X∧p since Λ(α) restricts to α∧p in each ﬁber.
Now we are ready to deﬁne some cohomology operations.
There is an inclu-
sion L∞×X > Γ(X) as the quotient of the diagonal embedding S∞×X > S∞×X∧p ,
(s, x), (s, x, ··· , x). Composing with the quotient map Γ(X)→Λ(X) we get a map
∇: L∞×X→Λ(X) inducing ∇∗: H∗(Λ(X))→H∗(L∞×X) ≈H∗(L∞)⊗H∗(X).
For

506
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
each α ∈Hn(X) the element ∇∗(λ(α)) ∈Hpn(L∞×X) may be written in the form
∇∗(λ(α)) =
X
i
ω(p−1)n−i ⊗θi(α)
where ωj is a generator of Hj(L∞) and θi(α) ∈Hn+i(X). Thus θi increases dimen-
sion by i. When p = 2 there is no ambiguity about ωj . For odd p we choose ω1 to
be the class dual to the 1 cell of L∞in its standard cell structure, then we take ω2 to
be the Bockstein βω1 and we set ω2j = ωj
2 and ω2j+1 = ω1ωj
2 .
It is clear that θi is a cohomology operation since θi(α) = α∗(θi(ι)). For p = 2
we set Sqi(α) = θi(α). For odd p we shall show that θi = 0 unless i = 2k(p −1)
or 2k(p −1) + 1. The operation P k will be deﬁned to be a certain constant times
θ2k(p−1) , and θ2k(p−1)+1 will be a constant times βP k , for β the mod p Bockstein.
Theorem 4L.12. The operations Sqi satisfy the properties (1)-(7).
Proof: We have already observed that the θi ’s are cohomology operations, so property
(1) holds. Because cohomology operations cannot decrease dimension, we have θi = 0
for i < 0. Also, θi = 0 for i > (p −1)n since the factor ω(p−1)n−i vanishes in
this case. The basic property that λ(α) restricts to α⊗p in each ﬁber implies that
θ(p−1)n(α) = αp since ω0 = 1. This gives property (5).
To show the additivity property (2) we will show λ(α + β) = λ(α) + λ(β) using
the following diagram:
∆
∆
×
×
λ
λ
Λ
ι
ι
1
1
X
n
n
(
)
Λ(
)
Λ(
)
Λ X
X
(
)
×
Λ K
K
(
)
n
Λ K
(
)
×
n
Λ X
(
)
Λ X
(
)
×
Λ K
(
)
n
Λ K
(
)
pn
K
−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
α
β
Λ(
)
×
Λ(
Λ( )
)
α
β
⊗
⊗
+
ι
ι
1
1
(
)
⊗
⊗
+
λ
λ
1
1
⊗
⊗
+
Here ∆is a generic symbol for diagonal maps x , (x, x). These relate tensor to
cup products via ∆∗(ϕ ⊗ψ) = ϕ ⌣ψ. The two unlabeled vertical maps are induced
by (s, x1, y1, ··· , xp, yp) , (s, x1, ··· , xp, s, y1, ··· , yp). It is obvious that the cen-
tral square commutes, and also the left and upper right triangles. To show that the
remaining triangle commutes it sufﬁces to show this when we restrict to the ﬁber
(Kn×Kn)∧p by the ‘uniqueness argument’ used earlier, since (Kn×Kn)∧p contains the
pn skeleton of Λ(Kn×Kn). On the ﬁber the two routes to Kpn are ι⊗p ⊗1 + 1 ⊗ι⊗p
and (ι ⊗1 + 1 ⊗ι)⊗p . These are equal since raising to the pth power is an additive
homomorphism of the ﬁeld Zp .
The composition Λ(X)→Λ(Kn) is Λ(α + β), so the composition Λ(X)→Kpn
across the top of the diagram is λ(α+β). Going from Λ(X) to Kpn across the bottom
of the diagram gives λ(α)+λ(β) since the second and third steps of this composition
give λ(α) ⊗1+1 ⊗λ(β) and ∆∗(ϕ ⊗ψ) = ϕ⌣ψ. Thus λ(α+β) = λ(α)+λ(β), which
implies that each θi is an additive homomorphism.
Next we turn to the Cartan formula. For any prime p we will show that λ(α⌣β) =
(−1)p(p−1)mn/2λ(α)λ(β) for m = |α| and n = |β|. This implies (3) when p = 2 since

Section 4.L.
Steenrod Squares and Powers
507
if we let ω = ω1 , hence ωj = ωj , then
X
i
Sqi(α ⌣β) ⊗ωn+m−i = ∇∗ λ(α ⌣β)

= ∇∗ λ(α) ⌣λ(β)

= ∇∗ λ(α)
 ⌣∇∗ λ(β)

=
X
j
Sqj(α) ⊗ωn−j ⌣
X
k
Sqk(β) ⊗ωm−k
=
X
i
 X
j+k=i
Sqj(α) ⌣Sqk(β)

⊗ωn+m−i
To obtain the formula λ(α ⌣β) = ±λ(α) ⌣λ(β) we use a diagram rather like the
previous one:
∆
∆
λ
λ
Λ
ι
ι
X
m
m
n
(
)
Λ(
)
Λ(
)
Λ X
X
(
)
Λ K
K
(
)
m n
Λ K
(
)
m
Λ X
(
)
Λ X
(
)
Λ K
(
)
n
Λ K
(
)
pm
pn
K
−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
α
β
Λ(
)
Λ(
Λ( )
)
α
β
⊗
∧
∧
∧
∧
∧
∧
n
ι
ι
m
(
)
⊗
n
λ ι
ι
m
(
λ(
)
)⊗
n
+
+
The composition Λ(X)→Kpm+pn going across the top of the diagram is λ(α⌣β) since
the map Λ(X)→Λ(Km+n) is Λ(α ⌣β). The composition Λ(X) ∧Λ(X)→Kpm+pn is
λ(α) ⊗λ(β) so the composition Λ(X)→Kpm+pn across the bottom of the diagram is
λ(α) ⌣λ(β). Commutativity of the square and the upper two triangles is obvious
from the deﬁnitions. It remains to see that the lower triangle commutes up to the
sign (−1)p(p−1)mn/2 . Since (Km ∧Kn)∧p is the (pm + pn) skeleton of Λ(Km ∧Kn),
restriction to this ﬁber is injective on Hpm+pn . On this ﬁber the two routes around
the triangle give (ιm ⊗ιn)⊗p and ι⊗p
m ⊗ι⊗p
n . These differ by a permutation which is
the product of (p −1) + (p −2) + ··· + 1 = p(p −1)/2 transpositions of adjacent
factors. Since ιm and ιn have dimensions m and n, this permutation introduces a
sign (−1)p(p−1)mn/2 by the commutativity property of cup product. This ﬁnishes the
veriﬁcation of the Cartan formula when p = 2.
Before proceeding further we need to make an explicit calculation to show that
Sq0 is the identity on H1(S1). Viewing S1 as the one-point compactiﬁcation of R,
with the point at inﬁnity as the basepoint, the 2 sphere S1∧S1 becomes the one-point
compactiﬁcation of R2 . The map T : S1 ∧S1→S1 ∧S1 then corresponds to reﬂecting
R2 across the line x = y , so after a rotation of coordinates this
becomes reﬂection of S2 across the equator. Hence Γ 1(S1) is ob-
tained from the shell I×S2 by identifying its inner and outer
boundary spheres via a reﬂection across the equator. The diag-
onal RP1×S1 ⊂Γ 1(S1) is a torus, obtained from the equatorial
annulus I×S1 ⊂I×S2 by identifying the two ends via the identity
map since the equator is ﬁxed by the reﬂection. This RP1×S1 represents the same
element of H2(Γ 1(S1); Z2) as the ﬁber sphere S1 ∧S1 since the upper half of the shell
is a 3 cell whose mod 2 boundary in Γ 1(S1) is the union of these two surfaces.

508
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
For α ∈H1(S1) a generator, consider the element ∇∗(λ(α)) in H2(RP∞×S1) ≈
Hom(H2(RP∞×S1; Z2), Z2). A basis for H2(RP∞×S1; Z2) is represented by RP2×{x0}
and RP1×S1 . A cocycle representing ∇∗(λ(α)) takes the value 0 on RP2×{x0} since
RP∞×{x0} collapses to a point in Λ(S1) and λ(α) lies in H2(Λ(S1)). On RP1×S1 ,
∇∗(λ(α)) takes the value 1 since when λ(α) is pulled back to Γ(S1) it takes the
same value on the homologous cycles RP1×S1 and S1 ∧S1 , namely 1 by the deﬁning
property of λ(α) since α ⊗α ∈H2(S1 ∧S1) is a generator. Thus ∇∗(λ(α)) = ω1 ⊗α
and hence Sq0(α) = α by the deﬁnition of Sq0 .
We use this calculation to prove that Sqi commutes with the suspension σ ,
where σ is deﬁned by σ(α) = ε ⊗α ∈H∗(S1 ∧X) for ε a generator of H1(S1)
and α ∈H∗(X). We have just seen that Sq0(ε) = ε. By (5), Sq1(ε) = ε2 = 0 and
Sqi(ε) = 0 for i > 1.
The Cartan formula then gives Sqi(σ(α)) = Sqi(ε ⊗α) =
P
j Sqj(ε) ⊗Sqi−j(α) = ε ⊗Sqi(α) = σ(Sqi(α)).
From this it follows that Sq0 is the identity on Hn(Sn) for all n > 0. Since Sn is
the n skeleton of Kn , this implies that Sq0 is the identity on the fundamental class
ιn , hence Sq0 is the identity on all positive dimensional classes.
Property (7) is proved similarly: Sq1 coincides with the Bockstein β on the gener-
ator ω ∈H1(RP2) since both equal ω2 . Hence Sq1 = β on the iterated suspensions
of ω, and the n fold suspension of RP2 is the (n + 2) skeleton of Kn+1 .
⊔⊓
Theorem 4L.13. The Ad´em relations hold for Steenrod squares.
Proof: The idea is to imitate the construction of Λ(X) using Zp×Zp in place of Zp .
The Ad´em relations will then arise from the symmetry of Zp×Zp interchanging the
two factors.
The group Zp×Zp acts on S∞×S∞via (g, h)(s, t) = (g(s), h(t)), with quotient
L∞×L∞. There is also an action of Zp×Zp on X∧p2 , obtained by writing points of X∧p2
as p2 tuples (xij) with subscripts i and j varying from 1 to p, and then letting the
ﬁrst Zp act on the ﬁrst subscript and the second Zp act on the second. Factoring out
the diagonal action of Zp×Zp on S∞×S∞×X∧p2 gives a quotient space Γ2(X). This
projects to L∞×L∞with a section, and collapsing the section gives Λ2(X). The ﬁbers
of the projection Λ2(X)→L∞×L∞are X∧p2 since the action of Zp×Zp on S∞×S∞is
free. We could also obtain Λ2(X) from the product S∞×S∞×Xp2 by ﬁrst collapsing
the subspace of points having at least one X coordinate equal to the basepoint x0 ,
then factoring out the Zp×Zp action.
It will be useful to compare Λ2(X) with Λ(Λ(X)). The latter space is the quotient
of S∞×(S∞×Xp)p in which one ﬁrst identiﬁes all points having at least one X coor-
dinate equal to x0 , then one factors out by an action of the wreath product Zp ≀Zp ,
the group of order pp+1 deﬁned by a split exact sequence 0→Zp
p→Zp ≀Zp→Zp→0
with conjugation by the quotient group Zp given by cyclic permutations of the p
Zp factors of Zp
p .
In the coordinates (s, t1, x11, ··· , x1p, ··· , tp, xp1, ··· , xpp) the

Section 4.L.
Steenrod Squares and Powers
509
ith factor Zp of Zp
p acts in the block (ti, xi1, ··· , xip), and the quotient Zp acts
by cyclic permutation of the index i and by rotation in the s coordinate. There is
a natural map Λ2(X)→Λ(Λ(X)) induced by (s, t, x11, ··· , x1p, ··· , xp1, ··· , xpp) ,
(s, t, x11, ··· , x1p, ··· , t, xp1, ··· , xpp). In Λ2(X) one is factoring out by the action of
Zp×Zp . This is the subgroup of Zp ≀Zp obtained by restricting the action of the quo-
tient Zp on Zp
p to the diagonal subgroup Zp ⊂Zp
p , where this action becomes trivial
so that one has the direct product Zp×Zp .
Since it sufﬁces to prove that the Ad´em relations hold on the class ι ∈Hn(Kn),
we take X = Kn . There is a map λ2 : Λ2(Kn)→Kp2n , unique up to homotopy, with
the property that its restriction to each ﬁber is ι⊗pr . This is constructed by the same
method used to construct λ. One starts with a map representing ι⊗p2 in a ﬁber, then
extends this over the part of Λ2(Kn) projecting to the 1 skeleton of L∞×L∞, and
ﬁnally one extends inductively over higher-dimensional cells of Λ2(Kn) using the fact
that Kp2n is an Eilenberg-MacLane space.
Now we consider the diagram:
×
×
2
2
2
1
1
11
2
n
×
L
Λ
n
K
K
p n
K
s
(
)
(
(
)
)
(
)
×
n
Λ K
(
)
(
(
)
)
n
Λ K
(
)
Λ(
)
−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
∞
L
∞
L
∞
▽
▽
▽
1
1
λ
λ λ
, t x
,
s,t x
,
12
x
,
21
x
,
22
x
,
11
x
,
12
x
,
21
x
,
22
x
,
s, t
s,t
2,
t
x
,
2
x
,
Here the unlabelled map is the one deﬁned above. The other three maps in the square
are also induced by various sorts of diagonal maps, indicated by the coordinates in
the right part of the ﬁgure for the case p = 2. It is clear that the square commutes.
Commutativity of the triangle, up to homotopy, follows from the uniqueness property
of λ2 .
The element ∇∗
2 λ∗
2 (ι) may be written in the form
P
r,s ωr ⊗ωs ⊗ϕrs . Switching
the two Zp factors of Zp×Zp gives the relation ϕrs = (−1)rs+p(p−1)n/2ϕsr since
we get a sign (−1)rs from permuting ωr and ωs , and interchanging the subscripts
on coordinates xij involves p(p −1)/2 transpositions, one for each pair (i, j) with
1 ≤i < j ≤p.
If we compute ∇∗
2 λ∗
2 (ι) using the lower route across the preceding diagram, we
obtain
X
i
ω(p−1)pn−i ⊗θi
X
j
ω(p−1)n−j ⊗θj(ι)

=
X
i,j
ω(p−1)pn−i ⊗θi
 ω(p−1)n−j ⊗θj(ι)

Now we specialize to p = 2. The Cartan formula converts this last summation into
X
i,j,k
ω2n−i ⊗Sqk(ωn−j) ⊗Sqi−kSqj(ι) =
X
i,j,k

n−j
k

ω2n−i ⊗ωn−j+k ⊗Sqi−kSqj(ι)
To write this expression more symmetrically with respect to the two ω terms, let
n −j + k = 2n −ℓ. Then we get
X
i,j,ℓ
 n−j
n+j−ℓ

ω2n−i ⊗ω2n−ℓ⊗Sqi+ℓ−n−jSqj(ι)

510
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
In view of the symmetry property of ϕrs , switching i and ℓin this formula leaves it
unchanged. Hence we get the relation
(∗)
X
j
 n−j
n+j−ℓ

Sqi+ℓ−n−jSqj(ι) =
X
j

n−j
n+j−i

Sqi+ℓ−n−jSqj(ι)
This holds for all n, i, and ℓ, and the idea is to choose these numbers so that the
left side of this equation has only one nonzero term. Given integers r and s , let
n = 2r −1 + s and ℓ= n + s , so that
 n−j
n+j−ℓ

=

2r −1−(j−s)
j−s

. If r is sufﬁciently large,
this will be 0 unless j = s . This is because the dyadic expansion of 2r −1 consists
entirely of 1’s, so the expansion of 2r −1−(j −s) will have 0’s in the positions where
the expansion of j −s has 1’s, hence these positions contribute factors of

0
1

= 0 to

2r −1−(j−s)
j−s

. Thus with n and ℓchosen as above, the relation (∗) becomes
SqiSqs(ι) =
X
j

2r −1+s−j
2r −1+s+j−i

Sqi+s−jSqj(ι) =
X
j

2r +s−j−1
i−2j

Sqi+s−jSqj(ι)
where the latter equality comes from the general relation

x
y

=

x
x−y

.
The ﬁnal step is to show that

2r +s−j−1
i−2j

=

s−j−1
i−2j

if i < 2s .
Both of these
binomial coefﬁcients are zero if i < 2j . If i ≥2j then we have 2j ≤i < 2s , so j < s ,
hence s −j −1 ≥0. The term 2r then makes no difference in

2r +s−j−1
i−2j

if r is large
since this 2r contributes only a single 1 to the dyadic expansion of 2r + s −j −1, far
to the left of all the nonzero entries in the dyadic expansions of s −j −1 and i −2j .
This gives the Ad´em relations for the classes ι of dimension n = 2r −1+s with r
large. This implies the relations hold for all classes of these dimensions, by naturality.
Since we can suspend repeatedly to make any class have dimension of this form, the
Ad´em relations must hold for all cohomology classes.
⊔⊓
Steenrod Powers
Our remaining task is to verify the axioms and Ad´em relations for the Steenrod
powers for an odd prime p. Unfortunately this is quite a bit more complicated than
the p = 2 case, largely because one has to be very careful in computing the many
coefﬁcients in Zp which arise. Even for the innocent-looking axiom P 0 = 11 it will
take three pages to calculate the normalization constants needed to make the axiom
hold. From an aesthetic viewpoint one could wish that the whole process was a lot
cleaner.
Lemma 4L.14. θi = 0 unless i = 2k(p −1) or 2k(p −1) + 1.
Proof: The group of automorphisms of Zp is cyclic of order p −1, and we can rep-
resent a generator by an automorphism which is multiplication by some number r .
Deﬁne a map ϕ : S∞×X∧p→S∞×X∧p by ϕ(s, (xi)) = (sr, (xri)) where subscripts
are taken mod p and sr means raise each coordinate of s , regarded as a unit vector

Section 4.L.
Steenrod Squares and Powers
511
in C∞, to the r th power and renormalize the resulting vector to have unit length.
Then if γ is a generator of the Zp action on S∞×X∧p , we have ϕ(γ(s, (xi))) =
ϕ(e2π/ps, (xi+1)) = (e2rπ/psr, (xri+r)) = γr(ϕ(s, (xi))). This means that ϕ takes
orbits to orbits, hence induces maps ϕ : Γ(X)→Γ(X) and ϕ : Λ(X)→Λ(X). Restrict-
ing to the ﬁrst coordinate, there is also an induced map ϕ : L∞→L∞. Taking X = Kn ,
these maps ﬁt into the diagram shown at the
×
×
n
L
Λ
n
K
K
pn
K
(
)
×
n
Λ K
(
)
n
K
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
∞
L
∞
▽
▽
1
1
λ
λ
ϕ
ϕ
right. The square obviously commutes, and the
triangle commutes up to homotopy since it suf-
ﬁces to verify this in the ﬁber X∧p , and here the
map ϕ is an even permutation of the coordinates since it has even order p −1, so ϕ
preserves ι⊗p .
Commutativity of the diagram means that
P
i ω(p−1)n−i ⊗θi(ι) is invariant under
ϕ∗⊗11. The map ϕ induces multiplication by r in π1(L∞), hence also in H1(L∞)
and H1(L∞; Zp), sending ω1 to rω1 . Since ω2 was chosen to be the Bockstein of
ω1 it is also multiplied by r . We chose r to have multiplicative order p −1 mod p,
so ϕ∗(ωℓ) = ωℓonly when the total number of ω1 and ω2 factors in ωℓis a
multiple of p −1, i.e., when ℓhas the form 2k(p −1) or 2k(p −1) −1. Thus in the
formula
P
i ω(p−1)n−i ⊗θi(ι) we must have θi(ι) = 0 unless i is congruent to 0 or
1 mod 2(p −1).
⊔⊓
Since θ0 : Hn(X)→Hn(X) is a cohomology operation which preserves dimension,
it must be deﬁned by a coefﬁcient homomorphism Zp→Zp , multiplication by some
an ∈Zp . We claim that these an ’s satisfy
am+n = (−1)p(p−1)mn/2aman
and
an = (−1)p(p−1)n(n−1)/4an
1
To see this, recall the formula λ(α ⌣β) = (−1)p(p−1)mn/2λ(α)λ(β) for α ∈Hm
and β ∈Hn .
From the deﬁnition of the θi ’s it then follows that θ0(α ⌣β) =
(−1)p(p−1)mn/2θ0(α)θ0(β), which gives the ﬁrst part of the claim. The second part
follows from this by induction on n.
Lemma 4L.15. a1 = ±m! where p = 2m + 1.
Proof: It sufﬁces to compute θ0(α) where α is any nonzero one-dimensional class, so
the simplest thing is to choose α to be a generator of H1(S1), say a generator coming
from a generator of H1(S1; Z); this determines α up to a sign. Since Hi(S1) = 0 for
i > 1, we have θi(α) = 0 for i > 0, so the deﬁning formula for θ0(α) has the form
∇∗(λ(α)) = ωp−1 ⊗θ0(α) = a1ωp−1 ⊗α in Hp(L∞×S1). To compute a1 there is no
harm in replacing L∞by a ﬁnite-dimensional lens space, say Lp , the p skeleton of L∞.
Thus we may restrict the bundle Λ(S1)→L∞to a bundle Λp(S1)→Lp with the same
ﬁbers (S1)∧p = Sp . We regard S1 as the one-point compactiﬁcation of R with base-
point the added point at inﬁnity, and then (S1)∧p becomes the one-point compactiﬁ-
cation of Rp with Zp acting by permuting the coordinates of Rp cyclically, preserving

512
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
the origin and the point at inﬁnity. This action deﬁnes the bundle Γ p(S1)→Lp with
ﬁbers Sp , containing a zero-section and a section at inﬁnity, and Λp(S1) is obtained
by collapsing the section at inﬁnity. We can also describe Λp(S1) as the one-point
compactiﬁcation of the complement of the section at inﬁnity in Γ p(S1), since the
base space Lp is compact. This complement of the section at inﬁnity is a bundle
E→Lp with ﬁbers Rp . In general, the one-point compactiﬁcation of a ﬁber bundle
E over a compact base space with ﬁbers Rn is called the Thom space T(E) of the
bundle, and a class in Hn(T(E)) which restricts to a generator of Hn in the one-point
compactiﬁcation of each ﬁber Rn is called a Thom class. In our situation, λ(α) is
such a Thom class.
Our ﬁrst task is to describe subbundles E0, E1, ··· , Em of E , where E0 has ﬁber R
and the other Ej ’s have ﬁber R2 , so p = 2m+1. The bundle E comes from the linear
transformation T : Rp→Rp permuting the coordinates cyclically. We claim there is a
decomposition Rp = V0⊕V1⊕··· ⊕Vm with V0 one-dimensional and the other Vj ’s
two-dimensional, such that T(Vj) = Vj for all j , with T|V0 the identity and T|Vj a
rotation by the angle 2πj/p for j > 0. Thus T deﬁnes an action of Zp on Vj and we
can deﬁne Ej just as E was deﬁned, as the quotient (Sp×Vj)/Zp with respect to the
diagonal action.
An easy way to get the decomposition Rp = V0⊕V1⊕··· ⊕Vm is to regard
Rp as a module over the principal ideal domain R[t] by setting tv = T(v) for
v ∈Rp .
Then Rp is isomorphic as a module to the module R[t]/(tp −1) since
T permutes coordinates cyclically; this amounts to identifying the standard basis
vectors v1, ··· , vp in Rp with 1, t, ··· , tp−1 . The polynomial tp −1 factors over C
into the linear factors t −e2πij/p for j = 0, ··· , p −1. Combining complex conjugate
factors, this gives a factorization over R, tp −1 = (t −1)
Q
1≤j≤m(t2 −2(cos ϕj)t +1),
where ϕj = 2πj/p.
These are distinct monic irreducible factors, so the module
R[t]/(tp −1) splits as R[t]/(t −1)
L
1≤j≤mR[t]/(t2 −2(cos ϕj)t + 1) by the basic
structure theory of modules over a principal ideal domain.
This translates into a
decomposition Rp = V0⊕V1⊕··· ⊕Vm with T(Vj) ⊂Vj . Here V0 corresponds to
R[t]/(t −1) ≈R with t acting as the identity, and Vj for j > 0 corresponds to
R[t]/(t2 −2(cos ϕj)t + 1). The latter module is isomorphic to R2 with t acting as
rotation by the angle ϕj since the characteristic polynomial of this rotation is readily
computed to be t2−2(cos ϕj)t+1, hence this rotation satisﬁes t2−2(cos ϕj)t+1 = 0
so there is a module homomorphism R[t]/(t2 −2(cos ϕj)t + 1)→R2 which is obvi-
ously an isomorphism.
From the decomposition Rp = V0⊕V1⊕··· ⊕Vm and the action of T on each
factor we can see that the only vectors ﬁxed by T are those in the line V0 . The vectors
(x, ··· , x) are ﬁxed by T , so V0 must be this diagonal line.
Next we compute Thom classes for the bundles Ej . This is easy for E0 which is the
product Lp×R, so the projection E0→R one-point compactiﬁes to a map T(E0)→S1

Section 4.L.
Steenrod Squares and Powers
513
and we can pull back the chosen generator α ∈H1(S1) to a Thom class for E0 . The
other Ej ’s have 2 dimensional ﬁbers, which we now view as C rather than R2 . Just
as Ej is the quotient of Sp×C via the identiﬁcations (v, z) ∼(e2πi/pv, e2πij/pz), we
can deﬁne a bundle Ej→CPm with ﬁber C by the identiﬁcations (v, z) ∼(λv, λjz)
for λ ∈S1 ⊂C. We then have the left half of the commu-
tative diagram shown at the right, where the quotient map
Ej
L
p
CP
m
CP
m
Ej
−
−−−−→
E−
−−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−→
1
−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
q
q
∼
f
f
∼
eq restricts to a homeomorphism on each ﬁber. The maps
ef and f are induced by the map Sp×C→Sp×C sending
(v, z) to (vj, z) where vj means raise each coordinate of v to the jth power and
then rescale to get a vector of unit length. The map ef is well-deﬁned since equivalent
pairs (v, z) ∼(λv, λjz) in Ej are carried to pairs (vj, z) and (λjvj, λjz) which are
equivalent in E1 .
Since both eq and ef restrict to homeomorphisms in each ﬁber, they extend to
maps of Thom spaces which pull a Thom class for E1 back to Thom classes for Ej
and Ej . To construct a Thom class for E1 , observe that the Thom space T(E1) is
homeomorphic to CPm+1 , namely, view the sphere Sp = S2m+1 as the unit sphere in
Cm+1 , and then the inclusion Sp×C>Cm+1×C = Cm+2 induces a map g : E1→CPm+1
since the equivalence relation deﬁning E1 is (v, z) ∼(λv, λz) for λ ∈S1 .
It is
evident that g is a homeomorphism onto the complement of the point [0, ··· , 0, 1]
in CPm+1 , so sending the point at inﬁnity in T(E1) to [0, ··· , 0, 1] gives an extension
of g to a homeomorphism T(E1) ≈CPm+1 . Under this homeomorphism the one-point
compactiﬁcations of the ﬁbers of E1 correspond to the 2 spheres S2
v consisting of
[0, ··· , 0, 1] and the points [v, z] ∈CPm+1 with ﬁxed v ∈Sp and varying z ∈C.
Each S2
v is a CP1 in CPm+1 equivalent to the standard CP1 under a homeomorphism
of CPm+1 coming from a linear isomorphism of Cm+2 , so a generator γ of H2(CPm+1)
is a Thom class, restricting to a generator of H2(S2
v) for each v . We choose γ to be
the Zp reduction of a generator of H2(CPm+1; Z), so γ is determined up to a sign.
A slightly different view of Thom classes will be useful. For the bundle E→Lp ,
for example, we have isomorphisms
eH∗(T(E)) ≈H∗(T(E), ∞)
where ∞is the compactiﬁcation point
≈H∗(T(E), T(E) −Lp)
where Lp is embedded in T(E) as the
zero-section, so that T(E) −Lp defor-
mation retracts to ∞
≈H∗(E, E −Lp)
by excision.
Thus we can view a Thom class as lying in H∗(E, E −Lp), and similarly for the bun-
dles Ej .
We have projections πj : E→Ej via the projections V0⊕V1⊕··· ⊕Vm→Vj in
ﬁbers. If τj ∈H∗(Ej, Ej −Lp) denotes the Thom class constructed above, then we
have the pullback π∗
j (τj) ∈H∗ E, E −π−1
j
(Lp)

, and the cup product
Q
jπ∗
j (τj) in

514
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
H∗(E, E −Lp) is a Thom class for E as one sees by applying the calculation in Exam-
ple 3.10 repeatedly in each ﬁber. Under the isomorphism H∗(E, E −Lp) ≈eH∗(T(E)),
the class
Q
jπ∗
j (τj) corresponds to ±λ(α) since both classes restrict to ±α⊗p in each
ﬁber Sp ⊂T(E) and λ(α) is uniquely determined by its restriction to ﬁbers.
Now we can ﬁnish the proof.
The class ∇∗(λ(α)) is obtained by restricting
λ(α) ∈Hp(T(E)) to the diagonal T(E0), then pulling back to Lp×S1 via the quo-
tient map Lp×S1→T(E0) which collapses the section at inﬁnity to a point. Restricting
Q
jπ∗
j (τj) to Hp(E0, E0−Lp) ≈Hp(T(E0)) gives τ0⌣e1⌣···⌣em where ej ∈H2(E0)
is the image of τj under H2(Ej, Ej −Lp)→H2(Ej) ≈H2(Lp) ≈H2(E0), these last two
isomorphisms coming from including Lp in Ej and E0 as the zero-section, to which
they deformation retract. To compute ej , we use the diagram
Ej
L
p
L
p
H
2
CP
m
CP
m
Ej
−
−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
q
q
∼
f
f
∼
(
)
H
2(
)
H
2(
)
H
2(
)
CP
m
E−
−−−→
H
2(
)
H
2
1
1
1
(
)
Ej Ej
Ej
−Ej
−
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
q∼
f∼
H
2(
)
H
2(
)
−−−→
,
,
-
-
CP
m
E−E−
H
2(
)
,
-
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
≈
≈
≈
The Thom class for E1 lies in the upper-right group. Following this class across the
top of the diagram and then down to the lower-left corner gives the element ej . To
compute ej we take the alternate route through the lower-right corner of the diagram.
The image of the Thom class for E1 in the lower-right H2(CPm) is the generator γ
since T(E1) = CPm+1 .
The map f ∗is multiplication by j since f has degree j
on CP1 ⊂CPm . And q∗(γ) = ±ω2 since q restricts to a homeomorphism on the
2 cell of Lp in the CW structure deﬁned in Example 2.43. Thus ej = ±jω2 , and so
τ0 ⌣e1 ⌣··· ⌣em = ±m!τ0 ⌣ωm
2 = ±m!τ0 ⌣ωp−1 . Since τ0 was the pullback of α
via the projection T(E0)→S1 , when we pull τ0 back to Lp×S1 via ∇we get 1 ⊗α,
so τ0 ⌣e1 ⌣··· ⌣em pulls back to ±m!ωp−1 ⊗α. Hence a1 = ±m!.
⊔⊓
The lemma implies in particular that an is not zero in Zp , hence has a multiplica-
tive inverse a−1
n . We then deﬁne
P i(α) = (−1)ia−1
n θ2i(p−1)(α)
for α ∈Hn(X).
The factor a−1
n
guarantees that P 0 is the identity. The factor (−1)i is inserted in order
to make P i(α) = αp if |α| = 2i, as we show next. We know that θ2i(p−1)(α) = αp , so
what must be shown is that (−1)ia−1
2i = 1, or equivalently, a2i = (−1)i .
To do this we need a number theory fact:
 (p −1)/2

!2 ≡(−1)(p+1)/2 mod p.
For consider the multiplicative group Z∗
p of nonzero elements of Zp . The elements
of this group are ±1, ±2, ··· , ±(p −1)/2, so the product of all the elements of Z∗
p
is
 (p −1)/2

!2(−1)(p−1)/2 . On the other hand, this group is cyclic of even order,
so the product of all its elements is the unique element of order 2, which is −1,

Section 4.L.
Steenrod Squares and Powers
515
since all the other nontrivial elements cancel their inverses in this product.
Thus
 (p −1)/2

!2(−1)(p−1)/2 ≡−1 and hence
 (p −1)/2

!2 ≡(−1)(p+1)/2 mod p.
Therefore, using the formulas an = (−1)p(p−1)n(n−1)/4an
1 and a1 = ±
 (p −1)/2

!
we have
a2i = (−1)p(p−1)2i(2i−1)/4 (p −1)/2

!2i
= (−1)p[(p−1)/2]i(2i−1)(−1)i(p+1)/2
= (−1)i(p−1)/2(−1)i(p+1)/2
since p and 2i −1 are odd
= (−1)ip = (−1)i
since p is odd.
Theorem 4L.16. The operations P i satisfy the properties (1)-(6) and the Ad´em rela-
tions.
Proof: The ﬁrst two properties, naturality and additivity, along with the fact that
P i(α) = 0 if 2i > |α|, are inherited from the θi ’s. Property (6) and the other half of
(5) have just been shown above. For the Cartan formula we have, for α ∈Hm and
β ∈Hn , λ(α ⌣β) = (−1)p(p−1)mn/2λ(α)λ(β) and hence
X
i
ω(p−1)(m+n)−i ⊗θi(α ⌣β) =
(−1)p(p−1)mn/2X
j
ω(p−1)m−j ⊗θj(α)
X
k
ω(p−1)n−k ⊗θk(β)

Recall that ω2r = ωr
2 and ω2r+1 = ω1ωr
2 , with ω2
1 = 0. Therefore terms with i even
on the left side of the equation can only come from terms with j and k even on the
right side. This leads to the second equality in the following sequence:
P i(α ⌣β) = (−1)ia−1
m+nθ2i(p−1)(α ⌣β)
= (−1)ia−1
m+n(−1)p(p−1)mn/2 X
j
θ2(i−j)(p−1)(α)θ2j(p−1)(β)
=
X
j
(−1)i−ja−1
m θ2(i−j)(p−1)(α)(−1)ja−1
n θ2j(p−1)(β)
=
X
j
P i−j(α)P j(β)
Property (4), the invariance of P i under suspension, follows from the Cartan formula
just as in the case p = 2, using the fact that P 0 is the only P i which can be nonzero
on one-dimensional classes, by (5).
It remains to prove the Ad´em relations for Steenrod powers.
We will need a
Bockstein calculation:
Lemma 4L.17. βθ2k = −θ2k+1 .
Proof: Let us ﬁrst reduce the problem to showing that β∇∗(λ(ι)) = 0. If we compute
β∇∗(λ(ι)) using the product formula for β we get
β
X
i
ω(p−1)n−i ⊗θi(ι)

=
X
i

βω(p−1)n−i ⊗θi(ι) + (−1)iω(p−1)n−i ⊗βθi(ι)


516
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
Since βω2j−1 = ω2j and βω2j = 0, the terms with i = 2k and i = 2k + 1 give,
respectively,
X
k
ω(p−1)n−2k ⊗βθ2k(ι)
and
X
k
ω(p−1)n−2k ⊗θ2k+1(ι) −
X
k
ω(p−1)n−2k−1 ⊗βθ2k+1(ι)
Thus the coefﬁcient of ω(p−1)n−2k in β∇∗(λ(ι)) is βθ2k(ι)+θ2k+1(ι), so if we assume
that β∇∗(λ(ι)) = 0, this coefﬁcient must vanish since we are in the tensor product
H∗(L∞)⊗H∗(Kn). So we get βθ2k(ι) = −θ2k+1(ι) and hence βθ2k(α) = −θ2k+1(α)
for all α. Note that βθ2k+1 = 0 from the coefﬁcient of ω(p−1)n−2k−1 . This also follows
from the formula βθ2k = −θ2k+1 since β2 = 0.
In order to show that β∇∗(λ(ι)) = 0 we ﬁrst compute βλ(ι). We may assume Kn
has a single n cell and a single (n + 1) cell, attached by a map of degree p. Let ϕ
and ψ be the cellular cochains assigning the value 1 to the n cell and the (n+1) cell,
respectively, so δϕ = pψ. In K∧p
n
we then have
(∗)
δ(ϕ⊗p) =
X
i
(−1)inϕ⊗i ⊗δϕ ⊗ϕ⊗(p−i−1) = p
X
i
(−1)inϕ⊗i ⊗ψ ⊗ϕ⊗(p−i−1)
where the tensor notation means cellular cross product, e.g., ϕ⊗p is the cellular
cochain dual to the np cell en× ··· ×en of K∧p
n .
The formula (∗) holds also in
Λ(Kn) since the latter space has only one (np + 1) cell not in K∧p
n , with cellular
boundary zero. Namely, this cell is the product of the 1 cell of L∞and the np cell of
K∧p
n
with one end of this product attached to the np cell by the identity map and the
other end by the cyclic permutation T , which has degree +1 since p is odd, so these
two terms in the boundary of this cell cancel, and there are no other terms since the
rest of the attachment of this cell is at the basepoint.
Bockstein homomorphisms can be computed using cellular cochain complexes,
so the formula (∗) says that
P
i(−1)inϕ⊗i ⊗ψ ⊗ϕ⊗(p−i−1) represents βλ(ι). Via the
quotient map Γ(Kn)→Λ(Kn), the class λ(ι) pulls back to a class γ(ι) with βγ(ι)
also represented by
P
i(−1)inϕ⊗i ⊗ψ ⊗ϕ⊗(p−i−1) . To see what happens when we pull
βγ(ι) back to β∇∗(λ(ι)) via the inclusion L∞×Kn > Γ(Kn), consider the following
commutative diagram:
L
K
H (
)
∗
∗
∞×
n
S
K
H (
)
∗
∞×
n
L
K
H (
)
∗
∞×
n
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
π
τ
K
H ( (
))
∗
∗
n
S
K
H (
)
∗
∞×
n
p
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
π
τ
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
Γ
K
H ( (
))
∗
n
−−−−−→
Γ
∧
In the left-hand square the maps π∗are induced by the covering space projections
π : S∞×K∧p
n →Γ(Kn) and π : S∞×Kn→L∞×Kn arising from the free Zp actions. The
vertical maps are induced by the diagonal inclusion S∞×K > S∞×K∧p
n . The maps τ
are the transfer homomorphisms deﬁned in §3.H. Recall the deﬁnition: If π : eX→X
is an m sheeted covering space, a chain map C∗(X)→C∗( eX) is deﬁned by sending a
singular simplex σ : ∆k→X to the sum of its m lifts to eX , and τ is the induced map on
cohomology. The key property of τ is that τπ∗: H∗(X)→H∗(X) is multiplication by

Section 4.L.
Steenrod Squares and Powers
517
m, for any choice of coefﬁcient group, since when we project the m lifts of σ : ∆k→X
back to X we get mσ . When X is a CW complex and eX is given the lifted CW structure,
then τ can also be deﬁned in cellular cohomology by the same procedure.
Let us compute the value of the upper τ in the diagram on 1 ⊗ψ ⊗ϕ⊗(p−1) where
‘1’ is the cellular cocycle assigning the value 1 to each 0 cell of S∞. By the deﬁnition
of τ we have τ(1 ⊗ψ ⊗ϕ⊗(p−1)) =
P
i T i(ψ ⊗ϕ⊗(p−1)) where T : K∧p
n →K∧p
n
permutes
the factors cyclically. It does not matter whether T moves coordinates one unit left-
wards or one unit rightwards since we are summing over all the powers of T , so let
us say T moves coordinates rightward. Then T(ψ ⊗ϕ⊗(p−1)) = ϕ ⊗ψ ⊗ϕ⊗(p−2) , with
the last ϕ moved into the ﬁrst position. This move is achieved by transposing this ϕ
with each of the preceding p −2 ϕ’s and with ψ. Transposing two ϕ’s introduces
a sign (−1)n2 , and transposing ϕ with ψ introduces a sign (−1)n(n+1) = +1, by
the commutativity property of cross product. Thus the total sign introduced by T is
(−1)n2(p−2) , which equals (−1)n since p is odd. Each successive iterate of T also
introduces a sign of (−1)n , so T i introduces a sign (−1)in for 0 ≤i ≤p −1. Thus
we have
τ(1 ⊗ψ ⊗ϕ⊗(p−1)) =
X
i
T i(ψ ⊗ϕ⊗(p−1)) =
X
i
(−1)inϕ⊗i ⊗ψ ⊗ϕ⊗(p−i−1)
As observed earlier, this last cocycle represents the class βγ(ι).
Since βγ(ι) is in the image of the upper τ in the diagram, the image of βγ(ι) in
H∗(L∞×Kn), which is ∇∗(βλ(ι)), is in the image of the lower τ since the right-hand
square commutes. The map π∗in the lower row is obviously onto since eH∗(S∞) =
0, so ∇∗(βλ(ι)) is in the image of the composition τπ∗across the bottom of the
diagram. But this composition is multiplication by p, which is zero for Zp coefﬁcients,
so β∇∗(λ(ι)) = ∇∗(βλ(ι)) = 0.
⊔⊓
The derivation of the Ad´em relations now follows the pattern for the case p =
2.
Setting p = 2m + 1 in our earlier formula for ∇∗
2 λ∗
2 (ι) gives the summation
P
i,j ω2mpn−i ⊗θi
 ω2mn−j ⊗θj(ι)

. The only nonzero θi ’s are θ2i(p−1) = (−1)ianP i
and θ2i(p−1)+1 = −βθ2i(p−1) so we have
X
i,j
ω2mpn−i ⊗θi
 ω2mn−j ⊗θj(ι)

=
X
i,j
(−1)i+ja2mnanω2m(pn−2i) ⊗P i ω2m(n−2j) ⊗P j(ι)

−
X
i,j
(−1)i+ja2mnanω2m(pn−2i) ⊗P i ω2m(n−2j)−1 ⊗βP j(ι)

−
X
i,j
(−1)i+ja2mnanω2m(pn−2i)−1 ⊗βP i ω2m(n−2j) ⊗P j(ι)

+
X
i,j
(−1)i+ja2mnanω2m(pn−2i)−1 ⊗βP i ω2m(n−2j)−1 ⊗βP j(ι)


518
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
Since m and n will be ﬁxed throughout the discussion, we may factor out the nonzero
constant a2mnan . Then applying the Cartan formula to expand the P i terms, using
also the formulas P k(ω2r) =

r
k

ω2r+2k(p−1) and P k(ω2r+1) =

r
k

ω2r+2k(p−1)+1 de-
rived earlier in the section, we obtain
X
i,j,k
(−1)i+j
m(n−2j)
k

ω2m(pn−2i) ⊗ω2m(n−2j+2k) ⊗P i−kP j(ι)
−
X
i,j,k
(−1)i+j
m(n−2j)−1
k

ω2m(pn−2i) ⊗ω2m(n−2j+2k)−1 ⊗P i−kβP j(ι)
−
X
i,j,k
(−1)i+j
m(n−2j)
k

ω2m(pn−2i)−1 ⊗ω2m(n−2j+2k) ⊗βP i−kP j(ι)
+
X
i,j,k
(−1)i+j
m(n−2j)−1
k

ω2m(pn−2i)−1 ⊗ω2m(n−2j+2k) ⊗P i−kβP j(ι)
−
X
i,j,k
(−1)i+j
m(n−2j)−1
k

ω2m(pn−2i)−1 ⊗ω2m(n−2j+2k)−1 ⊗βP i−kβP j(ι)
Letting ℓ= mn+j−k, so that n−2j+2k = pn−2ℓ, the ﬁrst of these ﬁve summations
becomes
X
i,j,ℓ
(−1)i+jm(n−2j)
mn+j−ℓ

ω2m(pn−2i) ⊗ω2m(pn−2ℓ) ⊗P i+ℓ−mn−jP j(ι)
and similarly for the other four summations.
Now we bring in the symmetry property ϕrs = (−1)rs+mnpϕsr , where, as before,
∇∗
2 λ∗
2 (ι) =
P
r,s ωr ⊗ωs ⊗ϕrs . Of the ﬁve summations, only the ﬁrst has both ω
terms with even subscripts, namely r = 2m(pn −2i) and s = 2m(pn −2ℓ), so the
coefﬁcient of ωr ⊗ωs in this summation must be symmetric with respect to switching
i and ℓ, up to a sign which will be + if we choose n to be even, as we will do. This
gives the relation
(1)
X
j
(−1)i+jm(n−2j)
mn+j−ℓ

P i+ℓ−mn−jP j(ι) =
X
j
(−1)ℓ+j
m(n−2j)
mn+j−i

P i+ℓ−mn−jP j(ι)
Similarly, the second, third, and fourth summations involve ω’s with subscripts of
opposite parity, yielding the relation
X
j
(−1)i+jm(n−2j)−1
mn+j−ℓ

P i+ℓ−mn−jβP j(ι) =
(2)
X
j
(−1)ℓ+j
m(n−2j)
mn+j−i

βP i+ℓ−mn−jP j(ι) −
X
j
(−1)ℓ+j
m(n−2j)−1
mn+j−i

P i+ℓ−mn−jβP j(ι)
The relations (1) and (2) will yield the two Ad´em relations, so we will not need to
consider the relation arising from the ﬁfth summation.
To get the ﬁrst Ad´em relation from (1) we choose n and ℓso that the left side of
(1) has only one term, namely we take n = 2(1 + p + ··· + pr−1) + 2s and ℓ= mn + s
for given integers r and s . Then
m(n−2j)
mn+j−ℓ

=

pr −1−(p−1)(j−s)
j−s


Section 4.L.
Steenrod Squares and Powers
519
and if r is large, this binomial coefﬁcient is 1 if j = s and 0 otherwise since if the
rightmost nonzero digit in the p adic expansion of the ‘denominator’ j −s is x , then
the corresponding digit of the ‘numerator’ (p −1)[(1 + p + ··· + pr−1) −(j −s)] is
obtained by reducing (p −1)(1 −x) mod p, giving x −1, and

x−1
x

= 0. Then (1)
becomes
(−1)i+sP iP s(ι) =
X
j
(−1)ℓ+j
m(n−2j)
mn+j−i

P i+s−jP j(ι)
or
P iP s(ι) =
X
j
(−1)i+j
m(n−2j)
mn+j−i

P i+s−jP j(ι)
since
ℓ≡s mod 2
=
X
j
(−1)i+j
m(n−2j)
i−pj

P i+s−jP j(ι)
since

x
y

=

x
x−y

=
X
j
(−1)i+j
pr +(p−1)(s−j)−1
i−pj

P i+s−jP j(ι)
If r is large and i < ps , the term pr in the binomial coefﬁcient can be omitted since
we may assume i ≥pj , hence j < s , so −1 + (p −1)(s −j) ≥0 and the pr has
no effect on the binomial coefﬁcient if r is large. This shows the ﬁrst Ad´em relation
holds for the class ι, and the general case follows as in the case p = 2.
To get the second Ad´em relation we choose n = 2pr + 2s and ℓ= mn + s . Rea-
soning as before, the left side of (2) then reduces to (−1)i+sP iβP s(ι) and (2) becomes
P iβP s(ι) =
X
j
(−1)i+j
(p−1)(pr +s−j)
i−pj

βP i+s−jP j(ι)
−
X
j
(−1)i+j
(p−1)(pr +s−j)−1
i−pj−1

P i+s−jβP j(ι)
This time the term pr can be omitted if r is large and i ≤ps .
⊔⊓
Exercises
1. Determine all cohomology operations H1(X; Z)→Hn(X; Z), H2(X; Z)→Hn(X; Z),
and H1(X; Zp)→Hn(X; Zp) for p prime.
2. Use cohomology operations to show that the spaces (S1×CP∞)/(S1×{x0}) and
S3×CP∞are not homotopy equivalent.
3. Since there is a ﬁber bundle S2→CP3→HP2 , one might ask whether there is an
analogous bundle S4→HP3→OP2 . Use Steenrod powers for the prime 3 to show
that such a bundle cannot exist. [The Gysin sequence can be used to determine the
map on cohomology induced by the bundle projection HP3→OP2 .]
4. Show there is no ﬁber bundle S7→S23→OP2 . [Compute the cohomology ring
of the mapping cone of the projection S23→OP2 via Poincar´e duality or the Thom
isomorphism.]

520
Chapter 4.
Homotopy Theory
5. Show that the subalgebra of A2 generated by Sqi for i ≤2 has dimension 8 as a
vector space over Z2 , with multiplicative structure encoded in the following diagram,
where diagonal lines indicate left-multiplication by Sq1 and horizontal lines indicate
left-multiplication by Sq2 .
Sq1
Sq2Sq1
Sq
1
2
Sq2Sq2
Sq2Sq2Sq2
Sq1Sq2
Sq2Sq1Sq2
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
−−−−−−−−−−−−−
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−

Topology of Cell Complexes
521
Topology of Cell Complexes
Here we collect a number of basic topological facts about CW complexes for con-
venient reference. A few related facts about manifolds are also proved.
Let us ﬁrst recall from Chapter 0 that a CW complex is a space X constructed in
the following way:
(1) Start with a discrete set X0 , the 0 cells of X .
(2) Inductively, form the n skeleton Xn from Xn−1 by attaching n cells en
α via maps
ϕα : Sn−1→Xn−1 . This means that Xn is the quotient space of Xn−1`
αDn
α under
the identiﬁcations x ∼ϕα(x) for x ∈∂Dn
α .
(3) X =
S
n Xn with the weak topology: A set A ⊂X is open (or closed) iff A ∩Xn is
open (or closed) in Xn for each n.
Note that condition (3) is superﬂuous when X is ﬁnite-dimensional, i.e., X = Xn for
some n. For if A is open in X = Xn , the deﬁnition of the quotient topology on Xn
implies that A ∩Xn−1 is open in Xn−1 , and then by the same reasoning A ∩Xn−2 is
open in Xn−2 , etc.
Each cell en
α has its characteristic map Φα , which is by deﬁnition the composi-
tion Dn
α > Xn−1`
αDn
α→Xn > X . This is continuous since it is a composition of
continuous maps, the inclusion Xn > X being continuous by (3). The restriction of
Φα to the interior of Dn
α is a homeomorphism onto en
α .
An alternative way to describe the topology on X is to say that a set A ⊂X is
open (or closed) iff Φ−1
α (A) is open (or closed) in Dn
α for each characteristic map Φα .
In one direction this follows from continuity of the Φα ’s, and in the other direction,
suppose Φ−1
α (A) is open in Dn
α for each Φα , and suppose by induction on n that
A∩Xn−1 is open in Xn−1 . Then since Φ−1
α (A) is open in Dn
α for all α, A∩Xn is open
in Xn by the deﬁnition of the quotient topology on Xn . Hence by (3), A is open in X .
A consequence of this characterization of the topology on X is that X is a quotient
space of
`
n,α Dn
α .
Example: ∆Complexes. In §2.1 we deﬁned a ∆complex X to be a quotient space
of a disjoint union of simplices under identiﬁcations of some of their faces via the
canonical linear homeomorphisms preserving orderings of vertices. We observed that
each n simplex of X comes with a canonical map σα : ∆n→X whose restriction to
the interior of ∆n is a homeomorphism with image a cell en
α . Now let us check that
these cells are the cells of a CW structure on X with the σα ’s as characteristic maps.
To simplify matters, let us modify the collection of disjoint simplices from which
X is built. First, enlarge this set of simplices by including copies of all their lower-

522
Appendix
dimensional faces, adjoining also the identiﬁcations which match these new simplices
with the corresponding faces of the old simplices. Having done this, we then eliminate
redundancy in the collection of disjoint simplices by identifying any two simplices of
the same dimension which become identiﬁed in X . As a result of these changes we
now have X constructed from a disjoint union of simplices with one n simplex for
each cell en
α of X .
Let Xk be the union of all cells en
α of X with n ≤k. Assume inductively that we
have veriﬁed that Xk−1 is a CW complex. Note that for each cell ek
α , the restriction ϕα
of its canonical map σα : ∆k→X to ∂∆k is a continuous map to Xk−1 since on each
(k −1) dimensional face of ∆k it is a characteristic map σβ of a cell ek−1
β
of Xk−1 .
Then Xk is a quotient of the disjoint union of Xk−1 with the various k simplices from
which X is formed, namely the quotient obtained by attaching the cells ek
α of X to
Xk−1 via the ϕα ’s. Thus Xk is also a CW complex. Since X has the weak topology
with respect to the Xk ’s, it is a CW complex as well.
A subcomplex of a CW complex X is a subspace A ⊂X which is a union of cells
of X , such that the closure of each cell in A is contained in A. Thus for each cell
in A, the image of its attaching map is contained in A, so A is itself a CW complex.
Its CW complex topology is the same as the topology induced from X , as one sees
by noting inductively that the two topologies agree on An = A ∩Xn . It is easy to
see by induction over skeleta that a subcomplex is a closed subspace. Conversely, a
subcomplex could be deﬁned as a closed subspace which is a union of cells.
A ﬁnite CW complex, i.e., one with only ﬁnitely many cells, is compact since at-
taching a single cell preserves compactness. A sort of converse to this is:
Proposition A.1. A compact subspace of a CW complex is contained in a ﬁnite sub-
complex.
Proof: First we show that a compact set C ⊂X can meet only ﬁnitely many cells of
X . Suppose on the contrary that there is an inﬁnite sequence of points xi ∈C all
lying in distinct cells. Then the set S = {x1, x2, ···} is closed in X . Namely, assuming
S ∩Xn−1 is closed in Xn−1 by induction on n, then for each cell en
α of X , ϕ−1
α (S) is
closed in ∂Dn
α , and Φ−1
α (S) consists of at most one more point in Dn
α , hence is closed
in Dn
α . Therefore S ∩Xn is closed in Xn for each n, hence S is closed in X . The
same argument shows that any subset of S is closed, so S has the discrete topology.
But it is compact, being a closed subset of the compact set C . Therefore S must be
ﬁnite, a contradiction.
Since C is contained in a ﬁnite union of cells, it sufﬁces to show that a ﬁnite union
of cells is contained in a ﬁnite subcomplex of X . A ﬁnite union of ﬁnite subcomplexes
is again a ﬁnite subcomplex, so this reduces to showing that a single cell en
α is con-
tained in a ﬁnite subcomplex. The image of the attaching map ϕα for en
α is compact,

Topology of Cell Complexes
523
hence by induction on dimension is contained in a ﬁnite subcomplex A ⊂Xn−1 . So
en
α is contained in the ﬁnite subcomplex A ∪en
α .
⊔⊓
Now we can explain the mysterious ‘CW.’ The letters refer to the following two
properties satisﬁed by CW complexes:
(1) Closure-ﬁniteness: the closure of each cell meets only ﬁnitely many other cells.
This follows from the preceding proposition since the closure of a cell is compact,
being the image of a characteristic map.
(2) Weak topology: a set is closed iff it meets the closure of each cell in a closed set.
For if a set meets the closure of each cell in a closed set, it pulls back to a closed
set under each characteristic map, hence is closed by an earlier remark.
In J.H.C.Whitehead’s original deﬁnition of CW complexes these two properties played
a more central role. The following proposition contains essentially this deﬁnition.
Proposition A.2. Given a Hausdorff space X and a family of maps Φα : Dn
α→X ,
then these maps are the characteristic maps of a CW complex structure on X iff:
(i) Each Φα is injective on int Dn
α , hence Φα restricts to a homeomorphism from
int Dn
α onto a cell en
α ⊂X . All these cells are disjoint, and their union is X .
(ii) For each cell en
α , Φα(∂Dn
α) is contained in the union of a ﬁnite number of cells
of dimension less than n.
(iii) A subset of X is closed iff it meets the closure of each cell of X in a closed set.
The dimension n of Dn
α and en
α depends on α but we prefer not to clutter the
notation by writing nα or n(α).
The ‘hence’ in (i) follows from the fact that Φα maps the compact set Dn
α to a
Hausdorff space, so since Φα takes compact sets to compact sets, it takes closed
sets to closed sets, which means that Φ−1
α : en
α→int Dn
α is continuous. By the same
compactness argument, condition (iii) can be restated as saying that a set C ⊂X is
closed iff Φ−1
α (C) is closed in Dn
α for all α. Note that condition (iii) holds automatically
if there are only ﬁnitely many cells.
One might wonder whether the ﬁniteness hypothesis in (ii) is necessary, and in-
deed it is. For an example where all the other conditions except this are satisﬁed,
take X to be D2 with its interior as a 2 cell and each point of ∂D2 as a 0 cell. The
identity map of D2 serves as the Φα for the 2 cell. Condition (iii) is satisﬁed since it
is a nontrivial condition only for the 2 cell.
Proof: We have already taken care of the ‘only if’ implication.
For the converse,
suppose inductively that Xn−1 , the union of all cells of dimension less than n, is a
CW complex with the appropriate Φα ’s as characteristic maps. The induction can start
with X−1 = ∅. Let f : Xn−1`
αDn
α→Xn be given by the inclusion on Xn−1 and the
maps Φα for all the n cells of X . This is a continuous surjection, and if we can show

524
Appendix
it is a quotient map, then Xn will be obtained from Xn−1 by attaching the n cells en
α .
Thus if C ⊂Xn is such that f −1(C) is closed, we need to show that C ∩em
β is closed
for all cells em
β of X , the bar denoting closure.
There are three cases. If m < n then f −1(C) closed implies C ∩Xn−1 closed,
hence C ∩em
β is closed since em
β ⊂Xn−1 . If m = n then em
β is one of the cells en
α , so
f −1(C) closed implies f −1(C) ∩Dn
α is closed, hence compact, hence its image C ∩en
α
under f is compact and therefore closed. Finally there is the case m > n. Then
C ⊂Xn implies C ∩em
β ⊂Φβ(∂Dm
β ). The latter space is contained in a ﬁnite union of
eℓ
γ ’s with ℓ< m. By induction on m, each C ∩eℓ
γ is closed. Hence the intersection
of C with the union of the ﬁnite collection of eℓ
γ ’s is closed. Intersecting this closed
set with em
β , we conclude that C ∩em
β is closed.
It remains only to check that X has the weak topology with respect to the Xn ’s,
that is, a set in X is closed iff it intersects each Xn in a closed set. The preceding
argument with C = Xn shows that Xn is closed, so a closed set intersects each Xn
in a closed set. Conversely, if a set C intersects Xn in a closed set, then C intersects
each en
α in a closed set, so C is closed in X by (iii).
⊔⊓
Next we describe a convenient way of constructing open neighborhoods Nε(A)
of subsets A of a CW complex X . The construction is inductive over the skeleta Xn ,
so suppose we have already constructed Nn
ε (A), a neighborhood of A ∩Xn in Xn ,
starting the process with N0
ε (A) = A ∩X0 . Then we deﬁne Nn+1
ε
(A) by specifying
its preimage under the characteristic map Φα : Dn+1→X of each cell en+1
α
, namely,
Φ−1
α
 Nn+1
ε
(A)

is the union of two parts: an open ε neighborhood of Φ−1
α (A)−∂Dn+1
in Dn+1 −∂Dn+1 , and a product (1 −ε, 1]×Φ−1
α
 Nn
ε (A)

with respect to ‘spherical’
coordinates (r, θ) in Dn+1 , where r ∈[0, 1] is the radial coordinate and θ lies in
∂Dn+1 = Sn . The number ε = εα > 0 we allow to depend on the cell en+1
α
. Then we
deﬁne Nε(A) =
S
n Nn
ε (A). This is an open set in X since it pulls back to an open set
under each characteristic map.
Proposition A.3. CW complexes are normal, and in particular, Hausdorff.
Proof: Points are closed in a CW complex X since they pull back to closed sets under
all characteristic maps Φα .
For disjoint closed sets A and B in X , we show that
Nε(A) and Nε(B) are disjoint for small enough εα ’s. In the inductive process for
building these open sets, assume Nn
ε (A) and Nn
ε (B) have been chosen to be disjoint.
For a characteristic map Φα : Dn+1→X , observe that Φ−1
α
 Nn
ε (A)

and Φ−1
α (B) are a
positive distance apart, otherwise using compactness we would have a sequence in
Φ−1
α (B) converging to a point of Φ−1
α (B) in ∂Dn+1 of distance zero from Φ−1
α
 Nn
ε (A)

,
but this is impossible since Φ−1
α
 Nn
ε (B)

is a neighborhood of Φ−1
α (B) ∩∂Dn+1 in
∂Dn+1 disjoint from Φ−1
α
 Nn
ε (A)

. Similarly, Φ−1
α
 Nn
ε (B)

and Φ−1
α (A) are a positive
distance apart. Also, Φ−1
α (A) and Φ−1
α (B) are a positive distance apart. So a small
enough εα will make Φ−1
α
 Nn+1
ε
(A)

disjoint from Φ−1
α
 Nn+1
ε
(B)

in Dn+1 .
⊔⊓

Topology of Cell Complexes
525
Proposition A.4. A CW complexes is locally contractible, in the strong sense that
each point has arbitrarily small contractible open neighborhoods.
Proof: Given x ∈X and a neighborhood U of x in X , we can choose the εα ’s small
enough so that Nε(x) ⊂U by requiring that the closure of Nn
ε (x) be contained in
U for each n. It remains to see that Nε(x) is contractible. If x ∈Xm −Xm−1 and
n > m we can construct a deformation retraction of Nn
ε (x) onto Nn−1
ε
(x) by sliding
out ‘radial segments’ in cells en
β , i.e., the images under the characteristic maps Φβ
of radial segments in Dn . A deformation retraction of Nε(x) onto Nm
ε (x) is then
obtained by performing the deformation retraction of Nn
ε (x) onto Nn−1
ε
(x) during
the t interval [1/2n, 1/2n−1], points of Nn
ε (x) −Nn−1
ε
(x) being stationary outside
this t interval. Finally, Nm
ε (x) is an open ball about x , and so deformation retracts
onto x .
⊔⊓
In particular, CW complexes are locally path-connected. So a CW complex is path-
connected iff it is connected.
Proposition A.5. For a subcomplex A of a CW complex X , the open neighborhood
Nε(A) deformation retracts onto A if εα < 1 for all α.
Proof: In each cell of X −A, Nε(A) is a product neighborhood of the boundary of
this cell, so a deformation retraction of Nε(A) onto A can be constructed just as in
the previous proof.
⊔⊓
Note that for subcomplexes A and B of X , we have Nε(A) ∩Nε(B) = Nε(A ∩B).
This implies for example that the van Kampen theorem and Mayer-Vietoris sequences
hold for decompositions X = A ∪B into subcomplexes A and B as well as into open
sets A and B .
A map f : X→Y with domain a CW complex is continuous iff its restrictions to
the closures en
α of all cells en
α are continuous, and it is useful to know that the same
is true for homotopies ft : X→Y .
With this objective in mind, let us introduce a
little terminology. A topological space X is said to be generated by a collection of
subspaces Xα if X =
S
α Xα and a set A ⊂X is closed iff A ∩Xα is closed in Xα for
each α. Equivalently, we could say ‘open’ instead of ‘closed’ here, but ‘closed’ is more
convenient for our present purposes. As noted earlier, though not in these words,
a CW complex X is generated by the closures en
α of its cells en
α . Since every ﬁnite
subcomplex of X is a ﬁnite union of closures en
α , X is also generated by its ﬁnite
subcomplexes. It follows that X is also generated by its compact subspaces, or more
brieﬂy, X is compactly generated.
Proposition A.15 later in the Appendix asserts that if X is a compactly generated
Hausdorff space and Z is locally compact, then X×Z , with the product topology, is
compactly generated. In particular, X×I is compactly generated if X is a CW complex.

526
Appendix
Since every compact set in X×I is contained in the product of a compact subspace
of X with I , hence in the product of a ﬁnite subcomplex of X with I , such product
subspaces also generate X×I .
Since such a product subspace is a ﬁnite union of
products en
α×I , it is also true that X×I is generated by its subspaces en
α×I . This
implies that a homotopy F : X×I→Y is continuous iff its restrictions to the subspaces
en
α×I are continuous, which is the statement we were seeking.
Products of CW Complexes
There are some unexpected point-set-topological subtleties which arise with prod-
ucts of CW complexes. As we shall show, the product of two CW complexes does have
a natural CW structure, but its topology is in general ﬁner, with more open sets, than
the product topology. However, the distinctions between the two topologies are rather
small, and indeed nonexistent in most cases of interest, so there is no real problem
for algebraic topology.
Given a space X and a collection of subspaces Xα whose union is X , these sub-
spaces generate a ﬁner topology on X by deﬁning a set A ⊂X to be open iff A ∩Xα
is open in Xα for all Xα ’s. The axioms for a topology are easily veriﬁed for this def-
inition. In case {Xα} is the collection of compact subsets of X , we write Xc for this
new compactly generated topology. It is easy to see that X and Xc have the same
compact subsets, and the two induced topologies on these compact subsets coincide.
If X is compact, or even locally compact, then X = Xc , i.e., X is compactly generated.
Theorem A.6. For CW complexes X and Y with characteristic maps Φα and Ψβ ,
the product maps Φα×Ψβ are the characteristic maps for a CW complex structure
on (X×Y)c . If either X or Y is compact or more generally locally compact, then
(X×Y)c = X×Y . Also, (X×Y)c = X×Y if X and Y have at most countably many
cells.
The simplest example where the two topologies X×Y and (X×Y)c differ has X
and Y graphs consisting of inﬁnitely many edges emanating from a single vertex, with
countably many edges for X and uncountably many for Y; see [Dowker].
Proof: For the ﬁrst statement it sufﬁces to check that the three conditions in Propo-
sition A.2 are satisﬁed when we take the space ‘X ’ there to be (X×Y)c . The ﬁrst two
conditions are obvious. For the third, which says that (X×Y)c is generated by the
products em
α ×en
β , observe that every compact set in X×Y is contained in the product
of its projections onto X and Y , and these projections are compact hence contained
in ﬁnite subcomplexes of X and Y , so the original compact set is contained in a ﬁnite
union of products em
α ×en
β . Hence the products em
α ×en
β generate (X×Y)c .
The second assertion of the theorem is a special case of Proposition A.15, hav-
ing nothing to do with CW complexes, which says that a product X×Y is compactly
generated if X is compactly generated Hausdorff and Y is locally compact.

Topology of Cell Complexes
527
For the last statement of the theorem, suppose X and Y each have at most
countably many cells. Then there are ﬁnite subcomplexes X1 ⊂X2 ⊂··· of X with
X =
S
i Xi , and similarly for Y . For an open set W ⊂(X×Y)c and a point (a, b) ∈W
we need to ﬁnd a product U ×V ⊂W with U an open neighborhood of a in X and
V an open neighborhood of b in Y . Suppose inductively that we have a compact
product Ki×Li ⊂W which is a neighborhood of (a, b) in Xi×Yi . We know such a
product Ki×Li exists since the two topologies on Xi×Yi are the same. We would like
to ﬁnd a compact product neighborhood Ki+1×Li+1 ⊂W of Ki×Li in Xi+1×Yi+1 . To
do this, we ﬁrst choose for each x ∈Ki compact neighborhoods Kx of x in Xi+1 and
Lx of Li in Yi+1 such that Kx×Lx ⊂W , using the compactness of Li . By compact-
ness of Ki , a ﬁnite number of the Kx ’s cover Ki . Let Ki+1 be the union of these Kx ’s
and let Li+1 be the intersection of the corresponding Lx ’s. This deﬁnes the desired
Ki+1×Li+1 . Let Ui be the interior of Ki in Xi , hence Ui ⊂Ui+1 for each i. The union
U =
S
i Ui is then open in X since it intersects each Xi in a union of open sets and
the Xi ’s generate X . In the same way the Li ’s yield an open set V in Y , and then
U ×V ⊂W is a product neighborhood of (a, b) in X×Y .
⊔⊓
Euclidean Neighborhood Retracts
At certain places in this book it is desirable to know that a given compact space
is a retract of a ﬁnite simplicial complex, or equivalently (as we shall see) a retract of
a neighborhood in some Euclidean space. For example, this condition occurs in the
Lefschetz ﬁxed point theorem, and it was used in the proof of Alexander duality. So
let us study this situation in more detail.
Theorem A.7. A compact subspace K of Rn is a retract of some neighborhood iff K
is locally contractible in the weak sense that for each x ∈K and each neighborhood
U of x in K there exists a neighborhood V ⊂U of x such that the inclusion V > U
is nullhomotopic.
Note that if K is a retract of some neighborhood, then it is a retract of every
smaller neighborhood, just by restriction of the retraction. So it does not matter if we
require the neighborhoods to be open. Similarly it does not matter if the neighbor-
hoods U and V in the statement of the theorem are required to be open.
Proof: Let us do the harder half ﬁrst, constructing a retraction of a neighborhood of
K onto K under the local contractibility assumption. The ﬁrst step is to put a CW
structure on the open set X = Rn −K , with the size of the cells approaching zero near
K . Consider the subdivision of Rn into unit cubes of dimension n with vertices at the
points with integer coordinates. Call this collection of cubes C0 . For an integer k > 0,
we can subdivide the cubes of C0 by taking n dimensional cubes of edgelength 1/2k
with vertices having coordinates of the form i/2k for i ∈Z. Denote this collection of
cubes by Ck . Let A0 ⊂C0 be the cubes disjoint from K , and inductively, let Ak ⊂Ck

528
Appendix
be the cubes disjoint from K and not contained in cubes of Aj for j < k. The open
set X is then the union of all the cubes in the combined collection A =
S
k Ak . Note
that the collection A is locally ﬁnite: each point of X has a neighborhood meeting
only ﬁnitely many cubes in A, since the point has a positive distance from the closed
set K .
If two cubes of A intersect, their intersection is an i dimensional face of one
of them for some i < n. Likewise, when two faces of cubes of A intersect, their
intersection is a face of one of them. This implies that the open faces of cubes of
A which are minimal with respect to inclusion among such faces form the cells of a
CW structure on X , since the boundary of such a face is a union of such faces. The
vertices of this CW structure are thus the vertices of all the cubes of A, and the n cells
are the interiors of the cubes of A.
Next we deﬁne inductively a subcomplex Z of this CW structure on X and a map
r : Z→K . The 0 cells of Z are exactly the 0 cells of X , and we let r send each 0 cell
to the closest point of K , or if this is not unique, any one of the closest points of
K . Assume inductively that Zk and r : Zk→K have been deﬁned. For a cell ek+1 of
X with boundary in Zk , if the restriction of r to this boundary extends over ek+1
then we include ek+1 in Zk+1 and we let r on ek+1 be such an extension which is not
too large, say an extension for which the diameter of its image r(ek+1) is less than
twice the inﬁmum of the diameters for all possible extensions. This deﬁnes Zk+1 and
r : Zk+1→K . At the end of the induction we set Z = Zn .
It remains to verify that by letting r equal the identity on K we obtain a continu-
ous retraction Z ∪K→K , and that Z ∪K contains a neighborhood of K . Given a point
x ∈K , let U be a ball in the metric space K centered at x . Choose a sequence of
balls in K centered at x , U = Un ⊃Vn ⊃Un−1 ⊃Vn−1 ⊃··· ⊃U0 ⊃V0 , each having
radius equal to some small fraction of the radius of the preceding one, and with Vi
contractible in Ui . Let B ⊂Rn be a ball centered at x with radius less than half the
radius of V0 , and let Y be the subcomplex of X formed by the cells whose closures
are contained in B . Thus Y ∪K contains a neighborhood of x in Rn . By the choice
of B and the deﬁnition of r on 0 cells we have r(Y 0) ⊂V0 . Since V0 is contractible
in U0 , r is deﬁned on the 1-cells of Y . Also, r(Y 1) ⊂V1 by the deﬁnition of r on
1 cells and the fact that U0 is much smaller than V1 . Similarly, by induction we have
r deﬁned on Y i with r(Y i) ⊂Vi for all i. In particular, r maps Y to U . Since U
could be arbitrarily small, this shows that extending r by the identity map on K gives
a continuous map r : Z ∪K→K . And since Y ⊂Z , we see that Z ∪K contains a
neighborhood of K by the earlier observation that Y ∪K contains a neighborhood of
x . Thus r : Z ∪K→K retracts a neighborhood of K onto K .
Now for the converse. Since open sets in Rn are locally contractible, it sufﬁces to
show that a retract of a locally contractible space is locally contractible. Let r : X→A
be a retraction and let U ⊂A be a neighborhood of a given point x ∈A. If X is

Topology of Cell Complexes
529
locally contractible, then inside the open set r −1(U) there is a neighborhood V of x
which is contractible in r −1(U), say by a homotopy ft : V→r −1(U). Then V ∩A is
contractible in U via the restriction of the composition rft .
⊔⊓
A space X is called a Euclidean neighborhood retract or ENR if for some n there
exists an embedding i : X > Rn such that i(X) is a retract of some neighborhood in
Rn . The preceding theorem implies that the existence of the retraction is independent
of the choice of embedding, at least when X is compact.
Corollary A.8. A compact space is an ENR iff it can be embedded as a retract of a
ﬁnite simplicial complex. Hence the homology groups and the fundamental group of
a compact ENR are ﬁnitely generated.
Proof: A ﬁnite simplicial complex K with n vertices is a subcomplex of a simplex
∆n−1 , hence embeds in Rn . The proposition then implies that K is a retract of some
neighborhood in Rn , hence any retract of K is also a retract of such a neighborhood,
via the composition of the two retractions. Conversely, let K be a compact space
which is a retract of some open neighborhood U in Rn . Since K is compact it is
bounded, hence lies in some large simplex ∆n ⊂Rn . Subdivide ∆n , say by repeated
barycentric subdivision, so that all simplices of the subdivision have diameter less
than the distance from K to the complement of U . Then the union of all the simplices
in this subdivision which intersect K is a ﬁnite simplicial complex which retracts onto
K via the restriction of the retraction U→K .
⊔⊓
Corollary A.9. Every compact manifold, with or without boundary, is an ENR.
Proof: Manifolds are locally contractible, so it sufﬁces to show that a compact man-
ifold M can be embedded in Rk for some k. If M is not closed, it embeds in the
closed manifold obtained from two copies of M by identifying their boundaries. So
it sufﬁces to consider the case that M is closed. By compactness there exist ﬁnitely
many closed balls Bn
i ⊂M whose interiors cover M , where n is the dimension of M .
Let fi : M→Sn be the quotient map which collapse the complement of the interior
of Bn
i
to a point. These fi ’s are the components of a map f : M→(Sn)m which is
injective since if x and y are distinct points of M with x in the interior of Bn
i , say,
then fi(x) ≠fi(y). Composing f with an embedding (Sn)m > Rk , for example the
product of the standard embeddings Sn > Rn+1 , we obtain a continuous injection
M > Rk , and this is a homeomorphism onto its image since M is compact.
⊔⊓
Corollary A.10. Every ﬁnite CW complex is an ENR.
Proof: Since CW complexes are locally contractible, it sufﬁces to show that a ﬁnite CW
complex can be embedded in some Rn . This is proved by induction on the number
of cells. Suppose the CW complex X is obtained from a subcomplex A by attaching

530
Appendix
a cell ek via a map f : Sk−1→A, and suppose that we have an embedding A > Rm .
Then we can embed X in Rk×Rm×R as the union of Dk×{0}×{0}, {0}×A×{1},
and all line segments joining points (x, 0, 0) and (0, f (x), 1) for x ∈Sk−1 .
⊔⊓
Spaces Dominated by CW Complexes
We have been considering spaces which are retracts of ﬁnite simplicial complexes,
and now we show that such spaces have the homotopy type of CW complexes. In fact,
we can just as easily prove something a little more general than this. A space Y is
said to be dominated by a space X if there are maps Y
i-----→X
r-----→Y with ri ≃11. This
makes the notion of a retract into something which depends only on the homotopy
types of the spaces involved.
Proposition A.11. A space dominated by a CW complex is homotopy equivalent to a
CW complex.
Proof: Recall from §3.F that the mapping telescopeT(f1, f2, ···) of a sequence of
maps X1
f1
------------→X2
f2
------------→X3 ------------→··· is the quotient space of the disjoint union of
the products Xi×[i, i + 1], obtained by identifying (x, i + 1) ∈Xi×[i, i + 1] with
(f(x), i + 1) ∈Xi+1×[i + 1, i + 2]. We shall need the following elementary facts:
(1) T(f1, f2, ···) ≃T(g1, g2, ···) if fi ≃gi for each i.
(2) T(f1, f2, ···) ≃T(f2, f3, ···).
(3) T(f1, f2, ···) ≃T(f2f1, f4f3, ···).
The second of these is obvious. To prove the other two we will use Proposition 0.18,
whose proof applies not just to CW pairs but to any pair (X1, A) for which there
is a deformation retraction of X1×I onto X1×{0} ∪A×I . To prove (1) we regard
T(f1, f2, ···) as being obtained from
`
i
 Xi×{i}

by attaching
`
i
 Xi×[i, i + 1]

.
Then we can obtain T(g1, g2, ···) by varying the attaching map by homotopy. To
prove (3) we view T(f1, f2, ···) as obtained from the disjoint union of the mapping
cylinders M(f2i) by attaching
`
i
 X2i−1×[2i −1, 2i]

. By sliding the attachment of
X×[2i−1, 2i] to X2i ⊂M(f2i) down the latter mapping cylinder to X2i+1 we convert
M(f2i−1) ∪M(f2i) into M(f2if2i−1) ∪M(f2i). This last space deformation retracts
onto M(f2if2i−1). Doing this for all i gives the homotopy equivalence in (3).
Now to prove the proposition, suppose that the space Y is dominated by the CW
complex X via maps Y
i-----→X
r-----→Y with ri ≃11. By (2) and (3) we have T(ir, ir, ···) ≃
T(r, i, r, i, ···) ≃T(i, r, i, r, ···) ≃T(ri, ri, ···). Since ri ≃11, T(ri, ri, ···) is ho-
motopy equivalent to the telescope of the identity maps Y→Y→Y→···, which
is Y ×[0, ∞) ≃Y . On the other hand, the map ir is homotopic to a cellular map
f : X→X , so T(ir, ir, ···) ≃T(f , f , ···), which is a CW complex.
⊔⊓
One might ask whether a space dominated by a ﬁnite CW complex is homotopy
equivalent to a ﬁnite CW complex. In the simply-connected case this follows from

The Compact-Open Topology
531
Proposition 4C.1 since such a space has ﬁnitely generated homology groups.
But
there are counterexamples in the general case; see [Wall].
In view of Corollary A.10 the preceding proposition implies:
Corollary A.12. A compact manifold is homotopy equivalent to a CW complex.
⊔⊓
One could ask more reﬁned questions. For example, do all compact manifolds
have CW complex structures, or even simplicial complex structures? Answers here
are considerably harder to come by.
Restricting attention to closed manifolds for
simplicity, the present status of these questions is the following. For manifolds of
dimensions less than 4, simplicial complex structures always exist. In dimension 4
there are closed manifolds which do not have simplicial complex structures, while the
existence of CW structures is an open question. In dimensions greater than 4, CW
structures always exist, but whether simplicial structures always exist is unknown,
though it is known that there are n manifolds not having simplicial structures locally
isomorphic to any linear simplicial subdivision of Rn , for all n ≥4.
See [Kirby-
Siebenmann] and [Freedman-Quinn] for more information on these questions.
Exercises
1.
Show that a covering space of a CW complex is also a CW complex, with cells
projecting homeomorphically onto cells.
2. Let X be a CW complex and x0 any point of X . Construct a new CW complex
structure on X having x0 as a 0 cell, and having each of the original cells a union of
the new cells. The latter condition is expressed by saying the new CW structure is a
subdivision of the old one.
3. Show that a CW complex is path-connected iff its 1 skeleton is path-connected.
4. Show that a CW complex is locally compact iff each point has a neighborhood that
meets only ﬁnitely many cells.
5. For a space X , show that the identity map Xc→X induces an isomorphism on π1 ,
where Xc denotes X with the compactly generated topology.
The Compact-Open Topology
By deﬁnition, the compact-open topology on the space XY of maps f : Y→X has
a sub-basis consisting of the sets M(K, U) of mappings taking a compact set K ⊂Y
to an open set U ⊂X . Thus a basis for XY consists of sets of maps taking a ﬁnite
number of compact sets Ki ⊂Y to open sets Ui ⊂X . If Y is compact, which is the only
case we consider in this book, convergence to f ∈XY then means, loosely speaking,
that ﬁner and ﬁner compact covers {Ki} of Y are taken to smaller and smaller open
covers {Ui} of f(Y). One of the main cases of interest in homotopy theory is when

532
Appendix
Y = I , so XI is the space of paths in X . In this case one can check that a system of
basic neighborhoods of a path f : I→X consists of the open sets
T
i M(Ki, Ui) where
the Ki ’s are a partition of I into non-overlapping closed intervals and Ui is an open
neighborhood of f (Ki).
A reassuring fact not actually needed in this book is:
Proposition A.13. If X is a metric space and Y is compact, then the compact-open
topology on XY is the same as the metric topology deﬁned by the metric d(f , g) =
supy∈Y d(f (y), g(y)).
Proof: First we show that every open ε ball Bε(f ) about f ∈XY contains a neigh-
borhood of f in the compact-open topology. Since f(Y) is compact, it is covered by
ﬁnitely many balls Bε/3
 f (yi)

. Let Ki ⊂Y be the closure of f −1 Bε/3(f (yi))

, so Ki
is compact, Y =
S
i Ki , and f (Ki) ⊂Bε/2
 f (yi)

= Ui , hence f ∈
T
i M(Ki, Ui). To
show that
T
i M(Ki, Ui) ⊂Bε(f ), suppose g ∈
T
i M(Ki, Ui). For any y ∈Y , say y ∈
Ki , we have d
 g(y), f (yi)

< ε/2 since g(Ki) ⊂Ui . Likewise d
 f (y), f (yi)

< ε/2,
so d
 f (y), g(y)

≤d
 f (y), f (yi)

+d
 g(y), f(yi)

< ε. Since y was arbitrary, this
shows g ∈Bε(f ).
Conversely, we show that for each open set M(K, U) and each f ∈M(K, U) there
is a ball Bε(f ) ⊂M(K, U). Since f (K) is compact, it has a distance ε > 0 from the
complement of U . Then d(f , g) < ε/2 implies g(K) ⊂U since g(K) is contained in
an ε/2 neighborhood of f (K). So Bε/2(f ) ⊂M(K, U).
⊔⊓
The next proposition contains the essential properties of the compact-open topol-
ogy from the viewpoint of algebraic topology.
Proposition A.14. If Y is locally compact, then:
(a) The evaluation map e : XY ×Y→X , e(f, y) = f (y), is continuous.
(b) A map f : Y ×Z→X is continuous iff the associated map bf : Z→XY , bf (z)(y) =
f (y, z), is continuous.
In particular, part (b) provides the point-set topology justifying the adjoint re-
lation ⟨ΣX, Y⟩= ⟨X, ΩY⟩in §4.3, since it implies that a map ΣX→Y is continuous
iff the associated map X→ΩY is continuous, and similarly for homotopies of such
maps. Namely, think of a basepoint-preserving map ΣX→Y as a map f : I×X→Y
taking ∂I×X ∪{x0}×I to the basepoint of Y , so the associated map bf : X→Y I has
image in the subspace ΩY ⊂Y I . A homotopy ft : ΣX→Y gives a map F : I×X×I→Y
taking ∂I×X×I∪I×{x0}×I to the basepoint, with bF a map X×I→ΩY ⊂Y I deﬁning
a basepoint-preserving homotopy bft .
Proof: (a) For (f , y) ∈XY ×Y let U ⊂X be an open neighborhood of f (y). Since Y
is locally compact, continuity of f implies there is a compact neighborhood K ⊂Y

The Compact-Open Topology
533
of y such that f (K) ⊂U . Then M(K, U)×K is a neighborhood of (f , y) in XY ×Y
taken to U by e, so e is continuous at (f , y).
(b) Suppose f : Y ×Z→X is continuous. To show continuity of bf it sufﬁces to show
that for a sub-basic set M(K, U) ⊂XY , the set bf −1 M(K, U)

= { z ∈Z | f (K, z) ⊂U }
is open in Z . Let z ∈bf −1 M(K, U)

. Since f −1(U) is an open neighborhood of the
compact set K×{z}, there are open sets V ⊂Y and W ⊂Z with K×{z} ⊂V ×W ⊂
f −1(U), and so W is a neighborhood of z in bf −1 M(K, U)

. (The hypothesis that Y
is locally compact is not needed here.)
For the converse half of (b) note that f is the composition Y ×Z→Y ×XY→X of
11× bf and the evaluation map, so part (a) gives the result.
⊔⊓
Proposition A.15. If X is a compactly generated Hausdorff space and Y is locally
compact, then the product topology on X×Y is compactly generated.
Proof: First a preliminary observation: A function f : X×Y→Z is continuous iff its
restrictions f : C×Y→Z are continuous for all compact C ⊂X . For, using (b) of the
previous proposition, the ﬁrst statement is equivalent to bf : X→ZY being continuous
and the second statement is equivalent to bf : C→ZY being continuous for all compact
C ⊂X . Since X is compactly generated, the latter two statements are equivalent.
To prove the proposition we just need to show the identity map X×Y→(X×Y)c
is continuous. By the previous paragraph, this is equivalent to continuity of the in-
clusion maps C×Y→(X×Y)c for all compact C ⊂X . Since Y is locally compact, it
is compactly generated, and C is compact Hausdorff hence locally compact, so the
same reasoning shows that continuity of C×Y→(X×Y)c is equivalent to continuity
of C×C′→(X×Y)c for all compact C′ ⊂Y . But on the compact set C×C′ , the two
topologies on X×Y agree, so we are done. (This proof is from [Dugundji].)
⊔⊓
Proposition A.16. The map XY ×Z→(XY )Z , f , bf , is a homeomorphism if Y is
locally compact Hausdorff and Z is Hausdorff.
Proof: First we show that a subbasis for XY ×Z is formed by the sets M(A×B, U) as
A and B range over compact sets in Y and Z respectively and U ranges over open
sets in X .
Given a compact K ⊂Y ×Z and f ∈M(K, U), let KY and KZ be the
projections of K onto Y and Z . Then KY ×KZ is compact Hausdorff, hence normal,
so for each point k ∈K there are compact sets Ak ⊂Y and Bk ⊂Z such that
Ak×Bk is a compact neighborhood of k in f −1(U) ∩(KY ×KZ). By compactness of
K a ﬁnite number of the products Ak×Bk cover K . Discarding the others, we then
have f ∈
T
k M(Ak×Bk, U) ⊂M(K, U), which shows that the sets M(A×B, U) form a
subbasis.
Under the bijection XY ×Z→(XY )Z these sets M(A×B, U) correspond to the sets
M(B, M(A, U)), so it will sufﬁce to show the latter sets form a subbasis for (XY )Z . We
show more generally that XY has as a subbasis the sets M(K, V) as V ranges over a
subbasis for X and K ranges over compact sets in Y , assuming that Y is Hausdorff.

534
Appendix
Given f ∈M(K, U), write U as a union of basic sets Uα with each Uα an in-
tersection of ﬁnitely many sets Vα,j of the given subbasis. The cover of K by the
open sets f −1(Uα) has a ﬁnite subcover, say by the open sets f −1(Ui). Since K is
compact Hausdorff, hence normal, we can write K as a union of compact subsets Ki
with Ki ⊂f −1(Ui). Then f lies in M(Ki, Ui) = M(Ki,
T
j Vij) =
T
j M(Ki, Vij) for each
i. Hence f lies in
T
i,j M(Ki, Vij) =
T
i M(Ki, Ui) ⊂M(K, U). Since
T
i,j M(Ki, Vij) is a
ﬁnite intersection, this shows that the sets M(K, V) form a subbasis for (XY )Z .
⊔⊓

The Compact-Open Topology
535
Books
J. F. Adams, Stable Homotopy and Generalised Homology, Univ. of Chicago Press, 1974.
J. F. Adams, Inﬁnite Loop Spaces, Ann. of Math. Studies 90, 1978.
A. Adem and R. J. Milgram, Cohomology of Finite Groups, Springer-Verlag, 1994.
M. Aigner and G. Ziegler, Proofs from THE BOOK, Springer-Verlag, 1999.
P. Alexandroff and H. Hopf, Topologie, Chelsea, 1972 (reprint of original 1935 edition).
M. A. Armstrong, Basic Topology, Springer-Verlag, 1983.
M. F. Atiyah, K-Theory, W.A.Benjamin, 1967.
H. J. Baues, Homotopy Type and Homology, Oxford Univ. Press, 1996.
D. J. Benson, Polynomial Invariants of Finite Groups, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1993.
D. J. Benson, Representations and Cohomology, Volume II: Cohomology of Groups and
Modules, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1992.
R. Bott and L. Tu, Differential Forms in Algebraic Topology, Springer-Verlag GTM 82,
1982.
G. Bredon, Topology and Geometry, Springer-Verlag GTM 139, 1993.
K. Brown, Cohomology of Groups, Springer-Verlag GTM 87, 1982.
R. Brown, The Lefschetz Fixed Point Theorem, Scott Foresman, 1971.
M. Cohen, A Course in Simple-Homotopy Theory, Springer-Verlag GTM 10, 1973.
J. Dieudonn´e, A History of Algebraic and Differential Topology 1900-1960, Birkh¨auser,
1989.
A. Dold, Lectures on Algebraic Topology, Springer-Verlag, 1980.
J. Dugundji, Topology, Allyn & Bacon, 1966.
H.-D. Ebbinghaus et. al., Numbers, Springer-Verlag GTM 123, 1991.
S. Eilenberg and N. Steenrod, Foundations of Algebraic Topology, Princeton Univ. Press,
1952.
R. Fenn, Techniques of Geometric Topology, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1983.
A. T. Fomenko and D. B. Fuks, A Course in Homotopic Topology, Izd. “Nauka,” 1989. (In
Russian; an English translation of an earlier version was published by Akad´emiai
Kiad´o, Budapest, 1986.)
M. Freedman and F. Quinn, Topology of 4-Manifolds, Princeton Univ. Press, 1990.
W. Fulton, Algebraic Topology: A First Course, Springer-Verlag, 1995.
B. Gray, Homotopy Theory, Academic Press, 1975.
M. Greenberg and J. Harper, Algebraic Topology: A First Course, Addison-Wesley, 1981.
P. Grifﬁths and J. Morgan, Rational Homotopy Theory and Differential Forms,
Birkh¨auser, 1981.
P. J. Hilton, An Introduction to Homotopy Theory, Cambridge University Press, 1953.

536
Bibliography
P. J. Hilton, Homotopy Theory and Duality, Gordon and Breach, 1966.
P. J. Hilton and S. Wylie, Homology Theory, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1967.
P. J. Hilton and U. Stammbach, A Course in Homological Algebra, Springer-Verlag, 1970.
P. J. Hilton, G. Mislin, and J. Roitberg, Localization of Nilpotent Groups and Spaces,
North-Holland, 1975.
C. Hog-Angeloni, W. Metzler, A. Sieradski eds., Two-dimensional Homotopy and Com-
binatorial Group Theory, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1993.
D. Husemoller, Fibre Bundles, McGraw-Hill, 1966 (later editions by Springer-Verlag).
I. M. James, ed., Handbook of Algebraic Topology, North-Holland, 1995.
K. J¨anich, Topology, Springer-Verlag, 1984.
R. M. Kane, The Homology of Hopf Spaces, North-Holland, 1988.
J. Kelley, General Topology, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1955 (reprinted by Springer-
Verlag).
R. Kirby and L. Siebenmann, Foundational Essays on Topological Manifolds, Smoothings,
and Triangulations, Ann. of Math. Studies 88, 1977.
S. Kochman, Bordism, Stable Homotopy and Adams Spectral Sequences, Fields Institute
Monographs 7, A. M. S., 1996.
S. Kochman, Stable Homotopy Groups of Spheres, Springer Lecture Notes 1423, 1990.
D. K¨onig, Theory of Finite and Inﬁnite Graphs, Birkh¨auser, 1990.
A. Lundell and S. Weingram, The Topology of CW Complexes, Van Nostrand Reinhold,
1969.
S. MacLane, Homology, Springer-Verlag, 1963.
S. MacLane, Categories for the Working Mathematician, Springer-Verlag GTM 5, 1971.
I. Madsen and R. Milgram, The Classifying Spaces for Surgery and Cobordism of Mani-
folds, Ann. of Math. Studies 92, 1979.
W. Massey, Algebraic Topology: An Introduction, Harcourt, Brace & World, 1967
(reprinted by Springer-Verlag).
W. Massey, A Basic Course in Algebraic Topology, Springer-Verlag, 1993.
C. R. F. Maunder, Algebraic Topology, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1980 (reprinted by Dover
Publications).
J. P. May, Simplicial Objects in Algebraic Topology, Van Nostrand, 1967 (reprinted by
Univ. Chicago Press).
J. P. May, A Concise Course in Algebraic Topology, Univ. Chicago Press, 1999.
J. Milnor, Topology from the Differentiable Viewpoint, Univ. Press of Virginia, 1965.
J. Milnor and J. Stasheff, Characteristic Classes, Ann. of Math. Studies 76, 1974.
R. Mosher and M. Tangora, Cohomology Operations and Applications in Homotopy The-
ory, Harper and Row, 1968.
D. Ravenel, Complex Cobordism and Stable Homotopy Groups of Spheres, Academic
Press, 1986.

Bibliography
537
D. Ravenel, Nilpotence and Periodicity in Stable Homotopy Theory, Ann. of Math. Stud-
ies 128, 1992.
E. Rees and J.D.S. Jones, eds., Homotopy Theory: Proceeding of the Durham Symposium
1985, London Math. Soc. Lect. Note Ser. 117, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1987.
D. Rolfsen, Knots and Links, Publish or Perish, 1976.
P. Selick, Introduction to Homotopy Theory, Fields Institute Monographs 9, A. M. S.,
1997.
J-P. Serre, A Course in Arithmetic, Springer-Verlag, 1973.
E. Spanier, Algebraic Topology, McGraw-Hill, 1966 (reprinted by Springer-Verlag).
N. Steenrod, The Topology of Fibre Bundles, Princeton Univ. Press, 1951.
N. Steenrod and D. Epstein, Cohomology Operations, Ann. of Math. Studies 50, 1962.
R. Stong, Notes on Cobordism Theory, Princeton Univ. Press, 1968.
D. Sullivan, Geometric Topology, xeroxed notes from MIT, 1970.
R. Switzer, Algebraic Topology, Springer-Verlag, 1975.
H. Toda, Composition Methods in Homotopy Groups of Spheres, Ann. of Math. Studies
49, 1962.
K. Varadarajan, The Finiteness Obstruction of C.T.C.Wall, Wiley, 1989.
G. Whitehead, Elements of Homotopy Theory, Springer-Verlag GTM 62, 1978.
J. Wolf, Spaces of Constant Curvature, Publish or Perish, 1984.
Papers
J. F. Adams, On the non-existence of elements of Hopf invariant one, Ann. of Math. 72
(1960), 20-104.
J. F. Adams, Vector ﬁelds on spheres, Ann. of Math. 75 (1962), 603-632.
J. F. Adams, On the groups J(X) IV, Topology 5 (1966), 21-71.
J. F. Adams and M. F. Atiyah, K theory and the Hopf invariant, Quart. J. Math. 17 (1966),
31-38.
J. F. Adams, A variant of E. H. Brown’s representability theorem, Topology 10 (1971),
185-198.
J. F. Adams and C. Wilkerson, Finite H spaces and algebras over the Steenrod algebra,
Ann. of Math. 111 (1980), 95-143.
M. Barratt and J. Milnor, An example of anomalous singular homology, Proc. A.M.S. 13
(1962), 293-297.
M. Bestvina and N. Brady, Morse theory and ﬁniteness properties of groups, Invent.
Math. 129 (1997), 445-470.
A. Borel, Sur la cohomologie des espaces ﬁbr´es principaux, Ann. of Math. 57 (1953),
115-207.
R. Bott and J. Milnor, On the parallelizability of spheres, Bull. A.M.S. 64 (1958), 87-89.

538
Bibliography
E. Brown and A. Copeland, An homology analog of Postnikov systems, Michigan Math.
J. 6 (1959), 313-330.
M. Brown, A proof of the generalized Schoenﬂies theorem, Bull. A.M.S. 66 (1960), 74-76.
J. Cannon and G. Conner, The combinatorial structure of the Hawaiian earring group,
Top. and its Appl. 106 (2000), 225-271.
G. Carlsson and R. J. Milgram, Stable homotopy and iterated loopspaces, pp. 505-583
in Handbook of Algebraic Topology, ed. I.M. James, Elsevier 1995.
J. Davis and R. J. Milgram, A survey of the spherical space form problem, Math. Reports
2 (1985), 223-283, Harwood Acad. Pub.
A. Dold and R. Thom, Quasifaserungen und unendliche symmetrischen Produkte, Ann.
of Math. 67 (1958), 239-281.
C. Dowker, Topology of metric complexes, Am. J. Math. 74 (1952), 555-577.
W. Dwyer, H. Miller, and C. Wilkerson, Homotopical uniqueness of classifying spaces,
Topology 31 (1992), 29-45.
W. Dwyer and C. Wilkerson, A new ﬁnite loop space at the prime two, J. Am. Math. Soc.
(6) 1993, 37-63.
E. Dyer and A. Vasquez, Some small aspherical spaces, J. Austral. Math. Soc. 16 (1973),
332-352.
R. Edwards, A contractible, nowhere locally connected compactum, Abstracts A.M.S.
20 (1999), 494.
S. Feder and S. Gitler, Mappings of quaternionic projective spaces, Bol. Soc. Mat. Mexi-
cana 18 (1978), 33-37.
J. Harris and N. Kuhn, Stable decompositions of classifying spaces of ﬁnite abelian
p-groups, Math. Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 103 (1988), 427-449.
P. Hoffman and G. Porter, Cohomology realizations of Q[x], Ox. Q. 24 (1973), 251-255.
R. Holzsager, Stable splitting of K(G,1), Proc. A.M.S. 31 (1972), 305-306.
I. M. James, Reduced product spaces, Ann. of Math. 62 (1955), 170-197.
S. Kochman and M. Mahowald, On the computation of stable stems, Contemp. Math.
181 (1995), 299-316.
I. Madsen, C. B. Thomas, and C. T. C. Wall, The topological spherical space form prob-
lem, II: existence of free actions, Topology 15 (1976), 375-382.
J. P. May, A general approach to Steenrod operations, Springer Lecture Notes 168
(1970), 153-231.
J. P. May, Weak equivalences and quasiﬁbrations, Springer Lecture Notes 1425 (1990),
91-101.
J. Milnor, Construction of universal bundles I, II, Ann. of Math. 63 (1956), 272-284,
430-436.
J. Milnor, Groups which act on Sn without ﬁxed points, Am. J. Math 79 (1957), 623-630.
J. Milnor, On spaces having the homotopy type of a CW complex, Trans. A.M.S. 90
(1959), 272-280.

Bibliography
539
J. Milnor, On axiomatic homology theory, Pac. J. Math. 12 (1962), 337-341.
J. Milnor and J. Moore, On the structure of Hopf algebras, Ann. of Math. 81 (1965),
211-264.
J. Milnor, On the Steenrod homology theory, pp. 79-96 in Novikov Conjectures, Index
Theorems, and Rigidity, vol. 1, ed. S. Ferry, A. Ranicki, and J. Rosenberg, Cam-
bridge Univ. Press, 1995.
J. Neisendorfer, Primary homotopy theory, Mem. A.M.S. 232 (1980).
D. Notbohm, Spaces with polynomial mod-p cohomology, Math. Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc.,
(1999), 277-292.
D. Quillen, Rational homotopy theory, Ann. of Math. 90 (1969), 205-295.
D. Rector, Loop structures on the homotopy type of S3 , Springer Lecture Notes 249
(1971), 99-105.
P. Scott and T. Wall, Topological methods in group theory, London Math. Soc. Lecture
Notes 36 (1979), 137-203.
S. Shelah, Can the fundamental group of a space be the rationals?, Proc. A.M.S.. 103
(1988), 627-632.
J. Stallings, A ﬁnitely presented group whose 3-dimensional integral homology is not
ﬁnitely generated, Am. J. Math. 85 (1963), 541-543.
D. Sullivan, Genetics of homotopy theory and the Adams conjecture, Ann. of Math.
100 (1974), 1-79.
H. Toda, Note on the cohomology ring of certain spaces, Proc. A.M.S. 14 (1963), 89-95.
C. T. C. Wall, Finiteness conditions for CW complexes, Ann. of Math. 81 (1965), 56-69.
G. Whitehead, Generalized homology theories, Trans. A.M.S. 102 (1962), 227-283.

540
Index
abelian space 342, 417
action of π1 on πn 342, 345, 421
action of π1 on the ﬁber of a covering space
68
action of a group 70, 457
acyclic space 142
Adams 427
adjoint 394, 462
admissible monomial 501
Ad´em relations 498, 503
Alexander 131, 175
Alexander duality 252
Alexander horned sphere 169
aspherical space 343
attaching cells 6
attaching spaces 13, 457
augmented chain complex 110
Barratt-Kahn-Priddy theorem 374
barycenter 120
barycentric coordinates 103
barycentric subdivision 120
base space 376
basepoint 26, 27
basepoint-preserving homotopy 36, 356, 421
Betti number 130
binomial coefﬁcient 285, 492
Bockstein homomorphism 301, 490
Borel construction 322, 458
Borel theorem 283
Borsuk-Ulam theorem 32, 38, 174
Bott periodicity 383, 396
boundary 106, 250
boundary homomorphism 105, 108, 116
Brouwer 32, 114, 126, 134, 171, 175
Brown representability 448
BSO(n) 440
BSU(n) 440
bundle of groups 329
Burnside problem 78
cap product 237
Cartan formula 490, 491
category 162
Cayley graph, complex 75
ˇCech cohomology 254
ˇCech homology 255
cell 5
cell complex 6
cellular approximation theorem 348
cellular chain complex 139
cellular cohomology 201
cellular homology 139, 153
cellular map 348
chain 104, 108
chain complex 106
chain homotopy 113
chain map 111
change of basepoint 27, 342
characteristic map 7, 521
circle 28
classifying space 165
closed manifold 228
closure-ﬁnite 523
coboundary 196
coboundary map 189, 195
cochain 189, 195
cocycle 196
coefﬁcients 153, 161, 196, 463
coﬁber 462
coﬁbration 461
coﬁbration sequence 398, 463
Cohen-Macauley ring 226
cohomology group 189, 196
cohomology operation 489
cohomology ring 209
cohomology theory 200, 313, 448, 455

Index
541
cohomology with compact supports 240
cohomotopy groups 455
colimit 460, 463
collar 250
commutative diagram 111
commutative graded ring 212
commutativity of cup product 212
compact supports 240, 334
compact-open topology 531
compactly generated topology 525, 533
complex of spaces 458, 463, 467
cone 9
connected graded algebra 282
connected sum 255
contractible 4, 157
contravariant 163, 199
coproduct 282, 462
covariant 163
covering homotopy property 59
covering space 55, 320, 342, 376
covering space action 71
covering transformation 69
cross product 215, 221, 266, 276, 277
cup product 247
CW approximation 351
CW complex 6, 521
CW pair 8
cycle 106
deck transformation 69
decomposable operation 499
deformation retraction 2, 35, 346, 525
deformation retraction, weak 18
degree 134, 255
Delta-complex 103
diagonal 282
diagram of spaces 456, 463
dihedral group 74
direct limit 241, 309, 456, 457, 463
directed set 241
divided polynomial algebra 222, 284, 289
division algebra 171, 219, 427
dodecahedral group 142
Dold-Thom theorem 484
dominated 530
dual Hopf algebra 288
Eckmann-Hilton duality 461
edge 81
edgepath 84
EHP sequence 475
Eilenberg 131
Eilenberg-MacLane space 86, 364, 393, 409,
454, 477
ENR, Euclidean neighborhood retract 529
Euler characteristic 6, 85, 146
Euler class 438, 444
exact sequence 114
excess 502
excision 119, 199, 359
excisive triad 477
Ext 193, 314, 316
extension problem 415
exterior algebra 217, 282
external cup product 215
face 103
ﬁber 374
ﬁber bundle 376, 432
ﬁber homotopy equivalence 407
ﬁber-preserving map 407
ﬁbration 375
ﬁbration sequence 408, 463
ﬁnitely generated homotopy 363, 392, 423
ﬁnitely generated homology 423, 529
ﬁve-lemma 129
ﬁxed point 31, 71, 115, 177, 226, 495
ﬂag 436, 447
frame 299, 391
free action 72
free algebra 224

542
Index
free group 40, 76, 84
free product 40
free product with amalgamation 91
free resolution 191, 261
Freudenthal suspension theorem 359
function space 531
functor 163
fundamental class 233, 393
fundamental group 26
fundamental theorem of algebra 31
Galois correspondence 62
general linear group GLn 291
good pair 114
Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization 291, 382
graph 6, 11, 81
graph of groups 90
graph product of groups 90
Grassmann manifold
224, 381, 435, 439,
445
groups acting on spheres 73, 135, 391
Gysin sequence 438, 444
H space 279, 419, 420, 422, 427
HNN extension 91
hocolim 460, 463
holim 463
homologous cycles 106
homology 106
homology decomposition 466
homology of groups 148, 423
homology theory 160, 313, 455
homotopy 3, 25
homotopy equivalence 3, 11, 36, 346
homotopy extension property 14
homotopy ﬁber 406, 462, 480
homotopy group 340
homotopy group with coefﬁcients 463
homotopy lifting property 59, 375, 379
homotopy of attaching maps 13, 16
homotopy type 3
Hopf 134, 171, 219, 279, 283
Hopf algebra 282
Hopf bundle 360, 374, 377, 378, 391
Hopf invariant 427, 447, 491, 492
Hopf map
378, 379, 384, 427, 430, 475,
476, 500
Hurewicz homomorphism 368, 488
Hurewicz theorem 370, 371, 390
induced ﬁbration 408
induced homomorphism 34, 110, 111, 118,
199, 214
inﬁnite loopspace 396
invariance of dimension 126
invariance of domain 170
inverse limit 310, 409, 463
inverse path 27
isomorphism of actions 69
isomorphism of covering spaces 66
iterated mapping cylinder 458, 467
J(X), James reduced product
221, 281,
286, 288, 469, 471
J homomorphism 386
join 9, 457
Jordan curve theorem 168
K(G, 1) space 86
Klein bottle 51, 73, 91, 102
k invariant 411, 477
K¨unneth formula 216, 266, 272, 274, 356,
432
Lefschetz 131, 177, 226
Lefschetz duality 251
Lefschetz number 177
lens space 73, 87, 144, 248, 281, 302, 308,
391
Leray-Hirsch theorem 432
Lie group 280
lift 29, 59

Index
543
lifting criterion 60
lifting problem 415
limit 460, 463
lim-one 311, 410
linking 45
local coefﬁcients: cohomology 328, 333
local coefﬁcients: homology 326
local degree 136
local homology 126, 253
local orientation 231
local trivialization 376
locally contractible 525, 527
locally ﬁnite homology 336
locally path-connected 61
long exact sequence: cohomology 198
long exact sequence: ﬁbration 375
long exact sequence: homology 114, 116,
117, 119
long exact sequence: homotopy 343
loop 26
loopspace 394, 406, 471
manifold 226, 529, 531
manifold with boundary 250
mapping cone 13, 180
mapping cylinder 2, 180, 347, 457, 462
mapping telescope 138, 310, 458, 530
mapping torus 53, 151, 458
maximal tree 82
Mayer-Vietoris axiom 449
Mayer-Vietoris sequence 149, 159, 161, 201
Milnor 406, 407
minimal chain complex 303
Mittag-Lefﬂer condition 315
monoid 163
Moore space 143, 275, 310, 319, 390, 463,
466, 477
Moore-Postnikov tower 413
morphism 162
natural transformation 165
naturality 127
n connected cover 414
n connected space, pair 346
nerve 254, 458
nonsingular pairing 247
normal covering space 69
nullhomotopic 4
object 162
obstruction 416
obstruction theory 415
octonion 171, 280, 292, 378, 500
Ωspectrum 396
open cover 459
orbit, orbit space 71, 457
orientable manifold 231
orientable sphere bundle 442
orientation 105, 231, 233
orientation class 234
orthogonal group O(n) 291, 306, 435
p adic integers 312
path 25
path lifting property 59
pathspace 405
permutation 67
plus construction 374, 420
Poincar´e 131
Poincar´e conjecture 390
Poincar´e duality 238, 243, 251, 335
Poincar´e series 227, 437
Pontryagin product 286, 296
Postnikov tower 355, 409
primary obstruction 418
primitive element 282, 296
principal ﬁbration 411, 420
prism 112
product of ∆complexes 277
product of CW complexes 8, 526
product of paths 26

544
Index
product of simplices 276
product space 33, 266, 343, 533
projective plane 51, 102, 106, 209, 378
projective space: complex 7, 140, 209, 223,
227, 248, 280, 321, 379, 439, 493
projective space: quaternion 211, 223, 227,
248, 321, 377, 379, 439, 493, 494
projective space: real 6, 73, 86, 144, 154,
177, 209, 227, 248, 321, 439, 493
properly discontinuous 71
pullback 408, 434, 462
Puppe sequence 398
pushout 462, 467
quasi-circle 78
quasiﬁbration 480
quaternion 74, 171, 280, 292, 448
Quillen 374
quotient CW complex 9
rank 146
reduced cohomology 197
reduced homology 110
reduced suspension 12, 394
rel 3, 16
relative cohomology 197
relative cycle, boundary 115
relative homology 115
relative homotopy group 343
reparametrization 27
retraction 3, 35, 115, 148, 527
Schoenﬂies theorem 169
semilocally simply-connected 62
sheet 60
short exact sequence 114, 116
shrinking wedge 49
shufﬂe 276
simplex 10, 102
simplicial approximation theorem 175
simplicial cohomology 200
simplicial complex 107
simplicial homology 106, 128
simplicial map 175
simply-connected 28
simply-connected 4-manifold 430
singular complex 108
singular homology 108
singular simplex 108
skeleton 6, 521
slant product 279
smash product 10, 221, 269
spectrum 454
sphere bundle 442, 445
Spin(n) 290
split exact sequence 147
stable homotopy group 383, 453
stable splitting 493
stable stem 384
star 175
Steenrod algebra 499
Steenrod homology 255
Steenrod squares, powers 489
Stiefel manifold 299, 381, 436, 447, 496
subcomplex 8, 522
subgraph 82
surface 50, 86, 92, 102, 141, 205, 238, 390
suspension 9, 137, 221, 468, 474
suspension spectrum 454
symmetric polynomials 436
symmetric product 281, 365, 482
symplectic group Sp(n) 224, 381, 434
tensor algebra 287, 472
tensor product 215, 327
tensor product of chain complexes 272
Thom class 441, 512
Thom isomorphism 442
Thom space 442, 512
Toda bracket 387
topological group 280

Index
545
torsion coefﬁcient 130
Tor 261, 265
torus 33, 73, 102, 106, 225
torus knot 46
total space 376
transfer homomorphism 172, 320
transitive action 69
tree 82
triple 119, 344
truncated polynomial algebra 283
unique lifting property 61
unitary group U(n) 224, 381, 434
universal coefﬁcient theorem 193, 262, 464
universal cover 58, 67
van Kampen 41
vector ﬁeld 135, 496
vertex 81, 102
weak homotopy equivalence 351
weak topology 6, 81, 523
wedge sum 10, 42, 126, 160, 200, 379, 468
Whitehead product 380, 430
Whitehead tower 354
Whitehead’s theorem 346, 367, 417

