

INTERNET THEORY, TECHNOLOGY AND APPLICATIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AMERICA'S EMBRACE  
OF THE MOBILE INTERNET 
 
ANALYSES AND ISSUES 
 
 
No part of this digital document may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or
by any means. The publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this digital document, but makes no
expressed or implied warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No
liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of information
contained herein. This digital document is sold with the clear understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
rendering legal, medical or any other professional services. 

INTERNET THEORY, TECHNOLOGY  
AND APPLICATIONS 
 
 
Additional books in this series can be found on Nova‘s website  
under the Series tab. 
 
 
Additional e-books in this series can be found on Nova‘s website  
under the e-book tab. 
 

INTERNET THEORY, TECHNOLOGY AND APPLICATIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AMERICA'S EMBRACE  
OF THE MOBILE INTERNET 
 
ANALYSES AND ISSUES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JENNIFER HAGGARD 
EDITOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New York 
 

Copyright © 2015 by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or 
transmitted in any form or by any means: electronic, electrostatic, magnetic, tape, 
mechanical photocopying, recording or otherwise without the written permission of the 
Publisher. 
 
For permission to use material from this book please contact us: 
Telephone 631-231-7269; Fax 631-231-8175 
Web Site: http://www.novapublishers.com 
 
NOTICE TO THE READER 
The Publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this book, but makes no 
expressed or implied warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or 
omissions. No liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection 
with or arising out of information contained in this book. The Publisher shall not be liable 
for any special, consequential, or exemplary damages resulting, in whole or in part, from 
the readers‘ use of, or reliance upon, this material. Any parts of this book based on 
government reports are so indicated and copyright is claimed for those parts to the extent 
applicable to compilations of such works. 
 
Independent verification should be sought for any data, advice or recommendations 
contained in this book. In addition, no responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any 
injury and/or damage to persons or property arising from any methods, products, 
instructions, ideas or otherwise contained in this publication. 
 
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information with regard 
to the subject matter covered herein. It is sold with the clear understanding that the 
Publisher is not engaged in rendering legal or any other professional services. If legal or any 
other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent person should be sought. 
FROM A DECLARATION OF PARTICIPANTS JOINTLY ADOPTED BY A 
COMMITTEE OF THE AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION AND A COMMITTEE OF 
PUBLISHERS. 
 
Additional color graphics may be available in the e-book version of this book. 
 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 
 
 
Published by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. † New York 
 
ISBN: 978-1-63463-606-3 (eBook)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
Preface 
 
vii 
Chapter 1 
Exploring the Digital Nation:  
Embracing the Mobile Internet 
1 
U.S. Department of Commerce,   
National Telecommunications  
and Information Administration 
Chapter 2 
The Impact of Culture on the Adoption,  
Design and Usage  of Mobile Devices 
61 
Susan G. Hill 
Chapter 3 
Text and Multimedia Messaging:  
Issues for Congress 
103 
Patricia Moloney Figliola  
and Gina Stevens 
Index 
 
127 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
 
The rise of sophisticated mobile devices and high-speed wireless networks 
is transforming the Internet and how our society interacts with it. Americans 
are rapidly embracing mobile technologies and the opportunities they create. 
This book examines data from the 2012 Current Population Survey (CPS) 
describing Americans‘ use of computers and the Internet. Data from this 
survey depict the accelerating popularity of mobile phone-based Internet use 
across demographic groups. The book also reveals the explosion in mobile 
Internet use accompanied by narrowing but persistent disparities in computer 
ownership and Internet use overall. This book's insights will allow 
policymakers, in cooperation with private partners, to make decisions that will 
improve America‘s productivity, ingenuity, world competitiveness, and 
standard of living. 
Chapter 1 – Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
builds on the last Digital Nation study (NTIA & ESA, 2013) and examines 
data from the 2012 Current Population Survey (CPS) describing Americans‘ 
use of computers and the Internet. Data from this survey depict the 
accelerating popularity of mobile phone-based Internet use across American 
demographic groups. The Census Bureau collected data from over 53,000 
households in the October 2012 CPS Computer and Internet Use Supplement, 
forming a representative sample of the 122 million households across the 
United States. NTIA‘s analysis of this dataset, summarized below, reveals a 
mobile Internet explosion, accompanied by narrowing but persistent disparities 
in computer ownership and Internet use overall. 
As in all installments of Digital Nation, this report includes NTIA‘s 
analysis of the demographic characteristics of home Internet users and the 
technologies they use to go online, as well as the alternative locations where 

Jennifer Haggard 
viii 
they use the Internet. The report also presents data on the primary reasons why 
some Americans do not access the Internet from their homes. These data can 
inform further research and policy that strives to eliminate disparities by 
increasing the availability of affordable broadband in the United States and 
promoting broadband adoption by all Americans. 
Chapter 2 – The use of mobile devices for communications and 
information exchange has been shown to be very desirable, with more than 5.3 
billion mobile subscribers estimated (mobiThinking, 2011) and more than 
half-billion mobile phones sold each year (Blom, Chipchase, and Lehikoinen, 
2005). Most often, when the term ―mobile devices‖ is used, the authors really 
mean ―mobile phones.‖ For example, Blom et al. (2005) describes ―personal, 
mobile synchronous and asynchronous communication for all types of users...‖ 
(p. 37) and then cites that more than one half a billion mobile phones are sold 
each year. However, mobile devices are not limited to phones; in addition to 
cellular phones, there are also personal digital assistants (e.g., Blackberry) as 
well as the more recent advent of wireless tablet computers (e.g., iPad). With 
these ―smart‖ mobile devices, users can communicate by voice and text as 
well as have Internet access as a means of communications and information 
exchange. Mobile device use has grown tremendously; for example, in 2002, 
mobile (cellular) phones exceeded the number of landlines (Donner, 2008). All 
types of mobile devices have increased as well; for example, it is estimated 
that 25 million iPads have been sold to date (Rosoff, 2011). 
The purpose of this report is to explore some of the research literature that 
discusses mobile technology, specifically mobile phones and mobile access to 
the Internet, and the impact that culture has on its adoption, use and design. 
One of the results of this review will be to identify factors that are important 
when considering mobile technology and culture, specifically, and factors that 
may be important in examining the impact of culture on decision making and 
communication, more generally. To accomplish this goal, the report first looks 
at culture, its definition, models of culture and dimensions used to describe 
specific cultures. The next section then examines mobile technology and 
culture, focusing on (1) models of adoption of technology, specifically mobile 
technology; (2) examples of uses of mobile technology and the influence of 
culture, and (3) design of mobile user interfaces and experience considering 
cultural influences. Finally, the authors discuss the information identified and 
its relevance to their goals of building a cognitive framework for social-
cultural modeling, as well as other observations concerning technology and 
culture, especially military applications. 

Preface 
ix 
Chapter 3 – The first text messages were sent during 1992 and 1993, 
although commercially, text messaging was not widely offered or used until 
2000. Even then, messages could only be sent between users subscribed to the 
same wireless carrier; for example, Sprint customers could only exchange 
messages with other Sprint customers. In November 2001, however, wireless 
service providers began to connect their networks for text messaging, allowing 
subscribers on different networks to exchange text messages. Since then, the 
number of text messages in the United States has grown to over 48 billion 
messages every month. Additionally, text messages are no longer only sent as 
―point-to-point‖ communications between two mobile device users. More 
specifically, messages are also commonly sent from web-based applications 
within a web browser (e.g., from an Internet e-mail address) and from instant 
messaging clients like AIM or MSN. 
For congressional policymakers, two major categories of issues have 
arisen: (1) ―same problem, different platform‖ and (2) issues stemming from 
the difficulty in applying existing technical definitions to a new service, such 
as whether a text message is sent ―phone-to-phone‖ or using the phone‘s 
associated email address. There are numerous examples of each. An example 
of the first category would be consumer fraud and children‘s accessing 
inappropriate content, which have existed previously in the ―wired world,‖ but 
have now found their way to the ―wireless world.‖ An example of the second 
category would be that spam sent between two phones or from one phone to 
many phones does not fall under the definition of spam in the CAN-SPAM 
Act of 2003 (Controlling the Assault of Non-Solicited Pornography and 
Marketing Act, P.L. 108-187); however, if that same message were to be sent 
from a phone or computer using the phone‘s associated e-mail address, it 
would. 
The increasing use of text and multimedia messaging has raised several 
policy issues: distracted driving, SMS spam, the inability of consumers to 
disable text messaging, text messaging price fixing, carrier blocking of 
common short code messages, deceptive and misleading common short code 
programs, protecting children from inappropriate content on wireless devices, 
―sexting,‖ mobile cyberbullying, privacy of text messages, and using SMS to 
support law enforcement and emergency response. 
 


In: America's Embrace of the Mobile Internet 
 ISBN: 978-1-63463-585-1 
Editor: Jennifer Haggard 
© 2015 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 1 
 
 
 
EXPLORING THE DIGITAL NATION: 
EMBRACING THE MOBILE INTERNET* 
 
 
U.S. Department of Commerce,  
National Telecommunications and  
Information Administration 
 
 
FOREWORD 
 
The whirlwind rise of sophisticated mobile devices and high-speed 
wireless networks is transforming the Internet and how our society interacts 
with it. Americans are rapidly embracing mobile technologies and the 
opportunities they create. In fact, adoption of mobile Internet is proceeding 
faster than earlier technologies, including the television (DeGusta, 2012). The 
use of mobile Internet applications skyrocketed between July 2011 and 
October 2012, rising by double-digit percentage points across generations. 
Mobile communications are now nearly ubiquitous—almost 9 out of 10 
Americans ages 25 and older reported that they use mobile phones. The data 
suggest that the use of mobile devices for communications and information 
access has expanded exponentially and is now deeply ingrained in the 
American way of life. 
Data from the Census Bureau‘s October 2012 Current Population Survey 
(CPS) show that 42 percent of mobile phone users ages 25 and older reported 
                                                        
* This is an edited, reformatted and augmented version of report issued October 2014. 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
2
browsing the Web on their devices, up from 33 percent in 2011. Similarly, 
email use on mobile phones grew from 33 percent to 43 percent of users, and 
use of social networking applications increased from 22 percent to 30 percent. 
Over half (54 percent) of mobile phone users reported using their devices to 
take photos or video, representing a 13 percentage-point increase in just 15 
months. 
Additionally, 88 percent of Americans over 25 reported in the CPS that 
they used mobile phones, and disparities in adoption of these devices shrunk in 
a number of key groups (including individuals lacking post-secondary 
education, those with annual family incomes below $25,000, and disabled 
Americans) more rapidly compared to the country as a whole. According to 
Pew Research Center, as of January 2014, more than half (55 percent) of all 
Americans 18 years or older now have smartphones, and 42 percent own tablet 
computers (Pew Research Center, 2014). 
When combined with advances in mobile Internet connectivity, some form 
of broadband, whether fixed or mobile, is now available to almost 99 percent 
of the U.S. population. That said, while broadband adoption has grown from 4 
percent to 72 percent of households since 2000, 28 percent of households still 
lacked home broadband connections by October 2012. Over a quarter of these 
non-users, representing over 7 percent of American households, did not go 
online at home primarily because it was too expensive. The continued 
persistence of financial and other barriers to Internet use is an urgent problem 
for policymakers because the ―Internet has become integral to daily life in the 
United States‖ (NTIA & ESA, 2013). Recently, the President reiterated the 
importance of Internet access to American society: 
 
If you think about the history of America, we united a continent by 
rail. We stretched a network of highways from sea to shining sea. We 
brought light to dark and remote areas. We connected the world through 
the Internet, through our imagination. All these projects created jobs. All 
these projects grew our economy. They also unified the country and they 
are unifying the world. 
—President Obama on Technology in Schools, June 6, 2013 
 
This report is the latest edition of our Digital Nation series, and it is based 
on data collected by the U.S. Census Bureau at the request of NTIA. Against 
this backdrop of data, today‘s Internet-connected society raises a range of 
significant policy issues, including questions about spectrum use, universal 
service, copyright, privacy, security, and the economy itself. 
 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
3
The data collected from NTIA‘s Broadband Technology Opportunities 
Program (BTOP) and the State Broadband Data and Development grants that 
supported data collection for the National Broadband Map, as well as the CPS 
data, provide insight for the President‘s wireless initiative, the Federal digital 
literacy programs, and the FCC‘s universal service reform initiative. These 
efforts will also help state and local policymakers throughout the country, in 
cooperation with private partners, to make sound, fact-based decisions that 
will improve America‘s productivity, ingenuity, world competitiveness, and 
standard of living. 
Consistent with this Administration‘s resolve to maintain a transparent 
and open government, the survey data utilized in this report are publicly 
available for use and analysis by academic and policy researchers and others 
interested in the state of Internet use in America. 
 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet builds on the 
last Digital Nation study (NTIA & ESA, 2013) and examines data from the 
2012 Current Population Survey (CPS) describing Americans‘ use of 
computers and the Internet. Data from this survey depict the accelerating 
popularity of mobile phone-based Internet use across American demographic 
groups. The Census Bureau collected data from over 53,000 households in the 
October 2012 CPS Computer and Internet Use Supplement, forming a 
representative sample of the 122 million households across the United States. 
NTIA‘s analysis of this dataset, summarized below, reveals a mobile Internet 
explosion, accompanied by narrowing but persistent disparities in computer 
ownership and Internet use overall. 
As in all installments of Digital Nation, this report includes NTIA‘s 
analysis of the demographic characteristics of home Internet users and the 
technologies they use to go online, as well as the alternative locations where 
they use the Internet. The report also presents data on the primary reasons why 
some Americans do not access the Internet from their homes. These data can 
inform further research and policy that strives to eliminate disparities by 
increasing the availability of affordable broadband in the United States and 
promoting broadband adoption by all Americans. 
Highlights of this report include the following: 
 
 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
4
Online On-the-Go with Mobile Phones 
 
Mobile Internet usage has grown substantially across demographic 
categories. 
 
 
In October 2012, mobile phone users were exploiting their devices‘ 
enhanced capabilities for much more than just voice communications. 
Over a 15-month period, the proportion of users who downloaded 
mobile applications jumped by ten percentage points, from 22 to 32 
percent. In addition, 54 percent of mobile phone users at least 25 
years of age reported taking photos or videos with their phones, 43 
percent stated they checked or sent email, and 42 percent browsed the 
Web. Each of the latter two activities increased in prevalence by 9 
percentage points since the July 2011 survey. 
 
Eighty-eight percent of Americans ages 25 and older used mobile 
phones by October 2012, up 2 percentage points from July 2011. This 
growth reflects an encouraging narrowing of the adoption gap among 
historically disadvantaged groups. For example, mobile phone use 
increased 4 percentage points each among individuals with family 
incomes below $25,000 (73 percent to 77 percent) and people with 
disabilities (68 percent to 72 percent). 
 
Use of Internet-dependent applications on mobile phones varied 
significantly based on educational attainment, family income, and 
population density. For example, among mobile phone users ages 25 
and older, 57 percent of college graduates stated they checked or sent 
email, and 54 percent of users with college degrees browsed the Web 
on their mobile phones, compared to 19 percent and 21 percent, 
respectively, of those with no high school diploma. A 36 percentage- 
point gap exists between the 63 percent of mobile phone users with 
family incomes of $100,000 or more who used their devices for email 
and the 27 percent of users with family incomes below $25,000 who 
did so. Even as mobile phones approach ubiquity and traditional 
disparities in adoption shrink, there is evidence of a socioeconomic-
based digital divide in usage patterns. Examination of population 
density also revealed differences in users‘ propensity to browse the 
Web on their mobile phones, with 44 percent of urban dwellers 
reporting they used their mobile phones for that purpose compared to 
31 percent of rural residents. 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
5
 
NTIA modeled the probability that mobile phone users ages 25 and 
older checked or sent email, browsed the Web, downloaded apps, and 
used online social networks through a technique known as 
multivariate regression analysis. The regression models enabled NTIA 
to study how various demographic and geographic characteristics 
correlate with these activities when holding other factors constant. 
The results were largely consistent across activities, with higher 
income and education levels strongly correlating with an increased 
probability of undertaking the activities. 
 
The regression models predict that female mobile phone users were 5 
percentage points more likely to use social networks on their devices 
than their male counterparts. Further, the results suggest associations 
between geographic region and Internet-based mobile phone 
activities. The model forecasts that users in the West were between 6 
and 8 percentage points more likely to use their phones for the studied 
purposes than their counterparts in the Northeast, and users in the 
South and Midwest exhibited smaller increases in these activities. 
 
 
The Diminishing Digital Divide: Adoption Demographics 
 
According to 2012 CPS data, U.S. broadband adoption continued to grow. 
 
 
Seventy-two percent of U.S. households used broadband at home in 
2012, while home computer use grew to 79 percent, representing a 3 
percentage-point gain in both activities from 2011 (69 percent and 76 
percent, respectively). Two percent of households continued to rely on 
dial-up service, which raised the percentage of households engaged in 
any home Internet use to approximately 75 percent. 
 
Over the five years from 2007 to 2012, home broadband use by 
persons 65 and older rose dramatically, increasing from 32 percent to 
47 percent, a 15 percentage-point increase. 
 
Persons 16 years and older who use the Internet at any location grew 
from 151 million in October 2007 to 187 million in October 2012, an 
increase of over 18 percent after adjusting for population growth. 
 
Libraries were important locations of Internet access across all income 
and educational brackets (used by 11 percent of households 
nationally), but especially so for unemployed householders (20 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
6
percent), households with school-age children (18 percent) and 
African Americans (16 percent). 
 
In 2012, 83 percent of households headed by an employed person 
reported using the Internet at home, compared to 70 percent of 
unemployed respondents. In 2007, only 71 percent of employed 
householders and 56 percent of unemployed householders used the 
Internet at home, resulting in a 13 and 15 percentage-point increase, 
respectively, over five years. 
 
 
Persistent Gaps in Home Internet Use 
 
In 2012, a significant portion—28 percent—of American households did 
not use broadband at home. Households commonly cited several primary 
reasons for non-use. 
 
 
No Need or Interest: Over time, U.S. households without the Internet 
at home have most often cited a lack of need or interest as the main 
reason why they did not go online at home. Although 48 percent of 
non-using households gave this reason in both 2011 and 2012, the 
figure rose from 39 percent in 2003. Consistently, White and Asian 
American households were most likely to express a lack of interest in 
going online at home. American Indian and Alaska Native households 
have been the least likely to say they lacked a need or interest in going 
online at home. In 2012, households led by people with disabilities 
citing lack of interest or need for home Internet use increased to 56 
percent of non- users, compared to 51 percent in 2011. Households 
with school-age children that lacked home Internet service were 7 
percentage points less likely to state they did not need to use the 
Internet at home at 47 percent, compared to 54 percent of those 
without school-age children. Non-using householders ages 65 or older 
were the least interested in going online at home, and the frequency 
with which seniors gave this response rose 3 percentage points from 
67 percent in 2011 to 70 percent in 2012. 
 
Expense: Affordability concerns deterred the next largest segment of 
households from going online at home. In 2012, as in past years, this 
reason was the second most popular explanation for no home Internet 
use, at 29 percent of non-using households. Viewed from a different 
perspective, these figures indicate that 7 percent of all American 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
7
households do not have Internet service at home because of the cost. 
Among households not online, unemployed householders (58 
percent), the youngest householders 15 to 24 years old (50 percent), 
those with family incomes below $25,000 (32 percent), and homes 
with children in school (30 percent) responded most often in 2012 that 
cost concerns prevented them from using the Internet at home. While 
White households not online (20 percent) continued to be the least 
concerned about the high cost of accessing the Internet in their homes, 
the proportion of other ethnic groups citing expense grew between 
2011 and 2012. During that period, householders of American Indian 
or Alaska Native origin who did not go online at home became 
dramatically more likely to cite expense, increasing by 17 percentage 
points from 25 percent to 42 percent, followed by a 9 percentage-
point increase among Asian American households. More urban 
households (30 percent) than rural residents (25 percent) that did not 
use the Internet at home stated that cost was the main reason for non-
use. 
 
No or Inadequate Computer: This reason for not using the Internet 
at home has continued to decrease in prominence, declining by 2 
percentage points between 2011 and 2012 to 11 percent. Data from 
the 2012 CPS reflected slight differences based on race and ethnicity, 
with non-using American Indian and Alaska Native households being 
the least likely at 8 percent to cite the lack of an adequate computer. 
This figure suggests a sharp 10 percentage-point decline among this 
group from 2011. Age, education, income, employment status, 
population density, gender, and the presence of school-age children at 
home only nominally differentiated households explaining they lacked 
an adequate computer as their main reason for not connecting to the 
Internet at home. 
 
 
Introduction 
 
There is considerable evidence that high-speed (broadband) Internet has a 
positive effect on a nation‘s economy and well-being (NTIA & ESA, 2013).1 
For example, about 752,000 U.S. jobs come from the mobile applications 
(―apps‖) industry, which followed the rapid spread of smartphones (Mandel, 
2013). One analyst estimates that each American consumer can save $8,674 
annually by using broadband in a variety of ways (Internet Innovation 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
8
Alliance, 2013). For example, a recent study found that 69 percent of surveyed 
baby boomers and seniors over age 54 used their smartphones while shopping 
in local stores, and half of them did so primarily to comparison shop and find 
discounts (Cisero, 2014). By the end of 2014, U.S. consumers will spend an 
estimated $114 billion in online retail sales on smartphones and tablets, which 
will account for 29 percent of all e-commerce sales, according to analysts‘ 
projections (Mulpuru, 2014). As NTIA stated in its June 2014 progress report 
on freeing up spectrum for commercial use, ―America‘s future competitiveness 
and global technology leadership depend on access to radio spectrum—the 
lifeblood of smartphones, tablets, and other data-hungry wireless devices.‖ 
Deployment of mobile wireless broadband networks (with speeds of at 
least 3 Mbps download and 768 Mbps upload) has proliferated in the United 
States in recent years, resulting in availability of service to 97.5 percent of the 
nation‘s population as of June 30, 2013. Wired broadband availability to 
Americans by individual technology—fiber (25.2 percent), DSL (74.0 
percent), and cable (87.5 percent)—trails the coverage of mobile wireless 
networks (NTIA & FCC, 2014). There is good news concerning higher- speed 
Internet as well. Ninety percent of Americans had access to 4G wireless 
broadband, defined as service with download speeds of at least 6 Mbps, as of 
the end of 2012. The increase over June 2010 is impressive, gaining 
approximately 64 percentage points during the span (NTIA, 2013). 
 
 
* Includes handheld devices such as smartphones and tablets (2010 only). 
** Includes tablets but not smartphones (2011-2012). 
Figure 1. Overview of Household Adoption Rates by Technology, Percent of U.S. 
Households, 1997-2012. 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
9
Broadband adoption and computer ownership by U.S. households 
continued their rise in 2012.2 Research suggests that adoption of new 
technologies typically resembles an S- shaped curve over time (Rogers, 1995). 
The slopes in Figure 1 have decreased over time but there is little evidence that 
any of the technologies depicted have reached saturation. Factors that affect 
the shape of the curve include consumer awareness of the technology, its 
affordability, accessibility, and ease of use (NTIA & ESA, 2000). 
The use of mobile devices continued to increase in 2012. Eighty-eight 
percent of Americans ages 25 and older reported using mobile phones in 
October 2012. Once online, mobile phone users increasingly used their devices 
to send and receive email, browse the Web, access social networks, and utilize 
other applications that offer increased productivity or entertainment in their 
busy lives. 
Smartphones and their diverse applications have led the mobility 
movement. Popular with the general public, smartphones are also important to 
people with disabilities for reasons beyond mere convenience. Smartphone 
applications can reveal one‘s location via GPS or provide directions to a 
desired destination. To help people with vision disabilities, researchers in 
Pakistan have developed a smartphone app that monitors a user‘s location and 
distance walked from a destination to warn of imminent nightfall. The 
application is geo-aware and so knows the time of sunset around the world, 
and with its access to online mapping software, the app can offer the 
potentially vulnerable user shortcuts for the return trip (Ahsan, Khan, & 
Salam, 2013). 
Smartphones can also aid the unemployed. Some 77 percent of job seekers 
have already begun to use smartphone apps to give them an advantage in job-
seeking. Application developers are creating tools that enhance one‘s ability to 
learn about and secure a new job and to customize and export a résumé 
expeditiously. Another uses geo-targeting to find industry-specific contacts 
that are open to career networking. One app permits busy job-seekers to create 
short videos with answers to employer questions (Jackson, 2012). 
The sections that follow illustrate the results of the Current Population 
Survey (CPS) Computer and Internet Use Supplement, collected by the Census 
Bureau in October 2012 at the request of NTIA. In the next section, we 
provide an analysis of mobility in the online world. The data suggest that the 
use of mobile devices for communications and information access has 
expanded exponentially, becoming an essential element of American daily life. 
The focus then turns to adoption, with a longitudinal analysis of devices of 
choice, Internet technologies, demographics, geography, and locations of 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
10
Internet use. We believe that, while progress continues in home broadband 
adoption, disparities among groups and areas persist, and libraries and other 
public access points provide alternative venues for Internet use. The final 
section contains new evidence as to why some U.S. households remained 
unconnected in 2012, providing key insights for policymakers seeking to 
expand Internet usage to all Americans. 
 
 
THE MOBILE TRANSFORMATION 
 
Digital Nation reports have historically focused on trends in computer and 
Internet use in the United States that highlight policy choices that might 
further accelerate adoption. Getting more Americans online remains vital to 
the nation‘s future. However, policymakers should note that in recent years 
there have been fundamental changes in the way people use the Internet. 
Through a combination of faster wireless data networks, advances in the 
miniaturization of computing hardware, and innovations in human-computer 
interaction, the Internet is now in people‘s pockets and at their fingertips, 
available to many at almost any time and location. 
To date, adoption of mobile computing technologies has primarily been in 
the form of mobile phones with advanced capabilities (―smartphones‖) and 
tablet computers. NTIA tracked the use of mobile phones in the July 2011 and 
October 2012 CPS Supplements, and the results are discussed in this section. 
The 2012 survey, which was less detailed than the 2011 survey, did not 
distinguish usage of tablets from desktop and laptop computers. Data from 
upcoming CPS Supplements will enable us to track growth in tablet adoption 
since the 2011 survey, which showed that 9 percent of Internet users reported 
using tablets to go online (NTIA and ESA, 2013). Research by the Pew 
Research Center suggests that 42 percent of Americans ages 18 and older 
owned tablet computers by January 2014; that number rises to 50 percent if e-
readers are included (Pew Research Center, 2014). 
Eighty-eight percent of Americans ages 25 and older used mobile phones 
as of October 2012. While this represents a small (2 percentage-point) increase 
from July 2011, mobile phone usage is evolving in two important ways. First, 
mobile phones are becoming more common among historically disadvantaged 
groups; the adoption gap is shrinking across demographic and socioeconomic 
groups. Second, Americans are taking advantage of the wide range of new 
functionalities made possible by the fast Internet connections and advanced 
hardware present in contemporary mobile phones. However, there are some 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
11 
significant disparities in phone usage patterns. Among mobile phone users, use 
of Internet-based applications is primarily a function of income, education, and 
age, even after controlling for a range of demographic variables. 
 
 
Mobile Phone Adoption 
 
The July 2011 CPS Supplement revealed different levels of mobile phone 
adoption based on income, education, race, and other factors, suggesting this 
technology is subject to a digital divide similar to those found in computer and 
Internet use (as described in previous Digital Nation reports). We are 
encouraged, however, that disparities in mobile phone use dropped 
significantly by the time of the October 2012 data collection. The small overall 
increase in mobile phone adoption during this time masks a more interesting 
story: adoption among historically lagging groups increased more quickly than 
among groups where mobile phone use was already extremely common. 
Among adults ages 25 and older, 96 percent of those with annual family 
incomes of $100,000 or greater used mobile phones in 2012, a nominal 
increase from 95 percent in 2011. During the same time period, however, 
those with family incomes below $25,000 became 4 percentage points more 
likely to use mobile phones, as adoption in this group increased from 73 to 77 
percent (see Figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 2. Mobile Phone Use by Family Income, Percent of Persons Age 25+, 2011-
2012. 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
12
There was also accelerated growth in mobile phone use among other 
historically lagging groups. Adoption among Americans with disabilities grew 
at twice the rate of their non- disabled counterparts. Mobile phone use 
increased from 68 percent of those who identified themselves as having a 
disability in 2011 to 72 percent in 2012, while adoption among those who did 
not self-identify as having a disability grew from 88 to 90 percent. Similarly, 
individuals with lower education levels narrowed the adoption gap with their 
highly-educated counterparts. Seventy-two percent of Americans who lacked a 
high school diploma or equivalent used mobile phones by 2012, an increase 
from 68 percent in 2011, and adoption among those who graduated from high 
school but did not continue their education increased from 79 to 83 percent. In 
contrast with the 4 percentage-point increases among those groups, mobile 
phone use among college graduates increased by just one percentage point, 
from 94 to 95 percent. 
Mobile phone use among rural3 Americans also increased significantly 
between 2011 and 2012. Eighty-five percent of rural dwellers reported using a 
mobile phone in 2012, a 5 percentage-point increase from the 80 percent 
reported 15 months earlier. In contrast, the adoption rate among urban 
Americans only increased by 2 percentage points, from 86 to 88 percent (see 
Figure 3). The narrowing of this adoption gap based on population density is 
particularly promising because rural areas have historically experienced less- 
extensive build-out of network infrastructure than urban areas (NTIA & FCC, 
2014). 
Racial disparities in mobile phone adoption were small in 2011 and 
appeared to nearly vanish in 2012. In 2011, 86 percent of Whites used mobile 
phones, compared to 84 percent of African Americans and 83 percent of 
Hispanics. In 2012, however, adoption among African Americans and 
Hispanics grew to 87 percent each, while adoption among Whites grew more 
slowly to 88 percent; the estimated difference between those groups is no 
longer statistically significant (see Figure 4). 
Trends in mobile phone adoption during this 15-month period are 
encouraging. Demographic disparities appear to be shrinking, and in at least 
one case may have disappeared—though it is important to recognize that 
substantial gaps remain and will only close if adoption continues to grow more 
quickly among lagging groups. 
 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
13 
 
Figure 3. Mobile Phone Use by Population Density, Percent of Persons Age 25+, 2011-
2012. 
 
 
Figure 4. Mobile Phone Use by Race, Percent of Persons Age 25+, 2011-2012. 
 
 
 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
14
Use of Mobile Applications 
 
Contemporary mobile phones are not mere telephones. In the rapid 
transition to advanced devices on high-speed data networks, mobile phone 
users are engaging in a dramatically expanded range of activities. Beyond 
phone calls and text messaging, mobile phones offer constant access to 
Internet applications like email and Web browsing, location-based services, 
and the ability to take pictures and listen to music. 
Use of these applications is skyrocketing. Usage of non-voice applications 
grew rapidly between July 2011 and October 2012, with application usage 
growing 10 percentage points or more over the 15-month period in many 
cases. For example, over half (54 percent) of American mobile phone users 
ages 25 and older used their devices to take photos or video by 2012, a 13 
percentage-point increase. The use of mobile phones for checking or sending 
email grew from 33 percent of users to 43 percent, and Web browsing 
increased from 33 to 42 percent. The proportion of mobile phone users 
utilizing maps and other GPS-based applications grew by 10 percentage points 
to 34 percent in 2012. Other uses of Internet-connected mobile phones, such as 
social networking and downloading apps, also saw considerable increases in 
popularity (see Figure 5). 
 
 
Figure 5. Activities Americans Conduct on Mobile Phones, Percent of Mobile Phone 
Users Age 25+, 2011-2012. 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
15 
NTIA focused on four reported Internet-dependent activities: checking or 
sending email, Web browsing, downloading apps, and social networking to 
determine if there are disparities in usage patterns among different groups of 
mobile phone users. Data show that there are dramatic differences in mobile 
phone usage based on educational attainment. Among mobile phone users ages 
25 and older, 57 percent of college graduates reported checking or sending 
email on their devices in 2012, compared to 45 percent of those with some 
college credit, 29 percent of high school graduates, and 19 percent of those 
with no diploma. Similarly, 54 percent of users with college degrees browsed 
the Web on their mobile phones, compared with just 21 percent of those 
without high school diplomas. There were also significant disparities in 
downloading apps and social networking based on education (see Figure 6). 
Use of mobile phone-based Internet also differs greatly based on income. 
Sixty-three percent of mobile phone users with family incomes of at least 
$100,000 checked or sent email with their devices, compared with 52 percent 
in the $75,000-99,999 range, 45 percent in the $50,000-74,999 range, 36 
percent in the $25,000-49,999 range, and 27 percent with family incomes 
below $25,000. Web browsing, downloading apps, and social networking were 
similarly stratified. 
 
 
Figure 6. Activities Americans Conduct on Mobile Phones by Education, Percent of 
Mobile Phone Users Age 25+, 2012. 
 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
16
In stark contrast to the modest and shrinking mobile phone adoption gap 
between urban and rural Americans, use of Internet-based applications on 
those mobile phones varied dramatically by population density. For example, 
while 45 percent of urban mobile phone users checked or sent email with their 
devices, only 29 percent of their rural counterparts reported doing so. 
Additionally, rural users were 13 percentage points less likely to browse the 
Web on their phones, 12 percentage points less likely to download apps, and 8 
percentage points less likely to use social networks (see Figure 7). Slower 
wireless network speeds in rural areas, in addition to demographic differences 
between urban and rural dwellers, may partially explain these disparities 
(NTIA & FCC, 2014). 
Similar to mobile phone adoption generally, Internet use on devices does 
not vary dramatically by race. The one exception is that Asian American 
mobile phone users were significantly more likely to check or send email, 
browse the Web, download apps, and use online social networks with their 
devices. For example, 51 percent of Asian American users reported checking 
or sending email on their mobile phones, compared with 43 percent of Whites, 
40 percent of African Americans, and 42 percent of Hispanics (see Figure 8). 
These differences may be due in part to other demographic characteristics, like 
income and education levels. 
 
 
Figure 7. Activities Americans Conduct on Mobile Phones by Population Density, 
Percent of Mobile Phone Users Age 25+, 2012. 
 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
17 
 
Figure 8. Activities Americans Conduct on Mobile Phones by Race, Percent of Mobile 
Phone Users Age 25+, 2012. 
 
To better understand why certain factors are associated with different 
patterns in mobile application use, NTIA used multivariate regression analysis, 
a statistical technique used to predict the marginal effects of different 
characteristics by holding constant other known factors. NTIA performed four 
regression analyses, modeling the probability that mobile phone users ages 25 
and older check or send email, browse the Web, download apps, and use 
online social networks. In each case, income, education, age, race, gender, 
disability, citizenship status, employment, presence of school-age children in 
the household, household size, population density, and geographic region were 
held constant. The results were largely consistent—there was a strong 
correlation between higher income and education levels and increased 
probability of undertaking the various phone-based activities. For example, 
when holding other factors constant, mobile phone users with family incomes 
of $100,000 or more were 19 percentage points more likely to browse the Web 
on their devices than their counterparts in the below $25,000 category. 
Similarly, users with college degrees were 22 percentage points more likely to 
use email on their phones than those without college diplomas, after 
controlling for other variables. Being employed was associated with higher 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
18
rates of Internet-based activities on mobile phones, and living in an urban area 
correlated with higher usage rates relative to rural dwellers. 
While the results for income, education, employment, and population 
density are in line with general expectations, there were interesting results by 
gender and geographic region. There was no statistically significant 
relationship between gender and using email, browsing the Web, or 
downloading apps, but the model predicts that female mobile phone users were 
5 percentage points more likely to use social networks on their devices than 
their male counterparts. This suggests that gender may play a role in the choice 
to engage in social networking from a mobile phone. Additionally, focusing on 
associations between geographic region and Internet-based mobile phone 
activities revealed that users in the West were between 6 and 8 percentage 
points more likely to use their phones for the studied purposes relative to their 
counterparts in the Northeast, and users in the South and Midwest exhibited 
smaller (but in most cases, still statistically significant) increases in these 
activities (see Figure 9). The exact cause of these geographic disparities after 
controlling for income, education, and other factors is worth further 
examination. 
Equally interesting are the correlations not exhibited in these regression 
analyses, most notably race and ethnicity. Consistent with the modest observed 
racial differences in mobile phone activities, the marginal effects of race on 
these phone-based Internet uses were small; in most cases the differences were 
not statistically significant. The model suggests that income and education are 
the largest predictors of mobile phone use habits, with employment status, 
geography, and a few other factors also playing roles. No one study of survey 
data can establish that any of these variables actually causes certain usage 
patterns. This analysis can only demonstrate that the factors appear to be 
correlated after controlling for other variables that are also thought to 
contribute. 
Examination of the October 2012 CPS Supplement data on mobile phone 
use suggests a need for further research and policy focus on how people are 
using their devices, rather than mere ownership. Simply having such a device 
does not reliably indicate that a user is taking advantage of the advanced 
applications made possible by recent innovations in mobile technologies. As 
mobile phones approach ubiquity and traditional disparities in adoption shrink, 
there is evidence of a new socioeconomic-based digital divide in usage 
patterns. Thus, policymakers should focus on addressing its possible causes, 
including the additional cost of mobile data plans, limited availability of high- 
speed networks in rural areas, or gaps in digital literacy. This is an essential 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
19 
step in extending to all Americans the opportunities created by carrying the 
entire Internet in their pockets. 
 
 
GETTING ONLINE 
 
Although gaps remain, broadband adoption continues to grow across 
demographic and geographic groups. Data also suggest some interesting 
variations in broadband adoption based on a number of factors. For example, 
households with school-age children report higher rates of adoption, possibly 
indicating greater demand among younger individuals or perhaps students‘ 
need to use the Internet for homework and studying. 
 
 
Using 
Email 
Web 
Browsing 
Downloading 
Apps 
Social 
Networking 
Family Income, Relative to Less Than$25,000 
$25,000-49,999 
4  
3  
4  
4  
$50,000-74,999 
9  
7  
7  
7  
$75,000-99,999 
13  
11  
12  
8  
$100,000 or More  
22  
19  
18  
12  
Education, Relative to No High School Diploma 
High School Diploma  
6  
5  
4  
4  
Some College  
16  
14  
11  
9  
College Degree  
22  
18  
15  
12  
Employment Status, Relative to Employed 
Unemployed  
-6  
-4  
-4  
-5  
Not in Labor Force  
-6  
-5  
-4  
-3  
Region, Relative to Northeast  
Midwest  
N/A  
3  
3  
3  
South  
5  
5  
4  
5  
West  
7  
8  
8  
6  
Other Factors  
Female, Relative to Male  
N/A  
N/A  
N/A  
5  
Urban, Relative to Rural  
8  
6  
6  
3  
Note: All listed marginal effects are statistically significant at the 95 percent 
confidence level. See Appendix B, Tables 1-4 for complete regression results. 
Figure 9. Marginal Effects of Demographics on Selected Mobile Phone Activities, 
Percentage-Point Change for Mobile Phone Users Age 25+, 2012. 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
20
Internet at Home: Devices, Technologies, and Trends 
 
Computer Use at Home 
Data collected in 2012 on Americans‘ digital device choices show that 79 
percent of households reported having computers at home, a 3 percentage-
point increase from 2011. This also represents a 28 percentage-point increase 
in home computer use since 2000. 
 
EXPANDING BROADBAND USE IN ARKANSAS  
THROUGH EDUCATION 
 
When Connect Arkansas received a $3.7 million BTOP award to 
increase broadband adoption, the state ranked 49th in Internet 
subscribership and 47th in per capita income, according to FCC data. 
NTIA‘s data suggest that the state has significantly improved its broadband 
adoption rate during the last few years (see Figures 11 and 12). To 
encourage broadband adoption by Arkansans, the project offers digital 
literacy and computer basics training for adults and free refurbished 
computers to qualifying low income families. In addition to selling 
discounted reconditioned computers to the public, Connect Arkansas trains 
residents in business plan writing, the principles of entrepreneurship, and 
small 
business 
technology 
use. 
See 
the 
project 
website 
at 
http://www.connect-arkansas.org/home for more details. 
 
In 2000, 61 percent of 25- to 44-year-old householders4 reported having a 
computer at home, while only 24 percent of those 65 and older reported the 
same. In 2012, this number jumped to 85 percent for 25- to 44-year-olds and to 
64 percent for those 65 and older, a 40 percentage-point increase among 
seniors. In 2001, only 54 percent of unemployed householders owned a 
computer, whereas by October 2012, 75 percent of households facing 
unemployment had this important resource at home to aid in job seeking. 
In 2012, low-income households continued to lag behind wealthier 
households in having a computer at home. Only 57 percent of households 
earning less than $25,000 a year had a computer at home, while they were 
nearly ubiquitous in households earning $100,000 or more (97 percent). 
Householders with no high school diploma made strides in closing the  
computer-at-home gap by 31 percentage points over the last 12 years (2000: 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
21 
18 percent to 2012: 49 percent); yet in 2012, they still lagged far behind those 
with a college degree or higher (94 percent). 
Throughout the last decade, Asian American householders consistently 
reported the highest rates of home computer use, while the lowest percentage 
shifted over the years between African American, Hispanic, and American 
Indian and Alaska Native households. In 2012, African American 
householders reported the lowest prevalence of computers at home at 67 
percent. 
The gap is closing between computers at home in rural versus urban 
communities. In 2000, urban households were 11 percentage points more 
likely to have computers at home than their rural counterparts. By 2012, 
however, that gap narrowed to 8 percentage points. 
 
Internet Use at Home 
Internet use at home is continuing to rise, although not at the same rates 
observed during the earlier years of the 21st century. Between August 2000 and 
September 2001, the proportion of households going online at home jumped 
by 9 percentage points, from 41 percent to 50 percent. In 2012, 75 percent of 
households reported having Internet at home, representing a 3 percentage-
point increase from 2011. By 2012, just 2 percent of households online at 
home relied solely on dial-up Internet service. 
Different demographic and geographic groups reported disparate levels of 
home Internet use. For instance, in 2012 82 percent of 25- to 44-year-old 
householders had Internet at home, similar to 79 percent of 45- to 64-year-
olds. Those 65 and over continued to lag behind other age brackets, with only 
57 percent reporting home Internet use. Income levels also impacted Internet 
adoption at home. Low-income households were far behind their wealthier 
counterparts: Forty-nine percent of households making less than $25,000 used 
the Internet at home, compared to 96 percent of households making $100,000 
or more. 
In 2012, 40 percent of householders without a high school diploma 
reported having the Internet at home, a 28 percentage-point gain over the last 
12 years, but significantly behind the 92 percent of home users with at least a 
college degree. Although 83 percent of employed householders used the 
Internet at home in 2012, such use has continued to rise among the  
unemployed as well, with 70 percent of unemployed householders having the 
Internet at home, compared to 50 percent in 2003. Importantly, households led  
by females continued to lag in home Internet use over the last 12 years. 
Although female heads of household narrowed the gap from a 10 percentage 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
22
point disparity (2000, 2001), they continued trailing male heads of household 
by 6 percentage points in 2012 (72 percent adoption for female householders). 
Similar to home computer use, while home Internet use increased during 
the last decade, adoption continued to be lowest among African American, 
Hispanic, and American Indian and Alaska Native householders. One of the 
largest increases occurred among Hispanic householders, with 64 percent 
reporting Internet at home in 2012, up from 24 percent in 2000. As with 
computer use at home, Asian American householders continued to lead in 
home Internet adoption, with 85 percent reporting having the Internet at home. 
 
 
Computer 
Use 
Internet 
Use 
Broadband 
Use** 
All Households 
79 
75 
73 
Family Income 
Less Than $25,000 
57 
49 
48 
$25,000-49,999 
77 
72 
70 
$50,000-74,999 
90 
88 
86 
$75,000-99,999 
95 
93 
92 
$100,000 or More 
97 
96 
95 
Education* 
No Diploma 
49 
40 
39 
High School Diploma 
69 
65 
63 
Some College 
84 
80 
79 
College Degree 
94 
92 
91 
Race and Ethnicity* 
White 
82 
79 
77 
African American 
67 
62 
61 
Hispanic 
69 
64 
63 
Asian American 
87 
85 
84 
American Indian or Alaska Native 
68 
58 
56 
Population Density 
Urban 
80 
76 
75 
Rural 
72 
66 
63 
* These are attributes of the householder. 
** For the purpose of this analysis, households are considered to use broadband if they 
report home Internet use and list any type of connection other than dial-up, 
including ―some other service.‖ 
Figure 10. Home Computer, Internet, and Broadband Use by Demographics and 
Population Density, Percent of Households, 2012. 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
23 
In 2012, rural households made progress in closing the gap with urban 
households, with 66 percent online; yet they remained 10 percentage points 
behind their urban counterparts, who reported 76 percent penetration. Disabled 
householders were 27 percentage points less likely to have the Internet at 
home than their non-disabled counterparts at 52 percent and 79 percent, 
respectively. 
 
Home Internet Use by State 
Similar to previous Digital Nation reports, states experienced significantly 
different Internet adoption levels in 2012. For example, households in some 
western and northeastern states reported home Internet adoption rates 
significantly above the national average of 75 percent, including Oregon at 85 
percent and New Hampshire at 83 percent. In contrast, certain states in 
southern regions and Appalachia reported the lowest adoption rates nationally, 
including Mississippi at 58 percent of households, and Louisiana at 61 percent 
(see Figure 11).5 
The estimated growth in Internet use during this three-year period varied 
significantly among the states from 2009 to 2012. Some historically lagging 
states appeared to make considerable progress towards closing the gap with 
their peers. For example, while only 56 percent of households in Arkansas 
were going online at home in 2009, the adoption rate there grew rapidly 
through 2012, when 69 percent of households used the Internet at home. While 
Arkansas still lagged behind the national home Internet use rate of 75 percent 
in 2012, the state may have significantly improved its standing (see Figure 
12).6 
 
Technologies Used to Go Online at Home 
In 2012, cable and DSL were the most popular technologies households 
used to go online, with 45 percent of online households using solely cable 
modems and 23 percent reporting DSL connections. Mobile broadband ranked  
a distant third, with 9 percent of online households using the technology  
exclusively. Although cable modems were consistently most popular across all 
age groups (between 44 percent and 47 percent of online householders in each 
category), DSL was more popular among householders 65 and over, at 27 
percent, than among other age groups. Online householders younger than 25 
were about as likely to choose mobile broadband alone (17 percent) as DSL 
alone (18 percent). Overall, DSL usage has decreased over time. While 33 
percent of online households exclusively used DSL at home in 2010, that 
number dipped to 23 percent by 2012. Only 5 percent of households with 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
24
home Internet reported using both cable and mobile broadband at home, which 
represents a 3 percentage-point increase from 2010. Dial-up continued its 
decline as a choice for Internet service, standing at only 2 percent in the 2012 
data collection. Dial-up service has always been most common among 
householders 65 and older, dropping, however, from 92 percent in 2000 to 4 
percent in 2012. 
A household‘s choice of broadband technology did not vary dramatically 
based on employment status, gender, disability status, or the presence of 
school-age children in the household. Across each of these categories, the 
overall averages remained consistent. Interestingly, 13 percent of online 
households with family incomes below $25,000 used mobile broadband 
exclusively. The exclusive use of mobile broadband at home was also most 
common among online heads of household lacking a diploma (12 percent), 
compared to the other education categories (7 percent for those with a college 
degree or higher). Four percent of those without a high school diploma 
reported utilizing dial-up alone, while only 1 percent of users with a college 
degree or higher did so. Seven percent of heads of household online at home 
with a college degree or higher accessed the Internet through fiber, while only 
3 percent of those without a high school diploma reported the same. Six 
percent of online householders with college degrees reported use of both cable 
and mobile broadband at home, while only 3 percent without a high school 
diploma reported the same. 
When considering employment status, mobile broadband use to access the 
Internet at home has grown most among the unemployed, rising from 8 
percent in 2010 to 13 percent in 2012. After remaining flat between 2010 and 
2011, growth in the use of both cable and mobile by households across income 
brackets occurred in 2012, while growing most significantly to 8 percent 
among households with incomes of $100,000 or more. 
In 2012, cable modems were least prevalent among online American 
Indian and Alaska Native householders (39 percent), compared with their 
counterparts from other ethnic groups. DSL was the least popular among 
Asian American householders (20 percent). Mobile broadband adoption was 
highest among American Indians and Alaska Natives (14 percent), African 
American (13 percent), and Hispanic (12 percent) householders, and least so 
among Asian Americans (5 percent). American Indians and Alaska Natives 
reported some of the highest rates of home mobile broadband use and lowest 
rates of cable modem use; this may be partly due to a lack of cable broadband 
availability in regions with a high concentration of these households. 
 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
25 
 
Note: See Appendix B, Table 5 for complete results. 
Figure 11. Internet Use at Home by State, Percent of Households, 2012. 
 
 
Note: See Appendix B, Table 5 for complete results. 
Figure 12. Estimated Growth of Internet Use at Home Over Time by State, Percentage 
of Households, 2009-2012. 
 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
26
 
Cable 
Only 
DSL 
Only  
Fiber-
optic 
Only 
Mobile 
BB 
Only 
Cable 
and 
Mobile 
All Online Households  
45 
23 
5 
9 
5 
Family Income  
Less Than $25,000  
43  
25  
4  
13  
3  
$25,000-49,999  
44  
25  
4  
10  
4  
$50,000-74,999  
46  
24  
6  
8  
5  
$75,000-99,999  
45  
24  
6  
7  
6  
$100,000 or More  
45  
20  
8  
6  
8  
Education*  
No Diploma  
43  
25  
3  
12  
3  
High School Diploma  
43  
25  
5  
10  
3  
Some College  
44  
24  
5  
10  
5  
College Degree  
46  
22  
7  
7  
6  
Race and Ethnicity*  
White  
45  
24  
6  
8  
5  
African American  
42  
24  
5  
13  
5  
Hispanic  
41  
24  
5  
12  
4  
Asian American  
53  
20  
7  
5  
5  
American Indian or Alaska 
Native  
39  
26  
2  
14  
5  
Population Density  
Urban  
47  
21  
6  
9  
5  
Rural  
32  
35  
2  
11  
3  
* These are attributes of the householder. 
Figure 13. Selected Technologies Used to Go Online at Home by Demographics and 
Population Density, Percent of Online Households, 2012. 
 
Four percent of online rural households relied on dial-up Internet service 
in 2012, while only 1 percent of their urban counterparts used dial-up service 
exclusively at home. Thirty-five percent of rural households with home 
Internet service used DSL, while only 21 percent of online urban households 
did the same. Forty-seven percent of urban users utilized cable alone, while 
only 32 percent of rural dwellers reported accessing the Internet this way. 
Satellite use was higher in rural areas at 5 percent, versus 2 percent reported 
by online urban households. Mobile broadband use was not significantly 
differentiated by geography: 11 percent of rural Internet-using households 
relied on this technology, while 9 percent of their urban counterparts reported 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
27 
the same. Only 2 percent of online rural households reported using fiber-optic 
connections for home Internet service, while 6 percent in urban areas reported 
utilizing this option. Of note, in 2011 and 2012 cable modem usage reported in 
rural areas was 15 percentage points lower than urban areas. However, during 
this same 15-month period, mobile broadband experienced a significant 
increase in rural communities, growing from 7 percent to 11 percent. 
 
 
Figure 14. Internet Use Locations, Percent of Households, 2012. 
 
 
Going Online in 2012: Connecting beyond the Home 
 
Internet Use Outside the Home 
In 2012, 42 percent of Americans used the Internet outside of the home, 
regardless of home use. Fifty-eight percent of 15- to 24-year-olds reported 
Internet use outside of the home, making them most likely to go online outside 
the home; only 16 percent of those ages 65 and older reported the same. 
Employed individuals were more likely than their unemployed counterparts to 
report going online outside the home, and persons with higher family incomes 
were more likely than low-income individuals to use the Internet outside the 
home. Internet use outside of the home was also higher among persons without 
a high school diploma (30 percent) than those whose education ended with a 
high school diploma (27 percent), which may be explained in part by Internet 
use at school. Hispanics reported the least amount of Internet usage outside of 
the home (33 percent), compared to 44 percent of both Whites and Asian 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
28
Americans. The biggest disparity was based on disability status, with only 19 
percent of disabled Americans reporting Internet use outside of the home, 
compared to 47 percent of their non- disabled counterparts. Urban dwellers 
reported Internet use outside of the home 7 percentage points more often (43 
percent) than their rural counterparts (36 percent). Of interest, whether school-
age children lived in the home seems to have a notable impact on usage 
outside of the home, potentially pointing to school-age children‘s use of the 
Internet at school or libraries (no school-age children: 40 percent; school-age 
children: 45 percent). 
 
Internet Use Locations Outside the Home 
The 2012 survey asked respondents where the household‘s Internet users 
go online. Among households with a member who used the Internet at 
locations other than home, 38 percent identified work as a source of Internet 
access. Householders ages 25-44 reported that someone in the household used 
the Internet at work more often than other age groups (51 percent). While only 
13 percent of households making less than $25,000 had someone going online 
at work, 70 percent of households making $100,000 or above did. Only 25 
percent of householders with a high school diploma reported Internet use at 
work, while 59 percent of those with a college degree or higher did so. 
Significantly, survey results largely show a great deal of parity in adoption 
numbers between the genders, but Internet use at work seems to be an 
exception—40 percent of male householders reported someone going online at 
work, while 36 percent of females reported the same. Only 29 percent of 
Hispanic householders and 31 percent of African Americans reported Internet 
use at work, while 41 percent of Whites and 48 percent of Asian American 
householders reported the same. Only 13 percent of householders with a 
disability stated that someone accessed the Internet at work, compared to 42 
percent of non-disabled householders. Among urban dwellers, 40 percent 
answered that someone in the household went online at work, while only 30 
percent of rural households reported the same. While 47 percent of households 
with school-age children at home indicated that someone goes online at work, 
only 35 percent of households without school-age children reported the same. 
Twenty percent of all households reported that someone in the household 
used the Internet at school. The authors observed a large gap between the 
lowest and highest income households: Only 15 percent of households making 
$25,000 and under stated that a member used the Internet at school, while 30 
percent of households earning $100,000 and above responded similarly. Of 
interest, only 18 percent of White householders reported that someone within 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
29 
the household goes online at school, compared to 22 percent of African 
American householders and 26 percent each for of Hispanic and Asian 
American householders.  
One possible explanation for this is that households with home Internet 
connections may rely less often on school Internet use (e.g., Whites at 79 
percent and African Americans at 62 percent). This also raises questions, 
however, about why Asian American households, with an adoption rate 
comparable to White households in 2012, were also those most likely, along 
with Hispanic households to go online at school. These findings may benefit 
from further research and investigation. Only 16 percent of rural dwellers 
reported that someone in the household goes online at school, compared to 21 
percent of households in urban areas. Eleven percent of households reported 
that someone went online at a public library. Use of public libraries to go 
online varies by age group: 15- to 24-year-old householders showed the 
highest utilization (16 percent), while householders 65 and older reported the 
lowest (5 percent). Of note, unemployed householders (20 percent) reported 
Internet use at public libraries much more often than their employed 
counterparts (11 percent). African American (16 percent), Asian American (14 
percent), and Hispanic (12 percent) householders reported the most Internet 
use at public libraries, compared to 9 percent of White householders. 
Additionally, 18 percent of households with school-age children at home 
reported that someone went online at a public library, compared to only 8 
percent of those without children at home. Only 2 percent overall of 
respondents reported that someone at home went online at a community 
center, which afforded Internet access primarily to householders who were: 15 
to 24 years old (4 percent), unemployed (4 percent), or American Indian or 
Alaska Native (4 percent). Ten percent of households reported that someone at 
home went online at an Internet café or coffee shop. The most frequent users 
there were: 15- to 24-year-olds (14 percent), employed (12 percent), high 
income earners at or above $100,000 annually (18 percent), college educated 
or better, (17 percent), and Asian American householders (17 percent). 
Overall, 14 percent of households reported that someone in the home went 
online at someone else‘s house. Again, this number was highest among the 
youngest age brackets (15-24:22 percent; 25-44:20 percent) and those making 
$100,000 or above (21 percent). Those least likely to go online at someone 
else‘s house were those 65 or older (6 percent), individuals not in the labor 
force (9 percent), the disabled (8 percent), and individuals without a high 
school diploma (7 percent). 
 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
30
CONNECTED 
 
Broadband has tremendous potential to enhance education through 
customized lessons, rich digital content, and access to unprecedented 
amounts of information. However, less than 30 percent of schools have the 
high-speed Internet capacity necessary to access these benefits. In June 
2013, President Obama announced ConnectEd, an effort to ensure that 99 
percent of schools and libraries are connected to broadband with speeds of 
at least 100 Mbps with the goal of 1 Gbps by 2017. The ConnectEd 
initiative also seeks to fund teacher technology training and professional 
development to support the adoption of digital learning tools. As of 
February 2014, the private sector had committed $750 million in software, 
hardware, Internet connectivity, and educational tools and content to 
support the initiative. The Federal Communications Commission has 
directed $2 billion of funding from its E-Rate universal service program for 
schools and libraries be used as a down payment to extend broadband to 2o 
million students. In addition, the U.S. Department of Agriculture 
committed another $10 million for distance learning grants to rural schools. 
For 
a 
fact 
sheet 
describing 
ConnectED‘s 
progress, 
visit 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/02/04/fact-sheet-
opportunity- all-answering-president-s-call-enrich-american-ed. 
 
 
Figure 15. Internet Use Location by Householder Employment Status, Percent of 
Households, 2012. 
 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
31 
Internet Use Anywhere (At-home or Away) 
Internet use anywhere (either at home or away from home) continued to 
show positive upward movement in 2012. Since 2000, Internet use anywhere 
has grown by 31 percentage points to 75 percent of all Americans in 2012. The 
age brackets that reported the highest numbers in this category were the 15- to 
24-year-olds (87 percent) and 25- to 44-year-olds (85 percent). The highest 
bump in Internet use anywhere occurred among those 65 and above, reporting 
a 37 percentage-point gain between 2000 and 2012. Adoption rates for using 
the Internet anywhere tended to rise along with income and education level, 
suggesting that persons with lower levels of family income and educational 
attainment may still lack resources and opportunities to get connected. 
Although in the year 2000 Hispanics were less likely than other ethnic groups 
to go online anywhere (24 percent), they closed the gap in 2012, by reporting 
numbers similar to other minority groups (Hispanic: 62 percent; American 
Indian and Alaska Native: 62 percent; African American: 68 percent). Persons 
living in rural areas still lagged behind their urban counterparts in Internet use 
anywhere, although both groups made over a 16 percentage-point gain since 
2003 (rural: 69 percent; urban: 76 percent). 
 
 
No Internet Use at Home 
 
Even as Americans increasingly access the Internet through mobile 
devices and outside of the home, the Administration continues to encourage 
home broadband adoption. As the Internet evolves, some uses—such as 
consulting by video conference with a health professional or completing an 
online application with personal information—may require the privacy 
afforded by a home broadband connection. In addition, residential broadband 
connections can extend student learning beyond the classroom and facilitate 
digital literacy among household members unfamiliar or uncomfortable with 
Internet use. Families with broadband connections and telework options may 
have the ability to spend less on child care services by shortening commuting 
times. Finally, the advent of the ―Internet of Things,‖ which is now allowing 
consumers to monitor their energy consumption and home security systems 
remotely, among other activities, could accelerate the demand for broadband-
enabled homes and the necessity of broadband adoption by all their 
occupants.7 
 
 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
32
 
Figure 16. Main Reason for Non-Use of the Internet at Home, Percent of Households 
Not Online at Home, 2012. 
 
As more Americans go online at home, a significant but declining number 
have yet to cross the digital divide by connecting to the Internet there. 
According to 2012 CPS data, 28 percent of the 122 million households 
represented in the survey did not use broadband at home. Including dial-up 
service decreases the proportion of households not online at home to 25 
percent. Even so, households without Internet service at home offered a 
variety of primary reasons why they did not use it where they live (see Figure 
16). Additionally, 18 percent of U.S. households did not use the Internet at all, 
regardless of location. The following discussion of the main reasons why some 
households declined to access the Internet at home, in order of their prevalence 
among 2012 CPS respondents, may assist policymakers as they pursue 
universal broadband adoption and affordable connectivity in every community 
in the nation. 
 
 
No Need or Interest 
 
In 2012, as in previous years, the prevailing reason that households 
without residential Internet service gave for not using it was the lack of need 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
33 
or interest in going online at home. In the 15 months between the July 2011 
and October 2012 data collections, the portion of non-Internet using 
households offering this explanation remained at 48 percent. The percentage 
of such households increased 9 points between 2003 and 2012 from 39 percent 
to 48 percent. 
Views on whether households needed Internet access or were interested in 
it varied based on previous home Internet use. Households that once used the 
Internet at home, but no longer did so as of the 2012 CPS, expressed 
disinterest in home Internet use much less frequently (21 percent) than the 
households that had never connected to the Internet from home (53 percent). 
Additionally, 38 percent of households that reported only using dial-up 
Internet service at home cited a lack of need for, or interest in, home 
broadband connections in 2012, an increase from 34 percent of dial-up users in 
2011. 
Dividing households by householder age shows differences in perceptions 
of whether home Internet use is needed or of interest. From 2001 to 2012, CPS 
data reveal a consistent pattern of non-adopting householders expressing no 
interest in, or no need for, home Internet service increasing with age. 
Accordingly, in 2012 non-Internet using householders ages 15 to 24 (24  
percent), and those between 25 and 44 (26 percent), were the least likely 
groups to state they did not want or need to use the Internet at home. Forty-
four percent of the next oldest age group, 45- to 64-year-olds, stated they did 
not want or need to use the Internet at home in 2012, and 70 percent of seniors 
ages 65 and older responded similarly. Between 2011 and 2012, however, 
disinterest increased among senior citizens over 65 years old (67 percent to 70 
percent). While the incidence of senior non-using householders reporting they 
did not want or need to access the Internet at home rose 3 percentage points 
from 2011 to 2012, this increase followed a significant 11 percentage-point 
jump from 57 percent to 68 percent between the 2009 and 2010 CPS data 
collections. 
In recent years, employers have more actively recruited through online job 
postings that extend beyond the declining circulation of some local 
newspapers or the limited reach of community job banks (Salpeter, 2012). 
CPS data from 2001 through 2012 demonstrate that unemployed householders 
were always the least likely to state they did not need to use the Internet at 
home. For example, in 2012, non-Internet using households led by an 
unemployed person expressed disinterest in home Internet use (19 percent) 
less often than households headed by employed individuals (39 percent) or 
those ―not in the labor force‖ (58 percent).8 Between 2011 and 2012, 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
34
unemployed-led households responding it was not necessary or desirable to go 
online at home declined 3 percentage points from 22 percent, while the 
percentage of households headed by working householders giving the same 
reason remained unchanged. At the same time, households of those outside the 
labor force continued to exhibit the least interest in home Internet adoption, 
showing a 1 percentage-point increase from 57 percent in 2011 to 58 percent 
in 2012. 
In 2012, the most affluent non-using households, with annual incomes of 
$100,000 or more, stated less often than other income groups that they did not 
want or need to use the Internet in their homes (45 percent), followed closely 
by households with family incomes below $25,000 per year (47 percent). 
About half of households with annual incomes ranging between $25,000 and 
$99,999 expressed disinterest in accessing the Internet at home (see Figure 
19). Comparing data from the 2011 CPS, the lowest income households, those 
earning below $25,000 annually, were the least likely to offer a lack of need or 
interest in using the Internet at home (45 percent), while households with 
incomes at or above $100,000 were the most likely to say they did not need to 
do so (53 percent). Between 2011 and 2012, disinterest in residential Internet 
use dropped 8 percentage points among these highest income households. 
 
 
2001 
2003 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
No Diploma 
55 
40 
40 
48 
49 
50 
High School Diploma 
53 
41 
41 
50 
50 
50 
Some College 
46 
36 
35 
41 
41 
43 
College Degree 
47 
41 
40 
45 
48 
50 
Note: Educational attainment is an attribute of the householder. 
Figure 17. Households Citing Lack of Interest as Main Reason for Not Going Online 
by Education, Percent of Households Not Online at Home, 2001-2012 
 
Non-using householders with some college education or an associate 
degree were less likely to report not going online at home due to a lack of 
interest than others with higher or lower educational attainment levels. Forty-
three percent said they did not get online at home because they were not 
interested in accessing the Internet there, up from 41 percent in 2011. In 2012, 
50 percent of every other category of academic completion expressed no 
interest in connecting to the Internet where they lived. Except in 2001, when 8 
percentage points separated the least educated (55 percent) and the most 
educated (47 percent) householders who said they did not need to visit the 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
35 
Internet at home, the difference between these groups has been nominal (see 
Figure 17). 
Following a pattern from 2001, more men than women expressed 
disinterest in going online at home in 2012, with 50 percent of male heads of 
non-using households and 47 percent of their female counterparts reporting 
this answer. The percentage of men offering this response increased 2 points 
from 2011, but was unchanged for women at 47 percent. 
 
 
2001 
2003 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
White  
56  
46  
45  
53  
53  
55  
African American 
40  
29  
33  
40  
40  
40  
Hispanic  
39  
25  
30  
35  
39  
38  
Asian American 
43  
36  
39  
46  
56  
49  
American Indian or Alaska 
Native  
38  
31  
34  
37  
34  
31  
Other  
N/A  
30  
28  
35  
39  
38  
Note: Race and ethnicity are attributes of the householder. 
Figure 18. Households Citing Lack of Interest as Main Reason for Not Going Online 
by Race, Percent of Households Not Online at Home, 2001-2012. 
 
The race or ethnicity of a householder correlates with whether a household 
not online is interested in using the Internet while home. Between 2001 and 
2012, White households have most often stated no interest or need to connect 
to the Internet in their homes, except in 2011, when 56 percent of Asian 
American non-using householders stated no desire to do so, compared to 53 
percent of Whites. In all other years, Asian American householders were the 
next group after Whites to express disinterest in using the Internet at home. In 
the period between 2009 and 2010, the proportion of households of all racial 
and ethnic groups reporting they lacked interest in, or need for, home Internet 
use increased markedly, although less so among American Indians and Alaska 
Natives. From 2011 to 2012, these households were the least likely to say they 
were not interested in accessing the Internet from home, with the percentage of 
such responses declining 3 points during the period. 
In 2010, Hispanic households (35 percent) were the least likely to say they 
did not need to use the Internet where they lived, but disinterest expressed by 
this group increased to 39 percent in 2011, before falling slightly to 38 percent 
in 2012. The percentage of American Indian and Alaska Native households 
that stated they were not interested in home Internet access decreased from 37 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
36
percent in 2010 to 34 percent in 2011 to 31 percent in 2012. While the 
percentage of African American households expressing that view remained 
flat at 40 percent from 2010 to 2012, Asian American households offering 
disinterest to explain why they did not use the Internet at home increased 10 
percentage points between 2010 and 2011 (2010: 46 percent; 2011: 56 
percent) then dropped 7 points to 49 percent between 2011 and 2012. (see 
Figure 18). 
Generally, between 2001 and 2012, rural residents stated they did not need 
to use the Internet at home more often than urban residents. CPS data for 2012 
show 52 percent of rural residents explained they were not interested in home 
Internet use, while 48 percent urban residents replied they were uninterested in 
home Internet). 
As in past years, households with school-age children were more likely to 
consider home Internet use an important supplement to classroom education 
than households without children in school. In 2001, 49 percent of non-using 
families with children stated they lacked a need or interest in accessing the 
Internet at home compared to 57 percent of households without children, but 
2012 CPS data reflect decreased disinterest among both groups at 47 percent 
and 54 percent respectively. Interestingly, between 2009 and 2010, 
expressions of disinterest in home Internet use increased significantly among 
families with school-age children (38 percent to 46 percent) and those without 
them (45 percent to 52 percent). 
A higher incidence of U.S. householders who were disabled cited their 
lack of need or interest in home Internet connections at 56 percent, compared 
to the 48 percent of all U.S. households that did not access the Internet at 
home in 2012. Yet in 2011, 51 percent of people with disabilities explained 
they did not visit the Internet at home because they did not need to. This figure 
represented a 3 percentage-point decline from 2010 (54 percent) and suggests 
that further research could help shed light on the reluctance of some people 
with disabilities to use residential Internet services despite the significant 
potential benefits such access could provide. For example, in 2012, 61 percent 
of deaf or hard of hearing individuals who did not access the Internet at home 
expressed the highest disinterest among people with various disabilities. These 
respondents may, however, be unaware of, or unable to afford, assistive 
technologies that could facilitate their use of the Internet at home. 
 
 
 
 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
37 
Expense 
 
The expense of using the Internet at home remained the second most often 
cited reason non-Internet households offered in 2012 as the main reason why 
they did not connect there. Although households indicating a lack of interest 
exceed those naming expense as the main obstacle, the number of households 
citing expense should raise concerns for policymakers. For those households—
7 percent of all American households—high costs or low income may present 
significant barriers to going online. 
 
 
No 
Need or 
Interest  
Too 
Expensive  
No/ 
Inadequate 
Computer 
All Households Not Online  
48  
29  
11  
Family Income  
Less Than $25,000  
47  
32  
11  
$25,000-49,999 
51  
26  
11  
$50,000-74,999 
52  
22  
10  
$75,000-99,999 
51  
20  
5  
$100,000 or More  
45  
19  
10  
Education*  
No Diploma  
50  
30  
12  
High SchoolDiploma 
50  
28  
11  
Some College  
43  
31  
11  
College Degree  
50  
24  
9  
Race and Ethnicity*  
White  
55  
22  
10  
African American  
40  
37  
13  
Hispanic  
38  
41  
12  
Asian American  
49  
26  
11  
American Indian or Alaska Native  
31  
42  
8  
Population Density  
Urban  
48  
30  
11  
Rural  
52  
25  
10  
* These are attributes of the householder. 
Figure 19. Main Reason for Non-Use of the Internet at Home by Demographics and 
Population Density, Percent of Households Not Online at Home, 2012. 
 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
38
Twenty-nine percent of unconnected households responded in 2012 that 
they viewed the cost of going online at home as too high. The proportion of 
households citing expense has since grown steadily, from 23 percent in 2003 
to 28 percent in 2011. Among households that ceased using the Internet at 
home by 2012, the expense of such service was the most frequent explanation 
for why they had relinquished it (43 percent), and they gave this response 
twice as often as their lost need or interest in home Internet use (21 percent). 
In contrast to formerly-using households, those that had never been online at 
home stated disinterest twice as often (53 percent) as too expensive (27 
percent). Only 2 percentage points separated dial-up households expressing 
disinterest in high-speed home Internet connections (38 percent) from such 
households responding that cost prevented them from using residential 
broadband service (36 percent) in 2012. 
Not surprisingly, non-using households led by the youngest householders 
ages 15 to 24 most often stated that high cost prevented their Internet use at 
home, rising since 2001 to a high of 51 percent in 2011, but declining a 
percentage point in 2012 to 50 percent. In 2012, more than twice as many of 
these younger householders explained that cost was the main barrier to home 
Internet use compared to the 24 percent of such householders who expressed 
disinterest in home Internet adoption. Forty-nine percent of householders ages 
25 to 44 also reported expense was the primary deterrent to their home Internet 
use. Householders 65 years of age or older were consistently the least likely 
age group to cite expense as the primary reason they did not go online at 
home, and the most likely to respond they did not desire to connect to the 
Internet there. In 2001, 11 percent of seniors said they thought residential 
Internet service was too expensive, while 72 percent said they did not want it. 
By 2012, the percentage of this group concerned about expense remained at 11 
percent and those citing no interest or need declined 2 percentage points to 70 
percent from 72 percent in 2001. 
Predictably, householder employment status affected the likelihood that 
respondents raised concerns about the expense of home Internet use, and 
unemployed householders were the most likely to do so. With employers 
rapidly migrating to online job postings, the jobless increasingly require 
Internet access to search and train for work but can least afford to go online 
from home. In 2012, 58 percent of unemployed persons reported that expense 
was the main reason for not using the Internet at home, which represented the 
highest percentage of respondents offering this reason between 2001 and 2012. 
Further, in the 15 months between the July 2011 and October 2012 data 
collections, a 3 percentage-point increase occurred among both unemployed 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
39 
(55 percent to 58 percent) and employed householders (33 percent to 36 
percent) who replied the high cost of using the Internet where they live 
prevented them from obtaining access. Among those not in the workforce who 
responded similarly, their proportion rose 4 percentage points from 17 percent 
in 2009 and 2010 to 21 percent in 2011 and 2012. 
CPS data reveal an inverse relationship between family income and the 
incidence of responding households to reply that high Internet costs prevented 
them from getting online in their homes. Consequently, the lowest earning 
households most often stated that financial concerns were the primary factor 
for not having residential Internet service. Both in 2012 and 2011, 32 percent 
of households with family incomes less than $25,000 cited expense, while 19 
percent of families earning $100,000 or more annually gave the same reason in 
each of those years. Families with household incomes between $25,000 and 
$49,999 expressing concern about the expense of accessing the Internet at 
home remained constant at 26 percent from 2011 to 2012, but grew 4 
percentage points among those earning between $50,000 and $74,999 during 
that period. In 2012, non- adopting households earning less than $25,000 
annually were the income group most concerned about the cost of home 
Internet service, but significantly, they were also the least likely to say they 
had no interest or need for such service (see Figure 19). 
Each year from 2009 to 2012 (27 percent in 2009, 28 percent in 2010, 32 
percent in 2011, and 31 percent in 2012), householders with some college or 
an associate degree were the most likely to say the Internet‘s expense was the 
main reason they did not use the service at home. By comparison, during that 
same period householders without a high school diploma expressed that 
concern less frequently (25 percent in 2009 and 2010, 28 percent in 2011, and 
30 percent in 2012). Since 2001, householders who have earned at least a 
college degree consistently have been the least likely to cite expense as their 
primary reason for declining to use the Internet at home. Significantly, the 
proportion of highly educated householders deterred from going online at 
home because of the high cost has climbed in recent years from 18 percent in 
2009 to 20 percent in 2010, to 23 percent in 2011, reaching a peak of 24 
percent in 2012. 
By 3 percentage points, female householders (30 percent) were more 
likely than their male counterparts (27 percent) to explain that expense 
prevented them from using the Internet at home in 2012. Such responses 
increased among both genders by a single percentage point from 2011. The 
frequency with which both groups cited the high cost of accessing the Internet 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
40
at home increased among male and female householders between 2010 and 
2011, from 22 to 26 percent for men and from 26 to 29 percent for women. 
CPS data continue to show that affordability as a household‘s main reason 
for not using the Internet at home varied among racial and ethnic groups. Since 
2001, Whites and Asian Americans have been the least likely to cite expense 
as their main impediment to home Internet use. Further, White households‘ 
responses have varied the least between 2001 and 2012, and were unchanged 
from the 2011 CPS at 22 percent. Between 2011 and 2012, the percentage of 
African American householders offering this reason dropped 1 point to 37 
percent. At the same time, the percentage of all other groups reporting expense 
as the most important reason for not using home Internet connections 
increased between 2011 and 2012. Hispanic households providing the same 
response rose a modest 4 percentage points from 37 percent to 41 percent 
compared to the 9 percentage-point gain reported by Asian American 
householders (17 percent to 26 percent) and the dramatic 17 percentage-point 
jump reflected in the responses of American Indians and Alaska Natives (25 
percent to 42 percent) from 2011 to 2012. During the preceding period 
between 2010 and 2011, the incidence of African American householders 
citing financial concerns increased by 8 percentage points from 30 percent to 
38 percent. Yet the proportion of Hispanic householders deterred by cost 
considerations from going online at home grew more slowly by 2 percentage 
points from 35 percent to 37 percent between 2010 and 2011. 
In 2003, African American (33 percent to 29 percent) and Hispanic 
householders (33 percent to 25 percent) cited expense over lack of need as the 
main reason for not using the Internet at home. Hispanics continued in 2009 to 
identify cost concerns as the most important reason for not going online at 
home, as opposed to not wanting or needing to do so (34 percent to 30 
percent). A different pattern began to emerge among Hispanic householders in 
2010, when both reasons tied at 35 percent, and by 2011 their responses began 
to diverge, with disinterest at 39 percent surpassing expense at 37 percent. By 
2012, however, the expense of home Internet use (41 percent) rather than 
disinterest (38 percent) again predominated Hispanic householders‘ reasons 
for not going online there. Finally, the sharp increase during this period from 
25 percent to 42 percent of American Indian and Alaska Native households 
citing expense as their main concern also resulted in that reason outranking 
disinterest (31 percent) among this group for the first time (see Figures 18  
and 20). 
Consistent with historical patterns, in 2012 rural households (25 percent) 
expressed less concern about the expense of home Internet use than did urban 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
41 
households (30 percent). Between 2011 and 2012, urban respondents who 
stated online access at home was too expensive rose by a percentage point, but 
the frequency of that response did not change among rural households. The 
percentages citing expense for both groups grew from 2010 (21 percent rural; 
25 percent urban) to 2011 (25 percent rural; 30 percent urban). 
Once again, household responses about why they did not use the Internet 
at home varied based on the presence of school-age children. In 2012, as in 
past years, families with school children (30 percent) were more likely than 
those without (24 percent) to say expense primarily explained why they did 
not use home Internet connections. In addition, 22 percent of householders 
with a disability expressed cost concerns as their primary reason for not going 
online at home. 
 
 
No or Inadequate Computer 
 
Since 2003, the frequency of this reason for no Internet use at home has 
declined over time from 23 percent that year to a low of 11 percent in 2012, 
falling 2 percentage points from 2011. According to the 2012 CPS, only 1 
percent of dial-up households cited no computer or one that did not work 
sufficiently well for their purposes to explain why they chose not to use more 
robust broadband connections at home. Yet 18 percent of households that no 
longer used the Internet at home and 10 percent of homes that had never been 
online explained they lacked a computer or an adequate one. 
 
 
2001  2003  2009  2010  2011  2012 
White  
19  
18  
19  
20  
22  
22  
African American  
38  
33  
30  
30  
38  
37  
Hispanic  
39  
33  
34  
35  
37  
41  
Asian American  
27  
22  
20  
18  
17  
26  
American Indian or Alaska  
Native  
34  
28  
25  
22  
25  
42  
Other  
N/A  
27  
33  
31  
41  
41  
Note: Race and ethnicity are attributes of the householder. 
Figure 20. Households Citing Expense as Main Reason for Not Going Online by Race, 
Percent of Households Not Online at Home, 2001-2012. 
 
 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
42
Except in 2003, when 10 percentage points separated the youngest 
respondents ages 15 to 24 (29 percent) from seniors 65 years or older (19 
percent), age did not seem to affect this response as the main reason 
householders of various age groups did not use the Internet at home. In 2011, 
14 percent of householders ages 25 to 44 replied they had an unsatisfactory 
computer or none at all, overtaking by 3 percentage points the 11 percent of 
15- to 24-year-olds who offered that explanation. The portion of all age groups 
citing this reason declined over time and by 2012, these two youngest age 
groups tied at 12 percent, followed by 45- to 64-year-olds at 11 percent, and 
seniors ages 65 or older at 10 percent. 
Householder employment status apparently has no effect on this reason for 
no home Internet use. In 2011, 13 percent of both unemployed householders 
and those not in the labor force cited no computer or a poor one for not going 
online at home, while 12 percent of employed respondents gave the same 
reason. In 2012, 11 percent of employed householders, as well as householders 
outside the labor force gave this response, as did 12 percent of unemployed 
CPS participants. 
Similarly, breaking out households by family income did not reveal large 
differences in the frequency with which respondents stated they did not go 
online at home because they lacked an adequate computer.9 In 2011, only 3 
percentage points separated the highest income families earning at least 
$100,000 annually (10 percent) from the lowest income household earning less 
than $25,000 per year (13 percent) responding that no computer or an 
inadequate one kept them offline at home. Only a single percentage point 
differentiated households making as much as $49,999 (11 percent) from 
households with annual incomes from $50,000 to $74,999, as well as those 
earning $100,000 or above (10 percent). Interestingly, in 2012, families 
earning $75,000 to $99,999 were half as likely as other income groups to 
respond that no or poor computer equipment prevented them from accessing 
the Internet at home (5 percent) (see Figure 19). CPS results for 2012 showed 
a large 8 percentage-point drop from 13 percent in 2011 among households in 
this $75,000 to $99,999 per year income range. 
A householder‘s lower education level indicated a slightly higher 
incidence of no computer or an inadequate one as the main reason the 
household did not use residential Internet service. Between 2003 and 2012, a 4 
percentage-point gap existed between householders with a college degree or 
more and those without a high school diploma generally, except in 2009, when 
the difference reached 7 percentage points (16 percent to 23 percent). The 
difference declined to 3 percentage points in 2012 (9 percent to 12 percent). In 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
43 
2012, the frequency of this response dropped 2 percentage points from 2011 
among those without a high school diploma (14 percent to 12 percent) and 
high school graduates (13 percent to 11 percent). From 2011 to 2012, the 
percentage gap fell to only 1 point among those with some college or an 
associate degree (12 percent to 11 percent) and those with at least college 
degree (10 percent to 9 percent). 
American Indian and Alaska Native respondents were the least likely, at 8 
percent, to say they lacked any or an adequate computer as the most important 
reason for not using the Internet at home. In 2010, 23 percent of American 
Indians and Alaska Natives compared to 14 percent of Whites gave that 
reason, with 17 percent each of African American and Hispanic householders 
and 18 percent of Asian American householders citing the same response. In 
2012, 10 percent of White householders said their poor or absent computer 
kept them offline at home, as Asian American (11 percent), Hispanic (12 
percent), and African American (13 percent) householders offered similar 
explanations for their non-use (see Figure 19). Data from all groups show a 
decrease in the incidence of this response between 2011 and 2012 (including 
among American Indians and Alaska Natives—18 to 8 percent; Hispanics—15 
to 12 percent; Asian Americans—14 to 11 percent; and Whites—13 to 10 
percent), except among African American householders, which grew from 11 
percent to 13 percent during the period. 
Householder gender made little difference between male and female 
respondents stating they lacked any or an adequate computer to explain why 
they did not access the Internet from home. In 2011, 13 percent of each gender 
stated this reason, which dropped to 11 percent for both men and women in 
2012. Two percentage points separated men and women in 2009, with men 
less likely (20 percent) than women (22 percent) to cite access to an 
insufficient computer, if one was available at all, to explain why they did not 
use the Internet at home. 
Rural or urban residence also negligibly affected whether a household 
identified no computer or an inadequate one as the major reason for no 
residential Internet use. Ten percent of rural householders compared to 11 
percent of urban householders offered this reason in 2012, with each 
decreasing from 13 percent in 2011. 
As the frequency of households citing computer inadequacy declined over 
time, only one percentage point distinguished households with school children 
and families without them in 2003 (23 percent to 22 percent), 2009 (21 percent 
to 20 percent), 2010 (15 percent to 16 percent), and 2012 (11 percent to 10 
percent). In 2011, these two household types tied at 13 percent in the 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
44
respective frequency of this explanation for no home Internet use. Among 
people with disabilities, 10 percent expressed dissatisfaction with their 
computer‘s adequacy or stated they had no computer to use for Internet access 
at home in 2012. 
 
 
Other Reasons 
 
The proportion of households offering this response for why they did not 
have the Internet at home remained unchanged at 7 percent since 2010, up 
slightly from 6 percent in 2009. As 2012 data show, 6 percent of households 
that have never had home Internet access cited ―other‖ reasons for not 
connecting at home, compared to dial-up households at 9 percent and 
formerly-Internet-using households at 10 percent. 
 
 
Can Use It Elsewhere 
 
In 2012, households stating they did not access the Internet at home 
because they could go online at some other location remained constant at 3 
percent from 2011, down from 5 percent in 2009 and 2010. Only 1 percent of 
dial-up households stated they could use the Internet at a different location in 
2012, compared to 3 percent of households that have never had residential 
Internet service and 4 percent of households that previously used the Internet 
at home. 
Consistently, householders ages 15 to 24 and 25 to 44 were the most likely 
to say they could access the Internet at a location other than their own homes, 
possibly because service was available to them at school or work. Seniors 65 
years or older were predictably the least likely to state alternative access as 
their main reason. For example, in 2012, 5 percent of 15- to 44-year-olds gave 
this as their main reason, followed by householders ages 45 to 64 at 4 percent, 
and those 65 and older at 1 percent. 
More employed and unemployed individuals offered this reason, 
compared to householders not in the labor force. Conceivably, employed 
householders could use the Internet where they work, just as unemployed 
household heads may find access at job placement and training sites or other 
locations. Data from the 2012 CPS demonstrate that employed householders (5 
percent) were more than twice as likely as those not in labor force (2 percent) 
to give this response. This represents a decrease from 2011 among employed 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
45 
(6 percent) and unemployed (3 percent) non-using householders, but doubled 
to 2 percent in 2012 for those not in labor force. 
Income appears to be positively related to the opportunity to use the 
Internet outside of the home, with the lowest earning households least likely to 
give alternative location as the primary reason they did not use the Internet at 
home. In 2012, householders earning $75,000 to $99,999 (9 percent) were 
three times more likely to give this answer than those earning $25,000 to 
$49,999 (3 percent). The most affluent householders with family incomes of at 
least $100,000 (8 percent) were four times more likely than those earning less 
than $25,000 (2 percent) to reply they could use the Internet somewhere else. 
The same pattern held in 2011, and remained constant for the highest and 
lowest income households, but increased from 5 percent to 9 percent in 2012 
for households earning $75,000 to $99,999 per year. 
As with income, the likelihood that respondents replied they had other 
places to access the Internet increases with educational attainment. The 
proportions did not fluctuate between 2011 and 2012 for householders with: 
no diploma (1 percent), a high school diploma (3 percent), some college 
courses or associate degree (4 percent), and a college degree or higher (7 
percent). The largest percentage-point change reported by higher educated 
householders occurred between 2010 and 2011, when the incidence dropped 4 
percentage points from 8 percent to 4 percent among those with some college, 
and by 5 points from 12 percent to 7 percent among householders with at least 
a college degree. 
Male and female households responding they could use the Internet 
elsewhere held firm for each at 3 percent in 2011 and 2012. Two percent of 
individuals with disabilities reported they could go online at another location 
in the 2012 CPS.  
CPS data indicate small differences in householders explaining they could 
go elsewhere to connect to the Internet based on their race and ethnicity. In 
2003, ―Others‖ provided this response most often at 4 percent, followed by 
Whites and Asian Americans at 3 percent each, American Indians and Alaska 
Natives at 2 percent, and African Americans and Hispanics at 1 percent each. 
However, the proportion of all racial and ethnic groups offering this as the 
main reason for no home Internet has increased over time between 2003 and 
2010, peaking in 2010 with American Indian and Alaska Native householders 
at 9 percent, African American householders at 6 percent and White, Asian 
American, and Hispanic householders each at 5 percent. The percentages of 
American Indian and Alaska Native householders fell by two-thirds in 2011 to 
3 percent, before doubling again to 6 percent in 2012, when again they were 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
46
the most likely to say their ability to use the Internet at an alternative location 
explained why they did not connect to the Internet where they lived. Between 
2011 and 2012, the portion of Whites giving this reason remained stable at 3 
percent as did that of Asian Americans at 4 percent, but African American and 
Hispanic householder responses dropped to 3 percent and 2 percent, 
respectively. 
In 2011, rural (2 percent) and urban (3 percent) respondents reported other 
locations as their main reason for no home Internet use, but they tied each at 3 
percent in 2012. No difference existed between the responses of non-using 
families with or without school- age children, with 5 percent of each 
responding in this fashion in 2010, compared to 3 percent each in 2011 and 
2012. 
 
 
Not Available in Area 
 
This response has remained constant for both rural and urban 
householders from 2009 to 2012. During that time, rural residents were twice 
as likely at 2 percent to explain they did not connect to the Internet at home 
because no Internet service was available where they lived compared to 1 
percent of urban residents. American Indian and Alaska Native households 
were the most likely racial group to give this reason, with the ratio fluctuating 
from 3 percent in 2009, to 4 percent in 2010, up significantly to 11 percent in 
2011, before settling back to 4 percent in 2012. Three percent of non-using 
households with family incomes of $100,000 or more reported that residential 
Internet service was unavailable, compared to 1 percent of those households 
with incomes below $50,000. Fifteen percent of dial-up households reported 
they did not use high-speed connections at home because residential 
broadband service was inaccessible to them. 
 
 
Privacy 
 
Although only 1 percent of households expressed privacy concerns in both 
2011 and 2012 as their primary reason for not using the Internet at home, well-
publicized data breaches and greater consumer awareness of Internet privacy 
issues may affect this response in future years. In view of its ongoing efforts to 
advance policies to protect consumer data privacy, NTIA will carefully 
monitor upcoming data on this question. 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
47 
As households increase their home Internet use, research exploring the 
value proposition for non-Internet consumers could help policymakers 
understand, for example, whether persistent non-users do not find such access 
integral to their daily lives and therefore are not interested in it, whether they 
do not find sufficient utility in home Internet use to pay the costs they perceive 
as too high, or whether they truly desire residential Internet service, but simply 
cannot afford it. Further research on these and other questions could help 
government and community leaders best tailor policies that facilitate sustained 
broadband adoption by Americans who cannot use this empowering 
technology or have not yet to chosen to do so. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
From the start of the Digital Nation series and predecessor reports on the 
digital divide beginning in 1994, each survey provides new insight into how 
Americans are accessing and using the Internet. NTIA looks forward to further 
exploring the questions generated by the current data, while continuing to find 
new ways to analyze and report findings to best meet the needs of social 
scientists and policymakers. In the next Digital Nation report, NTIA hopes to 
develop a greater understanding of why Americans choose to go online, and 
the device choices they make to do so. As NTIA uses this information to 
advance national policy to reach the critical goal of making the Internet 
available and affordable for every American, we urge each community to 
accelerate local efforts to bridge the digital divide through actively engaging 
citizens and elected officials, as well as its civic, business, and non-profit 
leaders. Our nation‘s future depends in part on our success in this common 
pursuit. 
 
 
APPENDIX A. DATA AND METHODOLOGY 
 
This report uses data from the October 2012 Current Population Survey 
(―CPS‖), a monthly survey of a representative sample of the U.S. 
noninstitutional population that provides data on labor force participation, 
income, and demographic characteristics of households. It includes data from 
the October 2012 CPS Computer and Internet Use Supplement, a special 
supplement to the CPS periodically commissioned by NTIA. 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
48
The October 2012 CPS asked each surveyed household whether someone 
in that household used or owned a computer, as well as who in the household 
used the Internet, and the devices and locations from which they did so. In 
addition, the survey asked the household which of the following technologies 
members utilized to connect to the Internet from home: dial-up service, DSL, 
cable modem, fiber optics, satellite, mobile broadband, or some other Internet 
connection technology. Using these data, it is possible to determine whether a 
household owned a personal computer (i.e., desktop, laptop, netbook, or 
notebook) or a handheld device, as well as the type of broadband technology 
(i.e., DSL, cable modem, fiber optics, satellite, or mobile broadband) members 
utilized to connect to the Internet. The survey also asked those households that 
did not access Internet services to state their main reason for not doing so. 
The October 2012 CPS Supplement included a group of questions 
primarily concerning Internet and mobile phone usage habits.10 These 
questions were asked of the household respondent about his/her own usage 
habits. Since one person in each household responded and that person was not 
randomly selected, a special set of weights was created to properly tally these 
variables. Care should be used when analyzing these data because the 
respondents are not evenly distributed across the sample based on age. This is 
why analysis of these data only includes the population ages 25 and older. 
About 53,600 household records comprise the sample, representing 122 
million American households. NTIA analyzes computer and Internet use at the 
household and person levels and their association with characteristics such as 
age, family income, household size and composition, and geographic location. 
When conducting household- level analysis, the authors use information for 
the household reference person (also known as the ―head of household‖ or 
―householder‖) as proxies for characteristics like education, race, ethnicity, 
age, disability status, and foreign-born status.  
Prior to October 2010, data on computer use, as well as the types of 
broadband technology that online households utilized, had not been available 
since the early 2000s. The supply and demand for both mobile devices and 
residential Internet access services have changed enormously during this 
period. The October 2012 data serve to update these trends. The data from the 
October 2012 CPS make it possible to continue to identify the preferred or 
most common types of computers and access technologies used for residential 
Internet access, including the prevalence of mobile broadband technologies 
and handheld devices. 
 
 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
49 
APPENDIX B. STATISTICAL TABLES 
 
Table 1. Regression of Mobile Phone-Based Email Use on Demographic 
and Geographic Characteristics, Mobile Phone Users Age 25+, 2012 
 
Variable 
Coefficient 
Estimate 
Standard 
Error 
Family Income: $25,000-49,999 
0.0412 ** 
0.0077 
Family Income: $50,000-74,999 
0.0851 ** 
0.0071 
Family Income: $75,000-99,999 
0.1333 ** 
0.0096 
Family Income: $100,000 or More 
0.2239 ** 
0.0090 
Education: High School Diploma 
0.0581 ** 
0.0096 
Education: Some College 
0.1561 ** 
0.0099 
Education: College Degree or More 
0.2207 ** 
0.0103 
Age 
-0.0196 ** 
0.0011 
Age Squared 
0.0001 ** 
0.0000 
Race: African American 
-0.0034 
0.0088 
Race: Hispanic 
-0.0029 
0.0096 
Race: Asian American 
-0.0135 
0.0130 
Race: American Indian or Alaska Native 
0.0335 
0.0345 
Race: Other 
0.0183 
0.0192 
Female 
-0.0047 
0.0050 
Disabled 
-0.0122 
0.0083 
Foreign-Born Non-Citizen 
-0.0696 ** 
0.0130 
Employment Status: Unemployed 
-0.0608 ** 
0.0124 
Employment Status: Not in Labor Force 
-0.0577 ** 
0.0062 
Related School-Age Children at Home 
0.0725 ** 
0.0177 
Household Size 
-0.0057 
0.0035 
Household Size When Related School-Age Children at 
Home 
-0.0100 † 
0.0051 
Metropolitan Status: Urban 
0.0847 ** 
0.0081 
Metropolitan Status: Unidentified 
-0.0267 
0.0449 
Region: Midwest 
0.0112 
0.0083 
Region: South 
0.0514 ** 
0.0080 
Region: West 
0.0719 ** 
0.0079 
Constant 
0.8397 ** 
0.0310 
Age 25+ Sample Size 
50,627 
 
Estimated Age 25+ Population Size 
205,182,829 
 
Mobile Phone User Subsample Size 
44,019 
 
Estimated Mobile Phone User Subpopulation Size 
180,320,465 
 
R2 
0.2134 
 
† indicates 90 percent confidence that the marginal effect is nonzero (p ≤ 0.1). 
* indicates 95 percent confidence that the marginal effect is nonzero (p ≤ 0.05). 
** indicates 99 percent confidence that the marginal effect is nonzero (p ≤ 0.01). 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
50
Table 2. Regression of Mobile Phone-Based Web Browsing on 
Demographic and Geographic Characteristics, Mobile Phone Users Age 
25+, 2012 
 
Variable 
Coefficient 
Estimate 
Standard 
Error 
Family Income: $25,000-49,999 
0.0290 ** 
0.0069 
Family Income: $50,000-74,999 
0.0688 ** 
0.0078 
Family Income: $75,000-99,999 
0.1068 ** 
0.0102 
Family Income: $100,000 or More 
0.1885 ** 
0.0093 
Education: High School Diploma 
0.0522 ** 
0.0088 
Education: Some College 
0.1365 ** 
0.0101 
Education: College Degree or More 
0.1846 ** 
0.0111 
Age 
-0.0218 ** 
0.0011 
Age Squared 
0.0001 ** 
0.0000 
Race: African American 
0.0038 
0.0081 
Race: Hispanic 
-0.0217 * 
0.0096 
Race: Asian American 
-0.0350 ** 
0.0132 
Race: American Indian or Alaska Native 
0.0296 
0.0353 
Race: Other 
0.0168 
0.0222 
Female 
0.0064 
0.0048 
Disabled 
-0.0087 
0.0080 
Foreign-Born Non-Citizen 
-0.0641 ** 
0.0126 
Employment Status: Unemployed 
-0.0441 ** 
0.0126 
Employment Status: Not in Labor Force 
-0.0505 ** 
0.0065 
Related School-Age Children at Home 
0.0485 ** 
0.0186 
Household Size 
-0.0019 
0.0032 
Household Size When Related School-Age Children at 
Home 
-0.0054 † 
0.0051 
Metropolitan Status: Urban 
0.0579 ** 
0.0082 
Metropolitan Status: Unidentified 
-0.0489 
0.0516 
Region: Midwest 
0.0343 
0.0084 
Region: South 
0.0513 ** 
0.0081 
Region: West 
0.0803 ** 
0.0084 
Constant 
0.9484 ** 
0.0310 
Age 25+ Sample Size 
50,627 
 
Estimated Age 25+ Population Size 
205,182,829 
 
Mobile Phone User Subsample Size 
44,019 
 
Estimated Mobile Phone User Subpopulation Size 
180,320,465 
 
R2 
0.2061 
 
† indicates 90 percent confidence that the marginal effect is nonzero (p ≤ 0.1). 
* indicates 95 percent confidence that the marginal effect is nonzero (p ≤ 0.05). 
** indicates 99 percent confidence that the marginal effect is nonzero (p ≤ 0.01). 
 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
51 
Table 3. Regression of Mobile Phone-Based App Downloading  
on Demographic and Geographic Characteristics, Mobile Phone  
Users Age 25+, 2012 
 
Variable 
Coefficient 
Estimate 
Standard 
Error 
Family Income: $25,000-49,999 
0.0396 ** 
0.0067 
Family Income: $50,000-74,999 
0.0747 ** 
0.0071 
Family Income: $75,000-99,999 
0.1187 ** 
0.0095 
Family Income: $100,000 or More 
0.1845 ** 
0.0087 
Education: High School Diploma 
0.0390 ** 
0.0091 
Education: Some College 
0.1115 ** 
0.0082 
Education: College Degree or More 
0.1455 ** 
0.0099 
Age 
-0.0230 ** 
0.0010 
Age Squared 
0.0001 ** 
0.0000 
Race: African American 
-0.0090 
0.0080 
Race: Hispanic 
-0.0371 ** 
0.0090 
Race: Asian American 
-0.0261 * 
0.0128 
Race: American Indian or Alaska Native 
0.0035 
0.0328 
Race: Other 
0.0199 
0.0197 
Female 
-0.0002 
0.0045 
Disabled 
-0.0062 
0.0073 
Foreign-Born Non-Citizen 
-0.0815 ** 
0.0120 
Employment Status: Unemployed 
-0.0421 ** 
0.0112 
Employment Status: Not in Labor Force 
-0.0382 ** 
0.0055 
Related School-Age Children at Home 
0.0640 ** 
0.0177 
Household Size 
0.0021 
0.0035 
Household Size When Related School-Age Children at 
Home 
-0.0138 ** 
0.0052 
Metropolitan Status: Urban 
0.0584 ** 
0.0078 
Metropolitan Status: Unidentified 
-0.0316 
0.0335 
Region: Midwest 
0.0251 ** 
0.0084 
Region: South 
0.0438 ** 
0.0081 
Region: West 
0.0797 ** 
0.0077 
Constant 
0.8562 ** 
0.0312 
Age 25+ Sample Size 
50,627 
 
Estimated Age 25+ Population Size 
205,182,829 
 
Mobile Phone User Subsample Size 
44,019 
 
Estimated Mobile Phone User Subpopulation Size 
180,320,465 
 
R2 
0.1725 
 
† indicates 90 percent confidence that the marginal effect is nonzero (p ≤ 0.1). 
* indicates 95 percent confidence that the marginal effect is nonzero (p ≤ 0.05). 
** indicates 99 percent confidence that the marginal effect is nonzero (p ≤ 0.01). 
 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
52
Table 4. Regression of Mobile Phone-Based Social Networking on 
Demographic and Geographic Characteristics, Mobile Phone Users  
Age 25+, 2012 
 
Variable 
Coefficient 
Estimate 
Standard 
Error 
Family Income: $25,000-49,999 
0.0352 ** 
0.0067 
Family Income: $50,000-74,999 
0.0651 ** 
0.0075 
Family Income: $75,000-99,999 
0.0779 ** 
0.0100 
Family Income: $100,000 or More 
0.1227 ** 
0.0088 
Education: High School Diploma 
0.0359 ** 
0.0084 
Education: Some College 
0.0928 ** 
0.0085 
Education: College Degree or More 
0.1168 ** 
0.0105 
Age 
-0.0274 ** 
0.0010 
Age Squared 
0.0002 ** 
0.0000 
Race: African American 
-0.0094 
0.0086 
Race: Hispanic 
-0.0190 * 
0.0087 
Race: Asian American 
-0.0226 † 
0.0131 
Race: American Indian or Alaska Native 
0.0464 
0.0324 
Race: Other 
0.0421 * 
0.0203 
Female 
0.0482 ** 
0.0049 
Disabled 
0.0001 
0.0067 
Foreign-Born Non-Citizen 
-0.0703 ** 
0.0115 
Employment Status: Unemployed 
-0.0468 ** 
0.0121 
Employment Status: Not in Labor Force 
-0.0342 ** 
0.0055 
Related School-Age Children at Home 
0.0640 ** 
0.0164 
Household Size 
0.0012 
0.0031 
Household Size When Related School-Age Children at 
Home 
-0.0132 ** 
0.0048 
Metropolitan Status: Urban 
0.0341 ** 
0.0073 
Metropolitan Status: Unidentified 
-0.0869 * 
0.0371 
Region: Midwest 
0.0311 ** 
0.0075 
Region: South 
0.0499 ** 
0.0071 
Region: West 
0.0608 ** 
0.0074 
Constant 
0.9967 ** 
0.0301 
Age 25+ Sample Size 
50,627 
 
Estimated Age 25+ Population Size 
205,182,829 
 
Mobile Phone User Subsample Size 
44,019 
 
Estimated Mobile Phone User Subpopulation Size 
180,320,465 
 
R2 
0.1739 
 
† indicates 90 percent confidence that the marginal effect is nonzero (p ≤ 0.1). 
* indicates 95 percent confidence that the marginal effect is nonzero (p ≤ 0.05). 
** indicates 99 percent confidence that the marginal effect is nonzero (p ≤ 0.01). 
 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
53 
Table 5. Internet Use at Home by State, Percent of Households, 2009-2012 
 
State 
2012 
95% Conf. Interval 
2006 
95% Conf. Interval 
Est. % 
Chg. 09-
12 
Est. 
Lower 
Upper 
Est. 
Lower 
Upper 
Alabama 
64.7 
60.8 
68.4 
56.1 
52.1 
60.1 
15.3 
Alaska 
78.1 
74.7 
81.2 
77.3 
73.9 
80.3 
1.0 
Arizona 
71.6 
67.8 
75.1 
72.1 
68.4 
75.5 
-0.7 
Arkansas 
68.8 
63.5 
73.7 
55.9 
51.8 
59.9 
23.1 
California 
78.2 
76.6 
79.7 
73.1 
71.7 
74.4 
7.0 
Colorado 
82.5 
79.5 
85.1 
72.9 
70.3 
75.4 
13.2 
Connecticut 
78.9 
76.2 
81.3 
74.8 
72.2 
77.1 
5.5 
Delaware 
74.1 
70.7 
77.3 
71.1 
67.9 
74.1 
4.2 
District of Columbia 
74.9 
71.7 
77.9 
71.8 
68.5 
74.8 
4.3 
Florida 
77.9 
76.0 
79.7 
71.5 
69.6 
73.4 
9.0 
Georgia 
75.1 
71.8 
78.2 
67.6 
64.8 
70.3 
11.1 
Hawaii 
79.5 
76.2 
82.4 
73.3 
69.6 
76.7 
8.5 
Idaho 
82.1 
78.3 
85.5 
72.2 
68.4 
75.7 
13.7 
Illinois 
77.8 
76.1 
79.5 
68.3 
66.0 
70.6 
13.9 
Indiana 
71.7 
68.7 
74.4 
62.5 
59.2 
65.7 
14.7 
Iowa 
74.9 
72.3 
77.4 
67.8 
64.9 
70.6 
10.5 
Kansas 
76.0 
71.6 
79.9 
70.5 
67.2 
73.6 
7.8 
Kentucky 
68.6 
64.0 
72.8 
59.5 
56.0 
62.9 
15.3 
Louisiana 
60.7 
55.0 
66.2 
60.6 
56.3 
64.7 
0.2 
Maine 
77.1 
73.8 
80.1 
70.2 
67.4 
72.9 
9.8 
Maryland 
79.3 
76.7 
81.7 
73.4 
70.8 
75.8 
8.0 
Massachusetts 
79.4 
76.8 
81.9 
75.8 
72.8 
78.6 
4.7 
Michigan 
74.5 
71.7 
77.2 
68.0 
65.4 
70.5 
9.6 
Minnesota 
82.4 
80.1 
84.5 
72.4 
69.9 
74.7 
13.8 
Mississippi 
58.4 
53.6 
63.0 
51.8 
47.4 
56.1 
12.7 
Missouri 
70.5 
67.6 
73.2 
63.7 
60.5 
66.7 
10.7 
Montana 
72.1 
67.3 
76.4 
64.1 
59.8 
68.1 
12.5 
Nebraska 
72.0 
68.9 
74.9 
70.0 
66.8 
73.0 
2.9 
Nevada 
79.5 
76.3 
82.4 
72.4 
69.1 
75.4 
9.8 
New Hampshire 
83.0 
80.7 
85.1 
78.7 
76.3 
81.0 
5.5 
New Jersey 
79.6 
77.1 
81.9 
76.8 
74.0 
79.4 
3.6 
New Mexico 
71.6 
65.8 
76.8 
61.7 
57.2 
66.1 
16.0 
New York 
75.8 
73.7 
77.8 
70.6 
68.7 
72.5 
7.4 
North Carolina 
72.9 
69.8 
75.8 
63.9 
61.0 
66.6 
14.1 
North Dakota 
79.5 
76.3 
82.4 
67.1 
63.5 
70.5 
18.5 
Ohio 
71.3 
68.5 
73.9 
66.8 
64.4 
69.2 
6.7 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
54
Table 5. (Continued) 
 
State 
2012 
95% Conf. Interval 
2006 
95% Conf. Interval 
Est. % 
Chg. 09-
12 
Est. 
Lower 
Upper 
Est. 
Lower 
Upper 
Oklahoma 
71.2 
65.2 
76.5 
60.6 
56.9 
64.2 
17.5 
Oregon 
84.8 
80.4 
88.4 
76.0 
72.9 
78.8 
11.6 
Pennsylvania 
74.4 
72.4 
76.4 
67.3 
65.0 
69.5 
10.5 
Rhode Island 
76.5 
73.5 
79.2 
71.6 
68.6 
74.3 
6.8 
South Carolina 
69.0 
66.4 
71.5 
58.3 
54.6 
61.8 
18.4 
South Dakota 
74.0 
70.3 
77.3 
65.5 
62.2 
68.6 
13.0 
Tennessee 
68.5 
63.8 
72.8 
62.3 
58.8 
65.7 
10.0 
Texas 
69.7 
67.7 
71.7 
63.9 
62.1 
65.8 
9.1 
Utah 
82.5 
77.6 
86.5 
77.9 
74.2 
81.2 
5.9 
Vermont 
80.1 
77.0 
82.9 
70.8 
67.7 
73.7 
13.1 
Virginia 
73.8 
71.2 
76.3 
71.0 
68.2 
73.7 
3.9 
Washington 
80.2 
77.5 
82.7 
77.9 
75.1 
80.5 
3.0 
West Virginia 
63.6 
59.6 
67.4 
59.7 
55.8 
63.5 
6.5 
Wisconsin 
74.3 
70.6 
77.7 
71.8 
69.1 
74.4 
3.5 
Wyoming 
76.1 
71.9 
79.9 
69.8 
66.3 
73.0 
9.0 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Ahsan, K., Khan, O. & Salam, A. (2013). Assistive technology for night 
blindness: A mobile application approach. International Journal of Mobile 
Learning and Organisation, 7 (2), 140-157. 
Arthur D. Little, Chalmers University of Technology, & Ericsson. (2013, 
Sep.). Socioeconomic effects of broadband speed. Retrieved from http:// 
www.ericsson.com/res/thecompany/docs/corporate-responsibility/2013/ 
ericsson-broadband-final-071013.pdf 
Cisero, M. (2014, April 17). How baby boomers are embracing mobile 
shopping. BIA/Kelsey Local Media Watch. Retrieved from http://blog. 
biakelsey.com/index.php/2014/04/17/how-baby-boomers-are- embracing-
mobile-shopping/ 
DeGusta, M. (2012, May 9). Are smart phones spreading faster than any 
technology in human history? MIT Technology Review. Retrieved from 
http://www.technologyreview.com/news/427787/are-smart-phones-
spreading- faster-than-any-technology-in-human-history/ 
Economics 
and 
Statistics 
Administration 
(ESA), 
& 
National 
Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA). (2000, 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
55 
Oct.). Falling through the net: Toward digital inclusion—A report on 
Americans’ access to technology tools. Retrieved from http://www.ntia. 
doc.gov/files/ntia/publications/fttn00.pdf 
Executive Order No. 13636, 78 F.R. 11739 (2013). 
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) & National Telecommunications 
and Information Administration (NTIA). (2014, Feb.). Access to 
broadband technology by speed. National Broadband Map Broadband 
Statistics 
Report. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.broadbandmap.gov/ 
download/Technology%20by%20Speed.pdf 
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) & National Telecommunications 
and Information Administration (NTIA). (2014, Feb.). Broadband 
availability in urban vs. rural areas. National Broadband Map Broadband 
Statistics 
Report. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.broadbandmap.gov/ 
download/Broadband%20Availability%20in%20Rural%20vs%20Urban%
20Areas.pdf 
Frost & Sullivan. (2014, May 15). Frost and Sullivan: A market potential of 
USD$731 billion in connected living by 2020. Retrieved from http://www. 
frost.com/prod/servlet/press-release.pag?docid=290755603 
Gartner. (2013, Dec. 12). Gartner says the Internet of things installed base will 
grow to 26 billion units by 2020. Retrieved from http://www.gartner.com/ 
newsroom/id/2636073 
Internet Innovation Alliance. (2013). Access to broadband internet: Top ten 
areas of saving—2013. Retrieved from http://www.internetinnovation.org/ 
library/special-reports/access-to- 
broadband-internet-top-ten-areas-of-
saving-2013/ 
Jackson, D. (2012, Jul. 30). Smartphones: The new weapon to combat 
unemployment. Jobs & Hire. Retrieved from http://www.jobsnhire.com/ 
articles/2606/20120730/jobs-hunting-mobile-apps-iphone-android-careers 
-entry-level-unemployment.htm 
Lowrey, A. (2014, Apr. 30). Changed life of the poor: Better off, but far 
behind. The New York Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/ 
2014/05/01/business/economy/changed-life-of-the- 
poor-squeak-by-and-
buy-a- 
lot.html?emc=edit_th_20140501&nl=todaysheadlines&nlid= 
62921653&_r=0 
Mandel, M. (2013, Jul. 8). 752,000 app economy jobs on the 5th anniversary of 
the app store. Progressive Policy Institute. Retrieved from http://www. 
progressivepolicy.org/2013/07/752000-app-economy-jobs-on-the-5th-
anniversary-of-the-app-store/ 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
56
Mulpuru, S. (2014, May 12). US mobile phone and tablet commerce forecast, 
2013 to 2018. Forrester Research. Retrieved from http://www.forrester. 
com/US+Mobile+Phone+And+Tablet+Commerce+Forecas 
t+2013+To+ 
2018/fulltext//ERES115514?intcmp=blog:forrlink 
National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA). (2001-
2012). Current Population Survey data. Internet and Computer Use 
Studies and Data Files. Retrieved from http://www.ntia.doc.gov/data  
National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA). (2013, 
Aug. 5). New broadband map data shows progress, but work remains. 
Retrieved from http://www.ntia.doc.gov/blog/2013/new-broadband-map-
data-shows-progress- work-remains 
National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA). (2014, 
Feb. 5). Digital learning program prepares students for school, careers 
and life in the 21st century. Retrieved from http://www.ntia.doc.gov/blog/ 
2014/digital-learning-program-prepares-students-school-careers-and-life-
21st-century 
National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA). (2014, 
Jun. 5). NTIA releases interim progress report on administration’s plan to 
free up more spectrum. Retrieved from http://www.ntia.doc.gov/blog/ 
2014/ntia-releases-interim-progress-report-administration-s-plan-free-
more-spectrum 
National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA) & 
Economics and Statistics Administration (ESA). (2013, June). Exploring 
the digital nation: America’s emerging online experience. Retrieved from 
http://www.ntia.doc.gov/files/ntia/publications/exploring_the_digital_nati
on_ -_americas_emerging_online_experience.pdf 
Office of Management and Budget (OMB). 2009, Dec. 9), OMB bulletin no. 
10-02: Update of statistical area definitions and guidance on their uses. 
Retrieved from http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/assets/ 
bulletins/b10-02.pdf 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 
(2014a, Jan. 9). Total fixed and wireless broadband subscriptions by 
country. OECD Broadband Portal. Retrieved from http://www.oecd.org/ 
sti/broadband/oecdbroadbandportal.htm 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 
(2014b, Jan. 9). Fixed and wireless broadband subscriptions per 100 
inhabitants. OECD Broadband Portal. Retrieved from http://www.oecd. 
org/sti/broadband/oecdbroadbandportal.htm 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
57 
Pew Research Center. (2014, Jan. 16). E-reading rises as device ownership 
jumps. PewResearch Internet Project. Retrieved from http://www. 
pewinternet.org/2014/01/16/e-reading-rises-as-device-ownership-jumps/ 
Rogers, E.M. (1995). Diffusion of innovations (4th ed.). New York, NY: Free 
Press.  
Salpeter, M. (2012, Jul. 11). The 9 best tips for submitting an online job 
application. US News & World Report. Retrieved from http://money. 
usnews.com/money/blogs/outside-voices-careers/2012/07/11/the-9-best-
tips-for-submitting-an-online- job-application 
SQW Group. (2013, Nov.) UK broadband impact study: Impact report. 
Commissioned by the United Kingdom Department for Culture, Media & 
Sport. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/ 
system/uploads/attachment_data/file/257006/UK_Broadband_Impact_ 
Study _-_Impact_Report_-_Nov_2013_-_Final.pdf 
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). (2014). Labor force characteristics. 
Labor force statistics from the Current Population Survey. Retrieved from 
http://www.bls.gov/cps/lfcharacteristics.htm#nlf 
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) & U.S. Census Bureau. (2006, Oct.). 
Technical paper 66. Design and Methodology—Current Population 
Survey, 5-1. Retrieved from http://www.census.gov/prod/2006pubs/tp-
66.pdf 
U.S. Census Bureau. (2011). July 2011 computer and Internet use 
supplemental survey. Retrieved from http://thedataweb.rm.census.gov/ftp/ 
cps_ftp.html#cpssupps 
U.S. Census Bureau. (2011). July 2011 current population survey. Retrieved 
from http://thedataweb.rm.census.gov/ftp/cps_ftp.html#cpsbasic 
U.S. Census Bureau. (2012). Current population survey (CPS) data. Retrieved 
from https://www.census.gov/cps/data/ 
U.S. Census Bureau. (2012). October 2012 current population survey. 
Retrieved from http://thedataweb.rm.census.gov/ftp/cps_ftp.html#cpsbasic 
U.S. Census Bureau. (2012). October 2012 school enrollment and Internet use 
supplemental survey. Retrieved from http://thedataweb.rm.census.gov/ 
ftp/cps_ftp.html#cpssupps 
U.S. Department of Commerce. (2013, July 31). Commerce’s Internet Policy 
Task Force releases report on digital copyright policy. Retrieved from 
http://www.commerce.gov/blog/2013/07/31/commerces-internet-policy-
task- force-releases-report-digital-copyright-policy 
The White House, Office of the Press Secretary. (2013, June 6). President 
Obama unveils connected initiative to bring America’s students into 

U.S. Department of Commerce and NTIA 
58
digital 
age. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press- 
office/2013/ 
06/06/president-obama-unveils-connected-initiative-bring- 
america-s-students-di 
The White House, Office of the Press Secretary. (2013, June 6). Remarks by 
the President at Mooresville Middle School. Speech presented at 
Mooresville 
Middle 
School, 
Mooresville, 
NC. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press- 
office/2013/06/06/remarks-
president-mooresville-middle-school-mooresville- nc 
 
 
End Notes 
 
1 Two studies issued in 2013 support the notion that broadband has salient effects. One study 
asserts that based on an 11-country analysis, the faster the connection speed, the greater the 
quantifiable benefits to household income and ultimately a nation‘s gross domestic product 
(Arthur D. Little, Chalmers University of Technology, & Ericsson, 2013); while the other 
argues that for every £1 the government invests in broadband, the UK economy benefits by 
£20, and that social and environmental benefits also result from broadband use (SQW 
Group, 2013). 
2 Among countries that are members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD), a global organization of nations with market economies backed by 
democratic institutions, the United States ranked number one in terms of total wired (91 
million) and wireless (299 million) broadband subscriptions as of June 2013. Arrayed by 
subscriptions per 100 inhabitants, the United States ranked 16th in wired connections and 
7th in wireless (OECD, 2014a & 2014b). 
3 The CPS public use files do not provide the geographic variable for identifying a household‘s 
location as urban or rural. In this report, ―urban‖ refers to metropolitan areas and ―rural‖ to 
nonmetropolitan areas. Since 2000, a metropolitan area is defined by its ―core based 
statistical area‖ (CBSA), which includes both metropolitan and micropolitan statistical 
areas. According to the 2000 standards, each CBSA must have at least one urban area with 
at least 10,000 inhabitants. Each metropolitan statistical area must contain at least one 
urbanized area with a population of 50,000 or more. Each micropolitan statistical area must 
contain at least one urban cluster with a population of between 10,000 and 50,000 (Office of 
Management and Budget [OMB], 2009). 
4 A ―householder‖ or ―reference person‖ is the household member who owns or rents the housing 
unit (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics & U.S. Census Bureau, 2006). When analyzing 
household-level data, NTIA uses the householder‘s demographic characteristics (such as 
age, race, and educational attainment) as a proxy for the entire household. 
5 It is important to note that, due to the smaller sample sizes for individual states, state-level 
adoption estimates are subject to a margin of error of several percentage points. These 
estimates therefore are best understood as a general assessment of home Internet use in each 
state, and not as a precise ranking. 
6 It is beyond the scope of this study to attempt to identify the causes of different growth rates 
observed in each state. In some states with high adoption rates, for example, saturation may 
simply have limited growth in home Internet use. Other states may have faced economic 
issues, population shifts, or a range of other factors. NTIA encourages researchers to delve 
more deeply into the circumstances that affect growth in Internet adoption. 

Exploring the Digital Nation: Embracing the Mobile Internet 
59 
7 Frost & Sullivan project the market for ―connected living‖ or ubiquitously connected video and 
data services at home, work, and public spaces will grow to $731.7 billion by 2020, citing 
cloud computing, big data, mobility, and low cost sensors as driving growth of the Internet 
of Things (IoT). Fifteen percent of this estimate ($111 billion) is attributable to the 
―connected home‖ (2014). Further, Gartner predicts that the low cost of processors will 
cause the number of IoT devices, which communicate or interact with external 
environments or internal systems, to grow 3.5 times larger than the 7.3 billion smartphones, 
tablets, and personal computers expected in use by 2020. Also, the IoT will yield $1.9 
trillion in global economic valued added through sales in diverse end markets (2014). 
8 The U.S. Department of Labor defines the term as ―[p]ersons who are neither employed nor 
unemployed are not in the labor force. This category includes retired persons, students, 
those taking care of children or other family members, and others who are neither working 
nor seeking work. Information is collected on their desire for and availability for work, job 
search activity in the prior year, and reasons for not currently searching.‖ (U.S. Bureau of 
Labor Statistics [BLS], 2014). 
9 The falling prices of certain consumer goods and services such as personal computers, cell 
phones, and cell phone service make them affordable for low income consumers, while ―the 
cost of many services crucial to escaping poverty—including education, health care, and 
child care—has soared‖ (Lowrey, 2014). 
10 The specific questions used in the October 2012 survey instrument are available at 
http://www.census.gov/prod/techdoc/cps/cpsoct12.pdf. 


In: America's Embrace of the Mobile Internet 
 ISBN: 978-1-63463-585-1 
Editor: Jennifer Haggard 
© 2015 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2 
 
 
 
THE IMPACT OF CULTURE ON  
THE ADOPTION, DESIGN AND USAGE  
OF MOBILE DEVICES* 
 
 
Susan G. Hill 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
The use of mobile devices for communications and information exchange 
has been shown to be very desirable, with more than 5.3 billion mobile 
subscribers estimated (mobiThinking, 2011) and more than half-billion mobile 
phones sold each year (Blom, Chipchase, and Lehikoinen, 2005). Most often, 
when the term ―mobile devices‖ is used, the authors really mean ―mobile 
phones.‖ For example, Blom et al. (2005) describes ―personal, mobile 
synchronous and asynchronous communication for all types of users...‖ (p. 37) 
and then cites that more than one half a billion mobile phones are sold each 
year. However, mobile devices are not limited to phones; in addition to 
cellular phones, there are also personal digital assistants (e.g., Blackberry) as 
well as the more recent advent of wireless tablet computers (e.g., iPad). With 
these ―smart‖ mobile devices, users can communicate by voice and text as 
well as have Internet access as a means of communications and information 
exchange. Mobile device use has grown tremendously; for example, in 2002, 
                                                        
* This is an edited, reformatted and augmented version of a report, ARL-TR-6183, issued by the 
Army Research Laboratory, October 2012. 

Susan G. Hill 
62
mobile (cellular) phones exceeded the number of landlines (Donner, 2008). All 
types of mobile devices have increased as well; for example, it is estimated 
that 25 million iPads have been sold to date (Rosoff, 2011). 
The purpose of this report is to explore some of the research literature that 
discusses mobile technology, specifically mobile phones and mobile access to 
the Internet, and the impact that culture has on its adoption, use and design. 
One of the results of this review will be to identify factors that are important 
when considering mobile technology and culture, specifically, and factors that 
may be important in examining the impact of culture on decision making and 
communication, more generally. To accomplish this goal, the report first looks 
at culture, its definition, models of culture and dimensions used to describe 
specific cultures. The next section then examines mobile technology and 
culture, focusing on (1) models of adoption of technology, specifically mobile 
technology; (2) examples of uses of mobile technology and the influence of 
culture, and (3) design of mobile user interfaces and experience considering 
cultural influences. Finally, we discuss the information identified and its 
relevance to our goals of building a cognitive framework for social-cultural 
modeling, as well as other observations concerning technology and culture, 
especially military applications. 
 
 
2. DIMENSIONS AND MODELS OF CULTURE 
 
There are a number of definitions of culture. Aryana and Oritsland (2010) 
say that, ―In 1952 Kroeber and Kluckholm reviewed different definitions of 
culture and found 162 definitions. Now there are even more...‖ (p. 217). An oft 
quoted definition is that of Hofstede (1980), which defines culture as ―the 
collective programming of the mind that distinguishes the members of one 
group or category of people from another‖ (quoted, for example, in Min, Li 
and Ji. 2009). Van Biljon (2006) proposes a definition of culture specific to 
mobile devices: ―The patterns of thinking, feeling and acting that influence the 
way in which people communicate among themselves and use mobile 
devices.‖ (p. 34) 
Researchers have tried to define culture in terms of objective, measurable 
elements. The most well known of culture dimensions are those proposed by 
Hofstede (e.g., Hofstede and McCrae, 2004). There are a number of other 
attempts made to describe cultural dimensions: Min, Li and Ji (2009) 
identified a number of these cultural dimensions commonly cited and 
combined them into a table of cultural dimensions, presented in table 1. 

The Impact of Culture on the Adoption, Design … 
63 
Table 1. Cultural Dimensions (adapted from Min, Li and Ji, 2009) 
 
Cultural Dimension 
Description 
Authors 
Individualism/Collectivism Individualism is a primary 
orientation to the self; 
Collectivism a primary orientation 
to common goals and objectives. 
Hofstede (1980), 
Kluckhohn and 
Strodtbeck 
(1961), 
Trompenaars 
(1993) 
Uncertainty avoidance 
The extent to which members of a 
culture feel threatened by 
uncertain or unknown situations. 
Hofstede (1980), 
Contextuality, Context 
High-context cultures prefer 
implicit messages and indirect 
communication; low-context 
cultures explicit messages and 
direct communication. 
Hall (1976) 
Power distance 
The extent to which members of a 
culture accept unequal 
distributions of power. 
Hofstede (1980), 
Masculinity/femininity 
The degree to which a society is 
characterized by assertiveness 
(masculinity) or nurturances 
(femininity). 
Hofstede (1980), 
Notions of time 
Monochromic and polychromic; 
past, present, and future 
orientation; short- and long-term 
orientation. 
Hall (1976), 
Trompenaars 
(1993) 
Affectivity/neutrality 
The range of feeling and emotions 
expressed in public. 
Parsons and 
Shils (1951), 
Trompenaars 
(1993) 
Universalism/particularism The manner in which members of 
a culture adhere to agreed 
standards; Universalism is rules 
based, particularism is relationship 
based. 
Parsons and 
Shils (1951), 
Trompenaars 
(1993) 
 
 
 

Susan G. Hill 
64
Table 1. (Continued) 
 
Cultural Dimension 
Description 
Authors 
Ascription/achievement 
Ascription gives priority to certain 
attributes individuals possess, 
whereas achievement gives 
priority to their accomplishments 
over their given attributes. 
Kluckhohn and 
Strodtbeck 
(1961), Parsons 
and Shils (1951), 
Trompenaars 
(1993) 
Specificity/diffuseness 
The degree to which individuals 
become involved with one 
another. 
Parsons and 
Shils (1951), 
Trompenaars 
(1993) 
Human relation to natural 
and social world 
The extent to which the human 
relation to the natural and social 
world is understood as one of 
mastery or one of harmony. 
Kluckhohn and 
Strodtbeck 
(1961), Schwartz 
and Ros (1995), 
Trompenaars 
(1993) 
 
Van Biljon (2006) and van Biljon and Kotze (2007a, b; 2008) also have 
extensive discussions on a number of theoretical issues and models of culture. 
In addition to Hofstede, they also mention the onion model of Trompenaars 
(1993), Hall (1976), and others. Bagchi and Kirs (2009) examined Schwartz‘s 
cultural values (Schwartz, 1992) as applied to information and communication 
technologies. These authors specifically look at personal computer (PC) and 
Internet use and do not address mobile devices. While other cultural studies 
discuss Schwartz‘s cultural values, no studies were found that apply those 
cultural dimensions to mobile devices; therefore, we can make no assessment 
as to the usefulness of that cultural framework to mobile device adoption, 
design and usage. 
Van Biljon and Kotze (2007a) discuss objective vs. subjective culture. 
Objective culture is related to concrete things that are ―visible, tangible and 
easy to examine‖ (p. 2), for example, language, currency, date and time 
formats, and color preferences. Subjective culture is related to psychological 
and sociological things such as humans‘ assumptions, beliefs, values, attitudes 
and patterns of thinking. Designing for the objective culture is largely 
understood, although some studies suggest otherwise (van Biljon and Kotze, 
2007a). Subjective culture does not seem to be as well understood and, 

The Impact of Culture on the Adoption, Design … 
65 
therefore, is more difficult to describe, assess and to determine the 
implications for technology design and human behavior. 
Baumgartner (2003) described and ranked 50 cultural dimensions related 
to human-computer interaction. Three of the first ten dimensions are drawn 
from Hofstede (1994): uncertainty avoidance (no. 3), power distance (no. 5), 
and individualism/collectivism (no. 10.) Hofstede‘s time (1994) orientation 
dimension was rated as no. 11 and his masculinity vs. femininity dimension 
rated at number 14. Van Biljon and Kotze (2007b, p. 4) used the descriptions 
from Baumgartner (2003) to define the other seven (non-Hofstede) 
dimensions. Table 2 shows the Baumgartner dimensions and the related 
Hofstede (1994) dimensions. 
 
Table 2. The top cultural dimensions as identified by Baumgartner (2003) 
and the relationship to the five dimensions of Hofstede (1994) 
 
Baumgartner (2003) 
Grouped and Ranked Cultural Dimensions and Definitions  
(p. 48) 
Hofstede 
(1994) 
1. Context 
Context, referring to the amount and specificity of information in 
a given situation, and scaling from high context communication, 
which has most of the meaning in the context, to low context 
where the complete meaning is in the message. 
— 
2. Technological Development 
Technological development, referring to the rate of technological 
development, and scaling from advancement to backwardness. 
— 
3. Uncertainty Avoidance 
Uncertainty avoidance is the extent (high or low) to which the 
members of a culture feel threatened by uncertain or unknown 
situations. Cultures vary in their avoidance of uncertainty, 
creating different rituals and having different values regarding 
formality, punctuality, legal-religious-social requirements, and 
tolerance for ambiguity. 
Uncertainty 
Avoidance 
4. Time perception 
Time perception, where monochronic time perception is 
characterized by schedules, promptness and 
compartmentalization of activities. The other end of the scale 
represents polychonic time perception which is characterised by 
people doing several things at a time. Schedules may be changed 
and time commitments are desirable rather than absolute. 
— 

Susan G. Hill 
66
Table 2. (Continued) 
 
Baumgartner (2003) 
Grouped and Ranked Cultural Dimensions and Definitions  
(p. 48) 
Hofstede 
(1994) 
5. Authority conception; Power distance 
Authority conception or Power distance is the degree to which 
people favor an authoritarian, egalitarian, paternalistic, or 
participative management style refers to the extent (high or low) 
to which less powerful members of institutions and organizations 
within a country expect and accept that power is distributed 
unequally. 
Power 
distance 
6. Affective vs. neutral 
Affective vs. neutral, refer to the way humans express their 
emotions, and scaling from high affective (expressing feelings 
openly) to low affective. 
— 
7. Face-saving; Specific vs. diffuse; Instrumental vs. expressive 
Face-saving, referring to the act of reserving one‘s prestige or 
outward dignity, and scaling from high face saving to low face 
saving. 
— 
8. Activity orientation; Meaning of life 
Activity orientation, referring to the extent to which activity is 
valued within a culture. Human activity can focus on doing, 
being or beingin-becoming. 
— 
9. Nonverbal communication; Space 
Nonverbal communication, referring to differences in behaviour 
as expresses in: ―kinesics (body movement and facial gestures); 
proxemics (distance); oculesics (eye movements and eye 
contact); haptics (touching behavior); paralanguage (tone of 
voice and non-language sounds); and appearance (dress and 
grooming)‖. 
— 
10. Individualism vs. collectivism 
Individualism vs. collectivism refers to the role of the individual 
and group, and which interest prevails over the other. For 
example, in individual-oriented countries everyone is expected to 
look after one‘s self or immediate family. Collectivism implies 
that people are integrated from birth into strong, cohesive groups 
that protect them in exchange for unquestioning loyalty. 
Individualism 
vs. 
collectivism 
 
 

The Impact of Culture on the Adoption, Design … 
67 
Baumgartner (2003) 
Grouped and Ranked Cultural Dimensions and Definitions  
(p. 48) 
Hofstede 
(1994) 
11. Time orientation; Long-term vs. short-term orientation 
Time orientation refers to the way cultures conform to time. Past 
Orientation implies a belief that understanding the past can guide 
current and future experience. Present Orientation implies 
dominance of the mental state of the moment. Future Orientation 
implies expectancy of advancement, improvement or progression. 
Longterm orientation means looking for meaning and results over 
long periods of time (similar to past or future orientation) as 
opposed to viewing meaning and results over a very short period 
of time (similar to present orientation). 
Time 
orientation 
12. Universalism vs. particularism 
Universalism vs. particularism describes the degree of adhering 
to agreed standards. Universalists believe that good and right are 
definite and always applicable. Particularists place more 
emphasis on the unique circumstances. 
— 
13. International trade and communication 
International trade and communications refers to the rate of 
development in the field of trade and communication with other 
countries/cultures (for example, isolation vs. cooperation). 
— 
14. Gender roles 
Gender roles portrays the extent within cultures to which social 
gender roles are clearly distinct. For example, in highly distinct 
(for example, masculine or assertive) cultures men are supposed 
to be assertive, tough and focused on material success, whereas 
women are supposed to be more modest, tender and concerned 
with the quality of life. Low or no distinction (that is, feminine or 
modest) cultures pertains to societies in which social gender roles 
overlap. Both men and women are supposed to be modest, tender, 
and concerned with the quality of life. 
Masculinity 
vs. femininity 
 
The culture dimensions that researchers have derived can be useful in 
trying to categorize and quantify aspects of culture. These cultural dimensions 
will be referred to in many of the studies reviewed. However, it is beyond the 
scope of this report to present an in-depth analysis of cultural models and 
dimensions and the strengths and weaknesses of them. 
Baumgartner (2003) proposes a means for visualizing and comparing the 
cultural dimensions of one or more countries based on a shape diagram using 

Susan G. Hill 
68
the number of relevant cultural dimensions. In the example, a pentagon is used 
for five cultural dimensions. Given that there is a quantitative measure of each 
cultural dimension, the dimension value can be plotted on the pentagon. In the 
example shown in figure 1, the two countries are similar in values for Time 
Perception, but are most different in Context. Baumgartner presents this 
approach as a means to see where localization efforts for human-computer 
interaction and interface design should be addressed. This approach could be 
used for any comparison of cultural dimensions, like for mobile device 
interfaces, if quantitative values are available. 
 
 
Figure 1. Using a cultural pentagon as a means to visualize and compare cultural 
dimensions. The quantitative measures from countries 1 and 2 are shown in (a) above 
and then visualized in the pentagon below (b) (Baumgartner, 2003). 

The Impact of Culture on the Adoption, Design … 
69 
3. CULTURE AND MOBILE DEVICES 
 
There is a large and growing literature specifically addressing issues 
related to culture and mobile devices. An initial grouping of the research 
issues suggest three categories: (1) issues dealing with the adoption of mobile 
technology in various cultures, (2) the impact of culture on the technology 
usage, and (3) the design of mobile systems, specifically applying human-
computer interaction and human factors knowledge related to the design of the 
user interface and user experience. This is similar to the approach used by 
Donner (2008). He reviewed ~200 recent studies concerning mobile (cell) 
telephones in the developing world and identified common themes in the 
literature. He then categorized the studies along various dimensions, including 
adoption, impact and the interrelationship between technologies and users. 
Each of these areas will be discussed. 
 
 
3.1. Adoption of Mobile Technology and Culture 
 
With any new technology, individuals must decide to use the technology 
before it can be helpful for a number of different applications. Adoption is the 
decision to use a technology. This is true, for example, for commerce 
conducted via mobile device, often called m-commerce. A broad range of 
users must adopt (i.e., decide to use) mobile technology before m-commerce 
will be widespread, therefore, those interested in promoting m-commerce are 
particularly interested in better understanding factors that affect adoption of 
mobile communications technology. 
There are a number of models of technology adoption. One model is 
called the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM), which says that a user‘s 
adoption decision is based on perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use 
(Davis, Bagozzi, and Warshaw, 1989). The TAM is shown in figure 2. As the 
name implies, this focuses primarily on technology acceptance and use. A 
more recent, updated model of technology acceptance is called the Unified 
Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT) (Venkatesh, Morris, 
Davis, and Davis, 2003). The UTAUT, shown in figure 3, is intended to 
consolidate key concepts from previous models. The concepts of performance 
expectancy, effort expectancy, social influence, and facilitating conditions are 
mediated by gender, age, experience, and voluntariness to determine usage 
intention and behavior. The definitions of these mediated concepts, as given 
by the authors, are: 

Susan G. Hill 
70
• 
Performance expectancy is defined as ―the degree to which an 
individual believes that using the system will help him or her to attain 
gains in job performance.‖ (p. 447). This is the strongest predictor of 
the intention to use. 
• 
Effort expectancy is defined as ―the degree of ease associated with the 
use of the system‖ (p. 450). This is important in initial usage, but 
lessens in importance as there is more usage. 
• 
Social influence is defined as ―the degree to which an individual 
perceives that important others believe he or she should use the new 
system‖ (p. 451). This is more important when usage is mandated and 
less important when usage is voluntary. 
• 
Facilitating conditions are defined as ―the degree to which an 
individual believes that an organizational and technical infrastructure 
exists to support use of the system‖ (p. 453). 
 
 
Figure 2. TAM (from Davis et al., 1989). 
Min, Li, and Ji (2009) suggest that m-commerce adoption requires more 
than just technology acceptance; it also entails the user to become part of a 
network, particularly a social network. Users also have roles as consumers in 
m-commerce applications. Therefore, adopting m-commerce is more than just 
adopting technology, it is also adopting roles of consumer and network 
member. Network member adoption refers to subjective norms influenced by a 
network of others, not just based on individual decisions. M-commerce users 
are primarily customers using businesses and may be more interested in things 
that benefit themselves, such as cost, trust, and enjoyment. In this case, 
consumers‘ adoption decisions include perceived enjoyment and personal 
innovativeness. 

The Impact of Culture on the Adoption, Design … 
71 
 
Figure 3. Diagrammatic representation of the UTAUT (from Venkatesh et al., 2003.). 
The authors were interested in examining how individual-level cultural 
values impact the adoption of m-commerce services. They particularly framed 
the examination in terms of each user having multiple roles of technology 
user, network member, and consumer. The researchers found that values of 
individual culture do impact adoption decisions. For example, individuals with 
high uncertainty avoidance (UA) look to their network membership (i.e., their 
social influence) for information and cues that m-commerce services should be 
adopted (i.e., used by the individual.) Therefore, to promote adoption, 
emphasis on network memberships could be used. For example, utilizing some 
form of ―friends and family‖ approach to promoting m-commerce would be 
thought to have impact, especially for those with high uncertainty avoidance. 
Similarly, those with high collectivistic cultural values would be receptive to 
an emphasis on collaborative services such as instant messaging rather than 
just stand-alone services. The authors‘ perspective of multiple roles for each 
user, including technology user, network member, and consumer, provides a 
better understanding of the interplay between roles, decisions to use 
technology, and the impact of cultural values. Based on this background and 
these ideas, Min, Li, and Ji propose an m-commerce adoption model based on 
individual level cultural characteristics, shown in figure 4. 
 
 
 

Susan G. Hill 
72
 
Figure 4. A model of m-commerce adoption based on individual-level cultural 
characteristics. (from Min, Li, and Ji, 2009). 
Definitions of the terms used in the model shown in figure 4 are derived 
from those discussed in Min, Li and Ji (2009). These definitions are: 
 
• 
Uncertainty avoidance – the degree to which people within a culture 
feel anxious or threatened by uncertain or unknown situations. 
• 
Individualism-collectivism – individualism has a main orientation 
towards the self; collectivism has a main orientation towards the 
group and common goals and objectives. 
• 
Context – context deals with the amount of information conveyed 
within a communication. High context cultures expect implicit 
information and indirect communication; low context cultures expect 
explicit messages and direct communication. 
• 
Time perception – how cultures perceived time and the degree to 
which cultures are oriented to the past, present, and future; or short-
term or long-term orientation. 
• 
Subjective norms – how a person thinks that most people who are 
important to him would view him if he performs or does not perform 
the behavior in question. 
• 
Behavioral intention – the intention to exhibit a particular behavior, in 
this case intent to adopt the use of m-commerce. 
• 
Perceived usefulness – how useful the adopted m-commerce 
technology is thought to be. 

The Impact of Culture on the Adoption, Design … 
73 
• 
Perceived ease of use – how easy the adopted m-commerce 
technology is perceived to be. 
• 
Personal innovativeness – the willingness of a person to try out new 
technology. 
• 
Perceived enjoyment – the extent to which the system is fun to use. 
 
Kwon and Chidambaram (2000) proposed a model of cell phone use that 
includes consideration of culture. Culture is embedded in the demographic 
factor of nationality. They studied cell phone adoption and use in an urban 
setting. They developed and tested a research model of cell phone use, based 
on earlier models of technology acceptance such as TAM, and tested the 
model in an urban area in Hawaii. They found the users were influenced 
directly or indirectly by: (1) individual characteristics; (2) perceived ease of 
use; (3) perceived usefulness (i.e., extrinsic motivations); (4) enjoyment/fun 
(i.e., intrinsic motivations); and (5) social pressure. Apprehensiveness about 
technology was also included in the model. These factors, then, influenced the 
individual‘s decision to adopt and use cell phones. The model is shown in 
figure 5. 
 
 
Figure 5. Research model on cell phone adoption from Kwon and Chidambaram, 2000. 

Susan G. Hill 
74
Sarker and Wells (2003) present an input-process-output model of mobile 
device adoption and use. They say that instead of using well-established 
models, such as TAM, that consider technology in general, they wanted to 
explore the important and unique factors that specifically contribute to mobile 
device use. Therefore, the model proposed in their paper addresses mobile 
handheld devices specifically and identifies factors unique to mobile devices, 
such as types of user mobility, network considerations, and characteristics of 
the network services available. The model is shown in figure 6. In the model, 
culture is considered within the individual characteristics that influence the 
decision to adopt and use mobile devices. 
Van Biljon and Kotze (2008) also address the importance of cultural 
factors in adoption and usage of mobile phones. After review of research on 
culture, mobile phones and technology adoption, they integrated the factors 
that influence mobile phone adoption and usage. There are determining factors 
and mediating factors, similar to the two types of factors in UTAUT. 
 
 
Figure 6. An Input-Process-Output model of mobile device use and adoption (from 
Sarker and Wells, 2003). 
Van Biljon and Kotze (2007a; 2008) present the proposed model, shown 
in green (lighter color) in figure 7. The authors also discuss revisions that 
result in the final model. The final model entitled, the final Mobile Phone 
Technology Adoption Model (MOPTAM), is presented in figure 7 in the black 
(darker color). Figure 7, shows both the proposed and final models presented 
in green (light) and black (dark), respectively, 

The Impact of Culture on the Adoption, Design … 
75 
There are three differences between the proposed model (van Biljon and 
Kotze, 2008) and the final model (van Biljon and Kotze, 2007a). In the final 
model, facilitating conditions are seen to influence perceived usefulness. 
Social influence does not directly influence behavioral influence, but only has 
indirect (one-step removed) influence. Finally, human nature influence and 
cultural influence are not specifically called out in the final model. In the final 
model, specific influences are left undefined. However, social influence 
remains, contributing to both perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use. 
 
 
Figure 7. Proposed (van Biljon and Kotze, 2008) and final models (van Biljon and 
Kotze, 2007a). MOPTAM. The final MOPTAM is in black (dark) and the proposed 
model elements are in green (light). 
The changes implemented in the proposed versus the final MOPTAM 
models are based on survey data collected from 59 participants, who were 
relatively homogenous in age (95% were between 18–30 years of age). The 
importance of facilitating conditions, such as phone cost, system cost, system 
service and system quality, in the decision to adopt mobile phone technology 
is reflected in the final version, with facilitating conditions influencing both 
perceived usefulness and actual system use. The facilitating conditions and 
personal factors were found to be particularly important for mobile phones as 

Susan G. Hill 
76
compared with other kinds of technology (van Biljon and Kotze, 2007a). 
Cultural influences were specifically identified in the proposal model as 
contributing to social influence. Note that in the final (revised) model, cultural 
factors are not specifically called out. Therefore, the role that culture plays in 
this model is left undefined. Cultural factors clearly could be placed within the 
mediating factors and can be associated with demographic (national-level 
culture) or personal factors (individual-level culture). Cultural influences 
could also be considered as a contributor to social influence (SI), as shown in 
the determining factors. While the final model does not clarify the role of 
culture and how and where it influences system use, culture should not be 
thought of as unimportant. Culture should be considered an important factor 
and its role should be clarified. 
Mobile phones encourage small power distance, individualism and self-
expression. However, mobile phones are accepted in cultures with large power 
distances and collectivist values, which suggest that mobile phone culture 
takes precedence over ethnic and cultural values and social behaviors (van 
Biljon, 2006). The implications of mobile technology and how it might change 
social and cultural norms are still to be worked out. 
 
 
3.2. Mobile Technology Usage and Culture 
 
In the previous section, some of the models refer to mobile device 
adoption and usage. Clearly, first there is adoption of the technology and then 
it is used for some purpose. Choi et al. (2005) suggest that as mobile device 
and services use has increased globally, cultural factors have had a more 
pronounced impact on mobile use than on traditional stationary Internet users. 
This is because wireless networks operate only in local areas whereas 
stationary Internet devices are ―globally uniform.‖ It is recognized that 
mobile commerce cannot meet its potential without widespread adoption 
of mobile technology (Sarker and Wells, 2003), hence the focus on technology 
adoption in the previous section. However, in this section, we will identify 
some of the uses of the mobile technology once it has been adopted and how 
the uses are related to culture. Mobile technology is seen as enabling mobile 
communication, mobile collaboration, and mobile commerce (Sarker and 
Wells, 2003)—three important areas of usage. 
 
 
 

The Impact of Culture on the Adoption, Design … 
77 
3.2.1. Mobile Communication 
Mobile technology allows communication between people at anytime and 
anywhere. Communication can take place verbally (speaking on the phone) or 
visually (text messages or e-mail). The purpose of communications can be 
thought of as (1) conveyance, where a person conveys a piece of information; 
(2) convergence, where people converge on a shared understanding; and (3) 
passive 
reception, 
where 
people 
just 
receive 
information. 
Mobile 
communication is, perhaps, the most obvious use of mobile technology. 
 
3.2.2. Mobile Collaboration 
Mobile collaboration, using mobile technology, is focused on processes 
and tools that allow users to work together anywhere (Guerrero et al., 2006). 
This application is often considered in the realm of computer-supported 
cooperative work (CSCW). It is beyond the scope of this paper to fully review 
the CSCW literature. However, it is not difficult to see that culture will play an 
important role in the ability of distributed individuals, possibly working at 
different times (i.e., asynchronously), to successfully collaborate on work 
using mobile technology. Herskovic, Ochoa, Pino, and Neyem (2011) provide 
a general framework for attributes to be considered during concept 
development and design of mobile collaborative systems. 
 
3.2.3. Mobile Commerce (m-Commerce) 
A major reason for interest in culture and information and communication 
technologies is because of the possible business opportunities. Aryana and 
Boks (2010) point out that ―new opportunities outside mature markets of 
developed countries may lead to more attention to user requirements in those 
new markets‖ (p. 2). The authors also point out that demographic changes, 
such as increasing life expectancy, can create ―new consumer groups with 
different needs‖ (p. 139). If a company can make a product that is preferred 
over others, it can be an economic advantage in marketing and sales. M-
commerce can be described as ―the emerging arena within which commercial 
transactions are made possible using handheld devices that are connected by 
wireless networks.‖ (Mathew, Sarker and Varshney, 2004, p. 1). While 
traditional e-commerce conducted on the Internet via desktop allows people to 
conduct commerce at anytime, mobile devices allow m-commerce to be 
conducted anywhere. 
Min, Ji, and Qu (2008) discuss some fundamental differences between 
mobile commerce (m-commerce) and Internet-based electronic commerce (e-
commerce). Some of these differences include network infrastructure, end user 

Susan G. Hill 
78
devices, tasks, applications, use environments, and costs and sources of 
revenue. Based on research conducted on user acceptance in China, the 
authors propose a revised UTAUT model, which would additionally include 
factors unique to m-commerce, Chinese culture, and user satisfaction. The 
additional factors are trust, privacy protection, and cost. System quality and 
information quality should be added as system-specific factors and culture and 
additional demographics should be added as additional mediating factors. 
In addition to Min, Ji and Qu (2008), other researchers have considered 
and researched additional factors to enhance the TAM. Enhancement factors 
considered by other researchers that will influence the decision to adopt 
technology include social influences and personality traits (such as personal 
innovativeness), (Lu et al., 2005), perceived risk, cost and compatibility (Wu 
and Wang, 2005) and individual characteristics, including innovativeness, past 
adoption decisions, and knowledge about technology (Yang, 2005). Others 
factors include technology readiness and wireless website interface usability 
(Massey et al., 2005) as well as development of an adoption model that is 
value-based, including benefits and sacrifices experienced as a result of the 
technology adoption. All of these additional TAM enhancement factors are 
mentioned in a discussion of mobile services‘ adoption decisons by 
Constantiou et al. (2009). 
While revisions and enhancements to the TAM model can add to our 
understanding of adoption, additional factors can also be important in 
considerations of communication, decision making, and the influence of 
culture on mobile technology. 
There are a number of application areas where commerce is a major 
driver. One such area is mobile banking services. For example, Koo and Wati 
(2010) state that mobile banking services are considered as one of the most 
value-added and important mobile services available. Because of that 
importance, the authors looked at the role of trust as a mediating variable in 
mobile banking in the developing country of Indonesia. They propose a 
research model for use to generate hypotheses to guide research (see figure 8). 
They collected data from over 250 participants via questionnaires and found 
that their proposed model was useful for explanation of the data: trust did 
mediate the effects of information quality for perceived usefulness and user 
satisfaction and confirmed the importance of trust in mobile banking 
applications. 
 
 
 

The Impact of Culture on the Adoption, Design … 
79 
 
Figure 8. Research model to integrate information system success and trust. The model 
was used to study trust as a mediating factor among information system success 
factors, using mobile banking as an example (adapted from Koo and Wati, 2010). 
3.2.4. Mobile Learning 
Another use of mobile technology is for learning. Mobile learning 
(mLearning) can be considered as a meeting of mobile computing and 
electronic learning that results in an ―anytime, anywhere learning experience.‖ 
(van Biljon and Kotze, 2007b, p. 1). The authors note that context, location, 
and culture are important in learning in general, and may be more important 
for learning with mobile devices given the small screens and limitations. 
Further, they believe that objective culture, such as language, is an implicit 
part of a model of the learner but that subjective culture needs to be 
investigated further as a means to develop learner profiles that can be used for 
mLearning. (See section 2 of this report for definitions of objective and 
subjective culture.) 
 
3.2.5. Other Mobile Phone Usage Issues 
Several other mobile phone uses were identified that relate directly to the 
consideration of culture. Three areas are discussed in this section: (1) use in 
developing countries; (2) use for local crises; and (3) patterns of usage. 
 
Mobile Phones in Developing Countries 
An area where mobile devices, specifically mobile phones, will play an 
increasing important role is in developing countries. According to sources 
cited by Medhi et al. (2011), there were more than 4 billion phone users in 
2008, and 60% of all subscribers (or 2.4 billion people) live in developing 

Susan G. Hill 
80
countries. So, researchers interested in global development see the mobile 
phone as a potential means to support development in areas such as education, 
finance, health, agriculture, and governance (Donner, 2008). 
A major challenge within developing countries is to understand the local 
population and culture and design mobile technology for their use. For 
example, one challenge is that much of the population of developing countries 
is non-literate, or if literate, the individuals are novice users of computer 
technology and mobile user interfaces must be designed for use by novices 
(Medhi et al., 2011). 
An example of using mobile phones for development is given in Martin 
and Abbott (2010), which describes the use of mobile phones in agricultural 
development. They conducted a study by interviewing small- to medium-size 
farm holders in Uganda to collect baseline data on the use, diffusion and 
impact of mobile phone use, specifically for agriculture-based use. The authors 
report five themes identified from the data for agricultural-based mobile phone 
use: (1) coordinating meetings, training, and access to agricultural inputs, (2) 
consulting with experts, (3) obtaining market information, (4) receiving 
agriculture emergency security information, such as livestock or crop 
emergencies, and (5) monitoring of financial transactions such as loans. Using 
a mobile phone provides a real opportunity to communicate with others 
without travel. Some of the unique local uses include using the calculator, 
using the loudspeaker function for group meetings, storage of information in 
the calendar, voice-recording of lessons, and use of the camera for 
demonstrations. The themes identified in this research directly relate to mobile 
communication (themes 2 and 4), collaboration (theme 1), and m-commerce 
(themes 3 and 5) and shows the broad range of activities that have been 
enabled by mobile technology that were not, or not easily, available 
previously. One can easily see how these potential uses will influence the 
decision to adopt mobile technology. 
Kamppuri (2011) has developed a new cross-cultural human-computer 
interaction (HCI) design approach that emphasizes worth, value and user 
experience as major topics. This new approach is used in an example case 
study of mobile phone use by Tanzanian university students. Some of the 
mobile phone uses discussed in this case study include immediate 
communication that was previously unavailable because of few land lines, as 
well as the slowness and unreliability of mail service; staying connected to the 
social network (even if connections are very brief); managing group studies 
and assignments; and, demonstrating status. An interesting point is the 
distinction between ownership and access to mobile phone usage; individuals 

The Impact of Culture on the Adoption, Design … 
81 
do not need to own a mobile phone in order to have access for use. Kamppuri 
notes that previous research states that perceived access among Tanzanian 
users was reported as high as 97% in 2005; sharing is considered typical 
(although some problems are noted.) Beeping, that is calling and hanging up 
quickly as a means to let the called party know that you wish them to call you 
back, is common, as is transferring airtime from one phone to another. These 
are different ways of using the phone as compared to other cultures. In 
addition to calling, texting, and beeping, other frequently used features include 
the alarm clock, calendar, calculator, radio and flashlight. This shows uses of 
mobile technology beyond communications. Kamppuri also notes three user 
characteristics that impact phone usage: gender, age, and living in urban vs. 
rural areas. 
 
Mobile Phones As Devices for Local Crises 
Another interesting use of mobile technology is discussed by Evers et al. 
(2010). They present ongoing research that describes communications by users 
and environmental agencies via environmental-monitoring autonomous mobile 
agents. The concept is that hazardous situations can be identified in populated 
areas by using inputs from people via mobile devices and through a distributed 
sensor network. For example, users can communicate with a virtual agent 
through the mobile phone about unusual smells. If there is an emergency, users 
can receive instructions from the agent. This dialogue agent can adapt 
interaction and communication to the cultural background of the user, 
including the tasks of interruption, requesting information, and instruction. It 
is relevant for users to perceive the agent as part of the culture because it has 
been shown that people are more likely to comply with agents that are seen as 
part of the same group (Evers et al., 2008) and more likely to change their 
decision to that of the agent if the agent communicates in a culturally 
appropriate (i.e., socially normative) way (Wang et al., 2009.) 
Aloudat and Michael (2011) present a case study describing 
considerations in developing a mobile phone-based emergency warning 
system in Australia. They describe their methodology of interviews with the 
general public and then with key individual experts (some independent and 
some from the government.) The authors identified, via the interviews, many 
factors that the public was concerned about, using the framework of factors 
associated with technology acceptance, such as behavioral intent, perceived 
usefulness, perceived ease of use, but also adding other factors such as privacy 
concerns and unauthorized use. Although not specifically a cultural study, this 

Susan G. Hill 
82
work does highlight a potential use of mobile phones (i.e., emergency warning 
via phone) that may occur within or across culturally diverse areas. 
 
Patterns of Usage 
There are examples of patterns of usage affected by cultural dimensions. 
Sarker and Wells (2003) give an example of how the meaning of text 
messaging over mobile devices can differ depending on culture. For example, 
in Korea, which has a high power distance culture, texting to work supervisors 
(i.e., individuals higher in the ―power‖ hierarchy) can be seen as offensive 
behavior. Users in Norway, a low power distance culture, did not see this 
texting as offensive, although the users thought it might be inappropriate for 
formal communications. Kayan, Fussell, and Setlock (2006) found that the use 
of instant messaging differed for Western individualistic, low-context cultures 
and Eastern collectivistic, high-context culture. Multi-party chat, audio-video 
chat and emoticons were more popular in the Eastern cultures than in the 
Western culture. 
The preceding paragraphs describe only a few examples of the kinds of 
applications for which mobile devices are being used. There are certainly more 
potential application areas for mobile devices and the impact of culture needs 
to be an important consideration in developing and using such applications. 
 
 
3.3. Mobile User Interface Design and Culture 
 
Cultural dimensions have been used as ways to describe impacts on user 
interface design. For example, Baumgartner (2003) identified five dimensions 
ranked as most important in designing user interfaces: (1) context (Hall 1959; 
1976); (2) technological development, referring to the rate of development as 
advanced to backward; (3) uncertainty avoidance (Hofstede, 1994); (4) time 
perception as described by Hall (1959; 1976) and (5) power distance 
(Hofstede, 1994). 
Bossard (2008) also includes concrete guidelines for mobile phone user 
interfaces depending upon cultural background. Bossard used these guidelines 
to develop adaptive interfaces for various cultures as described by Hofstede‘s 
cultural dimensions. This approach took into account the small screen displays 
on mobile phones. The concrete guidelines are presented in table 3. Choi et al. 
(2005) conducted a study using interviews of users from Korea, Japan, and 
Finland where the users discussed their thoughts about video clips of mobile 
data services. The use cases chosen were downloading ring tones, 

The Impact of Culture on the Adoption, Design … 
83 
downloading games, reserving movie tickets, and reading sports news. A total 
of 52 phone design features were extracted from interview data. Of those 52 
features, 11 were found to be most important, being mentioned at least once by 
at least 90% of each of the three groups of respondents. They found that users 
from the same country showed similar likes and dislikes in design attributes of 
mobile data services. Results of the interviews were compared against the four 
cultural dimensions of uncertainty avoidance, individualism vs. collectivism, 
context, and time perception. There appeared to be relationships between the 
design attributes the users liked and characteristics (i.e., dimensions) of their 
cultures. The definitions of the eleven attributes and identification of which 
attributes were preferred or not preferred by the three nationalities are 
presented in table 4. The only one of the attributes that was mentioned and 
preferred by all 24 participants was ―minimal steps or keystrokes.‖ This 
suggests that this attribute can be generalized as important for all three 
nationalities, and might possibly be generalized across more, even most, 
cultures. 
 
Table 4. Concrete guidelines for mobile phone user interfaces associated 
with cultural dimensions (adapted from Bossard, 2008, pages 14–15) 
 
General Guidelines Hofstede 
Classificationa 
Concrete Guidelines 
Show breadcrumb 
trail 
LTO 
Low 
Show breadcrumb trail. Generally, 
show position in the hierarchy. 
Much information at 
first level, only a 
few levels 
LTO 
PDI 
High 
High 
--Show a lot of menu items at the first 
level of navigation. --Use a shallow 
navigation hierarchy, or possibly no 
hierarchy. 
Show only limited 
information at the 
first level, hierarchy 
can be deep. 
LTO 
PDI 
Low 
Low 
--Show only a few menu items at the 
first level of the navigation. 
--Use a deep navigation hierarchy. 
Let the system 
initiate 
communication. 
PDI 
High 
If activated, help text is shown 
automatically. 
User can initiate 
communication. 
PDI 
Low 
If activated, help text is shown after the 
user presses a button. 
Low image-to-text 
ratio 
IDV 
High 
Use menus that can be shown without 
icons. 

Susan G. Hill 
84
Table 4. (Continued) 
 
General Guidelines Hofstede 
Classificationa 
Concrete Guidelines 
High image-to-text 
ratio 
IDV 
Low 
Use menus that have icons as an 
inherent property. If a breadcrumb trail 
is used, show one with icons. 
Contrast between 
interface areas 
IDV 
High 
Use background color for contrasts. 
Possible interface areas could be the 
title bar, the breadcrumb trail, the area 
containing the menu items and the 
menu bar which contains the command 
labels. Menu items belonging together 
could be grouped by using the same 
background color. 
Apply a high 
multimodality to the 
interface 
IDV 
Low 
Use additional ouput mode possibilities, 
like sounds and vibration, to give the 
user cues about how deep inside the 
navigation he is. 
Complex interface 
possible 
UAV 
Low 
Use menus with a lot of menu items and 
add a lot of user interface components 
like icons and breadcrumb trail. 
Simple user 
interface 
UAV 
High 
Use menus with only few menu items; 
as few user interface components as 
possible. 
Show the position 
of the user in the 
hierarchy 
UAV 
High 
Use menus with breadcrumb trails. 
Maybe use a tree menu. 
Use redundant cues 
UAV 
High 
For example, use a different 
background color and bold font to 
signal the importance of a navigation 
item. 
Use non-redundant 
cues to maximize 
information 
UAV 
Low 
For example, use only bold font for the 
meaning ―important‖. The background 
color can signal other meanings. 
Show large amount 
of information 
within a screen, use 
the screen space 
efficiently 
UAV 
High 
Use as many user interface components 
as possible. For example, use icons for 
navigation items to make their meaning 
clearer and use breadcrumb trails. 

The Impact of Culture on the Adoption, Design … 
85 
General Guidelines Hofstede 
Classificationa 
Concrete Guidelines 
Show secondary 
information 
UAV 
High 
For example use help texts or icons to 
give more information about choices. 
Show only limited 
choices 
MAS 
UAV 
PDI 
High 
High 
High 
Try to limit the number of choices as 
much as possible. For example, a menu 
with maximum of 6 navigation items. 
aThis classification uses Hofstede‘s five cultural dimensions, with low and high values 
for the dimensions. 
LTO = Long-term orientation. 
PDI = Power distance. 
MAS = Masculinity vs. femininity. 
IDV = Individualism vs. collectivism UAV = Uncertainty avoidance. 
 
Kim and Lee (2005) conducted a study looking at differences between 
Koreans and Americans in their ability to identify abstract vs. concrete icons 
and their preference for the icons. Americans recognized the abstract icons 
more than did the Koreans, while the Koreans recognized the concrete and 
semi-concrete icons more than the Americans. The authors conclude that there 
should be further studies to make clear the relation between culture and mobile 
phone interface design. 
Lee et al. (2005) identified three important uses of cross-cultural usability 
data: (1) to determine global components and components that need to be 
localized; (2) to avoid cultural mistakes that might have an impact on use, such 
as miscommunication; and (3) to assess usability of cross-cultural user 
interfaces.  
Using 28 participants (16 U.S. and 12 international cell phone users), a 
laboratory-based usability test was conducted to assess cell phone menu 
navigation system prototype usability. 
Although the authors recognize that such a relatively small sample cannot 
represent entire national cultures, cross-culture information on navigation, 
metaphors, and appearance were gathered using a systematic methodology 
including recorded performance, verbal protocol analysis, and interview data. 
Prior to this study, there were not many systematic studies of mobile device 
use and the influence of culture. 
 
 
 

 
Table 5. The eleven main attributes that partici pants felt were most important and their relationship with four 
cultural dimensions (Choi et al., 2005) 
 
Attribute 
Description 
Uncertainty 
Avoidance 
Individualism vs. 
Collectivism 
Context 
Time Perception 
(monochronic vs. 
polychromic) 
— 
— 
High 
Low 
Individ. 
Collect. 
High 
Low 
Mono 
Poly 
Minimal steps 
or keystrokes 
Service requires minimal steps of 
keystrokes in search for desired 
contents. 
Alla 
All 
All 
All 
All 
All 
All 
All 
Iconic menu 
style 
Menu items are represented by 
icons. 
 
 
 
 
K, Jb 
preferred 
F not 
preferred 
K,J,F 
preferred 
 
Secondary 
information 
about 
contents 
Service provides additional 
information about contents, such as 
ranking points, movie ratings, or 
related pictures. 
K, J 
preferred 
F not 
preferred 
 
K 
preferred 
 
 
 
 
Variety of 
contents 
Service provides a wide assortment 
of contents to choose from. For 
example, for games, number of 
games, game genres; for movie 
ticket reservations, number of 
movie theaters; for ring tone 
downloads, number of ring tones, 
musical genre; for sports news, 
number of news items. 
K, J 
preferred 
F not 
preferred 
F, J not 
preferred 
K 
preferred 
 
 
 
 
Logical 
ordering of 
menu items 
Service orders menu items or 
contents logically. 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
K,J,F 
preferred 
 

 
Attribute 
Description 
Uncertainty 
Avoidance 
Individualism vs. 
Collectivism 
Context 
Time Perception 
(monochronic vs. 
polychromic) 
— 
— 
High 
Low 
Individ. 
Collect. 
High 
Low 
Mono 
Poly 
Clear menu 
labeling or 
hyperl i nk 
connotation 
M enu labels tell users clearly what 
they can find behind them. 
K, J 
preferred 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Efficient 
layout or 
space usage 
Service uses the small screen space 
of the mobile phone efficiently. 
K, J 
preferred 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Variety of 
font sizes 
Services menus use a variety of 
font sizes for different menu types. 
 
 
 
— 
K, J 
preferred 
 
 
 
Variety of 
font colors 
Service uses different colors for 
different menu items. 
 
 
 
— 
K, J 
preferred 
F not 
preferred 
 
 
Large amount 
of 
information 
within a 
screen 
Service displays a large amount of 
information on a given screen. 
K, J 
preferred 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Various 
options for 
contents 
Service provides various options 
for contents. For instance, for 
games, stage option, difficulty 
option; for move ticket 
reservations, seat selection; for ring 
tone downloads, chord selection; 
for sports news, choice of amount 
of information to display. 
— 
— 
F, J 
preferred 
 
 
 
 
 
aAll 24 participants said this was important bK = Korean, J = Japanese, F = Finnish. 

Susan G. Hill 
88
Cha et al. (2005) conducted two studies to examine differences in mobile 
phone user interface preferences between people from the United Kingdom 
(Great Britain) and Korea. In the first, questionnaire-based study, they found 
that there were differences in preferences between the two nationalities. 
Korean users preferred Samsung while British users preferred Nokia phones. 
They used different features on the phones, with British users preferring 
talking and were not as interested in personalizing their phones with wallpaper 
or ringtones, while Korean users preferred texting and personalizing their 
phones. The second, user evaluation study showed that most Koreans users 
were frustrated with the simplicity of features while British users were 
frustrated with features that were too cluttered. Other differences in 
preferences were noted. However, both groups preferred fewer clicks, 
conducting easy tasks, and minimizing mistakes. 
Frandsen-Thorlacius et al. (2009) discuss the concept of usability and 
whether or not it is constant across cultures. Their study had 412 users from 
China and Denmark complete questionnaires about how they understand and 
prioritize different aspects of usability. Based on the results, Chinese 
respondents identify visual appearance, satisfaction, and fun as being more 
important than the Danish participants, and the Danish place more importance 
on effectiveness and lack of frustration. Therefore, the authors conclude that 
cultural background has an influence on the perception of usability and 
usability cannot be assumed to be constant across cultures. The implications 
are that future assessments of usability across cultures need to think carefully 
about how usability is defined and assessed. An interesting point made is that 
previous usability research is predominantly Western in origin and therefore 
may contain ―subtle but systematic cultural biases.‖ (p. 41). Although this 
work is not specific to mobile device HCI usability, it clearly applies to mobile 
devices and suggests the influence of culture on definitions of usability. 
In more recent literature, there is a shift from usability to user experience. 
This shift entails less focus on how the user interacts with the interface to more 
focus on the experience the user has, including not only practical functional 
requirements but also aspects to focus on user stimulation and identify needs 
(Walsh, Nurkka, Walsh, 2010). Kamppuri (2011) also has an extensive 
discussion about the change from usability to user experience in HCI research. 
Walsh et al. (2010) investigated whether user experience differed across 
cultures. To examine this question, the researchers gathered data using a 
remote online sentence completion survey, where users completed sentences 
describing various experiences. The authors concluded the users from different 

The Impact of Culture on the Adoption, Design … 
89 
countries answered in different styles as well as content. The authors also were 
able to generate product improvement ideas from the survey results. 
There are two views of design for a world-wide market—globalization (or 
internationalization) and localization. Globalization refers to the general 
process of worldwide economic, political, technological and social integration, 
and includes business interests such as making a product global (Jhangiani and 
Smith-Jackson, 2007). Localization refers to identifying local requirements, 
such as local cultural needs, and designing devices for local use. Eune and Lee 
(2009) define these views as ―Internationalization is the process of designing 
software applications that it [sic] can be adapted to various languages and 
regions. 
Localization 
is 
the 
process 
of 
adapting 
internationalized 
product/service for a specific region or language...‖ (p. 2). Yan (2010), for 
example, advocates for understanding local cultures and designing different 
user experiences for people from different local cultures. The research is 
looking for strategies to develop multiple (i.e., localized) user interfaces using 
―cultural templates‖ or perhaps ―special versioning tools.‖ Interesting, Eune 
and Lee (2009) uses a word ―glocalization‖ which the authors footnote as first 
appearing in the 1980s in articles by Japanese economists. The authors state, 
―Glocalization, a combined word globalization with localization [sic], is a term 
that was invented in order to emphasize that the globalization of a product is 
more likely to succeed when the product or service is adapted specifically to 
each locality or culture it is marketed in.‖ Vyncke and Brengman (2010), after 
reviewing 27 relevant, high quality papers from the previous 12 years, found 
that culturally congruent websites had a positive impact on measures of 
―usefulness,‖ ―ease of use,‖ positive attitudes,‖ ―positive intentions,‖ and 
―overall effectiveness.‖ While this paper did not address mobile devices, it can 
be postulated that such a positive effect would be found for culturally 
congruent websites on mobile devices as well. 
As mentioned in the previous section, a challenge for using mobile phones 
in the developing world is the challenge of creating interfaces for low-literacy 
or novice users. Medhi et al. (2011) has identified alternative input and output 
methods for mobile interfaces (see figure 9). The authors have conducted two 
studies, both in India, that compared various methods of input and output. For 
the study that evaluated text versus voice and graphics, with non- or semi-
literate participants, the text interface was unusable by individuals if they were 
non-literate. Spoken dialogue and graphical output both had advantages and 
disadvantages. Non-literate users need non-text interfaces, and spoken input 
with graphical output may combine benefits of each approach. A second study 
had literate health workers entering health data by either text entry or speaking 

Susan G. Hill 
90
with a live operator. Live operators decreased errors and the recommendation 
is to use live operator, if economically feasible. While low literacy is not 
unique to any culture, it is a challenge that needs to be considered in cross-
cultural environments. 
 
 
Figure 9. Design space of mobile user interfaces. Shaded regions indicate the 
comparative studies presented in the Medhi et al. (2011) article. (Medhi, Patnaik, 
Brunskill, Gautama, Thies and Toyama, 2011). 
Jhangiani and Smith-Jackson (2007) looked at groups in the U.S. and 
India, without any disability or with a visual disability (i.e., legally blind.) 
They were interested in comparing two kinds of culture—national culture and 
disability culture. They found that there were differences in usability ratings, 
some based on the disability group, some on the national groups and for some 
mobile phone functions for the disability specific nationality groups. This 
finding emphasizes the need to consider the influence of culture on usability. 
The authors also propose a model for cell phone design adapted from Jordan‘s 
pleasurability framework (Jordan, 2000). The model, shown in figure 10, 
relates the four pleasures from Jordan to mobile cell phone design 
requirements. It is interesting to note that the elements in the model are all 
elements that may influence use differently in different cultural contexts; for 
this particular paper, the focus is on disability and nationality cultures but 
could also be any other cultural context. 

The Impact of Culture on the Adoption, Design … 
91 
 
Figure 10. Pyramid model for mobile cell phone design (adopted from Jordan (2000) 
(from Jhangiani and Smith-Jackson, 2007). 
 
4. DISCUSSION 
 
As shown by the research discussed in this report, there is a great amount 
of interest in the use of mobile technology, specifically mobile phones, and the 
influence and impact of culture on the adoption, use and design of the 
technology. 
 
 
4.1. Observations 
 
An observation from this literature review is that the applicable research 
literature has been obtained from many sources and disciplines. A number of 
articles are from the ―traditional‖ HCI literature. However, there are a number 
of articles from information sciences and systems literature. Given the interest 
in mobile commerce and business opportunities, there may be additional 
relevant literature in more business- and marketing-oriented sources. Another 
observation is that several recent dissertations/thesis address the topic of 
interest (e.g., Kamppuri, 2011; Matsui, 2009; Bossard, 2008; van Biljon, 2006) 
which suggest the timeliness and emerging nature of this topic and how it is 
not yet well understood. 

Susan G. Hill 
92
A primary purpose of this literature review was to identify factors that are 
important in understanding the adoption decision and the use of mobile 
devices and the impact of cultural elements on the decision to adopt and use. If 
we can identify factors important to the influence of culture on mobile device 
adoption and usage, then these same factors may be applicable, more 
generally, to influences on communications and decision making—topics that 
are more generally of interest. Factors important to adoption and use may also 
provide some insights that would be valuable in supporting the creation of 
guidelines for system design, specifically for mobile devices. As seen in this 
report, there is research literature addressing the design of mobile interfaces 
for various cultures. Such guidelines may prove useful for U.S. Army and 
multinational military as interest increases in the use of smartphones and other 
lightweight, minimally sized display interfaces for military applications. 
This review has been successful in identifying a number of relevant 
factors that are related to the adoption and use of mobile devices. There are 
several models of technology acceptance and adoption that are continually 
being revised and refined for particular focused research questions. Of 
particular interest are the models of mobile technology adoption and use that 
incorporate cultural factors (e.g., van Biljon and Kotze, 2008; Min, Li and Ji, 
2009). It is difficult to say if the models are complete; in fact, they are almost 
surely not complete. But as a first approximation, the models may prove to be 
very useful in identifying factors relevant to cultural impacts on other areas of 
human performance and interaction with technology, such as decision making 
and communication. Potential factors of influence on decision making and 
communications can be drawn from these models, as both are present 
implicitly in the areas of making decisions to adopt and to use (e.g., 
communicate with) mobile technology. 
We can identify some potentially relevant factors from this examination of 
the impact of culture on adoption, design and use of mobile devices as we 
explore the impact of culture on, more generally, decision making and 
communications. Successful decision making and communications are 
instrumental for effective military operations. An initial list of important 
factors that may influence decision making and communications, drawn from 
this literature review, include: (1) demographics, (age; gender, income); (2) 
personality 
factors 
(e.g., 
innovativeness, 
uncertainty 
avoidance; 
apprehensiveness); (3) attitudes (e.g., expectations; perceived usefulness); and, 
(4) social influence. These are all factors that have been identified by one or 
more of the models discussed in this report. They are all factors that affect 
adoption decisions and use of mobile devices for communications and other 

The Impact of Culture on the Adoption, Design … 
93 
tasks. They also are areas that may be impacted by culture—in some of the 
models of adoption and use, culture is explicitly identified while in other 
models, it is not addressed at all. 
 
 
4.2. Relevance to Army 
 
The topic of mobile technology is very relevant to the Army. There is a 
move to providing mobile phones and software to Soldiers (Lane, 2010; 
Ackerman, April 22, 27, 2011.) Information we can learn about appropriate 
and effective design of mobile services and applications will be useful to the 
Army. There is considerable information available on design guidance for 
culturally appropriate user interfaces and experiences. This information can be 
used in design of software for U.S. Soldiers and for other national forces who 
may be our coalition partners. 
The U.S. Army has interest in mobile devices as a means for 
communications and as a way to disseminate applications (i.e., apps.) A 
successful app can be thought of as ―an elegant, easy-to use application that 
solves a real problem or provides meaningful entertainment.‖ (Barnard et al 
2009; p. 3). For the Army, we can think of providing software applications that 
solve real problems. (We will not consider the entertainment apps here.) The 
Army has adopted the app approach through competitions (e.g., U.S. Army 
Times, 2010; Lopez, 2010) and its own app store (Ackerman, April 2011; U.S. 
Army Architecture Community, 2010). It is possible to conceive of Army apps 
yet to be designed that can aid in mission accomplishment, for example, apps 
that address issues with local populations or humanitarian missions. 
A recent article in the Army AL&T (Acquisition, Logistics and 
Technology) magazine (Daniels and Stiner, 2011) describes a test where 
smartphones were plugged into tactical radios, allowing Soldiers to 
communicate using voice, data, or images. The authors suggested that the use 
of the smartphones and associated technology allowed the Soldiers ―to be 
faster, quieter, and therefore less detectable—all of which can save lives‖ (p. 
31) because the Soldiers did not need to communicate by yelling across 
distances. These ruggedized Android-based phones ran two apps: the Joint 
Battle Command-Platform (JBC-P Handheld) and the Tactical Ground 
Reporting (TIGR). One benefit of this technology cited was the small amount 
of training needed because of Soldier familiarity with cell phones. Another 
interesting example of possible benefits is that Soldiers could take a photo of a 
wound and send it to a doctor for assistance in getting precisely appropriate 

Susan G. Hill 
94
treatment. Within the article, it is reported that smartphones will continue to be 
pursued for use by Army program managers (Daniels and Stiner, 2011). 
We know that mobile devices, and smartphones in particular, are 
ubiquitous in our society. Mobile smartphone technology is used within the 
Army. These technologies are not only used within the U.S., but are used 
globally. What is not known at this time is how culture and mobile technology 
(including software design) can be exploited to serve Army missions abroad. 
Can mobile apps be pushed to the local population? Can information be 
gathered from the local population via mobile technology? There may be 
many ways to use this technology in service to Army goals that have not yet 
been imagined or fully developed. Can this technology be used to further 
positive interaction and success with other national forces with whom we 
interact and partner? 
Several specific research topics seemed of practical interest for the Army 
for the future. The first is the development of multiple, culturally appropriate 
versions of user interfaces and services through cultural templates or special 
versioning tools, as explored by Yan (2010). If the Army has a need for 
applications specific to cultures, this may be a useful approach. Similarly, the 
idea of an adaptive interface, either directly changing the interface, as 
suggested by Bossard (2008), or through an adaptive dynamic agent for 
international collaboration which adapts its social interaction to the user‘s 
cultural background, as Evers et al. (2010) has done, could each be used to 
develop and adapt applications for specific cultures. 
Another intriguing concept is the use of mobile devices as a distributed 
sensor and communications network, where information from humans can be 
received and then integrated with location-based information to provide a 
(potentially) robust description of a local environment. Mobile phones might 
also be used as a distributed, and potentially asynchronous, communications 
tool, used to interrupt, ask questions, and send instructions, as Evers et al. 
(2010) 
demonstrated. 
Other 
culturally 
appropriate 
and 
effective 
communication uses that would support Army missions could be imagined; for 
example, mobile tools to support communications between U.S. and national 
forces. 
In summary, this literature review only scratches the surface in identifying 
and reviewing studies related to how culture impacts the adoption, use, and 
design of mobile technology. We do not claim that this review is exhaustive. 
However, we hope the information and observations here may be valuable in 
furthering Army missions. 
 

The Impact of Culture on the Adoption, Design … 
95 
REFERENCES 
 
Ackerman, S. First Look: Inside the Army‘s App Store for War, April 27, 
2011. http://www.wired. com/dangerroom/2011/04/armys-app-store-for-
war (accessed 20 June 2011). 
Ackerman, S. U.S. Army picks Android to power its first smartphone. 
Arstechnica.com.. April 22, 2011. http://arstechnica.com/gadgets/news 
/2011/04/us-army-picks-android-to-power-its- first-smartphone.ars?utm_ 
source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=F (accessed 9 
June 2011). 
Aloudat, A.; Michael, K. Toward the Regulation of Ubiquitous Mobile 
Government: A Case Study on Location-Based Emergency Services in 
Australia. Electronic Commerce Research, 2011, 11 (1), 31–74. 
Aryana, B.; Boks, C. Cultural Customization of Mobile Communication 
Devices‘ Components. International Design Conference (Design 2010), 
Dubrovnik, Croatia, 17–20 May 2010, pp 137–146. 
Aryana, B.; Oritsland, T. A. Culture and mobile HCI: A review. NordDesign 
2010, 25–27 August 2010, Goteborg, Sweden. http://s3images. coroflot. 
com/user_files/individual_files/92608_zuA873FXC6UyiMS3r8unZKUZt.
pdf (accessed 25 May 2011). 
Bagchi, K.; Kirs, P. The Impact of Schwartz‘s Cultural Value Types on ICT 
use: 
A 
Multi-National 
Individual-Level 
Analysis. 
International 
Conference on Information Systems (ICIS) 2009 Proceedings Paper 205, 
http://aisel.aisnet.org/icis2009/205. 
Barnard, D.; Bondo, J.; Burcaw, D.; Kaneda, D.; Kemper, C.; Novikoff, T.; 
Parrish, C.; Ellis, B.; Peters, K.; Siebert, J.; Wilson, E. iPhone User 
Interface Design Projects. NY: Apress, 2009. 
Baumgartner, V-J. A Practical Set of Cultural Dimensions For Global User-
Interface 
Analysis 
and 
Design, 
June 
2003.. 
Diploma 
Thesis, 
Fachhochschule Joanneum, Graz, Austria. http://www.mavas.at/val 
/education05_thesis00.asp (accessed 12 June 2011). 
Blom, J.; Chipchase, J.; Lehikoinen, J. Contextual and Cultural Challenges for 
User Mobility Research. Communications of the ACM, 2005, 48 (7), 37–
41. 
Bossard, A. Ontology-Based Cultural Personalization in Mobile Applications. 
Diploma Thesis, University of Zurich, pp 111, 2008. 
Cha, H.; Oshlyansky, L.; Cairns, P. Mobile Phone Preferences and Values: 
The U.K. vs. Korea. In International Workshop on Internationalisation of 

Susan G. Hill 
96
Products 
and 
Systems 
(IWIPS). 
http://www-users.cs.york.ac.uk 
/~pcairns/papers/IWIPS_2005.pdf (accessed 24 August 2011). 
Choi, B.; Lee, I.; Kim, J.; Jeon, Y. A Qualitative Cross-National Study of 
Cultural Influences on Mobile Data Service Design. Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ‗05, 
ACM, 2005;pp 661–670. 
Constantiou, I.; Papazafeiropoulou, A.; Vendelo, M. Does Culture Affect the 
Adoption of Advanced Mobile Services? A Comparative Study of Young 
Adults‘ Perceptions in Denmark and the UK. The DATA BASE for 
Advances in Information Systems 2009 40 (4), 132–147. 
Davis, F.; Bagozzi, R.; Warshaw, P. User Acceptance of Computer 
Technology: A Comparison of Two Theoretical Models. Management 
Science 1989 35 (8), 982–1003. 
Daniels, M.; Stiner, M. Information on the Fly. Army AL&T Magazine, July-
September 2011, 30–33. 
Donner, J. Research Approaches to Mobile Use in the Developing World: A 
Review of the Literature. The Information Society 2008, 24 (3). 
Eune, J.; Lee, K. P. Analysis on Intercultural Differences through User 
Experiences of Mobile Phone for Glocalization [sic]. Proceedings of the 
International Association of Societies of Design (IASDR 2009).(Coex, 
Seoul, 
Korea, 
18–22 
October 
2009). 
http://www.iasdr2009. 
org/ap/Papers/Orally%20Presented%20Papers/Culture/Analysis%20on%2
0Intercultural%20 
Differences%20through%20User%20Experiences%20of%20Mobile%20P
hone%20for%20gl ocalization.pdf (accessed 25 May 2011). 
Evers, V.; Maldonado, H.; Brodecki, T.; Hinds, P. Relational vs. Group Self-
Construal: Untangling the Role of National Culture in HRI. In T. Fong 
and K. Dautenhahn Eds; HRI pp 255–262 New York: NY, 2008; ACM. 
Evers, V.; Winterboer, A.; Pavlin, G.; Groen, F. ICIC10, Copenhagen, 
Denmark, 19–20 August pp 183–186, 2010 ACM. 
Frandsen-Thorlacius, O.; Hornbaek, K.; Hertzum, M.; Clemmensen, T. Non-
Universal Usability? A Survey of How Usability Is Understood by 
Chinese and Danish Users, Proceedings of CHI 2009, pp 41–50, 2009. 
ACM. 
Guerrero, L.; Ochoa, S.; Pino, J. Selecting Computing Devices to Support 
Mobile Collaboration. Group Decision and Negotiation 2006, 15, 243–
271. 
Hall, E. The Silent Language. NY: Doubleday, 1959. 
Hall, E.T. Beyond Culture. Garden City, NY: Anchot Press, 1976. 

The Impact of Culture on the Adoption, Design … 
97 
Herskovic, V.; Ochoa, S.; Pino, J.; Neyem, A. The Iceberg Effect: Behind the 
User Interface of Mobile Collaborative Systems. Journal of Universal 
Computer Science, 2011, 17 (2), 183–202. 
Hofstede, G. Culture’s Consequences: International Differences in Work-
Relate Values. Beverly Hills, CA: 1980. Sage. 
Hofstede, G. The Business of International Buisness is Cultur5228672. e. 
International Business Review 1994, 3 (1), 1–14. 
Hofstede, G. The Business of International Business Is Culture. In Cross 
Cultural Management, T. Jackson Eds; London: Buterworth-Heinemann, 
1995; pp 150–154. 
Hofstede, G.; McCrae, R. Personality and Culture Revisited: Linking Traits 
and Dimensions Of Culture, Cross-Cultural Research 2004, 38 (1), 52–
88. 
Jhangiani, I.; Smith-Jackson, T. Comparison of Mobile Phone User Interface 
Design Preferences: Perspectives From Nationality and Disability Culture, 
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Mobile Technology, 
Applications and Systems (Mobility‘07, 10–12 September, Singapore, pp 
512–519, 2007 ACM. 
Jordan, P. W. Designing Pleasurable Products. London: Taylor and Francis, 
2000. 
Kamppuri, M. Theoretical and Methodological Challenges of Cross-Cultural 
Interaction Design. (Doctoral dissertation, University of Eastern Finland, 
2011). 
http://epublications.uef.fi/pub/urn_isbn_978-952-61-0407-2/urn_ 
isbn_978-952-61-0407- 2.pdf (accessed 25 May 25 2011). 
Kayan, S.; Fussell, S.; Setlock, L. Cultural Differences in the Use of Instant 
Messaging in Asia and North America. CSCW’06 Proceedings of the 2006 
20th Anniversary Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 
pp 525–528, NY: 2006. ACM. 
Kim, J. H.; Lee, K. P. Cultural Difference and Mobile Phone Interface Design: 
Icon Recognition According to Level of Abstraction. Proceedings of 
MobileHCI’05, Salzburg, Austria, 19–22 September 2005 pp 307–310; 
ACM. 
Kluckhohn, F.; Strodtbeck, F. Variations in Value Orientations. Oxford, 
England: Row, Peterson, 1961. 
Koo, C.; Wati, Y. Toward an Understanding of the Mediating Role of ―Trust‖ 
in Mobile Banking Service: An Empirical Test of Indonesia Case. Journal 
of 
Universal 
Computer 
Science 
2010, 
16 
(13), 
1801–1824. 
http://www.jucs.org/jucs_16_13/toward_ 

Susan G. Hill 
98
an_understanding_of/jucs_16_13_1801_1824_koo.pdf (accessed 25 May 
25 2011). 
Kwon, H. S.; Chidambaram, L. A Test of The Technology Acceptance Model, 
the Case of the Cellular Telephone Adoption. IEEE Proceedings of the 
33rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2000; pp 1–10. 
Lane, S. U.S. Army wants to equip all soldiers with an Apple iPhone or 
Android 
phone. 
AppleInsider. 
http://www.appleinsider.com 
/articles/10/12/14/us_ army_wants_to_give_soldiers_a_choice_of_apple_ 
iphone_or_android_phone.html (accessed 9 June 2010). 
Lee, Y. S.; Ryu, Y. S.; Smith-Jackson, T. L.; Shin, D. J.; Nussbaum, M. A.; 
Tomioka, K. Usability Testing With Cultural Groups in Developing a Cell 
Phone Navigation System.‖ Proceedings of HCI International 2005 – 11th 
International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, Las Vegas, 
NV, 2005. 
Lopez, C. T. Apps for Army to Shape Future Software Acquisition. 
http://www.army.mil/article 
/43293/apps-for-army-to-shape-future-
software-acquisition (accessed 20 June 2011). 
Lu, J.; Yao, J. E.; Yu, C. S. Personal Innovativeness, Social Influences and 
Adoption of Wireless Internet Services via Mobile Technology. Journal of 
Strategic Information Systems, 2005, 14 (3), 245–268. 
Martin, B.; Abbott, E. Development calling: The use of mobile phones in 
agriculture development in Uganda. Presented at the International 
Federation for Information Processing workshop, ―Information and 
Communications Technologies (ICT) and Development Research Voices 
from Africa,‖ IFIP9, 22–23 March 2010, at Makerere University, 
Kampala, 
Uganda. 
http://mak.ac.ug/documents/IFIP/Devleopment 
Calling.pdf (accessed 20 June 2011). 
Massey, A. P.; Khatri, V.; Ramesh, V. From the Web to the Wireless Web: 
Technology Readiness and Usability. Paper presented at the 38th Annual 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, Big Island, HA, 
2005. 
Mathew, J.; Sarker, S.; Varshney, U. M-commerce services: Promises and 
challenges. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 
2004, 14 (26) (accessed 16 June 2011). 
Matsui, K. Influence of Cultural Difference on Mobile User Experience. A 
Case Study of the Nokia Phone in Japanese Mobile Culture. (Master‘s 
thesis, University of Jyvaskyla, Finland, 2009.) https://jyx.jyu.fi/dspace 
/bitstream/handle/123456789/22463/URN_NBN_fi_jyu200911184415. 
pdf?sequence=1 (accessed 25 May 2011). 

The Impact of Culture on the Adoption, Design … 
99 
Medhi, I.; Patnaik, S.; Brunskill, E.; Gautama, S.N. N.; Thies, W.; Toyama, K. 
Designing Mobile Interfaces for Novice and Low-Literacy Users. ACM 
Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, 2011, 18, (1), 2. 
Min, Q.; Ji, S.; Qu, G. Mobile Commerce User Acceptance Study in China: A 
Revised UTAUT Model. Tsinghua Science and Technology 2008, 13 (3), 
257–264. http://qhxb.lib. tsinghua.edu.cn/myweb/english//2008/2008e3 
/257-264.pdf (accessed 25 May 2011). 
Min, Q.; Li, Y.; Ji, S. The Effects of Individual-Level Culture on Mobile 
Commerce Adoption: An Empirical Study. IEEE 2009 Eighth 
International Conference on Mobile Business, 2009; pp 305–312. 
mobiThinking. Global Mobile Statistics 2011: All Quality Mobile Marketing 
Research, Mobile Web Stats, Subscribers, Ad Revenue Usage, Trends.... 
http://mobithinking.com/mobilemarketing-tools/latest-mobile-stats 
(accessed 20 June 2011). 
Parsons, T.; Shils, E. Toward a General Theory of Action. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1951. 
Rosoff, M. Apple leaked how many iPads it sold in Q2 and it‘s a good 
number. Business Insider website, http://www.businessinsider.com/new-
expectation-for-ipad-sales-8-millionthis-quarter-2011-6 
(accessed 
29 
August 2011). 
Sarker, S.; Wells, J. Understanding Mobile Handheld Device Use and 
Adoption. Communications of the ACM, 2003, 46 (12), 35–40. 
Schwartz, S. H. Universals in the Content and Structure of Values: Theoretical 
Advances and Empirical Tests in 20 Countries. Advances in Experimental 
Social Psychology, 1992, 25, 1–65. 
Schwartz, S. H.; Ros, M. Value in the West: A Theoretical And Empirical 
Challenge to the Individualism-Collectivism Cultural Dimension. World 
Psychology 1995, 1, 99–122. 
Trompenaars, F. Riding the Waves of Culture. London: Nicholas Brealy 
Publishing, 1993. 
U.S. Army Architecture Community Introducing the U.S. Army Marketplace! 
http:// architecture.army.mil/technical-view/applications/applications.html 
(accessed 20 June 2011). 
U.S. Army Times, 3 March 2010, Army launches app development contest. 
http://www.armytimes.com/news/2010/03/army_a4a_030310w/ (accessed 
20 June 2011). 
Van Biljon, J. A. A Model for Representing the Motivational and Cultural 
Factors That Influence Mobile Phone Usage Variety. (Doctoral 
dissertation, University of South Africa, 2006). http://uir.unisa.ac.za 

Susan G. Hill 
100 
/bitstream/handle/10500/2149/thesis.pdf?sequence=1 (accessed 25 May 
2011). 
Van Biljon, J.; Kotze, P. Modelling the Factors That Influence Mobile Phone 
Adoption. Proceedings of the 2007 Annual Research Conference of The 
South African Institute of Computer Scientists and Information 
Technologists on IT Research in Developing Countries, SAICSIT’07, NY, 
2007a, pp 152–161; ACM. 
Van Biljon, J.; Kotze, P. Profiling mLearning Students According to Cultural 
Dimensions: Is that possible? Proceedings of the 37th Southern Africa 
Computer Lecturers’ Association Conference, 1–3 July 2007, Victoria 
Falls, Zimbabwe, pp 1–14, http://uir.unisa. ac.za/handle/10500/3137? 
show=full (accessed 14 June 2011). 
Van Biljon, J.; Kotze, P. Cultural Factors in a Mobile Phone Adoption and 
Usage Model. Journal of Universal Computer Science 2008, 14 (16), 
2650–2679. 
http://www.jucs.org/jucs_14_16/cultural_factors_in_a/jucs_14_16_2650_
2679_biljon.pdf (accessed 25 May 2011). 
Venkatesh, V.; Morris, M.; Davis, G.; Davis, F. User Acceptance of 
Information Technology: Toward a Unified View, MIS Quarterly 2003, 
27 (3), 425-478. 
Walsh, T.; Nurkka, P.; Walsh, R. Cultural Differences in Smartphone User 
Experience Evaluation. Proceedings of the 9th International Conference 
on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia, MUM ‘10, no. 24, 2010 ACM. 
Wang, L.; Rau, P.; Evers, V.; Robinson B.; Hinds, P. Responsiveness to 
Robots: Effects of ingroup orientation & communication style on HRI in 
China. Proceedings of Human Root Interaction Conference HRI’09, San 
Diego, CA, 11–13 March 2009. 
Wu, J. H.; Wang, S. C. What Drives Mobile Commerce? An Empirical 
Evaluation of the Revised Technology Acceptance Model. Information 
and Management, 2005, 42: 719–729. 
Yan, Q. Cultural Versioning of Mobile User Experience. Proceedings of the 
CHI 2010. Atlanta, GA, 10–15 April 2010, pp 2943–2946; NY: ACM. 
Yang, K. C. C. Exploring Factors Affecting the Adoption of Mobile 
Commerce in Singapore. Telematics and Informatics 2005, 22, 257–277. 
Vyncke, F.; Brengman, M. Are Culturally Congruent Websites More 
Effective? An Overview of a Decade of Empirical Evidence. Journal of 
Electronic Commerce Research 2010, 11 (1), 14–29. 
 
 

The Impact of Culture on the Adoption, Design … 
101 
LIST OF SYMBOLS, ABBREVIATIONS, AND ACRONYMS 
 
CSCW 
computer-supported cooperative work 
F 
 
Finland 
HCI 
human-computer interaction 
IDV 
Individualism vs. collectivism 
J 
 
Japan 
JBC-P 
Joint Battle Command-Platform 
K  
Korea 
LTO 
Long-term orientation 
MAS 
Masculinity vs. femininity 
mLearning Mobile Learning 
MOPTAM Mobile Phone Technology Adoption Model 
PC  
personal computer 
PDI  
Power distance 
SI  
social influence 
TAM 
Technology Acceptance Model 
TIGR 
Tactical Ground Reporting 
UA  
uncertainty avoidance 
UAV 
Uncertainty avoidance 
UTAUT 
Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology 
 
 


In: America's Embrace of the Mobile Internet 
 ISBN: 978-1-63463-585-1 
Editor: Jennifer Haggard 
© 2015 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3 
 
 
 
TEXT AND MULTIMEDIA MESSAGING: 
ISSUES FOR CONGRESS 
 
 
Patricia Moloney Figliola and Gina Stevens 
 
 
SUMMARY 
 
The first text messages were sent during 1992 and 1993, although 
commercially, text messaging was not widely offered or used until 2000. 
Even then, messages could only be sent between users subscribed to the 
same wireless carrier; for example, Sprint customers could only exchange 
messages with other Sprint customers. In November 2001, however, 
wireless service providers began to connect their networks for text 
messaging, allowing subscribers on different networks to exchange text 
messages. Since then, the number of text messages in the United States 
has grown to over 48 billion messages every month. Additionally, text 
messages are no longer only sent as ―point-to-point‖ communications 
between two mobile device users. More specifically, messages are also 
commonly sent from web-based applications within a web browser (e.g., 
from an Internet e-mail address) and from instant messaging clients like 
AIM or MSN. 
For congressional policymakers, two major categories of issues have 
arisen: (1) ―same problem, different platform‖ and (2) issues stemming 
from the difficulty in applying existing technical definitions to a new 
                                                        
 This is an edited, reformatted and augmented version of a Congressional Research Service 
publication RL34632, prepared for Members and Committees of Congress, dated January 
12, 2012. 

Patricia Moloney Figliola and Gina Stevens 
104 
service, such as whether a text message is sent ―phone-to-phone‖ or using 
the phone‘s associated email address. There are numerous examples of 
each. An example of the first category would be consumer fraud and 
children‘s accessing inappropriate content, which have existed previously 
in the ―wired world,‖ but have now found their way to the ―wireless 
world.‖ An example of the second category would be that spam sent 
between two phones or from one phone to many phones does not fall 
under the definition of spam in the CAN-SPAM Act of 2003 (Controlling 
the Assault of Non-Solicited Pornography and Marketing Act, P.L. 108-
187); however, if that same message were to be sent from a phone or 
computer using the phone‘s associated e-mail address, it would. 
The increasing use of text and multimedia messaging has raised several 
policy issues: distracted driving, SMS spam, the inability of consumers to 
disable text messaging, text messaging price fixing, carrier blocking of 
common short code messages, deceptive and misleading common short 
code programs, protecting children from inappropriate content on 
wireless devices, ―sexting,‖ mobile cyberbullying, privacy of text 
messages, and using SMS to support law enforcement and emergency 
response. 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The first text messages were sent during 1992 and 1993, although 
commercially, text messaging was not widely offered or used until 2000. Even 
then, messages could only be sent between users subscribed to the same 
wireless carrier; for example, Sprint customers could only exchange messages 
with other Sprint customers. In November 2001, however, wireless service 
providers began to connect their networks for text messaging, allowing 
subscribers on different networks to exchange text messages. Since then, the 
number of text messages in the United States has grown to over 48 billion 
messages every month. Additionally, text messages are no longer only sent as 
―point-to-point‖ communications between two mobile device users. For 
example, messages are also commonly sent from web-based applications 
within a web browser and from instant messaging clients like AIM, MSN, or 
Google Chat. 
 
 
 
 
 

Text and Multimedia Messaging: Issues for Congress 
105 
DEFINITIONS 
 
Short Message Service 
 
Short Message Service (SMS) is a method of communication that sends 
text between cell phones, or from a computer or handheld device to a cell 
phone. The ―short‖ part refers to the maximum size of the text messages: 160 
characters.1 The term ―SMS‖ is generally used interchangeably with the term 
―text message.‖ 
Even when not being used for a voice call, a mobile phone is constantly 
sending and receiving information. It is communicating to its cell phone tower 
over a control channel. The reason for this communication is so that the cell 
phone system knows which cell a phone is in, and so that the phone can 
change cells as the user moves around. Every so often, a phone and a tower 
will exchange a packet of data that lets both ―know‖ that everything is 
working properly. 
The control channel also provides the pathway for SMS messages. When 
someone sends an SMS message, the message flows through the SMS Center 
(SMSC), then to the cell tower, and the tower then sends the message to the 
recipient‘s phone as a packet of data on the control channel. Figure 1 
illustrates how an SMS message is processed. 
 
Enhanced and Multimedia Message Service 
While SMS only allows plain text to be sent, two alternative messaging 
services allow for more elaborate types of messages. With Enhanced 
Messaging Service (EMS), formatted text, sound effects, small pictures, and 
icons can be sent. MMS (Multimedia Messaging Service) allows animations, 
audio, and video files in addition to text to be sent. 
 
E-mail-to-SMS Messaging 
As noted above, SMS messages may be sent between a computer and a 
mobile phone. However, these messages are sent using the e-mail address 
associated with the mobile device, such as 2025551212@carrier.com. For that 
reason, these messages are classified as e-mail and therefore are subject to 
different and more stringent regulation (see ―SMS Spam‖). 
 
 
 

Patricia Moloney Figliola and Gina Stevens 
106 
 
Source: Used with permission from Motorola. Definitions: The ―Internet Protocol (IP) 
cloud‖ represents an Internet Protocol network used to carry data traffic; HLR = 
Home Location Register (the central database that contains details of each mobile 
phone subscriber); MAP = Mobile Application Part signaling protocol; MSC = 
Mobile Switching Center; the ―Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN) 
cloud‖ is included to demonstrate that SMS messages are not carried over it; SMS 
Aggregator = an intermediary between mobile service providers providing SMS 
service; SMSC = SMS Center; SMPP = Short Message Peer-to-Peer Protocol. 
Figure 1. Path of Intercarrier SMS Messages. 
 
Common Short Codes (CSCs) 
 
Introduced in the U.S. market in October 2003, Common Short Codes 
(CSCs) are short numeric codes of five or six digits, compatible across 
carriers, to which text messages can be sent from a mobile phone. Wireless 
subscribers send text messages to short codes to access a wide variety of 
mobile content, for example, to vote for contestants on American Idol. Many 
entities use CSCs to communicate with interested parties: television stations; 
individual television shows; radio stations; instant messaging services; 
political, advocacy, and other organizations; magazines; and sports teams—

Text and Multimedia Messaging: Issues for Congress 
107 
among others. Users send a message to the CSC to subscribe to alerts or other 
messages. Sometimes these messages are delivered for free by the originator, 
sometimes there is a fee. Figure 2 illustrates how a CSC message is processed. 
 
 
Source: Used with permission from Motorola. See Figure 1 for acronym definitions. 
Figure 2. Path of Common Short Code Messages. 
―Vanity‖ CSCs are also available (for a higher price)—these CSCs use 
letters on a mobile device keypad to spell out words that are easy to remember 
and are chosen to reflect the service the short code is being used to access.2 
Furthermore, although CSCs can be ―compatible‖ across all carriers, some 
CSCs are established as business partnerships between a specific carrier and 
another entity. For example, American Idol has an exclusive partnership with 
AT&T Wireless.3 
 
 
ISSUES FOR CONGRESS 
 
For congressional policymakers, the major issues that have arisen stem 
from what could be called ―same problem, different platform.‖ For example, 
issues such as consumer fraud and children‘s accessing inappropriate content, 
which have existed previously in the ―wired world,‖ have now found their way 
to the ―wireless world.‖ 
Other issues stem from the difficulty in applying technical definitions to a 
given service, such as whether a text message is sent ―phone-to-phone‖ or 

Patricia Moloney Figliola and Gina Stevens 
108 
using the phone‘s associated e-mail address. For example, spam sent between 
two phones or from one phone to many phones does not fall under the legal 
definition of spam; but if that same message is sent from a phone or computer 
using the phone‘s associated e-mail address, it does. 
 
 
Distracted Driving Caused By Texting 
 
According 
to 
the 
U.S. 
Department 
of 
Transportation 
(DOT), 
approximately 16% of fatalities in distraction-related crashes were caused in at 
least some part by mobile devices. Further, 
 
 
In 2009, 5,474 people were killed in U.S. roadways and an estimated 
additional 448,000 were injured in motor vehicle crashes that were 
reported to have involved distracted driving. 
 
The age group with the greatest proportion of distracted drivers was 
the under-20 age group—16% of all drivers younger than 20 involved 
in fatal crashes were reported to have been distracted while driving. 
 
Drivers who use hand-held devices are four times as likely to get into 
crashes serious enough to injure themselves. 
 
Using a cell phone while driving, whether it is hand-held or hands-
free, delays a driver‘s reactions as much as having a blood alcohol 
concentration at the legal limit of 0.08 percent.4 
 
While reading and composing text messages while driving is only one of 
numerous factors that can lead to distracted driving, such activity is a growing 
concern among safety and regulatory groups. In response to this concern, there 
have been various actions taken at the federal and state levels. 
 
Legislation—112th Congress 
A number of bills have been introduced in the 112th Congress on the issue 
of ―distracted driving.‖ 
 
Motorcoach Enhanced Safety Act of 2011, H.R. 873 Motorcoach 
Enhanced Safety Act of 2011, S. 453 Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety 
Enhancement Act of 2011, S. 1950 
The Motorcoach Enhanced Safety Act was introduced in the Senate by 
Senator Sherrod Brown and in the House by Representative John Lewis on 

Text and Multimedia Messaging: Issues for Congress 
109 
March 2, 2011. With respect to text messaging, the Motorcoach Enhanced 
Safety Act would require the Secretary of Transportation to 
 
 
prescribe regulations on the use of electronic or wireless devices 
(including cell phones and other distracting devices) by motorcoach 
operators; and 
 
prohibit their use in cases where they interfere with the driver‘s safe 
operation of a motorcoach, but not when necessary for driver or 
public safety in emergency situations. 
 
S. 453 was referred to the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
Transportation on December 14, 2011, and ordered to be reported with an 
amendment in the nature of a substitute favorably. The text of S. 453 was 
included in Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Enhancement Act of 2011, S. 
1950. That bill was introduced by Senator Frank Lautenberg on December 7, 
2011;5 the bill was ordered to be reported with an amendment in the nature of 
a substitute favorably. 
 
Mariah’s Act, S. 1449 
Senator Mark Pryor introduced Mariah‘s Act on July 29, 2011. The bill 
would create grants to states that enact and enforce a law that 
 
 
prohibits drivers from texting while driving; 
 
prohibits drivers age 18 or younger from using a cell phone while 
driving, making violation of the law a primary offense; and 
 
establishes certain minimum fines and increased civil and criminal 
penalties. The bill would also create a distracted driving grant 
program at the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 
(NHTSA). 
 
The bill was referred to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
Transportation. On December 14, 2011, the committee ordered the bill to be 
reported with an amendment in the nature of a substitute favorably. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Patricia Moloney Figliola and Gina Stevens 
110 
Students Taking Action for Road Safety Act (STARS Act) of 2011,  
S. 1422 
Senator Amy Klobuchar introduced this bill on July 27, 2011. The bill 
focuses on teen traffic safety in general, including providing grants to educate 
teens on issues related to safe driving. Specifically, the bill: 
 
 
Directs the Secretary of Transportation to establish a teen traffic 
safety grant program to award formula grants to states to implement 
statewide programs to improve the traffic safety of teen drivers. 
 
Authorizes a state to use grant funds to implement such statewide 
program to improve the traffic safety of teen drivers, including 
activities to support peer-topeer education and prevention strategies in 
schools and communities to increase safety belt use and reduce 
speeding, impaired and distracted driving, underage drinking, and 
other destructive teen driver decisions that lead to injuries and 
fatalities. 
 
Authorizes the Secretary to contract with a national, nonprofit 
organization to establish a technical assistance center to provide 
training and technical assistance to state and local officials, student 
leaders, school advisors, and other entities associated with the grant 
program. Authorizes the center to operate a national teen traffic safety 
clearinghouse. 
 
Directs the Secretary to establish the National Teen Driver Advisory 
Council to study and develop an education and prevention strategy to 
reduce teen driver injuries and fatalities. 
 
The bill was referred to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
Transportation. No further action has been taken. 
 
Safe Drivers Act of 2011, H.R. 2333 
Representative Carolyn McCarthy introduced this bill on June 23, 2011. 
The act would: 
 
 
Direct the Secretary of Transportation to study distracted driving, 
including cognitive distraction when driving and driver distraction 
impacts on young, inexperienced drivers. 
 
Require the Secretary to withhold 25% of a state‘s apportionment of 
certain federal-aid highway program funds for the fiscal year if the 

Text and Multimedia Messaging: Issues for Congress 
111 
state has not enacted or is not enforcing a law that (1) prohibits, 
except in an emergency, an operator of a moving or idling motor 
vehicle on a public road from using a hand-held mobile device (other 
than a voice-activated, vehicle-integrated, or similar device, or a 
global positioning system [GPS] which is not vehicle-integrated); and 
(2) requires, upon conviction of a violation of such prohibition, the 
imposition of certain minimum penalties. 
 
The bill was referred to the House Transportation and Infrastructure 
Committee Subcommittee on Highways and Transit. No further action has 
been taken. 
 
Distracted Driving Prevention Act of 2011, H.R. 1772 
Representative Eliot Engel introduced this bill on May 5, 2011. The bill 
would: 
 
 
Direct the Secretary of Transportation to make distracted driving 
prevention incentive grants for each fiscal year to states that enact 
laws that prohibit, with certain exceptions, and establish fines for 
texting and/or handheld cellphone use while driving. 
 
Require a state that receives a grant to allocate (1) at least 50% to 
educate and advertise to the public about the dangers of texting or 
using a cellphone while driving as well as to enforce the distracted 
driving law; and (2) up to 50% for other traffic safety improvement 
projects. 
 
Direct the Administrator of the NHTSA to administer a distracted 
driving national education program with at least two high-visibility 
education and advertising campaigns. 
 
Require the Secretary to establish a research program to study 
distracted driving by passenger and commercial vehicle drivers. 
 
Direct the FCC to report to Congress on existing and developing 
wireless communications technology that may be used to reduce 
problems associated with distracted driving. 
 
Require the Secretary to (1) issue regulations on the use of electronic 
or wireless devices, including cell phones and other distracting 
devices, by operators of commercial motor vehicles and school buses; 
and (2) prohibit their use in circumstances where it interferes with the 
driver‘s safe operation of the vehicles. 

Patricia Moloney Figliola and Gina Stevens 
112 
This bill was referred to the Committee on Transportation and 
Infrastructure and Committee on Energy and Commerce. No further action has 
been taken. 
 
Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act, 2012, P.L. 
112-55 (S. 1596) (Originally Transportation, Housing and Urban 
Development, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2012 (H.R. 
2112)) 
P.L. 112-55 directs the NHTSA and the Centers for Disease Control to 
report on the extent to which electronic devices can be causally linked to the 
reported rise in fatal accidents or injuries involving distracted driving, as well 
as the impact distracted driving prevention laws and enforcement actions can 
have on motorist behavior. 
 
 
SMS Spam 
 
The CAN-SPAM Act was and is intended to curb the amount of spam that 
consumers receive in their e-mail accounts. At the time the act was being 
considered in 2003, text messaging was in its infancy as a service. As 
discussed above, SMS messaging is not the same as messaging that uses a 
mobile phone‘s associated e-mail address (e.g., 2025551212@carrier.com). At 
this time, only the latter type of message is covered by CAN-SPAM; messages 
that are sent ―phone-to-phone‖ through the SMSC are not. 
There is no evident reason for messages that appear the same to a user and 
have the same effect on a user (generally, annoyance) to be treated differently 
under CAN-SPAM (Controlling the Assault of Non-Solicited Pornography and 
Marketing Act, P.L. 108-187). Resolving this discrepancy in the treatment of 
these two types of messages would require a change to the statute. 
 
 
Inability of Consumers to Disable Text Messaging 
 
In the past, some mobile service customers had expressed frustration to 
their congressional representatives about unwanted text messages and the 
inability to selectively block or completely disable text messaging on their 
phones. Carriers generally offer a range of text messaging packages, for 
example, 500 messages for $10, but some customers simply do not use text 
messaging and, therefore, pay a small fee every time they receive a message. 

Text and Multimedia Messaging: Issues for Congress 
113 
In December 2007, a class-action lawsuit was filed against T-Mobile in this 
matter.6 At that time, most carriers already offered some form of text blocking to 
their customers. The Appendix contains information from that article that may be 
helpful to consumers.7 In August 2008, T-Mobile began allowing text blocking. 
At this time, all major carriers provide this service. 
 
 
Text Messaging Price Fixing 
 
A class-action suit pending before the district court for the Northern 
District of Illinois accuses the four national wireless carriers—AT&T, 
Verizon, Sprint, and T-Mobile—of colluding to set the price of text messages. 
Plaintiffs allege that the defendants agreed, in 2005, to set the price for a single 
text message at $0.10 and then subsequently agreed to raise that price twice, 
first to $0.15 and then to $0.20. The plaintiffs allege that it is reasonable to 
infer that those price changes were the result of a prior agreement because the 
industry is concentrated, the defendants made identical price changes at about 
the same time, no defendant attempted to gain an advantage in the market by 
lowering its price (even though the price is far in excess of cost), and the 
defendants had ample opportunity to conspire through participation in a trade 
association, which frequently discussed matters related to text messaging. 
Plaintiffs‘ complaint also notes that the Antitrust Subcommittee of the Senate 
Judiciary Committee initiated an investigation into the price increases. 
Defendants have denied that they engaged in any collusion and dispute the 
claim that the facts support any inference of unlawful conduct. Defendants 
have pointed out that most consumers do not purchase text messaging services 
on a message-by-message basis, but instead buy packaged plans that include 
hundreds of messages—or an unlimited number—each month. The structure 
and pricing of those bundled plans varies among the carriers—plaintiffs do not 
claim that defendants reached any agreement with respect to those plans—and 
the effective price of text messaging service has declined sharply as output has 
expanded dramatically. The wireless carriers have also argued that the 
increases in prices for single-use text messages occurred over the space of 6 to 
11 months, a pattern that is more suggestive of ―follow-the-leader‖ pricing—
which is lawful—than any advance coordination. Defendants dispute that the 
wireless service providers ever discussed pricing at meetings of their trade 
association, and they note that neither the Antitrust Subcommittee‘s 
investigation, nor a DOJ investigation initiated at the subcommittee‘s request, 
found any evidence of collusion among the carriers. 

Patricia Moloney Figliola and Gina Stevens 
114 
Carrier Blocking of Common Short Code Messages 
 
In 2007, Verizon notified NARAL Pro-Choice America that it would not 
participate in its CSC program. NARAL does not charge for its messages and 
users may opt-in or opt-out as desired, but Verizon stated that it does not 
accept programs from any group ―that seeks to promote an agenda or distribute 
content that, in its discretion, may be seen as controversial or unsavory to any 
of [its] users.‖8 
This decision was immediately criticized by free-speech advocates, 
although communications scholars pointed out that the company most likely, 
from a legal standpoint, did have the right to refuse to participate in the 
program.9 Since text messages are not carried over the traditional telephone 
network, such messages are not protected under common carrier regulation. 
The next day, Verizon changed its decision and is now participating in 
NARAL‘s CSC program, saying in a statement that the decision had been ―an 
incorrect interpretation of a dusty internal policy‖ that ―was designed to ward 
against communications such as anonymous hate messaging and adult 
materials sent to children.‖ The policy had been developed ―before text 
messaging protections such as spam filters adequately protected customers 
from unwanted messages.‖10 
This issue highlights the difficulty in applying the current regulatory 
structure to new services. While mobile providers appear to have the legal 
right to determine what information is available through their CSC programs, 
Congress may wish to consider whether and how political and other speech 
might be better protected in those programs. However, there have been no 
recent cases in which carriers have blocked CSCs. 
 
 
Deceptive and Misleading Common Short Code Programs 
 
Many third-party content providers use the CSC program and bill the 
usage through the mobile service provider. For example, content providers can 
allow mobile device users to download content (e.g., ringtones) or participate 
in SMS-based ―chat.‖ While most of these content providers are legitimate 
businesses, others use deceptive tactics to gain customers and run up 
unexpected charges.11 
For example, as reported by CBS News in February 2008, some customers 
have subscribed to monthly services without reading the ―fine print‖ and find 

Text and Multimedia Messaging: Issues for Congress 
115 
that the charge is often difficult to remove because it is an independent third 
party rather than the customer‘s mobile service provider.12 
The Mobile Marketing Association has developed ―Consumer Best 
Practices Guidelines‖13 that it expects its members to follow. This code 
includes limiting subscription periods to one month, after which consumers 
must re-subscribe, and providing alerts to customers when their chat-related 
charges reach $25 increments. Although the best practices have not 
eliminated all misleading programs, over time the industry may bring its 
members into compliance. More clarity on industry efforts might allow 
policymakers an opportunity to assess the efficacy of those efforts. 
 
 
Protecting Children from Inappropriate Content  
on Wireless Devices 
 
As more mobile devices become equipped to access the web and 
additional content services are made available via CSCs, the risk of children 
downloading inappropriate content will likely increase. While carriers may 
follow a set of voluntary guidelines14 to promote wireless safety for children, 
there is no way to guarantee that children will not be able to access 
inappropriate content by circumventing carrier-implemented safeguards. 
The following types of material can be downloaded on many wireless 
devices, and may include content inappropriate for children: 
 
 
Images, such as background ―wallpaper‖ for the phone screen. 
 
Games, including some games that are also available for gaming 
systems. 
 
Music and songs, including ring tones, ringback tones, and downloads 
of full songs. 
 
Video, including certain television shows, movies, and music videos, as 
well as video programming specially made for, and only available on, 
wireless devices.15 
 
The wireless industry is working to ensure that children do not access 
inappropriate information over their wireless devices, but there is no definitive 
research on the success of these efforts. Whether current efforts to protect 
children from inappropriate content over wireless devices may be an issue of 
interest to policymakers. 

Patricia Moloney Figliola and Gina Stevens 
116 
―Sexting‖ 
 
Sexting is a term coined by the media that generally refers to youth 
writing sexually explicit messages, taking sexually explicit photos of 
themselves or others in their peer group, and transmitting those photos and/or 
messages to their peers.16 Sexting is not the same as a child sending a sexually 
explicit photo to an adult, however, the ramifications can be extremely serious 
because of how child pornography laws are written. In general, regardless of 
the age of the person who takes the photograph and/or sends it, that 
photograph is considered child pornography. This has led to situations in 
which underage girls have been charged with distributing child pornography 
and others in which teenagers have been required to register as sex offenders. 
Although no federal charges have been brought in these types of cases yet, 
it is conceivable that they could. Congress may wish to consider whether 
children should be prosecuted under statutes intended to prosecute child 
predators and pornographers and whether, in certain cases, such prosecutions 
might be warranted. 
A report conducted in 2008 by the National Campaign to Prevent Teen 
and Unplanned Pregnancy found that 20% of its respondents had indicated 
they had engaged in sexting. That study, however, had included 18- to 19-
year-old adults, which significantly skewed the findings.17 A more recent 
study published in January 2012 indicated that the problem is not as 
widespread as originally thought. The second study, published in Pediatrics, 
asked tweens and teens (ages 10- 17) if they had ever engaged in sexting. Of 
those asked, 2.5% of the respondents in the survey said ―they had appeared in 
or created images that depicted themselves nude or nearly nude.‖ But, when 
the researchers asked if the images ―showed breasts, genitals or someone‘s 
bottom,‖ only 1.3% said they had appeared in or created such images.18 
The study also found that older teens are much more likely to appear in 
such images than younger children. Just under three-quarters of the 2.5% who 
appeared in or created nude or nearly nude images were 16 or 17. Only 6% of 
that 2.5% were between 10 and 12. About 7% of the youth had received a 
nude or nearly nude picture, but only 1% reported forwarding or posting the 
image. Of those who received such images, 56% were girls and 55% were 16 
or 17. Just under 6% reported receiving sexually explicit images. The study 
found that some—but far from most—youth engaged in sexting were 
emotionally upset as a result. For example, ―21 percent of respondents 
appearing in or creating images reported feeling very or extremely upset, 

Text and Multimedia Messaging: Issues for Congress 
117 
embarrassed or afraid as a result, as did 25 percent of the youth receiving 
images.‖19 
 
Legislation—112th Congress 
In the 112th Congress, one bill has been introduced that includes a section 
on sexting. 
 
Anti-Bullying and Harassment Act of 2011, H.R. 975 
Representative Danny Davis introduced H.R. 975, the Anti-Bullying and 
Harassment Act of 2011, on March 9, 2011. The bill was referred to the 
Committee on Education and the Workforce Subcommittee on Early 
Childhood, Elementary, and Secondary Education on March 21, 2011. The bill 
includes language that includes sexting in the definition of cyberbullying if the 
transmittal of a ―nude picture‖ constitutes bullying20 ―that is undertaken, in 
whole or in part, through use of technology or electronic communications 
(including electronic mail, internet communications, instant messages, or 
facsimile communications) to transmit images, text, sounds, or other data.‖ 
 
 
Mobile Cyberbullying 
 
―Cyberbullying,‖ harassing communications sent, for example, via e-mail 
or text messages or through social networking sites such as Facebook or 
MySpace, is a growing problem. The issue made national headlines in 
November 2007 after the suicide of Megan Meier, a 13-year-old Missouri girl. 
In that case, the mother of a former friend of Megan‘s set up a fake MySpace 
page, pretending to be a boy who had just moved to the area and was home-
schooled. Within a few weeks of becoming ―friends‖ with ―Josh,‖ on October 
15, 2006, the tone of his messages changed drastically, with ―Josh‖ saying he 
no longer wanted to be friends with Megan, because ―he‖ had heard that she 
had been mean to some of her friends. On October 16, 2006, Megan hanged 
herself in her closet. 
Although, as in the case described above, much cyberbullying takes place 
in the ―wired‖ world, more recently, these sorts of messages are being sent 
from and to mobile devices. Since many mobile devices are capable of 
performing the same tasks as computers, these messages are now being sent 
via mobile instant messaging, the mobile websites of social networking sites, 
and text messaging. 

Patricia Moloney Figliola and Gina Stevens 
118 
Legislation—112th Congress 
In the 112th Congress, one bill has been introduced that includes a section 
on cyberbullying. 
 
Anti-Bullying and Harassment Act of 2011, H.R. 975 
Representative Danny Davis introduced H.R. 975, the Anti-Bullying and 
Harassment Act of 2011, on March 9, 2011. The bill was referred to the House 
Education and the Workforce Committee Subcommittee on Early Childhood, 
Elementary, and Secondary Education on March 21, 2011. The bill includes 
language defining cyberbullying as bullying21 ―that is undertaken, in whole or 
in part, through use of technology or electronic communications (including 
electronic mail, internet communications, instant messages, or facsimile 
communications) to transmit images, text, sounds, or other data.‖ A number of 
other bills are aimed at bullying, in general. 
 
 
Privacy of Text Messages22 
 
Text messages are routinely used to conduct government business, both 
officially and unofficially. As a result employers,23 litigants, newspapers, law 
enforcement,24 and public interest groups are increasingly seeking access to 
the contents of such communications in order to shed light on the workings of 
government. Most states have laws ―prohibiting public officials from 
discussing official business privately and failing to disclose information 
regarding the operations of government.‖25 On the other hand, some contend 
that text messages should be treated as private because of the nature of the 
delivery platforms or technological devices employed to send text messages. 
States are increasingly disregarding the public nature of the employee‘s 
position and the property ownership of the device used to send e-mail and text 
messages, and instead defining public communication based on whether the 
individual is conducting the public‘s business. Thus, communication about the 
public‘s business, and records documenting the communication are a part of 
the public record. Because text messaging represents a relatively new form of 
electronic communication, federal and state courts,26 legislatures,27 and 
commissions28 are considering access to text messages pursuant to Sunshine 
Laws, Open Meetings Laws, Public Records Acts, Freedom of Information 
Acts, and electronic surveillance laws. 
In Detroit, MI, newspapers filed a Michigan Freedom of Information Act 
(FOIA) lawsuit against that city seeking disclosure of text messages sent by 

Text and Multimedia Messaging: Issues for Congress 
119 
Detroit elected officials on city-issued pagers that related to the city‘s $8.4 
million settlement of two whistle-blower lawsuits brought by former Detroit 
police officers.29 The city argued that disclosure of the text messages would 
violate the federal Stored Communications Act, which outlaws unlawful 
access to stored communications.30 A public records directive issued by the 
city states that all electronic communications sent on city equipment ―is not 
considered to be personal or private.‖31 Although the newspapers obtained the 
text messages through an anonymous source, they continued to press for the 
release of additional information under public records law.32 A court ruled part 
of the information the newspapers wanted was public, the Free Press 
published text messages related to the cover-up, and the mayor and chief of 
staff were charged with eight felonies and convicted.33 In Flagg v. City of 
Detroit,34 the district court held that a city‘s text messages satisfied the 
definition of ―public records‖ under Michigan‘s Freedom of Information Act 
(FOIA)35 because they captured communications among city officials or 
employees in the performance of an official function. For purposes of the 
discovery rule governing production of documents, the district court concluded 
that the city had ―control‖ over any such ―public records‖ in the possession of 
a third party service provider under contract with the city by virtue of its 
statutory obligation to maintain these records and make them available for 
examination or inspection.36 
Courts also have examined whether the disclosure of text messages sent by 
employees on employer-issued pagers violates the privacy rights of employees, 
and whether such disclosure is barred by the Stored Communications Act 
(SCA).37 The United States Supreme Court in City of Ontario v. Quon 
overturned a federal appellate court decision which had held that officials in the 
city of Ontario, CA, engaged in an unconstitutional search and seizure when 
they acquired and read the contents of messages sent to and from a city police 
officer‘s city-provided pager.38 In Quon v. Arch Wireless Operating 
Company,39 the court of appeals for the Ninth Circuit concluded that, under 
certain circumstances, an employee sending text messages from an employer‘s 
device has a reasonable expectation of privacy under the Fourth Amendment. 
The United States Supreme Court resolved the case by applying settled 
principles for determining when a search is reasonable.40 In City of Ontario v. 
Quon, the Supreme Court held that officials had acted reasonably when they 
reviewed transcripts of messages sent to and from Sergeant Quon‘s city-issued 
pager in order to determine whether service limits on the pager‘s use should be 
increased. The Court assumed, without deciding, that Quon had a reasonable 

Patricia Moloney Figliola and Gina Stevens 
120 
expectation of privacy for Fourth Amendment purposes, but found that the 
search of the transcripts was reasonable. 
Courts also have begun exploring ways to apply open government laws to 
text messages. In Texas, a state judge ordered the city of Dallas to turn over 
e-mails and text messages sent by city officials from personal accounts and 
personal hand-held devices to conduct city business, and held that the e-mails 
and messages were subject to disclosure under the Texas Public Information 
Act.41 
 
 
Using SMS to Support Law Enforcement and Emergency 
Response 
 
In May 2011, the FCC and FEMA announced the implementation of a 
Personal Localized Alerting Network (PLAN). This program was previously 
called the Commercial Mobile Alert System (CMAS), which has been under 
development since April 2008 under rules developed by the FCC. 
The PLAN system will be operational in Washington, DC, and New York 
City by the end of 2011 and in the rest of the country by April 2012. PLAN 
will deliver emergency text messages to the public during emergencies and 
natural disasters.42 
 
The program was mandated by the Warning, Alert and Response Network 
Act that was signed into law in 2006.43 Under this law, the FCC was required 
to develop plans for a commercial mobile-alert system through which wireless 
carriers would voluntarily transmit text messages sent out by the government. 
The FCC has divided the types of messages the government will send out to 
mobile-phone users into three broad categories:44 
 
 
Presidential Alerts deal with national emergencies and will take 
precedence over any other impending alerts 
 
Imminent Threat Alerts deal with emergencies that may pose an 
imminent risk to people‘s lives or well-being. 
 
Child Abduction Emergency/AMBER alerts will be related to missing 
or abducted children. 
 
In addition, the FCC says that all subscribers with roaming agreements 
will receive timely alerts ―provided the subscriber‘s mobile device is 

Text and Multimedia Messaging: Issues for Congress 
121 
configured for and technically capable of receiving alert messages from the 
roamed upon network.‖45 
The architecture adopted by the FCC calls for a centralized alert-
aggregator where federal and state emergency-response agencies would send 
their warning messages to be authenticated and dispersed to the appropriate 
participating commercial mobile services. Noting FEMA‘s role in developing 
the proposal for the adopted architecture, the FCC recommended the agency as 
its first choice to serve as the alert aggregator and FEMA has accepted that 
role. 
The FCC has issued a Second Report and Further Notice of Proposed 
Rulemaking;46 an Order on Reconsideration and Erratum;47 and a Third Report 
and Order.48 Of particular note, in the Third Report and Order, the FCC— 
 
 
adopted notification requirements for wireless providers that elect not 
to participate, or to participate only in part, with respect to new and 
existing subscribers; 
 
adopted procedures by which wireless providers may elect to transmit 
emergency alerts and to withdraw such elections; 
 
adopted a rule governing the provision of alert opt-out capabilities for 
subscribers; 
 
allowed participating wireless providers to recover costs associated 
with the development and maintenance of equipment supporting the 
transmission of emergency alerts; and 
 
adopted a compliance timeline under which participating wireless 
providers must begin CMAS deployment. 
 
The FCC continues to refine the rules for providing PLAN/CMAS. The 
most recent set of requirements is contained in the Third Report and Order, 
released August 7, 2008 (Docket No. 07-287). The WARN Act did not 
provide a mandatory deadline for the implementation of PLAN/CMAS. 
The National Continuity Programs (NCP) Directorate, within the Federal 
Emergency Management Administration (FEMA), will take on the 
responsibility of acting as a gateway and aggregator of alerts for 
dissemination through PLAN/CMAS.49 On December 7, 2009, FEMA and 
the FCC jointly announced that FEMA had adopted the CMAS Government 
Interface Design specifications. This triggered requirements in the Third 
Report and Order for wireless carriers that have agreed to participate in the 
PLAN/CMAS program to begin development and testing. The deadlines 
established by the FCC give these carriers until April 7, 2012, to provide 

Patricia Moloney Figliola and Gina Stevens 
122 
PLAN/CMAS alerts sent through the IPAWS gateway.50 The four major 
wireless carriers will participate in the program.51 
 
 
CONGRESSIONAL AND INDUSTRY RESPONSE TO SMS-
RELATED ISSUES 
 
The issues discussed in this report have prompted different levels of 
response from Congress and the wireless industry: 
 
 
Issues that are being addressed by industry, so policymakers may wish 
to wait and see how those efforts play out; 
 
Issues that have not risen to a level of priority in Congress, but would 
require statutory action to effect change; and 
 
Issues that have triggered a legislative response. 
 
As wireless communications technologies, and the issues that accompany 
them, evolve over time, so likely will the approaches that industry and 
Congress will take to ensure consumer safety and satisfaction. 
 
 
APPENDIX. TEXT BLOCKING WITH SELECTED MAJOR 
CARRIERS—INFORMATION FOR CONSUMERS 
 
AT&T 
 
Customers must log in at mymessages.wireless.att.com. Text-blocking and 
alias options are available under ―Preferences.‖ Messages from specific e-mail 
addresses or websites can also be blocked from this page. 
 
Verizon Wireless 
Customers must log in at vtext.com. Text blocking options are available 
under ―Text Messaging‖/‖Preferences.‖ Select ―Text Blocking.‖ Consumers 
may block text messages from email or from the web, including blocking 
specific addresses or websites. 
 

Text and Multimedia Messaging: Issues for Congress 
123 
Sprint 
Customers must log in at http://www.sprint.com. Sprint does not offer 
auto-blocking, but consumers can block specific phone numbers and 
addresses. 
On 
the 
top 
navigation 
bar, 
select, 
―My 
Online 
Tools‖/‖Communication Tools‖/‖Text Messaging.‖ On the Compose a Text 
Message page, under Text Messaging Options, select ―Settings & 
Preferences.‖ In the text box, customers can enter a phone number, e-mail 
address, or domain name to block. 
 
T-Mobile 
Customers must log in at http://www.t-mobile.com and select 
―Communication Tools.‖ T-Mobile doesn‘t yet offer a ―block text messages 
from the Internet‖ option. Customers can block all messages sent by e-mail, 
though, or permit only messages sent to the phone‘s e-mail address or alias, or 
create filters that block text messages containing certain phrases.52 
 
 
End Notes 
 
1 For some alphabets, such as Chinese, the maximum SMS size is 70 characters. 
2 See https://www.usshortcodes.com/csc/search/publicsearchCSC.do?method=showVanity & 
group=all for examples of such codes. 
3 See http://www.americanidol.com/mobile/ for specific instructions. 
4 Official U.S. Government website for Distracted driving, http://www.distraction.gov/stats-and-
facts/. 
5 Section 712 addresses distracted driving. 
6 RCR Wireless News, ―Class Action Nails T-Mobile USA Over Texting Services,‖ January 30, 
2008, available online at http://www.rcrnews.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/ 200801 
30/FREE/927035123/1005/rss01. 
7 New York Times, ―How to Block Cellphone Spam,‖ by David Pogue, June 12, 2008, available 
online 
at 
http://www.nytimes.com/2008/06/12/technology/personaltech/12pogue-email. 
html. 
8 New York Times, ―Verizon Blocks Messages of Abortion Rights Group,‖ by Adam Liptak, 
September 27, 2007, available online at http://www.nytimes.com/2007/09/27/us/ 27 
verizon.html. 
9 New York Times, ―Verizon Blocks Messages of Abortion Rights Group,‖ by Adam Liptak, 
September 27, 2007, available online at http://www.nytimes.com/2007/09/27/us/ 
27verizon.html. 
10 New York Times, ―Verizon Reverses Itself on Abortion Messages,‖ by Adam Liptak, 
September 28, 2007, available online at http://www.nytimes.com/2007/09/28/business/ 
28verizon.html. 
11 See Class Action Connect online at http://www.classactionconnect.com/cell_phone_issues/ 
category/complaints-inthe-news/ for examples of these types of complaints. 

Patricia Moloney Figliola and Gina Stevens 
124 
12 CBS News, ―Ringing Up Big Charges For ‗Free‘ Tones,‖ February 22, 2008, available online 
at http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2008/02/22/eveningnews/main3867197.shtml. 
13 This document is available online at http://www.mmaglobal.com/bestpractices.pdf. 
14 CTIA—The Wireless Association® has voluntary guidelines for wireless carriers to use in 
classifying content that they provide directly over wireless handsets. These voluntary 
guidelines apply only to content that you purchase from your wireless carrier, either on a 
one-time use or download basis, or as part of a package with a monthly fee such as ring 
tones, wallpaper, games, music, video clips, or TV shows. Content that is generated or 
owned by a wireless user, such as text messages, instant messages, e-mail (through chat 
rooms, message boards, etc.) and picture mail is not included in the wireless carrier‘s 
content classification system. Also, content that is accessed by surfing the Internet on a 
wireless handset is not currently included in the classification system. The guidelines urge 
carriers to provide separate web filtering software for web browsing services. Wireless 
carriers choosing to follow these voluntary guidelines agree to use at least two content 
ratings: (1) Generally Accessible or available to consumers of all ages; and (2) Restricted or 
accessible only to those age 18 and older or to those younger than 18 years old, when 
specifically authorized by a parent or guardian. The Restricted ratings system generally is 
based on or uses criteria under existing ratings systems for movies, television, music, and 
games. CTIA Guidelines are available online at http://www.ctia.org/advocacy/ 
policy_topics/topic.cfm/TID/36. 
15 FCC Consumer Fact Sheet, ―Protecting Children from Adult Content on Wireless Devices,‖ 
available online at http://www.fcc.gov/cgb/consumerfacts/protectingchildren.html. 
16 National Conference of State Legislatures, 2009 Legislation Related to ―Sexting‖ 
http://www.ncsl.org/?tabid=17756. 
17 ―Sexting Far Less Prevalent Than Previously Reported,‖ CNET, December 5, 2011, 
http://news.cnet.com/8301-19518_3-57336423-238/sexting-far-less-prevalent-than-previ 
ously-reported/. 
18 The ―nude or nearly nude‖ category included youth wearing underwear or bathing suits or even 
fully clothed but in sexy poses. 
19 ―Sexting Far Less Prevalent Than Previously Reported,‖ CNET, December 5, 2011, 
http://news.cnet.com/8301-19518_3-57336423-238/sexting-far-less-prevalent-than-previ 
ously-reported/. 
20 The term ―bullying‖ is defined in the act as conduct, including conduct that is based on a 
student‘s actual or perceived identity with regard to race, color, national origin, gender 
identity, disability, sexual orientation, religion, or any other distinguishing characteristics 
that may be defined by a state or local educational agency that (1) is directed at one or more 
students; (2) substantially interferes with educational opportunities or educational programs 
of such students; and (3) adversely affects the ability of a student to participate in or benefit 
from the school‘s educational programs or activities by placing a student in reasonable fear 
of physical harm.‖ 
21 The term ―bullying‖ is defined in the act as conduct, including conduct that is based on a 
student‘s actual or perceived identity with regard to race, color, national origin, gender 
identity, disability, sexual orientation, religion, or any other distinguishing characteristics 
that may be defined by a State or local educational agency that (1) is directed at one or more 
students; (2) substantially interferes with educational opportunities or educational programs 
of such students; and (3) adversely affects the ability of a student to participate in or benefit 
from the school‘s educational programs or activities by placing a student in reasonable fear 
of physical harm.‖ 

Text and Multimedia Messaging: Issues for Congress 
125 
22 Gina Stevens, Legislative Attorney in the CRS American Law Division, wrote this section. 
23 Lavis, Amanda J., ―Employers Cannot Get the Message: Text Messaging and Employee 
Privacy,‖ 54 Vill. L. Rev. 516 (2009). 
24 Alyssa H. DaCunha, ―Txts R Safe 4 2Day: Quon v. Arch Wireless and the Fourth Amendment 
Applied to Text Messages,‖ 17 Geo. Mason L. Rev. 296 (Fall 2009). 
25 Cooper, Cheryl, ―Sending the Wrong Message: Technology, Sunshine Law, and the Public 
Record in Florida,‖ 39 Stetson L. Rev. 411, 413 (2009-2010). 
26 See Disclosure of Electronic Data Under State Public Records and Freedom of Information 
Acts, 54 A.L.R.6th 653. 
27 A new Freedom of Information Law became effective in New York on August 7, 2008, and 
includes provisions which reflect a recognition of advances in information technology, but 
does not include a provision on text messaging. N.Y. Pub. Off. Law §84 et seq. (McKinney 
2009). For a summary of the amendments to the Freedom of Information Law, see 
http://www.dos.state.ny.us/coog/foilnews2.html. See also ―Battle Over Public Information 
Expands,‖ by Ledyard King, Federal Times, March 24, 2008, p. 14. 
28 The Florida Commission on Open Government Reform reviewed open government laws to 
recommend areas for legislative review and amendment, and found that while e-mail 
communications between public officials become part of the public record, text or instant 
messages ―most likely‖ do not. Ibid. at 413. 
29 Detroit Free Press, Inc., et al. v. City of Detroit, No. 08-100214 CZ, Wayne County Circuit 
Court, MI, at http://info.detnews.com/2008/0307motiontocompel.pdf. 
30 18 U.S.C. §2701-2708. Subject to certain exceptions, the Stored Communications Act (SCA), 
which is part of the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, bars ―a person or entity 
providing an electronic communications service to the public‖ from knowingly divulging to 
any person or entity the contents of a communication while in electronic storage by that 
service.‖ 18 U.S.C. §2702(a)(1). 
31 On June 26, 2000, Mayor Kilpatrick signed a ―Directive for the Use of the City of Detroit‘s 
Electronic Communications System.‖ 
32 A ―public record‖ under the Michigan Freedom of Information Act is ―a writing that is: (1) 
prepared; (2) owned; (3) used; (4) in the possession of; or (5) retained by a public body in 
the performance of an official function....‖ Mich. Comp. Laws Ann. §15.232(e). 
33 For a chronology of developments, see Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press, at 
http://www.rcfp.org/ newsitems/index.php?key=121&op=keyword. 
34 252 F.R.D. 346 (E.D. Mich. 2008) (applying Michigan law). 
35 Mich. Comp. Laws Ann. §15.232(e). 
36 Ibid. at 356. 
37 18 U.S.C. §2701 et seq. 
38 City of Ontario v. Quon, 130 S.Ct. 2619 (2010), rev'g, Quon v. Arch Wireless Operating Co., 
Inc., 529 F.3d 892 (9th Cir. 2008), cert. granted sub nom., City of Ontario v. Quon (Doc. 
No. 08-1332), 130 S.Ct. 1011 (2009). 
39 529 F. 3d 892 (9th Cir, 2008) re‘hg. en banc denied, 554 F. 3d 769 (9th Cir. 2009). 
40 CRS Report R41344, Public Employees‘ Right to Privacy in Their Electronic 
Communications: City of Ontario v. Quon in the Supreme Court, by Charles Doyle. 
41 Jennifer LaFleur, Dallas: City Must Provide Messages From Officials‘ Personal Accounts, 
Dallas Morning News, October 30, 2007, available at http://www.dallasnews.com/ 
sharedcontent/dws/news/localnews/stories/DNemails_30met.ART0.State.Edition1.421befa. 
html. 

Patricia Moloney Figliola and Gina Stevens 
126 
42 Federal Communications Commission, In the Matter of the Commercial Mobile Alert System, 
First Report and Order, FCC 08-99, PS Docket No. 07-287, April 9, 2008, available online 
at http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/ attachmatch/FCC-08-99A1.pdf (―Commercial 
Mobile Alert System, First Report and Order‖). See also, FCC Adopts Rules for Delivery of 
Commerical Mobile Alerts to the Public During Emergencies (FCC 08-99), April 9, 2008, 
available online at http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-08-99A1.pdf. 
See also the FCC‘s Consumer Fact Sheet on CMAS at http://www.fcc.gov/ cgb/consumer 
facts/cmas.html. 
43 Warning, Alert, and Response Network Act, Title VI of the Security and Accountability for 
Every Port Act of 2006, P.L. 109-347, 120 Stat. 1884 (2006). 
44 Commercial Mobile Alert System, First Report and Order, paras. 26-32. 
45 Commercial Mobile Alert System, First Report and Order, para. 79. 
46 Federal Communications Commission, In the Matter of the Commercial Mobile Alert System, 
Second Report and Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking , FCC 08-164, PS Docket No. 
07-287, July 8, 2008, available online at http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/ attach 
match/FCC-08-164A1.pdf. 
47 Federal Communications Commission, In the Matter of the Commercial Mobile Alert System, 
Order on Reconsideration and Erratum, FCC 08-166, PS Docket No. 07-287, July 15, 2008, 
available online at http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-08-166A1.pdf. 
48 Federal Communications Commission, In the Matter of the Commercial Mobile Alert System, 
Third Report and Order, FCC 08-184, PS Docket No. 07-287, July 15, 2008, available 
online at http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/ attachmatch/FCC-08-184A1.pdf. 
49 ―Nationwide Emergency Mobile Telephone Alert System Soon to Be Realized,‖ Press Release, 
U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Homeland Security, May 30, 2008. 
50 FCC Public Notice, ―FCC‘s Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau Sets Timetable in 
Motion for Commercial Mobile Alert Service Providers to Develop a System that Will 
Deliver Alerts to Mobile Devices,‖ December 7, 2009, at http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_ 
public/attachmatch/DA-09-2556A1.pdf. 
51 Daily Report for Executives, ―FCC, FEMA Initiate Testing Phase of Wireless Emergency Alert 
System,‖ by Alexel Alexis, December 8, 2009. 
52 ―How to Block Cellphone Spam,‖ NYTimes.com, Pogue‘s Posts, June 12, 2008, available 
online at http://pogue.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/06/12/how-to-block-cellphone-spam/?scp= 
1&sq=Text%20Blocking&st=cse. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDEX 
 
 
# 
21st century, 21, 56 
A 
Abstraction, 97 
access, viii, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 9, 14, 24, 28, 29, 
30, 31, 32, 33, 35, 36, 38, 41, 43, 44, 45, 
47, 48, 55, 61, 62, 80, 106, 107, 115, 
118, 119 
accessibility, 9 
adults, 11, 20, 116 
advancement, 65, 67 
advocacy, 106, 124 
Africa, 98, 99, 100 
African Americans, 6, 12, 16, 28, 29, 45 
age, 4, 6, 7, 8, 11, 17, 19, 21, 23, 24, 28, 29, 
31, 33, 36, 38, 41, 42, 46, 48, 58, 69, 75, 
81, 92, 108, 109, 116, 124 
agencies, 81, 121 
agriculture, 80, 98 
Alaska, 6, 7, 21, 22, 24, 26, 29, 31, 35, 37, 
40, 41, 43, 45, 46, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53 
Alaska Natives, 24, 35, 40, 43, 45 
animations, 105 
Appropriations Act, 112 
Asia, 97 
Asian Americans, 24, 28, 40, 43, 45 
assertiveness, 63 
assessment, 58, 64 
assets, 56 
asynchronous communication, viii, 61 
AT&T, 107, 113, 122 
attachment, 57 
attitudes, 64, 89, 92 
Austria, 95, 97 
avoidance, 63, 65, 71, 72, 82, 83, 85, 92, 
101 
awareness, 9, 46 
B 
baby boomers, 8, 54 
backwardness, 65 
banking, 78, 79 
banks, 33 
barriers, 2, 37 
base, vii, ix, 3, 15, 55, 80, 81, 88, 103, 104, 
114 
behaviors, 76 
benefits, 30, 36, 58, 78, 89, 93 
BIA, 54 
blindness, 54 
blogs, 57, 126 
blood, 108 
Britain, 88 
Broadband, 3, 9, 20, 22, 30, 55, 56, 57 
browser, ix, 103, 104 
browsing, 2, 14, 15, 18, 124 

Index 
128 
bullying, 118, 124 
Bureau of Labor Statistics, 57, 58, 59 
business partners, 107 
businesses, 70, 114 
C 
campaigns, 111 
CAN-SPAM Act, ix, 104, 112 
case study, 80, 81 
CBS, 114, 124 
cell phones, 59, 73, 93, 105, 109, 111 
cellular phones, viii, 61 
Census, vii, 1, 2, 3, 9, 57, 58 
challenges, 98 
chat rooms, 124 
child pornography, 116 
children, ix, 6, 7, 17, 19, 24, 28, 29, 36, 41, 
43, 46, 59, 104, 107, 114, 115, 116, 120 
China, 78, 88, 99, 100 
circulation, 33 
citizens, 33, 47 
citizenship, 17 
City, 96, 119, 120, 125 
clarity, 115 
classification, 85, 124 
classroom, 31, 36 
clients, ix, 103, 104 
coffee, 29 
collaboration, 76, 77, 80, 94 
collectivism, 65, 66, 72, 83, 85, 101 
collusion, 113 
color, 64, 74, 84, 124 
commerce, 8, 56, 57, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 76, 
77, 78, 80, 91, 98 
commercial, 8, 77, 111, 120, 121 
communication(s), viii, ix, 1, 4, 9, 61, 62, 
63, 64, 65, 66,67, 69, 76, 77, 78, 80, 81, 
82, 92, 93, 94, 100, 103, 104, 105, 111, 
114, 117, 118, 119, 122, 125 
communication technologies, 64, 77 
Communications Act, 119, 125 
communities, 21, 27, 110 
community, 29, 32, 33, 47 
compatibility, 78 
competitiveness, vii, 3, 8 
compliance, 115, 121 
composition, 48 
computer, vii, ix, 3, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 20, 21, 
22, 41, 42, 43, 48, 57, 64, 65, 68, 69, 77, 
80, 101, 104, 105, 108 
computer technology, 80 
computer use, 5, 20, 21, 22, 48 
computing, 10, 59, 79 
conception, 66 
conference, 31 
congress, v, 103, 107, 108, 111, 114, 116, 
117, 118, 122 
connectivity, 2, 30, 32 
consulting, 31, 80 
consumer goods, 59 
consumers, ix, 8, 31, 47, 59, 70, 104, 112, 
113, 115, 123, 124 
consumption, 31 
context cultures, 63, 72, 82 
controversial, 114 
convergence, 77 
conviction, 111 
cooperation, vii, 3, 67 
coordination, 113 
copyright, 2, 57 
correlation(s), 17, 18 
cost, 7, 18, 38, 39, 40, 41, 59, 70, 75, 78, 
113 
CPS, vii, 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 18, 32, 33, 
34, 36, 39, 40, 41, 42, 44, 45, 47, 48, 57, 
58 
crises, 79 
Croatia, 95 
crop, 80 
CSCs, 106, 107, 114, 115 
cues, 71, 84 
cultural influence, viii, 62, 75 
cultural norms, 76 
cultural values, 64, 71, 76 
culture, viii, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 69, 71, 
72, 73, 74, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 85, 
88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 94 
currency, 64 

Index 
129 
customers, ix, 70, 103, 104, 112, 113, 114, 
115, 123 
cyberbullying, ix, 104, 117, 118 
D 
data collection, 3, 11, 24, 33, 38 
database, 106 
defendants, 113 
demographic change, 77 
demographic characteristics, vii, 3, 16, 47, 
58 
demographic groups, vii, 3 
demonstrations, 80 
Denmark, 88, 96 
Department of Agriculture, 30 
Department of Commerce, v, 1, 57 
Department of Labor, 59 
Department of Transportation, 108 
depth, 67 
detectable, 93 
developed countries, 77 
developing countries, 79, 80 
diffusion, 80 
digital divide, 4, 11, 18, 32, 47 
dignity, 66 
disability, 12, 17, 24, 28, 41, 48, 90, 124 
disclosure, 118, 119, 120 
dissatisfaction, 44 
distance learning, 30 
District of Columbia, 53 
DOJ, 113 
dominance, 67 
DOT, 108 
E 
e-commerce, 8, 77 
education, 2, 5, 7, 11, 12, 15, 16, 17, 18, 24, 
27, 30, 31, 34, 36, 42, 48, 59, 80, 110, 
111 
educational attainment, 4, 15, 31, 34, 45, 58 
educational opportunities, 124 
educational programs, 124 
electronic communications, 117, 118, 119, 
125 
Electronic Communications Privacy Act, 
125 
electronic surveillance, 118 
e-mail, ix, 77, 103, 104, 105, 108, 112, 117, 
118, 120, 122, 123, 124, 125 
email address, ix, 104 
emergency, ix, 80, 81, 104, 109, 111, 120, 
121 
emergency response, ix, 104 
employees, 119 
employers, 33, 38, 118 
employment, 7, 17, 18, 24, 38, 42 
employment status, 7, 18, 24, 38, 42 
EMS, 105 
energy, 31 
energy consumption, 31 
enforcement, ix, 104, 112, 118 
England, 97 
enrollment, 57 
entrepreneurship, 20 
environment(s), 59, 78, 90, 94 
equipment, 42, 119, 121 
e-readers, 10 
ethnic groups, 7, 24, 31, 35, 40, 45 
ethnicity, 7, 18, 35, 41, 45, 48 
evidence, 4, 7, 9, 10, 18, 113 
Executive Order, 55 
external environment, 59 
extrinsic motivation, 73 
eye movement, 66 
F 
Facebook, 117 
families, 20, 36, 39, 41, 42, 43, 46 
family income, 2, 4, 7, 11, 15, 17, 24, 27, 
31, 34, 39, 42, 45, 46, 48 
family members, 59 
fear, 124 
Federal Communications Commission, 30, 
55, 126 
Federal Emergency Management 
Administration, 121 

Index 
130 
feelings, 66 
FEMA, 120, 121, 126 
femininity, 63, 65, 67, 85, 101 
fiber, 8, 24, 27, 48 
fiber optics, 48 
filters, 114, 123 
financial, 2, 39, 40, 80 
Finland, 82, 97, 98, 101 
force, 29, 34, 42, 44, 47, 57, 59 
formula, 110 
Fourth Amendment, 119, 125 
fraud, ix, 104, 107 
frost, 55 
funding, 30 
funds, 110 
future orientation, 63, 67 
G 
gender identity, 124 
gender role, 67 
genitals, 116 
genre, 86 
geography, 9, 18, 26 
Georgia, 53 
gestures, 66 
globalization, 89 
goods and services, 59 
governance, 80 
GPS, 9, 14, 111 
grants, 3, 30, 109, 110, 111 
Great Britain, 88 
greed, 113 
gross domestic product, 58 
grouping, 69 
growth, 4, 5, 10, 12, 23, 24, 58, 59 
growth rate, 58 
guardian, 124 
guidance, 56, 93 
guidelines, 82, 83, 92, 124 
H 
handheld devices, 8, 48, 74, 77 
harmony, 64 
Hawaii, 53, 73, 98 
health, 31, 59, 80, 89 
health care, 59 
heme, 80 
high school, 4, 12, 15, 20, 21, 24, 27, 28, 
29, 39, 42, 45 
high school diploma, 4, 12, 15, 20, 21, 24, 
27, 28, 29, 39, 42, 45 
highways, 2 
Hispanics, 12, 16, 27, 31, 40, 43, 45 
history, 2, 54 
home Internet, vii, 3, 5, 6, 21, 22, 23, 24, 
26, 29, 33, 35, 36, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 44, 
45, 46, 47, 58 
homes, viii, 3, 7, 31, 34, 35, 39, 41, 44 
homework, 19 
House, 57, 58, 108, 111, 118, 126 
House of Representatives, 126 
household income, 39, 58 
housing, 58 
Housing and Urban Development, 112 
human, 10, 54, 64, 65, 68, 69, 75, 80, 92, 
101 
human behavior, 65 
human nature, 75 
hunting, 55 
I 
identification, 83 
identity, 124 
image(s), 83, 84, 93, 116, 117, 118 
imagination, 2 
incidence, 33, 36, 39, 40, 42, 43, 45 
income, 4, 5, 7, 11, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 
24, 27, 28, 29, 31, 34, 37, 39, 42, 45, 47, 
48, 58, 59, 92 
India, 89, 90 
Indians, 24, 35, 40, 43, 45 
individual character, 73, 74, 78 
individual characteristics, 73, 74, 78 
individualism, 65, 72, 76, 83 
individuals, 2, 4, 12, 19, 27, 29, 33, 36, 44, 
45, 64, 69, 71, 77, 80, 82, 89 

Index 
131 
Indonesia, 78, 97 
industry, 7, 9, 113, 115, 122 
infancy, 112 
information exchange, viii, 61 
information technology, 125 
infrastructure, 12, 70, 77 
injure, 108 
injuries, 110, 112 
institutions, 58, 66 
integration, 89 
interest groups, 118 
interface, 68, 69, 78, 82, 84, 85, 88, 89, 94 
internationalization, 89 
intrinsic motivation, 73 
Iowa, 53 
iPad, viii, 61 
IPAWS, 122 
isolation, 67 
issues, ix, 2, 46, 58, 64, 69, 93, 103, 104, 
107, 110, 122, 123 
J 
Japan, 82, 101 
job performance, 70 
jobless, 38 
Jordan, 90, 91, 97 
Judiciary Committee, 113 
K 
Korea, 82, 88, 95, 96, 101 
L 
labeling, 87 
labor force, 29, 33, 42, 44, 47, 59 
labor force participation, 47 
languages, 89 
laptop, 10, 48 
law enforcement, ix, 104, 118 
laws, 111, 112, 116, 118, 120, 125 
lead, 22, 77, 108, 110 
leadership, 8 
learning, 30, 31, 56, 79 
life expectancy, 77 
light, 2, 36, 74, 75, 118 
literacy, 3, 18, 20, 31, 89 
livestock, 80 
loans, 80 
localization, 68, 89 
Louisiana, 23, 53 
loyalty, 66 
M 
magazines, 106 
major issues, 107 
management, 66 
mapping, 9 
marketing, 77, 91 
Maryland, 53 
MAS, 85, 101 
masculinity, 63, 65 
materials, 114 
matter, 113 
media, 116 
membership, 71 
mental state, 67 
messages, ix, 63, 72, 77, 103, 104, 105, 106, 
108, 112, 113, 114, 116, 117, 118, 119, 
120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125 
methodology, 81, 85 
metropolitan areas, 58 
Mexico, 53 
military, viii, 62, 92 
miniaturization, 10 
minority groups, 31 
miscommunication, 85 
mission(s), 93, 94 
Missouri, 53, 117 
MMS, 105 
mobile communication, 69, 76, 80 
mobile device, vii, viii, ix, 1, 9, 31, 48, 61, 
62, 64, 68, 69, 74, 76, 77, 79, 81, 82, 85, 
88, 89, 92, 93, 94, 103, 104, 105, 107, 
108, 111, 114, 115, 117, 120 

Index 
132 
mobile devices, vii, viii, 1, 9, 31, 48, 61, 62, 
64, 69, 74, 77, 79, 81, 82, 88, 89, 92, 93, 
94, 108, 115, 117 
mobile Internet, vii, 1, 2, 3 
mobile phone, vii, viii, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 
11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 48, 56, 61, 62, 
74, 75, 76, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 85, 87, 88, 
89, 90, 91, 93, 98, 105, 106, 112 
mobile technologies, vii, 1, 18 
models, viii, 5, 62, 64, 67, 69, 73, 74, 75, 
76, 92 
Montana, 53 
multimedia, ix, 104 
music, 14, 115, 124 
music videos, 115 
MySpace, 117 
N 
naming, 37 
national culture, 85, 90 
national origin, 124 
national policy, 47 
nationality, 73, 90 
natural disaster(s), 120 
navigation system, 85 
NCP, 121 
network members, 71 
networking, 2, 9, 14, 15, 18, 117 
neutral, 66 
North America, 97 
Norway, 82 
O 
Obama, 2, 30, 57 
OECD, 56, 58 
offenders, 116 
Office of Management and Budget, 56, 58 
officials, 47, 110, 118, 119, 120, 125 
Oklahoma, 54 
OMB, 56, 58 
operations, 92, 118 
opportunities, vii, 1, 19, 31, 77, 91, 124 
output method, 89 
overlap, 67 
ownership, vii, 3, 9, 18, 57, 80, 118 
P 
pagers, 119 
Pakistan, 9 
parity, 28 
participants, 42, 75, 78, 83, 85, 87, 88, 89 
peer group, 116 
penalties, 109, 111 
per capita income, 20 
permission, 106, 107 
permit, 123 
personal accounts, 120 
personal computers, 59 
personal digital assistants, viii, 61 
personality, 78, 92 
personality factors, 92 
personality traits, 78 
platform, ix, 103, 107 
playing, 18 
police, 119 
policy, viii, ix, 2, 3, 10, 18, 47, 57, 104, 114, 
124 
policy choice, 10 
policy issues, ix, 2, 104 
policymakers, vii, ix, 2, 3, 10, 18, 32, 37, 
47, 103, 107, 115, 122 
population, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 12, 16, 17, 18, 47, 
48, 57, 58, 80, 94 
population density, 4, 7, 12, 16, 17, 18 
population growth, 5 
positive attitudes, 89 
potential benefits, 36 
poverty, 59 
predators, 116 
president, 2, 3, 30, 57, 58 
President Obama, 2, 30, 57 
prestige, 66 
prevention, 110, 111, 112 
price changes, 113 
principles, 20, 119 
private sector, 30 

Index 
133 
probability, 5, 17 
professional development, 30 
profit, 47 
programming, 62, 115 
project, 20, 59 
proposition, 47 
protection, 78 
prototype, 85 
public interest, 118 
public officials, 118, 125 
public safety, 109 
Q 
quality of life, 67 
questionnaire, 88 
R 
race, 7, 11, 16, 17, 18, 35, 45, 48, 58, 124 
racial differences, 18 
radio, 8, 81, 106 
reactions, 108 
reading, 57, 83, 108, 114 
reception, 77 
recognition, 125 
reform, 3, 125 
regression, 5, 17, 18, 19 
regression analysis, 5, 17 
regression model, 5 
regulations, 109, 111 
relevance, viii, 62 
religion, 124 
requirements, 65, 77, 88, 89, 90, 121 
researchers, 3, 9, 58, 67, 71, 78, 80, 88, 116 
resources, 31 
response, ix, 6, 35, 38, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 
45, 46, 104, 108, 121, 122 
retail, 8 
revenue, 78 
rights, 119 
ringtones, 88, 114 
risk, 78, 115, 120 
rules, 63, 120, 121 
rural areas, 12, 16, 18, 26, 31, 55, 81 
rural schools, 30 
S 
safety, 108, 109, 110, 111, 115, 122 
Samsung, 88 
saturation, 9, 58 
scaling, 65, 66 
school, 4, 6, 7, 12, 15, 17, 19, 20, 21, 24, 27, 
28, 29, 30, 36, 39, 41, 43, 44, 45, 46, 56, 
57, 58, 110, 111, 124 
school enrollment, 57 
scope, 58, 67, 77 
secondary education, 2 
secondary information, 85 
security, 2, 31, 80 
seizure, 119 
self-expression, 76 
Senate, 108, 109, 113 
sensor network, 81 
sensors, 59 
service provider, ix, 103, 104, 106, 113, 
114, 115, 119 
services, 14, 31, 36, 48, 59, 71, 74, 76, 78, 
82, 93, 94, 98, 105, 106, 113, 114, 115, 
121, 124 
sex, 116 
sex offenders, 116 
sexting, ix, 104, 116, 117, 124 
sexual orientation, 124 
shape, 9, 67, 98 
showing, 34 
Singapore, 97, 100 
SMS, ix, 104, 105, 106, 112, 114, 120, 122, 
123 
social behavior, 76 
social influence(s), 69, 71, 75, 76, 78, 92, 
101 
social integration, 89 
social network, 2, 5, 9, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 
70, 80, 117 
society, vii, 1, 2, 63, 94 
software, 9, 30, 89, 93, 94, 98, 124 
South Africa, 99, 100 

Index 
134 
South Dakota, 54 
spam, ix, 104, 108, 112, 114, 126 
specifications, 121 
speech, 114 
Sprint, ix, 103, 104, 113, 123 
standard of living, vii, 3 
state(s), 3, 6, 20, 23, 33, 44, 48, 58, 67, 78, 
81, 89, 108, 109, 110, 111, 118, 119, 
120, 121, 124, 125 
statistics, 57 
statutes, 116 
stimulation, 88 
storage, 80, 125 
structure, 113, 114 
style, 66, 86, 100 
subscribers, viii, ix, 61, 79, 103, 104, 106, 
120, 121 
suicide, 117 
supervisors, 82 
Supreme Court, 119, 125 
surveillance, 118 
Sweden, 95 
T 
tactics, 114 
Task Force, 57 
teams, 106 
technical assistance, 110 
technical definitions, ix, 103, 107 
technologies, vii, 1, 3, 9, 10, 23, 36, 48, 69, 
77, 94 
technology, viii, 8, 9, 11, 20, 23, 24, 26, 30, 
47, 48, 54, 55, 62, 65, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 
74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 91, 92, 93, 
94, 111, 117, 118, 123, 125 
teens, 110, 116 
telephone(s), 14, 69, 114 
television stations, 106 
testing, 121 
text messages, ix, 77, 103, 104, 105, 106, 
108, 112, 113, 114, 117, 118, 119, 120, 
122, 123, 124 
text messaging, ix, 14, 82, 103, 104, 109, 
112, 113, 114, 117, 118, 125 
thoughts, 82 
TID, 124 
time commitment, 65 
time use, 124 
Title V, 126 
tones, 82, 86, 115, 124 
trade, 67, 113 
training, 20, 30, 44, 80, 93, 110 
traits, 78 
transactions, 77, 80 
transcripts, 119 
transmission, 121 
treatment, 94, 112 
U 
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 57, 58, 59 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, 30 
U.S. Department of Commerce, v, 1, 57 
U.S. Department of Labor, 59 
UK, 57, 58, 96 
unemployed individuals, 44 
uniform, 76 
United Kingdom, 57, 88 
United States, vii, viii, ix, 2, 3, 8, 10, 58, 
103, 104, 119 
urban, 4, 7, 12, 16, 18, 21, 23, 26, 28, 29, 
31, 36, 40, 43, 46, 55, 58, 73, 81 
urban areas, 12, 27, 29 
USA, 123 
V 
variables, 11, 17, 18, 48 
variations, 19 
vehicles, 111 
Verizon, 113, 114, 122, 123 
vibration, 84 
video programming, 115 
videos, 4, 9, 115 
vision, 9 
vote, 106 

Index 
135 
W 
war, 95 
Washington, 54, 120 
web, ix, 103, 104, 115, 122, 124 
web browser, ix, 103, 104 
websites, 89, 117, 122 
well-being, 7, 120 
White House, 57, 58 
wireless carrier, ix, 103, 104, 113, 120, 121, 
124 
wireless devices, ix, 8, 104, 109, 111, 115 
wireless networks, vii, 1, 8, 76, 77 
wireless tablet computers, viii, 61 
Wisconsin, 54 
workers, 89 
workforce, 39 
worldwide, 89 
Y 
yield, 59 
Z 
Zimbabwe, 100 
 

