
AMERICAN FAMILIES 
IN CRISIS

Selected Titles in ABC CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Campaign and Election Reform, Glenn H. Utter and Ruth Ann
Strickland
Chemical and Biological Warfare, Al Mauroni
Childhood Sexual Abuse, Karen L. Kinnear
Climate Change, David L. Downie, Kate Brash, and Catherine
Vaughan
Corporate Crime, Richard D. Hartley
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Emergency Management, Jeffrey B. Bumgarner
Energy Use Worldwide, Jaina L. Moan and Zachary A. Smith
Environmental Justice, David E. Newton
Food Safety, Nina E. Redman
Gangs, Karen L. Kinnear
Globalization, Justin Ervin and Zachary A. Smith
Illegal Immigration, Michael C. LeMay
Internet and Society, Bernadette H. Schell
Lobbying in America, Ronald J. Hrebenar and Bryson B. Morgan
Mainline Christians and U.S. Public Policy, Glenn H. Utter
Mental Health in America, Donna R. Kemp
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and James
Clay Moltz
Policing in America, Leonard A. Steverson
Renewable and Alternative Energy Resources, Zachary A. Smith
and Katrina D. Taylor
Rich and Poor in America, Geoffrey Gilbert
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
U.S. Military Service, Cynthia A. Watson
U.S. National Security, Cynthia A. Watson
U.S. Social Security, Steven G. Livingston
Waste Management, Jacqueline Vaughn
For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit 
www.abc-clio.com.

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society, such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need to have a better understanding
of the social, political, environmental, and economic issues
facing the world today.


AMERICAN FAMILIES 
IN CRISIS
A Reference Handbook
Jeffrey S. Turner
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California 
Denver, Colorado 
Oxford, England

Copyright 2009 by ABC-CLIO, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Turner, Jeffrey S.
American families in crisis : a reference handbook / Jeffrey S. Turner.
p. cm. 
  (Contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-59884-164-0 (hard copy : alk. paper) 
 ISBN 978-1-59884-
165-7 (ebook)
1. Family
United States
Handbooks, manuals, etc.
I. Title. 
HQ536.T796 2009
362.820973
dc22
2008043888
13
12
11
10
09
1
2
3
4
5
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook.
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper 
Manufactured in the United States of America
∞

Dedicated to the college students who have come and 
gone in my classroom and touched my life. 
All 12,000 of them.


Contents
List of Tables, xv
List of Figures, xvii
Preface, xix
1
Background and History, 1
Introduction, 1
Stress: Basic Terminology and Concepts, 2
Primary and Secondary Stressors, 4
Theories of Stress, 5
Han Selye’s Theory, 5
Karl Menninger’s Theory, 6
Meyer Friedman and Ray Rosenman’s Theory, 7
Family Stress and Crises, 8
Developmental Crisis, 8
Situational Crisis, 9
Traumatic Crisis, 9
History of Family Crisis Intervention, 12
The ABCX Model, 13
Examples of Prevention and Enrichment 
Programs, 18
Examples of Family Intervention Programs, 19
Special Considerations for Children, 21
Characteristics of Strong and Resilient Families, 23
Summary, 26
References, 27
2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 31
Introduction, 31
Addiction, 32
ix

Implications for Family Life, 36
Approaches to Therapy, 38
Adolescent Runaways, 39
Characteristics of Runaways, 40
Intervention for Teenage Runaways, 41
Unemployment, 42
Trends and Patterns of Unemployment, 43
Implications for Family Life, 45
Infidelity, 47
Online Infidelity: Cheating on the Internet, 49
Divorce, 50
Implications for Family Life, 52
Effects of Divorce on Children, 56
Chronic Disease and Illness, 57
Implications for Family Life, 60
Caring for Aging Family Members, 62
Implications for Family Life, 65
The Dark Side of Caregiving: Elder Abuse, 66
Caregiving Support and Assistance, 67
Summary, 68
References, 69
3
Special U.S. Issues, 81
Introduction, 81
Domestic Violence, 82
Partner Abuse, 83
Child Abuse, 84
Implications for Family Life, 86
School Violence, 87
Bullying and School Violence, 91
Implications for Family Life, 92
Natural Disasters, 93
Implications for Family Life, 94
Deployed Military Families, 96
Implications for Family Life, 97
Teenage Suicide, 101
Implications for Family Life, 104
Summary, 105
References, 106
4
Chronology, 117
References, 133
x
Contents

5
Biographical Sketches, 137
Constance R. Ahrons, 137
Joan Aldous, 138
Paul J. Bohannan, 138
Elaine M. Brody, 140
Sarah M. Buel, 141
Robert N. Butler, 142
Nancy Chandler, 143
Andrew J. Cherlin, 144
Milton H. Erickson, 144
Patricia Fennell, 145
Charles Figley, 146
James L. Framo, 147
Frank F. Furstenberg Jr., 148
Richard J. Gelles, 149
Ann M. Goetting, 150
Bernard Guerney Jr. and 
Louise Guerney, 151
Jay Haley, 153
E. Mavis Hetherington, 153
Reuben Hill, 154
Don Jackson, 155
Hamilton McCubbin, 156
Virginia Satir, 157
Gregory A. Thomas, 158
Judith S. Wallerstein, 159
Glen W. White, 160
William Wilson and Robert Smith, 161
6
Data and Documents, 163
Introduction, 163
Addiction, 164
Unemployment, 171
Divorce, 172
Chronic Illness and Disease, 176
Caring for Aging Family Members, 181
Domestic Violence, 183
School Violence, 189
Natural Disasters, 200
Deployed Military Families, 203
Adolescent Suicide, 207
References, 211
Contents
xi

7
Directory of Organizations, 213
Addiction, 213
Adolescent Runaways, 215
Unemployment, 218
Infidelity, 220
Divorce, 222
Chronic Illness and Disease, 224
Caring for Aging Family Members, 226
Domestic Violence, 228
School Violence, 231
Natural Disasters, 234
Deployed Military Families, 237
Adolescent Suicide, 239
8
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources, 243
Books, 244
Addiction, 244
Adolescent Runaways, 246
Unemployment, 248
Infidelity, 250
Divorce, 252
Chronic Illness and Disease, 254
Caring for Aging Family Members, 256
Domestic Violence, 258
School Violence, 261
Natural Disasters, 264
Deployed Military Families, 266
Adolescent Suicide, 268
Research Journals, 270
Addiction, 270
Adolescent Runaways, 270
Unemployment, 271
Infidelity, 272
Divorce, 273
Chronic Illness and Disease, 274
Caring for Aging Family Members, 275
Domestic Violence, 275
School Violence, 276
Natural Disasters, 277
Deployed Military Families, 278
Adolescent Suicide, 278
xii
Contents

DVDs/Videotapes, 279
Addiction, 279
Adolescent Runaways, 280
Unemployment, 280
Infidelity, 281
Divorce, 281
Chronic Illness and Disease, 282
Caring for Aging Family Members, 282
Domestic Violence, 283
School Violence, 283
Natural Disasters, 284
Deployed Military Families, 285
Adolescent Suicide, 286
Links to Additional Resources, 286
Family Health and Well-Being, 286
Family Policy, 287
Government Agencies Serving Families, 289
National Family Organizations, 290
Family Research Sites, 292
Glossary, 293
Index, 297
About the Author, 307
Contents
xiii


List of Tables
6.1
Admissions, Age 65 or Older, by Primary Substance at
Admission: 1995–2005, 170
6.2
Projections of Occupations with the Largest Job Decline,
2004–2014 (numbers in thousands of jobs), 171
6.3
Live Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Divorces: 
1960 to 2006, 173–174
6.4
Grandparents Living with Grandchildren by 
Race and Sex: 2005, 184
6.5
Child Maltreatment: Percentage of Substantiated
Maltreatment Reports, Maltreatment Type and 
Age, 2005, 190
6.6
Summary of Weather Events, Fatalities, Injuries, and
Damage Costs: 2006, 201
6.7
Summary of Fatalities for All Natural Disasters, 
by Age: 2006, 202
6.8
Death Rates for Suicide, by Age: United States, 
1950–2004 (deaths per 100,000 resident population), 209
6.9
Demographic Characteristics of Patients Age 18 or 
Older Treated in Emergency Departments (EDs) for 
Drug-Related Suicide Attempts, 211
xv


List of Figures
6.1
Use of Specific Illicit Drugs during Past Month 
among Persons Age 12 or Older, 2006, 166
6.2
Drug Use among Persons Age 12 or Older 
during the Past Month, by Age, 2002–2006, 167
6.3
Use of Selected Drugs during the Past Month 
among Persons Age 12 or Older, by Gender, 168
6.4
Current, Binge, and Heavy Alcohol Use among 
Persons Age 12 or Older, by Age, 169
6.5
Current Alcohol Use among Persons Age 12 to 20, 
by Gender, 2002–2006, 169
6.6
Selected Chronic Health Conditions Causing 
Limitation of Activity among Children, by Age, 178
6.7
Selected Chronic Health Conditions Causing 
Limitation of Activity among Working-age Adults, 
by Age, 179
6.8
Three or More Chronic Conditions among Adults 
45 Years of Age and Over, by Age and Percent of 
Poverty Level, 180
6.9
Selected Chronic Health Conditions Causing Limitation
of Activity among Older Adults, by Age, 181
6.10
Elderly Population Growth Compared to the 
General Population, 1950–2050, 182
6.11
Nursing Home Population by Age: 2000 (Percent
Distribution), 185
6.12
Nonfatal Intimate Partner Victimization Rate by 
Gender and Race, 1993–2004, 186
6.13
Homicides of Intimates by Gender and Race of 
Victim, 1976–2004, 187
6.14
Nonfatal Intimate Partner Victimization Rate for 
Females by Age, 1993–2004, 187
xvii

6.15
Nonfatal Intimate Partner Victimization Rate for 
Females by Marital Status, 1993–2004, 188
6.16
Rate of Substantiated Maltreatment Reports of Children
Ages 0–17 per 1,000 Children, 1998–2005, 189
6.17
Number of Homicides and Suicides of Youth Ages 
5–18, by Location, 2003–2004, 191
6.18
Number of Homicides and Suicides of Youth Ages 
5–18 at School: 1992–2005, 192
6.19
Percentage of Students in Grades 9–12 Who Reported
Being Threatened or Injured with a Weapon on School
Property from 1993–2005, 193
6.20
Percentage of Students Ages 12–18 Who Reported That
Gangs Were Present at School during the Previous 6
Months, by Urbanicity and Race/Ethnicity: 2005, 195
6.21
Percentage of Students Ages 12–18 Who Reported
Selected Bullying Problems at School during the 
Previous 6 Months, by Type of Bullying: 2005, 196
6.22
Percentage of Students Ages 12–18 Who Reported 
Being Bullied at School during the Previous 6 Months, 
by Location of Bullying and Injury: 2005, 197
6.23
Percentage of Students in Grades 9–12 Who Reported
Having Been in a Physical Fight during the Previous 
12 Months, by Location and Sex, Various Years:
1993–2005, 198
6.24
Percentage of Students in Grades 9–12 Who Reported
Carrying a Weapon at Least 1 Day during the Previous 
30 Days, by Location and Race/Ethnicity: 2005, 199
6.25
Monthly Weather-Related Fatalities: 2006, 202
6.26
Percentages of Adults Age 18 or Older Reporting a 
Past-Year Major Depressive Episode, by Age Group, 209
6.27
Percentages Reporting Suicide Plans and Attempts 
among Adults Age 18 or Older with Past-Year Major
Depressive Episodes, 210
xviii
List of Figures

Preface
W
e are living in an age of near-overwhelming change. To suc-
cessfully adapt to change and the challenges it brings, fam-
ilies must embrace their past in order to live through the
present and prepare for the future. For, contrary to that most pop-
ular of adages, while ignorance may well be bliss, knowledge of
oneself and one’s family is central to survival. To this end, Ameri-
can Families in Crisis is designed to encompass our current knowl-
edge about that most central of human groups—the family—and
stands as witness to its resiliency and durability in the wake of ad-
versity and turmoil.
At one time or another, all families face troubled waters. A
crisis can happen at a moment’s notice and can penetrate the fab-
ric of even the strongest families. Examples of family crises in-
clude unemployment, illness or disability, addictive behaviors,
the loss of loved ones, caring for aging family members, or hav-
ing to cope with a divorce. During these modern and uncertain
times, other crises have added new dimensions to family disrup-
tion and disequilibrium and demand research attention: school
shootings, natural disasters, deployed military families, and ado-
lescent suicide. Any of these crises has the potential of creating a
situation in which the family perceives a sudden loss of its ability
to employ effective problem-solving and coping skills. Depend-
ing on the severity of the crisis, the signs and symptoms of do-
mestic upheaval may last a few days, several weeks or months, or
longer.
American Families in Crisis offers insight into how family crises
can be identified, as well as how to prevent and respond to such
challenges, in the process building family strength and resiliency.
This reference manual begins with an introductory chapter ex-
ploring the conceptual components of family crises, including 
xix

important concepts, themes, and theories widely used in the field
today. Once this foundation has been established, the text explores
12 key problems plaguing modern-day families. In Chapter 2,
readers will learn about the impact of the following on families:
• Addiction
• Adolescent runaways
• Unemployment
• Infidelity
• Divorce
• Chronic illness and disease
• Caring for aging family members
In Chapter 3, attention will be focused on five problems par-
ticularly prevalent in modern U.S. society:
• Domestic violence
• School violence
• Natural disasters
• Deployed military families
• Adolescent suicide
Throughout the book, an effort is made to integrate the key
points explored in Chapter 1 into each of the above crises. This
section, backed by hundreds of key reference sources (95 percent
are post-2000) enables readers to explore the varieties of family
crises that exist, including elements contributing to disharmony
as well as intervention techniques designed to resolve them. A
particular emphasis is placed on strategies and techniques for
dealing with challenging or threatening family behaviors. The re-
maining chapters of the book present notable contributors to the
field, important data and documents, and resources for further
information.
Each chapter is designed to be engaging as well as informa-
tive, empirical as well as pragmatic. Everyday examples are used
to show readers how the information can be applied to their
lives. Strides have been taken to make the “facts” of the book in-
teresting to the reader by revealing how other families deal with
stress and crises and by offering ways for readers to apply the
hard data of the book to their own families.
The volume is designed for a broad range of readers in col-
lege, high school, institutional, and public library settings. It
xx
Preface

makes a valuable reference source for high school courses focus-
ing on marriage and family; troubled relationships, family stress,
and crises; family development; parent-child relationships; and
interpersonal relationships. At the college level, it has significant
appeal to those students studying family systems, family ther-
apy, guidance and counseling, crisis intervention, and conflict
resolution.
American Families in Crisis exposes the reader to major crises
impacting modern-day families. A thread weaving itself through-
out the text is how a crisis in the life of one member affects other
family members. Although it is made up of individuals, a family
is a system, and what affects one member affects the others. A
particular emphasis is placed on a preventive or proactive ap-
proach to family crisis intervention. Techniques for intervention,
assessment of risk, and follow-up counseling are stressed. Inter-
vention services designed to restabilize the family by providing
the tools to improve family functioning and build connections to
support networks in the community receive special attention.
Another key element throughout the book is the manner in
which children are impacted by family stress and crises. We tend
to think of childhood as a time of life free from pressures and
worries. However, younger generations are not immune to the
stresses surrounding them. On the contrary, children are sensi-
tive to changes in routine and are often deeply affected when a
crisis—a divorce, a natural disaster, a chronic illness of a loved
one—touches their lives. Like adults, children encounter feelings
of helplessness and lack of control that stress and crises bring
forth. However, unlike adults, youngsters have little experience
to help them place the current challenges into perspective. They
are also less able to put their feelings into words. Complicating
matters is that children are exposed to crisis events through tele-
vision, radio, newspapers, magazines, and even adult conversa-
tions that they overhear. All of this may cause children to
respond with a combination of worry and fear, which will inhibit
their ability to cope.
This reference manual takes aim at such child-oriented is-
sues and offers readers practical guidance and supportive assis-
tance during times of family stress and crises. Although children
respond differently to disasters—depending on their age, level of
understanding, and maturity level—they need to be assured that
resiliency and family equilibrium can be restored. They also need
to know that loved ones are there to help them regain stability
Preface
xxi

and support. Parents must recognize that when they assist chil-
dren during times of domestic upheaval, they not only help
youngsters handle their feelings but launch a recovery program
of their own.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank those individ-
uals who helped make this book a reality. At Mitchell College,
appreciation is extended to Dr. Mary Ellen Jukoski and Dr.
Gilbert J. Maffeo Jr., for their ongoing support of my research and
writing. Dr. Catherine Wright, chair of the Behavioral Sciences
Department, kept me sane as I neared the end of this project,
often putting out numerous fires and protecting me from needy
students who seemingly enjoy rattling the cages of those profes-
sors burning the midnight oil. Dr. Scott Horton and Dr. Nancy
Levine of the Behavioral Sciences Department also provided
needed support and encouragement, and their sense of humor
lifted my spirits and added much-needed levity to my work. I
wish to thank Lindsay Hollis for transcribing my often dis-
jointed, hen-scratched notes and transforming them into a read-
able and fluid manuscript. My students also deserve praise and
acknowledgment, for it was their very interest in family stress
and crises that planted the seeds for my penning this reference
manual.
I would also like to extend my appreciation to a truly won-
derful team of professionals at ABC-CLIO. Mildred Vasan, acqui-
sitions editor, saw the potential of this project early on and
provided many helpful suggestions, encouraging me to push for-
ward. American Families in Crisis is my fourth book with Mim,
and for every title she has been a source of great inspiration and
support. Holly Heinzer was a splendid managing editor, who
proved invaluable with her knowledge, advice, and dedication.
Holly is directly responsible for a number of additions, improve-
ments, and refinements, and without her energy and ideas, this
book would not exist. How Holly managed to maintain her up-
beat, enthusiastic, and sunny disposition while working with a
sometimes moody and cantankerous author remains, at least for
me, one of life’s greatest mysteries. I also wish to thank Kim
Kennedy White, submissions editor, who brought spirited en-
thusiasm and vision to this project. Her editorial expertise was
instrumental in transforming a rough manuscript into a readable
and an engaging book. Appreciation is also extended to Joyce
Dunne, copy editor, and to Christian Green, production editor.
xxii
Preface

Christian was responsible for orchestrating the completion of this
title and keeping its production on schedule.  
Finally, to my loved ones goes my deepest appreciation: my
wife, Nancy, and sons Jeremy, Zachary, and Benjamin. Writing re-
quires many personal and family sacrifices, and the patient un-
derstanding of those closest to my heart enabled me to devote the
long hours necessary to complete this project successfully.
Preface
xxiii


1
Background and History
Introduction
For the Greenwood family, the nagging problem was financial in
scope. The Mattison household never seemed to recover from the
accidental death of their nine-month-old son. Around-the-clock
care for their aging parents placed the Thompson family in a con-
tinual state of sorrow and depression. And for Donna Rivera, the
problem persisting for years was her alcoholic husband. (Names
used in this book are fictitious unless otherwise noted.)
In this introductory chapter, the nature of family stress and
crisis is explored, as is the concept of therapeutic intervention—
be it individual counseling for the principally affected family
member, the entire family unit, or some segments of it. This ex-
ploration is presented not only in terms of the traditional Amer-
ican family but also with full recognition that many variations in
family systems exist today (e.g., single parents, cohabitating rela-
tionships, gay partnerships, grandparent-grandchild living
arrangements).
Throughout the family life cycle, successful adjustment in-
volves the mastery of tasks, challenges, and demands met along
the way. For example, couples just starting out face such devel-
opmental tasks as establishing and maintaining intimacy, adjust-
ing to parenthood, and launching careers. These are all life
changes that bring along their share of change and challenge.
Other events persist into middle and late adulthood. In
midlife, coping with the departure of grown children or caring
for aging parents are but two examples of potentially stressful
life situations. During late adulthood, adjusting to retirement,
1

adapting to lowered income, and dealing with the death of one’s
partner offer the potential for disruption and stress. 
And throughout all of life, crises not limited to any develop-
mental period of family life appear. They are sudden and abrupt,
a “bolt from the blue.” They are unexpected and capable of cre-
ating upheaval and disorganization: the deployment of an ado-
lescent or a spouse to war, a school shooting, a natural disaster
such as a hurricane or tornado, a family member’s addiction to
gambling, or an unfaithful spouse. These changes are especially
difficult for families because they require the system to deal with
many changes, often simultaneously (Nelson 2007; Kanel 2007;
Patrick 2007).
As this book will reveal, some families are not able to rise to
the challenge and instead experience suffering and defeat. Oth-
ers, though, are flexible enough to make needed changes and are
able to develop resiliency and higher levels of functioning. Re-
siliency is a family’s ability to recover from disruptive change
without being overwhelmed or acting in dysfunctional ways.
Stress: Basic Terminology and Concepts
Before the manner in which stress affects the family is explored,
some basic terminology and concepts need to be defined. Stress
is the common, nonspecific response of the body to any demand
made upon it, be it psychological, sociological, or physiological.
In effect, stress represents change. Demands made by the internal
or external environment upset the balance of a person, heralding
the need to restore internal stability.
From a family crisis point of view, stress is normal and often
unavoidable. It needs to be recognized from the outset that stress
in one family member impacts the system’s overall functioning,
all of the parts contributing to the whole. Necessary adjustments
have to be made by the entire system. A system, then, refers to
the family unit and the members comprising it. Although certain
levels of stress accompanying life changes are minimal and can
be easily handled, other levels are not so easily managed and can
create a crisis situation (Miller and Cohen 2008; Greenberg 2008;
Hattie, Myers, and Sweeney 2004).
It might prove worthwhile at this juncture to introduce two
terms related to family functioning, particularly in relation to
stress and crises. Family equilibrium refers to the ability of a sys-
2
Background and History

tem to function smoothly and demonstrate stability and balance,
particularly in the face of challenge or change. Family disequi-
librium, on the other hand, is a state marked by upheaval and in-
stability. Usually, the family system loses its ability to utilize its
resources in a way that controls and contains challenge or change.
A stressor is an external event or condition that affects the
equilibrium of an organism. Stressors are thus situations that
place the family in a stressful state. Examples of stressors include
emotional turmoil, fear, disease, physical injury, and even fa-
tigue. Everyday stressors may include domestic tensions, per-
sonal tensions, noise, interpersonal relationships, indecision or
anxiety about work-related issues, and so forth. Obviously, stres-
sors become very individualized. What is one person’s stressor
may be viewed with indifference by someone else (Catherall
2005; Goodrick, Kneuper, and Steinbauer 2005; Snyder 2001).
A number of stressors may work together at any one time
and create disequilibrium. They may be big, small, nagging, or
acute; some stressors remain uncategorized. In all, six major
types of stressors have been identified. First are social stressors,
such as noise or crowding. Second, psychological stressors in-
clude such elements as worry and anxiety. Third are psychoso-
cial stressors, such as the loss of a job or the death of a friend.
Fourth, biochemical stressors include heat, cold, injury, pollu-
tants, toxicants, or poor nutrition. Fifth, philosophical stressors
create value-system conflicts, lack of purpose, or lack of direc-
tion. Finally, endemic stressors are long term in scope and have
become so prevalent that humans have learned to live with them,
such as being afflicted with a chronic disease or illness (Blonna
2007; DiMatteo and Martin 2002).
Stressors are thus conditions producing some type of reac-
tive change that triggers physical (e.g., increased pulse rate) and
psychological (e.g., worry) reactions. But it should be pointed out
that both good and bad circumstances can be stressors and thus
can interfere with the body’s balance or equilibrium and create a
stressful state. For example, it does not matter whether you have
won the lottery or are in the midst of moving into a multimillion
dollar home, whether you have failed an important college exam
or have just been reprimanded by your boss. A state of stress has
been launched in each situation (Seaward 2005; DiMatteo and
Martin 2002).
It is important to recognize, therefore, that stress has both
positive and negative qualities. Eustress, or positive stress, occurs
Stress: Basic Terminology and Concepts
3

when the body’s reactive change is put to productive use. For in-
stance, athletes often use the anxiety and tension in their bodies
before a game as a method of “psyching themselves up” for the
competition. It may well be that humans function best at moder-
ate levels of stress, or healthy tension. In fact, the lack of stress
often creates a reaction known as “cabin-fever syndrome,” where
there is too little stimulation, variety, and challenge (Nevid and
Rathus 2007).
Distress, on the other hand, is negative and unpleasant
stress. It occurs when the body and mind are worn down from re-
peated exposure to an unpleasant situation (McGowan, Gardner,
and Fletcher 2006). Stress of this nature can affect the body’s
overall immunity, nervous system, hormone levels, and meta-
bolic rates. It can create anxiety and other forms of emotional up-
heaval and disorganization. Distress can also lead to real physical
illnesses such as hypertension, headache, sleep disorders, peptic
ulcers, and cardiovascular illness (Cormier and Hackney 2008;
Greenberg 2008).
Primary and Secondary Stressors
Stressors can be either primary or secondary. A primary stressor
is one that initiates the stress response. Secondary stressors are
conditions that result from the first stressor and keep the stress
response activated. Primary stressors are primary in the sense
that they are the root origin of a series of other problematic life
circumstances, the secondary stressors. Secondary stressors are
not necessarily secondary in their potency and refer to the
spillover of the primary stressor into other aspects of a person’s
life (O’Halloran and Linton 2000).
For example, suppose a person is suffering from drug ad-
diction (primary stressor). The primary stressor in itself creates
an altered state of consciousness through intoxication. But the
stress response does not stop here. To illustrate, drug addictions
also tend to upset the balance of family life and create turmoil
and upheaval. Confrontation, embarrassment, fear, or abusive
behaviors are not uncommon behaviors in homes dealing with
an addicted family member. Extending beyond the family, the
addict often faces employment difficulties, such as absenteeism
and lowered work performance. All of these behaviors represent
4
Background and History

secondary stressors. Secondary stressors combine with the pri-
mary stressor, creating a self-destructive cycle.
Theories of Stress
Several noteworthy theories of stress have been proposed and
are worthy of our attention. If the reader is to achieve a clear un-
derstanding of the many dynamics attached to family stress, an
examination of how stress leaves its mark on the individual must
be undertaken. This way, one will be able to better understand
how the pieces of the system converge and affect the whole unit.
Han Selye’s Theory
Han Selye (1982, 1980) developed the concept of the general adap-
tation syndrome to help explain the physiological changes that
occur when prolonged physical or emotional stress is experi-
enced. The general adaptation syndrome consists of three suc-
cessive stages: alarm reaction, resistance, and exhaustion.
The alarm reaction stage occurs when the body’s defenses pre-
pare for the stressful situation. Hormones that arouse—for exam-
ple, epinephrine (adrenaline)—are produced and the person
switches from the parasympathetic nervous system (the system that
controls internal organs on a day-to-day basis) to the sympathetic
nervous system (the system that serves as a “backup” or “reserve”
emergency system). For short spurts of energy, the backup ner-
vous and hormonal (endocrine) systems are quite remarkable.
Should a family member remain under stress, the stage of re-
sistance is encountered, wherein the body continues to produce
huge amounts of energy. A person could remain in this stage for
hours, days, months, or even years. Since the individual is in
high metabolic gear, the wear and tear on the organism can be
phenomenal. However, each of us experiences these two stages
regularly with no significant impact on our health and well-
being. This is because most stressors are encountered and re-
moved with regularity. The trick is to not lapse into the third
stage.
Exhaustion is the final stage of the general adaptation syn-
drome. Exhaustion hits us when a counterreaction of the nervous
system occurs and the body’s functions decrease to abnormal
Theories of Stress
5

levels. Continued exposure to stress at this time may create
stress-related diseases such as high blood pressure and ulcers, or
even depression and death. Whether or not one reaches the stage
of exhaustion depends on a number of factors, including the in-
tensity of the stressor and the amount of time spent in the resis-
tance stage.
Selye’s three stages should be viewed as a cycle of adapta-
tion. When used repeatedly, the human machine runs the risk of
breakdown. Our reserves of adaptation energy can be compared
to an inherited bank account from which withdrawals are made
but to which deposits cannot be made. Following exhaustion
from stressful activity, sleep can restore resistance and overall
adaptation almost to previous levels, but total restoration is prob-
ably unlikely.
Karl Menninger’s Theory
An interesting contrast to Selye’s general adaptation syndrome is
a stress theory developed by Karl Menninger (1963). Menninger
proposes that stress introduces a psychological continuum that
includes five levels of emotional response. Each level represents
a progressive degree of emotional disorganization.
Level 1 disorganization is commonly called “nervousness,”
tension that is produced when an individual is experiencing
stress management difficulties. Feelings of anxiety, fear, frustra-
tion, and even anger escalate. These feelings are also usually ac-
companied by psychosomatic disorders. Everyone at one time or
another enters level 1.
Level 2 disorganization is characterized by neuroses such as
phobias, hysteria, obsessions, and physical disorders. Individuals
at this level typically withdraw by fainting or developing amne-
sia; they may become infantile, dependent on drugs, or hypo-
chondriacs. Because of individual differences, an assortment of
other debilitating or semidebilitating disorders may be present.
Level 3 disorganization often includes aggressive behavior
(homicide, assault and battery, and other social offenses), often
with little or no evidence of conscience. Level 4 disorganization
often triggers psychotic behavior. That is, the person loses contact
with reality, sometimes becoming paranoid and delusional. Fi-
nally, at level 5 disorganization, there is a loss of will to live, and the
disorganized person at this level may become severely depressed,
6
Background and History

lethargic, or even suicidal. Physical death is not atypical at this
level.
Meyer Friedman and Ray Rosenman’s Theory
Why is it that some persons are more susceptible to stress than
others? How can one person’s pleasure be another person’s poi-
son? Again, individual differences account for wide variations in
stress reactions. For instance, some persons can be classified as
“hot reactors.” Their psychological and physical makeup is such
that stress causes disruption and a state of upheaval. Others react
to the same situation without physical or psychological harm, or
they react with only a brief disruption in their stability and well-
being.
The Type A and Type B stress theory proposed by Meyer Fried-
man and Ray Rosenman (1974) helps to explain why stress reac-
tions vary from person to person. More specifically, they suggest
that the Type A personality is a stressful one and prone to cardio-
vascular disease. Individuals with a Type A personality are ex-
tremely competitive and impatient and always seem to strive to
accomplish more than is feasible. They are always rushed and un-
dertake multiple tasks on a regular basis. Type A behavior also in-
cludes difficulty in controlling anger and aggression, which
usually persist beneath the surface and are expressed in the form
of fist-clenching, facial grimaces, nervous tics, and tensing of mus-
cles. Also, Type A traits include impulsivity, hurried speech, no
compassion for other Type As, and feelings of guilt during periods
of relaxation.
The Type B personality contrasts with Type A behavior. The
Type B personality is characterized by a generally relaxed atti-
tude toward life, no hostility, and competitiveness only when the
situation demands it. Type B personality types have no sense of
urgency about them and do not have free-floating hostility. Un-
like Type A personalities, Type Bs have the ability to relax with-
out guilt.
Research indicates that not only are Type A personalities
more likely than Type Bs to suffer coronary heart disease but also
fatal heart attacks occur almost twice as frequently in Type As.
The relationship between Type A behavior and heart disease is
reported to be especially significant for individuals in their thir-
ties and forties, and it affects both males and females. Among
Theories of Stress
7

women, the most prominent group of Type A personalities com-
prises those who have changed their lifestyle to fit executive ca-
reers. Research such as that conducted by Friedman and
Rosenman illustrates that although cardiovascular disease is re-
lated to many factors, such as obesity and smoking, the role of
the stressful personality cannot be overlooked.
In addition to the Type A and Type B personality types, a
third has been recently recognized: the Type C personality. Type
C personalities are individuals who sustain considerable stress
but have learned to cope with it. Whether or not they are both-
ered by cardiovascular illness depends on how effectively they
have learned to cope. Many of us tend to be in this category, since
nearly all of us share, to a certain degree, some characteristics of
the Type A personality. The more involved persons are with these
characteristics, the more involved they are with stress and the
more they need to learn about effective coping strategies.
Family Stress and Crises
Now that the nature of stress has been explored, including theo-
retical explanations, an application of this material to the family
system is in order. As indicated at the outset, families rarely ex-
perience life without complication or strain. A family crisis oc-
curs when the system encounters disruption to its everyday
routines and experiences a state of disequilibrium or instability.
Sometimes, day-to-day hassles can pile up and cause a stress
overload. The crisis creates a turning point: things will either get
better, or they will get worse (Nelson 2007).
Usually, the moment of crisis is followed by a period of dis-
organization and emotional upheaval, during which the family
makes various attempts to resolve their problems and regain con-
trol. In the end, some adaptation is achieved for better or worse.
This outcome is frequently governed by the way in which the
family organizes itself and by its interaction during the crisis pe-
riod (Goldenberg and Goldenberg 2008).
Developmental Crisis
A developmental crisis (also called a normative crisis) originates
from predictable, developmental changes over the family life
8
Background and History

cycle. This crisis is related to the developmental tasks faced by
the family at a given point in time, such as when the system
moves from one transition to another. Developmental crises are
regarded as normal, and therefore carry some element of pre-
dictability. Because of that predictability, intervention often in-
cludes anticipatory guidance, or the provision of information
informing the family about what is going to occur.
If the crisis is handled advantageously, it is assumed that the
result will be some kind of family achievement, maturation, or
development. More important, the family regains its equilibrium.
If the crisis is not handled well, new areas of conflict surface and
disequilibrium results. In the next chapter, we explore the devel-
opmental crises of caring for aging parents. Notice how such a
crisis for the most part represents an expected life transition and
reflects a developmental, normative quality.
Situational Crisis
A situational crisis (also called a non-normative crisis) is neither
predictable nor normal. Rather, this type of crisis is sudden and
abrupt and can occur at any point in the family’s development.
Examples of situational crises include violent crime, the sudden
loss of a child, hospitalization, or financial ruination. Because of
the unpredictable and unforeseen nature of situational crises,
families may not have the psychological, social, or material re-
sources needed to manage the situation. Situational crises are
often emotionally overwhelming and disabling.
Situational crises, similar to those of a developmental nature,
require the family to find ways to restore equilibrium and stabil-
ity, to develop new styles of coping. If successful, the system will
grow through its adaptive strategies and no doubt enhance its re-
siliency (Myer and Moore 2006). If unsuccessful, the family may
resort to ineffective strategies, and the suffering will most likely
be long lasting. In addition, situational crises run the risk of never
being resolved (Goldenberg and Goldenberg 2008; James 2008).
Traumatic Crisis
A traumatic crisis is an extreme variation of a situational crisis. A
traumatic crisis is often life threatening and, due to the circum-
stances, gives survivors a feeling of extreme helplessness. 
Family Stress and Crises
9

Traumatic crises are highly stressful events. In Chapter 3, “Spe-
cial U.S. Issues,” attention is focused on a number of such crises:
domestic violence, school violence, natural disasters, deployed
military families, and adolescent suicide.
One of the most important scholars in the field of trauma re-
search is Charles Figley (Figley 2006; Figley and Barnes 2005;
Barnes and Figley 2005; Figley 2002a, 2002b, 2002c; Figley, Figley,
and Norman 2002). Figley observes that traumatic crises disrupt
the lifestyle and routine of survivors, cause a sense of destruc-
tion and loss, and leave a permanent and detailed memory of the
event that may be recalled voluntarily or involuntarily. From
Figley’s research some of the characteristics of traumatic crises
that impact families can be identified. These are discussed
below.
Limited Time to Prepare
Victims typically have little or no time to prepare because of the
trauma’s sudden onset. Because of this, the individual victim or
family is prevented from planning and rehearsing a survival
strategy.
Limited Sources of Guidance 
Information is available on coping with family life situations, but
these resources are usually geared toward developmental crises.
Sources of guidance are limited for those families who must cope
with such traumas as experiencing the World Trade Center ter-
rorist attacks or sending loved ones off to war.
Experienced by Few
Families who are victims of trauma are relatively small in num-
ber and typically have limited access to one another. This situa-
tion underscores the need for families in similar situations to
offer mutual support and guidance.
Slight Previous Experience 
For most, the traumatic crisis is a new experience. For those who
do have repeated exposure to the same type of crisis, the amount
of stress experienced has a tendency to decline. For example, fre-
quent flood and coastal storm victims demonstrate fewer stress
symptoms than new inhabitants of these disaster-prone areas
when natural crises occur.
10
Background and History

Interminable Time in Crisis 
Traumatic catastrophic crises may last days, months, and even
years. Recovery is difficult and victims often feel that the worst is
not yet over.
Lack of Control/Helplessness 
Compared with families undergoing developmental crises, fami-
lies trapped in traumatic crises are often unable to modulate the
sources of stress and are powerless to remove or postpone them.
Consequently, traumatic crisis victims experience a sense of
being out of control and helpless.
Disruption and Destruction
Although developmental crises are disruptive, in the presence of
change they usually bring new roles, routines, and responsibili-
ties. Traumatic crises, on the other hand, have the potential of
disrupting and destroying a family’s entire lifestyle, including
deep and permanent changes.
Sense of Loss
Loss as a result of traumatic stress can embody more than death.
Indeed, a loss of time, loss of innocence, loss of a role or function,
or loss of a sense of invulnerability can occur.
Emotional Impact
Developmental stressors are usually emotionally upsetting, but
they tend to be acute for only limited durations. Catastrophic
stressors often are acute as well as chronic.
Medical Problems
As mentioned, stress can create health problems. Such stress-in-
duced disorders are found more frequently among victims of
traumatic crises. The threat of physical harm or death causes the
most intense of human reactions and leaves behind an emotional
imprint, which may never go away.
At this juncture, it might prove useful to summarize the
progress made so far in this introductory chapter. Most families en-
counter stress in their lives, and the stressors that trigger the need
to adjust and adapt come in all shapes and sizes. In some cases, the
stressors of family life are isolated and are resolved before a pileup
of stress occurs. Should this be the case, disorganization and 
Family Stress and Crises
11

emotional upheaval often result. Our knowledge of the impact of
stress has been heightened by the theories proposed by Selye,
Menninger, and Friedman and Rosenman. Developmental, situa-
tional, and traumatic crises are variations of the disequilibrium
that can result. Families may become disorganized in the face of a
crisis and may not be able to effectively adjust to it.
History of Family Crisis Intervention
Family crisis intervention, an extension of family therapy, is a rel-
atively new division of the helping professions. Its roots can be
traced to the 1930s through the 1960s, to a number of key figures
who began challenging conventional therapy by including whole
families in their approach to helping troubled individuals. Al-
though it is impossible in the confines of one chapter to trace the
contributions of all family therapy pioneers, the reader is di-
rected to Chapter 5 for background on some of the more notable
figures—Milton Erickson, Jay Haley, Don Jackson, and Virginia
Satir, among others.
At one time, maladaptive behavior was approached by indi-
vidual treatment strategies. The therapeutic focus was placed
squarely on the person creating family instability. Today, how-
ever, it is recognized that therapy should embrace the whole fam-
ily, since domestic disequilibrium rarely exists in a vacuum.
Rather, domestic problems are best understood when the practi-
tioner examines the family as a system, including its roles, rules,
and other processes of functioning. This treatment mode became
known as systems theory, a school of thought proposing that in-
dividual behavior cannot be understood without reference to its
past and present relationships, especially family interactions.
Michael Nichols and Richard Schwartz (2006) point out that
unlike individual therapy, which is directed at a client’s personal
makeup, this new approach regarded the family as a whole as the
unit of treatment. Treatment began to be viewed as most power-
ful and effective when it was applied directly to the entire family
system. Family therapists began looking at families as not caus-
ing problems; rather, they became more interested in the family
patterns of interactions that perpetuated and influenced prob-
lems. As this therapeutic approach took hold, all members of the
family were encouraged to meet with the therapist, who in turn
sought to analyze family dynamics as a whole. Early clinicians
made an effort to help family members become more conscious
12
Background and History

of patterns or interactions and communication styles (Sexton,
Weeks, and Robinson 2003; Sandoval 2002).
The family therapy movement took hold and gained a
strong following. Proponents maintained that a systems ap-
proach shed more light on the many complexities of turmoil and
instability. Therapists agreed that prompt, action-oriented inter-
vention focusing on the crisis yielded great benefits for the entire
system. A shift in therapeutic strategies thus emerged. Problems
were treated by changing the way the system works rather than
trying to “fix” a specific member. Family crisis therapists sought
to help a distressed individual and his or her family by defining
the crisis in terms of the system. Therapists utilized the family’s
combined coping skills to deal with the existing, as yet unre-
solved, situation (Goldenberg and Goldenberg 2008).
Since its inception in the 1930s, family therapy researchers
have provided much insight into stress and crises. As the disci-
pline evolved, each new theory built on what came before, and
each provided a new perspective. Of particular importance to this
volume are those theories aimed at how families adjust to dis-
equilibrium and instability. Two theories in particular merit our 
attention—the ABCX and Double ABCX models. It is important
for the reader to understand the importance of theories when in-
vestigating topics in the social sciences (or any discipline, for that
matter). Theories are explanations that unify facts. Theories help
us grasp the meaning of the facts being collected, thus enhancing
our understanding of the topic at hand (White and Klein 2007). As
family crises are explored in the next two chapters, reference is
made to the various facets of the theories covered here.
The ABCX Model
Reuben Hill (1949) was one of the earliest researchers to explore
the effects of stress on the family. His theory—referred to as the
ABCX model—is an older, yet nonetheless relevant, contribution
to the field of family studies. It is an excellent illustration of how
a meaningful theory can withstand the test of time and still have
contemporary application. Hill’s model consists of four compo-
nents, indicated by the letters ABCX:
The Stressor (A)
This part of the model refers to the stressor challenging the fam-
ily. Recall that a stressor is a condition that usually triggers
Family Stress and Crises
13

change and brings the potential for instability and disharmony.
Hill maintained that family stressors can be classified according
to their impact: dismemberment, the loss of a family member 
(for example, death), which in turn affects the unit’s social struc-
ture; accession, the addition of new family members (birth, adop-
tion), which changes the family’s structure; loss of family morale
and unity (alcoholism, abuse); and changed family structure and
morale (divorce, desertion). Note how all of these stressors can
change many facets of family life, including roles and patterns of
interaction.
The Resources (B)
This facet of the model represents the family’s resources for deal-
ing with the stressor. The successful application of these resources
will provide resistance and, ultimately, prevent disequilibrium.
Two primary forms of family resources have been identified: inte-
gration and adaptability. Family integration refers to unity and
strength in such areas as affection, interests, and economic inter-
dependence. Family adaptability embodies the concept of flexi-
bility, that is, the family’s ability to implement an assortment of
problem-solving strategies as needs dictate.
The Family’s Definition of the Stressor (C)
Here, the magnitude and severity of the stressor are assessed by
the family. This assessment will be a subjective analysis of the
stressor rather than the community’s objective and cultural defi-
nition of it. The family typically explores the hardships that the
stressor will bring, including sacrifices to be made and lifestyle
changes to be implemented. Also affecting the family’s overall
assessment of the stressor will be how successfully it was dealing
with the past changes and challenges or the presence of other
stressors.
The Actual Crisis (X)
The last feature of Hill’s model represents the amount of dise-
quilibrium, instability, and disorganization that a crisis brings.
Whether or not the stressor triggers a crisis depends on the pre-
ceding factors: the magnitude of the stressor, available family re-
sources, and the ultimate definition given to the stressor. If a
family is resilient and resourceful, stress may never reach this cri-
sis point. Should this not be the case, the family will not be able
to maintain equilibrium.
14
Background and History

The Double ABCX Model
Stimulated by Hill’s work, Hamilton McCubbin and Joan Patter-
son (1983) developed a theory that complements and expands
the ABCX model. It is distinguished from Hill’s model by its em-
phasis on the additional life stressors influencing the family’s re-
siliency and adaptation ability. The Double ABCX model also
describes those psychological and social factors families use in
managing crises, the processes families engage in to attain satis-
factory resolution, and the eventual outcome of these efforts. The
Double ABCX model can be broken down as follows:
1. The pileup of family demands (aA factor) is the first compo-
nent of the model. More than likely, families are not
dealing with a single stressor (e.g., an economically dis-
advantaged family is forced to deal with a natural disas-
ter). Rather, there is a pileup of stressors and strains,
referred to as the aA factor in this model. These de-
mands or strains may result from individual family
members, the family system, and/or the community. A
variety of stressors and strains contributing to a pileup
can be identified as follows:
• The stressor and its hardships. The stressor brings hard-
ships that often increase and intensify as the situation
persists or remains unresolved. When hardships such as
anxiety, insecurity, or frustration persist, they become ad-
ditional sources of strain contributing to family distress.
• Developmental crises. Occurring simultaneously but in-
dependently of the initial stressor, these crises are devel-
opmental or normative. Recall that such crises are
normal and can be expected (e.g., adult children caring
for aging parents), but their presence along with other
stress adds to the demands placed on the family.
• Prior strains. Many families carry some residue of
strain, often the result of some unresolved demands
from earlier stressors or transitions. When a new stres-
sor is introduced, these prior strains usually complicate
the situation by adding to the pileup of demands.
• Consequences of family efforts to cope. Separate stres-
sors and strain can evolve from the coping behaviors
employed by the family. Suppose, for example, that in a
household facing financial hardship one partner takes a
Family Stress and Crises
15

second job. Although this type of coping will reduce the
financial difficulties, the second job might create others:
loneliness of the other partner, disruption of lifestyle,
physical and psychological demands placed on the dou-
bly employed partner, and so on.
• Intrafamily and social ambiguity. Every stressor em-
bodies ambiguity because change creates uncertainty
about the future. Within the internal framework, the
family may feel uncertainty about its structure. This un-
certainty is particularly evident with such situations as
the death of a family member, the military deployment
of a loved one, or a divorce.
2. The second component of the Double ABCX model is la-
beled family adaptive resources (bB factor). Resources are
an integral part of the family’s ability to meet demands.
Resources include characteristics of individual mem-
bers, the overall system, the family unit, and the com-
munity. In response to a crisis situation over time, two
general types of resources evolve: existing resources and
expanded family resources.
• Existing resources. Such resources are already in place
and will typically minimize the impact of the initial stres-
sor. Moreover, existing stressors will reduce the probabil-
ity that the family will enter into a crisis. Examples of
existing family resources include togetherness, conflict
resolution skills, role flexibility, and shared values.
• Expanded family resources. These include new resources
(individual, family, and community) strengthened or 
developed in response to the strain and demands. Ex-
amples include the reallocation of family roles and re-
sponsibilities, or the seeking of community resources.
The authors emphasize that one of the most important
resources comprising the bB factor is social support.
Those families able to gain support through friends, rel-
atives, community resource specialists, and the like tend
to be more resistant to major crises and better able to re-
gain equilibrium.
3. The third component of the model is called family defini-
tion and meaning (cC factor). The cC factor represents the
16
Background and History

meaning given to the total crisis situation, including the
stressor believed to have initiated it, the added stressors
and strains, old and new resources, and estimates of
what needs to be accomplished to restore balance and
stability. All of these elements require considerable work
to resolve: clarifying the hardships and issues so that
they are more manageable and responsive to problem-
solving strategies, decreasing the intensity of the emo-
tional burdens accompanying the crisis, and encouraging
the system to continue with its task of promoting each
member’s social and emotional development. Also, fam-
ily coping and eventual adaptation are often facilitated
when members view crisis situations as a challenge or an
opportunity for growth.
4. The fourth component is termed family adaptation balanc-
ing (xX factor). As stated, adaptive resources emerge
from individual family members, the family system, and
the community. Each of these elements has both capabil-
ities and demands. Family adaptation occurs through
reciprocal relationships, that is, demands of one of these
elements met by the capabilities of another. When this
reciprocity is accomplished, a simultaneous balance is
achieved at two primary levels of interaction. In relation
to this concept, consider the following forms of balance:
• Balance of member to family. The balance sought here is
between individual family members and the family sys-
tem. Family stress often emerges when a demand-
capability imbalance exists at this level of family func-
tioning. More precisely, the demands an individual
member places on the family may exceed the family’s
ability to meet these demands, thus creating the imbal-
ance. To cite an example, the stressor of a rebellious ado-
lescent may create an imbalance because of the family’s
rigid rules and inability to alter expectations, which
would allow for the autonomy a teenager often needs
for personal development. To remedy this imbalance, a
new “balance” between the individual member and the
family system is needed.
• Balance of family to community. A “fit” must also exist
between the family and the community of which it is a
Family Stress and Crises
17

part. McCubbin and Patterson (1983) observe that two in-
stitutions in particular—the family and the work 
community—compete for the involvement and commit-
ment of family members. Often, this competition creates a
demand-capability imbalance, which in turn produces
stress. As an illustration, the stressor of a mother return-
ing to work may create an imbalance if the family de-
mands that she make a priority commitment to her
husband and children. To resolve this imbalance, the fam-
ily must reestablish and achieve a balance between its de-
mands and capabilities and those of the work community.
The concept of family adaptation is regarded as the central
concept in the Double ABCX model. It is used to describe a con-
tinuum of outcomes that reflect family efforts to achieve a bal-
ance fit at the member-to-family and the family-to-community
levels. The positive side to the continuum of family adaptation is
labeled bonadaptation and is characterized by a balance at both
levels of functioning. This results in the maintenance or strength-
ening of family integrity, the continued promotion of member de-
velopment, and the maintenance of family independence and its
sense of control over environmental influences. At the negative
end of the continuum is family maladaptation, which is character-
ized by a continued imbalance at either level of family function-
ing or the achievement of a balance at both levels. Maladaption
comes at a price in terms of a deterioration in family integrity, a
curtailment or deterioration in the personal health and develop-
ment of a member or the well-being of the family unit, or a loss
or decline in family independence.
Examples of Prevention and 
Enrichment Programs
Over the years, family therapists have developed prevention and
enrichment programs to deal with stress and crises. Such thera-
peutic intervention has gained increasing popularity and is ex-
panding rapidly in terms of the number, scope, and type.
A distinction exists between prevention programs and en-
richment programs. Bernard Guerney and his associates (1985)
point out that prevention is concerned with dealing with prob-
lems on a community-wide basis rather than an individual basis.
18
Background and History

Prevention does not, however, mean that one works only with
people of families who have no stress or difficulties. Early and ef-
ficient treatment programs and programs dealing with aftermath
problems also fall into the category of prevention programs.
Whether it is before, during, or after a crisis arises, effective pre-
vention programs are designed so that they are applicable to large
numbers of people. Their impact must also be broad enough to
make a substantial difference when the rate of the problems on a
community-wide basis is examined.
Enrichment programs, on the other hand, are typically tar-
geted to strengthen families not at risk. However, as Guerney
and associates point out, in the wake of such crises as divorce,
addiction, and natural disasters today, it seems fair to say that all
families are at risk. Because of this prevalence of risk, enrichment
programs should not be sharply distinguished from prevention
programs. Rather, enrichment programs should be viewed as be-
longing at the lower end of the at-risk continuum, not off the con-
tinuum entirely. Therapeutic interventions need not be sharply
segregated with respect to whether they are prevention versus
enrichment. Instead, any particular program may define as its
target population families anywhere or everywhere on a contin-
uum of risk or on a continuum of strength or resiliency. Addi-
tionally, all intervention programs (whether they be preventive
or enrichment) should be viewed as having a common purpose:
improving the family system and improving the psychosocial
well-being of each member of that family system.
Examples of Family 
Intervention Programs
It will prove useful at this juncture to identify and briefly discuss
several representative intervention programs. Guerney, Guerney,
and Cooney (1985) offer the following descriptions:
Family-Structured Enrichment
The goals of family-structured enrichment programs are to build
personal skills into daily family life. Couples and families partic-
ipating in this approach receive programmed instruction from a
group leader and participate in structured exercises on a wide
range of topics. Depending on issues relevant to the family seek-
ing assistance, the specificity of the program may vary. For 
Family Stress and Crises
19

example, it could include such topics as problem-solving and
conflict resolution skills or more specific areas such as intimate
partner violence, infidelity, loss of a family member, or unem-
ployment. In general, the program focuses on family develop-
ment and its transitions, family needs, and the needs of special
families, such as those facing military deployment or those deal-
ing with the aftermath of divorce.
Family Relationship Enhancement
The family relationship enhancement program can be used by in-
dividual family members, a subsystem from a family (e.g., sib-
lings), an entire family system, or groups consisting of any of
these combinations from different families. The primary teaching
techniques are skill training and practice. Among the skills
taught are those designed to enhance family adaptation and ad-
justment, particularly in the face of adversity; problem-solving
skills; utilization of family resources; communication effective-
ness; and heightened awareness of others. Also, families are
taught how to maintain these desired behaviors.
Marriage Encounter
Originally conceived by the Roman Catholic Church, Marriage
Encounter has been altered to fit both Protestant and Jewish
faiths. The program is designed as a retreat that typically in-
volves large numbers of couples. Usually beginning on a Friday
evening and ending on a Sunday afternoon, it covers a wide
range of topics designed to enhance the marital arrangement and
prevent stress: self-disclosure skills, empathy, self-awareness, tol-
erance, and marital unity. Typically a religious ceremony and a
renewal of marriage vows conclude the weekend.
Minnesota Couples Communication Program
This marital enrichment program is widely used and is based on
a theory of growth-oriented systems. That is, the marital or fam-
ily system is seen as having a number of potential patterns and
structures. Couples receive training on how to develop strategies
that will enable them to experience various levels of interactions
and deal with stressful life circumstances. Emphasis is placed on
such areas as accurate self-perception, improvement of commu-
nication skills, flexibility in interactional styles, and adjustment
to threatening and potentially damaging domestic situations.
20
Background and History

Special Considerations for Children
As the next two chapters reveal, family stress and crises are no
strangers to the lives of children. On the contrary, Alice Honig
(2003, 1986) writes that some degree is to be expected throughout
the entire course of child and adolescent development. She main-
tains that an assortment of situations throughout life produce
stress reactions, including physical illness; pain; concentration;
anxious anticipations of failure due to overly strict or high
parental expectations; fear and tension originating from domes-
tic violence or divorce; rejection from being teased and bullied;
fear of abandonment through loss or separation; living through
the unpredictability and danger of a natural disaster or school
shooting; or experiencing the uncertainties and insecurities that
often accompany unemployment.
Honig points out that childhood stress surfaces for identifi-
able reasons. For example, stress can originate from internal fac-
tors. It can develop from a chronic illness or disability or from the
painful stomachaches of a young child lying in bed and listening
each night to parents’ violent quarreling in the next room. Stress
can also emerge from external factors. For example, a kinder-
garten child from a military family, forced by a recent family
move to attend a new school, finds walking the new route alone
a terrifying experience. The youngster may arrive home with
soiled pants because bowel or urinary control has been lost.
Stress can also be acute as well as chronic. Acute stresses arise
suddenly, they are usually isolated episodes, and their impact
may not last long. Some acute stressors, such as a single hospi-
talization for a child, are often associated with short-term emo-
tional disturbance, but not with long-term upset or imbalance
years later. Chronic stressors, on the other hand, may be cumula-
tive even for the most well-adjusted child and can lead to long-
term disturbances. An alcoholic or an unpredictably abusive
parent are examples of chronic stressors that may impair even
the psychologically sturdiest child functioning. The chapters that
follow supply more specific information on the potential impact
of chronic stressors.
Lorraine Stern (1986, 1985) feels that a certain amount of
stress in a child’s life is not necessarily bad. Coping with stress
and the changes it brings helps a youngster learn to overcome
obstacles and develop into a flexible, adaptable person. But too
Family Stress and Crises
21

much stress or poorly handled stress can undermine a child’s
emotional and perhaps even physical health. The following sug-
gestions are designed to help parents and significant others re-
duce the stress in children’s lives:
Set Aside Plenty of Quiet Time with the Child
Children and caregivers need time just to be together. Any unin-
terrupted period is important, and affection is good therapy for
the day-to-day stressors the youngster faces.
Adults Need to Be a Source of Support for the Youngster
A child under stress or experiencing a crisis needs more than the
usual amount of warmth and closeness. Children are not spoiled
by being held and comforted at times of need.
Treat the Child’s Distress as Real, Even if It 
Seems Inappropriate from an Adult Perspective
Sometimes children have traumatic—and dramatic—reactions to
seemingly minor experiences. This is perfectly normal, and the
best way for an adult to respond is to treat such a reaction as le-
gitimate and intercede accordingly.
Keep Discussions of Adult Uncertainties Out of the Youngster’s Hearing
A discouraged remark about not having enough money or the in-
evitability of a divorce can severely upset a child. Children not
only take these problems to heart but often feel responsible for
them as well. If a child does overhear a disturbing conversation,
give immediate, optimistic reassurance that the problem can be
solved.
If Possible, Prepare the Youngster for Future Stressful Experiences
Sometimes an adult can soothe fears and correct misconceptions
about a coming event in a concrete, developmentally appropriate
fashion. Most hospitals, for example, have special programs that
use tours, games, or books to prepare children for hospitaliza-
tion. Adults can use children’s books to ease the impact of other
upcoming events.
Do Not Hesitate to Seek Outside Supportive Assistance
As indicated, acute stressful life stressors alone rarely cause long-
term problems. Rather, stress leads to trouble or pressure when it
is present in the midst of ongoing difficulties such as poor self-
22
Background and History

image or pressure to perform in school. Early therapeutic inter-
vention can not only solve an immediate problem but also
strengthen the youngster’s future coping capacities.
Adults Need to Examine Their Own Stress Management Skills
How a caregiver handles and controls stress has a lot to do with
how a child fares. Adults need to examine whether they have an
optimistic attitude or feel overwhelmed by circumstances. If
adults are ineffective with their coping strategies, they can help
both themselves and their children by obtaining professional
help in stress management.
Characteristics of Strong 
and Resilient Families
As this chapter draws to a close, it would not be surprising if you
spent a moment or two reflecting on your own family, perhaps
recognizing its strengths or reflecting on areas needing attention.
Maybe you have thought about how your family has weathered
past family crises, perhaps analyzing what it did right or how it
might have done things differently.
Numerous researchers have examined characteristics of
stress-effective families and the skills used to improve their health,
well-being, and resiliency (e.g., James 2008; Kilpatrick 2006; Van-
gelisti 2004; Walsh 2003; Greenstone and Leviton 2002). All fami-
lies, including single parent–led families, blended families,
working couples, and older families, can survive stress and grow
closer. But how do they do it? Suzanna Smith (2005) and Dolores
Curran (1985) have isolated the commonalities of stress-effective
couples and identified certain attitudes and characteristics that
shed light on strong and resilient families, those systems that learn
to meet daily pressures and manage life’s changes. The reader
might want to keep these qualities in mind as the various crises are
presented in the next two chapters. The characteristics are:
Recognition of Stress as a Normal Part of Family Life
Healthy couples do not equate family life with perfection. In-
deed, their goals and expectations are frequently lower than
those of other families. These families also do not correct prob-
lems with self-failure. Rather, they anticipate stresses like chil-
dren’s behaviors and occasional disagreements over money as a
Family Stress and Crises
23

normal facet of family life. Furthermore, they tend to develop
ways of coping that are both traditional and unique, which will
end up being invaluable when dealing with normative and 
non-normative crises.
Commitment
Commitment is the expectation that the family system will be to-
gether forever, in good times and bad. Committed families feel a
sense of trust, belonging, and unity. They solve problems to-
gether and look toward the future, giving the family purpose and
direction. Commitment is marked by giving time and energy to
each other on a daily basis and by developing family interests.
Strong families make choices about what activities are important
to them. Commitment does not mean the family overtakes the in-
dividual, creating enmeshment. Strong families know that family
members will grow and develop individual identities. They af-
firm and appreciate positive qualities and encourage and sup-
port each other.
Family Wellness
Research shows that individual wellness helps a person manage
daily pressures, and this ability has a positive impact on family
equilibrium. Family wellness also means that all family members
have a healthy lifestyle that includes proper nutrition, regular ex-
ercise, adequate rest, and relaxation. Family wellness goes beyond
just physical health. It is a holistic way of living that nurtures and
develops the body, mind, and spirit. Wellness also means looking
outside the self and tuning in to the feelings, needs, and welfare
of others.
Effective Communication
Effective family communication maintains positive, healthy rela-
tionships, helps solve problems, and lowers stress. Effective fam-
ily communication also means family members are specific about
what they need or expect from others, as well as sharing their
own feelings, thoughts, and experiences. Strong families deal
with conflict quickly and directly by using effective communica-
tion and problem-solving skills (Turner and West 2006; Segrin
and Flora 2005; LePoire 2005; Day 2003). Moreover, healthy fam-
ilies rely on the importance of honesty and sincerity. They em-
ploy nonthreatening techniques that enable them to get in touch
24
Background and History

with their own feelings and those of others within the system.
Parenting partners share ideas, activities, and emotions without
the feeling of being owned or judged.
Conflict Resolution Skills and Creative Coping Skills
Related to the last point, the families best able to deal with every-
day stresses are those who develop workable ways of solving
their disagreements and an assortment of coping skills. Conflict
resolution skills depend largely on communication, while coping
skills depend on creativity, ingenuity, and perseverance. Among
parents, self-esteem is usually equal, with neither partner allow-
ing himself or herself to be manipulated or pushed around by the
other. In this respect, healthy communicating partners rarely ex-
hibit a boss-employer relationship. In addition, they utilize com-
promise to resolve conflict and practice collaboration, exploring
underlying issues and arriving at solutions that best meet the
needs of the family.
Adaptability
Stress-effective families are adaptable and flexible. They see rela-
tives, friends, and community as valuable supports in dealing
with stresses and therefore turn to them when the need arises. On
the other hand, highly stressed families view such support sys-
tems as their own inability to deal with conflict and turmoil.
Healthy partners also adapt and borrow each other’s techniques
in resolving conflict and dealing with stress. When confronted
with a stressor, they are able to modify attitudes and habits to
best meet it. These types of behaviors reflect the flexibility that
healthy families possess, a skill that enables them to cope with
the many stresses and demands that life presents.
Appreciation
Stress-effective family members genuinely care about each other.
This caring can be demonstrated in a number of different ways.
First, a person’s good qualities can be accented and positive
words used to describe that family member. Second, caring is
conveyed through both words and deeds. Finally, appreciation
is accepted by those who extend it. Although accepting appreci-
ation is difficult for some people, it is important because it es-
tablishes trust and goodwill between people as well as builds
self-esteem.
Family Stress and Crises
25

Family Time Together
Stress-resilient families spend meaningful time together on a regu-
lar basis. Time together gives the family an identity and a sense of
unity. Time with supportive people nurtures positive self-identity
in family members and reduces feelings of isolation. Research con-
sistently shows that strong families eat, play, work, and share out-
side activities together. Strong families celebrate traditions that
enrich family life and build memories for the future.
Summary
Successful adjustment over the family life cycle involves the mas-
tery of tasks, challenges, and stresses that life brings. In this chap-
ter, the topics of stress and crises, and how they both affect the
family system, were examined. Stress is defined as the common,
nonspecific response of the body to any demand made on it, be it
psychological, sociological, or physiological. Stress can have both
positive (eustress) and negative (distress) dimensions. Stress is a
response to stimuli called stressors, which may range from fear
and fatigue to physical injury and emotional conflict.
This chapter also explores how a variety of stressors can be
working together at one time. Stressors can be social, psycholog-
ical, psychosocial, biochemical, philosophical, and endemic. A
distinction has to be made between primary stressors, responsi-
ble for initiating the stress response, and secondary stressors, the
behaviors that result from the primary stressor and keep the
stress response activated. Our knowledge of the manner in which
stress impacts individual behavior has been heightened by the
research of Selye (the general adaptation syndrome), Menninger
(levels of emotional disorganization), and Friedman and Rosen-
man (Type A and Type B personalities).
A family crisis occurs when the system encounters disrup-
tion to its everyday routines and experiences a state of disequi-
librium or instability. Usually, the moment of crisis is followed by
a period of disorganization and emotional upheaval, during
which the family makes various attempts to solve its problems. A
developmental (normative) crisis originates from predictable
changes over the course of the family life cycle. A situational
(non-normative) crisis is not predictable, but instead, sudden and
abrupt. A traumatic crisis is often life threatening and, due to the
circumstances, gives survivors a feeling of helplessness.
26
Background and History

In addition to tracing the historical roots of family crisis inter-
vention, the chapter describes two of the more prominent theories
of family stress and crisis. Reuben Hill’s ABCX model consists of
four components: the stressor (A), resources (B), family definition
of the stressor (C), and actual crisis (X). The Double ABCX model,
developed by Hamilton McCubbin and Joan Patterson, expands
upon Hill’s earlier work. It consists of four components: the pileup
of family demands (aA), family adaptive resources (bB), family de-
finition and meaning (cC), and family adaptation (xX).
The family’s depletion of resources and the inability to per-
form basic functions usually mean that therapeutic intervention
is needed. Systems theory is the preferred mode of therapeutic
intervention, which operates on a belief that individual behavior
cannot be understood without reference to its past and present
relationships, especially family interactions.
Intervention is viewed as most effective when it is applied
directly to the entire family system, which means the therapist
does not look at families as causing problems, but rather at the
family patterns of interactions as perpetuating and influencing
problems. Several varieties of family prevention and enrichment
programs are described: family-structured enrichment, family re-
lationship enhancement, Marriage Encounter, and the Minnesota
Couples Communication Program. The chapter concludes with a
discussion of stress-effective families and the qualities they pos-
sess: recognition of stress as a normal part of family life, commit-
ment, family wellness, effective communication, conflict
resolution skills and creative coping skills, adaptability, appreci-
ation, and togetherness.
References
Barnes, M., and C. R. Figley. 2005. “Family Therapy: Working with Trau-
matized Families.” In Handbook of Clinical Family Therapy, edited by J.
Lebow. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Becvar, D. S., and R. J. Becvar. 2006. Family Therapy: A Systematic Integra-
tion, 6th ed. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Beels, C. 2002. “Notes for a Cultural History of Family Therapy.” Family
Process 41 (1): 67 82.
Blonna, R. 2007. Coping with Stress in a Changing World, 4th ed. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
References
27

Catherall, D. R., ed. 2005. Family Stressors: Interventions for Stress and
Trauma. New York: Brunner-Routledge.
Cormier, S., and H. L. Hackney. 2008. Counseling Strategies and Interven-
tions. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Curran, D. 1985. Stress and the Healthy Family. Minneapolis: Winston Press.
Day, R. D., ed. 2003. Introduction to Family Processes. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
DiMatteo, M. R., and L. R. Martin. 2002. Health Psychology. Boston: Allyn
and Bacon.
Figley, C. R. 2002a. Brief Treatments for the Traumatized: A Project for the
Green Cross Foundation. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Figley, C. R. 2002b. “Theory-Informed Brief Treatments.” In Brief Treat-
ments for the Traumatized: A Project of the Green Cross Foundation, edited by
C. R. Figley. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Figley, C. R. 2002c. “Introduction.” In Treating Compassion Fatigue, edited
by C. R. Figley. New York: Brunner-Routledge.
Figley, C. R., ed. 2006. Mapping the Wake of Trauma: Autobiographical Es-
says by the Pioneers of Trauma Research. New York: Routledge.
Figley, C. R., and M. Barnes. 2005. “External Trauma and Families.” In
Families and Change, 3rd ed., edited by P. C. McKenry and S. J. Price. Los
Angeles: Sage.
Figley, C. R., K. R. Figley, and J. Norman. 2002. “Tuesday Morning Sep-
tember 11, 2001: The Green Cross Projects’ Role as a Case Study in Com-
munity-Based Traumatology Services.” In Trauma Practice in the Wake of
September 11, 2001, edited by S. N. Gold and J. Faust. New York: Haworth.
Friedman, M., and R. H. Rosenman. 1974. Type A Behavior and Your Heart.
New York: Knopf.
Goldenberg, H., and I. Goldenberg. 2008. Family Therapy: An Overview,
7th ed. Belmont, CA: Thomson Learning.
Goodrick, G. K., S. Kneuper, and J. R. Steinbauer. 2005. “Stress Percep-
tions in Community Clinic: A Pilot Survey of Patients and Physicians.”
Journal of Community Health 30 (2): 75 93.
Greenberg, J. S. 2008. Comprehensive Stress Management, 10th ed. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Greenstone, J. L., and S. C. Leviton. 2002. Elements of Crisis Intervention:
Crises and How to Respond to Them. Belmont, CA: Thomson Learning.
Guerney, B., L. Guerney, and T. Cooney. 1985. “Marital and Family Pre-
vention and Enrichment Programs.” In Handbook of Family Psychology
and Therapy, edited by L. l’Abate. Homewood, IL: Dorsey Press.
28
Background and History

Hattie, J. A., J. E. Myers, and T. J. Sweeney. 2004. “A Factor Structure of
Wellness: Theory, Assessment, Analysis, and Practice.” Journal of Coun-
seling and Development 82 (3): 354 371.
Hill, R. 1949. Families under Stress. New York: Harper and Row.
Honig, A. 1986. “Stress and Coping in Children.” Young Children 41 (4):
50 63.
Honig, A. S. 2003. Love and Learn: Positive Guidance for Young Children.
Washington, DC: National Association for the Education of Young 
Children.
James, R. K. 2008. Crisis Intervention Strategies, 6th ed. Belmont, CA:
Thomson Learning.
Kanel, K. 2007. A Guide to Crisis Intervention, 3rd ed. Belmont, CA: Thom-
son Learning.
Kilpatrick, A. C. 2006. Working with Families: An Integrative Model by Level
of Need, 4th ed. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
LePoire, B. A. 2005. Family Communication: Nurturing and Control in a
Changing World. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
McCubbin, J. M., and J. M. Patterson. 1983. “The Family Stress Process:
The Double ABCX Model of Adjustment and Adaptation.” In Social
Stress and the Family, edited by H. I. McCubbin, M. B. Sussman, and J. M.
Patterson. New York: Haworth.
McGowan, J., D. Gardner, and R. Fletcher. 2006. “Positive and Negative
Affective Outcomes of Occupational Stress.” New Zealand Journal of Psy-
chology 35 (2): 95 104.
Menninger, K. 1963. The Vital Balance. New York: Viking.
Miller, G., and C. Cohen. 2008. Current Directions in Health Psychology.
Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Myer, R. A., and H. B. Moore. 2006. “Crisis in Context Theory: An Eco-
logical Model.” Journal of Counseling and Development 84 (2): 139 144.
Nelson, P. T. 2007. “Surviving a Family Crisis.” [Online article; retrieved
8/9/07.] http://ag.udel.edu/extension/fam/FM/issue/survivecrisis
.htm.
Nevid, J. S., and S. A. Rathus. 2007. Psychology and the Challenges of Life:
Adjustment to the New Millennium, 10th ed. New York: Wiley.
Nichols, M. P., and R. C. Schwartz. 2006. The Essentials of Family Therapy,
3rd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
O’Halloran, T. M., and J. M. Linton. 2000. “Stress on the Job: Self-Care
Resources for Counselors.” Journal of Mental Health Counseling 22 (4):
354 362.
References
29

Patrick, P. K. 2007. Contemporary Issues in Counseling. Boston: Allyn and
Bacon.
Sandoval, J., ed. 2002. Handbook of Crisis Counseling, Intervention, and Pre-
vention in the Schools, 2nd ed. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Seaward, B. L. 2005. Managing Stress: Principles and Strategies for Health
and Well-being. Sudbury, MA: Jones and Bartlett.
Segrin, C., and J. Flora. 2005. Family Communication. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Selye, H. 1980. Selye’s Guide to Stress Research. New York: Van Nostrand.
Selye, H. 1982. “History and Present Status of the Stress Concept.” In
Handbook of Stress, edited by L. Goldberger and S. Breznitz. New York:
Free Press.
Sexton, T. L., G. R. Weeks, and M. S. Robbins, eds. 2003. Handbook of Fam-
ily Therapy: The Science and Practice of Working with Families and Couples.
New York: Brunner-Routledge.
Smith, S. 2005. “Building a Strong and Resilient Family.” [Online article;
retrieved 8/11/07.] http://edis.ifas.ufl.edu/HE326#FOOTNOTE 2.
Snyder, C. R., ed. 2001. Coping with Stress: Effective People and Processes.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Stern, L. 1985. Off to a Great Start: How to Relax and Enjoy Your Baby. New
York: Free Press.
Stern, L. 1986. “How to Help Your Child Handle Stress.” Your Child’s
Health 8:20 21.
Turner, L. H., and R. L. West, eds. 2006. The Family Communication Source-
book. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Vangelisti, A. L., ed. 2004. Handbook of Family Communication. Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Walsh, F., ed. 2003. Normal Family Processes: Growing Diversity and Com-
plexity, 3rd ed. New York: Guilford Press.
White, J. M., and D. M. Klein. 2007. Family Theories, 3rd ed. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
30
Background and History

2
Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions
Introduction
As we learned in the last chapter, a family crisis occurs when
stress disrupts the stability of the household and causes disequi-
librium. When a system is in crisis, family resources or possibly
outside intervention is needed to weather the storm. Many fam-
ilies find strength in the face of adversity and recover within rel-
atively short periods of time. Other families, though, are unable
to repair the damage and experience a state of helplessness and
even hopelessness.
Family crises vary in intensity, duration, and severity, and
our task in the next two chapters is to better understand the
many sides to stressor events and the challenges they pose. In
this chapter, we examine a representative number of situational
and developmental crises: addiction, adolescent runaways, un-
employment, infidelity, divorce, chronic illness and disease, and
caring for aging parents. These crises alter family equilibrium,
but some form of control and confidence is usually restored. In
Chapter 3, our focus is on traumatic crises, overwhelming life
events that pose complicated coping and adjustment processes:
domestic violence, school violence, natural disasters, deployed
military families, and adolescent suicide. Here, the lives of sur-
vivors run the risk of never returning to normal—recovery is es-
pecially difficult and can take months, years, or sometimes an
entire lifetime.
31

This in no way means that the family crises covered in this
chapter are easily overcome or should be treated lightly. The
reader is reminded that families react differently to stressor
events and that any of the crises explored here bring the poten-
tial for more serious consequences and added stressors (e.g., di-
vorce unleashing self-destructive behaviors or caregiving for
aging parents bringing out the potential for elder abuse). Also, it
must be kept in mind that a family’s resiliency and recovery
hinge on its equilibrium at the time of the crisis. The family deal-
ing with multiple stressors is susceptible to even greater vulner-
ability and more extreme crisis reactions.
In this chapter and the next, background material on each
crisis is presented along with important terminology, implica-
tions for family life, and intervention efforts. Later chapters are
designed to complement the material in this section of the book,
such as notable historical events (Chapter 4) and contributions to
the study of family stress and crises (Chapter 5).
Addiction
Brian Southworth is a highly touted junior executive in a presti-
gious account firm in Boston. He is the husband of Jessica and fa-
ther of two elementary school-age children, Janna and Molly, and
lives in an affluent, upscale neighborhood in nearby Cambridge.
He is proud of his accomplishments and pleased with the way
his life has been unfolding.
Brian is also a problem drinker, although he did not know it
at first. His consumption of alcohol started innocently enough—
an occasional beer or cocktail with partners at the firm after work,
a glass of wine with Jessica, a beer or two watching the Red Sox
on the weekends. Soon, though, his drinking pattern changed.
Pressures from work and some marital friction with Jessica inten-
sified Brian’s thirst. He began having several drinks in the after-
noon, then a few more with dinner, a nightcap or two before
turning in. He became friendly with hangovers in the morning.
As his consumption increased, Brian rationalized that booze
was becoming his best friend, a means to help him relax and get
him through the day. He also convinced himself that he was only
hitting a small speed bump. But losing a huge account at work
and further squabbling with Jessica over financial matters did lit-
tle to still the waters. He started spending less time with his fam-
32
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

ily and more time pulling away. Brian was falling deeper and
deeper into a black hole.
It was only a matter of time before Brian’s tolerance increased,
the curtain of relief demanding a higher price. The bracers during
the day became more frequent, sometimes beginning early in the
morning. The glasses got bigger, trips to the liquor store more fre-
quent. Brian upgraded proofs for greater potency. He kept a wary
eye on the liquor cabinet so that he would not run dry, especially
on weekends.
Problem drinking creeps up on most people, with denial
often cloaking the damage and concealing the truth. Brian con-
vinced himself he was not a problem drinker and manufactured
lie after lie to justify his dependence. He told himself he had
every right to drink, that he deserved to imbibe, given the pres-
sures he was under. He continued to tell himself that his drink-
ing was temporary, and that he would cut back as soon as things
settled down.
These were fairly convincing rationalizations, but his behav-
iors painted a different portrait, a man clearly in trouble. He be-
came secretive and dishonest, doing whatever was necessary to
cover his tracks. He hid empties in the garbage, wrapping them
in separate plastic bags or newspapers, sometimes tossing them
in public trash bins to avoid detection. He lied to his wife about
cash withdrawals from the bank. He blamed hangovers on lin-
gering colds or other imagined illnesses.
Cutting back was easier said than done. Brian remembered
one particular morning being shocked at the amount of vodka he
had consumed the previous night. He told himself he needed to
get the upper hand. He refrained from drinking for a little while
and began to feel better, confident that he had regained control of
his life. Brian began brimming with optimism and was con-
vinced that he could have a glass of wine or a short cocktail at the
end of the day. Of course, this plan failed. He would have the one
drink and the cycle would start all over again.
Brian Southworth was fighting alcohol addiction, and with-
out proper treatment would no doubt lose the battle. An addic-
tion is defined as a dependence on a behavior or substance that
a person is powerless to stop. The dependence becomes a domi-
nant preoccupation in a person’s life. Beyond this preoccupation,
additional symptoms are shared by addicts like Brian South-
worth: loss of willpower and control, harmful consequences to
oneself and others, an unmanageable lifestyle, escalation of use,
Addiction
33

and withdrawal symptoms upon quitting. An addiction is also a
progressive syndrome, which means that it increases in severity
over time unless it is treated (Brown 2004; Center for Substance
Abuse Treatment 2004; Khantzian 2001).
As we will see, addictive behaviors also cause a wide range
of secondary stressors, including the breakdown of families. Al-
cohol addiction and domestic violence often go hand in hand,
with alcohol intensifying the abuser’s feelings of anger, aggres-
sion, and hostility (Bell et al. 2006; Kaysen et al. 2006; Wekerle
and Wall 2001). Also, children who grow up in surroundings
where drugs and alcohol are openly available and misused are
more at risk to succumbing to addictive patterns of behavior
(Russell 2007; Asenjo 2007). Figures 6.1, 6.2, and 6.3 in Chapter 6
provide a statistical glimpse at the use of illicit drugs in the
United States, including variations by gender.
At one time, the term addiction was used almost exclusively
for substance addiction, such as dependency on alcohol or co-
caine. Today, though, addiction also includes mood-altering be-
haviors or activities. This shift has led to the creation of two
addiction categories: substance addictions (e.g., alcoholism and
other forms of substance abuse) and process addictions (e.g., gam-
bling, Internet addiction). Millions of American families know
firsthand the headaches and heartaches of addiction, and mil-
lions of others are at risk. It is impossible within the parameters
of this chapter to discuss the many kinds of addiction that exist,
but the following brief statements may help illuminate the kinds
mentioned to highlight their magnitude.
Alcohol Addiction
Alcohol is a depressant of the central nervous system that, when
consumed in moderation, induces relaxation and eases inhibi-
tions. Responsible drinking is accepted in everyday life in most
societies around the world. In excessive amounts, though, alcohol
can severely impair judgment and coordination and create physi-
cal and psychological dependence. Alcohol addiction impairs
work performance as well as family equilibrium and has been
linked to liver damage, peptic ulcers, and other health problems.
Approximately 14 million people in the United States are ad-
dicted to alcohol, and millions more display symptoms of abuse,
including binge drinking (National Institute on Alcoholism and
Alcohol Abuse 2007; Russell 2007; Asenjo 2007). The reader is di-
34
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

rected to Chapter 6, especially Figures 6.4 and 6.5, for alcohol
abuse information. Table 6.1 in that chapter provides information
regarding substance abuse among the elderly population.
Gambling Addiction
This addiction, similar to all others, is characterized by a desire
to escape from reality and a distortion of normalcy. It is marked
by an increased preoccupation and obsession with gambling, re-
sulting in the destruction of a person’s life—family, work, and
friends. Gambling dominates the addict’s life and exerts pro-
found control, evidenced by an increasing desire to bet more
money frequently, even in the face of mounting serious conse-
quences. Denial typically clouds the addict’s ability to see dam-
ages inflicted on oneself and others. The National Institute of
Mental Health (2007) estimates that 4.2 million Americans are ad-
dicted to gambling. Of this total, 60 percent have annual incomes
under $25,000 (Black et al. 2006; Toneatto and Ferguson 2003;
Sellman et al. 2002; Hodgins, Makarchuk, and Peden 2002; Clarke
and Dempsey 2001; Petry 2000).
Internet Addiction
Once again, this addiction is characterized by a desire to escape
from daily life or personal problems. In this case, the anonymity of
the Internet provides the means for escape. It is estimated that
more than 85 million Americans are online, with that number ex-
pected to increase by 12 million in the next year. The latest studies
suggest that nearly 6 percent, or 11 million, online users suffer
from Internet addiction (Young 2007). Internet addiction refers to
excess use of the Internet that causes psychological, social, and
physical problems for the user. It includes a number of different ac-
tivities: chat rooms, online pornography, Internet gaming, or com-
pulsive surfing and data collection. The obsessive use of cell
phones and text messaging, known as contact addiction, is an ex-
tension of Internet addiction. In addition to creating family dishar-
mony, Internet addiction has the potential for creating a disregard
for health and appearance, sleep deprivation, and decreased phys-
ical activity and social interaction with others (Young 2007; Chou
and Belland 2005; Griffiths 2003; Shaffer 2002; Jones and Minatrea
2001; Oravec 2000). Particular concern has been directed to the
number of children and teenagers engaged in Internet use and
abuse (see Turner 2003).
Addiction
35

According to Asenjo (2007), all addictions are extremely
costly public health problems in the United States and cripple
millions of families. Addiction is a progressive disorder, which
means that it increases in severity over time unless successfully
treated. Addiction is characterized by frequent relapse, or return
to the abused substance or behavioral pattern. Addicts often
make repeated attempts to quit before they are successful.
The National Institute of Drug Abuse and Addiction (2007)
points out that many people incorrectly view addiction as strictly
a social problem. Parents, adolescents, older adults, and other
members of the community tend to characterize addicts as
morally weak or as having criminal tendencies. They believe that
addicts should be able to stop taking drugs or engaging in other
addictive behaviors if they are willing to change. These myths
have stereotyped not only those with addictive behaviors but
also their families, their communities, and the health care profes-
sionals who work with them. Addictions comprise a major pub-
lic health problem that has wide-ranging social consequences
(Dawson et al. 2005).
Implications for Family Life
People with addictions usually realize they are increasingly iso-
lated from their families. A growing body of literature suggests
that addictions have distinct effects on different family struc-
tures. We recognize today that the effects of substance abuse fre-
quently extend beyond the nuclear family. Extended family
members may experience feelings of embarrassment, resent-
ment, or fear, or they may wish to ignore or cut ties with the ad-
dict. This removal of social support is a good example of family
maladaptation discussed in Chapter 1.
According to the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Ser-
vices Administration (2004), various treatment issues surface de-
pending on the family structure that includes a person with an
addiction. The following family structures illustrate the com-
plexities that might arise:
• Client who lives alone or with a partner. Here, both
partners need help. The treatment of either partner often
affects both. When one partner experiences addiction
and the other does not, issues of codependency might
36
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

arise. Codependency refers to a relationship in which a
person exhibits too much, and often inappropriate, car-
ing for addicts who depend on him or her.
• Client who lives with a spouse (or partner) and minor
children. As pointed out earlier in the chapter, the endur-
ing effects of parental addiction on children suggest that a
parent’s problem often has a detrimental effect on young-
sters (see Andreas, O’Farrell, and Fals-Stewart 2006;
Chalder, Elgar, and Bennett 2006; Kroll 2004; Fitzgerald,
Lester, and Zuckerman 2000). The spouse of an addict is
apt to protect the children and assume the parenting du-
ties not fulfilled by the addict. If both parents are fighting
addictions, the effect on children worsens.
• Client who is part of a blended family. Blended families
pose special challenges under normal circumstances (see
Turner 2002), but an addiction can intensify problems
and become a threat to the family’s equilibrium. (A
blended family is a family that results when a divorced
parent with custody of children remarries.) Those offer-
ing help and assistance need to be aware of the familial
dynamics of blended families and recognize that special
considerations may be required.
• Older client who has grown children. An older adult
with an addiction can affect everyone in a household.
Additional family resources may be needed to treat the
older adult’s addiction.
• Client is an adolescent and lives with family of origin.
When a teenager is dealing with an addiction, siblings
in the family may find their needs and concerns are ig-
nored or minimized by parents or caregivers. In many
families that include adolescent addicts, at least one par-
ent also faces an addiction. This unfortunate modeling
can create a combination of potentially dangerous phys-
ical and emotional problems.
• Someone not identified as the client having an addiction.
When someone in the family other than the person with
presenting symptoms is involved with addictive behav-
iors, issues of blame, responsibility, and causation often
surface. The family needs to refrain from blaming but still
be encouraged to reveal and repair family interactions
that create the conditions for continued addiction.
Addiction
37

Approaches to Therapy
Addictive behaviors will not go away on their own. On the con-
trary, therapeutic intervention and the addict’s commitment to
change are needed to conquer such problems (Kesten 2004; Dee-
gan 2003; Lemanski 2001). The Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration (2004) acknowledges that the
dual forces of addiction treatment and family therapy are the
preferred paths to recovery.
The fields of addiction therapy and family therapy share
many commonalities, but they differ in ways that impact treat-
ment approaches and goals. Although treatment for an addiction
is generally more uniform in its approach than is family therapy,
overlap exists. We take a brief look at each.
Many addiction therapists base their understanding of a
family’s relation to an intoxicant on what is called the disease
model of addiction (see DiClemente 2003; Graham, Schulz, and
Wilford 2003; White, Boyle, and Loveland 2002; Heyman 2001).
For example, this is the stance taken by the American Medical
Association (AMA 2006). Alcoholism is viewed as a primary,
chronic disease with genetic, psychosocial, and environmental
factors influencing its development. The AMA maintains that no
cure exists for alcoholism, but effective treatments are available,
such as the social support offered by Alcoholics Anonymous and
Al-Anon.
Family therapists, on the other hand, utilize a family systems
approach to intervention (see Chapter 1). The systems model
conceptualizes addiction as a symptom of dysfunction within the
family. Addiction experienced by one family member affects all
components. It is this focus on the entire family system that de-
fines this type of therapeutic intervention.
But while different in focus, the fields of addiction treatment
and family therapy are compatible and complementary. For ex-
ample, while family therapists focus on intrafamily relationships,
addiction therapists concentrate on helping clients achieve and
maintain abstinence. Also, while addiction therapists see as their
primary goal arresting a client’s abuse, family therapists see the
family system as an integral component of the addiction. Finally,
addiction therapists regard the individual with the dependence
as the primary person requiring treatment. Family therapists, on
the other hand, might assume that if long-term change is to
occur, the entire family must be treated as a unit. In this sense, the
38
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

family as a whole constitutes the client (Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Administration 2004).
Adolescent Runaways
Kevin Gaston had been an abused child for as long as he could
remember. His stepfather would physically beat him, often with
his mother looking on. When Kevin turned 13, he packed what
few belongings he owned and snuck away in the middle of the
night. Despite extensive searches, he was never found.
Fourteen-year-old Maria Rodriguez stunned her parents and
neighbors alike when she left home unannounced and stayed
away for six days. When found, Maria said she had met someone
online six months ago while chatting on the Internet, a charming
young man she claimed she loved. When he asked her to run
away so that they could meet and spend time together, Maria felt
like it was a romance come true and left home the next day.
Paul Margolis, age 16, became a runaway when he decided
to “get away from all the hassles at home.” He did not get along
with his parents, had few friends, and hated school. Paul was
also bullied on a regular basis by a group of senior athletes,
adding to his desire to leave it all behind. He left his Connecticut
home in April and turned up six months later in California.
Each of these episodes involves a teenage runaway, defined
as a person under 18 who is away from home or place of legal
residence at least one night without the permission of parents,
guardians, or custodial authorities. The above incidents are
hardly remote occurrences. Indeed, the problem of teenage run-
aways has reached such magnitude in recent years that social sci-
entists are labeling it one of the key family life issues in the
United States today. According to the National Runaway Switch-
board (2006), between 1.3 and 2.8 million teenagers in the United
States run away or are forced out of parental homes each year.
When teenagers decide to run away, the emotions experi-
enced by parents are immense and, in many instances, beyond
description. Sleepless nights and endless days are spent worry-
ing about the health, safety, and welfare of their teenagers. Such
concerns are not only legitimate but also realistic. Many run-
aways end up working as prostitutes; others fall victim to drug
pushers and hardened criminals. Without adequate protection,
shelter, and food, runaways are prey not only to the dangers of
Adolescent Runaways
39

the street but also to a wide range of other risks: malnutrition,
emotional and conduct disorders, sexually transmitted diseases,
unwanted pregnancies, criminal behavior, substance abuse dis-
orders, and sexual and physical assault (Tyler and Johnson 2006;
Halcon and Lifson 2004; Van Leeuwen et al. 2004; Baer, Ginzler,
and Peterson 2003; McMorris et al. 2002; Tyler et al. 2000; Cauce
et al. 2000).
Characteristics of Runaways
Through the years, we have gathered a considerable amount of in-
formation on runaways. For example, we know that runaways
come from the full range of American families: white, black,
Latino, Native American, and Asian; single-parent and two-parent
households; and privileged, middle-class, working-class, low-
income, and homeless families. It is important to note that run-
aways do not always run away from “home.” Teenagers also run
from foster care, shelters, group homes, and residential treatment
facilities (Schaffner 1998).
Just as many females run away from home as males, although
females are more likely to seek help through shelters and hotlines.
The average age of a runaway is 14, but it is not unusual to see 11-
to 13-year-olds choosing to flee. One study (Whitbeck and Hoyt
1999) exploring age differentials involved more than 600 adoles-
cent runaways between the ages of 12 and 22 years. Both males
and females first ran at age 13.5 years. Very few ran prior to age 10.
The majority (80 percent) had run by 16 years of age. All were on
their own by age 19. Few differences were seen between adoles-
cent males and females throughout the years studied. The re-
searchers noted that the timing of the first runaway climbs very
steeply from about age 11 through 17 years, indicating that the
cycle often begins prior to becoming a teenager. It was also specu-
lated that the greater the number of family structural changes (e.g.,
divorce, separation) and geographic changes (changing resi-
dency), the earlier the first run.
Sometimes, adolescents run away from home because of
peer group pressure or because they are drawn to the glitter of a
big city. Some leave seeking fame and fortune; others wish to re-
join friends who had moved away. Still others choose to flee be-
cause they feel as though they have an “unshareable” problem,
such as not wanting to divulge a crime they have committed or,
in the case of females, an unintended pregnancy. For many
40
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

teenagers, running away is seen as a solution to their problems,
as they believe that no other options exist for them (Thompson
and Pillai 2006; Son 2002).
Sadly, some teenagers are throwaways, dubbed so because
their parents have encouraged—or told them—to leave home.
One source (National Runaway Switchboard 2006) found that
more than 50 percent of youth in shelters and on the streets re-
ported that their parents either told them to leave or knew they
were leaving but did not care. Such parents did not want their
adolescents to ever return, and some teenagers were even physi-
cally forced out of the home.
Most throwaway adolescents are likely older, usually be-
tween the ages of 15 and 17 years. At these ages, adolescents are
often more independent, tend to resist parental authority more
than during earlier years, are more likely to become involved in
activities that bring them into conflict with their caretakers, and
are often viewed by their caretakers as being capable of living on
their own. All these factors increase the likelihood of throwaway
episodes (RunawayTeens.org 2007).
Intervention for Teenage Runaways
Beyond family therapy, treatment programs for adolescent run-
aways often include individual or group therapy. Other inter-
ventions include community programming aimed at topics and
problems unique to adolescence, such as substance abuse, in-
appropriate sexual behavior, or strained parent-teenager rela-
tionships. Runaways often need help in developing effective
communication abilities, including assertiveness training and
conflict resolution skills. Self-esteem issues are also addressed.
Additionally, programming is directed at parents of teenage run-
aways, including school programs, conferences, training ses-
sions, literature, and support groups (Fest 2003).
Social service advocates generally acknowledge that more
voluntary agencies are needed to help adolescents around the
clock, as well as the establishment of central youth boards, the
creation of shelter homes, and the development of community
recreation facilities that are easily accessible to teenagers. Most
experts (e.g., Thompson and Pollio 2006; Van Leeuwen et al.
2004; Baker et al. 2003) advocate more federal funding to support
programs designed to combat the growing runaway problem.
Many feel that if federal funding does not keep pace with the
Adolescent Runaways
41

problem, needed assistance for runaways becomes unpre-
dictable. This means that the safety and welfare of our adolescent
population will succumb to institutional restraint.
The growing abundance of research that has been gathered
on teenage runaways is indicative of widespread societal concern
over this situational family crisis. The runaway problem is one
that has been with us for ages, whether it be in the form of the fic-
tional characters Huckleberry Finn, leaving his home to seek ad-
venture along the Mississippi River, or Dick Whittington, striking
out on his own to discover fortune in England. Yet today’s run-
aways, whose numbers are increasing dramatically each year, face
far more complications, hazards, and dangers than those choos-
ing similar routes years ago.
Parents must strive to openly communicate with their
teenagers and work on being able to detect problems before they
develop. If such efforts are effectively undertaken, perhaps we
can begin to curb this family crisis. More important, perhaps we
can convey to adolescents that staying at home to work through
problems or getting social service assistance in the community is
far more effective than running away from one’s problems. It is
the obligation of parents and guardians everywhere to convince
teenagers that, compared with striking out on one’s own at a
young age and facing the turmoil, insecurities, and threatening
conditions of the outside world, the home will always be the
source of love, care, and affection, especially during the chal-
lenges of the adolescent years.
Unemployment
Sharonda Beck was in shock when the news was delivered. An ac-
count executive and a single parent for eight years, Sharonda as-
sumed she would always have her job in corporate America. But
she found out last month that she was a casualty of downsizing
and learned firsthand the stark reality that no one is really assured
of job security during tough economic times. With her oldest
daughter a senior in high school and looking at colleges, and a son
in middle school, Sharonda suddenly found herself jobless.
Downsized. Laid off. Let go. Pink slipped. It does not matter
how you refer to it. Regardless of what a person does, no matter
what the job performance, he or she may someday find himself
42
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

or herself unexpectedly out of work, and that is just the begin-
ning. As Sari Harrar and Rita DeMaria (2006) observe, whether
you are downsized or flat-out fired, the financial stress and em-
barrassment of being unemployed, plus the anger, worry, and
lowered self-esteem that can go with it, can strain even the most
solid families. Money is tight. Household routines change. Ex-
pectations shift.
When unemployment hits home, the family is confronted by
a situational crisis. The primary stressor of unemployment creates
a variety of secondary stressors. The strain of being unemployed
is reflected not only through the financial challenges of paying
regular ongoing bills but also through increases in alcohol and
drug abuse, marital problems, and criminal activity among those
who are unemployed. Researchers have also found that lengthy
periods of unemployment can lead to depression, and even suici-
dal behavior. Many unemployed persons experience such symp-
toms as migraine headaches, high blood pressure, and stomach
ailments. Those working with the unemployed need to be sensi-
tive to the many consequences of job loss, including how it often
triggers financial desperation, negative self-appraisals, and phys-
iological complications (National Council on Economic Education
2008; Alleyne, Egodigwe, and Holmes 2004; Foston 2003).
Trends and Patterns of Unemployment
Numerous factors affect America’s rate of unemployment. For
example, an overabundance of workers in a selected career, in-
stability of the economy, automation, and the demise of old in-
dustries take their toll on unemployment rates. Technological
change, including a series of product and process innovations,
has and will continue to exert profound influences on the labor
force. Being affected the most are those factory workers having
limited job skills. In 2006, more than 7 million people were out of
work, nearly one in five jobless for more than six months (U.S.
Department of Labor 2008; Harrar and DeMaria 2006). (Table 6.2
in Chapter 6 charts projections of occupations with the largest job
declines from 2004 to 2014.)
According to the National Council on Economic Education
(2008), there are three types of unemployment, each of which de-
scribes the particular circumstances of the individual and his or
her employment situation.
Unemployment
43

Frictional Unemployment
Frictional unemployment refers to temporary unemployment
originating from the normal and routine job search process. This
type of unemployment helps the economy function more effi-
ciently, as it simply refers to those individuals who are in search
of better or more convenient jobs and those who are graduating
and just entering the job market. Some degree of frictional un-
employment exists in any economy.
Structural Unemployment
Structural unemployment refers to changes in the economy
caused by technological progress and shifts in the demand for
goods and services. Structural changes eliminate some jobs in
certain sectors of the economy and create new jobs in faster-
growing areas. Persons who are structurally unemployed do not
have marketable job skills and may face prolonged periods of un-
employment, as they must often be retrained or relocate in order
to find employment.
Cyclical Unemployment
Cyclical unemployment is unemployment caused by a drop in
economic activity. This type of unemployment can hit many dif-
ferent industries and is caused by a general downturn in the
business cycle.
Unemployment does not affect all segments of the popula-
tion equally. As of July 2007, the number of unemployed persons
in the United States stood at 7.1 million and the unemployment
rate was 4.6 percent. (The unemployment rate is the percentage
of the U.S. labor force that is unemployed. It is calculated by di-
viding the number of unemployed individuals by the sum of the
number of people unemployed and the number of people em-
ployed.) Rates are invariably higher among nonwhite segments
of the population. African American adults are about twice as
likely to be unemployed as white adults (8.5 percent and 4.0 per-
cent, respectively). The unemployment rate of Hispanics hovers
at 5.8 percent. Overall, minorities also have fewer job opportuni-
ties and lower levels of pay when they achieve employment, 
illustrating the inequality that exists between whites and non-
whites in the vocational arena. Teenagers are more apt to be un-
employed than any other population segment (U.S. Department
of Labor 2008; U.S. Census Bureau 2007; Gnuschke and 
Alvarado 2007).
44
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

As David Kessler (2007) sees it, losing a job is a personal loss.
It is not like losing a loved one, but similarities can be drawn. For
better or worse, in our society we tend to identify ourselves by
our jobs, and when one’s workplace is taken away, sadness and
emptiness are often felt. Many displaced workers go through a
grieving period, making it difficult for coworkers and friends to
find the right things to say. Telling displaced workers that it is not
their fault (which might or might not be true) or that they will re-
cover may seem logical, but it probably will not be helpful, at
least not in the early going. When someone has been wounded
this way and may have withdrawn from the people who are
close, being logical or trying to raise his or her spirits may be un-
welcome. The wounded party probably is not ready for these
words yet.
Implications for Family Life
In addition to managing the feelings that accompany unemploy-
ment, the displaced worker must also cope with managing his or
her family life. This can be highly stressful for everyone, espe-
cially as financial pressures mount. We remind the reader that the
family is a system, and all members of the family are affected by
a crisis such as job loss. Jeri Miller (2007) writes that unemploy-
ment brings the system a multitude of challenges, including day-
to-day issues and emotional ups and downs. She identifies some
of the major tasks at hand, as follows.
Financial Worries
Unemployment is a primary stressor and financial worries are a
secondary stressor. Even if the employed person has received a
severance package and unemployment compensation, concerns
about money create tension and financial instability. It is impor-
tant for couples to review their financial commitments and
spending priorities, which means they need to analyze their in-
come, assets, and liabilities. For some, this may mean worrying
less about image and lifestyle and focusing instead on managing
their money wisely.
Daily Routines and Domestic Duties
We established in Chapter 1 that a family crisis brings about a
disruption of routines, which in turn creates household instabil-
ity. If the unemployed person is conducting a job search from
Unemployment
45

home, domestic routines may be disturbed. Even if the other
spouse is working, getting in each other’s way is commonplace.
Unemployed professionals and their spouses must negotiate
other issues as well, such as the division of domestic labor. Many
partners believe the unemployed person is now available for all
kinds of tasks throughout the day, from chauffeuring to laundry.
Obviously, couples need to acknowledge the adjustments and ex-
pectations that must be made and be respectful and supportive
of each other.
Managing Emotions and Blame Issues
We mentioned earlier that the unemployed person experiences a
wide range of emotions: denial, anger, doubt, and even relief.
The family can be an important source of trust and support when
combating these feelings. More specifically, the unemployed per-
son needs to overcome obsessive thoughts, such as dwelling on
past choices and missed opportunities. It must be recognized,
too, that the unemployed person being blamed for a job loss by
one’s partner accomplishes nothing. If the partner of the unem-
ployed sees job loss as a reflection of his or her inadequacy, more
depression and hopelessness are likely. The family needs to rec-
ognize that blaming and criticism will not help a person regain
self-worth.
Changing Values
Unemployment can evoke a sense of relief, especially if the per-
son was not happy or was under extreme stress at work. The un-
employed person may enjoy the freedom to reexamine his or her
values, priorities, and career goals. However, if one’s partner is
not comfortable with the other’s changing values, the potential
for conflict arises. Some partners may feel the displaced worker
should just take a job to restore the household income. An unex-
pected change in career direction may also threaten or cause jeal-
ousy in one’s spouse.
Issues Involving Children and Teenagers
Many parents avoid telling children about a job loss for fear they
will worry or because the parent is embarrassed. However, chil-
dren can sense when something is wrong. If they feel parents are
not giving them important information, they may become mis-
trustful or feel that something is being hidden. Helene King
(2007) echoes this sentiment and adds that it is usually futile to
46
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

try to keep information from children. Without knowing the
source of adult unhappiness, a child might feel responsible for
the sadness or anger. It is important for all members of the fam-
ily to talk together and help each other while a parent is between
jobs. Children can be understanding and supportive when they
know they are not to blame.
In conclusion, a job loss does not have to damage or derail
family relationships. Some family systems actually grow stronger
because spouses learn how to support each other during a situa-
tional crisis such as this. Indeed, the family can be a source of
needed support and understanding during unemployment. The
key is being able to communicate and compromise with other fam-
ily members and face the practical and emotional issues sur-
rounding job loss. It is the resilient family that digs in its heels after
a pink slip is delivered, offering mutual support and understand-
ing while navigating the pitfalls of unemployment (Harrar and
DeMaria 2006). Robert Fetsch (2006) concurs with this assessment
and adds that one of the most important characteristics of resilient
families who cope well with unemployment is the meaning they
attach to the unemployment. When individuals and families see
unemployment as manageable, it becomes less stressful. The more
positive the meaning, the better people adapt to the change.
Infidelity
Another situational crisis warranting our attention in this chap-
ter is infidelity. Infidelity, also called adultery, an affair, or a non-
consensual extramarital relationship, is sexual activity with
another person without the consent of one’s spouse. There are
different types of affairs, depending on the form of involvement
and the escalation of the relationship. Of these, the isolated affair
is the most common. This relationship, often referred to as a
“one-night stand,” is defined as sexual activity without emo-
tional commitment or future involvement. The less common in-
tense affair is characterized not only by regular sexual activity but
also by emotional involvement with the partner and the escala-
tion of attachment.
Although estimates vary on how many men and women en-
gage in affairs, there is fair agreement that about 40 percent of
women and 60 percent of men have an affair at one time or an-
other. These figures may be on the low side, though, since some
Infidelity
47

respondents are probably reluctant to admit to such behavior. For
this reason, it is likely that affairs, initiated by either the husband
or wife—or both—occur in a majority of marriages (Peluso 2007;
Manette 2005).
What kinds of people are more likely to become involved in
a nonconsensual extramarital relationship? Although most peo-
ple who have affairs are somewhat dissatisfied, sexually and oth-
erwise, within their marriages, some of those who stray are
actually content with their spouses and their marriage. Still, mar-
ried people who have affairs have certain predictable qualities:
They tend to be liberated and also to have a high need for sexual
intimacy and a low level of emotional dependency on their mar-
riage partners (Peluso 2007; Spring and Spring 2005; Temple
2004; Mitchell 2001; Sponaugle 1989).
In recent years, incidences of affairs among women have
been growing. Cassandra Black (2007) points to a number of rea-
sons for this upswing. For example, the large number of working
women today must now take into account the social lives beyond
the confines of home. The job, business lunches, work-related
travel, and the Internet are all breeding grounds for infidelity in
a shaky marriage. Also, infidelity carries a lesser risk financially
than it did years ago. Many women make just as much or more
money than their spouses and do not depend on them for sur-
vival. And many women today are choosing to have children
later, or not at all, and do not have youngsters to consider if they
decide to test the waters outside of a stale marriage.
Interestingly, Black (2007) acknowledges that sex is often not
the driving force behind infidelity. Rather, many women seek to
fill emotional voids rather than sexual voids in their extramarital
relationships. If a wife does not feel valued or respected, or feels
taken for granted, she may turn to someone who can fill these
emotional craters and help her feel better about herself. In this re-
spect, unfaithful wives are sharing their bodies and, more im-
portant, their hearts.
Whether the affair is initiated by husband or wife, deceit and
dishonesty come to characterize the relationship. Excuses must
be fabricated to make up for absences and time away from home,
and sometimes to explain changes in mood or dress. Often, lies
must be spun to keep the affair out of sight, not only from one’s
partner and other loved ones but also from work associates and
even friends and acquaintances.
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Extramarital affairs clearly complicate people’s lives. Addi-
tionally, serious negative consequences result from affairs for the
couple’s children and family, the extramarital sex partner, and
that partner’s family. The consequences for the adulterous spouse
can be equally serious: the breaking of trust; guilt, anger, and re-
gret; lost respect and love; the disruption of a career and the loss
of reputation; sexually transmitted diseases; sexual conflicts and
dysfunctions; and sometimes even suicide or homicide. Such con-
sequences provide another good example of how a primary stres-
sor has the potential of unleashing multiple secondary stressors.
Online Infidelity: Cheating on the Internet
To say that the Internet has revolutionized the computer and com-
munications world would be an understatement. Designed in the
1960s as a network to link university and government researchers,
the Internet has become an information infrastructure that now
spans the globe and allows people to electronically interact with-
out regard for geographic location. Although originally a network
of technical communications, the Internet today provides a vari-
ety of services and activities, including electronic commerce, in-
formation access, communication, and entertainment (Borgman
2003; Gleick 2003; Neville 2002).
An extensive review of the literature (Hertlein and Piercy
2006) indicates that formulating a definition of Internet infidelity
is difficult, although one component constantly surfacing among
researchers is its secrecy. In cases of Internet infidelity, the un-
faithful spouse can carry on the relationship in secrecy by rapidly
closing chat windows being used, deleting transcripts, and purg-
ing e-mail boxes. In addition, what might appear as someone
typically working in his or her cubicle or on a home PC may ac-
tually be a spouse secretly engaging in online infidelity. Most re-
searchers also mention sexual chemistry in their definition of
Internet infidelity. That is, most participants feel sexual in a
medium that makes it relatively easy to flirt or share sexual fan-
tasies online. Internet affairs are often discovered because the
trace (or trail) of e-mails and chat room conversations is discov-
ered by suspicious partners.
Deborah Corley (2007) points out that online chatting or 
e-mailing can begin simply as a distraction from boredom or emo-
tional malcontent. Behaviors considered off limits in a face-to-face
Infidelity
49

situation with strangers are suddenly available through the pow-
ers of the Internet. Those persons seeking to connect with a po-
tential partner via the Internet can present themselves in any way
they choose and can omit information they do not want others to
know. What started innocently can easily move toward a real-life
emotional and/or physical extramarital affair. But even if the be-
havior never advances to meeting in person, many partners view
cyber-sex chatting and/or pornography viewing as a form of in-
fidelity, a threat to the marriage, and just as emotionally distress-
ing as a “live” affair. Notice how such perceptions of online
infidelity are a reflection of the third component of the Double
ABCX model, defining and attaching meaning to the family crisis.
Anthony Bradley (2006) believes that the anonymity pro-
vided by chat rooms allows users to share their intimate feelings
without becoming embarrassed. Initial chat conversations may
be fairly innocent, but when a partner receives a sympathetic re-
sponse from a fellow chatter, this response can translate into a
deep emotional attachment to him or her. The messages often
then become intensely personal and can lead to an online affair.
Even if it stays on a nonphysical plane, it can still be devastating
for a wife or husband to discover that a partner has been in-
dulging in emotional infidelity with someone who is relatively
unknown (Underwood and Findlay 2004). The initiator may be-
lieve that it is all harmless escapism and that he or she is doing
nothing wrong, but the spouse may feel a deep sense of betrayal,
knowing that one’s partner has been discussing intimate details
with a virtual stranger (Bradley 2006).
Thus, online relationships may not reach the legal definition
of infidelity, but they can lead to a breakdown of a marriage if not
kept in check. The injured spouse may feel a definite alienation
of affection, which is indeed grounds for a trial separation or
even divorce. Truly innocent chatting online with others who
share an interest or a hobby is clearly not infidelity, but the
amount of time spent away from a spouse in pursuit of those
chats can lead to serious intimacy issues (Pollick 2002).
Divorce
For Bill and Laura Tucker, it started out as a match made in
heaven. They fell in love in high school and dated steadily
throughout their formal schooling. Shortly thereafter, they mar-
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

ried and, in time, started their own family. Over the next 12 years,
the Tuckers brought up three children in what neighbors called a
happy and loving household. That is why it came as a total sur-
prise when Bill and Laura first filed for a legal separation and, six
months later, obtained a divorce.
The marriage of Darnell and Myisha Cummings did not even
last that long. The two conceived a child before they completed
high school and reluctantly agreed to get married. Without a high
school education, Darnell had to settle for tedious and low-paying
jobs while Myisha became a full-time teenage mother. Mounting
bills created financial pressure, which did not help the marital
strife that had begun to appear on a regular basis. As the conflicts
escalated, both Darnell and Myisha knew their relationship was
going nowhere. Within two years, they called it quits and obtained
a divorce. Darnell has since moved away, while Myisha—still in
her teens—has custody of their child.
The dissolution of a family by divorce can occur at any stage
of marriage and can be a major crisis for all its members. How-
ever, contrary to the thoughts of many, the divorce rate is declin-
ing in the United States. The divorce rate per thousand people
actually peaked in 1981 and has been moving downward ever
since. The divorce rate in 2004—3.7 divorces per thousand 
people—was at its lowest level since 1970 (see Table 6.3 in Chap-
ter 6). But it needs to be recognized that the number of people en-
tering marriage, as a proportion of the population, has also been
falling for the past 25 years. The current marriage rate in the
United States is at its lowest point in recorded history. Marriage
rates rose as the divorce rate rose, but reached an earlier peak in
1972 (U.S. Census Bureau 2007; Brentano 2007; Willis 2007; Mur-
phy 2007).
This trend prompts researchers like Andrew Cherlin (2005,
2004a, 2004b, 2003) to remark that marriage as an institution is
here to stay, but we need to acknowledge that its present form
differs from its past. This conclusion is due at least in part to
changes in marrying, divorcing, and remarrying. He observes
that a smaller proportion of families today than in the 1950s re-
semble the two-biological-parents-with-children family that has
been the norm in the United States. Rather, a larger proportion
consists of single parents and their children or families formed by
remarriage after divorce. The common assumption that a family
occupies one household is also increasingly incorrect. Although
separation and divorce sever the ties between father and mother,
Divorce
51

the ties between children and parents tend to remain intact (An-
drews 2007).
Because of these trends, an increasing number of families ex-
tend across two or three or more households, linked by the con-
tinuing ties between parents and children who live apart. Thus,
kinship ties are more complex and far reaching than in families
formed by first marriages. Also, even the definition of a family
can become problematic. For example, a child whose mother and
father have divorced and remarried may define the members of
his or her family differently from either of his or her parents.
It may well be, then, that how one views America’s divorce
rate depends on how one views the role of marriage and family
in society—this is how Leonard Cargan (Cargan 2007a, 2007b;
Cargan and Ballantine 2006) approaches the matter. Those who
view the nuclear family as the norm regard the U.S. divorce rate
as an indicator of the breakdown of the social structure and a
sign of moral decay. However, those who perceive marriage as a
choice for personal fulfillment may see the divorce increase as an
indication that this goal is being better met.
Cargan proposes that it is expectations, then, that determine
what is acceptable and desirable in marriage. As indicated above,
these expectations are changing toward an emphasis on self-
fulfillment, personal happiness, personal growth, and sexual sat-
isfaction. Couple this with our immense romantic expectations of
marriage, along with our lack of preparation for it, and it is not
surprising that few anticipate the conflicts that occur, not to men-
tion being ill-prepared to resolve them. It is thus conceivable that
many turn to divorce, not because they regard marriage so little,
but rather because they expect so much of it—affection, compan-
ionship, empathy, and self-actualization, to name but a few areas.
Implications for Family Life
Divorce is a difficult situational crisis to deal with largely because
couples and families must confront a number of diverse processes
and mentally taxing decisions. Internationally renowned family
studies researcher, therapist, and consultant Constance Ahrons
(Ahrons 2007, 2004a, 2004b, 2004c, 1998; Ahrons and Tanner 2003)
has supplied considerable insight into the family changes that ac-
company divorce. She regards divorce as a family transition that
consists of five stages. These five stages represent a process
through which family members acquire new roles and the family
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

itself takes on a new definition. Her stages represent an interest-
ing parallel to the four components of family crises captured by
the Double ABCX model discussed in Chapter 1.
Individual Cognition
During the individual cognition stage, there is an awareness
that something is wrong in the marital relationship. Individual
reactions vary in the early phases of this stage: blaming one’s
partner, anger, depression, or even denial of the problem. Any
resolution chosen at this stage depends on the couple’s history of
coping strategies. Some couples may decide to stay in the mar-
riage until the children are grown. Others may decide to spend
time and energy on interests outside the family while attempting
to maintain the facade of an intact marriage. This process of emo-
tional divorce, the withdrawal of emotional investment in the
marital relationship, is self-protective and may have some posi-
tive benefits for the individual. However, this withdrawal will
have implications for the entire family system.
How long this stage lasts hinges on the coping behaviors
used and other factors related to the family’s vulnerability to
stress. Equilibrium in the family is usually maintained, although
precariously, during this transition. Role patterns may remain
stable even in the midst of the growing family tension. Families
may deal with internal stress by assigning one member the role
of family scapegoat, and he or she is then blamed for any trouble.
Thus, the coping strategies families use to alleviate feelings about
the parents’ marital difficulties often elevate family stress in
other ways. Note the interplay here between primary and sec-
ondary stressors.
Family Metacognition
In the family metacognition stage, the entire family begins to re-
alize that the marriage is deteriorating, and the family system be-
gins to change in recognition of the problem. The problem is
typically discussed by the family and the dialogue often sums up
each member’s anxieties. This is also a time for potential solu-
tions and consequences of the problem to be discussed.
If the family has not demonstrated adequate and rational
problem solving in past crisis situations, it is not apt to do so at
this time, and for many families, this stage marks the time of
greatest disequilibrium. Wife and husband roles are fading, and
new ones (divorced coparents) have yet to develop. The future
Divorce
53

seems uncertain and ambiguous, and the family often searches
for role models. For example, old rules and rituals may be sought
by the family to preserve stability, but these usually fail to pro-
vide unity or comfort. Or children may begin to seek information
about divorce by looking for friends who have experienced this
crisis.
Separation
The third transition proposed by Ahrons is the separation stage.
During this stage, one parent moves out of the home and away
from the family. The family system is in a state of flux, and fam-
ily members often express more doubt in regard to family roles
and boundaries. For example, a youngster may wonder if his or
her parents are both still part of the family.
The typical separation involves the father moving out while
the mother and children remain as a system. Ahrons feels that the
mother-headed household faces a difficult situation—should it
reorganize and fill roles once enacted by the now absent father,
or should it maintain his psychological presence in the system by
not reorganizing? If the system attempts to reassign roles, the fa-
ther’s return is usually met with resistance. Or if they deal with
the father as psychologically present, they perpetuate family dis-
equilibrium characterized by the father’s intermittent exit and re-
turn. Referring back to the Double ABCX model of family crisis,
the system thus experiences imbalance and instability.
The family typically faces stress at this time, even if it has
successfully coped with earlier stages. However, it may not ex-
perience serious disruption if its coping strategies are successful.
Also during this transition, the family typically shares its marital
separation with extended family, friends, and the community as
it begins the tasks of the economic and legal divorce. Ahrons be-
lieves these mediating factors can help and/or hinder the transi-
tional process. The family typically encounters the legal system
now and faces secondary stressors in confronting the realities of
economic hardships (that is, splitting money, selling the home)
and child-focused issues of custody and care. All of these factors
may heighten the intensity of this situational crisis.
Family Reorganization
During earlier stages, the lack of clear boundaries caused much
of the family’s confusion and stress, but in the family reorgani-
zation stage, the clarification of boundaries itself creates distress.
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

One of the most stressful chores confronting divorcing par-
ents is that of redefining their coparental relationship, the rela-
tionship that permits them to continue their child-rearing
obligations and responsibilities after divorce. Ahrons takes this a
step further by saying this task requires them to separate their
spousal roles from their parental roles, terminating the former
while redefining the latter. This complex process of ceasing to be
husband and wife while still continuing to be mother and father
creates the foundation for divorced family reorganization.
For family adaptation to occur, divorcing spouses need to
form new rules to redefine their continued relationship. For ex-
ample, the divorced family needs to develop new structural rules
that will guide its patterns of transactions (who relates to whom,
when, and under what conditions). This type of arrangement can
help clarify responsibilities and, by eliminating possible dis-
agreements, minimize conflict between ex-spouses. Such rules
are also critical to the child’s understanding and to the stabiliza-
tion of his or her relationship with each parent. How divorced
parents define the ways in which they will share parenting can be
critical to the child’s psychological adjustment. Without a clear
understanding of the relational rules, the child may become a
victim in unresolved spousal or parental conflicts, yet another
secondary stressor (Steadman 2007; Bailey 2007; Hansen 2007).
Family Redefinition
Ahrons feels that the outcome of the family redefinition stage
depends on the relationship between the divorced parents. Al-
though a continued and cooperative relationship between di-
vorced parents reduces the crisis potential associated with
divorce, its dynamics remain largely unexplored. As already in-
dicated, the growing debate about custody rights reveals the gen-
eral lack of knowledge about the time-honored concept “best
interests of the child” and brings the custom of sole custody into
serious question. Shared custody and coparenting represent an
alternative and would thus play a role in family redefinition.
A major feature of the redefinitional process appears to be the
parents’ ability to maintain a child-centered relationship. For some
this includes maintaining a continuing friendship. For others,
though, the relationship becomes less intimate and more task ori-
ented. Finally, components of this stage include the processes of re-
marriage and the introduction of stepparents into the postdivorce
family, situations requiring further adjustments and adaptations. It
Divorce
55

is beyond the scope of this chapter to explore the dynamics of re-
marriages and blended families, although in Chapter 6, various
trends and statistics are made available to the reader.
To sum up, the research of Ahrons enables us to see the in-
dividual and family factors involved in divorce. None of her
identified processes or transitions exist in a vacuum, though, nor
are they independent or mutually exclusive of one another. Also,
since reactions to divorce are highly individualized, variations of
the identified stages are more than likely. They should not be
taken as precise and rigid blueprints that everyone follows.
Nonetheless, her theory is useful in helping us to understand the
changes that people face when negotiating this painful situa-
tional crisis. Her theory also succeeds in capturing how divorce
represents a complex and multifaceted experience.
Effects of Divorce on Children
One and one half million of our nation’s children—about 20 
percent—will experience the divorce of their parents this year.
Often, these children suffer needlessly when their parents at-
tempt to punish each other. Some children feel personally re-
sponsible for the divorce. Many are persuaded to take sides by
their parents. Others may bear the brunt of displaced parental
aggression. Coping with the divorce may also spill over to other
aspects of the child’s life and create additional problems, such as
in schoolwork. And children may exhibit a wide range of emo-
tional reactions, such as anger, sadness, irritability, distractibility,
and rejection (Baksh and Murphy 2007; Grabenstein 2007).
One of the most extensive and comprehensive investigations
focusing on the effects of divorce on children was undertaken by
Judith Wallerstein and a team of researchers (Wallerstein, Lewis,
and Blakeslee 2000). Wallerstein, who launched her research in
1971, identified and tracked the lives of 60 families in which the
parents had separated and filed for divorce in California. Over
the course of time, Wallerstein and her colleagues discovered
that the children of divorce—now in their twenties, thirties, and
forties—still suffer from the fallout of their parents’ split. Many
of the adult children reported fears of betrayal, feelings of pow-
erlessness, unrealistic ideas about love and partnership, and shy-
ing away from intimacy altogether.
It should be pointed out, though, that many children of di-
vorce show remarkable resiliency in the face of domestic turmoil.
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Resiliency as a response to divorce tends to be enhanced by open
and honest family communication, not placing the blame on the
child and not trapping the child in the middle of a divorce cross-
fire. Resilient children also tend to have access to a meaningful
support system, such as the presence and reassurance of other
family members, friends, and teachers (Smoke 2007; Baksh and
Murphy 2007).
Chronic Disease and Illness
First comes the shock: emergency treatment for a stroke or heart
attack, for example. Or perhaps it is the diagnosis and treatment
of cancer. Or test results that reveal the presence of a chronic
medical condition that will be with the person and the family for-
ever, such as chronic pain, diabetes, or arthritis. Next comes the
long haul. When a health condition travels home with a patient
from the hospital or the doctor’s office, it takes up residence in
the family bedroom and kitchen, on the family calendar and in
everyone’s daily lives, and in everyone’s heart and mind. The
script of the family system has been changed: money, work,
fun—they are all different now. Family members discover that
managing the way an illness impacts the system is just as impor-
tant as keeping up with medications and doctor’s appointments
and treatments. Compounding matters is the fact that most
chronic illnesses today are not short-term; they are processes that
go on and on (Harrar and DeMaria 2006).
Good health is something that many of us simply take for
granted. We often feel that we are immune and invincible,
cloaked in a suit of armor that protects us from conditions threat-
ening our health and well-being. Indeed, we never fully appreci-
ate our health until we have to face the fact that we have a
condition or illness that will not go away (Conway 2007; Davis
2007). For a statistical analysis of chronic health conditions in the
United States among the young as well as the old, we direct the
reader to Chapter 6 and Figures 6.6, 6.7, 6.8, and 6.9.
We need to be reminded that we are mortal beings and that
we live in a world marked by potential risk and accident. One
false step on a staircase, a heart attack, or an automobile accident
can forever change our lives. Whether it be a baby born into the
family with a developmental illness or a marriage partner con-
tracting cancer, challenging health conditions such as these often
Chronic Disease and Illness
57

make family members dependent on others for the simplest tasks
and alter family dynamics. The most pressing issue is whether
the family system can regain equilibrium in the wake of instabil-
ity and strain (Szinovacz 2007; Wills 2007; Bouvard 2007).
In this section, we focus on physical disability and chronic
illness and the impact they usually have on the person and the
family. We do so because of the widespread nature of these health
conditions in the United States, the special challenges that af-
flicted persons must face, and the various family adjustments
that usually have to be made. Regarding the last point, disabili-
ties and chronic illnesses exert an influence on the system in a
wide range of interactions, such as work-family dynamics, par-
ent-child relations, sibling interactions, and caring for elderly
parents. We also include the topics of disabilities and chronic ill-
nesses because of the huge challenges they pose for individuals,
health care professionals, and policy makers.
Before exploring the manner in which physical disability and
chronic illness impact family life, the terms physical disability and
chronic illness need to be clarified. A physical disability, such as
cerebral palsy or a spinal cord injury, is an impairment of body
structure and function, including mobility impairments, amputa-
tions, skeletal deformities, and disfigurements. An individual is
considered to have a disability if he or she has difficulty executing
certain activities (e.g., talking, walking, seeing, hearing), has diffi-
culty performing activities of daily living (e.g., bathing, toileting,
eating), or has difficulty with certain social roles (e.g., working at
a job). An individual who is unable to execute one or more activ-
ities, who uses an assistive device to move from location to loca-
tion, or who needs assistance from another individual to execute
basic activities is considered to have a severe disability.
Disabilities are widespread in the United States. An estimated
one in five Americans has some kind of disability, a proportion
translating into an estimated 50 million noninstitutionalized per-
sons. About 1 in 10 Americans has a severe disability, which ac-
counts for approximately 24 million persons. And with the
population aging and the likelihood of having a disability increas-
ing with age, the growth in the number of individuals with dis-
abilities is expected to accelerate in the future. Currently, about one
in two seniors 65 years of age and older has a physical disability
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Merck Foun-
dation 2007; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
2007).
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Improved medical care and prevention efforts have con-
tributed to dramatic increases in life expectancy in the United
States during the past century. However, they also have pro-
duced a major shift in the leading causes of death for all age
groups, including older adults, from infectious diseases and
acute illnesses to chronic diseases and degenerative illnesses. In
2002, the top three causes of death for U.S. adults age 65 or older
were heart disease (32 percent of all deaths), cancer (22 percent),
and stroke (8 percent). These causes accounted for 61 percent of
all deaths in this age group (Centers for Disease Control and Pre-
vention and the Merck Foundation 2007).
Achronic illness, such as diabetes or arthritis, is a progressive
disorder caused by a nonreversible condition that often leaves the
person with some type of disability. Chronic illness is thus a long-
term or permanent condition, one that often results in the need for
rehabilitation or continuous care. Although chronic illness cannot
be cured, it can often be controlled by carefully following dietary,
exercise, and medication regimens. More than 90 million Ameri-
cans are estimated to live with chronic illnesses; of this figure,
about 57 million have two or more chronic diseases. Currently,
more than two-thirds of health care costs are spent treating chronic
illnesses; among older Americans, almost 95 percent of health care
expenditures are for chronic diseases. The cost of providing health
care for one person age 65 or older is three to five times greater
than the cost for someone younger than 65 (Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention and the Merck Foundation 2007; U.S. De-
partment of Health and Human Services 2007).
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(2007), chronic diseases—such as heart disease, cancer, and 
diabetes—are the leading causes of death and disability in the
United States. Chronic diseases account for 70 percent of all deaths
in the United States, which is 1.7 million each year. These diseases
also cause major limitations in daily living for almost 1 out of 10
Americans, or about 25 million people. Although chronic diseases
are among the most common and costly health problems, they are
also among the most preventable. Adopting healthy behaviors
such as eating nutritious foods, being physically active, and avoid-
ing tobacco use can prevent or control the devastating effects of
these diseases.
While advancing age increases the risk of contracting both a
physical disability and chronic illness, racial disparities also need
to be considered. The health status of racial and ethnic minorities
Chronic Disease and Illness
59

of all ages lags far behind that of nonminority populations. For a
variety of reasons, older minority adults may experience the ef-
fects of health disparities more dramatically than any other pop-
ulation group. First, older adults are more likely to have chronic
illness and require frequent contact with the health care system.
Second, many live in poverty, making access to health care a chal-
lenge. The care of older adults who are chronically ill, poor, and
members of an ethnic community is an increasingly urgent
health priority (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and
the Merck Foundation 2007; U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services 2007).
It is beyond the scope and focus of this book to present a de-
scriptive, medically oriented discussion on the chronic illnesses
and diseases that exist today. Rather, our efforts will continue to
focus on how stressor events impact family life. The reader seek-
ing more information is directed to Martz and Livneh (2007), Na-
telson (2007), Thomas (2007), Schwartz (2007), Schulz (2006), and
Putnam (2006).
Implications for Family Life
Whether being born with a lifelong disability such as cerebral
palsy or being afflicted in midlife with cardiovascular disease,
adjusting to a long-term health impairment is difficult for the
person as well as the family system. We must continually remind
ourselves of the interplay that exists between the two. Although
the afflicted individual certainly shoulders the burden of the ill-
ness, the family system is also influenced by the changes in the
health of a loved one. The resulting interaction can be found at all
stages of the family life cycle.
Although disabilities and chronic illnesses are considered
separate medical conditions, they do share certain characteristics.
For example, both are usually permanent conditions that pose an
assortment of limitations. Both can dramatically alter a person’s
life. Also, a physical disability can create a chronic illness and
vice versa.
As indicated above, chronic disease and illness influences
the lives of everyone in the family system. The demands of care-
giving must be negotiated and stress levels addressed. Family
members’ emotions may be on a continuous roller-coaster ride.
Sacrifices need to be made, and the workload of caregiving seems
never-ending. On the other hand, families may come together
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

and grow closer, bolstering their resiliency. Their lives may take
on new meaning. They may find rewards they had not expected
on their journey through illness. The only certain thing is that
chronic illness is a family experience, one that is shared by the en-
tire family system (Seaburn 2001).
In addition to playing a vital role in reducing the discomfort
of the chronically ill and disabled, the family can do much to help
the chronically ill maintain a sense of dignity and self-worth. As
we discovered in Chapter 1, the family can draw from existing
and expanded resources to weather this situational crisis. The
most resilient chronically ill are those who have strong support
from within and who communicate effectively with those who
care. Regarding the latter, it is not uncommon for the chronically
ill to pull away, even from family members. Many do not seek the
company of others, let alone ask for help. Experts agree that
working through one’s feelings with others helps to combat the
loneliness that is prevalent following the early stages of a pro-
longed illness.
Open and clear communication is especially important as
family roles and responsibilities change with the illness. Rela-
tives outside the immediate family or friends may be so uncom-
fortable with the situation that they may deny the illness. They
may feel overwhelmed and cut off communication at a time
when they really need each other’s support. If the strains are too
great, a family member might shut down, feeling hopeless, iso-
lated, and trapped. Sometimes relatives fret over minor issues
while holding back painful news, angry feelings, or resentments
(ElderCare Advocates 2007; Bumagin 2006; Burbank 2006).
Family caregivers also need to get in touch with their own in-
securities and fears (e.g., loss of income, loss of a spouse or par-
ent, death of a loved one). By doing so, they are less likely to
express them inappropriately or take them out on others. The
stressor of chronic illness will likely produce a wide variety of sec-
ondary stressors. For example, parents usually express a variety
of reactions when they learn that their child is health impaired:
shock, denial, sadness, fear, and anger. Many parents also believe
that the child’s disability was their fault. Some reason that the dis-
ability is punishment for a sin or wrongdoing. The extra care and
special accommodations often required by health-impaired fam-
ily members often alters how parents and siblings interact with
the person, as well as with one another. The difficulty of living
normally while relating to and caring for a disabled person often
Chronic Disease and Illness
61

unleashes anxiety, confusion, and despair. Even the most compe-
tent and balanced family units can feel overwhelmed. Yet parents
and siblings usually adjust to the reality of the disability in di-
verse and unique ways and establish family equilibrium. Indeed,
many families discover that living with a health-impaired person
promotes family cohesion and resiliency (Jackson 2001).
As this section winds down, a few concluding comments are
in order. Millions of Americans, young and old, are limited in
their daily functioning because of a chronic mental health or
physical health condition. According to David Seaburn (2001),
for the vast majority of these individuals, family is their first line
of health care. Whether the family member is a child with cystic
fibrosis, an adolescent with diabetes, a parent with multiple scle-
rosis, or a grandparent with Alzheimer’s disease, it is the family,
first and foremost, that cares for an ill loved one.
Caring for Aging Family Members
Eighty-three-year-old Marion Thorpe lost her husband 10 years
ago and has been living with her son Bob ever since. A number of
factors prompted the move, including lingering depression from
her loss and financial hardships. Although Marion remains in
fairly good health, Bob and his wife, Christine, must prepare her
meals every day as well as tend to an assortment of her personal
needs.
A medical crisis within the family changed the lives of
Roberta and Frank Cummings. Tests revealed that Roberta’s 78-
year-old father, Carl, was in the early stages of Alzheimer’s dis-
ease. Because he was living alone and needed day-to-day
assistance, Carl moved in with his daughter shortly after the
prognosis was made. This move postponed institutional care,
something the entire family wanted to avoid for as long as possi-
ble. In the meantime, Carl receives medical attention each week
while Roberta and Frank provide as much loving care as possible.
For Carla Davidson, a middle-aged tax accountant, the plan
needing to be implemented was an obvious one. Her elderly par-
ents still lived independently in their own home, but they were
finding daily chores increasingly difficult. The oldest of three
children and the one living nearest to her parents, Carla took it
upon herself to provide the needed assistance. She regularly vis-
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

its her parents during the week and on Saturdays and faithfully
tends to the cleaning and laundering.
These scenarios are illustrative of the growing numbers of
adult children caring for their aging parents, an example of a de-
velopmental or normative family crisis. Among adults over age
50, more than 1 in 10 is providing assistance with basic everyday
activities to his or her parent(s). Such assistance includes provid-
ing direct physical and medical care to parents every day and
tending to daily living needs, including financial support, house-
hold chores, shopping, and transportation.
All indicators suggest that such involvement will increase in
the years to come. Projections show that a larger proportion of
adult children are likely to become caregivers as the 65 years and
over population continues to grow at a faster rate than the popu-
lation under age 65. The growth in the number and proportion of
older adults is unprecedented in the history of the United States.
Two factors—longer life spans and aging baby boomers—will
combine to double the population of Americans age 65 and older
during the next 25 years. By 2030, 71 million older adult Ameri-
cans will account for roughly 20 percent of the U.S. population
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Merck
Foundation 2007; Center on an Aging Society 2005; Szinovacz
2007; U.S. Census Bureau 2006). See Figure 6.10 for projections of
the elderly population.
The majority of today’s caregivers are female. Women are
the primary caregivers of young children, and as our society
ages, an increasing number will find themselves back on this job
for their parents. Women are presumed to be responsible for the
well-being of their family members. Until quite recently, the care
and well-being of the family was the only occupation of a large
percentage of women in the United States. For those who also
worked outside the home, including many lower-income
women, family caregiving was an additional responsibility (Szi-
novacz 2007).
However, the numbers of male caregivers today are grow-
ing. This trend is already occurring for spouses, but we may even
see more sons begin to help caregiving daughters and daughters-
in-law in the care of elderly parents. Also, the gender differences
in caregiving for others, which have been pronounced in the
child-raising years because of occupational and family struc-
tures, do not seem as prevalent in the later years with retirement.
Caring for Aging Family Members
63

Large differences are not found between male and female care-
givers in the later years. Whether the number of younger male care-
givers will increase and whether younger male and female
caregivers will adapt similarly to their caregiving remain uncertain.
In analyzing patterns of female intergenerational care, Mar-
cia Ory (2006, 1985) believes that certain demographic and social
trends will affect the quantity and quality of services rendered.
For example, she believes that changing gender roles, coupled
with increased labor force participation among middle-aged
women, may place an additional burden on already strained fam-
ily resources. Further, an important question to ask is whether as-
sistance to the aged will decline as more women enter the
workplace. Women traditionally have spent many hours in sup-
port of the aged in their families and in their communities. With
escalating proportions of females in the labor force, assistance
may not be as readily available in the future.
The fact that we are living longer than ever before means
that a new wrinkle in caregiving patterns will become evident:
the old helping the old. Indeed, in years to come we will see the
existence of more four- and five-generation families. This trend
means that older impaired parents needing assistance will be get-
ting it from their offspring, who are themselves aging. In this
fashion, it will become increasingly common for 85-year-old par-
ents to be cared for by their 60-year-old children (Schaie 2007;
Moody 2006; Gibson 2002). See Chapter 6 (Table 6.4 and Figure
6.11) for more information on the elderly population.
The notion that most younger generations want to help their
aging parents was borne out in the research of Elaine Brody (2006).
Exploring intergenerational attitudes about familial closeness and
care, she found that young women in particular were just as com-
mitted to caring for aged relatives as were their middle-aged
mothers and their grandparents. Most of the women she studied
also reported that they sincerely wanted to care for aging family
members, not because they were obliged to do so nor because it
was their “duty.” In addition, aging parents reported that they
wanted to be cared for by their offspring if it was at all possible for
their children.
But not all adult children have the flexibility to provide ex-
tensive care. For example, many adult children have to settle for
less intensive involvement because of family and/or vocational
obligations, or the presence of a personal crisis. Along these lines,
little research has been conducted on the impact of an adult
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

child’s divorce on the relationship with elderly parents; clearly,
however, a loss of a spouse with his or her attendant pressures
may cause such a drain on the divorced child’s resources and
available time that the child may never be able to establish a solid
basis from which to provide affectional and supportive relation-
ships to elderly parents. Thus, the stressor of caring for aging
parents might be compounded by a pileup of other pressures and
strains.
Implications for Family Life
The care of aging parents brings many changes, including ones
affecting the underlying family system. Often, the assistance re-
ceived prompts parents to reflect on the past while looking ahead
to the future, causing many to rethink earlier relationships. Many
experts (e.g., Haber 2007; Bumagin 2006) point out that most
family relations prior to the point at which they are in need of as-
sistance are characterized by regular contact, affection, and a de-
sire to help in time of need. But when the obligation and/or need
to help becomes the dominant element in the family system,
trouble often brews. Problems may even begin when actual aid
enters into the relationship because it has the potential for weak-
ening the enjoyable aspects of it. Thus, realignment of care from
the parent to the offspring may create problems because it repre-
sents something that neither system is accustomed to.
Caregiving brings other adjustment challenges and de-
mands. Today, the typical caregiver is middle aged and often
caught in what has been called the “sandwich” or “squeeze” gen-
eration. That is, they have their aging parents on one end of the
generational cycle, their children on the other, and themselves in
the middle. As a result of this squeeze, middle-agers frequently
face growing pressures as they simultaneously cope with the
needs of their aging parents and their offspring (Bumagin 2006).
This is a good example of two developmental crises colliding—
one family at midlife and the other experiencing the later life
transition.
Couples at midlife are also typically confronted with com-
peting role responsibilities and time demands. The rigors of pro-
viding regular care while maintaining one’s own household are
physically and psychologically exhausting. The loss of personal
freedom, the lack of time for social and recreational activities,
and other restrictions are often part of the sacrifices to be made.
Caring for Aging Family Members
65

The pressures become more intense when the female caregiver,
who traditionally shoulders most of the work, is employed out-
side of the home (Prieto 2008; Haber 2007; Bumagin, 2006). 
The Dark Side of Caregiving: Elder Abuse
The often unrelenting rigors and demands of caregiving have
been known to produce a dark side to intergenerational care:
abuse of the elderly. Researchers (e.g., Schimer 2005; Matthews
2004; Carp 2000) report that the abuse of the elderly takes many
forms, including neglect, verbal and emotional abuse, physical
assault, and financial exploitation. As many as 1 million aged
Americans are estimated to suffer maltreatment each year, and
this figure is expected to rise in years to come.
The abuser of an elderly person is likely to be a parent’s 
middle-aged caregiver, often the daughter. Robert Pierce and
Rosilee Trotta (1986) write that the female caregiver often is ex-
periencing some kind of personal crisis, such as alcohol or drug
addiction, illness, or financial problems. The combination of per-
sonal crisis coupled with the new task of caring for an aged par-
ent often creates a situation that increases the likelihood of abuse.
As we have seen throughout this chapter, the pileup of demands
or prior strains complicates the family crisis and creates consid-
erable disequilibrium.
Other researchers (e.g., Nerenberg 2007) write that abusers
are typically normal persons who are encountering escalating
stress levels. For middle-aged female caregivers, such stress may
accompany their traditional nurturing role. They most likely start
caring for an elderly parent at the time when their own teenagers
are beginning to leave home. Being placed back into a nurturing
role, just when it is expected that this responsibility is finished,
may prove overwhelming.
A persistent theme in the literature (e.g., Nerenberg 2007;
Brandl 2006; Ambrogi and London 1985) is that pressured care-
givers often face a workload without relief. They point out that a
dependent, frail elder often requires constant, physically and
emotionally demanding care. Caregivers may have to get up sev-
eral times during the night to take the elder to the toilet to man-
age incontinence, thus interrupting their own needed sleep. And
if the elder has had a stroke and is severely disabled, the care-
giver may have to bathe, dress, and feed the elder. All of this
drains precious coping resources and adds to the disequilibrium.
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Despite caregivers’ good intentions, many cannot easily meet the
long-term demands of frail elders.
Gerontologists (e.g., Dell Orto 2007; Putnam 2006) tell us that
for many caregivers, certain parts of assistance often prove more
burdensome than others. For example, for some it is not the degree
of physical impairment of the person being cared for, or even cog-
nitive impairment, but rather changes in the elder’s behavior.
More specifically, personality changes that lead to unresponsive-
ness or unpredictability or to changes in past relationships often
create caregivers’ depression. Also, inconvenience in living
arrangements—such as parents moving into children’s homes or
children moving into parents’ homes—creates disequilibrium.
Caregiving Support and Assistance
In recent years, attention has been directed toward the needs of
adult caregivers. A number of support groups have been estab-
lished to help adult children better handle the pressures of caring
for aging parents, including abusive tendencies. Such support
groups have proven valuable in terms of providing resources and
referrals, companionship, guidance, education, and reassurance
(Gelfand 2006; AARP Public Policy Institute 2005; Gartska, Mc-
Callion, and Toseland 2001). The reader is directed to Chapter 7,
which provides a comprehensive listing of caregiving support
groups.
Whether sharing a residence or tending to the needs of the
elderly on a visitation basis, caregivers must reckon with the fi-
nancial burden. The material support of an aging parent is an ex-
pensive venture, be it the amount of time given or actual dollars
expended. The cash value of services performed by families far
exceeds the combined cost of government and professional ser-
vices to both elderly living in the community and those living in
institutions. Experts (e.g., Feinberg and Newman 2004; Goodman
et al. 2004; Skocpol 2000; Wisendale 2001) agree that policy mak-
ers need to pay more attention to the financial drain posed by
caregiving.
Unfortunately, most people are not aware of how expensive
caregiving is or how little coverage exists until the crisis hits.
Medical costs at hospitals and nursing homes have increased
dramatically, resulting in depletion of Medicare and Medicaid
funds (Connell, Janevic, and Gallant 2001; Hudson and Gonyea
2000). If no one is at home to care for the elderly parent, services
Caring for Aging Family Members
67

must be paid for from someone’s pocket. Obviously, the continu-
ing care for a loved one represents a very expensive venture
(Roog et al. 2004; Simon-Rusinowitz et al. 2005).
The complexities attached to caregiving mean that adult
children need to seriously address the issue of who is going to be
the primary caregiver. Planning in advance is the key. When an
aged parent is stricken with an illness or faces acute financial
hardship, it is often too late to do the most effective planning. The
time to work out financial and legal considerations possibly lurk-
ing ahead is before they occur, when parents are optimally healthy
and content with their lives (Brodie and Gadling-Cole 2003).
Family discussions should take place repeatedly over the
years. Nothing has to be decided definitively after the first con-
versation, since most strategies and decisions need to evolve.
Family members usually need time to think about matters and
refine their own particular ideas.
Family discussions and advance planning need not be re-
stricted to finances, either. Honest, open discussions are needed
about all aspects of family life. When this is done in productive
and healthy ways, an assortment of parents’ plans and wishes
usually unfolds. Better yet, difficult situations in later years can
be eased, since a well-informed adult child is in the best position
to ensure that parents’ best interests are protected and caregiving
stress is kept at manageable levels (Hooyman and Kiyak 2008;
Bumagin 2006; Brodie and Gadling-Cole 2003).
Summary
This chapter illustrates how family crises come in all shapes and
sizes. Generally speaking, a crisis is a period of stress that has the
potential for disrupting routines and sometimes causing over-
whelming feelings of disequilibrium. Separate sections in the
chapter explored situational crises (addiction, adolescent runaways,
unemployment, infidelity, divorce, and chronic illness and dis-
ease) and developmental crises (caring for aging parents). Regardless
of the crisis category, change in one part of the system creates a rip-
ple effect and impacts other parts of the system.
A deliberate effort is made in this chapter to show how crises
create many implications for family life, especially the lives of
children. How the family perceives the stressor, its current state
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

in terms of equilibrium or disequilibrium, and its previous expe-
rience in handling crises are critical factors in recovery. In the
wake of stress and disequilibrium, many families benefit from
outside intervention for support and assistance. Intervention ef-
forts seek to employ the family’s strengths and resources to help
the unit regain stability. Therapy typically utilizes a systems ap-
proach, aimed at the individual within the context of the family,
or within a support group setting.
References
AARP Public Policy Institute. 2005. Family Caregiver Support Services:
Sustaining Unpaid Family and Friends in a Time of Public Fiscal Restraint.
Washington, DC: AARP Public Policy Institute.
Ahrons, C. R. 1998. The Good Divorce: Keeping Your Family Together when
Your Marriage Comes Apart, 2nd ed. New York: HarperCollins.
Ahrons, C. R. 2004a. We’re Still Family: What Grown Children Have to Say
About Their Parents’ Divorce. New York: HarperCollins.
Ahrons, C. R. 2004b. “What Grown Children Have to Say about Their
Parents’ Divorce.” Children’s Legal Rights Journal 24:48 56.
Ahrons, C. R. 2004c. “Divorce: An Unscheduled Life Cycle Transition.”
In The Family Life Cycle, 3rd ed., edited by B. Carter and M. McGoldrick.
New York: Allyn and Bacon.
Ahrons, C. R. 2007. “Family Ties after Divorce: Long-term Implications
for Children.” Family Process 46:53 65.
Ahrons, C. R., and J. Tanner. 2003. “Adult Children’s Relationships with
Their Fathers Twenty Years after Divorce.” Family Relations 52:340 351.
Alleyne, S., L. Egodigwe, and T. E. Holmes. 2004. “How to Effectively
Compete in a Tough Job Market: Getting in Gear for Career Success.”
Black Enterprise 34:73 81.
Ambrogi, D., and C. London. 1985. “Elder Abuse Laws: Their Implica-
tions for Caregivers.” Generations 10 (1): 37 39.
American Medical Association. 2006. “Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.”
[Online information; retrieved 7/25/07.] http://jama.ama-assn.org/cgi/
content/full/295/17/2100.
Andreas, J. B., T. J. O’Farrell, and W. Fals-Stewart. 2006. “Does Individual
Treatment for Alcoholic Fathers Benefit Their Children? A Longitudinal
Assessment.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 74 (1): 191 198.
Andrews, S. 2007. Love, Marriage and Divorce. Waco, TX: Library Binding.
References
69

Asenjo. B. 2007. “Addiction.” [Online information; retrieved 7/21/07.]
http://www.answers.com/topic/addiction.
Aviles, A., and C. Helfrich. 2004. “Life Skill Service Needs: Perspectives
of Homeless Youth.” Journal of Youth and Adolescence 33 (4): 331 342.
Baer, J. S., J. A. Ginzler, and P. L. Peterson. 2003. “DSM-IV Alcohol and
Substance Abuse and Dependence in Homeless Youth.” Journal of Stud-
ies on Alcohol 64 (1): 5 15.
Bailey, J. L. 2007. The Parental Peace Accord. Bloomington, IN: Author-
House.
Baker, A. J. L., M. M. McKay, C. J. Hans., H. Schlange, and A. Auville.
2003. “Recidivism at a Shelter for Adolescents: First-Time versus Repeat
Runaways.” Social Work Research 27:84 94.
Baksh, N., and L. Murphy. 2007. In the Best Interest of the Child. Gardena,
CA: Hohm Press.
Bell, N. S., T. C. Harford, C. H. Fuchs, J. E. McCarroll, and C. E. Schwartz.
2006. “Spouse Abuse and Alcohol Problems among White, African
American, and Hispanic U.S. Army Soldiers.” Alcoholism: Clinical and Ex-
perimental Research 30 (10): 1721 1733.
Beymer, J. K., and R. L. Hutchinson. 2002. “Profile of Problem Children
from a Rural County in Indiana.” Adolescence 37 (145): 183 191.
Black, C. 2007. “Survey Reports More Women Are Having Extramarital Af-
fairs.” [Online article; retrieved 8/23/07.] http://www.associatedcontent.
com/article/231316/survey reports more women are having.html.
Black, D. W., P. O. Monahan, M. Temkit, and M. Shaw. 2006. “A Family
Study of Pathological Gambling.” Psychiatry Research 141 (3): 295 303.
Borgman, Christine. 2003. From Gutenberg to the Global Information Infra-
structure: Access to Information in the Networked World. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Bouvard, M. G. 2007. Healing: A Life with Chronic Illness. Lebanon, NH:
University Press of New England.
Bradley, A. 2006. “Online Infidelity
Is Your Partner Having a Cyber Af-
fair?” [Online article; retrieved 8/23/07.] http://www.article99.com/
news-and-society/relationships/article.php?art=9891.
Brandl, B. 2006. Elder Abuse Detection and Intervention: A Collaborative Ap-
proach. New York: Springer.
Brentano, C. 2007. Divorce: Causes and Consequences. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press.
Brodie, K., and C. Gadling-Cole. 2003. “The Use of Family Decision
Meetings when Addressing Caregiver Stress.” Journal of Gerontological
Social Work 41:89 100.
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Brody, E. 2006. Women in the Middle: Their Parent Care Years. New York:
Springer.
Brown, J. M. 2004. “The Effectiveness of Treatment.” In The Essential
Handbook of Treatment and Prevention of Alcohol Problems, edited by N.
Heather and T. Stockwell. New York: Wiley.
Browne, M. H., and M. M. Browne. 2007. You Can’t Have Him, He’s Mine.
Avon, MA: Adams Media.
Bumagin, V. 2006. Caregiving: A Guide for Those Who Give Care and Those
Who Receive It. New York: Springer.
Burbank, P. 2006. Vulnerable Older Adults: Health Care Needs and Interven-
tions. New York: Springer.
Cargan, L. 2007a. Doing Social Research. Lanham, MD: Rowman and 
Littlefield.
Cargan, L. 2007b. Being Single: Myths and Realties. Lanham, MD: Row-
man and Littlefield.
Cargan, L., and J. H. Ballantine. 2006. Sociological Footprints: Introductory
Readings in Sociology, 10th ed. Belmont, CA: Thomson Higher Education.
Carp, F. M. 2000. Elder Abuse in the Family: An Interdisciplinary Model for
Research. New York: Springer.
Cauce, A. M., M. Paradise, J. A. Ginzler, L. Embry, C. J. Morgan, and Y.
Lohr. 2000. “The Characteristics and Mental Health of Homeless Ado-
lescents: Age and Gender Differences.” Journal of Emotional and Behavioral
Disorders 8 (4): 230 242.
Center for Substance Abuse Treatment. 2004. Substance Abuse Treatment and
Family Therapy. Treatment Improvement Protocol Series, No. 39. Rockville,
MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
Center on an Aging Society. 2005. Caregivers of Older Persons: Data Profile.
No. 2, May. Washington, DC: Georgetown University.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2007. Chronic Disease Pre-
vention. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Merck Foundation.
2007. The State of Aging and Health in America 2007. Whitehouse Station,
NJ: The Merck Company Foundation.
Chalder, M., F. J. Elgar, and P. Bennett. 2006. “Drinking and Motivations
to Drink among Adolescent Children of Parents with Alcohol Prob-
lems.” Alcohol and Alcoholism 41 (1): 107 113.
Cherlin, A. J. 2003. “Family Demography.” In Encyclopedia of Population,
edited by P. Demeny and G. McNicoll. New York: Macmillan.
Cherlin, A. J. 2004a. Public and Private Families: An Introduction. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
References
71

Cherlin, A. J. 2004b. “The Deinstitutionalization of American Marriage.”
Journal of Marriage and Family 66:848 861.
Cherlin, A. J. 2005. “American Marriage in the Early Twenty-first Cen-
tury.” The Future of Children 15 (2): 33 55.
Chou, C., L. Condron, and J. C. Belland. 2005. “A Review of the Literature
on Internet Addiction.” Educational Psychology Review 17 (4): 363 388.
Clarke, R., and W. Dempsey. 2001. “The Feasibility of Regulating Gam-
bling on the Internet.” Managerial and Decision Economics 22:125 132.
Connell, C. M., M. R. Janevic, and M. P. Gallant. 2001. “The Costs of Car-
ing: Impact of Dementia on Family Caregivers.” Journal of Geriatric Psy-
chiatry and Neurology 14:179 188.
Conway, K. 2007. Illness and the Limits of Expression. Ann Arbor, MI: Uni-
versity of Michigan Press.
Corley, M. D. 2007. “Online Infidelity.” [Online article; retrieved 8/22/07.]
http://www.instituteforcouplescounseling.com/onlineinfidelity.htm.
Dalton, M. M., and K. I. Pakenham. 2002. “Adjustment of Homeless
Adolescents to a Crisis Shelter: Application of a Stress and Coping
Model.” Journal of Youth and Adolescence 31 (1): 79 84.
Davis, N. 2007. Lean on Me: Ten Powerful Steps to Moving beyond Your Di-
agnosis and Taking Back Your Life. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Dawson, D. A., B. F. Grant, F. S. Stinson, P. S. Chou, B. Huang, and W. J.
Ruan. 2005. “Recovery from DSM-IV Alcohol Dependence: United States,
2001 2002.” Addiction 100 (3): 281 292.
Deegan, G. 2003. “Discovering Recovery.” Psychiatric Rehabilitation Jour-
nal 26 (4): 368 376.
Dekel, R., E. Peled, and S. E. Spiro. 2003. “Shelters for Houseless Youth:
A Follow-up Evaluation.” Journal of Adolescence 26:201 212.
Dell Orto, A. E. 2007. The Psychological and Social Impact of Illness and Dis-
ability. New York: Springer.
DiClemente, C. 2003. Addiction and Change: How Addictions Develop and
Addicted People Recover. New York: Guilford Press.
Duran, M. G. 2003. “Internet Addiction Disorder.” [Online article; re-
trieved 7/22/07.] http://allpsych.com/journal/internetaddiction.html.
ElderCare Advocates. 2007. “Coping with a Chronic Illness in Your Fam-
ily.” [Online article; retrieved 8/28/07.] http://www.eldercareadvocates.
com/pages/art22.htm.
Feinberg, L. F., and S. L. Newman. 2004. “A Study of 10 States since Pas-
sage of the National Family Caregiver Support Program: Policies, Per-
ceptions and Program Development.” The Gerontologist 44 (6): 760 769.
72
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Fest, J. 2003. “Understanding Street Culture: A Prevention Perspective.”
School Nurse News 20 (2): 16 18.
Fetsch, R. 2006. “Coping Well with Unemployment.” [Online article; re-
trieved 8/15/07.] http://www.ext.colostate.edu/emptrans/feature0209.
html.
Fitzgerald, H., B. Lester, and B. Zuckerman. 2000. Children of Addiction:
Research, Health, and Public Policy Issues. New York: Garland Science.
Foston, N. A. 2003. “How to Find a Job in a Tight Market.” Ebony 58 (Jan-
uary): 52 59.
Gartska, T., P. McCallion, and R. Toseland. 2001. “Using Support Groups
to Improve Caregiver Health.” In Aging, Communication, and Health,
edited by M. L. Hummert and J. F. Nussbaum. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Gelfand, D. 2006. The Aging Network: Programs and Services, 6th ed. New
York: Springer.
Gibson, P. 2002. “Barriers, Lessons Learned and Helpful Hints: Grand-
mother Caregivers Talk about Service Utilization.” Journal of Gerontolog-
ical Social Work 39:55 74.
Glass, S. P., and J. C. Staeheli. 2004. Not “Just Friends”: Rebuilding Trust
and Recovering Your Sanity after Infidelity. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Gleick, James. 2003. What Just Happened: A Chronicle from the Information
Frontier. New York: Vintage.
Gnuschke, J. E., and B. L. Alvarado. 2007. “Wary and Watchful: The Na-
tional Outlook for 2007 2008.” Business Perspectives 18 (Winter): 1 9.
Goodman, C. C., M. Potts, E. M. Pasztor, and D. Scorzo. 2004. “Grand-
mothers as Kinship Caregivers: Private Arrangements Compared to
Public Child Welfare Oversight.” Children and Youth Services Review
26:287 305.
Grabenstein, C. C. 2007. Divorced Parents Challenge: Eight Lessons to Teach
Children Love and Forgiveness. Calverton, MD: Collier Productions.
Graham, A. W., T. K. Schulz, and B. B. Wilford, eds. 2003. Principles of Ad-
diction Medicine, 3rd ed. Annapolis Junction, MD: American Society of
Addiction Medicine.
Greene, R. R. 2000. Social Work with the Aged and Their Families. New
York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Griffiths, M. 2003. “Internet Abuse in the Workplace: Issues and Con-
cerns for Employers and Employment Counselors.” Journal of Employ-
ment 40 (2): 87 96.
Haber, D. 2007. Health Promotion and Aging. New York: Springer.
References
73

Halcon, L. L., and A. R. Lifson. 2004. “Prevalence and Predictors of Sex-
ual Risks among Homeless Youth.” Journal of Youth and Adolescence 33 (1):
71 82.
Hammer, H. 2003. “Vanishing Youngsters: No Easy Answers.” USA
Today 132 (September): 14 25.
Hammer, H., D. Finkelhor, and A. Sedlak. 2002. “Runaway/Thrownaway
Children: National Estimates and Characteristics.” National Incidence
Studies of Missing, Abducted, Runaway, and Thrownaway Children. Wash-
ington, DC: Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention.
Hansen, D. 2007. Broken Strings: Wisdom for Divorced and Separated Fami-
lies. Bloomington, IN: AuthorHouse.
Harrar, S., and R. M. DeMaria. 2006. The Seven Stages of Marriage. New
York: Penguin.
Harvey, J., A. Wenzel, and S. Sprecher. 2004. Handbook of Sexuality in Close
Relationships. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hertlein, K. M., and F. P. Piercy. 2006. “Internet Infidelity: A Critical Re-
view of the Literature.” The Family Journal 14:366 376.
Heyman, G. M. 2001. “Is Addiction a Chronic, Relapsing Disease?” In
Drug Addiction and Drug Policy: The Struggle to Control Dependence, edited
by G. M. Heymann and W. N. Brownsberger. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Hodgins, D. C., K. Makarchuk, and N. Peden. 2002. “Why Problem
Gamblers Quit Gambling: A Comparison of Methods and Samples.” Ad-
diction Research and Theory 10 (2): 203 208.
Hooyman, N., and H. A. Kiyak. 2008. Social Gerontology. Boston: Allyn
and Bacon.
Hudson, R., and J. Gonyea. 2000. “Time Not Yet Money: The Politics and
Promise of the Family Medical Leave Act.” Journal of Aging and Social
Policy 11 (2/3): 189 200.
Jackson, W. 2001. “Coping with Chronic Illness.” [Online article; re-
trieved 7/2/08.] http://www.geocities.com/cfsdays/chronic.htm.
Jones, K. D., and N. B. Minatrea. 2001. “The Consequences of Internet
Addiction: Implications for Counseling Practice.” Journal of Technology in
Counseling 2 (1): 22 43.
Kart, C. S., and J. M. Kinney. 2001. The Realities of Aging: An Introduction
to Gerontology, 6th ed. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Kaysen, D., T. M. Dillworth, T. Simpson, A. Waldrop, M. E. Larimer, and
P. A. Resick. 2006. “Domestic Violence and Alcohol Use: Trauma-Related
Symptoms and Motives for Drinking.” Addictive Behavior 32 (6):
1272 1283.
74
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Kessler, D. (2007). “After a Job Loss.” [Online article; retrieved 8/15/07.]
http://davidkessler.biz/articles/afterjobloss.htm.
Kesten, D. 2004. Addiction, Progression and Recovery: Understanding the
Stages of Change on the Addiction Recovery Learning Curve. Eau Claire, WI:
PESI Healthcare.
Khantzian, E. J. 2001. “Addiction: Disease, Symptom or Choice?” Coun-
selor 2 (6): 46 50.
King, H. 2007. “Coping with Job Loss.” [Online article; retrieved
8/15/07.] http://oser.state.wi.us/docview.asp?docid=1143.
Kroll, B. 2004. “Living with an Elephant: Growing Up with Parental Sub-
stance Misuse.” Child and Family Social Work 9 (2): 129 140.
Labeau, J. 2003. “Chronic Career Stress: What It Looks Like and What to
Do about It.” Public Management 85 (November): 8 16.
Lemanski, M. 2001. A History of Addiction and Recovery in the United
States. Tucson, AZ: Sharp Press.
Manette, D. 2005. Ultimate Betrayal: Recognizing, Uncovering, and Dealing
with Infidelity. Garden Park, New York: Square One.
Martz, E., and H. Livneh. 2007. Coping with Chronic Illness and Disability:
Theoretical, Empirical, and Clinical Aspects. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Mathews, S. H. 2003. Sisters and Brothers/Daughters and Sons: Meeting the
Needs of Old Parents. Bloomington, IN: Unlimited.
Matthews, F. 2004. “Doctors, Elder Abuse, and Enduring Powers of At-
torney.” New Zealand Medical Journal 117 (120): 612 616.
McMorris, B. J., K. A. Tyler, L. B. Whitbeck, and D. R. Hoyt. 2002. “Fa-
milial and ‘On-the-Street’ Risk Factors Associated with Alcohol Use
among Homeless and Runaway Adolescents.” Journal of Studies on Alco-
hol 63 (1): 34 44.
Miller, J. S. 2007. “Keeping the Family Calm after a Job Loss.” [Online ar-
ticle; retrieved 8/15/07.] http://www.careerjournal.com/jobhunting/
jobloss/19980311-miller.html.
Missing Children’s Recovery Foundation. 2007. “Missing Children Sta-
tistics.” [Online information; retrieved 8/14/07.] http://www.mcrf.us/
Statistics.asp.
Mitchell, W. 2004. The More You Know: Getting the Evidence and Support for
a Troubled Relationship. Greenville, SC: Eagle’s Nest.
Mitchell, W. F. 2001. Adultery: Facing Its Reality. Binghamton, NY: Global
Academic.
Moody, H. 2006. Aging: Concepts and Controversies, 5th ed. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
References
75

Murphy, P. J. 2007. Divorce and Separation. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Natelson, B. H. 2007. Your Symptoms Are Real: What to Do When Your Doc-
tor Says Nothing Is Wrong. New York: Wiley.
National Council on Economic Education. 2008. EconEd Link. [Online arti-
cle; retrieved 8/12/07.] http://www.econedlink.org/lessons/index.cfm?
lesson=EM754&page=teacher.
National Institute on Alcoholism and Alcohol Abuse. 2007. A Guide to
Action for Families. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services.
National Institute of Drug Abuse and Addiction. 2007. Understanding
Drug Abuse and Addiction. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services.
National Institute of Mental Health. 2007. Gambling Addiction. Washing-
ton, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
National Runaway Switchboard. 2006. “2006 Annual Report: The Jour-
ney Continues.” [Online information; retrieved 8/12/07.] http://www.
1800runaway.org/downloads/pdfs/NRSAnnualReport 06.pdf.
Nerenberg, L. 2007. Elder Abuse Prevention. New York: Springer.
Neuman, M. G. 2002. Emotional Infidelity. New York: Crown.
Neville, Kristine. 2002. Communicate and Connect to the Internet. New
York: Gateway.
Novak, M. 2006. Issues in Aging. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Oravec, J. 2000. “Internet and Computer Technology Hazards: Perspec-
tives for Family Counseling.” British Journal of Guidance and Counseling
28 (3): 309 324.
Ory, M. G. 1985. “The Burden of Care.” Generations 10 (1): 15 17.
Ory, M. G. 2006. “Gerontological Research: Changes and Stabilities over
Time.” Paper presented at the American Public Health Association An-
nual Meeting, Washington, D.C., November 4.
Peluso, P. R. (2007). Infidelity: A Practitioner’s Guide to Working with Cou-
ples in Crisis. Philadelphia: Routledge.
Petry, N. M. 2000. “Psychiatric Symptoms in Problem Gambling and
Nonproblem Gambling Substance Abusers.” American Journal on Addic-
tions 9:163 171.
Pierce, R. L., and R. Trotta. 1986. “Abused Parents: A Hidden Family
Problem.” Journal of Family Violence 1:99 110.
Pitman, F. S. 1987. Turning Points: Treating Families in Transition and Cri-
sis. New York: Norton.
76
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Pollick, M. 2002. “Are Internet Relationships Infidelity?” [Online article; re-
trieved 8/22/07.] http://www.essortment.com/lifestyle/internetrelatio
ttus.htm.
Prieto, E. 2008. Home Health Care Provider: A Guide to Essential Skills. New
York: Springer.
Putnam, M. 2006. Aging and Disability. New York: Springer.
Quinn, F. L. 2001. “First Do No Harm: What Could Be Done by Casinos
to Limit Pathological Gambling.” Managerial and Decision Economics
22:133 142.
Redfield, S. 2005. “Understanding and Addressing the Challenges of Job
Loss for Low-Wage Workers.” Economic Perspectives 29 (2): 67 72.
Reece, H. 2003. Divorcing Responsibly. Oxford, UK: Hart.
Roog, S. A., T. A. Knight, J. Koob, and M. J. Krause. 2004. “The Utiliza-
tion and Effectiveness of the Family and Medical Leave Act.” Journal of
Health and Social Policy 18 (4): 39 52.
Rubinstein, R. L., M. Moss, and M. H. Kleban, eds. 2000. The Many Di-
mensions of Aging. New York: Springer.
RunawayTeens.org. 2007. “About Runaway Teens.” [Online information;
retrieved 8/13/07.] http://www.runawayteens.org/statistics.html.
Russell, M. 2007. “Addictive Behaviors and Addictions.” [Online infor-
mation; retrieved 7/21/07.] http://ezinearticles.com/?Addictions
Addictive-Behavior-and-Addictions&id=216914.
Schaffner, L. 1998. “Searching for Connection: A New Look at Teenage
Runaways.” Adolescence 33 (131): 619 623.
Schaie, K. W. 2007. Social Structures: Demographic Changes and the Well-
being of Older Persons. New York: Springer.
Schimer, M. 2005. “Elder Abuse: The Attorney’s Perspective.” The Clini-
cal Gerontologist 28 (2): 55 82.
Schulz, R., ed. 2006. The Encyclopedia of Aging. New York: Springer.
Schwartz, D. 2007. Disease Management Directory and Guidebook. North-
boro, MA: HCPro, Inc.
Seaburn, D. 2001. “AAMFT Consumer Update: Chronic Illness.” [Online
information; retrieved 8/28/07.] http://www.aamft.org/families/
Consumer Updates/ChronicIllness.asp.
Sellman, J. D., S. Adamson, P. Robertson, S. Sullivan, and J. Coverdale.
2002. “Gambling in Midmoderate Alcohol-Dependent Outpatients.”
Substance Use and Misuse 37 (2): 199 213.
References
77

Shaffer, H. J. 2002. “Is Computer Addiction a Unique Psychiatric Disor-
der?” [Online article; retrieved 7/28/07.] http://www.psychiatrictimes.
com/p020435.html.
Simon-Rusinowitz, L., K. Mahoney, D. Loughlin, and M. D. Sadler. 2005.
“Paying Family Caregivers: An Effective Policy Option in the Arkansas
Cash and Counseling Demonstration and Evaluation.” In Challenges of
Aging on U.S. Families: Policy and Practice Implications, edited by R. K. 
Caputo. New York: Haworth Press.
Skocpol, T. 2000. “Reaching for the Middle: What It Will Take to Build a
Family-Friendly America.” In The Missing Middle: Working Families and
the Future of American Social Policy. New York: W. W. Norton.
Smoke, J. 2007. Growing through Divorce. Eugene, OR: Harvest House.
Son, A. J. 2002. “Information Packet: Runaway and Homeless Youth.” [On-
line report; retrieved 8/13/07.] http://www.hunter.cuny.edu/socwork/
nrcfcpp/downloads/information packets/homeless and runaway
youth-pkt.pdf.
Sponaugle, G. C. (1989). “Attitudes Toward Extramarital Relations.” In
Human Sexuality: The Societal and Interpersonal Context, edited by K. 
McKinney and S. Sprecher. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Corporation.
Spring, J. A., and M. Spring. 2005. How Can I Forgive You? New York:
HarperCollins.
Steadman, L. 2007. It’s a Breakup, Not a Breakdown. Prince Albert, Canada:
Polka Dot Press.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. 2004. Sub-
stance Abuse Treatment and Family Therapy. Washington, DC: U.S. Depart-
ment of Health and Human Services.
Szinovacz, M. E. 2007. Caregiving Contexts. New York: Springer.
Temple, D. S. 2004. Picking Up the Pieces: A Guide to Recovery from Betrayal
and a Broken Heart. Bloomington, IN: AuthorHouse.
Thomas, C. 2007. Sociologies of Disability and Illness. New York: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Thompson, S. J., and V. K. Pillai. 2006. “Determinants of Runaway
Episodes among Adolescents Using Crisis Shelter Services.” Interna-
tional Journal of Social Welfare 15:142 149.
Thompson, S. J., and D. E. Pollio. 2006. “Adolescent Runaway Episodes:
Application of an Estrangement Model of Recidivism.” Social Work Re-
search 30 (4): 245 261.
Thompson, S. J., A. E. Safyer, and D. E. Pollio. 2001. “Examining Differ-
ences and Predictors of Family Reunification among Subgroups of Run-
away Youth Using Shelter Services.” Social Work Research 25:163 172.
78
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Toneatto, T., and D. Ferguson. 2003. “Effect of a New Casino on Problem
Gambling in Treatment-Seeking Substance Abusers.” Canadian Journal of
Psychiatry 48 (1): 40 44.
Turner, J. S. 2002. Families in America. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Turner, J. S. 2003. Dating and Sexuality in America. Santa Barbara, CA:
ABC-CLIO.
Tyler, K. A., and K. A. Johnson. 2006. “Trading Sex: Voluntary or Co-
erced? The Experiences of Homeless Youth.” Journal of Sex Research 43
(3): 208 214.
Tyler, K. A., L. B. Whitbeck, D. R. Hoyt, and K. A. Yoder. 2000. “Predic-
tors of Self-Reported Sexually Transmitted Diseases among Homeless
and Runaway Adolescents.” Journal of Sex Research 37 (4): 369 377.
Underwood, H., and B. Findlay. 2004. “Internet Relationships and Their
Impact on Primary Relationships.” Behaviour Change 21 (4): 127 140.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2007. Handbook of Labor Statistics. Wash-
ington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2006. Statistical Abstract of the United States, 125th
ed. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2007. Statistical Abstract of the United States, 126th
ed. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2007. Health, United
States, 2006. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics
U.S. Department of Labor. 2008. “Employment Situation Summary.”
[Online information; retrieved 8/14/07.] http://www.bls.gov/news.
release/empsit.nr0.htm
Van Leeuwen, J. M., C. Hopfer, S. Hooks, R. White, J. Petersen, and J.
Pirkopf. 2004. “A Snapshot of Substance Abuse among Homeless and
Runaway Youth in Denver, Colorado.” Journal of Community Health 29
(3): 217 229.
Wallerstein, J., J. Lewis, and S. Blakeslee. 2000. The Unexpected Legacy of
Divorce: A 25 Year Landmark Study. New York: Hyperion.
Weil, B. 2003. Adultery: The Forgivable Sin, 2nd ed. Poughkeepsie, NY:
Vivisphere.
Wekerle, C., and A. M. Wall, eds. 2001. The Violence and Addiction Equa-
tion: Theoretical and Clinical Issues in Substance Abuse and Relationship Vio-
lence. New York: Brunner-Routledge.
Whitbeck, L. B., and D. R. Hoyt. 1999. Nowhere to Grow: Homeless and
Runaway Adolescents and Their Families. New York: Aldine De Gruyter.
White, W. L., M. Boyle, and D. Loveland. 2002. “Alcoholism/Addiction as
a Chronic Disease: From Rhetoric to Clinical Reality.” In Alcohol Problems
References
79

in the United States: Twenty Years of Treatment Perspective, edited by T. F. Mc-
Govern and W. L. White. New York: Haworth.
Willis, L. 2007. Divorce. Farmington Hills, MI: Thomson Gale.
Wills, J. 2007. Promoting Health. Boston: Blackwell.
Wisensale, S. 2001. “Federal Initiatives in Family Leave Policy: Formula-
tion of the FMLA.” In Family Leave Policy: The Political Economy of Work
And Family in America, by S. Wisensale. New York: M. E. Sharpe.
Young, K. 2007. “New Research on Internet Addiction Legitimizes the
Controversial Clinical Disorder.” [Online article; retrieved 7/25/07.]
http://www.netaddiction.com/newspr/cpbpr.htm.
80
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

3
Special U.S. Issues
Introduction
There is no mistaking the fact that we live in uncertain times. The
horrific tragedy of September 11, 2001, reminded us of our vul-
nerabilities and the impact that life-altering circumstances have
on family life. Trauma and turmoil have moved closer to all of us,
whether it be in the form of airline crashes, highway fatalities,
acts of terrorism, or hurricanes. Crises such as these—and count-
less others—put the modern American family to task and test its
inner resolve and resiliency.
In this chapter, we examine some representative traumatic
crises plaguing American families: domestic violence, school vi-
olence, natural disasters, deployed military families, and adoles-
cent suicide. Given their unpredictable nature and the escalating
numbers of families involved with these problems, never has the
need been greater to understand traumatic crises, particularly in
terms of preparing families for impending trauma (if possible)
and providing support and family relief. Researchers (e.g., Gold-
enberg and Goldenberg 2008; Greenberg 2008; James 2008) ac-
knowledge that understanding and preparing for traumatic
crises can reduce accompanying feelings of helplessness and
pave the way for the restoration of balanced family functioning.
Some even discover that facing extreme adversity brings out the
best in people.
Other families, though, are not so fortunate. Coping mecha-
nisms are stretched to the limit or meet with failure. Residual
trauma lingers for years, perhaps forever. Such families are stag-
gered by traumatic crises, discovering that pressures are unyielding
81

and stress levels unmanageable. Many survivors experience what
is called an acute stress disorder, a psychological disturbance
marked by intrusive and disturbing memories of the crisis, an ex-
aggerated startle response, and a tendency to avoid the situation by
withdrawing from it physically and psychologically. Simply put,
they are unable to return to a normal range of functioning. For these
families, the task of rebuilding and restoring family equilibrium
looms insurmountable.
Domestic Violence
Marilyn Lane is an abused wife. Her husband has battered her
about twice a month for 11 years. The physical abuse started six
months after the wedding, and her husband has become more vi-
olent over time. Over the years, Marilyn has had three broken
bones, contusions all over her body, and on one occasion, a gash
that required 16 sutures to close during an emergency room visit.
She has always chosen to strategically cover her wounds with
extra makeup or clothing, blaming those that could be seen on
falling down, accidentally bumping into large objects, or outdoor
injuries.
Although the expression “Home sweet home” conjures up
images of peace and safety, for the battered spouse there is no
place worse than home. Domestic violence is most commonly ap-
plied to an intimate relationship between two adults in which one
partner uses a pattern of assault and intimidating acts to assert
power and control over the other partner. It is also referred to as
intimate partner violence. Domestic violence is considered a trau-
matic family crisis because of its unpredictability, life-threatening
potential, and the fact that it creates a sense of destruction and
loss for the victims.
The most conservative estimates place the number of bat-
tered women of all races and classes at 2 to 4 million each year
(National Organization for Women 2007). Abused partners may
be married or not married; heterosexual, gay, or lesbian; living to-
gether, separated, or dating. Domestic violence can happen to
anyone regardless of race, age, sexual orientation, religion, or gen-
der. Although partner violence is particularly widespread, abu-
sive behavior also gets directed toward children and teenagers.
We need to acknowledge, too, that other forms of domestic vio-
lence exist: elder abuse (see Chapter 2), sibling abuse, husband
82
Special U.S. Issues

abuse, and parent abuse (see Kiselica and Morrill-Richards 2007;
Barnett, Miller-Perrin, and Perrin 2005; Turell 2003; Bonnie and
Wallace 2003; Carp 2000). Our focus in this section is first on part-
ner abuse, followed by child abuse.
It will prove helpful at the outset to distinguish between the
different kinds of violence abuse that exist. According to the U.S.
Department of Justice (2007), domestic violence can be physical,
sexual, emotional, economic, or psychological actions or threats
of actions that influence another person. This definition includes
any behaviors that intimidate, manipulate, humiliate, isolate,
frighten, terrorize, coerce, threaten, blame, hurt, injure, or wound
someone.
Partner Abuse
When a woman begins to lose her sense of identity or self-worth
to the point that she no longer feels safe expressing opinions or
feelings to her partner, or she starts going along with things be-
cause she is afraid that her partner will react violently, she may
be at risk for intimate partner violence. Unfortunately, circum-
stances will likely only get worse over time (Rondini 2007).
Intimate partner abuse can exert effects on a woman’s
health, both physically and psychologically. Physical harm, in-
cluding contusions, fractures, and lacerations, is one obvious ef-
fect. Intimate partner abuse has also been connected to chronic
health problems and even death—from either suicide because of
depression or murder by the partner. Battered women are more
likely to have arthritis, neck pain, pelvic pain, and migraine
headaches. They also have an increased risk of menstrual prob-
lems and difficulties during pregnancy, including bleeding, ane-
mia, and low birth weight (Harvard Medical School Family
Health Guide 2006; Zink et al. 2006). The reader is encouraged to
visit Chapter 6 (Figures 6.12, 6.13, 6.14, and 6.15), where more
specific details on the topic of intimate partner violence appear.
The abusive partner uses various strategies to achieve power
and control. He may intimidate and demean his partner by con-
stantly criticizing her, taking full command of household fi-
nances, or telling her what she can wear, where she can go, and
whom she can see. (While the majority of abusers in domestic vi-
olence situations are the male partner, the reader should recog-
nize that women can also be the abusing partner.) Many batterers
may play “mind games” with their partners, such as suggesting
Domestic Violence
83

that she is hypersensitive, hysterical, or even mentally unbal-
anced. Often he makes sure that she is isolated from family,
friends, and colleagues. His mental manipulation may also sur-
face as pathological jealousy, such as making false accusations
about her having an affair. Shortly, the partner realizes that she is
cut off from all outside support and connections, no longer in
touch with the people and services that could help her. This sense
of isolationism is exactly the environment the abuser wishes to
create (Harvard Medical School Family Health Guide 2006; Lee,
Sebold, and Uken 2003).
What prompts abusive behaviors such as these? The abuser
is a complicated puzzle, but a number of psychological and soci-
ological factors have been cited (Loseke, Gelles, and Cavanaugh
2005; Kurst-Swanger and Petcosky 2003). The abusive partner
often faces a pileup of pressures from work and the home, finan-
cial difficulties, and low levels of self-esteem. Many abusers feel
the need to control and are usually lonely, are typically depressed,
and have never learned how to contain their aggression or hostil-
ity. Substance use is often involved in many incidents of partner
violence. When substance use and partner violence co-occur, sub-
stance use may play a facilitative role by precipitating or exacer-
bating violence (Wekerle and Wall 2002; Fazzone, Holton, and
Reed 2001).
Intimate partner violence also appears to be a product of
past learning. Children who were victims of violence often grow
up and resort to similar methods of discipline with their partners
or children. They learn early in life that aggressive force is an ef-
fective way of controlling the perceived unpleasant behaviors of
others. Violent juvenile offenders are four times more likely to
have grown up in homes where they saw violence. Children who
have witnessed violence at home are also five times more likely
to commit or suffer violence when they become adults (National
Organization for Women 2007).
Child Abuse
Child abuse is a traumatic family crisis and is defined as harm
to, or neglect of, a child by another person, whether adult or
child. Child abuse happens in all cultural, ethnic, and income
groups. Much like partner abuse, different forms of child abuse
are seen. Child abuse can be physical, emotional, verbal, sexual,
or neglectful. Abuse may cause serious injury to the child and
84
Special U.S. Issues

may even result in death. Child abuse is perhaps the most alarm-
ing type of domestic violence because of the acute vulnerability
of children, their inability to escape the trauma of the situation,
and the degrees of physical punishment that they suffer (Ianelli
2005).
Maltreatment during infancy or early childhood can cause
important regions of the brain to form improperly, leading to
physical, mental, and emotional problems, such as sleep distur-
bances, panic disorder, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disor-
der (Righthand, Kerr, and Drach 2003; Bancroft and Silverman
2002). See Figure 6.16 as well as Table 6.5 for more information on
child maltreatment.
Child abuse can also extend to child sexual abuse. Child sex-
ual abuse occurs when a child is used for sexual purposes by an
adult or adolescent. It involves exposing a child to any sexual ac-
tivity or behavior. It usually includes fondling and may include
inviting a child to touch or be touched sexually. Other forms of
sexual abuse include sexual intercourse, juvenile prostitution,
and sexual exploitation through child pornography. In addition
to the physical violation, sexual abuse is inherently emotionally
abusive and is often accompanied by other forms of mistreat-
ment. It is a betrayal of trust and an abuse of power over the child
(McDowell 2006; Jaffe, Baker, and Cunningham 2004).
The statistics on physical and sexual child abuse are alarm-
ing and a cause for concern. An estimated hundreds of thousands
of children are physically abused each year by a parent, close rel-
ative, or other adult perpetrator. An estimated 3 million children
are reported each year as suspected victims of child abuse and
neglect. One in three girls and one in five boys are sexually
abused by an adult at some time during childhood (Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention 2007a).
The family disequilibrium and emotional trauma of abuse
remain long after the external bruises have healed. For instance,
an adult who was physically abused as a child often has trouble
establishing intimate personal relationships. Both men and
women encounter trouble with physical closeness, touching, in-
timacy, and trust as adults. They are also at higher risk for anxi-
ety, depression, substance abuse, medical illness, and problems
at school or work. Adult women sexually molested as children
are more likely than nonvictims to suffer from both physical and
psychological problems. Men who were sexually abused as chil-
dren may also suffer from depression, anxiety, and suicidal
Domestic Violence
85

thoughts and behavior, especially if they were repeatedly abused
(McDowell 2006; American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry 2008).
What motivates child abusers? Much like partner abuse, all
of the causes of child abuse are not known. However, a signifi-
cant amount of research points to parental behaviors and condi-
tions that put children at risk for abuse: lack of parenting
knowledge, especially nurturing qualities; depression or other
mental health problems; onset of a financial crisis; exposure to
domestic violence at an early age or to current violence; difficulty
controlling anger and poor conflict resolution abilities; and sub-
stance abuse. Child sexual abusers share many of the same moti-
vations, as well as the possibility of having been sexually
violated as a youngster themselves.
Implications for Family Life
It should be obvious by now that the traumatic crisis of domestic
violence poses many serious implications for family life. One
might think the battered woman should just pack up her belong-
ings and leave the abuser, but it is not that simple. For battered
partners, deciding to leave an abusive relationship is a process
more than a single action. As we have learned, isolation and fear
may prevent a battered woman from leaving, even when she
knows it is probably for the best. Lack of financial resources due
to the batterer’s economic control of the household often pre-
vents the woman from leaving. And while community support is
usually available, a woman in an abusive relationship often has
difficulty asking for help (Harvard Medical School Family Health
Guide 2006).
Melinda Smith and colleagues (Smith et al. 2007) add that
most women cannot simply leave their homes, their jobs, their
children’s schools, their friends, and their relatives to escape their
abuser. They depend upon police to enforce the law against phys-
ical abuse. However, law enforcement cannot act until a restrain-
ing order is violated or until the victim is physically harmed.
Because of these factors, many battered women rationalize that it
is easier to stay with their abuser than to try to leave and face the
consequences (Cooper and Vetere 2005; Roberts 2002; Loue 2001).
Women can take a number of steps to protect themselves
while getting out of an abusive situation, and people are waiting
to help (Schewe 2002; Zorza 2002). An abused woman is in par-
86
Special U.S. Issues

ticular danger if she is thinking of leaving or tries to leave an abu-
sive relationship; abusers often react with anger and hostility
since their desire to control is threatened. When women leave,
they often experience fear for their lives as well as their children’s
safety, not fear of an unpredictable future (Flannery 2006; Fowler
2003; Feindler, Rathus, and Silver 2003; Gondolf 2002; Geffner,
Dutton, and Sonkin 2002).
It is therefore of the utmost importance for battered women to
have some kind of safety plan and knowledge of expanded family
resources (the second component of the Double ABCX model).
Calling a domestic violence hotline is recommended, such as the
National Domestic Violence Hotline at 1-800-799-SAFE (7233) or
TTY 1-800-787-3224. Help is available to callers 24 hours a day, 365
days a year. Hotline advocates are available for victims and any-
one calling on their behalf to provide crisis intervention; safety
planning; information; and referrals to agencies in all 50 states,
Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Assistance is available in
English and Spanish, with access to more than 140 languages
through interpreter services. More specific information regarding
safety plans is readily available (e.g., Roberts and Roberts 2005;
Shipway 2004; Jordan 2004; Mills 2003; Sever 2002).
As far as child abuse intervention is concerned, it must be
kept in mind that battered youngsters will not just come out and
tell adults they are being abused. Most fear what might happen
to them if they tell. Some feel they are betraying the abuser. Still
others believe that the abuse is their fault and should therefore
feel ashamed to tell others. Because of such confusion in the face
of this traumatic family crisis, it is important for adults to keep a
watchful eye on possible signs of child abuse (beyond those of a
physical nature). For more information on possible signs of child
abuse, the reader is directed to the American Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry (2008). 
School Violence
Real life episodes of school shootings are as horrifying as they are
tragic, prompting all of us to ponder the circumstances creating
such violent behavior. For example, consider the case of 15-year-
old Kipland Kinkel, who hardly captured the image of a real-life
school shooter and murderer. In fact, he appeared to be an ordi-
nary adolescent, gangly and unimposing, with freckles and a
School Violence
87

slight case of acne dotting his face. Growing up in Springfield,
Oregon, he tended to be on the shy side, a youngster who did not
have many friends and usually kept to himself. The Kinkel family
appeared to be a supportive and nurturing one: parents Bill and
Faith were highly successful educators and older sister Kristen
was outgoing and popular, a happy-go-lucky and well-adjusted
sibling.
But outward family appearances are sometimes deceiving,
and much swirled beneath the surface during Kip’s childhood
and adolescence. He repeated the first grade due to his slow
emotional and physical development, and his relationship with
his father became strained. He often saw himself in competition
with his older sister and usually ended up on the losing end. Kip
continued to have problems in school, including being bullied,
and by third grade had qualified for special education services.
He was eventually diagnosed with dyslexia, a learning disability
that alters the way the brain processes written material.
Matters would only get worse. As he got older, Kip became
easily frustrated in school and at home and developed an uncon-
trollable temper. He became drawn to guns, knives, and explo-
sives. He suffered from a failed relationship with a high school
sweetheart. He began to retreat into himself, spending countless
hours on the Internet, visiting pornographic sites and sites fea-
turing graphic violence. After a brush with the law for throwing
a 12-inch rock onto a car from an overpass, Kip was placed in
psychotherapy by the Kinkels, where he was diagnosed with a
major depressive disorder. He was hungry for attention, but an
undercurrent of pent-up anger and hostility drove him to seek it
in all the wrong ways. He was a powder keg ready to explode,
the stressors in his life creating intense emotional upheaval.
Kipland Kinkel would leave behind a legacy of horror on
May 20, 1998. After being expelled for bringing a handgun to
school, one of many firearms he owned, he murdered both his
parents. The next morning he drove to Thurston High School
wearing a trench coat to hide the weapons he was carrying: a 9
mm Glock pistol, a Ruger .22 semiautomatic rifle, a Ruger .22 pis-
tol, and a hunting knife taped to his leg. A backpack slung over
his shoulder was filled with extra ammunition. As he calmly
walked down a corridor leading to the cafeteria, he shot two stu-
dents. Once in the cafeteria, he opened fire with his rifle without
saying a word before he was overtaken by students and wrestled
88
Special U.S. Issues

to the floor. The casualties: 2 students dead, 25 wounded. When
the police arrived, Kinkel was arrested, and he is currently serv-
ing a 111-year prison term. He will never be eligible for parole.
Years ago, the school setting was considered a protective
shield and an extension of parental supervision, an environment
that posed few if any dangers and kept younger generations out
of harm’s way. However, an alarming number of school violence
episodes beginning in the early 1990s changed such thinking,
and safety in the classroom became an issue generating consid-
erable public concern and attention (see, for example, Schreck
and Miller 2003; Miller 2003; Addington et al. 2002). Chapter 6
provides various details on school violence (Figures 6.17, 6.18,
6.19, and 6.20).
Marlene Wong (2007) writes that over the past 20 years, al-
most 600 school shootings have taken place, not including planned
or attempted shootings that were prevented. The United States
leads the world in the number of school shootings, including those
at elementary schools, high schools, and colleges. Moreover, a
number of national surveys completed by high school youth indi-
cated that many students felt that a shooting could happen in their
school, some respondents identifying peers that they believed
were most likely to perpetrate such a crime.
In response to this traumatic family crisis, a barrage of inter-
ventions was launched from educational leaders and national
and state political leaders to tighten school security (e.g., Guerino
et al. 2007; Jimerson, Brock, and Pletcher 2005; Crepeau-Hobson,
Franci, and Marylynne 2005), and specialized training programs
were aimed at teachers to upgrade their knowledge of school vi-
olence (e.g., Newman 2007; Trump 2002; Druck and Kaplowitz
2005; Kohm 2004; Wilde 2002; Hester 2003).
According to the Report on Youth Violence (U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services, Office of the Surgeon General
2001) the United States has made laudable progress in gaining an
understanding of the magnitude of the problem. We have made
great strides in identifying and quantifying factors that, in par-
ticular settings or combinations, increase the probability that vi-
olence will occur. Furthermore, we have developed an array of
interventions of well-documented effectiveness in helping young
people whose lives are already marked by a propensity for vio-
lence as well as in preventing others from viewing violence as a
solution to needs, wants, or problems.
School Violence
89

These positive outcomes do not mean, however, that school
shootings no longer happen. A public uneasiness about the topic
still exists, and many parents today worry about the safety of
their children in the classroom. Among teachers, Lesli Maxwell
(2007) observes that each school shooting revives vexing ques-
tions and raises familiar fears for educators across the country
who grapple daily with ensuring the safety of their students and
staff.
The American Psychological Association (2007a) adds that
when children see episodes of school violence such as shootings
on television or on Web-based news flashes, it is natural for them
to worry about their own school and their own safety, particu-
larly if the violence occurred nearby or in a neighboring city or
state.
In its reporting, the media leave no stone unturned when cov-
ering school shootings. The live television broadcasts are haunt-
ingly similar: SWAT teams in full combat gear surrounding
school property, traumatized parents ashen-faced and terrorized,
bloodied survivors receiving emergency medical treatment, the
call for more ambulances and body bags. Few, if any, will ever
forget the above-mentioned 1998 Kinkel shootings or the one that
followed in 1999 at Columbine High School in Littleton, Col-
orado (in which 14 students and 1 teacher were killed and 23 oth-
ers were wounded).
The images of these tragic shootings and all others leave be-
hind unsettled and troubling memories, making an uneasy pop-
ulation wonder whether what ignited such violence and, worse,
if the nation’s schools would experience more of this new brand
of terrorism. Regarding the latter, the trail of violence since the
Columbine shooting has spoken for itself (see the chronology of
school shootings presented in Chapter 4).
Incidents involving other forms of school violence, while di-
minishing in occurrence, remain cause for concern. According to
Jill DeVoe and colleagues (2004), for youths to reach their poten-
tial in school, schools must be safe and secure places for students,
teachers, and staff members. Without a safe learning environ-
ment, educators may have trouble teaching and students may
have difficulty learning. As Ken Druck and Matthew Kaplowitz
(2005) report, school violence such as rape, robbery, theft, and ag-
gravated assault affects one in every five teenagers. It is no won-
der that many youngsters feel threatened in the midst of such
violence. Because of such sentiments, many parents and other
90
Special U.S. Issues

adults feel that America’s schools are under siege (Maxwell 2006;
Lubell and Vette 2006; Lavarello and Trump 2002).
Bullying and School Violence
Many students miss school because they fear attack or intimida-
tion through bullying. Bullying is a form of violence that exposes
a person to abusive actions repeatedly over time. It entails un-
wanted and repeated written, verbal, or physical behavior, in-
cluding any threatening, insulting, or dehumanizing gesture, by
an adult or a student that is severe or pervasive enough to create
an intimidating, hostile, or offensive educational environment. It
creates discomfort or humiliation for the victim and unreason-
ably interferes with the target person’s school performance or
participation (Florida Department of Education 2007; Shields and
Cicchetti 2001; Swearer and Doll 2001).
Students who are bullied experience a flood tide of negative
emotions. Feelings of persecution undermine feelings of safety
and confidence. Fear, frustration, anger, and anxiety may lead to
ongoing mood swings, illness, withdrawal from friends and fam-
ily, an inability to concentrate, and loss of interest in school. Bul-
lying can cause the targeted student to develop attendance
and/or discipline problems, or fail at school altogether. In the
worst scenarios, the bullied become suicidal or become retalia-
tory and violent (California Department of Education 2006; Es-
pelage and Holt 2001; Shields and Cicchetti 2001). The reader is
directed to Chapter 6 (Figures 6.21 and 6.22) for more informa-
tion on bullying.
Obviously, the reactions experienced by those who are bul-
lied connect directly to our topic of school shootings. The humil-
iation or degradation of bullying might be swallowed at the time,
but anger tends to steadily brew. According to the Menninger
Clinic (2005), in more than two-thirds of school shootings, clear
cases of bullying by social groups and individuals have been es-
tablished. Being bullied often combines with a troubling mix of
easy access to violent and hate-laden media, weaponry, and in-
formation on strategies for terrorist attacks. Such was the case
with the Kipland Kinkel shootings introduced at the beginning of
this section. A school’s response to bullying also deserves atten-
tion. A school climate that tolerates physical and relational ag-
gression, especially by popular groups such as athletes or
wealthier students, is at higher risk for violence.
School Violence
91

Implications for Family Life
Exploring the underlying dynamics of school shootings or school
violence in general is beyond the scope of this chapter. Rather,
our focus is on the implications of school violence for the family.
For those readers wishing to learn more about the motivations of
the perpetrators of school violence, as well as school program-
ming designed to curb school violence, a number of excellent
publications exist. We direct attention to Maxwell (2007); Gross
(2007); Lieberman (2006); Denmark (2005); Walker, Ramsey, and
Gresham (2004); Sexton-Radek (2004); and Wessler and Preble
(2003). In addition, Chapter 6 provides other details related to
school violence (Figures 6.23 and 6.24).
When school violence poses a threat of serious injury or
death, it can become a source of psychological distress for the
child and the family. Understanding how children are impacted
by this kind of traumatic crisis, including levels of distress ex-
pressed, can help the family system discover needed resources
and needed adaptation skills. The latter will hopefully restore the
family’s equilibrium and overall resiliency (National Child Trau-
matic Stress Network 2007a).
Marlene Wong’s (2007) review of the literature indicates that
witnessing school shootings and other kinds of school violence
affect different people in different ways. The American Psycho-
logical Association (2007a) concurs with this assessment and re-
ports that every child will respond to this traumatic crisis
differently. Some will have no ill effects; others may suffer an im-
mediate and acute effect. Still others may not show signs of stress
until sometime after the crisis event (Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention 2007b). 
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(2007b), it is natural for youngsters—no matter where they go to
school—to worry about whether this type of incident may some-
day affect them. Parents, teachers, and school administrators need
to join forces and communicate with one another not only about
how to keep children safe but also about which children might
need more reassurance and the best way to give it to them (Amer-
ican Psychological Association 2007a; Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention 2007b). Talking with children about these
tragedies, and what they watch or hear about them, can help put
frightening or disturbing information into a better perspective to
achieve family equilibrium. Along these lines, experts (e.g., Amer-
92
Special U.S. Issues

ican Psychological Association 2007a; Dorn 2005; Jones and
Compton 2003) recommend that parents monitor how much ex-
posure a child has to news reports of traumatic events, including
those centering on recent school shootings.
Natural Disasters
When Hurricane Katrina unleashed its fury on the Gulf Coast of
the United States on August 29, 2005, it was the third-strongest
hurricane on record. Building up its strength in the Atlantic on
August 23, it traveled landward and left immense devastation in
its path along the north-central Gulf Coast. However, it saved its
worst loss and property damage for New Orleans, arriving with
145 mile-per-hour winds, flooding the levee system, and placing
about 80 percent of New Orleans under water. At least 1,836 peo-
ple lost their lives in Hurricane Katrina and in the subsequent
floods, about 400,000 jobs were lost, and about 1 million people
became homeless (Clarke 2005; Comfort 2005; Friedman 2005;
Mlakar 2005).
Hurricane Katrina is an example of a natural disaster, an ex-
treme, sudden traumatic crises caused by environmental factors.
Natural disasters can strike at any time, often with little or no
warning, and can threaten the lives of people and destroy prop-
erty in their wake. Examples of natural disasters are hurricanes,
tsunamis, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, extreme heat waves,
droughts, floods, landslides and mudslides, tornadoes, volcanoes,
and wildfires. Natural disasters are also classified as endemic
stressors (see Chapter 1) because they are beyond our control and
thus cannot be prevented. Rather, we must learn to live with
them. They are especially dangerous because the changes they
bring are comparatively rapid and affect our immediate environ-
ment and safety (Pararas-Carayannis 2007; Halpern and Tramon-
tin 2007). Tables 6.6 and 6.7 and Figure 6.25 provide information
on natural disasters occurring in 2006.
Lynne Borden (2003) points out that a distinction needs to be
made between a natural disaster and a human-made disaster.
While natural disasters are caused by forces of nature, human-
made disasters, such as vehicle accidents, mining cave-ins, war,
and terrorist attacks, pose a different set of challenges for families
and often create greater distress than natural disasters. Terrorist
attacks in recent years have created a seemingly unending array
Natural Disasters
93

of traumatic crises: hijackings, bombings, kidnappings, execu-
tions, and mass murder. Individuals and families perceive these
and all human-made disasters as involving someone or some-
thing (e.g., government, terrorists, business) that is to blame (Bor-
den 2003).
Understanding the experience of families living with disas-
ter requires considering the family system and the community
context, including circumstances prior to, during, and after the
disaster. Also, it is important to consider the impact of the disas-
ter on the community. Each disaster is different, depending on its
scope and intensity, and on characteristics of the community,
family, and individual. Disasters can take their toll in many ways,
including destruction of infrastructure; absence of electricity, san-
itation, and potable water; destruction of physical contact with
the outside world (e.g., roadways, phones, and bridges); vulner-
ability and exploitation due to disaster and media sensational-
ism; and potential recurrence (Borden 2003).
On a personal level, people often try to make sense of what
happened and deal with the stress of the situation. Disasters create
a tremendous amount of stress and anxiety for those directly and
indirectly affected. In the days and weeks following the disaster,
survivors typically experience a variety of reactions: fear and anx-
iety about the future, shock and disbelief, disorientation, difficulty
making decisions or concentrating, recurring thoughts about the
event, anger, and sadness and depression (Halpern and Tramontin
2007; Mental Health America 2007a). As we have seen throughout
this book, the primary stressor has the potential of unleashing a
multitude of secondary stressors.
Implications for Family Life
When a disaster strikes a family member or the whole family, the
entire system experiences the aftermath. Traumatic crises have
the ability to disrupt functions and routines within the family,
such as parents’ emotional nurturing, attention, and protection.
Children may be especially at risk as traumatized parents often
reduce physical contact and try to shield their offspring from the
realities of what happened. Communication, intimacy, and ex-
pressiveness may be affected, resulting in a reduced capacity to
cope with internal and external demands. Single parents may be
at special risk, given the multiple resources that are drained fol-
94
Special U.S. Issues

lowing a disaster (Dyregrov 2007). Notice the connection here to
the first component of the Double ABCX model, the pileup of
family demands.
The needs of children and youth come to the forefront when
a family experiences a natural disaster. According to one source
(Lazarus, Jimerson, and Brock 2002), experiencing a dangerous or
violent flood, storm, or earthquake is frightening even for adults,
and the devastation to one’s surroundings can be long lasting and
distressing. Often an entire community is impacted, further un-
dermining a child’s sense of security and normalcy (Howitt and
Leonard 2006). These factors present a variety of unique issues
and coping challenges, including issues associated with specific
types of natural disasters, the need to relocate when home and/or
community have been destroyed, the role of the family in lessen-
ing or exacerbating the trauma, emotional reactions, and coping
techniques (Halpern and Tramontin 2007). Such challenges em-
brace both psychological and social stressors (see Chapter 1).
According to the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(2006), children look to parents or other caregivers for guidance
on how to manage their reactions after the immediate threat is
over. Children’s coping with disaster or emergencies is often tied
to the way parents cope. Children have uncanny radar and can
pick up on adults’ fears and sadness. Parents and adults can
make disasters less traumatic for children by taking steps to man-
age their own feelings and plans for coping. Parents are almost
always the best source of support for children in disasters.
To summarize, multitudes of families across the United
States find themselves in the difficult position of dealing with the
ramifications of an ongoing natural disaster (drought) or an im-
mediate natural disaster (tornado, wildfire, hurricane). Regard-
less of the type or duration of the disaster, such unforeseen
events create a traumatic crisis for families. Families affected by
disaster are forced to cope with the immediate disaster and its
long-term effects, in addition to the typical daily stressors faced
by all families. Most families can learn to live with what has hap-
pened in a way that ensures the continued health of all con-
cerned. If the disaster is dealt with openly and directly within
the family, and children’s and adolescents’ needs are acknowl-
edged and met, they can achieve family equilibrium and go on
with their lives in a constructive manner (Zenere 2004; Borden
2003).
Natural Disasters
95

Deployed Military Families
It was an especially difficult good-bye for Ned and Rita Hart.
Ned is a sergeant in the U.S. Army and was being deployed to
Iraq, his second tour of duty in the Middle East. He is a veteran
of the first Persian Gulf War but knows his deployment to Oper-
ation Iraqi Freedom will be a longer and much more dangerous
haul. He was recently informed by his company commander that
military deployments had been extended from 12 to 15 months.
Both Ned and Rita grew up in military families. They got
married shortly after high school and Ned enlisted the next year.
Since then, the Harts have brought two children into the world,
Leah and Andrea. Both girls attend public school, and Rita works
as a receptionist at a local pharmaceutical company.
Ned enlisted in the army for a number of reasons: family tra-
dition, a chance to travel, a sense of adventure, and a desire to
serve his country. Over the past year, though, he has found his loy-
alty wavering. He has lost a number of combat friends in Iraq, and
now he wonders if his country is fighting against an enemy that
can never be beat. He views his upcoming tour with a mixture of
hope and fear, and recognizes that the road ahead represents dan-
gerous and unsettling times. Leaving behind a loving wife and
two beautiful children does not make separation any easier.
Rita shares the same uncertainties and anxieties, and saying
good-bye is even worse than ever before. She has spent her adult
life balancing army needs with personal and family needs, but
her husband’s current deployment into hostile territory for such
an extended period is by far the most formidable challenge. She
knows that the thought of perhaps becoming a widow will weigh
heavily on her each day, as will the struggle of raising two chil-
dren alone and trying to maintain household equilibrium.
Ned’s deployment is hardly earth-shattering news. Since the
terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, military operations in
Afghanistan and Iraq have required substantial increases in the
number of U.S. service members deployed and the frequency
with which units are sent overseas. Through December 2007,
more than 1.4 million active-duty personnel and 400,000 reserve
personnel had been deployed to those theaters and served a tour
of duty. But Afghanistan and Iraq do not paint a complete picture
of U.S. military involvement. The forces of the U.S. military are
located in nearly 130 countries around the world, performing a
variety of duties from combat operations to peacekeeping to
96
Special U.S. Issues

training with foreign militaries. Some of these deployments have
existed for nearly 50 years, as in Japan, Germany, and South
Korea (Global Security 2007; U.S. Congress 2007).
Ned and Rita Hart join legions of other deployed military
families who are forced to deal with an unpredictable, traumatic
family crisis. The life-threatening potential of military deployment
has become a fact of life for military families. Currently, 700,000
children in the United States have at least one parent deployed
overseas for military duty; more than half a million children under
the age of five are waiting for their active-duty National Guard or
Reserve mother or father to come home. This total is the highest
since World War II. Since 2001, 160,000 female troops have also
been deployed, and 10 percent of them are single mothers (U.S.
Congress 2007; American Psychological Association 2007b; Bennis
and Leaver 2005).
Implications for Family Life
When a family member goes to war, the separation is usually
painful for all concerned and results in a flood of unsettled emo-
tions. Feelings such as pride, anger, fear, and bitterness can add
to the distress of uncertainty. Anxieties mount if the military as-
signment is in a hostile environment, and intensified even further
when the media transmit news of war atrocities, suicide bomb-
ings, and environmental destruction (Whealin and Pivar 2007).
Due to the sheer number of deployed service men and
women in the world today, many military families face repeated
deployments. In many instances, it is unknown when a deploy-
ment will end, which serves to elevate the tension and uncer-
tainty of this family crisis. According to Simon Pincus and
colleagues (2007) and Jennifer Morse (2007), it is possible to es-
tablish seven rather predictable emotional stages of deployment.
Each stage is characterized both by a time frame and by specific
emotional challenges for the family, which must be dealt with
and mastered by the system. Failure to adequately negotiate
these challenges can lead to disequilibrium within the system as
well as within the deployed soldier. Morse’s (2007) seven stages
are described below.
Anticipation of Departure
Before the departure occurs, partners may feel a mixture of de-
nial and anticipation of loss. As the deployment date edges
Deployed Military Families
97

closer, tempers often erupt as partners attempt to take care of all
necessary preparations, obligations, and duties while simultane-
ously trying to make time for themselves and their loved one.
This stage reappears during all future deployments.
Detachment and Withdrawal
Here, the soon-to-be-deployed partner becomes focused on the
pending mission and connectedness with his or her unit. Re-
garding the latter, such bonding with one’s unit may create emo-
tional detachment from the family system. Sadness and anger
might occur as couples seek to protect themselves from the pain
and hurt of separation. As this stage happens more frequently,
marital friction may increase. The creation of emotional insula-
tion is seen by many as a coping strategy, but in reality it only
serves to create more distance. It may well be that such “numb-
ing” behaviors are preferable to feeling sad or distraught.
Emotional Disorganization
With repeated deployments, one might surmise that emotional
upheaval and domestic instability would lessen. However, this is
not always the case. While a military spouse may be used to the
routine(s), he or she may also be experiencing “burnout” and fa-
tigue from the last deployment (no doubt a pileup of stressors as
captured by the Double ABCX model). Many spouses report feel-
ing overwhelmed starting this stage again.
Recovery and Stabilization
During this stage, most partners recognize that they are resilient
and able to meet the challenges attached to deployment. Confi-
dence is achieved and a positive outlook emerges. With repeated
deployments, however, partners may face difficulty rallying the
emotional strength required. The quest for family equilibrium is
not an easy journey, and some families struggle with it more than
others.
Anticipation of Return
For most, this becomes a happy and hectic time, a period of an-
ticipation preparing for the return of the service member. Fam-
ily members need to discuss realistic plans and expectations for
the return and reunion, the end result being the restoration of
equilibrium.
98
Special U.S. Issues

Return Adjustment and Renegotiation
Once the service member is home, the family system must
reestablish its expectations and renegotiate its roles. If the re-
turning veteran has experienced war-related injuries and/or
stress-related symptoms, the complexities of family adjustment
magnify. It goes without saying that combat fatalities pose addi-
tional stressors and create other waves of family upheaval and
disequilibrium.
The key to establishing household stability is engaging in
open and honest communication. The family must also reckon
with the lingering effects of combat stress on the returning service
member. The existing literature exposes how difficult this transi-
tion can be (see, for example, Mental Health America 2007b;
Drummet, Coleman, and Cable 2003; Patterson 2002). Those ser-
vice members suffering from combat stress are often guarded, are
often irritable, and prefer solitude. Some may resort to substance
abuse in an attempt to “numb” the emotional pain and dark
memories. Efforts to renegotiate family stability and equilibrium
may trigger marital friction.
Reintegration and Stabilization
This final stage can take up to six months as the family regains
equilibrium, although lingering combat stress can lengthen the
duration. For most, family dynamics capture renewed vitality
and harmony. However, disequilibrium may return should addi-
tional stressors be encountered, such as the family being ordered
to establish a new residence upon the return of the service mem-
ber. Back-to-back deployments create stress and a return of the
family to the first stage.
What can military families do to best weather this traumatic
crisis? According to Lorraine Gallagher (2007), having a primary
caretaker dispatched to a war zone can be one of the most stress-
ful events a family can experience. She recognizes that military
deployment is hard on everyone and offers some relatively sim-
ple guidelines that can make deployment easier and enable the
time to pass more quickly for all concerned. These guidelines are
discussed below.
The importance of sustaining effective family communica-
tion cannot be overstated. It is important for families to discuss
how they are feeling about all of the changes that are taking place
or pending. By sharing feelings and providing mutual support,
Deployed Military Families
99

the transition will be smoother and will enable the family to
achieve resiliency. Gallagher (2007) suggests spending as much
family time as possible before the departure. This need for con-
nectedness is especially important if children are involved. De-
pending on their developmental level, youngsters might not
understand what is happening and may not be able to express
what they are feeling. Parents and caregivers need to help them
understand and provide the special attention needed to get them
through deployment with minimal adjustment problems.
Another guideline is for the family to seek help when it is
needed. It is very important for family members to keep their spir-
its high and offer mutual support. This can be accomplished, at
least in part, by family members and service members writing and
calling each other. They can also send pictures to show how some-
one has changed or how the kids have grown. Some send tape
recordings or videos to each other. Finally, deployed military fam-
ilies need to be encouraged to seek out more formal support and
assistance if needed (the notion of expanded family resources in
the Double ABCX model). People who have had previous mental
health problems and who have survived past trauma may also
want to check in with a mental health care professional. Nearly
every military installation has a family service center, family sup-
port center, or community service center where persons can access
information, referral, counseling, and crisis intervention services
(Hoshmand and Hoshmand 2007; Mental Health America 2007b;
Martin et al. 2004; Drummet, Coleman, and Cable 2003).
Before closing, we need to acknowledge that fairly recent re-
search has uncovered a dark side to deployed military families:
child maltreatment. More specifically, researchers (Gibbs et al.
2007) have suggested that children are more likely to experience
maltreatment at home during large-scale military deployments,
raising concerns about the impact of war on military personnel
and their families across the United States.
Gibbs and colleagues (2007) conducted a large-scale investi-
gation to measure the impact of the 9/11 terrorist attacks on mili-
tary and nonmilitary families. The sample consisted of 1,771 Texas
families of noncommissioned soldiers who had been combat-
deployed at least once between 2001 and 2004. The researchers
chose to study Texas families because of the large military popu-
lation there and the availability of data.
The researchers discovered that prior to October 2002, rates
of child maltreatment were a bit higher among nonmilitary fam-
100
Special U.S. Issues

ilies compared with military families. However, after the United
States began deploying larger numbers of troops to Afghanistan
and Iraq in 2003, rates of abuse and neglect in military families
surpassed the rates among nonmilitary families. More specifi-
cally, rates of child maltreatment in military families rose twice as
high in the period after October 2002 compared with the period
prior to this time. During the same time frame, the rate of sub-
stantiated child abuse and neglect was relatively stable for non-
military families. The higher rates of child maltreatment were
associated with increases both in deployments and in returns
from deployment. For more on the topic of child maltreatment,
the reader is directed back to the section on domestic violence
earlier in this chapter.
Although family support services are available in each
branch of military services to assist deployed troops and their
families, this investigation reveals that either deployed families
are not able to access the resources available to them or the exist-
ing support services do not effectively respond to the needs of the
deployed families. In other words, the family is not able to
achieve the balance outlined in the ABCX model. The investiga-
tors emphasized that some type of additional intervention should
be explored, perhaps providing more support and educational
programs for family members during the deployment period.
Teenage Suicide
News of the suicidal death of 15-year-old Sean Riggins reverber-
ated through the community. Neighbors bunched together and
talked in hushed tones about what he did and how he did it, a
four-story leap from an abandoned warehouse that resulted in
massive head trauma. No one could understand how something
so tragic could have happened.
Sean had suffered from depression since middle school. He
became moody and irritable in the eighth grade, sometimes even
defiant and rebellious, which prompted his parents to seek psy-
chiatric assistance. After an initial evaluation and diagnosis, he
was prescribed Zoloft and saw his therapist once a month.
Things calmed down, at least for a little while. On the outside, it
looked like Sean Riggins had regained his footing.
Entry into high school, though, placed Sean on a collision
course with new pressures and challenges. He became the target
Teenage Suicide
101

of bullies, something he had experienced off and on in middle
school. He kept the bullying to himself, swallowing whatever in-
sults or humiliation that came his way, wanting desperately to
come across as one of the guys. He had a girlfriend for a little
while, but that relationship failed and ushered in a new wave of
dejection and despondency.
During the winter of his freshman year, Sean’s behavior
changed. Although his grades were at acceptable levels, he began
cutting classes and hanging out with the wrong crowd. Contact
with his family was minimal—he didn’t get along with his step-
father and rarely spent time with his older brother—and he
began pulling more and more into himself. He lost interest in any
outside activities and his moods became dark again, prompting
his parents to schedule several appointments with Sean’s psychi-
atrist. The psychiatrist increased Sean’s medication and began
seeing Sean biweekly instead of monthly. Little did anyone know
that Sean had taken himself off the Zoloft; each day he tossed the
unused tablets down the bathroom sink.
Sean’s friends would remark later that he seemed agitated
and preoccupied—more so than usual—before he chose to end his
life. Most attributed his darkness to the upcoming term exams
staring every freshman in the face. Sean, though, was on a down-
ward spiral. He spent most of his days wasting time and evenings
behind his bedroom door, listening to the Grateful Dead or star-
ing vacantly at the television. When his parents checked in on
him, he made sure he had an open textbook or notebook next to
him, wanting to create the image of the serious and determined
student. What he was really doing was planning to end his life,
the only missing piece being how he was going to do it. The aban-
doned warehouse four blocks away beckoned and eventually pro-
vided him with the answer.
At an age when they are supposed to have everything to live
for, about 2 million adolescents each year attempt suicide, and al-
most 700,000 receive medical attention for their attempt. In 2001,
2.6 percent of students reported making a suicide attempt that
had to be treated by a doctor or nurse. It is estimated that each
year in the United States, approximately 2,000 youth age 10 to 19
complete suicide, making suicide the third-leading cause of
death among young people age 15 to 24, following unintentional
injuries and homicide. As many as 25 suicides are attempted for
each one that is completed (National Institute of Mental Health
2006; National Alliance on Mental Illness 2003). Table 6.8, con-
102
Special U.S. Issues

tained in Chapter 6, charts suicide death rates for teenagers as
well as those for other age brackets.
Recent trends in adolescent suicide are cause for concern. In
2007, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported that
the suicide rate rose 8 percent for young people between the ages
of 10 and 24 from 2003 to 2004 (based on the latest numbers avail-
able). Such findings suggest a troubling reversal of fairly recent
trends, a 25 percent decline in teenage suicide rates since the early
1990s. The suicide rate among preteen and young teen girls rose 76
percent, the causes of which are puzzling to health officials. Sui-
cide rates among older adolescent females, those age 15 to 19,
spiked 32 percent; rates for males in that age group increased by 9
percent. Males committed suicide far more often than females, ac-
counting for about three-quarters of adolescent suicide (Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention 2007c, 2007d).
Regarding this upswing in suicides, the declining use of an-
tidepressants among adolescents is thought to play a role. Several
years ago, federal regulators warned that antidepressants seemed
to raise the risk of suicidal behavior among teenagers, so black
box warnings were put on the drugs’ packaging. With the recent
outbreak, experts also noted a drop in the sales of antidepressants.
According to the National Institute of Mental Health (2006),
suicidal behavior is complex. Some risk factors vary with age, gen-
der, or ethnic group and may occur in combination or change over
time. Suicide rates are highest among non-Hispanic whites and sec-
ond highest among American Indian and Native Alaskan males.
The lowest rates are found among non-Hispanic blacks, Asians and
Pacific Islanders, and Hispanics. Although non-Hispanic white
adolescents commit suicide at a much higher rate than non-
Hispanic blacks, the suicide rate for non-Hispanic blacks has al-
most doubled over the last 20 years (Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention 2007c, 2007d; Lipton 2006; Rudd et al. 2006).
As far as gender differences are concerned, males outnum-
ber females four to one in the number of suicidal deaths reported
each year. But as far as attempted suicides are concerned, females
clearly outnumber males. Females also are more apt to allow for
intervention and are more likely to “call for help” through a sui-
cide attempt. Gender differences also appear when one considers
the means teenagers use to commit suicide. Females tend to over-
dose on drugs or cut themselves. Males use firearms, hanging, or
jumping more frequently. Given the fact that males choose more
sudden, lethal methods, it makes sense that they are more likely
Teenage Suicide
103

to succeed in their attempts. Firearms are used in about 60 per-
cent of all adolescent suicides (Penn State Medical Center 2006;
Soreff 2006).
Adolescents often experience stress and confusion from situ-
ations occurring in their families, schools, and communities. Such
feelings can overwhelm young people and lead them to consider
suicide as a “solution” (Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion, 2007c, 2007d). Where do such feelings originate? What moti-
vates teenagers to take their lives? One persistent theme is
depression; many have a pervasive feeling of worthlessness, ap-
prehension, and hopelessness (see Figures 6.26 and 6.27 and Table
6.9 in Chapter 6 for a graphic portrayal of the link between de-
pression and suicidal behavior). Such feelings create a sense of
helplessness, a general feeling that life is not worth living. Other
factors linked to adolescent suicidal behavior include previous
suicide attempts, a family history of mental disorders or suicidal
behavior, family violence (physical or sexual abuse), exposure to
other adolescents who have committed suicide, being bullied,
easy access to firearms, and aggressive and disruptive behavior
(National Institute of Mental Health 2006; Soreff 2006; Caruso
2007). Finally, a connection between substance abuse and suicidal
behavior is well documented in the literature (Agosti and Levin
2006; Brady 2006; Conner et al. 2006; Esposito-Smythers et al.
2006; Goldstein and Levitt 2006). Referring back to material cov-
ered in Chapter 1, it becomes obvious that suicidal teenagers have
experienced a pileup of personal and family demands.
For adolescents who are already receiving psychiatric treat-
ment, family therapy may be an effective approach to help par-
ents and family members to understand better the problems of
their adolescent. The goals of such education are to increase com-
pliance with treatment, promote a partnership with the parents
so that they can monitor the patient with regard to recurrences,
and help the family learn how to cope with a child with a psy-
chiatric illness (Berman 2006a, 2006b; National Alliance on Men-
tal Illness 2003). As we have witnessed in all of our family crisis
situations, a systems approach to the problem is the preferred
mode of treatment.
Implications for Family Life
The death of a family member is a serious crisis at any time, but es-
pecially so with the sudden loss of a child or teenager. For parents,
104
Special U.S. Issues

a traumatic crisis such as this is likely the most painful loss imag-
inable. The fact that suicide was involved intensifies the heartache
and suffering. According to Peter Durand (2006), when a teenager
dies by suicide, a number of reactions are often experienced.
First, family members have a strong and perpetual need to
know what happened, yet so many unanswered questions will
likely remain. The frustrating aspect of this need is that the facts
have died with the teenager. The reality of the situation is that the
family may never know what truly happened. Further contribut-
ing to the frustration is that family members spend considerable
energy trying to make sense of a senseless incident.
It also needs to be recognized that the suicide leaves behind
a legacy of guilt. It is not uncommon for family members to blame
themselves for what happened—the “if onlys” and “I wishes.”
Such feelings can create extreme levels of anxiety and stress. An
important part of grief work for family members is coming to the
conclusion that they could not have done anything to prevent the
suicide. Such acceptance may take time to evolve as family mem-
bers share their guilt with someone they trust (Parkes 2002; Jor-
dan 2001; Carlson 2000).
The value of support groups cannot be overstressed. For
many survivors, an important facet of the healing process is the
support and sense of connection they feel through sharing their
grief with other survivors. The most common way this sharing
occurs is through survivor support groups. Such groups provide
a safe haven where survivors can share their experiences and
offer supportive assistance to one another. Support groups can be
an important way to connect with other survivors and enable the
bereaved to be able to talk openly about suicide with people who
really understand (American Foundation for Suicide Prevention
2007).
Summary
A traumatic crisis is an extreme variation of a situational crisis
and is unpredictable and often life threatening. This chapter ex-
plored five kinds of traumatic crises: domestic violence, school
violence, natural disasters, deployed military families, and ado-
lescent suicide. Never has the need been greater to understand
traumatic crises, given the escalating numbers of American fam-
ilies forced to deal with them.
Summary
105

The path to recovery is a difficult one. It is not uncommon for
families to relive the trauma, in the process experiencing feelings of
loss, vulnerability, and insecurity. Relapses are not uncommon, nor
are secondary stressors accompanying the upheaval—problem
drinking, domestic violence, abandonment, and health issues often
entering the mix. Many survivors suffer from an acute stress disor-
der, a psychological disturbance marked by intense levels of inse-
curity and fear. Basic assumptions of safety and security are
shattered in the wake of traumatic crises, often leading to feelings
of vulnerability and insecurity. We acknowledged in this chapter
that children and adults respond in different ways to traumatic
crises. Both young and old need to be reassured that they are safe
and assured that ongoing guidance and contact are available.
Recovery from traumatic crises and the restoration of control
and confidence knows wide variation. The depth of impact from
the crisis on the family influences the timetable of recovery time,
and we must take into consideration the family’s state of affairs
when the crisis strikes, especially the presence of concurrent mul-
tiple stressors. Intervention specialists need to help the troubled
family identify and share thoughts and images of the crisis, in-
cluding an acceptance of what happened and intentions to chart
a new path in life.
References
Abbott, Patrick L. 2004. Natural Disasters, 4th ed. New York: McGraw-
Hill Higher Education.
Addington, L. A., S. A. Ruddy, A. K. Miller, and J. F. DeVoe. 2002. Are
America’s Schools Safe? Students Speak Out. Washington, DC: National
Center for Education Statistics.
Agosti, V., and F. R. Levin. 2006. “One-Year Follow-up Study of Suicide
Attempters Treated for Drug Dependence.” American Journal on Addic-
tions 15 (4): 293 296.
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 2008. “Child
Abuse: The Hidden Bruises.” [Online information; retrieved 8/29/07.]
http://aacap.org/cs/root/facts for families/child abuse the hidden
bruises.
American Foundation for Suicide Prevention. 2007. “Coping with Sui-
cide Loss: Support Groups.” [Online information; retrieved 8/20/07.]
http://www.afsp.org/index.cfm?fuseaction=home.viewPage&page.
106
Special U.S. Issues

American Psychological Association. 2007a. “Talking to Your Children
about the Recent Spate of School Shootings.” [Online article; retrieved
7/13/07.] http://www.apa.org/topics/schoolshooting.html.
American Psychological Association. 2007b. “Psychological Needs of
Military Personnel and Their Families Are Not Being Met, Reports APA
Task Force.” [Online article; retrieved 8/3/07.] http://www.medical
newstoday.com/articles/63863.php.
Bancroft, L., and J. G. Silverman. 2002. The Batterer as Parent: Addressing the
Impact of Domestic Violence on Family Dynamics. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Barnett, O. W., C. L. Miller-Perrin, and R. D. Perrin. 2005. Family Violence
across the Lifespan: An Introduction. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Bennis, Phyllis, and Erik Leaver. “The Iraq Quagmire: The Mounting
Costs of War and the Case for Bringing Home the Troops.” Foreign Pol-
icy in Focus (August 31, 2005).
Berman, A. L. 2006a. “Suicide Data: What the Family Therapist Needs to
Know.” American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy 6 (July/
August): 7 10.
Berman, A. L. 2006b. “Risk Assessment, Treatment Planning, and Man-
agement of the At-Risk for Suicide Client.” American Association for Mar-
riage and Family Therapy 6 (July/August): 13 15.
Bolton, D., D. O’Ryan, O. Udwin, S. Boyle, and W. Yule. 2000. “The Long-
Term Psychological Effects of a Disaster Experienced in Adolescence:
General Psychopathology.” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and
Allied Disciplines 41:513 523.
Bonnie, R. J., and R. B. Wallace. 2003. Elder Mistreatment: Abuse, Neglect,
and Exploitation in an Aging America. Washington, DC: National Acade-
mies Press.
Borden, L. 2003. “Supporting Families Following a Disaster.” [Online
fact sheet; retrieved 7/19/07.] http://ag.arizona.edu/fcs/supporting
families/01overview.html.
Bowen, G. L., J. A. Mancini, J. A. Martin, W. B. Ware, and J. P. Nelson.
2003. “Promoting the Adaptation of Military Families: An Empirical Test
of a Community Practice Model.” Family Relations: Interdisciplinary Jour-
nal of Applied Family Studies 52:33 44.
Brady, J. 2006. “The Association between Alcohol Misuse and Suicidal
Behavior.” Alcohol and Alcoholism 41 (5): 473 478.
California Department of Education. 2006. “Bullying Frequently Asked
Questions.” [Online information; retrieved 8/8/07.] http://www.cde.
ca.gov/ls/ss/se/bullyfaq.asp.
Carlson, T. 2000. Suicide Survivors Handbook. Duluth, MN: Benline Press.
References
107

Carp, F. M. 2000. Elder Abuse in the Family: An Interdisciplinary Model for
Research. New York: Springer.
Caruso, K. 2007. “Bullied Children Suffer Behavioral Problems; Are at Risk
for Suicide.” [Online article; retrieved 8/20/07.] http://www.suicide.
org/bullied-children-suffer-behavioral-problems.html.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2007a. “Child Maltreat-
ment: Fact Sheet.” [Online fact sheet; retrieved 8/29/07.] http://www.
cdc.gov/ncipc/factsheets/cmfacts.htm.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2007b. “School Violence:
Tips for Coping with Stress.” [Online article; retrieved 7/13/07.] http://
www.cdc.gov/Features/SchoolViolence/.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2007c. “Suicide Prevention.”
[Online fact sheet; retrieved 8/20/07.] http://www.cdc.gov/ncipc/
factsheets/suifacts.htm.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2007d. “Suicide Trends
among Youths and Young Adults Aged 10 24 Years; United States,
1990 2004.” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 56 (35): 905 908.
Clarke, L. 2005. “Worst Case Katrina.” Social Science Research Council
12:6 12.
Conner, K. R., V. M. Hesselbrock, M. A. Schuckit, J. K. Hirsch, K. L. Knox,
and S. Meldrum. 2006. “Precontemplated and Impulsive Suicide At-
tempts among Individuals with Alcohol Dependence.” Journal of Studies
on Alcohol 67 (1): 95 101.
Cooper, J., and A. Vetere. 2005. Domestic Violence and Family Safety: A Sys-
temic Approach to Working with Violence in Families. London: Whurr/Wiley.
Crepeau-Hobson, M., F. Franci, and G. L. Marylynne. 2005. “Violence
Prevention after Columbine: A Survey of High School Mental Health
Professionals.” Children and Schools 27 (3): 157 165.
Denmark, F. L., ed. 2005. Violence in Schools: Cross-National and Cross-
Cultural Perspectives. New York: Springer.
DeVoe, J. F., P. Kaufman, A. Miller, M. Noonan, T.D. Snyder, and K.
Baum. 2004. Indicators of School Crime and Safety. 2004. Washington, DC:
U.S. Department of Education and U.S. Department of Justice.
Dorn, C. 2005. Innocent Targets: When Terrorism Comes to School. Atlanta:
Georgia Institute of Technology.
Druck, K., and M. Kaplowitz. 2005. “Preventing Classroom Violence.”
Education Digest 71 (2): 40 43.
Drummet, A. R., M. Coleman, and S. Cable. 2003. “Military Families
under Stress: Implications for Family Life Education.” Family Relations
52 (3): 279 294.
108
Special U.S. Issues

Durand, P. 2006. “When Someone Dies by Suicide.” [Online information;
retrieved 8/20/07.] http://www.griefworksbc.com/Suicide.asp.
Dyregrov, A. 2007. “Family Recovery from Terror, Grief and Trauma.” [On-
line article; retrieved 7/16/07.] http://www.icisf.org/articles/Acrobat
%20Documents/TerrorismIncident/Terrorovertime.html.
Espelage, D. L., and M. Holt. 2001. “Bullying and Victimization during
Early Adolescence: Peer Influences and Psychosocial Correlates.” Journal
of Emotional Abuse 2 (3): 123 142.
Esposito-Smythers, C., A. Spirito, R. Uth, and H. LaChance. 2006. “Cog-
nitive Behavioral Treatment for Suicidal Alcohol Abusing Adolescents:
Development and Pilot Testing.” American Journal on Addictions 15
(Suppl. 1): 126 130.
Fazzone, P. A., J. K. Holton, and B. G. Reed. 2001. Substance Abuse Treat-
ment and Domestic Violence. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services.
Federal Emergency Management Agency. 2006. Helping Children Cope
with Disaster. [Online information, retrieved 8/6/08.]  http://www.fema.
gov/rebuild/recover/cope child.shtm
Feindler, E. L., J. H. Rathus, and L. B. Silver. 2003. Assessment of Family
Violence: A Handbook for Researchers and Practitioners. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Flannery, D. J. 2006. Violence and Mental Health in Everyday Life: Prevention
and Intervention Strategies for Children and Adolescents. Lanham, MD: 
AltaMira Press.
Florida Department of Education. 2007. “Florida’s Bullying Prevention
Project.” [Online information; retrieved 8/8/07.] http://www.fldoe.
org/besss/bullying.asp.
Fowler, J. 2003. A Practitioner’s Tool for Child Protection and the Assessment
of Parents. Philadelphia: Jessica Kingsley.
Friedman, J. 2005. “Reflections on Katrina.” Policy and Practice of Public
Human Services 63 (4): 12 16.
Gallagher, L. C. 2007. “U.S. Military Deployment: When a Family Mem-
ber Leaves.” [Online article; retrieved 8/2/07.] http://www.operation
homefront.org/Info/info deploy familymember.shtml.
Geffner, R., D. G. Dutton, and D. J. Sonkin. 2002. Intimate Violence: Con-
temporary Treatment Innovations. Binghamton, NY: Haworth.
Gibbs, D. A., S. L. Martin, L. L. Kupper, and R. E. Johnson. 2007. “Child
Maltreatment in Enlisted Soldiers’ Families during Combat-Related De-
ployment.” Journal of the American Medical Association 298 (5): 528 535.
References
109

Global Security. 2007. “Where are the Legions? Global Deployments of
U.S. Forces.” [Online information; retrieved 8/2/07.] http://www.global
security.org/military/ops/global-deployments.htm.
Goenjian, A. K., L. Molina, A. M. Steinberg, and L. A. Fairbanks. 2001.
“Post Traumatic Stress and Depressive Reactions among Adolescents
after Hurricane Mitch.” American Journal of Psychiatry 158:788 794.
Goldenberg, H., and I. Goldenberg. 2008. Family Therapy: An Overview,
7th ed. Belmont, CA: Thomson Learning.
Goldstein, B. I., and A. J. Levitt. 2006. “Is Current Alcohol Consumption
Associated with Increased Lifetime Prevalence of Major Depression and
Suicidality? Results from a Pilot Community Survey.” Comprehensive
Psychiatry 47 (5): 330 333.
Gondolf, E. W. 2002. Batterer Intervention Systems: Issues, Outcomes, and
Recommendations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Goodman, L. A., and D. Epstein. 2007. Listening to Battered Women: A
Survivor-Centered Approach to Advocacy, Mental Health, and Justice. Wash-
ington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Greenberg, J. S. 2008. Comprehensive Stress Management, 10th ed. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Gross, K. A. 2007. “Good Policy, Not Stories, Can Reduce Violence.”
Chronicle of Higher Education 53 (35): B10.
Guerino, P., M. Hurwitz, M. E. Noonan, and S. E. Kaffenberger. 2007.
Crime, Violence, Discipline, and Safety in U.S. Public Schools: Findings from
the School Survey on Crime and Safety. Washington, DC: National Center
for Education Statistics.
Halpern, J., and M. Tramontin. 2007. Disaster Mental Health. Belmont,
CA: Thomson Learning.
Harrison, C. 2007. “Protect Children from Post-Traumatic Stress Disor-
der (PTSD) in a Natural Disaster.” [Online article; retrieved 7/16/07.]
http://www.associatedcontent.com/article/236676/protect children
from posttraumatic.html.
Harvard Medical School Family Health Guide. 2006. “Recognizing Do-
mestic Partner Abuse.” [Online article; retrieved 8/29/07.] http://www.
health.harvard.edu/fhg/updates/update1006d.shtml.
Hester, J. P. 2003. Public School Safety: A Handbook. Jefferson, NC: 
McFarland.
Hoshmand, L. T., and A. L. Hoshmand. 2007. “Support for Military
Families and Communities.” Journal of Community Psychology 35 (2):
171 186.
110
Special U.S. Issues

Howitt, A. M., and H. B. Leonard 2006. “Katrina and the Core Chal-
lenges of Disaster Response.” Fletcher Forum of World Affairs 30(1):
215 221.
Ianelli, V. 2005. “Child Abuse Facts for Parents.” [Online information; re-
trieved 8/29/07.] http://pediatrics.about.com/cs/pediatricadvice/a/
child abuse.htm.
Jaffe, P. G., L. L. Baker, and A. J. Cunningham. 2004. Protecting Children
from Domestic Violence: Strategies for Community Intervention. New York:
Guilford Press.
James, R. K. 2008. Crisis Intervention Strategies, 6th ed. Belmont, CA:
Thomson Learning.
Jimerson, S. R, S. E. Brock, and S. W. Pletcher. 2005. “An Integrated
Model of School Crisis Preparedness and Intervention: A Shared Foun-
dation to Facilitate International Crisis Intervention.” School Psychology
International 26 (3): 275 296.
Jones, R. T., R. Fray, J. D. Cunningham, and L. Kaiser. 2001. “The Psy-
chological Effects of Hurricane Andrew on Ethnic Minority and Cau-
casian Children and Adolescents: A Case Study.” Cultural Diversity and
Ethnic Minority Psychology 7:103 108.
Jones, S. J., and R. Compton, eds. 2003. Kids Working It Out: Strategies and
Stories for Making Peace in Our Schools. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Jordan, C. E. 2004. Intimate Partner Violence: A Clinical Training Guide for
Mental Health Professionals. New York: Springer.
Jordan, J. 2001. “Is Suicide Bereavement Different? A Reassessment of
the Literature.” Suicide and Life Threatening Behavior 31 (1): 91 102.
Kiselica, M. S., and M. Morrill-Richards. 2007. “Sibling Maltreatment:
The Forgotten Abuse.” Journal of Counseling and Development 85:148 160.
Kohm, K. 2004. “Rebuilding School Culture to Make Schools Safer.” Ed-
ucational Digest 70 (3): 23 30.
Kurst-Swanger, K., and J. L. Petcosky. 2003. Violence in the Home: Multi-
disciplinary Perspectives. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lavarello, C., and K. S. Trump. 2002. “Schools Are Vulnerable to Attack.”
National Academy Associate 4 (6): 30 36.
Lazarus, P. J., S. R. Jimerson, and S. E. Brock. 2002. “Natural Disasters.”
In Best Practices in School Crisis Prevention and Intervention, edited by S. E.
Brock, P. J. Lazarus, and S. R. Jimerson. Bethesda, MD: National Associ-
ation of School Psychologists.
Lee, M. Y., J. Sebold, and A. Uken. 2003. Solution-Focused Treatment of Do-
mestic Violence Offenders: Accountability for Change. New York: Oxford
University Press.
References
111

Lieberman, A. F., and P. Van Horn. 2004. “Assessment and Treatment of
Young Children Exposed to Traumatic Events.” In Young Children and
Trauma: Intervention and Treatment, edited by J. Osofsky. New York: Guilford
Press.
Lieberman, J. 2006. The Shooting Game: The Making of School Shooters.
Santa Ana, CA: Seven Locks Press.
Lipton, L. 2006. “Emergency Responders Management of Patients Who
May Have Attempted Suicide.” Internet Journal of Rescue and Disaster
Medicine 5 (2): 1 5.
Litz, B. T., and M. J. Gray. 2004. “Early Intervention for Trauma in Adults:
A Framework for First Aid and Secondary Prevention.” In Early Interven-
tion for Trauma and Traumatic Loss, edited by B. T. Litz. New York: Guilford
Press.
Loseke, D. R., R. J. Gelles, and M. M. Cavanaugh. 2005. Current Contro-
versies on Family Violence. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Loue, S. 2001. Intimate Partner Violence: Societal, Medical, Legal, and Indi-
vidual Responses. New York: Kluwer.
Lubell, K. M., and J. B. Vette. 2006. “Suicide and Youth Violence Preven-
tion: The Promise of an Integrated Approach.” Aggression and Violent Be-
havior 11 (4): 167 175.
Martin, J. A., D. L. Mancini, G. L. Bowen, J. A. Mancini, and D. K. Orth-
ner. 2004. Building Strong Communities for Military Families. NCFR Policy
Brief, April. Minneapolis, MN: National Council on Family Relations.
Maxwell, L. A. 2006. “School Shootings in Policy Spotlight.” Education
Week 26 (7): 16 17.
Maxwell, L. A. 2007. “College Rampage Renews School Safety Con-
cerns.” Education Week 27 (4): 16 17.
McCann, E., and K. Olson. 2007. “Parents Should Talk to Children of Every
Age About School Shootings.” [Online article; retrieved 7/13/07.] http://
www.extension.umn.edu/extensionnews/2005/schoolshooting07.html.
McCue, M. L. 2007. Domestic Violence. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
McDermott, B. M., and E. Lee. 2005. “Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and
General Psychopathology in Children and Adolescents Following a
Wildfire Disaster.” Canadian Journal of Psychiatry 50 (3): 137 143.
McDowell, B. M. 2006. “Caring for Child Victims: Countering the Effects
of Domestic Violence.” Journal for Specialists in Pediatric Nursing 11 (2):
129 132.
Menninger Clinic. 2005. “School Violence: Take School Climate & Bully-
ing Seriously.” [Online article; retrieved 8/8/07.] http://www.newswise.
com/articles/view/513397/.
112
Special U.S. Issues

Mental Health America. 2007a. “Dealing with Stress After a Natural Dis-
aster.” [Online information; retrieved 7/19/07.] http://www1.nmha.
org/reassurance/naturalDisaster.cfm.
Mental Health America. 2007b. “Operation Healthy Reunions: Coping
with War-Related Stress.” [Online information; retrieved 8/2/07.]
http://www.mentalhealthamerica.net/reunions/infoWarStress.cfm.
Miller, A. 2003. Violence in U.S. Public Schools. Washington, DC: National
Center for Education Statistics.
Mills, L. G. 2003. Insult to Injury: Rethinking Our Responses to Intimate
Abuse. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Mlakar, P. 2005. “Hurricane Katrina and Levee Failure.” U.S. Army: 
Federal Document Clearing House congressional testimony. Washing-
ton, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Morse, J. 2007. “A Closer Look for Current Conditions: A Fresh Glance
at the Emotional Cycle.” [Online article; retrieved 8/4/07.] http://
www.hooah4health.com/deployment/familymatters/emotionalcycle
support.htm.
National Alliance on Mental Illness. 2003. “Suicide in Youth.” [Online ar-
ticle; retrieved 8/20/07.] http://www.nami.org/Content/Content
Groups/Helpline1/Suicide in Youth.htm.
National Association of School Psychologists. 2006. “Talking to Children
about Violence: Tips for Parents and Teachers.” [Online information; re-
trieved 7/14/07.] http://www.nasponline.org/resources/crisis safety/
talkingviolence.pdf.
National Child Traumatic Stress Network. 2007a. “Parenting in a Chal-
lenging World.” [Online information; retrieved 7/10/07.] http://www.
nctsnet.org/nccts/nav.do?pid=ctr aud prnt chlg.
National Child Traumatic Stress Network. 2007b. “Age-Related Reac-
tions to a Traumatic Event.” [Online article; retrieved 7/20/07.] http://
www.nctsnet.org/nctsn assets/pdfs/age related reactions.pdf.
National Institute of Mental Health. 2006. “Suicide in the U.S.: Statistics
and Prevention.” [Online information; retrieved 8/20/07.] http://www.
nimh.nih.gov/publicat/harmsway.cfm#references.
National Organization for Victim Assistance. 2002. The Community Crisis
Response Training Manual. Washington, DC: National Organization for
Victim Assistance.
National Organization for Women. 2007. “Violence against Women in the
United States.” [Online information; retrieved 8/28/07.] http://www.
now.org/issues/violence/stats.html.
Natraian, M., ed. 2007. Domestic Violence. Aldershot, UK: Ashgate.
References
113

Newman, K. S. 2007. “Before the Rampage: What Can Be Done?” Chron-
icle of Higher Education 53 (35): 20.
Pararas-Carayannis, G. 2007. “Natural Disasters: International Decade for
Natural Disaster Reduction (IDNDR).” [Online article; retrieved 7/2/07.]
http://www.drgeorgepc.com/NaturalDisasters.html#anchor292767.
Parkes, C. 2002. “Grief: Lessons from the Past.” Death Studies (26): 367 385.
Patterson, J. M. 2002. “Integrating Family Resilience and Family Stress
Theory.” Journal of Marriage and the Family 64:349 360.
Penn State Medical Center. 2006. “Understanding and Preventing Teen
Suicide.” [Online information; retrieved 8/20/07.] http://www.hmc.
psu.edu/childrens/healthinfo/s/suicide.htm.
Pincus, S. H., R. House, J. Christenson, and L. E. Adler. 2007. “The Emo-
tional Cycle of Deployment: A Military Family Perspective.” [Online ar-
ticle; retrieved 7/4/07.] http://www.hooah4health.com/deployment/
familymatters/emotionalcycle.htm.
Righthand, S., B. Kerr, and K. Drach. 2003. Child Maltreatment Risk As-
sessments: An Evaluation Guide. New York: Haworth.
Roberts, A. R. 2002. Handbook of Domestic Violence Intervention Strategies:
Policies, Programs, and Legal Remedies. New York: Oxford University Press.
Roberts, A. R., and B. S. Roberts. 2005. Ending Intimate Abuse: Practical
Guidance and Survival Strategies. New York: Oxford University Press.
Rondini, A. 2007. “Relationship Abuse.” [Online information; retrieved
8/29/07.] http://www.plannedparenthood.org/news-articles-press/
politics-policy-issues/medical-sexual-health/relationship-abuse-
14715.htm.
Rudd, M. D., A. L. Berman, T. E. Joiner, Jr., M. K. Nock, M. Silverman, M.
Mandrusiak, K. Van Orden, and T. Witte. 2006. “Warning Signs for Sui-
cide: Theory, Research, and Clinical Applications.” Suicide and Life
Threatening Behavior 36 (3): 255 262.
Sample, D. 2003. “War on TV Affects Students of Deployed Parents, Par-
ents, Teachers.” [Online article; retrieved 8/2/07.] http://www.cfs.
purdue.edu/mfri/pages/news/parent goes to war.htm.
Schewe, P. A. 2002. Preventing Violence in Relationships: Interventions across
the Life Span. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Schreck, C. J., and J. M. Miller. 2003. “Sources of Fear of Crime at School:
What Is the Relative Contribution of Disorder, Individual Characteris-
tics, and School Security?” Journal of School Violence 2 (4): 57 79.
Sever, A. 2002. Fleeing the House of Horrors: Women Who Have Left Abusive
Partners. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
114
Special U.S. Issues

Sexton-Radek, K., ed. 2004. Violence in Schools: Issues, Consequences, and
Expressions. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Shafir, N. 2006. “Effective Crisis Communications and Emergency Noti-
fication.” School Business Affairs 72 (6): 6 10.
Shen, Y. J., and C. A. Sink. 2002. “Helping Elementary-Age Children
Cope with Disasters.” Professional School Counseling 5 (5): 322 330.
Shields, A., and D. Cicchetti. 2001. “Parental Maltreatment and Emotion
Dysregulation as Risk Factors for Bullying and Victimization in Middle
Childhood.” Journal of Clinical Psychology 30:349 363.
Shipway, L. 2004. Domestic Violence: A Handbook for Health Professionals.
New York: Routledge.
Silva, A. 2004. “Culturally Competent Crisis Response: Information for
School Psychologists and Crisis Teams.” [Online article; retrieved
8/2/07.] http://www.nasponline.org/resources/culturalcompetence/
cc crisis.pdf.
Smith, K. 2002. Environmental Hazards: Assessing Risk and Reducing Disas-
ter, 3rd ed. New York: Routledge.
Smith, M., T. de Benedictis, J. Jaffe, and J. Segal. 2007. “Domestic Vio-
lence and Abuse: Help, Treatment, Intervention, and Prevention.” [On-
line information; retrieved 8/28/07.] http://www.helpguide.org/
mental/domestic violence abuse help treatment prevention.htm.
Soreff, S. 2006. “Suicide.” [Online article; retrieved 8/20/07.] http://
www.emedicine.com/med/topic3004.htm.
Swearer, S. M., and B. Doll. 2001. “Bullying in Schools: An Ecological
Framework.” Journal of Emotional Abuse 2 (2/3): 7 23.
Trump, K. S. 2002. “Be Prepared, Not Scared.” Principal Magazine 81 (5):
10 14.
Turell, S. C. 2003. “The Abuse of Men: Trauma Begets Trauma.” Sex Roles:
A Journal of Research 54 (6): 27 34.
U.S. Congress. 2007. “The All-Volunteer Military: Issues and Performance.”
Congressional Budget Office study. [Online report; retrieved 8/2/07.]
http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/83xx/doc8313/07-19-MilitaryVol.
pdf.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Surgeon
General. 2001. Report on Youth Violence. Washington, DC: U.S. Govern-
ment Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Justice. 2007. “About Domestic Violence.” [Online
information; retrieved 8/28/07.] http://www.usdoj.gov/ovw/dom
violence.htm.
References
115

Walker, H. M., E. Ramsey, and F. M. Gresham. 2004. Antisocial Behavior in
School: Evidence-based Practices, 2nd ed. Belmont, CA: Thomson/
Wadsworth.
Wallace, H. 2007. Family Violence: Legal, Medical, and Social Perspectives,
5th ed. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
Wekerle, C., and A. Wall. 2002. The Violence and Addiction Equation: Theo-
retical and Clinical Issues in Substance Abuse and Relationship Violence. New
York: Brunner-Routledge.
Wessler, S., and W. Preble. 2003. The Respectful School: How Educators and
Students Can Conquer Hate and Harassment. Alexandria, VA: Association
for Supervision and Curriculum Development.
Whealin, J., and I. Pivar. 2007. “Coping When a Family Member Has
Been Called to War.” [Online article; retrieved 8/2/07.] http://www.
operationhomefront.org/Info/info deploy called2war.shtml.
Wilde, J. 2002. Anger Management in School: Alternatives to Student Violence,
2nd ed. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press.
Wong, M. 2007. “Managing Threats: Safety Lessons Learned from School
Shootings.” [Online article; retrieved 7/13/07.] http://www.nctsnet.
org/nctsn assets/pdfs/UrbanED Managing Threats MWongPhD.pdf.
Zenere, F. J. 2004. “How Children Cope with Trauma and Ongoing
Threat.” [Online article; retrieved 8/20/07.] http://www.nasponline.
org/resources/crisis safety/ongoingthreat.aspx.
Zink, T., C. J. Jacobson, S. R. Pabst., and B. S. Fisher. 2006. “A Lifetime of
Intimate Partner Violence: Coping Strategies of Older Women.” Journal
of Interpersonal Violence 21 (5): 634 651.
Zorza, J. 2002. Violence against Women: Law, Prevention, Protection, En-
forcement, Treatment, Health. Kingston, NJ: Civic Research Institute.
116
Special U.S. Issues

4
Chronology
1900
A devastating hurricane strikes Galveston, Texas, on
September 18, killing approximately 8,000 residents
(Alexander 2000).
About 6 percent of married women work outside the
home (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 2007).
The rate of divorce per 1,000 of total population is 1.3
(U.S. Census Bureau 2007).
1901
Noted family therapist and author Milton H. Erickson is
born in Aurum, Nevada. Erickson will become a psychi-
atrist and psychologist regarded by many as a foremost
practitioner of medical hypnosis. He will write many
books on the discoveries he made while treating the
many patients and families he encountered.
1904
Clara Barton resigns as head of the American Red Cross
and is replaced by Mabel T. Boardman. Over the years,
the organization will become an influential source of res-
cue and assistance to individuals and families in emer-
gencies. Today, the American Red Cross is at the scene of
more than 40,000 disasters a year, from house fires to
floods and tornadoes.
117

1906
The San Francisco earthquake claims up to 3,000 lives.
Within a matter of seconds, the city is thrown into chaos
as the earth splits open and buildings topple over. Mas-
sive fires develop throughout the city. In all, 28,000
buildings are destroyed, 225,000 residents are left home-
less, and property damage amounts to more than
$400,000,000 in 1906 dollars (Abbott 2007).
1912
The first family court is established in Trenton, New Jersey,
giving it jurisdiction to hear and determine all domestic re-
lations disputes. Ohio will follow in 1914 with legislation
creating the Division of Domestic Relations in the Hamil-
ton County (Cincinnati) Court of Common Pleas with ju-
risdiction over divorce, alimony matters, delinquency,
dependency, neglected and crippled children, adults con-
tributing to or tending to cause delinquency or depen-
dency, and failure to provide support (Hurst 1999).
1916
Family therapist Virginia Satir is born.
1918
The unemployment rate stands at 1.4 percent, but will
skyrocket to 24.9 percent by 1933 (U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics 2007).
1920
Don Jackson, an early contributor to the field of family
therapy, is born.
1925
The Great Tri-State Tornado rips through Missouri, Illi-
nois, and Indiana on March 18, killing 695 people, injur-
ing more than 2,000, and destroying about 15,000 homes
(Abbott 2007).
1929
The stock market crash occurs and leads to the Great De-
pression, leaving millions of families in financial ruination.
1930
The rate of divorces per 1,000 of total population is 1.6
(U.S. Census Bureau 2007).
1931
Family therapist, teacher, and author Jay Haley is born.
1935
A hurricane slams into the Florida Keys on September 2,
claiming more than 500 lives (Alexander 2000).
118
Chronology

Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) is founded by Bill Wilson
and Don Smith in Akron, Ohio. Alcoholics Anonymous
is a voluntary, worldwide fellowship of men and women
from all walks of life who meet together to attain and
maintain sobriety. The only requirement for membership
is a desire to stop drinking. Today, it is estimated that
more than 114,000 AA groups and more than 2,000,000
members are active in 180 countries.
1936
A tornado on April 6 kills 203 and injures 1,800 in Gaines-
ville, Georgia (Alexander 2000).
1938
The National Council on Family Relations is established;
the organization is designed for family professionals to
plan and act together on concerns relevant to families.
A hurricane pounds the Atlantic U.S. coastline. In a matter
of hours, 688 people are killed, 4,500 people are injured,
and more than 75,000 buildings are damaged (Abbott
2007).
1940
The divorce rate per 1,000 of total population is 2.1 (U.S.
Census Bureau 2007).
1942
The American Association for Marriage and Family
Therapy is established, which is geared to the profes-
sional development of marriage and family therapists
throughout the United States, Canada, and abroad.
1948
Sex researcher Alfred Kinsey and colleagues report in the
book Sexual Behavior in the Human Male that approxi-
mately one-third of American husbands engage in extra-
marital sexual intercourse. Five years later, in Sexual
Behavior in the Human Female, they report that one-fifth of
American wives do the same.
1949
Reuben Hill publishes the now classic Families under Stress,
which features the ABCX model of family stress and crisis.
Nearly three-quarters of all 65-year-old men are in the
labor force. By 1985, this percentage will shrink to one-
third (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 2007).
Chronology
119

1950
The divorce rate per 1,000 of total population is 2.6 (U.S.
Census Bureau 2007).
Two wives of Alcoholics Anonymous members in New
York, Lois W. and Anne B., form a clearinghouse commit-
tee to coordinate the family groups related to AA that had
informally sprung up around the country. Starting with 87
initial inquiries, they send out questionnaires and receive
responses from 56 groups. As a result of the question-
naires, the name Al-Anon Family Groups is chosen and
the groups adopt the “Twelve Steps” of AA. Al-Anon’s
first book, The Al-Anon Family Group: A Guide for the Fami-
lies of Problem Drinkers, will be published in 1955 (Al-Anon
1997).
1952
The Women’s Bureau of the U.S. Department of Labor
publishes Women Workers and Their Dependents and Ma-
ternity Protection of Employed Women (Pruitt and Rapoport
2008).
1954
Family therapist Murray Bowen becomes the first direc-
tor of the Family Division at the National Institute of
Mental Health.
1957
Parents without Partners is founded in New York City by
two single parents, Jim Egleson, a noncustodial parent,
and Jacqueline Bernard, a custodial parent. It is a support
organization devoted to the welfare and interests of sin-
gle parents and their families. As concerned parents,
Egleson and Bernard feel isolated from society because
of their marital status and decide to form a mutual sup-
port organization.
The Mental Research Institute is founded in Palo Alto,
California. The institute is a training facility for the inter-
actional study of individuals, families, and their 
communities.
1958
Therapists Don Jackson and Jay Haley emerge as influen-
tial figures in shaping the family therapy movement.
Working in Palo Alto, California, the two explore family
120
Chronology

stress and crises against the backdrop of communications
analysis.
1960
The divorce rate doubles from that recorded in 1900 (U.S.
Census Bureau 2007).
Women in the labor force comprise 31 percent of all
women, 39 percent of women with children age 6 to 17,
and 19 percent of women with children under age 6
(Pruitt and Rapoport 2008).
1961
The first family therapy research journal, Family Process, is
founded by Don Johnson, Jay Haley, and Nathan Acker-
man. Since its inception, the journal has become a major
resource for mental health and social service profession-
als who are looking for cutting edge research and clinical
ideas about family and systems theory and practice.
Family therapist Jay Haley publishes Strategies of Psycho-
therapy.
The first state system of family courts is established in
Rhode Island. Rhode Island will be followed by New
York in 1962 and Hawaii in 1965. By 1980, 13 states will
be operating or seriously studying the feasibility of fam-
ily court consolidation (Hurst 1999).
1962
The state of New York rules that cases of intimate partner
violence will be handled in civil court rather than criminal
court. As a consequence, convicted men face lesser penal-
ties than would have been handed down in criminal court.
1964
Family therapist and noted researcher Virginia Satir pub-
lishes Conjoint Family Therapy.
1966
One of the first school shootings in U.S. history takes
place on August 1 at the University of Texas. Charles
Whitman kills 15 persons and wounds 31.
The state of New York establishes that cruel and inhu-
mane treatment at the hands of a spouse is grounds for
Chronology
121

divorce. However, the abused party must prove that a
sufficient number of physical assaults have occurred.
1968
The American Association of Suicidology is founded by
Edwin Shneidman and is organized to promote research,
public awareness programs, public education, and train-
ing for professionals and volunteers.
Internationally recognized family therapist Don Jackson
dies.
1969
California enacts the Family Law Act, thus becoming the
first state to legislate a “no fault” divorce concept. The
no-fault concept recognizes the breakdown of a marriage
as a ground for divorce and helps reduce the adversarial
process often associated with traditional divorce pro-
ceedings. In the years that follow, nearly every state will
adopt some form or variation of the no-fault divorce 
concept.
1970
The divorce rate per 1,000 of total population is 3.5 (U.S.
Census Bureau 2007).
Women in the labor force comprise 41 percent of all
women, 49 percent of women with children age 6 to 17,
and 30 percent of women with children under age 6. Be-
tween 1970 and 1996, the number of children living in
single-parent families will more than double (Pruitt and
Rapoport 2008).
1971
The National Runaway Switchboard is founded in
Chicago. It is a centralized organization with free 24-hour
services, expertise in all youth-related issues, and an infor-
mation clearinghouse of youth services.
In Philadelphia, one of the first feminist self-help groups,
Women in Transition, is established. It provides social
services and support for divorced or separated women,
battered wives, and single mothers.
1972
The Center for Family Learning is founded by family
therapist Phil Guerin in New Rochelle, New York. The
122
Chronology
1966
(cont.)

center becomes a distinctive and critically acclaimed
family therapy program.
Rainbow Retreat, one of the earliest battered women’s
shelters, opens in Phoenix, Arizona.
1974
The National Clearinghouse on Child Abuse and Neglect
is established. The organization provides information
and technical assistance on child abuse, neglect, and re-
lated child welfare issues.
Family therapist Salvador Minuchin publishes Families
and Family Therapy, a classic text identifying family struc-
tural components, such as subsystems and boundaries.
The Child Abuse and Neglect Prevention and Treatment
Act assists states and other bodies to develop programs
to identify and prevent abuse and to provide ameliora-
tive services.
The National Institute on Aging (NIA) is formed. Its es-
tablishment represents a broad scientific effort to under-
stand the nature of aging and to extend the healthy,
active years of life. The NIA provides leadership in aging
research, training, health information dissemination, and
other programs relevant to aging and older people.
The National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) is estab-
lished as the federal focal point for research, treatment,
prevention, training, services, and data collection on the
nature and extent of drug abuse. The mission of NIDA is
to lead the nation in bringing the power of science to
bear on drug abuse and addiction.
1976
Pennsylvania establishes the first state coalition against
domestic violence.
The National Organization for Women establishes its
Task Force on Battered Women.
1977
The Family Caregiver Alliance (FCA) is founded, the
first community-based nonprofit organization in the
Chronology
123

United States to address the needs of families and friends
providing long-term care of elders at home. The FCA will
eventually offer programs at national, state, and local lev-
els to support and sustain caregivers.
Oregon becomes the first state to enact legislation man-
dating arrest for perpetrators of domestic violence.
1978
Lenore Walker pens the critically acclaimed book, The
Battered Woman. This book discusses the “learned help-
lessness” theory of battered women and the “cycle of 
violence.”
1979
President Jimmy Carter presides over the White House
Conference on Families and subsequently establishes the
Office for Families.
1980
The divorce rate per 1,000 of total population is 5.2 (U.S.
Census Bureau 2007).
The National Coalition against Domestic Violence holds
its first national conference in Washington, D.C.
Women in the labor force comprise 52 percent of all
women, 68 percent of women with children age 6 to 17,
and 50 percent of women with children under age 6 who
are divorced (U.S. Census Bureau 2007).
1981
The first annual Domestic Violence Awareness Week is
celebrated across the United States.
1983
Hamilton McCubbin and Joan Patterson publish their
findings regarding the Double ABCX model of family
crisis.
1984
The number of divorces declines for the first time in two
decades (U.S. Census Bureau 2007).
The Family Violence Prevention and Services Act is
passed, identifying federal funding for programs serving
domestic violence victims.
124
Chronology
1977
(cont.)

U.S. Surgeon General C. Everett Koop declares domestic
violence the number one health problem in the United
States.
1988
Family therapist and author Virginia Satir dies.
The Administration on Aging funds the first national re-
source base aimed at increasing public understanding.
The National Center for Elder Abuse will emerge from
this effort as a national resource for elder rights advo-
cates, adult protective service, law enforcement and legal
professionals, medical and mental health providers, pub-
lic policy leaders, educators, researchers, and concerned
citizens.
1989
Charles Figley publishes Treating Stress in Families.
The divorce rate per 1,000 of total population is 4.7 (U.S.
Census Bureau 2007).
1991
More than 2.6 million cases of suspected child maltreat-
ment are reported in the United States. More than four
children a day die from maltreatment (Healthy Families
America 2008).
1992
The U.S. surgeon general ranks abuse by husbands as the
leading cause of injuries to women age 15 to 44 (National
Organization for Women 2007).
1993
After taking nearly 10 years to work its way through Con-
gress, the U.S. Family and Medical Leave Act is enacted. It
entitles employees of all public agencies and private-sector
companies employing 50 or more people to 12 weeks of
unpaid leave for birth and care of newborns, adoption, ill-
ness of immediate family member, and medical leave for a
serious health condition (Pruitt and Rapoport 2008).
1994
The Violence against Women Act combines tough law en-
forcement strategies with safeguards for victims of do-
mestic violence and sexual assault. The act increases
penalties for sex offenders and domestic abusers, provides
Chronology
125

additional funding to assist state and local law enforce-
ment agencies, and enhances restitution for victims of do-
mestic violence. It receives an unprecedented $1.6 billion
budget for violence prevention and services.
1995
Federal, state, and local governments spend about $11.2
billion on child protection (Children’s Defense Fund 1995).
1996
Congress passes the Domestic Violence Option, which
grants abused women exemptions from punitive welfare
reform provisions. The National Organization for Women
is instrumental in getting this congressional legislation
passed.
1998
The National Institute on Drug Abuse releases Preventing
Drug Use among Children and Adolescents: A Research-Based
Guide, which describes the most successful concepts for
preventing drug abuse among young people.
Jay Haley publishes Learning and Teaching Therapy.
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services re-
ports an estimated 903,000 cases of child maltreatment.
Of the reported cases, 53.5 percent suffer neglect, 22.7
percent are physically abused, 11.5 percent are sexually
abused, and the remainder suffer psychological abuse
and medical neglect. More than one-quarter of the re-
ported cases suffer more than one type of maltreatment.
More than 1,000 children die of abuse and neglect (U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services 2007b).
The National Domestic Violence Hotline (1-800-799-
SAFE), funded by the federal Violence against Women
Act, begins operation.
More than 1,200 battered women’s shelters exist in the
United States, sponsored by approximately 1,800 domes-
tic violence agencies (National Organization for Women
2007).
It is estimated that almost 450,000 adults over age 60 are
abused or neglected in their home. When including self-
126
Chronology
1994
(cont.)

neglect, this number increases to more than 550,000 (Na-
tional Center on Elder Abuse 1998).
About 60 percent of all married women living with their
husbands work outside the home (U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics 2007).
Constance Ahrons writes the best-selling book The Good
Divorce.
2000
The divorce rate per 1,000 of total population is 4.1 (U.S.
Census Bureau 2007).
Fatherless homes account for 63 percent of youth sui-
cides, 90 percent of homeless/runaway children, 85 per-
cent of children with behavior problems, 71 percent of
high school dropouts, 85 percent of youths in prison, and
well over 50 percent of teen mothers (U.S. Census Bureau
2007).
Nate Brazille, a 13-year-old at Lake Worth (Florida) mid-
dle school, kills a teacher, Barry Grunow, on the last day
of classes (Lieberman 2006).
It is estimated that before the age of 18, one in four chil-
dren is exposed to family alcoholism or addiction, or al-
cohol abuse. Children of alcoholics are significantly more
likely to initiate drinking during adolescence and to de-
velop alcohol use disorders. Parents’ drinking behaviors
and favorable attitudes about drinking have been associ-
ated with adolescents’ initiating and continuing drinking
(Grant 2000).
2001
More than half the states enact legislation to combat
school bullying. The passage of these acts of legislation is
motivated, at least in part, by tragic shootings at several
U.S. high schools in the late 1990s and later reports that
many perpetrators of school shootings had felt bullied or
threatened by peers. Most state laws require or encourage
that school officials (typically school boards) develop a
policy to prohibit bullying. Research indicates that bully-
ing is prevalent among American school children, directly
Chronology
127

involving approximately 30 percent of school children
within a school semester (Nansel et al. 2001).
Fifteen-year-old Charles Andrew Williams kills 2 stu-
dents and wounds 13 others at Santana High School in
Santee, California (Lieberman 2006).
More than 50 million people provide care for a chroni-
cally ill, disabled, or aged family member or friend dur-
ing any given year. About 30 percent of family caregivers
caring for seniors are themselves age 65 or over; another
15 percent are between the ages of 45 and 54. The typical
family caregiver of an elderly family member is a 46-year-
old woman caring for her widowed mother who does not
live with her. She is married and employed. Approxi-
mately 60 percent of family caregivers are women. The
need for family caregivers will increase in the years
ahead. People over 65 are expected to increase at a 2.3
percent rate, but the number of family members available
to care for them will only increase at a 0.8 percent rate
(U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 2001).
The National Center on Caregiving is established to ad-
vance the development of high-quality, cost-effective
programs and policies for caregivers in every state in the
United States. The center is sponsored by the Family
Caregiver Alliance.
It is estimated that in the United States, nearly 2 million
U.S. adolescents attempt suicide, and almost 700,000 re-
ceive medical attention for their attempt (American
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 2008). This
year, 2.6 percent of adolescents report making a suicide
attempt that has to be treated by a doctor or nurse. Ap-
proximately 2,000 youth age 10 to 19 complete suicide.
This year, suicide is the third-leading cause of death
among young people age 15 to 24, following uninten-
tional injuries and homicide (American Academy of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 2008).
2002
The average life expectancy in the United States is 76
years. Those retiring at age 62, on average, can expect to
128
Chronology
2001
(cont.)

spend 15 to 20 years in retirement (U.S. Census Bureau
2007).
2003
The Federal Emergency Management Agency becomes
part of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Its
mission is to reduce the loss of life and property and to
protect individuals and families from all hazards, in-
cluding natural and man-made disasters.
Fourteen-year-old James Sheets shoots and kills the prin-
cipal of Red Lion Area (Pennsylvania) Middle School in
a crowded cafeteria before killing himself (Lieberman
2006).
John Jason McLaughlin, age 15, kills two students at Ro-
cori High School in Cold Spring, Minnesota (Lieberman
2006).
It is believed that between 1 million and 2 million elderly
Americans are physically abused, neglected, or exploited
by family and/or care providers. Furthermore, for every
case of maltreatment or self-neglect reported, approxi-
mately five more go unreported (Bonnie and Wallace
2002).
The National Institute on Drug Abuse releases its newly
updated publication, Preventing Drug Use among Children
and Adolescents: A Research-Based Guide for Parents, Educa-
tors, and Community Leaders, Second Edition, which reflects
NIDA’s expanded research program and knowledge
base in the area of drug abuse prevention.
The National Center on Elder Abuse (NCEA) is estab-
lished to provide information, data, and expertise to fed-
eral, state, and local agencies, professionals, and the
public. It is operated as a partnership among six organiza-
tions, with the National Association of State Units on
Aging serving as the lead agency. Other partners in NCEA
are the National Committee for the Prevention of Elder
Abuse; the Clearinghouse on Abuse and Neglect of the El-
derly, operated by the College of Human Resources of the
University of Delaware; the San Francisco Consortium for
Chronology
129

Elder Abuse Prevention at the Goldman Institute on
Aging; the National Association of Adult Protective Ser-
vice Administrators; and the Commission on Legal Prob-
lems of the Elderly of the American Bar Association
(National Center on Elder Abuse 2008).
2004
A total of 2,279,000 Americans get married this year, a
rate of 7.8 marriages per 1,000 people. About 43 percent
of all first marriages in 2004 end within the first 15 years,
10 percent after 5 years. Seventy-five percent of di-
vorcees remarry, almost half within three years. The me-
dian age of those who divorce is as follows: men 30.5,
women 29 (U.S. Bureau of the Census 2007).
Desmond Keels, age 16, fatally shoots one student and
wounds three others outside Strawberry Mansion High
School in Philadelphia (Lieberman 2006).
Florida is hit with four major hurricanes—Charley,
Frances, Ivan, and Jeanne—with estimated losses at $22
billion (Federal Emergency Management Agency 2008).
2005
The number of people between the ages of 55 and 64 is
estimated to grow by about 11 million between 2005 and
2025, placing a strain on grown children serving as care-
givers (U.S. Census Bureau 2007).
Hurricane Katrina unleashes its fury on New Orleans
and the Gulf Coast on August 29. At least 1,836 people
lose their lives in the subsequent floods, and about
400,000 jobs are lost. One million residents become
homeless (Federal Emergency Management Agency
2008).
Sixteen-year-old Jeff Weise kills his grandfather and
companion, then arrives at Red Lake (Minnesota) High
School and murders a teacher, a security guard, five stu-
dents, and then himself (Lieberman 2006).
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reports
that each year 3 million children are reported as sus-
130
Chronology
2003
(cont.)

pected victims of child abuse and neglect (Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention 2007a).
2006
It is estimated that one out of every seven children will
run away before the age of 18. Seventy-five percent of
runaways who remain at large for two or more weeks
will become involved in theft, drugs, or pornography.
Each year, approximately 5,000 runaway and homeless
youth die from assault, illness, and suicide (National
Runaway Switchboard n.d.).
One in 10 Americans has some form of disability, a figure
amounting to about 24 million persons (U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services 2007a).
Thirty-two-year-old Carl Charles Roberts IV shoots 10
schoolgirls at West Nickel Mines Amish School (Pennsyl-
vania), the victims ranging in age from 6 to 13, and then
himself. Five of the girls and Roberts die (U.S. News and
World Report 2008).
Teenage suicide rates remain alarmingly high. More than
2 million teenagers attempt to take their lives each year.
Suicide remains the third-leading cause of death among
young people age 15 to 24 (U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services 2007a).
The United States has nearly 1.4 million active military
personnel, approximately 369,000 deployed outside the
United States and its territories (Global Security 2007).
More than 200 wildfires in a 24-hour period in Texas de-
stroy 15 homes, kill 10,000 cattle and horses, and burn
191,000 acres (Federal Emergency Management Agency
2008).
About 52 percent of men age 62 to 64 are employed, com-
pared with 43 percent in 1995 and 42 percent in 1990 (U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics 2007). Of men age 65 to 69, 31
percent are employed, compared with 27 percent in 1995
and 26 percent in 1990. Among women 62 to 64 years old,
41 percent are working, compared with 32 percent in 1995
Chronology
131

and 28 percent in 1990. Among women 65 to 69 years old,
23 percent are working, compared with 17 percent in 1995
and 1990 (Purcell 2006).
2007
Approximately 14 million people in the United States are
addicted to alcohol (National Institute of Drug Abuse
and Addiction 2007).
The number of unemployed persons reaches 7.1 million;
the unemployment rate registers at 4.6. Rates are highest
among nonwhite segments of the population (U.S. Bu-
reau of Labor Statistics 2007).
Direct costs (judicial, law enforcement, and health sys-
tem responses) of child maltreatment are estimated at
$24 billion each year. The indirect costs (long-term eco-
nomic consequences) of child maltreatment exceed an es-
timated $69 billion annually (Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention 2007a).
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services re-
ports that about one in two elderly 65 years and older
has a physical disability (U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services 2007a).
Among adults over age 50, more than 1 in 10 is provid-
ing care to aging parents (Brody 2006).
It is estimated that more than one-half million children
have at least one parent deployed overseas for military
duty (Global Security 2007).
Douglas Chanthabouly, age 18, shoots fellow student
Samnang Kok, 17, at Henry Foss High School in Tacoma,
Washington (U.S. News and World Report 2008).
Jay Haley dies in his sleep at his home in San Diego. He
is 83. Haley devoted his life to the study of individuals
within intimate relationships. A gifted and prolific au-
thor, he wrote many of the most significant books and
training materials in the field of family therapy.
132
Chronology
2006
(cont.)

Following a 25 percent decline in adolescent suicides
since the early 1990s, the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention reports that the overall rate of suicide for
youth rises 8 percent; the rate stands at 76 percent for
preteen and young teen females (Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention 2007b).
The deadliest outbreak in school shootings occurs April
16 at Virginia Tech University. Twenty-three-year-old
Cho Seung-Hui kills two students in a residence hall
then kills 30 more about two hours later in a classroom
building. His suicide brings the death toll to 33. Fifteen
other students are wounded (U.S. News and World Report
2008).
Every day, four women die in the United States as a re-
sult of domestic violence, which amounts to approxi-
mately 1,400 female deaths a year. The number of
women killed by their intimate partners overall amounts
to more than the number of soldiers killed during the
Vietnam War (National Organization for Women 2007).
2008
Scores of tornadoes tear through Arkansas, Mississippi,
Kentucky, and Tennessee, killing 59 people, injuring
hundreds, and causing millions of dollars worth of prop-
erty damage (Federal Emergency Management Agency
2008).
Former student Stephen Kazmierczak opens fire with a
shotgun and two handguns from the stage of a lecture
hall at Northern Illinois University. He kills five students
and injures 16 others before committing suicide (U.S.
News and World Report 2008).
References
Abbott, P. 2007. Natural Disasters, 6th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Al-Anon. 1997. Paths to Recovery: Al-Anon’s Steps, Traditions and Concepts.
New York: Al-Anon Family Group Headquarters.
Chronology
133

Alexander, D. 2000. Confronting Catastrophe: New Perspectives on Natural
Disasters. New York: Oxford University Press.
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 2008. “Facts for
Families #10: Teen Suicide.” [Online fact sheet; retrieved 3/4/08.] http://
www.aacap.org/publications/factsfam/suicide.htm.
Bonnie, R. J., and R. B. Wallace. 2002. Elder Mistreatment: Abuse, Neglect
and Exploitation in an Aging America. Washington, DC: National Acade-
mies Press.
Brody, E. 2006. Women in the Middle: Their Parent Care Years. New York:
Springer.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2007a. “Child Maltreat-
ment: Fact Sheet.” [Online fact sheet; retrieved 8/29/07.] http://www.
cdc.gov/ncipc/factsheets/cmfacts.htm.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2007b. “Suicide Preven-
tion.” [Online information; retrieved 8/20/07.] http://www.cdc.gov/
ncipc/factsheets/suifacts.htm.
Children’s Defense Fund. 1995. Annual Report. Washington, DC: Chil-
dren’s Defense Fund.
Federal Emergency Management Agency. 2008. “Major Disaster Decla-
rations.” [Online information; retrieved 3/1/08.] http://www.fema.
gov/news/disasters.fema?year=2008#sev1.
Global Security. 2007. “Where Are the Legions? Global Deployments of
U.S. Forces.” [Online information; retrieved 8/2/07.] http://www.global
security.org/military/ops/global-deployments.htm.
Grant, B. F. 2000. “Estimates of U.S. Children Exposed to Alcohol Abuse
and Dependence in the Family.” American Journal of Public Health 90 (1):
112 115.
Healthy Families America. 2008. Promoting Healthy Families in Your Com-
munity: 2008 Resource Packet. Chicago: Healthy Families America.
Hurst, H. 1999. “Family Courts in the United States.” Family Court Bul-
letin Volume 1, Issue 1, 1 5.
Lieberman, J. 2006. The Shooting Game: The Making of School Shooters.
Santa Ana, CA: Seven Locks Press.
Minnesota Board on Aging. 2008. “Timeline to Retirement: Project 2030.”
[Online report; retrieved 3/3/08.] http://www.dhs.state.mn.us/main/
groups/aging/documents/pub/dhs id 050399.pdf.
Nansel, T. R., M. Overpeck, R. S. Pilla, J. Ruan, B. Simons-Morton, and P.
Scheidt. 2001. “Bullying Behaviors among US Youth: Prevalence and As-
sociation with Psychosocial Adjustment.” Journal of the American Medical
Association 285:2094 2100.
134
Chronology

National Center on Elder Abuse. 1998. “National Elder Abuse Incidence
Study.” Center for Community and Development. Newark, DE: Univer-
sity of Delaware.
National Center on Elder Abuse. 2008. “NCEA Partners.” [Online infor-
mation; retrieved 8/11/08] http://www.ncea.aoa.gov/NCEAroot/
Main Site/About/Partners.aspx.
National Institute of Drug Abuse and Addiction. 2007. “Understanding
Drug Abuse and Addiction.” Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services.
National Organization for Women. 2007. “Violence against Women in
the United States.” [Online information; retrieved 8/28/07.] http://
www.now.org/issues/violence/stats.html.
National Runaway Switchboard. n.d. “What to Do when Your Child Re-
turns Home.” [Online information; retrieved 8/13/07.] http://www.
1800runaway.org/pub mat/what to do.html.
Pruitt, B., and R. Rapoport. 2008. “Looking Backwards to Go Forward: A
Timeline of the Work-Family Field in the United States since World War
II.” [Online report; retrieved 3/2/08.] http://wfnetwork.bc.edu/
timelines/other/PRtimeline.pdf.
Purcell, P. 2006. “Older Workers: Employment and Retirement Trends.”
[Online report; retrieved 9/2/07.] http://www.wmitchell.edu/elder
law/documents/CRSWorkers0906.pdf.
Robinson, A. G. 2002. Earthshock: Hurricanes, Volcanoes, Earthquakes, Tor-
nadoes, and Other Forces of Nature. New York: Thames and Hudson.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2007. Handbook of Labor Statistics. Wash-
ington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2007. Statistical Abstract of the United States, 126th
ed. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2001. Characteristics of
Long-Term Care Users. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research
and Quality.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2007a. Health, United
States, 2006. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2007b. America’s Chil-
dren: Key National Indicators of Well-Being, 2007. Hyattsville, MD: Na-
tional Center for Health Statistics. 
U.S. News and World Report. 2008. “Timeline of School Shootings.” March
2, 12 14.
Chronology
135

5
Biographical Sketches
Constance R. Ahrons
Constance R. Ahrons is a well-known educator, therapist, and au-
thor. She received her PhD in counseling psychology and her
master’s degree in social work from the University of Wisconsin,
Madison. She is professor emerita from the Department of Soci-
ology and former director of the Marriage and Family Therapy
Doctoral Training Program at the University of Southern Califor-
nia (USC) in Los Angeles. Ahrons is currently the director of the
Divorce and Marriage Consulting Association in San Diego.
Prior to joining the USC faculty, she taught at the University
of Wisconsin, Madison. In 2000–2001, she was awarded a fellow-
ship from the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study at Harvard
University to launch longitudinal research on the effects of a
parental divorce on grown children 20 years later. She was also
named a senior scholar and founding cochair of the Council on
Contemporary Families.
Ahrons is the author of the critically acclaimed books The
Good Divorce: Keeping Your Family Together when Your Marriage
Comes Apart and We’re Still Family: What Grown Children Have to
Say about Their Parents’ Divorce (see Chapter 2 of this book).
Ahrons is especially well known for her conceptualization of the
divorce process and how it impacts the family system. She de-
tailed the family transitions that accompany divorce, including
the stages of individual cognition, family metacognition, separa-
tion, family reorganization, and family redefinition. For more in-
formation on these five stages, the reader is directed to the
137

section titled “Divorce” in Chapter 2 of the current book. Ahrons
has received several prestigious awards and has published more
than 40 articles in family studies research journals.
Joan Aldous
Joan Aldous is the William R. Kenan, Jr. Professor of Sociology at
the University of Notre Dame. She received her PhD from the
University of Minnesota in 1963 and is considered an expert in
family systems and dynamics, family policy, and intergenera-
tional relationships.
Aldous has received numerous honors and awards for her
professional contributions to her discipline. She is past president
of the National Council on Family Relations, received the presti-
gious Ernest W. Burgess Award for her research in the field, and
was elected a member of the Council of the American Sociologi-
cal Association.
Beyond receiving research grants from the National Institute
of Mental Health and the National Science Foundation, Aldous
has received recognition from the University of Notre Dame for
her teaching and writing accomplishments. She is the author of
more than 50 published articles as well as two books, including
the critically acclaimed Family Careers: Rethinking the Developmen-
tal Perspective. Aldous has also served with the National Science
Foundation and on National Institutes of Health review panels as
well as on the Sociology Panel of the Graduate Record Examina-
tion for Educational Testing Services.
Paul J. Bohannan (1920–2007)
Paul J. Bohannan is a widely recognized authority on divorce and
the many challenges it poses to family systems. Born in 1920 in
Lincoln, Nebraska, Bohannan was raised in Indiana, Montana,
and Colorado and received his bachelor’s degree, then became a
Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University. He eventually earned a
doctorate in philosophy from Oxford and taught at Princeton
University and Northwestern University. He then taught at the
University of California at Santa Barbara before finishing a dis-
tinguished teaching career at the University of Southern Califor-
nia. Bohannon was recognized as an expert in anthropology,
138
Biographical Sketches

stepfamilies, aging, law, divorce, and American history, among
other topics. Bohannon died in 2007 from complications stem-
ming from Alzheimer’s disease. He was 87.
His contributions to the study of divorce are particularly rel-
evant to this reference manual. In an effort to better understand
the complex dynamics of divorce, Bohannan identified six com-
ponents or processes of divorce in a landmark book, Divorce and
After (1970). These components are not sequential and can over-
lap. Bohannan felt that it is important to understand these
processes in order to find order and direction in the emotional
chaos that frequently accompanies divorce.
The emotional divorce typically begins long before the ac-
tual break. It is centered around the deteriorating marriage and
the initial motivations for considering a divorce. A wide range of
negative feelings and behaviors characterize this component, in-
cluding betrayals, accusations, and lack of affection and support.
Partners usually feel misunderstood, rejected, and disillusioned.
In many instances, one or both partners have psychologically de-
parted long before the actual physical separation.
During the legal divorce, couples go to court to sever the
legal ties of marriage. The legal grounds for obtaining a divorce
vary from state to state, so many couples find themselves lost in
the shuffle of courtroom proceedings. Many partners never envi-
sioned the many complexities of divorce proceedings or the
amount of psychological energy needed to pursue divorce. Al-
though couples typically experience relief once the legal separa-
tion is final, many exhibit varying levels of emotional sensitivity
throughout the entire period.
The economic divorce occurs when couples have to decide
how they will divide their money and property. This is no simple
task, since complications arise due to tax laws. Legal assistance is
usually needed, and couples often experience resentment, anger,
and hostility concerning the redistribution of money and property.
Bohannan also acknowledges that the economic divorce can prove
difficult for two reasons: First, there is never enough money or
property to go around, and second, people get attached to certain
objects and may need them to support their image of themselves.
As a result of these interacting forces, psychological turbulence is
to be expected during this divorce component.
The coparental divorce focuses on the issue of child custody.
The parental responsibility for child rearing and custody is de-
termined by the court on the basis of the children’s well-being.
Biographical Sketches
139

Visitation rights for the parent not awarded custody must be de-
termined. Worry and concern about the effects of divorce on chil-
dren are frequently expressed during this stage. Bohannan points
out that the issues of custody and economic settlement represent
the two greatest difficulties couples face. Also, more divorces fail
in the coparental aspect than in any other way.
The community divorce implies that a divorced person’s sta-
tus in the surrounding neighborhood changes in certain ways. Di-
vorce is viewed differently by people, and separated individuals
must learn to adapt to these varying perceptions. Sometimes rela-
tionships with friends are altered. Many divorced persons report
feelings of isolation and loneliness, while some also feel degrees
of social disapproval. To ease such feelings, the social support of
friends and family members is often stressed. Some divorced per-
sons regret that divorcing one’s spouse involves “divorce” from
one’s in-laws. Conversely, in-laws may become “out-laws.” How-
ever, many divorced persons keep in touch with those they now
call “the children’s relatives.”
Finally, the divorce from dependency focuses on the impor-
tance of divorced parties regaining psychological autonomy. The
shift from being in a couple-oriented situation to being a single
person requires role realignment and considerable psychological
adjustment. Expectedly, those couples who maintained high lev-
els of independence in their marriages are likely to regain auton-
omy more rapidly than are those marriage partners who were
dependent on one another.
Elaine M. Brody
Elaine M. Brody is former associate director of Research at the
Philadelphia Geriatric Center and past president of the Geronto-
logical Society of America. She has been a force in gerontological
social work research for decades, including landmark research
exploring the dynamics and struggles of adult female children
caring for their aging parents.
In her critically acclaimed book, Women in the Middle: Their
Parent Care Years, Brody examines the effects of caregiving on the
mental health, careers, and family life of women. Her research
disclosed that caregiving has a profound impact on women, who
provide the bulk of parent care. Although many female care-
140
Biographical Sketches

givers derive satisfaction from helping a parent, the added re-
sponsibilities often create stress, depression, and curtailed em-
ployment, as well as conflict within their own families. Brody is
credited with raising the consciousness level of executives from
large companies all across the nation, who began to realize how
caring for aging parents impacts the employee ranks.
Among her many other accomplishments, Brody was a pro-
fessor of clinical psychiatry at the Medical College of Pennsylva-
nia and adjunct associate professor of social work in psychiatry
at the School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania. She
received an honorary doctorate from the Medical College of
Pennsylvania and was elected a Distinguished Scholar of the Na-
tional Academies of Social Work Practice. In 1985, she received
the Brookdale Award of the Gerontological Society of America
and, in 1982, received the Distinguished Alumni Award of the
University of Pittsburgh School of Social Work.
Brody has also served on editorial boards of many profes-
sional journals and on peer review committees at the National In-
stitute of Mental Health, the Administration on Aging, and a
number of foundations. She was a member of the Congressional
Advisory Panel on Alzheimer’s Disease and of the Brookings In-
stitution Advisory Panel on Long Term Care. She has directed
nearly two dozen federally financed research studies on subjects
such as individualized treatment of mentally impaired aged;
mental and physical health practice of older people; women,
work, and care of the aged; and marital status, parent care, and
mental health. She is in demand as a guest speaker and work-
shop consultant at universities, foundations, hospitals, and gov-
ernmental and voluntary agencies. She has also testified many
times before committees of the U.S. House of Representatives
and the U.S. Senate.
Sarah M. Buel
Sarah M. Buel has devoted her entire professional life to working
with battered women, abused children, and juveniles within the
legal system. She is a clinical professor at the University of Texas
School of Law and codirector of the campus Domestic Violence
Clinic. Buel is cofounder of the University of Texas Voices
Against Violence program, a service that offers comprehensive,
Biographical Sketches
141

coordinated services for victims of sexual assault, intimate part-
ner violence, and stalking.
Buel has served as special counsel for the Texas District and
County Attorneys Association, providing training, technical, and
case assistance to prosecutors throughout Texas. For six years she
was a prosecutor, most of that time with the Norfolk County Dis-
trict Attorney’s Office in Quincy, Massachusetts, helping to estab-
lish its award-winning domestic violence and juvenile programs.
Previously, Buel served as a victim advocate, state policy coordi-
nator, and legal aid paralegal.
Buel’s background is testimony to her drive and determina-
tion. As a domestic violence survivor, she committed herself to
improving the court and community response to abuse victims.
She was a welfare mother for a short time before spending seven
years working full time in the day while attending college at
night to obtain her undergraduate degree in 1987. She graduated
cum laude from Harvard Law School in 1990, where she founded
the Harvard Battered Women’s Advocacy Project, the Harvard
Women in Prison Project, and the Harvard Children and Family
Rights Project.
Robert N. Butler
Robert N. Butler is an internationally known gerontologist, au-
thor, and consultant. He was born in New York and received a
medical degree from Columbia University’s College of Physi-
cians and Surgeons in 1953. He has been Brookdale Professor and
chairman of the Gerald and May Ellen Ritter Department of Geri-
atrics and Adult Development of Mount Sinai Medical Center in
New York City since 1982. As chairman of the first department of
geriatrics in an American medical school, Butler is a leader in im-
proving the quality of life for older people, including caregiving
in multigenerational households.
Before he came to Mount Sinai, Butler worked at the Na-
tional Institutes of Health, where he created the National Insti-
tute on Aging in 1976 and served as its first director. Under his
leadership, the need for federal funding for research in gerontol-
ogy gained recognition. He was particularly outspoken about
the few service-related research activities available to enhance
the health and social service delivery to the elderly in terms of ef-
ficiency, cost, and quality. Butler felt that future research on
142
Biographical Sketches

aging has to be unusually inventive and take advantage of a
broad range of collaboration in seeking to telescope its natural
development.
A prolific writer, Butler won the Pulitzer Prize in 1976 for his
book Why Survive? Being Old in America, a penetrating social
analysis of the elderly in the United States. He is a member of the
Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences and is
a founding Fellow of the American Geriatrics Society. Butler has
also served as a consultant to the U.S. Senate Special Committee
on Aging, the National Institute of Mental Health, the Common-
wealth Fund, and numerous other organizations.
Nancy Chandler
Nancy Chandler received her master’s degree in social work from
the University of Georgia and currently serves as executive direc-
tor of the National Children’s Alliance (NCA), a nonprofit mem-
bership organization that represents more than 500 children’s
advocacy centers throughout the United States. NCA provides
training, technical assistance, and networking opportunities to
communities seeking to plan, establish, and improve children’s
advocacy centers. As executive director, Chandler oversees man-
agement of NCA’s finances, resource development, training, pro-
gram development, communications, membership services, and
staff supervision.
Chandler is a strong advocate of children’s rights and the
prevention of child maltreatment. She has spoken at more than
300 conferences and workshops throughout the United States.
She serves on the National Advisory Committee for Darkness to
Light, a primary prevention program aimed at reducing the inci-
dence and consequence of child sexual abuse.
Before moving to Washington, D.C., Chandler served as the
executive director of the Memphis Child Advocacy Center, where
she was instrumental in formulating plans for the operations of
the center, coordinating the work of the multidisciplinary team,
fund-raising, and collaborating on the renovation of the center.
She is a member of the Academy of Certified Social Workers and
the National Association of Social Workers, which named her Ten-
nessee Social Worker of the Year in 1994. Chandler was also a
member of Leadership Memphis and a founding board member
of the National Network of Children’s Advocacy Centers.
Biographical Sketches
143

Andrew J. Cherlin
Andrew J. Cherlin is a professor in the Sociology Department at
Johns Hopkins University. He earned his undergraduate degree
from Yale University in 1970 and completed his doctoral studies
in sociology at the University of California at Los Angeles in
1976. He is considered an expert in the fields of public policy,
family studies, divorce, and remarriage and has published exten-
sively in these areas.
In his 1992 book, Marriage, Divorce, and Remarriage, Cherlin
provides readers with a comprehensive examination of marriage
dissolution, including demographic trends, explanations for di-
vorce rates, consequences of separation, and racial as well as
class implications. In Public and Private Families, published in
2004, he explores the larger social structures in which family re-
lations are embedded and the activities of private life such as dat-
ing, courtship, and cohabitation.
In 1989–1990, Cherlin was chair of the Family Section of the
American Sociological Association, and in 1999, he was president
of the Population Association of America. Cherlin is a recipient of
a MERIT (Method to Extend Research in Time) Award from the
National Institutes of Health for his research on the effects of
family structure on children.
Milton H. Erickson (1901–1980)
Milton H. Erickson was born in 1901 in Aurum, Nevada. He is
considered one of the founders of strategic family therapy, a
short-term approach to counseling that emphasizes problem-
focused intervention. Erickson was known for his development
of pragmatic and flexible therapeutic approaches, as well as help-
ing his clients devise alternative problem-solving strategies. Er-
ickson was also considered one of the leading practitioners of
medical hypnosis in the United States.
Erickson completed his undergraduate degree in psychology
at the University of Wisconsin and received his medical degree at
Colorado General Hospital. Among his appointments, Erickson
served as chief psychiatrist at Worcester (Massachusetts) State
Hospital, director of psychiatric research at Wayne County Gen-
eral Hospital and Infirmary in Michigan, and professor of psychi-
atry at Wayne State University and Michigan State University.
144
Biographical Sketches

Throughout his professional life, Erickson maintained a pri-
vate practice and spent time researching, consulting, and con-
ducting seminars on strategic family therapy. He was the
founding president of the American Society for Clinical Hypno-
sis as well as the founder and editor of that organization’s pro-
fessional journal. Erickson was also a fellow of both the
American Psychiatric Association and the American Psychologi-
cal Association.
Patricia Fennell
Patricia Fennell is a nationally recognized expert on chronic ill-
nesses, trauma, forensics, and hospice care. Fennell received an un-
dergraduate sociology degree from the College of St. Rose in New
York and a graduate degree in social work from the State Univer-
sity of New York at Albany. Her organization, Albany Health Man-
agement Associates, treats and examines health care concerns
through clinical care, consulting, and professional education uti-
lizing the Fennell Four Phase Treatment (FFPT) approach.
The FFPT model is a multiphased approach that provides a
narrative framework and cognitive map for patients and fami-
lies, helping them describe, understand, and adapt to life with a
chronic condition. The model can be summarized as follows:
In Phase One, Crisis, the person moves from onset of illness,
which may be specifically detectable or may happen gradually, to
an emergency period when the patient knows that something is
seriously wrong. The task of the individual, caregivers, and clin-
icians during this phase is to cope with urgency and trauma.
In Phase Two, Stabilization, the individual discovers that he
or she fails, sometimes repeatedly, to return to normal regardless
of interventions or behavior. The task in this phase is to initiate
stabilization and life restructuring.
In Phase Three, Resolution, the individual recognizes
deeply that his or her old life will never return. Early in this
phase, most experience profound existential despair. The task of
this phase is to begin establishing an authentic new self and start
developing a supportive, meaningful philosophy.
In Phase Four, Integration, the individual defines a new self
in which illness may be an important factor, but it is not the only
or even the primary one in his or her life. Integration of the ill-
ness into a meaningful life is the goal the individual seeks.
Biographical Sketches
145

The FFPT model is regarded as a highly practical, interna-
tionally utilized, and empirically validated treatment model that
recognizes the influences of cultural, psychosocial, and physical
factors in both assessment and treatment. It addresses the com-
plexity of chronic conditions by matching best medical practices
to the model’s four phases. By intervening with therapies suited
to the patient’s or family’s current phase, health care providers
can help families break out of patterns of repeated crises that
usually require more extensive resources in response.
Fennell frequently lectures and consults on chronic illness is-
sues with health care organizations, including the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, Fortune 150 organizations, and patient advo-
cacy groups. Her research affiliations include Cornell University,
Ithaca, New York; Vrije Universiteit, Brussels, Belgium; New Cas-
tle, Australia Research Consortium; DePaul University, Chicago;
and Capital Region Sleep Center, Albany, New York. She is the
author of numerous research and lay press articles, as well as the
recent books The Chronic Illness Workbook: Strategies and Solutions
for Taking Back Your Life and Managing.
Charles Figley
Charles Figley is one of the world’s foremost authorities on the
topics of stress and crises. He is director of the Florida State Uni-
versity Traumatology Institute. He is also a Fulbright Fellow and
professor in the College of Social Work at Florida State Univer-
sity. Figley is formerly professor of Family Therapy and Psychol-
ogy at Purdue University. He received his doctoral degree from
Pennsylvania State University and his undergraduate degree
from the University of Hawaii.
Figley has written more than 200 scholarly works, including
19 books and scores of articles for research journals. Among his
book titles are Mapping the Wake of Trauma, Burnout in Families,
and Helping Traumatized Families. He has also served as editor of
a number of research publications, including the Journal of Trau-
matic Stress, Innovations in Psychology, Traumatology: The Interna-
tional Journal, and the Psychosocial Stress Book Series. Most of
Figley’s research has been guided by and contributes to theories
and interventions that are evidence based and that prevent, limit,
or eliminate unwanted stress and crises.
146
Biographical Sketches

For years, Figley has been committed to applying his re-
search and expertise toward solving human problems. Many of
his efforts have been through the collective efforts of the interna-
tional humanitarian organization the Green Cross, which he
helped establish following the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995.
Also, in response to the growing tensions in the Middle East and
the deployment of thousands of troops to that region, he orga-
nized an emergency meeting of military mental health profes-
sionals shortly after the start of the Middle East crisis in 1990. He
organized similar workshops and training conferences in 1991.
Additionally, in response to the Columbine High School shooting
in 1999, Figley provided extensive consultation to the state of
Colorado, including a series of articles in helping mental health
providers cope.
Figley has been elected to the highest level, fellow, in six pro-
fessional organizations: the American Psychological Association,
the American Psychological Society, the American Association for
the Advancement of Psychology, the American Association for
Marriage and Family Therapy, the American Orthopsychiatric As-
sociation, and the Society for the Psychological Study of Social Is-
sues. He has presented keynote addresses nationally and
internationally.
Figley has received dozens of awards throughout his long
career, perhaps the most gratifying of which was his selection by
the leading traumatology organization in the world, the Interna-
tional Society for Traumatic Stress Studies, as its final winner of
its coveted Pioneer Award. The award recognizes traumatolo-
gists whose lifetime achievement substantially advanced the
field. The American Psychological Association named Professor
Figley Family Psychologist of the Year in 1997. A year prior, the
Florida State University School of Social Work’s student body
named him Professor of the Year. In 2005, Figley received the
Lifetime Achievement Award by the International Critical Inci-
dent Stress Foundation.
James L. Framo (1922–2001)
James L. Framo was a notable contributor to the fields of psychol-
ogy and family therapy. He received his bachelor’s and master’s 
degrees from Pennsylvania State University and his doctoral degree
from the University of Texas. He was a professor of psychology at
Biographical Sketches
147

Alliant International University in San Diego and also taught at
Temple University in Philadelphia. Framo had a long and distin-
guished career and was highly respected for his many contribu-
tions to the field, including a number of critically acclaimed books
and research articles. He died from a stroke in 2001 at the age of 79.
Framo was a founding member and former president of the
American Family Therapy Association and was recognized as an
early proponent of family-of-origin therapy. Much of his writing
focused on that approach, explaining the rationale for involving
the patient’s family of origin in helping to resolve psychological
issues. Among his more prominent book titles are Family Interac-
tion: A Dialogue between Family Researchers and Family Therapists;
Family Therapy: Major Contributions; Explorations in Marital and
Family Therapy: Selected Papers of James L. Framo; Family-of-Origin
Therapy: An Intergenerational Approach; and Coming Home Again: A
Family of Origin Consultation.
Among Framo’s other achievements, he was a founder of the
American Family Therapy Academy (AFTA), served as its sec-
ond president, and received the AFTA Distinguished Achieve-
ment Award in 1984. He also served as president of the Family
Institute of Philadelphia and was a fellow in both the American
Association for Marriage and Family Therapy and the American
Psychological Association. He served in an editorial capacity for
several important research journals, including Family Process, the
Journal of Sex and Marital Therapy, and the Journal of Divorce and
Remarriage. Framo conducted hundreds of professional work-
shops around the United States, as well as in Canada, Mexico,
Italy, Switzerland, Germany, Denmark, Ireland, Israel, Australia,
the former Soviet Union, and Central Asia.
Frank F. Furstenberg Jr. 
Frank F. Furstenberg Jr. is a widely recognized authority in the
field of family studies research. He is the Zellerbach Family Pro-
fessor of Sociology and a research associate in the Population
Studies Center at the University of Pennsylvania. Furstenberg
completed his undergraduate degree at Haverford College in
Pennsylvania in 1961 and earned his doctoral degree in 1967
from Columbia University.
Furstenberg has published numerous books and research ar-
ticles on divorce, remarriage, and stepparenting. Among his more
148
Biographical Sketches

notable books are Divided Families: What Happens to Children When
Parents Part, Adolescent Mothers in Later Life, and Teenage Sexuality,
Pregnancy and Childbearing.
His current research projects focus on the family in the context
of disadvantaged urban neighborhoods, adolescent sexual behav-
ior, cross-national research on children’s well-being, urban educa-
tion, and the transition from adolescence to adulthood. He is the
chair of the MacArthur Foundation Research Network on the
Transition to Adulthood. In October 1966, he was made a member
of the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Science.
Richard J. Gelles
Richard J. Gelles is an internationally known expert on domestic
violence. He is currently chair of the Child Welfare and Family
Violence Program in the School of Social Work at the University
of Pennsylvania. Gelles received his undergraduate degree from
Bates College (1968), a master’s degree in sociology from the Uni-
versity of Rochester (1971), and a PhD in sociology from the Uni-
versity of New Hampshire (1973).
Gelles is the author or coauthor of 21 books and more than
100 articles and chapters on family violence. His 1997 book Inti-
mate Violence in Families paints a sobering portrait of hidden vic-
tims of familial violence—siblings, parents, and the elderly—as
well as an examination of violence within gay and lesbian cou-
ples. He also explores emotional and psychological abuse, sexual
abuse, neglect, and abandonment. Gelles informs readers what is
known about intervention and treatment program effectiveness,
with special attention to intensive family preservation programs
and men’s treatment programs. In an earlier book, International
Perspectives on Family Violence, Gelles offers a worldview of do-
mestic abuse, in the process offering convincing evidence that
battering is a universal social problem.
Gelles is a member of the National Academy of Science’s
Panel on Assessing Family Violence Interventions. He also served
as vice president for publications for the National Council on
Family Relations. From 1973 to 1981, Gelles edited the journal
Teaching Sociology and earned the Outstanding Contributions to
Teaching Award in 1979 from the American Sociological Associa-
tion. Gelles has presented innumerable lectures to family studies
organizations and policy-making and media groups.
Biographical Sketches
149

Ann M. Goetting
Ann M. Goetting is a professor of sociology at Western Kentucky
University. She received her doctoral degree from Western Michi-
gan University, and her teaching specialties are family systems,
divorce and remarriage, family violence, and gender issues. She
has coedited one book, Individual Voices, Collective Visions: Fifty
Years of Women in Sociology, with Sarah Fenstermaker, and au-
thored two more, Homicide in Families and Other Special Popula-
tions and Getting Out: Life Stories of Women Who Left Abusive Men.
Currently, Goetting is executive editor of Humanity & Society, the
journal of the Association for Humanist Sociology. Beyond her
research pursuits, Goetting serves as an expert witness for bat-
tered women who kill abusers in self-defense and for those who
have lost child custody to their batterers.
One of Goetting’s more interesting contributions to the liter-
ature has been her reformulation of Paul Bohannan’s components
and processes of the divorce experience (readers are directed back
to the biography of Bohannan and his analysis of the different
sides to marital dissolution). Goetting reformulated Bohannan’s
divorce components and fashioned six processes of remarriage.
She feels that each of these components requires adaptation and
adjustment. As with Bohannan’s conceptualization, these compo-
nents may not occur to all remarried people with the same inten-
sity or in the same order.
The emotional remarriage involves the reinvestment of emo-
tions in a relationship so that comfort and love can be secured.
This may be fear provoking for some, since loss and rejection
loom as distinct possibilities. Obviously, failure can lead to disap-
pointment as well as damage to one’s identity and self-concept.
The legal remarriage involves the legal complexities associ-
ated with the new lifestyle. Beyond the child support, alimony,
and property division that were associated with one’s first mar-
riage, other legal ramifications await remarrieds. For example, it
must be determined which spouse—past or present—legally de-
serves the life and accident insurance inheritance, medical cover-
age, or pension rights. For that matter, one’s financial obligations
to children from a previous marriage, such as support for a col-
lege education, also need to be determined. As one can see, the
new marriage can often create legal complications, particularly
when the former marriage is considered.
150
Biographical Sketches

The economic remarriage is the reestablishment of a marital
household as a unit of economic productivity and consumption.
The existence of children from a former marriage often compli-
cates matters and creates financial instability. The remarriage also
creates the problem of resource distribution, in other words, how
the household’s money is to be spent and who gets how much of
what is available.
The coparental remarriage occurs if children are involved,
either from one side of the marriage or both. The process of com-
bining children to form a new, blended family is a formidable
task in scope. To be sure, a number of adjustments and adapta-
tions loom important: Brothers and sisters may have been sepa-
rated, relationships with grandparents may have been severed,
or alienation from friends and a familiar community may have
occurred. Families differ in the time it takes them to adjust, as
adults form new and meaningful relationships while children are
faced with adjusting to a new home, a new school, new friends,
or separation from a parent.
The community remarriage involves reentry into the world
of couples. In the process, unmarried friends, especially those of
the opposite sex, may be lost for lack of a common lifestyle. Mar-
ried life is often intolerant of relationships with former friends
and is thus an obstacle that has to be faced.
The remarriage from independency entails changing one’s
conjugal identity from individual to couple. This means giving
up the personal freedom and independence established for the
previous divorce and adjusting to a lifestyle in which a partner is
expected to be an involved, intimate partner.
Bernard Guerney Jr. and Louise Guerney 
Bernard Guerney Jr., PhD, and Louise Guerney, PhD, are inter-
nationally recognized as two of the most prominent and innova-
tive practitioners of marital and family therapy in the United
States. Experts in a systems approach to family disequilibrium,
the husband and wife have made numerous contributions in
writing, teaching, and practicing individual, marital, and group
counseling. Both received their master’s and doctoral degrees at
Pennsylvania State University.
Bernard Guerney Jr. is professor emeritus of counseling 
psychology and of human development and family studies at
Biographical Sketches
151

Pennsylvania State University, where he founded and directed
the Individual and Family Consultation Center. He is also ad-
junct professor of psychology and family studies at the Univer-
sity of Maryland. He founded and directs the National Institute
of Relationship Enhancement in Bethesda, Maryland. Bernard
Guerney is approved as a therapist-supervisor by the American
Association for Marriage and Family Therapy and has produced
scores of articles and book chapters; four books; and numerous
training manuals, audiotapes, and videotapes.
Louise Guerney is a licensed psychologist with a concentra-
tion in clinical child psychology. She is also a registered play ther-
apist supervisor and past chairman of the Board of Directors of
the International Association for Play Therapy. Together with her
husband, Louise Guerney is recognized as the creator of filial
family therapy, a unique family intervention model that teaches
parents how to become the primary therapeutic agents for their
children through the medium of play therapy. Louise Guerney is
also a fellow of the American Psychological Association (APA)
and of the Maryland Psychological Association. She is a faculty
member of the National Institute of Relationship Enhancement in
Bethesda, Maryland, where she conducts training programs for
professionals in play and filial therapies and parent education
leadership. She is an editor of the International Journal of Play
Therapy and The Family Journal. Dr. Guerney is professor emeritus
at Pennsylvania State University and for 23 years was head of the
parent-child programs at Penn State’s Individual and Family
Consultation Center. She has published manuals for parents and
parent educators for these programs and has coauthored the
book Helping Your Child.
For their work in family therapy, the Guerneys have re-
ceived a number of national awards and recognitions. Bernard
Guerney is a fellow in four APA divisions: clinical psychology,
counseling and psychotherapy, behavioral medicine, and 
marital/family therapy; and a certified group therapist. Louise
Guerney received the 1988 Marriage and Family Therapy Award
for Contributions to the Field of Marriage and Family Therapy,
awarded by the Family Therapy Section of the National Confer-
ence of Family Relations, and together with her husband was
awarded the 1983 Mace Medal for Contributions to Marital En-
richment, awarded by the Association for Couple and Marital
Enrichment.
152
Biographical Sketches

Jay Haley (1923–2007)
Jay Haley was a well-known family therapist, teacher, and au-
thor. Haley held degrees from the University of California at Los
Angeles, the University of California at Berkeley, and Stanford
University. He was one of the founders of family therapy, having
earned that distinction with Don Jackson and other notable ther-
apists at the Mental Research Institute in Palo Alto, California, in
1958. Haley promoted strategic therapy, which places an empha-
sis on short-term, focused efforts to solve specific problems.
In addition to his work at the Mental Research Institute,
Haley served as director of family therapy research at the
Philadelphia Child Guidance Clinic and was a consultant to the
Family Committee Group for the Advancement of Psychiatry. He
also served as editor of the research journal Family Process. Haley
taught at the University of Maryland, Howard University, and
the University of Pennsylvania.
Haley regularly conducted workshops and seminars on fam-
ily therapy. He also authored numerous books, including Strate-
gies of Psychotherapy, Problem-solving Therapy, Ordeal Therapy, and
Learning and Teaching Therapy.
E. Mavis Hetherington
E. Mavis Hetherington was a professor of psychology for many
years at the University of Virginia and retired in 1999. She ob-
tained her PhD in psychology at the University of California at
Berkeley. Hetherington is a past president of the Developmental
Psychology Division of the American Psychological Association
and of the Society for Research in Child Development in Adoles-
cence. She has authored and edited many books in the areas of
child and adolescent development and has contributed dozens of
articles to professional research journals.
Hetherington is well known for her work on the effects of di-
vorce, one-parent families, and remarriage on children’s devel-
opment. Her book For Better or for Worse: Divorce Reconsidered
provides readers with an in-depth investigation of marital disso-
lution and its effects on children. The book summarizes findings
from the Virginia Longitudinal Study of Divorce, which analyzed
how children and their families adapted to divorce over the
Biographical Sketches
153

course of time. Hetherington’s longitudinal study followed an
initial group of 72 children of divorce and their families as they
began remarrying; becoming stepparents; and, in some cases,
getting divorced once again. In all, Hetherington tracked more
than 1,400 individuals over the course of 30 years.
From her long-term perspective, Hetherington identifies dis-
tinct pathways into and out of divorce. She identifies the kinds of
marriages that predispose a couple to divorce and others that do
not. She also pinpoints “windows of change” that allow some
people to transform the challenges of divorce into an opportu-
nity. As Hetherington follows families through the life process of
divorce, she shows how women and girls experience divorce dif-
ferently from men and boys; why single mother–son relation-
ships and stepfather-daughter relationships are often difficult;
why divorce presents a greater risk to adolescent children; and
how mentoring and authoritative parenting can provide the
needed buffering against the negative effects of divorce.
This captivating look at the underlying dynamics of Amer-
ica’s divorce-prone society is a valuable reference. Hetherington
shows that while some barely survive divorce’s effects, others ac-
tually thrive. She offers readers an important first step in recog-
nizing the obstacles likely to be encountered and the choices to be
made, so that the pathway out of divorce need not be a prescribed
path of dissolution but one of healing and ultimate fulfillment.
Reuben Hill (1912–1985)
Reuben Hill is recognized as one of the pioneers of family stud-
ies and the creator of the widely referenced ABCX family stress
model. Hill received his bachelor’s degree from Utah State Uni-
versity and his doctorate from the University of Wisconsin. He
joined the faculty at the University of Minnesota in 1957, at
which time he launched the Minnesota Family Studies Center. In
1976, he was named Regents Professor and retired from the uni-
versity in 1983 as an emeritus professor. He was also a visiting
Fulbright scholar at the Institute of Sociology and Psychology at
the University of Oslo in 1985.
Over the span of his career, Hill penned 20 books and more
than 150 articles on various aspects of family dynamics. He placed
a particular emphasis on a family development perspective, con-
stantly exploring ways to make it more systematic, cumulative,
154
Biographical Sketches

and applied. The interplay between a developmental perspective
and family therapy was of particular interest to Hill. He was also
influential in the development of the research journal Family
Process. He was a member of its board of directors between 1977
and 1983, was an advisory editor since 1964, and remained a valu-
able consultant throughout his professional career.
His book Families under Stress (1949) is considered a classic in
the field and groundbreaking in its detailed explanation of family
stress and disequilibrium. In it, he expounds upon a new theory of
family crisis, which he dubs the ABCX model. The model grew out
of Hill’s observations of deployed military families, most notably
the reactions of wives and children when their loved ones left to
fight in World War II. He was intrigued by how some families ad-
justed well while others experienced intense disequilibrium. The
ABCX model was Hill’s effort to explain such reactions: the stres-
sor (A), resources (B), family definition of the stressor (C), and the
actual crisis (X). Hill argued that examining each component en-
ables clinicians to analyze the stressful event, the family supports
available, and the outcome (Chapter 1 of this book contains a de-
tailed explanation of the ABCX model).
Hill received many awards in recognition of his contribu-
tions to the field, including the Regents Professorship; the first
Burgess Award given by the National Council on Family Rela-
tions (NCFR); and the Reuben Hill Research Award, which is
given annually in his name by NCFR for the best research or the-
ory paper in the family field.
Don Jackson (1920–1968)
Don Jackson was one of the early contributors to the field of fam-
ily therapy. He graduated from Stanford University’s School of
Medicine in 1943 and launched a career that spanned teaching,
therapy, and research. Many leaders in the field of family therapy
acknowledge Jackson as a major contributor to the understand-
ing of family dynamics and therapeutic intervention. More
specifically, Jackson was instrumental in developing interactional
family therapy, which emphasizes that the key to understanding
family members is to focus on their present-day behaviors, not
past influences.
Before his untimely death in 1968 at the age of 48, Jackson
published more than 125 articles and book chapters and seven
Biographical Sketches
155

books. Two of the titles he coauthored, Mirages of Marriage and
Human Communication, are regarded as classic family therapy
textbooks. Additionally, he cofounded the journal Family Process
with colleagues Jay Haley and Nathan Ackerman. He also helped
to launch the national publishing firm Science and Behavior
Books.
In 1958, Jackson helped to establish the Mental Research In-
stitute in Palo Alto, California, and worked with such notable
therapists as Jay Haley and Virginia Satir. Among his many hon-
ors and awards, Jackson won the Frieda Fromm-Reichmann
Award for contributions to understanding schizophrenia, the Ed-
ward R. Strecker Award for contributions to in-patient treatment
of hospitalized patients, and a special citation from the American
Psychiatric Association.
Hamilton McCubbin
Hamilton McCubbin is chief executive officer of the Kamehameha
Schools system in Hawaii. Prior to this position, McCubbin was
dean of the School of Human Ecology at the University of Wis-
consin at Madison (UWM). McCubbin received undergraduate
and graduate degrees from (UWM). He received his doctoral de-
gree in 1970 and then pursued postdoctoral studies at Yale Uni-
versity, the University of Minnesota, and Stanford University,
where he was an Andrew Mellon Fellow.
Included among his professional and academic administra-
tive appointments are professor of Child and Family Studies and
director of the Family Stress, Coping and Health Project, both
with the School of Human Ecology at UWM; assistant director of
the Agricultural Experiment Station, College of Agriculture and
Life Science, UWM; director for the Center for Excellence in Fam-
ily Studies, UWM; and director of the Institute for the Study of
Resiliency in Families at UWM.
An internationally recognized authority in child and family
studies with more than 100 published professional articles and 25
books, he is particularly well known as one of the creators of the
Double ABCX model of family crisis. Building from the earlier
work of Hill’s ABCX model, McCubbin and fellow researcher
Joan Patterson proposed four components: the pileup of family
demands (aA), family adaptive resources (bB), family definition
156
Biographical Sketches

and meaning (cC), and family adaptation balancing (xX). The
Double ABCX model contains what can be called a feedback
loop; the outcome of one component feeds into the next compo-
nent. For instance, if a family is faced with repeated stressors but
has good supports and a positive interpretation, a sense of confi-
dence is nurtured. The family uses this confidence to handle new
stressors, which is termed bonadaptation. Should this not be the
case and the family suffers from inadequate support and nega-
tive interpretation, maladaptation occurs.
McCubbin has served as an administrator or advisory board
director to institutions such as the State of Wisconsin Council on
Human Concerns and Services; the National Parenting Associa-
tion; the Kuwait International Advisory Committee for the Gov-
ernment of Kuwait; the University of the United Arab Emirates;
and the Drug and Alcohol Rehabilitation Program at the Presidio
in San Francisco.
Virginia Satir (1916–1988)
Virginia Satir is recognized as one of the pioneers of family ther-
apy. She believed that the family unit was an integral force in the
growth and development of its members. Because individuals
are constantly changing and evolving, the family must create op-
timal levels of functioning. She was particularly interested in im-
proving patterns of family communication and problem-solving
strategies.
Satir attended graduate school at the University of Chicago.
Early in her career she worked with families at the Dallas Child
Guidance Center and later at the Illinois State Psychiatric Insti-
tute. In 1959, Satir was invited to join Don Jackson and a team of
therapists to launch the Mental Research Institute in Palo Alto,
California. The Mental Research Institute would become the first
formal program in family therapy in the United States.
Satir’s first book, Conjoint Family Therapy, was published in
1964 and is considered a classic in the field. She has written many
other books, including Peoplemaking in 1972 and The New People-
making in 1988. Satir is also the author of many articles and con-
ducted workshops and training seminars on the topic of family
therapy. She remained involved in the family therapy movement
for almost 50 years. She died in 1988 from pancreatic cancer.
Biographical Sketches
157

Gregory A. Thomas
Gregory A. Thomas is deputy director of Planning and Response
in the National Center for Disaster Preparedness at the Columbia
University Mailman School of Public Health. Thomas assists com-
munities and schools around the United States in the assessment
and improvement of their current levels of emergency prepared-
ness. Prior to his position with Columbia University, he served as
the executive director of the Office of School Safety and Planning
with the New York City Department of Education. As the senior
law enforcement/security official there, he worked closely with
federal, state, and local officials to address security- and disaster-
related issues that arose for the many schools in the Lower Man-
hattan area affected by the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.
Thomas attended college at the University of Maryland, Eastern
Shore, where he received his bachelor of arts degree in sociology,
and the Brooklyn campus of Long Island University, where he re-
ceived his master of science degree in criminal justice.
Thomas is the author of the 2005 book Freedom from Fear: A
Guide to Safety, Preparedness, and the Threat of Terrorism. The book
provides an overview of the history of terrorism, puts the current
global situation into perspective, and offers a wealth of advice on
how to cope during all kinds of disasters and emergencies. The
book addresses common fears about terrorism and offers sugges-
tions on how to reduce anxiety about potential attacks, such as air-
plane hijacking and dirty bombs. It also outlines how to set up
emergency plans for the office and at home and explains how to
speak to children about terrorism and violence. Thomas advocates
that readers prepare for natural disasters that may occur in their
communities, including natural disasters such as hurricanes and
tornadoes.
Thomas’s professional affiliations include membership in the
National Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives, 
the largest organization of minority criminal justice officials in the
United States; the Commission on Accreditation for Law Enforce-
ment Agencies, where he served as an assessor of police depart-
ments and law enforcement agencies across the United States; and
the professional advisory board of the National Center for School
Crisis and Bereavement, based at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital.
Thomas also serves on the board of directors of the Hope Pro-
gram, an award-winning New York City–based program that
helps impoverished New Yorkers find and keep jobs.
158
Biographical Sketches

In recognition of his professional and civic accomplishments,
Thomas received the Thurgood Marshall Scholarship Fund
Awards for Outstanding Community Service and Outstanding
Board Leadership and a distinguished alumni citation from the
National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education.
He is the first recipient of the Outstanding Young Alumnus
Award from the University of Maryland, Eastern Shore.
Judith S. Wallerstein
Judith S. Wallerstein is considered one of the world’s foremost
authorities on the effects of divorce on children. Wallerstein at-
tended Columbia University, attended the Topeka Institute for
Psychoanalysis, and received her PhD in psychology from Lund
University in Sweden. She is the founder and executive director
of the Judith Wallerstein Center for the Family in Transition in
Marin County, California. The Wallerstein Center conducts re-
search and provides education and counseling for separated, di-
vorced, and remarried families. Wallerstein has also taught at the
School of Social Welfare and the School of Law at the University
of California at Berkeley as well as at the University of Kansas
and the Menninger School of Psychiatry.
Wallerstein is best known for her longitudinal research focus-
ing on the long-term effects of divorce on children, which she
translated into several successful books. Her 1996 book Surviving
the Breakup: How Children and Parents Cope with Divorce grew out of
her California Children of Divorce Study, launched in 1971. At that
time, Wallerstein began studying a group of 131 children whose
parents were all going through a divorce. She tracked the young-
sters from childhood through their adolescent struggles and into
adulthood. Her book Second Chances: Men, Women and Children a
Decade after Divorce comprised the 10- and 15-year follow-up re-
ports on her research.
Her book The Unexpected Legacy of Divorce: A 25-Year Landmark
Study describes the feelings, expectations, and memories of di-
vorce that these youngsters carried into adulthood and brought
into their own intimate relationships. Using a comparison group
of adults who grew up in the same communities, Wallerstein
shares how adult children of divorce essentially view life differ-
ently from those who did not experience divorce as children.
Wallerstein contends that for children of divorce, every life stage
Biographical Sketches
159

presents unique reminders and manifestations of earlier marital
dissolution. Even in adulthood, the divorce experienced in child-
hood affects personality, the ability to trust, and the ability to cope
with change.
Wallerstein also coauthored The Good Marriage: How and Why
Love Lasts, based on her research examining 50 stable and fulfill-
ing marriages between 1990 and 1991. Wallerstein describes what
she considers the four basic types of marriage: romantic, rescue,
companionate, and traditional. She identifies the stages through
which a marriage evolves and explains the nine psychological
tasks—including separating from the family of origin and mak-
ing a safe place for conflict—that must be undertaken by anyone
committed to building a good marriage.
Glen W. White
Glen W. White is the director of the Research and Training Cen-
ter on Independent Living at the University of Kansas and the
Research and Training Center on Measurement and Interdepen-
dence in Community Living. White earned his master’s degree
from Winona State University and his doctorate from the Uni-
versity of Kansas.
Past president of the National Association of Rehabilitation
Research and Training Centers and past president of the Ameri-
can Public Health Association’s Disability Forum, White is cur-
rently a professor in the Department of Applied Behavioral
Science at the University of Kansas and conducts teaching and re-
search in the areas of behavioral and community psychology and
disability studies. He also has a joint academic appointment with
the University of Kansas Medical School Department of Preven-
tive Medicine.
White has a strong interest in conducting research and train-
ing activities in the areas of full community participation, disas-
ter preparation and emergency response for people with
disabilities and advocacy, and has been working with disability
organizations in Peru and Vietnam. For the past several years, he
also has been developing a systematic line of research in the areas
of health promotion and prevention of secondary conditions.
A Phi Beta Delta inductee for international scholarly achieve-
ment, White has had several national appointments, including
160
Biographical Sketches

serving on the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Na-
tional Center on Environment and Health National Advisory
Committee and as a board member of the 21-member Commis-
sion on National and Community Service (since renamed the Cor-
poration for National and Community Service), serving under
U.S. presidents George H. W. Bush and Bill Clinton.
William Wilson (1895–1971) and 
Robert Smith (1879–1950)
William Wilson and Robert Smith are recognized as cofounders
of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), a worldwide organization that
provides assistance to individuals struggling with alcohol addic-
tion. Alcoholics Anonymous offers the problem drinker a way to
live a full and satisfying life without the use of alcohol. The pur-
pose of AA is for alcoholics to stay sober and help other alco-
holics achieve sobriety.
Alcoholics Anonymous was founded in 1935. Wilson and
Smith, both problem drinkers, saw alcoholism as a physical and
spiritual disease and vowed to provide supportive guidance to
alcoholics. Their belief and experience provided the basis for AA
and, most important, the concept of the “Twelve Step” program,
guidelines used to overcome addictive or dysfunctional behav-
iors. This program grew with the formation of autonomous
groups, first in the United States and then around the world.
Today, more than 1,000 AA groups are active worldwide. The
Twelve-Step program has also generated successful programs for
eating disorders, gambling, narcotics, and sex addiction as well
as for people affected by others’ addictions.
Devising a plan to help millions of people, Bill Wilson, a
stockbroker, and Bob Smith, a surgeon, experienced little success
at first. However, the Twelve-Step concept eventually caught on,
culminating in a book that captured the mission of the program,
causing AA’s membership to mushroom. This publication, called
Alcoholics Anonymous, was released April 10, 1939. Still in circula-
tion, the book contains inspiration and insight into the steps
needed to overcome alcoholism. Among the steps is the member’s
admittance of the problem, regular attendance at meetings, the
member’s right to anonymity, and a commitment to abstinence. A
Biographical Sketches
161

pivotal feature of AA’s philosophy is the support members give
each other. Members establish regular contact with a sponsor for
support purposes.
Of particular relevance to this book was the founding of Al-
Anon in the 1950s by Lois Wilson, wife of Bill Wilson. Al-Anon
was adapted from Alcoholics Anonymous and is a Twelve-Step
program for relatives and friends of problem drinkers. Members
share their experience, strength, and hope in order to solve their
common problems. They believe that alcoholism is a family ill-
ness and that changed attitudes can aid recovery. Al-Anon is not
allied with any sect, denomination, political entity, organization,
or institution; does not engage in any controversy; and neither en-
dorses nor opposes any cause. There are no dues for membership.
In 1957, Alateen was formed in California by a teenage son of
AA/Al-Anon parents. As the name implies, Alateen is a youth/
young adult program of Al-Anon. The program follows many of
the same steps as its parental organization, yet is more geared to
teenagers and children. These traditions include the Twelve Steps
and the concept of supportive assistance from the membership.
There are no dues or fees required for attendance, and the only re-
quirement for membership is that a problem of alcoholism exists
in a relative or friend. Today, Al-Anon serves more than 33,000
groups in 112 countries, including 4,000 Alateen groups. Al-Anon
membership worldwide is estimated at 600,000.
162
Biographical Sketches

6
Data and Documents
Introduction
This chapter provides readers with a statistical portrait of family
stress and crises. Americans are a very curious people, as the sta-
tistical graphics, surveys, studies, and opinion polls that the
media continually bombard us with suggest. The fact that so
much of this research is concerned with marriage and family
life—including its ups and downs—is understandable if we look
closely at our culture. As we have seen in previous chapters, fam-
ily life has always been an integral and important part of our
lives, and whatever turbulence comes our way invariably piques
our attention. Exploring the many sides to family life is part of
our nature, embracing us in some fashion from birth until death
and, as this volume has shown, presenting us with a wide as-
sortment of problems and challenges to explore.
Regardless of the discipline, to learn about something, we
must have valid and reliable information. That is the goal of the
statistical portraits contained in this chapter: to provide accurate,
meaningful, and reliable information to the general public, as
well as to others who are engaged in such fields as research, ed-
ucation, and therapy. Statistical portraits can help us see data re-
lated to family stress and crises clearly and systematically, which
in turn promotes careful, critical, and systematic thinking. On a
practical level, research in family stress and crises can help us
make informed decisions about our behavior, allow us to com-
pare our behaviors and attitudes with those of other people, and
enable us to better understand the complexities of family stress
and crisis.
163

Researchers gather data and graphically convey their find-
ings in many different ways. In the pages that follow, a wide as-
sortment of graphics is presented that consists of tables, which
usually show quantitative data, as well as figures, which often
consist of charts or graphs. All of the graphics included in this
chapter have been carefully selected to accompany important
sections of the book, such as material related to addiction, do-
mestic violence, school shootings, and chronic illness.
In addition to complementing important textual material,
the statistical portraits in this chapter are used to summarize key
points or provide a visual display when words alone cannot ad-
equately describe a concept. The graphics thus serve to offer a
variation of text material, in the process providing readers with
ways to better understand important concepts and visual aids to
better remember them.
Many of the tables and figures in this chapter represent dis-
plays of demographics, or population trends, as they relate to
family crisis issues. The statistical portraits are drawn from gov-
ernment sources, such as the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
the Population Reference Bureau, and the Bureau of Justice Sta-
tistics. All sources provide timely and insightful information re-
garding the focus of this volume.
The data in this chapter follow the progression of topics cov-
ered in Chapters 2 and 3 of this book. The most available data are
aligned with most of the topics presented in these two chapters:
addiction, unemployment, divorce, chronic illness and disease,
caring for aging family members, domestic violence, school vio-
lence, natural disasters, deployed military families, and adoles-
cent suicide.
Addiction
The National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) is the
primary source of statistical information on the use of illegal
drugs by the American population. NSDUH is a division of the
Department of Health and Human Services. Conducted by the
federal government since 1971, the survey collects data annually
by administering questionnaires to a representative sample of the
population through face-to-face interviews at the respondent’s
place of residence. The survey is an excellent source of informa-
164
Data and Documents

tion on the use of illicit drugs and the nonmedical use of lawful
drugs, as well as alcohol and tobacco products. The sample con-
sists of civilian, noninstitutionalized persons in the United States
age 12 years or older (U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services 2006a).
Overall, the survey revealed that approximately 22.6 million
persons (9.2 percent of the population age 12 and older) may
have had either substance abuse or dependency problems in the
past year. Of this total, 3.2 million were dependent on or abused
both alcohol and illicit drugs; 3.8 million were dependent on or
abused illicit drugs but not alcohol; and 15.6 million were de-
pendent on or abused alcohol but not illicit drugs. Marijuana was
the most commonly used illicit drug (14.8 million), followed by
illicit drugs other than marijuana (9.6 million). Particularly dis-
turbing was the increased misuse of prescription drugs. For ex-
ample, nonmedical use of prescription drugs among young
adults increased from 5.4 percent in 2002 to 6.4 percent in 2006,
due largely to an increase in the nonmedical use of pain relievers.
Figure 6.1 shows how many people (in millions) used illicit
drugs in the past month, as well as the specific illicit drugs (mar-
ijuana, illicit drugs other than marijuana, psychotherapeutics,
pain relievers, cocaine, tranquilizers, stimulants, hallucinogens,
inhalants, methamphetamine, crack, Ecstasy, sedatives, heroin,
OxyContin, LSD, and PCP). Note that some illicit drugs carry a
footnote marker (indicated with a 1 following the category). This
is because estimates for methamphetamine use incorporate data
from new survey questions added in 2005 and 2006 that are not
included in estimates for use of illicit drugs other than marijuana,
use of psychotherapeutics, or stimulant use.
Among the more positive findings, current illicit drug use
has declined among America’s adolescents. The reader is directed
to Figure 6.2, where a bar graph displays the respondents’ age in
years and the percentage using illicit drugs in the past month.
Note that for each age group, there are bars representing 2002,
2003, 2004, 2005, and 2006. Among adolescents between the ages
of 12 and 17, the percentage using illicit drugs in the past month
was 11.6 percent in 2002, 11.2 percent in 2003, 10.6 percent in 2004,
9.9 percent in 2005, and 9.8 percent in 2006. Among young adults
age 18 to 25, the percentage using illicit drugs in the past month
was 20.2 percent in 2002, 20.3 percent in 2003, 19.4 percent in 2004,
20.1 percent in 2005, and 19.8 percent in 2006. Among adults age
26 or older, the percentage using illicit drugs in the past month
Addiction
165

was 5.8 percent in 2002, 5.6 percent in 2003, 5.5 percent in 2004,
5.8 percent in 2005, and 6.1 percent in 2006.
The use of selected drugs among persons age 12 or older re-
flected gender differences. By this measure, males were more
likely than females to be illicit drug users. Figure 6.3 shows that
the rate of past-month marijuana use for males was about double
the rate for females (8.1 vs. 4.1 percent). However, males and fe-
166
Data and Documents
Marijuana
 
 
 
Pain Relievers
Cocaine
Tranquilizers
Numbers in Millions
0                      5                   10                    15
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
14.8
9.6
7.0
Inhalants
Crack
Ecstasy
Sedatives
Heroin
OxyContin 
LSD
PCP
5.2
2.4
1.8
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.7
0.7
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.3
0.1
0.0
Hallucinogens
R
FIGURE 6.1
Use of Specific Illicit Drugs during Past Month among Persons Age 12 or Older, 2006
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2006a. Results from the 2006 National Survey on Drug Use
and Health: National Findings. Office of Applied Studies. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Illicit Drugs other
than Marijuana1
Psychotherapeutics1
Stimulants1
Methamphetamine1

males had similar rates of past-month use of stimulants (0.5 per-
cent for both males and females), tranquilizers (0.8 percent for
males and 0.6 percent for females), hallucinogens (0.5 percent for
males and 0.3 percent for females), and inhalants and metham-
phetamine (0.4 percent for males and 0.2 percent for females in
both categories of illicit drugs).
The survey also queried respondents about alcohol consump-
tion, including current, binge, and heavy usage. Figure 6.4 displays
age in years, and the percentage using alcohol in the past month is
displayed. Fourteen age categories are identified, and for each age
category, the bar is divided into three sections corresponding to
three types of alcohol use: (1) current alcohol use, which does not
include binge use or heavy use; (2) binge alcohol use, which does
not include heavy use; and (3) heavy alcohol use. Individual esti-
mates may not sum to the total due to rounding. One can see that
alcohol consumption is particularly prevalent during the young
adult years. Among 21- to 25-year-olds, 68.6 percent were past-
month alcohol users; this statistic can be broken down further as
follows: 22.5 percent were current alcohol users (nonbinge or heavy
use), 29.3 percent were binge alcohol users (nonheavy use), and
16.7 percent were heavy alcohol users. Among 26- to 29-year-olds,
63.5 percent were past-month alcohol users; this statistic can be bro-
ken down further as follows: 25.2 percent were current alcohol
Addiction
167
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Percent Using in Past Month
25
20
15
10
5
0
12 to 17                                     18 to 25                                26 or Older
11.6+ 11.2+ 10.6+ 9.9
9.8
20.2
20.3
19.4
20.1
19.8
5.8
5.6
5.5
5.8
6.1
2002
2005
2003
2004
2006
Age in Years
FIGURE 6.2
Drug Use among Persons Age 12 or Older 
during the Past Month, by Age, 2002–2006
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2006a. Results from the 2006 National Survey on Drug Use
and Health: National Findings. Office of Applied Studies. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

users (nonbinge or heavy use), 26.4 percent were binge alcohol
users (nonheavy use), and 11.9 percent were heavy alcohol users.
Much like the trend uncovered in the use of other drugs, the
consumption of alcohol reflected gender differences, as Figure
6.5 reveals. In this bar graph, which separates each gender and
the total of all persons within various age groupings, there are
bars representing 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, and 2006. Among all
persons age 12 to 20, the percentage using alcohol in the past
168
Data and Documents
Marijuana
Psychotherapeutics
Pain Relievers
Cocaine
Tranquilizers
Stimulants
Hallucinogens
Inhalants
Methamphetamine
Percent Using in Past Month
 0              2               4               6               8              10
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
8.1
4.1
3.2
2.5
2.5
1.7
1.4
0.6
0.8
0.6
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.3
0.4
0.2
0.4
0.2
Male
Female
FIGURE 6.3
Use of Selected Drugs during the Past Month among 
Persons Age 12 or Older, by Gender
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2006a. Results from the 2006 National Survey on Drug Use
and Health: National Findings. Office of Applied Studies. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Percent Using in Past Month
Current Use (Not Binge)
Binge Use (Not Heavy)
Heavy Alcohol Use
Age in Years
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
12–13            16–17           21–25           30–34          40–44           50–54           60–64
14–15             18–20          26–29          35–39          45–49            55–59             65+
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Percent Using in Past Month
40
30
20
10
0
Overall                                        Male                                        Female
28.8
29.0
28.7
28.2
28.3
29.6
29.9
29.6
28.9
29.2
28.0
28.1
27.8
27.5
27.4
2002
2005
2003
2004
2006
FIGURE 6.4
Current, Binge, and Heavy Alcohol Use among Persons Age 12 or Older, by Age
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2006a. Results from the 2006 National Survey on Drug Use
and Health: National Findings. Office of Applied Studies. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2006a. Results from the 2006 National Survey on Drug Use
and Health: National Findings. Office of Applied Studies. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
FIGURE 6.5
Current Alcohol Use among Persons Age 12 to 20, by Gender, 2002–2006

month was 28.8 percent in 2002, 29.0 percent in 2003, 28.7 percent
in 2004, 28.2 percent in 2005, and 28.3 percent in 2006. Among
males age 12 to 20, the percentage using alcohol in the past
month was 29.6 percent in 2002, 29.9 percent in 2003, 29.6 percent
in 2004, 28.9 percent in 2005, and 29.2 percent in 2006. Among fe-
males age 12 to 20, the percentage using alcohol in the past
month was 28.0 percent in 2002, 28.1 percent in 2003, 27.8 percent
in 2004, 27.5 percent in 2005, and 27.4 percent in 2006.
Before closing this chapter section, a word or two needs to be
said about substance abuse among the elderly. As we learned in
Chapter 2, the U.S. population is aging, a demographic trend bring-
ing important consequences for substance abuse treatment. In 2005,
Americans age 65 or older comprised approximately 37 million
people in the United States—13 percent of the total population—
and 11,300 people from this age bracket were admitted to sub-
stance abuse treatment facilities. In each year from 1995 to 2005,
alcohol was the most frequently reported primary substance of
abuse for admissions age 65 or older. Between 1995 and 2005, pri-
mary opiate admissions increased from 6.6 to 10.5 percent of ad-
missions age 65 or older. Table 6.1 displays more detail on this
170
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.1
Admissions, Age 65 or Older, by Primary Substance at Admission: 1995–2005
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
Admissions
Age 65 or 
Older
(thousands)
12.1
11.7
11.4
11.6
11.7
12.2
11.5
11.6
11.5
11.7
11.3
Primary 
Substance
Percent
Alcohol
84.7
84.8
83.6
83.1
80.5
80.4
78.7
77.8
78.5
74.4
75.9
Opiates
6.6
6.5
7.3
7.5
7.9
8.2
9.2
9.2
9.3
8.8
10.5
Cocaine
2.1
2.0
1.9
2.3
2.6
2.9
2.6
2.9
3.2
3.9
4.4
Sedatives
0.5
0.5
0.7
0.3
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.8
1.3
Marijuana
0.9
0.9
1.0
0.9
1.2
1.2
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.3
1.0
Stimulants
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.2
0.5
0.5
0.4
0.8
0.6
0.6
0.8
Tranquilizers
0.7
0.8
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.8
1.2
0.9
0.8
0.6
0.6
Other
4.2
4.2
4.5
5.0
6.4
5.7
6.5
6.8
5.8
9.6
5.5
Source: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Office of Applied Studies. 2007. The DASIS Re-
port: Adults Aged 65 or Older in Substance Abuse Treatment: 2005. Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration.

problem, including the kinds of substance abuse leading to ad-
mission to treatment centers.
Unemployment
As pointed out in Chapter 2, unemployment is a fact of life for
many workers today. Unemployment rates are influenced by a
number of factors, such as the instability of the economy, au-
tomation, or the overabundance of workers in a selected career.
A glance at Table 6.2 examines those occupations with the largest
numerical job declines. Changes in technology or business prac-
tices will reduce the demand for most of the listed occupations.
More specifically, advances in manufacturing technology, such as
faster machines and more automated processes, and a shift of as-
sembly and other production activities to countries with lower
labor costs are expected to decrease employment for a number of
production and related occupations. Farmers and ranchers will
see a job decline as market pressures and improved farm tech-
nology result in the consolidation of farms into fewer and larger
Unemployment
171
TABLE 6.2
Projections of Occupations with the Largest Job Decline, 2004–2014 
(numbers in thousands of jobs)
Employment
Change
Occupation
2000
2014
Number
Percent
Farmers and Ranchers 
1,065
910
–155
–14.5
Stock Clerks and Order Fillers
1,566
1,451
–115 
–7.3
Sewing Machine Operators
256
163
–93
–36.5 
File Clerks
255 
163
–93
–36.3
Order Clerks
293 
230
–63
–21.4
Mail Clerks and Mail Machine Operators, 
Except Postal Service
160
101
–59
–37.1
Computer Operators
149
101
–49
–32.6
Secretaries, Except Legal, Medical, and Executive
1,934
1,887
–48
–2.5
Cutting, Punching, and Press Machine Setters, 
Operators, and Tenders, Metal and Plastic
251
208
–43
–17.2
Telemarketers
415
373
–42
–10.0
Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor. 2005. Monthly Labor Review, November, Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office.

units. Advances in computer, optical scanning, and voice recog-
nition technologies and growth in electronic business will reduce
demand for many office and administrative support occupations
(such as file clerks and order clerks). Other declining occupations
in this group include mail clerks and mail machine operators, ex-
cept postal service; computer operators and secretaries, except
legal, medical, and executive; word processors and typists; meter
readers for utilities; telemarketers; and office machine operators,
except computer operators.
Divorce
Divorce rates hit an all-time peak in 1946 and then steadily de-
clined until the late 1950s. At that time, and until recently, the
proportion of first marriages ending in divorce sharply in-
creased. The approximately one million divorces granted in 1974
marked the first time in American history that more marriages
ended in divorce than through death. Between 1970 and 1980, the
number of divorces in the United States increased almost 70 per-
cent. In 2000, approximately one million divorces were granted
(U.S. Census Bureau 2008).
One method of computing the frequency of divorce is to ex-
amine the crude divorce rate. The crude divorce rate indicates the
number of divorces per 1,000 members of the population in a
given year. In the United States in 1999, there were about 4.2 di-
vorces per 1,000 population. This is considered a high rate of di-
vorce. The 4.2 crude divorce rate at that time was almost double
the rate recorded in 1965. The rate then hovered at this level for
a few years, and since has steadily declined. The divorce rate in
2006 was 3.6—the lowest rate since 1970 (U.S. Census Bureau
2008). Crude divorce rates, along with live birth-, death, and mar-
riage rates, between 1960 and 2006 are shown in Table 6.3.
The media often report that almost 50 percent of all mar-
riages end in divorce. This statement is very misleading; such a
statistical analysis must be placed into a proper perspective.
This percentage was arrived at by comparing all divorces
granted in one year with the marriages performed in that same
year. This method of calculation is quite different from the crude
divorce rate and tends to be less than straightforward. Divorces
granted in any year are the result of marriages performed in ear-
172
Data and Documents

lier years. The divorce rate has never reached one in every two
marriages.
It needs to be pointed out, too, that divorce does not affect all
social groups equally. The poor and the poorly educated, mem-
bers of the working class, and those who marry young have
higher divorce rates than better-educated and middle-class pro-
fessionals. To illustrate, black women are more likely to experi-
ence first marital dissolution and Asian women are less likely to
Divorce
173
TABLE 6.3
Live Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Divorces: 1960 to 2006
Number
Rate per 1,000 population
Deaths
Deaths
Births
Total
Infant1 Marriages2 Divorces3
Year (1,000) (1,000) (1,000)
(1,000)
(1,000) Births Total Infant1 Marriages2 Divorces3
1960
4,258
1,712
111
1,523
393
23.7
9.5
26.0
8.5
2.2
1965
3,760
1,828
93
1,800
479
19.4
9.4
24.7
9.3
2.5
1970
3,731
1,921
75
2,159
708
18.4
9.5
20.0
10.6
3.5
1971
3,556
1,928
68
2,190
773
17.2
9.3
19.1
10.6
3.7
1972
3,258
1,964
60
2,282
845
15.6
9.4
18.5
10.9
4.0
1973
3,137
1,973
56
2,284
915
14.8
9.3
17.7
10.8
4.3
1974
3,160
1,934
53
2,230
977
14.8
9.1
16.7
10.5
4.6
1975
3,144
1,893
51
2,153
1,036
14.6
8.8
16.1
10.0
4.8
1976
3,168
1,909
48
2,155
1,083
14.6
8.8
15.2
9.9
5.0
1977
3,327
1,900
47
2,178
1,091
15.1
8.6
14.1
9.9
5.0
1978
3,333
1,928
46
2,282
1,130
15.0
8.7
13.8
10.3
5.1
1979
3,494
1,914
46
2,331
1,181
15.6
8.5
13.1
10.4
5.3
1980
3,612
1,990
46
2,390
1,189
15.9
8.8
12.6
10.6
5.2
1981
3,629
1,978
43
2,422
1,213
15.8
8.6
11.9
10.6
5.3
1982
3,681
1,975
42
2,456
1,170
15.9
8.5
11.5
10.6
5.1
1983
3,639
2,019
41
2,446
1,158
15.6
8.6
11.2
10.5
5.0
1984 3,669
2,039
40
2,477
1,169
15.6
8.6
10.8
10.5
5.0
1985 3,761
2,086
40
2,413
1,190
15.8
8.8
10.6
10.1
5.0
1986 3,757
2,105
39
2,407
1,178
15.6
8.8
10.4
10.0
4.9
1987 3,809
2,123
38
2,403
1,166
15.7
8.8
10.1
9.9
4.8
1988
3,910
2,168
39
2,396
1,167
16.0
8.9
10.0
9.8
4.8
1989 4,041
2,150
40
2,403
1,157
16.4
8.7
9.8
9.7
4.7
1990
4,158
2,148
38
2,443
1,182
16.7
8.6
9.2
9.8
4.7
1991
4,111
2,170
37
2,371
1,187
16.2
8.6
8.9
9.4
4.7
1992
4,065
2,176
35
2,362
1,215
15.8
8.5
8.5
9.3
4.8
1993
4,000
2,269
33
2,334
1,187
15.4
8.8
8.4
9.0
4.6
1994 3,953
2,279
31
2,362
1,191
15.0
8.8
8.0
9.1
4.6
continues

experience first marital dissolution compared with white or His-
panic women.
Before closing, a few comments are warranted regarding re-
marriages. The United States has one of the highest remarriage
rates in the world. Statistics indicate that for those age 25 and
older, 52 percent of men and 44 percent of women are remarried.
This statistic means that in the United States today, divorce tends
to be a transitional rather than a terminal event for those commit-
ted to marriage. However, it is important to point out that the
pathways to remarriage are varied. For example, partners can be
single, divorced or widowed with no children, divorced or wid-
owed with custody of children, divorced or widowed without cus-
174
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.3
continued
Number
Rate per 1,000 population
Deaths
Deaths
Births
Total
Infant1 Marriages2 Divorces3
Year (1,000) (1,000) (1,000)
(1,000)
(1,000) Births Total Infant1 Marriages2 Divorces3
1995
3,900
2,312
30
2,336
1,169
14.6
8.7
7.6
8.9
4.4
1996
3,891
2,315
28
2,344
1,150
14.4
8.6
7.3
8.8
4.3
1997
3,881
2,314
28
2,384
1,163
14.2
8.5
7.2
8.9
4.3
19984 3,942
2,337
28
2,244
1,135
14.3
8.5
7.2
8.4
4.2
19994 3,959
2,391
28
2,358
(NA)
14.2
8.6
7.1
8.6
4.1
20004 4,059
2,403
28
2,329
(NA)
14.4
8.5
6.9
8.3
4.1
20014 4,026
2,416
28
2,345
(NA)
14.1
8.5
6.8
8.2
4.0
20025 4,022
2,443
28
2,254
(NA)
13.9
8.5
7.0
7.8
3.9
20035 4,090
2,448
28
2,245
(NA)
14.1
8.4
6.9
7.7
3.8
20045 4,112
2,398
28
2,279
(NA)
14.0
8.2
6.8
7.8
3.7
20055,6 4,143
2,432
28
2,249
(NA)
14.0
8.2
6.8
7.6
3.6
20065,6 4,269
2,416
28
2,1607
(NA)
14.3
8.1
6.6
7.37
3.6
Notes: NA Not available. 1Infants under 1 year, excluding fetal deaths; rates per 1,000 registered live births. 2Includes
estimates for some states through 1965 and also for 1976 and 1977, and marriage licenses for some states for all
years except 1973 and 1975. Beginning 1978, includes nonlicensed marriages in California. 3Includes reported an-
nulments and some estimated state figures for all years. 4Divorce rate excludes data for California, Colorado, Indiana,
and Louisiana; population for this rate also excludes these states. 5Divorce rates exclude data for California, Georgia,
Hawaii, Indiana, Louisiana, and Minnesota in 2005 and 2006; California, Georgia, Hawaii, Indiana, and Louisiana in
2004; California, Hawaii, Indiana, Louisiana, and Oklahoma in 2003; and California, Indiana, and Oklahoma in 2002.
Populations for these rates also exclude these states. 6Provisional data. Includes nonresidents of the United States. 7Ex-
cludes Louisiana.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau. 2008. Statistical Abstract of the United States, 127th ed. Washington, DC: U.S. Govern-
ment Printing Office.

tody of children, or divorced or widowed with custody of some
children but not others (U.S. Census Bureau 2008; Cooper 2007).
Those who choose to remarry tend to do so within a rela-
tively brief time frame. The average interval between divorce and
remarriage is approximately three and one-half years. Widowed
men and women who do remarry tend to take longer to remarry
than do divorced individuals, even when age is considered. A di-
vorced person at any given age has a greater chance of marrying
a second time than a never-married person has of marrying a first
time. Finally, women and men in remarriages tend to differ in age
by a greater margin than do women and men in first marriages.
In both first marriages and remarriages, the man is the same age
or older than the woman in most marriages (Cooper 2007).
The probability of remarriage is highest among white di-
vorced women and lowest among black divorced women, and
white divorced women tend to remarry more quickly. Also, re-
marriage is more likely among women who were under age 25 at
divorce than among women age 25 and over at divorce. Rapid re-
marriage is also more likely among females who were married
when they were young and who had less than a college educa-
tion. Women with no children at the start of the second marriage
are the least likely to experience a second marital disruption.
Among those with children at remarriage, those with any un-
wanted children are more likely to experience a second marital
disruption than those with no unwanted children. Additionally,
women who live in communities with higher male unemploy-
ment, lower median family income, higher poverty, and higher
receipt of welfare are more likely to experience the second mari-
tal breakup (U.S. Census Bureau 2008; Cooper 2007).
Rates of remarriage among blacks are lower than those of
white non-Hispanics, and remarriage rates have been declining
among blacks over the last two decades. Because of lower mar-
riage rates and higher rates for divorce and the presence of ille-
gitimate children, it appears that the low rate for black remarriage
reinforces a pattern in which a much smaller proportion of the life
course is spent in conventional two-parent families among blacks
than among whites, with many more years spent in female-
headed households both in childhood and for women as adults
(Cooper 2007).
Divorce rates among the remarried are high. It is estimated
that 60 percent of all remarriages eventually end in divorce. How-
ever, the divorce rate varies by the type of remarriage. Research
Divorce
175

indicates that when only one of the partners is remarried and the
other is single, chances for divorce are no greater than they are for
marriages in which both partners are in a first marriage. However,
the chances for divorce escalate if both partners were previously
married and have no children. The chances for divorce also tend
to rise if both partners were previously married and one or both
of them brought children into the remarriage (Stewart 2007).
About 65 percent of remarriages involve children from the
prior marriage and form blended families. The number of step-
families has been steadily increasing over the past few decades.
To illustrate, 1,300 stepfamilies are formed daily, and each year
500,000 adults become new stepparents. About 6.4 million chil-
dren, representing approximately one-tenth of U.S. children, live
with one stepparent and one birth parent. Today, one of three
Americans is now a stepparent, a stepchild, a stepsibling, or some
other member of a blended family (Popkin and Einstein 2007;
Stewart 2007).
The most common stepfamilies where children reside are
stepfather families or combined stepfather-stepmother families.
Regarding the latter category, the man’s children from the prior
marriage typically do not reside in the blended family. Further-
more, some children who are not now stepchildren will become
stepchildren before age 18, and some children who were for-
merly stepchildren will see their parent and stepparent divorce.
It is estimated in the next several years that the blended family
will be the predominant family form in the United States (Cooper
2007; Lebey 2005; Marsolini 2006).
Chronic Illness and Disease
According to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
(2007a), chronic disease and illness can affect both the young and
the old. The Department of Health and Human Services ana-
lyzed trends in chronic disease and illness, including childhood
impairments. In the survey used, younger generations with ac-
tivity limitation were identified through questions about specific
limitations in such activities as walking, self-care, and play, as
well as the current use of special education or early intervention
services. Estimates of the number of children with an activity
limitation varied depending on the type of limitations included
and the methods used to identify them. In the Department of
176
Data and Documents

Health and Human Services study, youngsters who were re-
ported having more than one chronic health condition as the
cause of their activity limitation were counted in each reported
category (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
2007a).
A closer look at the survey data reveals that chronic health
conditions causing activity limitation in children varied by age.
Speech problems, mental retardation, and asthma were the pri-
mary causes of activity limitation among children under five years
of age. Learning disabilities and attention deficit/hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD or ADD) tended to be the leading causes of activ-
ity limitation among all school-age children. Among younger
school-age children (5 to 11 years of age), speech problems were an-
other important cause of activity limitation. Among older school-
age children (12 to 17 years of age), other mental, emotional, and
behavioral problems were identified as important causes. Figure
6.6 displays selected chronic health conditions causing limitations
of activity among children by age.
Among working-age adults (18 through 44 years of age), the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2007a) reported
that arthritis and other musculoskeletal conditions were the most
frequently mentioned conditions causing limitation. Mental ill-
ness was the second-leading cause of activity limitation, followed
by fractures or joint injury. Among adults between the ages of 45
and 64 years, heart and circulatory conditions were the second-
leading cause of limitation. Mental illness and diabetes were other
widely reported conditions. For adults between the ages of 55 and
64, arthritis or other musculoskeletal conditions, heart and circu-
latory conditions, and diabetes headed the list of chronic health
conditions. See Figure 6.7 for more detail on the age groupings
and the accompanying chronic conditions.
It is important to point out the linkage between chronic
health conditions and income, especially with advancing age. Ac-
cording to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
(2007a), the percentage of persons reporting three or more chronic
conditions tends to increase as income declines. Adults with three
or more chronic conditions included persons ever diagnosed with
three or more of the following conditions: hypertension, heart dis-
ease, stroke, emphysema, diabetes, cancer, arthritis, or asthma.
Among adults 75 years of age and over, the percentage of per-
sons with three or more chronic conditions did not vary signifi-
cantly by income. Adults 55 to 64 years of age in the lowest income
Chronic Illness and Disease
177

group (below 100 percent of the poverty level) were as likely to
have three or more chronic conditions as older adults 75 years of
age and over in the highest income group. Figure 6.8 provides
more detail on the relationship between chronic health conditions
and income.
178
Data and Documents
Speech problem
Asthma or breathing problem
Under
5
years
5–11
years
12–17
years
Number of children with limitation of activity caused by selected
chronic health conditions per 1,000 population.
0                 10                 20                30                 40                50
 6
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Attention deficit/
hyperactivity disorder
Learning disability
Mental retardation or other
developmental problem
Other mental, emotional, or
behavioral problem
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2007a. Health, United States, 2006. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
FIGURE 6.6
Selected Chronic Health Conditions Causing Limitation of
Activity among Children, by Age

Finally, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
(2007a) explored chronic health conditions among the population
over the age of 65. Not surprisingly, advancing age often brings
chronic health conditions, some more serious than others. Figure
6.9 shows that arthritis and other musculoskeletal conditions
Chronic Illness and Disease
179
Mental illness
Fractures or joint injury
Lung
Diabetes
18–44
years
45–54
years
55–64
years
Number of persons with limitation of activity caused by selected
chronic health conditions per 1,000 population.
0             20             40            60             80             100           120
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Heart or other 
circulatory
Arthritis or other 
musculoskeletal
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2007a. Health, United States, 2006. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
FIGURE 6.7
Selected Chronic Health Conditions Causing Limitation of Activity among 
Working-age Adults, by Age

were the most frequently mentioned chronic conditions causing
limitation of activity during later life. Heart and circulatory con-
ditions were the second-leading cause of limitations. Among
adults 85 years and over, senility, vision conditions, and hearing
problems were frequently mentioned causes of activity limitation.
180
Data and Documents
Percent of poverty level
Below 100%
100%–less than 200%
200%–less than 400%
400% or more
45–54 years
55–64 years
65–74 years
75 years 
and over
Percent
0               10               20              30               40             50
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2007a. Health, United States, 2006. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
FIGURE 6.8
Three or More Chronic Conditions among Adults 45 Years of Age and Over,
by Age and Percent of Poverty Level

Caring for Aging Family Members
It is no longer a secret that people today are living longer than
ever before. According to the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services (2007a), population projections indicate that the
rate of growth for the total population from now until 2050 will
Caring for Aging Family Members
181
Senility
Lung
Diabetes
65–74
years
75–84
years
85
years
and
over
Number of persons with limitation of activity caused by selected
chronic health conditions per 1,000 population.
0               50            100             150           200          250          300
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
 
 
Heart or other
circulatory
Arthritis or other
musculoskeletal
Vision
Hearing
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2007a. Health, United States, 2006. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
FIGURE 6.9
Selected Chronic Health Conditions Causing Limitation of Activity among 
Older Adults, by Age

be slower, but older age groups will continue to grow more
rapidly than the total population. By 2029, all of the baby
boomers (those born in the post–World War II period 1946–1964)
will be age 65 years and over. As a result, the population age 65
to 74 years will increase from 6 percent to 10 percent of the total
population between 2005 and 2030. As the baby boomers age, the
population 75 years and over will also rise from 6 percent to 9
percent of the population by 2030 and continue to grow to 12 per-
cent in 2050. By 2040, the population age 75 years and over will
exceed the population 65 to 74 years of age (see Figure 6.10).
Most of today’s elderly reside in family settings, although
living arrangements differ considerably between men and
women as they age. To illustrate, more than half of older, non-
institutionalized persons lived with their spouse in 2006. About
10.9 million, or 71.9 percent, of older men, and 8.5 million, or 41.9
percent, of older women lived with their spouse. However, the
proportion of elderly living with their spouses decreased with
age, particularly among women. Only 29.8 percent of women
over age 75 lived with their spouses (U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services 2007b).
182
Data and Documents
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Year
500
400
300
200
100
0
1950       1960      1970       1980       1990                    2005   2010         2020       2030       2040      2050
Total Population
65 years and over
75 years and older
Projected
Number in Millions
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2007a. Health, United States, 2006. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
FIGURE 6.10
Elderly Population Growth Compared to the General Population, 1950–2050

Approximately 30 percent (almost 11 million) aged, non-
institutionalized persons in the United States live alone. Broken
down by gender, this total includes about 8 million women and
3 million men. These totals account for about 38 percent of aged
women and almost 20 percent of aged men. It should be noted
that the proportion of elderly persons alone increases with ad-
vanced age. To illustrate, almost half of women age 75 and over
live alone (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
2007b).
In 2006, more than 670,000 grandparents age 65 or over
maintained households in which grandchildren were present.
Additionally, more than 800,000 grandparents over 65 years lived
in parent-maintained households in which their grandchildren
were present. Almost 2 million elderly citizens lived in house-
holds with grandchildren present in the house. Approximately
450,000 grandparents over age 65 had primary responsibility for
the grandchildren living with them. For a statistical analysis of
this information, the reader is directed to Table 6.4.
It is not uncommon for older grandchildren to lend a hand
and assist their grandparents with day-to-day chores and rou-
tines. When the elderly need more intensive care, that care is
more likely to originate from adult offspring. More than 20 mil-
lion persons in the United States are informal caregivers, provid-
ing unpaid help to older persons who live in the community and
have at least one limitation in their activities of daily living.
These caregivers include spouses, adult children, and other rela-
tives and friends (U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices 2007b). However, it needs to be recognized that while most
people age 65 and older live in households and receive care from
adult offspring or other family members, the probability of living
in a nursing home increases with age (see Figure 6.11).
Domestic Violence
One of the more extensive investigations of domestic violence was
undertaken by the Bureau of Justice Statistics (2006a). Utilizing the
National Crime Victimization Survey, it analyzed data related to
domestic violence using an ongoing, nationally representative
sample of households in the United States. The survey data in-
cluded information about survivors of domestic abuse (age, gen-
der, race, ethnicity, marital status, income, and educational level),
Domestic Violence
183

criminal offenders (gender, race, approximate age, and victim-
offender relationships), and the nature of the crime (e.g., time and
place of occurrence, use of weapons, nature of injury). The inci-
dents of domestic violence were reported by those persons resid-
ing in households, not the homeless or those living in institutional
settings such as shelters for the homeless. About 77,200 house-
holds and 134,000 individuals age 12 and older were interviewed.
184
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.4
Grandparents Living with Grandchildren by Race and Sex: 2005 
Grandparents responsible
for grandchildren
Grandparents
Race, Hispanic
living with
30 to 59
60 years
origin, and sex
grandchildren, total1
Total 
years old
old and over
Grandparents living with own
Grandchildren under 18 years old
(1,000)
5,743
2,459
1,677
782
PERCENT DISTRIBUTION
Total
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
White alone
59.3
60.4
60.1
60.9
Black or African 
American alone
21.0
25.5
25.3
26.0
American Indian and 
Alaska Native alone
1.6
2.2
2.2
2.0
Asian alone
6.8
2.8
2.1
4.3
Native Hawaiian and Other
Pacific Islander alone
0.3
0.2
0.3
0.2
Some other race alone
9.7
7.5
8.4
5.4
Two or more races
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.2
Hispanic or Latino2
22.2
18.1
19.9
14.4
White alone, not 
Hispanic or Latino
47.5
50.4
49.4
52.6
Male
36.0
37.2
35.5
40.9
Female
64.0
62.8
64.5
59.1
Notes: 1Covers both grandchildren living in grandparent’s home and grandparents living in grandchildren’s home.
2Persons of Hispanic origin may be of any race.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau. 2008. Statistical Abstract of the United States, 127th ed. Washington, DC: U.S. Govern-
ment Printing Office.

Figure 6.12 shows that for white females, the rate of nonfatal
intimate partner violence began at 9.8 per 1,000 persons age 12 or
over in 1993 and decreased to 3.1 in 2005. For black females, the
rate of nonfatal intimate partner violence began at 11.9 in 1993,
then climbed to 13.3 in 1995. After 1995, the rate decreased to 3.8
in 2003. It fluctuated as it increased to 4.6 in 2005, during which
time it spiked to 6.6. For white males, the rate of nonfatal inti-
mate partner violence began at 1.6 in 1993 and increased to 1.7 in
1994. The rate then decreased to a low of 0.5 in 2003. After 2003,
it fluctuated as it increased to 0.7 in 2005, during which time it
reached a high of 1.1.
Physical assault against one’s intimate partner can lead to the
assailant killing the abused partner. The number of white female
homicide victims began at 840 in 1976 and fluctuated, with a low
of 821, as it increased to 1,002 in 1985. After 1985, the number de-
creased, reaching 749 in 1997. After 1997, it fluctuated, with a high
of 862, as it increased to 789 in 2005. The number of black female
homicide victims began at 709 in 1976 and decreased, reaching a
low of 316 in 2004. The number of white male homicide victims
began at 467 in 1976 and fluctuated, with a low of 452, as it in-
creased to 528 in 1981. Then the number dropped to a low of 174
Domestic Violence
185
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
85 and over
44.9%
75 to 84
33.5%
65 to 74
12.2%
Under 65 9.5%
Source: U.S. Census Bureau. 2005. 65+ in the United States: 2005. Current Population Reports, P23–209. Washing-
ton, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
FIGURE 6.11
Nursing Home Population by Age: 2000 (Percent Distribution)

in 2001. It next fluctuated, with a high of 195, as it increased to 183
in 2004. The number of black male homicide victims began at 820
in 1976 and dropped to a low of 138 in 2004, where it remained
constant until 2004. See Figure 6.13 for more details.
The Bureau of Justice Statistics (2006a) also found that for fe-
males in all age categories, nonfatal intimate partner victimiza-
tion declined over time. Females in the age ranges of 16 to 19, 20
to 24, and 25 to 34 were at a greater risk of nonfatal intimate part-
ner violence. Females in the age ranges of 12 to 15, 50 to 64, and
65+ were at the lowest risk of nonfatal intimate partner violence
(see Figure 6.14).
One’s marital status posed certain risks for partner violence.
On average, from 2001 to 2004, both females and males who were
separated or divorced had the greatest risk of nonfatal intimate
partner violence, while persons who were married or widowed
reported the lowest risk of violence. For separated females, the
rate of nonfatal intimate partner violence began at 92.3 per 1,000
persons age 12 or over in 1993 and decreased to a low of 26.6 in
2002. Then the rate increased to 49.0 in 2004. For divorced fe-
males, the rate of nonfatal intimate partner violence began at 26.2
in 1993 and decreased to 8.5 in 2004. For married females, the rate
of nonfatal intimate partner violence began at 3.1 in 1993 and
186
Data and Documents
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
15
10
5
0
1993         1995         1997         1999         2001         2003
Rates per 1,000 persons age 12 or older
White female
White male
Black female
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics. 2006a. Intimate Partner Violence in the United States. Washington, DC: Bureau
of Justice Statistics.
FIGURE 6.12
Nonfatal Intimate Partner Victimization Rate by Gender and Race, 1993–2004

 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
White female
Black female
White male
Black male
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
200
0
1980         1985         1990         1995         2000
Number of victims
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics. 2006a. Intimate Partner Violence in the United States. Washington, DC: Bureau
of Justice Statistics.
FIGURE 6.13
Homicides of Intimates by Gender and Race of Victim, 1976–2004
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25
20
15
10
5
0
1993         1995         1997         1999         2001         2003
Rates per 1,000 females in age group
20–24
25–34
16–19
35–49
12–15*
50–64
65+
*Based on 10 or fewer sample cases
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics. 2006a. Intimate Partner Violence in the United States. Washington, DC: Bureau
of Justice Statistics.
FIGURE 6.14
Nonfatal Intimate Partner Victimization Rate for Females by Age, 1993–2004

climbed to 3.2 in 1994. Then the rate fell, reaching 0.9 in 2004. For
females never married, the rate of nonfatal intimate partner vio-
lence began at 11.5 in 1993 and increased to 12.3 in 1995. Then the
rate decreased to 4.4 in 2004 (see Figure 6.15).
As we learned in Chapter 3, child abuse is a widespread type
of domestic abuse. According to the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services (2007c), child maltreatment takes many dif-
ferent forms, including physical, sexual, and psychological
abuse, as well as neglect. Maltreatment is often associated with a
number of negative consequences for youngsters, including sub-
stance abuse, lower school achievement, juvenile delinquency,
and mental health problems. Some forms of maltreatment are
connected to long-term physical, emotional, and social problems,
and even death. For example, “shaken baby syndrome” can re-
sult in paralysis, mental retardation, or cerebral palsy. As Figure
6.16 reveals, the highest rates of substantiated maltreatment for
children are between the ages of 0 and 3, followed by the age
range of 4 to 7. The lowest rates of substantiated maltreatment for
children are between the ages of 16 and 17.
188
Data and Documents
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
100
75
50
25
0
1993         1995         1997         1999         2001         2003
Rates per 1,000 persons age 12 or older
Never 
married
Divorced
Married
Separated
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics. 2006a. Intimate Partner Violence in the United States. Washington, DC: Bureau
of Justice Statistics.
FIGURE 6.15
Nonfatal Intimate Partner Victimization Rate for Females by 
Marital Status, 1993–2004

Although the U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices (2007c) reports that neglect is the most common type of
maltreatment across all age groups, types of maltreatment vary
by age. In 2005, 73 percent of substantiated child maltreatment
reports for children age 0 to 3 involved neglect, compared with
53 percent for adolescents age 16 and older. On the other hand,
23 percent of substantiated reports for teens age 16 and older in-
volved physical abuse, and 17 percent involved sexual abuse.
Among substantiated reports for children age 0 to 3, 12 percent
involved physical abuse and 2 percent involved sexual abuse.
Table 6.5 provides more detail.
School Violence
School violence committed by children and adolescents in the re-
cent past has generated considerable concern among the general
public, and social scientists have launched a wave of research
School Violence
189
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
20
16
12
8
4
0
1998             1999             2000            2001              2002             2003             2004           2005
Total
Ages 0–3
Ages 4–7
Ages 8–11
Ages 12–15
Ages 16–17
Note: The count of child victims is based on the number of investigations by Child Protective Services that found the
child to be a victim of one or more types of maltreatment. The count of victims is, therefore, a report-based count
and is a “duplicated count,” since an individual child may have been maltreated more than once. The number of states
reporting varies from year to year. States vary in their definition of abuse and neglect.
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2007c. America’s Children: Key National Indicators of Well-
Being, 2007. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
FIGURE 6.16
Rate of Substantiated Maltreatment Reports of Children Ages 0–17 
per 1,000 Children, 1998–2005

aimed at finding causes, consequences, and ways to curb it. One of
the more comprehensive investigations was conducted by the Bu-
reau of Justice Statistics (2006b). It scrutinized information drawn
from a variety of independent data sources, including national
surveys of students, teachers, and principals, as well as data from
federal departments and agencies, such as the Federal Bureau of
Investigation and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
From these sources, the Bureau of Justice Statistics summarized
the research and established a series of indicators of the current
state of school crime and safety across the United States.
Due to effective interventions in helping young people
whose lives are marked by a propensity for violence, school
shootings and suicides have dramatically decreased. In fact,
youth between the ages of 5 and 18 are more than 50 times more
likely to be murdered and almost 150 times more likely to com-
mit suicide when they are away from school than at school. Fig-
ure 6.17 displays the number of homicides and suicides of youth
between the ages of 5 and 18 by location, while Figure 6.18 charts
190
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.5
Child Maltreatment: Percentage of Substantiated Maltreatment Reports, 
Maltreatment Type and Age, 2005  
Physical 
Medical 
Sexual
Psychological
Other
Characteristic
Abuse
Neglect
Neglect
Abuse
Abuse
Abuse
Unknown
Overall
16.6
63.4
2.0
9.4
6.9
13.9
1.1
Age
Age 0–3
12.2
73.1
2.7
2.1
5.5
14.9
1.2
Age 4–7
15.6
64.6
1.7
8.9
7.1
13.4
1.1
Age 8–11
17.6
60.3
1.7
11.2
8.1
13.7
1.1
Age 12–15
21.3
53.8
1.7
17.3
7.4
13.1
1.1
Age 16–17
23.2
52.7
1.8
16.7
6.6
13.9
0.9
Unknown or 
23.0
55.9
0.5
16.2
8.7
3.9
0.1
Missing
Note: Based on data from 49 states. The count of child victims is based on the number of investigations by Child Pro-
tective Services that found the child to be a victim of one or more types of maltreatment. The count of victims is,
therefore, a report-based count and is a “duplicated count,” since an individual child may have been maltreated more
than once. Substantiated maltreatment includes the dispositions of substantiated, indicated, or alternative response-
victim. States vary in their definition of abuse and neglect. Rows total more than 100 percent since a single child may
be the victim of multiple kinds of maltreatment.
Source: Department of Health and Human Services. 2007c. America’s Children: Key National Indicators of Well-Being,
2007. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

the number of homicides and suicides of youth between the
years 1992 and 2005.
Although the victimization rates for students age 12 to 18
have generally declined both at school and away from school,
theft and violence are still prevalent, exposing victims to a dis-
ruptive and threatening environment, physical injury, emotional
stress, and interference to their academic success. (Theft includes
purse snatching, pickpocketing, all burglaries, attempted forcible
entry, and all attempted and completed thefts except motor vehi-
cle thefts. Theft does not include robbery in which threat or use
of force is involved. Violent crimes include such serious offenses
as rape, sexual assault, robbery, and aggravated assault.) Stu-
dents age 12 to 18 are more likely to be victims of theft at school
than away from school, while rates of serious violent crime tend
to be lower at school than away from school.
School Violence
191
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
Homicides
Suicides
Total
1,437
Total
1,285
At school            Away from school
2
1,418
1,282 3
1
19
31
1
Youth ages 5–18 from July 1, 2003, through June 30, 2004. 
Data are preliminary and subject to change.
1
2
3
Youth ages 5–18 in the 2003 calendar year. Data are pre-
liminary and subject to change.
This number approximates the number of suicides away from
school. Use caution when interpreting this number due to time-
line differences.
NOTE:  “At school” includes on school property, on the way to or
from regular sessions at school, and while attending or traveling 
to or from a school-sponsored event. Due to missing data for
suicides for the 2004–05 school year, this figure contains data for 
the 2003–04 school year.
SOURCE:  Data on homicides and suicides of youth ages 5–18 at school 
and total school-associated violent deaths are from the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 2003–04 School-Associated Violent
Deaths Surveillance Study (SVD), partially funded by the U.S. Dept. of 
Education, Office of Safe and Drug-free Schools, previously unpublished 
tabulation (May 2006); data on total suicides of youth ages 5–18 are from 
the CDC, National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, Web-based 
Injury Statistics Query and Reporting System Fatal (WISQARS   Fatal)(2006)
retrieved July 2006 from http://www.cdc.gov/ncipc/wisqars; and data
on total homicides of youth 5–18 for the 2003–04 school year are from the
Supplementary Homicide Reports (SHR) collected by the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation and tabulated by the Bureau of Justice Statistics, preliminary 
data (July 2006).
TM
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics. 2006b. Indicators of School Crime and Safety: 2006. Washington, DC: Bureau of
Justice Statistics.
FIGURE 6.17
Number of Homicides and Suicides of Youth Ages 5–18, by Location, 2003–2004

According to the Bureau of Justice Statistics (2006b), victim-
ization rates for students age 12 to 18 vary according to certain
characteristics. To illustrate, older students (age 15 to 18) are less
likely than younger students (age 12 to 14) to be victims of crime
at school, but the opposite tends to be true for the likelihood of
crime away from school. Females tend to have a lower rate of vi-
olent victimization at school and a lower rate of serious violent
victimization away from school than males, but there appear to
be no measurable gender differences in the rates of theft at and
away from school.
It is not an uncommon occurrence for students to be threat-
ened or injured with a weapon while they are on school property.
The likelihood of being threatened or injured with a weapon on
school property tends to vary by student characteristics. A consis-
tent theme in the literature is that males are more likely than fe-
males to report being threatened or injured with a weapon on
school property (see Figure 6.19). Also, students in lower grades
192
Data and Documents
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Number
School Year
1Data are preliminary and subject to change.
NOTE:  Includes homicides and suicides of youth ages 5–18 at school from July 1, 1992, through June 30, 2005.  “At school” includes on school
property, on the way to or from regular sessions at school, and while attending or traveling to or from a school-sponsored event.
SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 1992–2005 School-Associated Violent Deaths Surveillance Study (SAVD), partially
funded by the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Safe and Drug-Free Schools, previously unpublished tabulation (May 2006).
Homicides at school            Suicides at school
50
40
30
20
10
0
1992–93 1993–94 1994–95 1995–96
1996–97 1997–98 1998–99
1999–2000
2000–01 2001–02 2002–03
2003–04 2004–05
1
1
1
1
1
1
34
29
28
32
28
34
33
13
11
16
18
19
21
8
4
6
6
6
7
7
1
4
6
9
3
7
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics. 2006b. Indicators of School Crime and Safety: 2006. Washington, DC: Bureau of
Justice Statistics.
FIGURE 6.18
Number of Homicides and Suicides of Youth Ages 5–18 at School: 1992–2005

are generally more likely to report being threatened or injured
with a weapon on school property than those in higher grades. Fi-
nally, the likelihood of being threatened or injured with a weapon
on school property appears to vary by race/ethnicity. For exam-
ple, Hispanic students are more likely than white students to re-
port being threatened or injured with a weapon on school
property. However, the literature tends to report no measurable
differences in the percentages of black and white students or black
and Hispanic students who reported being threatened or injured
in this way.
Teachers are not immune to intimidation or violence in the
school setting. On the contrary, teachers are on the receiving end
of threats and physical attacks from their students. Certain trends
School Violence
193
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
NOTE: “On school property” was not defined for survey respondents. Population sizes from the Digest of Education Statistics, 
2005 (NCES 2006-030) for students in grades 9 to 12 are 13,093,000 students in 1993; 13,697,000 in 1995; 
14,272,000 in 1997; 14,623,000 in 1999; 15,061,000 in 2001; 15,723,000 in 2003; and 16,286,000 (projected) 
in 2005.    
SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health 
Promotion, Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System (YRBSS), various years, 1993 through 2005.
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Year
25
20
15
10
5
0
1993             1995             1997            1999              2001             2003             2005
Total
Male
Female
Percent
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics. 2006b. Indicators of School Crime and Safety: 2006. Washington, DC: Bureau of
Justice Statistics.
FIGURE 6.19
Percentage of Students in Grades 9–12 Who Reported Being Threatened or 
Injured with a Weapon on School Property from 1993–2005

related to teacher attacks have been identified by the Bureau of
Justice Statistics (2006b). For instance, teachers in central-city
schools tend to be threatened with injury or physically attacked
more than those educators in rural schools. Gender differences in
victimization can also be identified. Although more male than fe-
male teachers tend to be threatened with injury, female teachers
are more likely to be victims of a physical attack. Finally, sec-
ondary school teachers are more apt than elementary school
teachers to have been threatened with injury by a student. But el-
ementary school teachers are more likely than secondary school
teachers to be physically attacked.
Gangs within the school setting can be disruptive to the stu-
dent population, since they are often connected to violence,
drugs, and weapons trafficking. The Bureau of Justice Statistics
(2006b) reports that the presence of a school gang may create fear
among students and contribute to increased outbreaks of school
violence. Students in urban settings are more apt to report the
presence of school gangs than their suburban and rural counter-
parts. Regarding racial/ethnic variations, Hispanic and black
students are more likely than white students to report the pres-
ence of gangs in their schools (a trend evident in both urban and
suburban settings). Public school students tend to report the
presence of gangs more than private school students (regardless
of the school’s location). No significant difference appears to
exist in the extent to which males and females report the presence
of school gangs (see Figure 6.20).
As we learned in Chapter 3, bullying by social groups and in-
dividuals is often connected to school shootings and other forms
of school violence. The Bureau of Justice Statistics (2006b) concurs
with this assessment, adding that being bullied at school is asso-
ciated with key violence-related behaviors, including carrying
weapons, fighting, and sustaining injuries from fighting. Citing
fairly recent research, the Bureau of Justice Statistics (2006b)
shares that almost 30 percent of students report being bullied at
school. A wide range of bullying behaviors can be identified:
being made fun of; being the subject of rumors; or being pushed,
shoved, tripped, or spit on (see Figure 6.21). Most bullying takes
place inside the school and, to a lesser degree, outside on school
grounds (see Figure 6.22).
White and black students are more apt than Hispanic stu-
dents to report being bullied. White students are also more likely
194
Data and Documents

than other racial/ethnic groups to report being bullied and to re-
port that they were the subject of rumors than were Hispanic stu-
dents and students of racial/ethnic groups. The Bureau of Justice
Statistics (2006b) also reports that, generally speaking, grade
level is inversely related to students’ likelihood of being bullied:
As grade level increases, students’ likelihood of being bullied
tends to diminish. Public school students are more likely to be
bullied than those in private schools. Finally, while no measur-
able gender differences appear to exist in students’ reporting a
bullying incident, males are more likely than females to report
being injured during such an episode.
The Bureau of Justice Statistics (2006b) analyzed data that fo-
cused on school fighting and student possession of weapons.
Males are much more likely than females to engage in a fight any-
where, including on school property. However, in recent years, 
School Violence
195
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Urbanicity
!
1Interpret data with caution
Other includes American Indian, Alaska Native, Asian or Pacific Islander, and more than one race. For this report, non-Hispanic students who identified 
themselves as more than one race were included in the Other category. Respondents who dentified themselves as being of Hispanic origin are clas-
sified as Hispanic, regardless of their race.
NOTE:  All gangs, whether or not they are involved in violent or illegal activity, are included. “At School” includes the school building, on school prop-
erty, on a school bus, or going to and from school. In 2005, the unit response rate for this survey did not meet NCES statistical standards; therefore,
interpret the data with caution. For more information, please see appendix A. Population size for students ages 12–18 is 25,811,000 in 2005.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, School Crime Supplement (SCS) for the National Crime Victimization Survey, 2005.
White           Black          Hispanic           Other
50
40
30
20
10
0
Total                                        Urban                                     Suburban                                   Rural
41
48
23
17
38
37
23
27
35
32
16
22
24
26
14
14!
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics. 2006b. Indicators of School Crime and Safety: 2006. Washington, DC: Bureau of
Justice Statistics.
FIGURE 6.20
Percentage of Students Ages 12–18 Who Reported That Gangs Were Present at School
during the Previous 6 Months, by Urbanicity and Race/Ethnicity: 2005
1
1

incidents of female fighting have been on the upswing (see Figure
6.23). For both male and female students, students in lower
grades are more apt to engage in fights than students in higher
grades. Also, fighting in school varies, depending on students’
race/ethnicity. More specifically, Asian students are less likely
than students from all other racial/ethnic groups to fight any-
where, including on school property. In recent years, an increase
has been seen in the number of Hispanic students choosing to en-
gage in fighting on school grounds and elsewhere.
Males are twice as likely as females to carry a weapon, both
on school property and at other locations. Regarding racial/ethnic
composition, Asian students are less likely than students from all
196
Data and Documents
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
NOTE:  “At School” includes the school building, on school property, on a school bus, or going to and from school. Types of 
bullying do not sum to total because students could have experienced more than one type of bullying. In 2005, the unit 
response rate for this survey did not meet NCES statistical standards; therefore, interpret the data with caution. For more 
information, please see appendix A. Population size for students ages 12–18 is 25,811,000 in 2005.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, School Crime Supplement
(SCS) to the National Crime Victimization Survey, 2005. 
Bullying Type
Percent
100
80
60
40
20
0
Total
Made fun of,
called names,
or insulted
Subject of
rumors
Threatened
with harm
Pushed,
shoved,
tripped,
spit on
Tried to
make do
things did
not want
to do
Excluded
from
activities
on purpose
Property
destroyed
on purpose
28
19
15
5
9
3
5
3
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics. 2006b. Indicators of School Crime and Safety: 2006. Washington, DC: Bureau of
Justice Statistics.
FIGURE 6.21
Percentage of Students Ages 12–18 Who Reported Selected Bullying Problems at
School during the Previous 6 Months, by Type of Bullying: 2005

other racial/ethnic groups, with the exception of Pacific Islanders,
to carry a weapon anywhere. No discernable differences in
weapon possession anywhere appear to exist among white, black,
and Hispanic students. Asian students are less likely than students
from all other racial/ethnic groups, except for blacks, to carry a
weapon on school property. On the other hand, no differences ap-
pear to exist among white, black, and American Indian students.
Finally, recent research suggests that Hispanic students are more
likely than black students to report carrying a weapon during the
previous 30 days on school property. Figure 6.24 displays more de-
tail regarding racial/ethnic differences among students carrying
weapons.
School Violence
197
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Injury includes bruises or swelling: cuts, scratches, or scrapes; black eye or bloody nose; teeth chipped or knocked out; broken bones or inter-
nal injuries; knocked unconscious; or other injuries. Only students who reported that their bullying incident constituted being pushed, shoved, 
tripped, or spit on were asked if they suffered injuries as a result of the incident.  
NOTE:  “At School” includes the school building, on school property, on a school bus, or going to and from school. In 2005, the unit response 
rate for this survey did not meet NCES statistical standards, therefore, interpret the data with caution. For more information, please see 
appendix A. Population size for students ages 12–18 is 25,811,000 in 2005. Location totals may sum to more than 100 because
students could have been bullied in more than one location.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, School Crime Supplement (SCS) to the National Crime Victimization Survey, 2005.
Location of Bullying
Percent
100
80
60
40
20
0
Inside
school
Outside
on school
grounds
School
bus
Somewhere
else
Injury
79
28
8
5
24
1
1
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics. 2006b. Indicators of School Crime and Safety: 2006. Washington, DC: Bureau of
Justice Statistics.
FIGURE 6.22
Percentage of Students Ages 12–18 Who Reported Being Bullied at School
during the Previous 6 Months, by Location of Bullying and Injury: 2005

 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOTE: “On school property” was not defined for survey respondents. The term “anywhere” is not used in the YRBS 
questionnaire; students are simply asked how many times in the past 12 months had they been in a physical fight. 
Population sizes from the Digest of Education Statistics, 2005 (NCES 2006-030) for students in grades 9 to 12 are 
13,093,000 students in 1993; 13,697,000 in 1995; 14,272,000 in 1997; 14,623,000 in 1999; 15,061,000 in 2001; 
15,723,000 in 2003; and 16,286,000 (projected) in 2005.    
SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health 
Promotion, Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System (YRBSS), various years, 1993 through 2005.
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Year
100
80
60
40
20
0
1993             1995             1997            1999              2001             2003             2005
Total
Male
Female
Percent
Year
100
80
60
40
20
0
1993             1995             1997            1999              2001             2003             2005
Total
Male
Female
Percent
On School Property
Anywhere
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics. 2006b. Indicators of School Crime and Safety: 2006. Washington, DC: Bureau of
Justice Statistics.
FIGURE 6.23
Percentage of Students in Grades 9–12 Who Reported Having Been in a Physical Fight
during the Previous 12 Months, by Location and Sex, Various Years: 1993–2005

 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anywhere
Percent
Total
White
Black
Hispanic
Asian
0                     10                            20                       30                            40                         50
19
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
1
Race/ethnicity
19
16
19
7
26
20
27
American
Indian
Pacific
Islander
More than
one race
Percent
Total
White
Black
Hispanic
Asian
0                     10                            20                       30                            40                         50
6
6
5
8
3!
15!
12
American
Indian
Pacific
Islander
More than
one race
1
Race/ethnicity
On school property
7
Interpret data with caution
!
1American Indian includes Alaska Native, Black includes African American, Pacific Islander includes Native Hawaiian, and Hispanic includes 
Latino.  Respondents who identified themselves as being of Hispanic origin are classified as Hispanic, regardless of their race. 
NOTE: “On school property” was not defined for survey respondents. The term “anywhere” is not used in the YRBS questionnaire; students 
are simply asked how many days they carried a weapon during the past 30 days. Population size from the Digest of Education Statistics, 
2005 (NCES 2006-030) for students in grades 9–12 is 16,286,000 (projected) in 2005.
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Youth Risk
Behavior Surveillance System (YRBSS), 2005.
Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics. 2006b. Indicators of School Crime and Safety: 2006. Washington, DC: Bureau of
Justice Statistics.
FIGURE 6.24
Percentage of Students in Grades 9–12 Who Reported Carrying a Weapon at Least 
1 Day during the Previous 30 Days, by Location and Race/Ethnicity: 2005

Natural Disasters
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
is a branch of the U.S. Department of Commerce. Among its func-
tions, NOAA provides information to citizens, planners, emer-
gency managers, and other decision makers on weather forecasts,
severe storm warnings, and climate monitoring. It also provides
statistical information on fatalities, injuries, and damages caused
by weather-related hazards, including natural disasters.
NOAA’s analysis of natural disasters occurring during 2006
illustrates the kinds of data gathered and made available by the
organization (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
2006). Consider some of the statistical information on fatalities,
injuries, and damages caused by weather-related hazards. After
the United States experienced extreme losses—1,836 lives—in
2005, mostly due to Hurricane Katrina, weather-related deaths
dipped to 566 in 2006. This total was beneath the 10-year average
(1997–2006) of 649. Heat was the most deadly weather hazard in
2006, taking 253 lives, followed by flooding, with 76 victims, and
tornadoes, responsible for 67 deaths.
Of the 567 weather-related fatalities, males accounted for
more than twice as many deaths (378) as females (181) (the gen-
der of the remaining 7 individuals who died was unknown).
Males were more apt to be victims in all age brackets with the ex-
ception of the 90+ category. This exception likely reflects the fact
that fewer males than females live into their 90s. Tables 6.6 and
6.7 and Figure 6.25 provide more detail on the weather-related fa-
talities of 2006.
Although weather-related deaths decreased in 2006, injuries
sustained from weather events were on the upswing. To illustrate,
3,489 weather-related injuries occurred in 2006, a significant in-
crease from 1,834 in 2005 and the 2,428 that occurred in 2004. Ex-
treme heat was responsible for most of the injuries (1,513), while
thunderstorms and high winds caused 380 injuries. Lightning
was the fourth-leading cause of injuries (246).
In 2006, July and August claimed the most lives. July recorded
the biggest toll, with extreme heat claiming the most lives (160).
August was next (144 victims), with extreme heat again being the
cause. Regarding geographic location, California recorded the
most fatalities (79), 65 being heat related. New York, Pennsylvania,
and Illinois were next with 48, 46, and 45 fatalities, respectively.
200
Data and Documents

TABLE 6.6
Summary of Weather Events, Fatalities, Injuries, and Damage Costs: 2006
Amount of
Amount of
Total
Property
Crop
Prop/Crop
Weather Event
Fatalities
Injuries
Damage (M)
Damage (M)
Damage (M)
Convection
Lightning
48
246
$63.8
$0.0
$63.8
Tornado
67
990
752.3
6.7
759.0
Tstm Wind
14
249
408.0
31.1
439.1
Hail
0
18
1,569.4
132.9
1,702.3
Extreme Temperatures
Cold
2
5
0.0
11.9
11.9
Heat
253
1,513
0.2
492.5
492.7
Flood
Flash Flood
59
18
2,136.6
104.9
2,241.5
River Flood
17
5
1,631.1
95.2
1,726.3
Small Stream/ 
0
0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Urban Flood
Marine
Coastal Storm
7
16
55.1
0.0
55.1
Tsunami
0
0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Rip Current
23
24
0.0
0.0
0.0
Tropical Cyclones
Tropical Storm/ 
0
1
2.4
43.3
45.7
Hurricane
Winter
Winter Storm
17
109
571.0
0.0
571.0
Ice
0
0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Avalanche
11
6
0.0
0.0
0.0
Other
Drought
0
4
138.0
2,498.1
2,636.1
Dust Storm
2
22
0.7
2.3
3.0
Dust Devil
0
1
0.0
0.0
0.0
Rain
1
4
52.4
49.7
102.1
Fog
0
0
0.0
0.0
0.0
High Wind
26
133
195.0
15.2
210.2
Waterspout
0
0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Fire Weather
0
0
192.4
0.0
192.4
Mud Slide
3
2
58.9
20.0
78.9
Volcanic Ash
0
0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Miscellaneous
17
126
157.3
232.7
390.0
TOTALS
567
3,492
$7,984.6M
$3,736.5M
$11,721.1M
Source: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce. 2006. Natural Hazard Sta-
tistics, 2006. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
} 76
} 23

TABLE 6.7
Summary of Fatalities for All Natural Disasters, by Age: 2006
Fatalities
Female
Male
Unknown
Total
Percent
0 to 9
9
17
0
26
5
10 to 19
10
28
0
38
7
20 to 29
18
30
0
48
8
30 to 39
9
39
0
48
8
40 to 49
24
58
0
82
14
50 to 59
27
67
0
94
17
60 to 69
20
51
0
71
13
70 to 79
26
29
0
55
10
80 to 89
26
34
0
60
11
90 to –
9
7
0
16
3
UNKNOWN
3
18
7
28
5
TOTAL
181
378
7
566
100 
PERCENT
32
67
1
100
Source: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce. 2006. Natural Hazard Sta-
tistics, 2006. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Month
Fatalities
Jan       Feb         Mar       Apr        May       Jun         Jul        Aug       Sep       Oct       Nov       Dec
26
28
28
40
160
144
17
4
11
5
51
52
200
160
120
80
40
0
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 2006. Natural Hazard Sta-
tistics, 2006. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
FIGURE 6.25
Monthly Weather-Related Fatalities: 2006

New York and Illinois each lost 42 residents to extreme heat, while
Pennsylvania numbered 29 heat victims and 9 flood deaths. Forty
lives were lost in Tennessee, 34 from tornadoes.
As far as property damage was concerned, severe weather
left its mark. Total damages amounted to an estimated $11.72 bil-
lion in 2006. Property damages topped $7.98 billion, down from
$96.7 billion in 2005. Compared with the previous two years,
when hurricanes were the most damaging natural disasters,
flooding caused the most property damage in 2006 (an estimated
$3.97 billion in claims). Hail was responsible for $1.7 billion in
losses, and tornadoes caused another $759 million in damages.
Finally, crop damages in 2006 created a loss of $3.7 billion.
Drought was the leading cause, costing farmers $2.5 billion in
lost crops. The hardest-hit states were Texas, which lost $2.43 bil-
lion in crop damage, and California, which suffered losses of
$706 million.
Deployed Military Families
For this section, we will turn to an important demographic ac-
count of America’s military population, a research investigation
coauthored by David Segal and Mady Wechsler Segal (2004) of
the Population Reference Bureau. The Population Reference Bu-
reau is an organization seeking to inform the general public
about various population trends and transitions, making avail-
able objective, applied, and up-to-date demographic research.
This particular analysis of America’s military population fo-
cused on the approximately 1.4 million active-duty uniformed per-
sonnel serving in the four military branches of the armed forces, as
well as their 1.9 million dependents. Segal and Segal’s (2004) re-
search examines the size, distribution, and composition of this
population, analyzing deployment and other separations, mar-
riage and family dynamics, and other lifestyle considerations.
Segal and Segal (2004) inform us that not until the last quar-
ter of the 20th century did the armed forces emerge as a major
piece in America’s occupational and labor force. Of course, the
pattern of surge and decline in the size of the armed forces
changes when the United States mobilizes for war. Looking be-
yond the 1.4 million active-duty uniformed personnel today, it is
easy to see how military service has impacted most families in
Deployed Military Families
203

the United States. About 26 million Americans living today have
served in the armed forces—24 million of these are veterans, and
12 million are over age 60.
In Chapter 3, it was noted that war-related fatalities and in-
juries pose complex adjustments for both the veteran and the fam-
ily. The largest number of combat fatalities (about 300,000) was
associated with World War II, the largest military mobilization in
U.S. history. The second-largest number (more than 50,000) is
linked to America’s second-largest mobilization, World War I. As
this book goes to press, Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation
Enduring Freedom (in and around Afghanistan) continue to take
their toll. To date, more than 4,000 service men and women have
been killed and more than 16,600 service men and women have
been wounded in action in Iraq, and more than 400 killed and 1,180
wounded in action in Operation Enduring Freedom (DefenseLink
Casualty Statistics 2008).
We also mentioned in Chapter 3 that growing numbers of
women in the military are deployed and sent overseas for mili-
tary duty. Segal and Segal (2004) report that while women repre-
sented only 1.9 percent of military personnel in 1972, a shift
occurred in 1973 with the introduction of an all-voluntary mili-
tary. Faced with a shortage of qualified male volunteers, the mil-
itary looked to female volunteers to fill the void. As a result, the
percentage of female military personnel spiked, reaching 8.4 per-
cent by 1980 and 15 percent by 2002. Along with this surge came
increased job opportunities for enlisted women. Additionally,
legal and regulatory changes removed many of the military’s
gender-based restrictions on the assignment of women to various
jobs and positions. For example, in 1991, Congress repealed the
provisions of a 1948 law that prohibited women from flying air-
craft on combat missions. Starting in 1994, women are allowed to
serve on U.S. Navy surface combatant ships.
However, women are still excluded from military units that
engage in direct ground combat. This restriction means that
women are legally barred from serving in approximately 20 per-
cent of all military positions. To illustrate some of the restrictions,
the U.S. Army prohibits females from serving in the fields of spe-
cial forces, infantry, and armor. In the navy, females are permitted
to serve in more than 90 percent of its ranks but are excluded from
special forces (SEALS), submarines, and coastal patrol boats,
among others. The U.S. Air Force, which has the largest percent-
age of females of all military branches, poses few restrictions on
204
Data and Documents

occupations and positions (approximately 99 percent of the as-
signments are not gender based). But women are not assigned to
ground combat units, pararescue, and tactical air command and
control. The U.S. Marine Corps has the smallest percentage of
women (about 6 percent both of officers and enlisted personnel)
and imposes the most restrictions. Women are excluded from in-
fantry, armor, and artillery assignments, as well as a number of
other ground combat units.
Women’s occupational distributions within the military vary
by rank. Most officers are in support jobs, usually health care and
administrative specialties. Combined, these two assignments ac-
count for 55 percent of women, compared with only 20 percent of
men. However, about 50 percent of female officers and enlisted
women are in fields that are not traditional for military women.
To illustrate, about 11 percent of female officers are in engineer-
ing and maintenance (about the same as for men), and 9 percent
are in tactical operations occupations (compared with 42 percent
of males). Among enlisted personnel, females are about as likely
as men to be in service and supply specialties or intelligence and
communication specialties, areas that extend beyond traditional
female jobs. Furthermore, enlisted women’s concentration in
these nontraditional specialties has increased over time.
The research of Segal and Segal (2004) also reveals a statisti-
cal portrait of military families. At one time, the U.S. armed
forces were composed of young single men. Those females who
served in the armed forces who had children were not permitted
to remain in the ranks, and men needed their commanding offi-
cer’s permission to get married. However, trends have changed.
Since the draft ended in 1973, the numbers of married military
personnel have increased, due for the most part to the military’s
determination to retain trained and experienced personnel and
reduce turnover.
Today, approximately half of U.S. military personnel are
married, and nearly three-quarters have children. About 1.4 mil-
lion active-duty service members have 1.9 million family mem-
bers, including spouses, children, and adult dependents (such as
siblings or parents). This means that America’s armed forces
have more family members than personnel in uniform. As far as
demographics are concerned, more military men than military
women are likely to be married or to have children. In many mil-
itary marriages, both husband and wife are in the service, ac-
counting for approximately 12 percent of all military marriages.
Deployed Military Families
205

Although most of today’s dual-military couples do not have chil-
dren, the numbers who do are on the upswing.
Similar to demographic trends among civilians, the share of
young military adults who are single (because they never mar-
ried or are divorced or separated) has risen since 1990. Further-
more, a growing percentage of single military personnel have
children. Although military women are more likely than men to
be single parents, the much larger proportion of men in the
armed forces means that there are more single fathers than single
mothers. Within the enlisted and officer categories, higher-rank-
ing personnel are more apt to be married than single, since rank
and age are closely related. Only lower-ranking enlisted person-
nel are more apt to be single than married. Men are more likely
than women to be married, except in the lowest enlisted ranks.
Segal and Segal (2004) point out that the large gender differences
among senior enlisted personnel and officers mirror the difficulty
for women of juggling work and family life in the military, espe-
cially those women with youngsters.
Demographic differences in marriage and family life also
exist in the four branches of the armed forces. For instance, air
force personnel are more apt to be married than their cohorts in
the other branches. This statistic might reflect the fact that those
in the air force are the most likely to be viewing military service
as a career. Although marine corps enlisted personnel on the
whole are younger and less apt to be married than their counter-
parts in the other branches of the armed forces, enlisted women
in the navy are less likely to be married than other enlisted
women. Along the same lines, female officers in the navy and
marine corps are less likely to be married than women officers in
the army and the air force.
In each branch of the military, men are more likely to be mar-
ried than their female peers, especially among officers. And
among married military women, substantial proportions are
married to military men. Across all branches, almost half of mar-
ried enlisted women have established dual-service marriages.
Most dual-service marriages are in the marine corps, followed by
the air force. Higher-ranking (and therefore older) personnel are
more likely than junior personnel to be married.
Finally, Segal and Segal (2004) illuminate racial differences
in married military life. Black military women are less likely than
other women to be single and childless, and more likely to be sin-
gle parents. They are also more apt than other servicewomen to
206
Data and Documents

be in dual-service marriages with children and less likely to be in
dual-military marriages without children. Such differences may
be explained—at least in part—by the higher ranks of black
women, who tend to remain in service longer than white women.
Like black women in the armed forces, black military men are
less likely than other men to be single and childless. They are also
more likely than Asian/Pacific Islander, white, and Hispanic
men to be single parents.
Segal and Segal (2004) note that with the passage of time, the
military has been pressured to respond to the increases in the
proportion of personnel with spouses and/or children, in single
parents, in dual-service couples, and in spouse employment de-
sires. With more frequent deployments and more dangerous mis-
sions, the military has been under pressure to respond to greater
service member and family dissatisfaction with the military
lifestyle and consequent difficulty in retaining experienced per-
sonnel. Whether the armed forces becomes more family friendly
and eases the burdens borne by the military lifestyle remains to
be seen.
Adolescent Suicide
We approach the topic of adolescent suicide by drawing refer-
ence to research conducted in 2006 by the Office of Applied
Studies (OAS) in the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Ser-
vices Administration. A branch of the government’s Department
of Health and Human Services, OAS gathers, analyzes, and
makes available important public health information. To this
end, OAS utilized two national surveys that probed such areas
as suicidal ideation and attempts and, in particular, drug-related
suicide attempts. The two surveys were the National Survey on
Drug Use and Health and the Drug Abuse Warning Network.
Within this section, information is drawn from findings gathered
from these surveys (U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices 2006b).
In the research design, subjects age 18 or older were asked
questions to assess lifetime and past-year major depressive
episodes (MDEs). (An MDE is a mental condition that persists for
two or more weeks and causes a depressed mood or a loss of in-
terest, as well as such symptoms as sleep problems, loss of ap-
petite, or reduced energy levels.) Suicide-related questions were
Adolescent Suicide
207

administered to respondents who reported being depressed for
two weeks or longer. These survey items asked, among other
questions, whether respondents had ever thought of ending their
lives, whether the act of suicide was seen as a solution to their
conditions, and whether they had made suicide plans or suicide
attempts. Because mental illness and substance use often co-
occur, respondents were also asked about their use of alcohol and
illicit drugs during the 12 months prior to the interview.
Before turning to some of the major findings of the OAS in-
vestigation, the reader is reminded (see Chapter 3) of the high 
incidence rate of adolescent suicide. By 2004, suicide was the
third-leading cause of death for children between the ages of 5
and 14 (10.9 per 100,000 young people in this age group) and for
adolescents and young adults between the ages of 15 and 24 (10.3
per 1,000). Gender differences in suicide were also found in these
two age groupings. Almost four times as many males as females
age 15 to 19 died by suicide, and more than six times as many
males as females age 20 to 24 died by suicide. As in the general
population, young people were much more likely to use firearms,
suffocation, and poisoning than other methods of suicide overall.
However, while adolescents and young adults were more likely to
use firearms than suffocation, children were dramatically more
likely to use suffocation. Although suicide death rates are high for
young people, note the disproportionate death rates for older
Americans. Table 6.8 displays U.S. suicide death rates between
1950 and 2004; the shaded area highlights adolescence and the
young adult years.
The OAS investigation’s findings reveal that 14.5 percent of
respondents age 18 or older (31.2 million adults) experienced at
least one MDE in their lifetime, and 7.6 percent (16.4 million
adults) experienced an MDE within the past year. Females were
almost twice as likely as males to have experienced a past-year
MDE (9.8 vs. 5.4 percent). Rates of past-year MDE varied by age
group; people in late adolescence (age 18–20) were more likely to
have had a past-year MDE, while adults age 55 or older were
least likely to have had a past-year MDE (see Figure 6.26).
Among persons age 18 or older with a past-year MDE, 14.5
percent made suicide plans during their worst or most recent
MDEs. Also, 10.4 percent (1.7 million adults) made suicide at-
tempts during such episodes. No significant differences were
found between males and females in attempting suicide, but
males were more likely than females to have made suicide plans
208
Data and Documents

TABLE 6.8
Death Rates for Suicide, by Age: United States, 1950–2004 
(deaths per 100,000 resident population)
Age
1950 
1960 
1970 
1980 
1990
2000 
2003
2004
All ages
13.2
12.5
13.1
12.2
12.5
10.4
10.8
10.9
5–14 years
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.4
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.7
15–24 years
4.5
5.2
8.8
12.3
13.2
10.2
9.7
10.3
15–19 years
2.7
3.6
5.9
8.5
11.1
8.0
7.3
8.2
20–24 years
6.2
7.1
12.2
16.1
15.1
12.5
12.1
12.5
25–44 years
11.6
12.2
15.4
15.6
15.2
13.4
13.8
13.9
25–34 years
9.1
10.0
14.1
16.0
15.2
12.0
12.7
12.7
35–44 years
14.3
14.2
16.9
15.4
15.3
14.5
14.9
15.0
45–64 years
23.5
22.0
20.6
15.9
15.3
13.5
15.0
15.4
45–54 years
20.9
20.7
20.0
15.9
14.8
14.4
15.9
16.6
55–64 years
26.8
23.7
21.4
15.9
16.0
12.1
13.8
13.8
65 years and over
30.0
24.5
20.8
17.6
20.5
15.2
14.6
14.3
65–74 years
29.6
23.0
20.8
16.9
17.9
12.5
12.7
12.3
75–84 years
31.1
27.9
21.2
19.1
24.9
17.6
16.4
16.3
85 years and over
28.8
26.0
19.0
19.2
22.2
19.6
16.9
16.4
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2007a. Health, United States, 2006. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Percent
Age in Years
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
18–20           21–24          25–34           35–54              55+
10.2
9.9
8.7
9.1
4.0
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2006b. Suicidal Thoughts, Suicide Attempts, Major Depressive
Episode, and Substance Use among Adults. Office of Applied Studies. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
FIGURE 6.26
Percentages of Adults Age 18 or Older Reporting a
Past-Year Major Depressive Episode, by Age Group

(17.9 percent vs. 12.7 percent). Also seen were a few differences
by age. Adults age 18 to 20 were more likely than adults in all
other age groups to have attempted suicide, and adults age 55 or
older with past-year MDEs were less likely to have made suicide
plans (see Figure 6.27).
Adolescents age 18 or older who reported having used illicit
drugs during the past month were also more likely to report past-
year MDEs than adults who had not used illicit drugs during the
past month (14.2 percent vs. 7.1 percent). Rates of past-year sui-
cidal thoughts and suicide attempts were also higher among
adults with past-year MDEs who had used illicit drugs during
the past month than adults with past-year MDEs who had not
used illicit drugs.
Finally, the OAS (U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services 2006b) investigation explored characteristics of patients
involved in emergency department visits for drug-related suicide
attempts. In 2004, 106,079 emergency department visits were
connected to drug-related suicide attempts by individuals 18
years of age or older. Females had a higher rate of attempts (57
visits per 100,000 population), while adults 55 years of age and
older had the lowest rate (10 visits per 100,000). Once again, ado-
lescents and young adults led all age groupings with the most
210
Data and Documents
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
25
20
15
10
5
0
Made Suicide Plan                                    Attempted Suicide
22.3
18.0
17.4
13.5
7.3
19.5
14.7
10.9
9.8
3.9
18 to 20
21 to 24
25 to 34
35 to 54
55 or Older
Percentages
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2006b. Suicidal Thoughts, Suicide Attempts, Major Depressive
Episode, and Substance Use among Adults. Office of Applied Studies. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
FIGURE 6.27
Percentages Reporting Suicide Plans and Attempts among Adults Age 18 or
Older with Past-Year Major Depressive Episodes

emergency department visits (see Table 6.9). In 41 percent of the
drug-related suicide attempts, a psychiatric condition was diag-
nosed; the most frequent diagnosis was depression, accounting
for 36 percent of the total visits.
References
Bureau of Justice Statistics. 2006a. Intimate Partner Violence in the United
States. Washington, DC: Bureau of Justice Statistics.
Bureau of Justice Statistics. 2006b. Indicators of School Crime and Safety:
2006. Washington, DC: Bureau of Justice Statistics.
Cooper, T. J. 2007. Marriage, Divorce, Remarriage. Longwood, FL: Xulon
Press.
DefenseLink Casualty Report. 2008. “U.S. Military Casualty Update.”
[Online information; retrieved 5/5/08.] www.defenselink.mil/news/
casualty.
Lebey, B. 2005. Remarried with Children: Ten Secrets for Successfully Blend-
ing and Extending Your Family. New York: Bantam.
Marsolini, M. 2006. Raising Children in Blended Families: Helpful Insights,
Expert Opinions, and True Stories. Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel.
References
211
TABLE 6.9
Demographic Characteristics of Patients Age 18 or Older Treated in Emergency
Departments (EDs) for Drug-Related Suicide Attempts
ED Visits
Demographic 
Population
Estimated
per 100,000 
Characteristics
(in millions)
ED Visits
Population
Gender
Male
144.5
41,430
39
Female
149.1
64,632
57
Age in Years
18–20
12.4
11,145
90
21–24
16.9
13,180
78
25–34
40.0
30,076
75
35–54
85.7
45,111
53
55 or Older
65.4
6,568
10
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2006b. Suicidal Thoughts, Suicide Attempts, Major Depres-
sive Episode, and Substance Use among Adults. Office of Applied Studies. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office.

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, U.S. Department of
Commerce. 2006. Natural Hazard Statistics, 2006. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
Popkin, M. H., and E. Einstein. 2007. Active Parenting for Stepfamilies.
Kennesaw, GA: Active Parenting Publishers.
Segal, D. R., and M. W. Segal. 2004. “America’s Military Population.”
Population Bulletin 59 (4), 1 40. Washington, DC: Population Reference
Bureau.
Stewart, S. D. 2007. Brave New Stepfamilies. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2008. Statistical Abstract of the United States, 127th
ed. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2006a. Results from the
2006 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: National Findings. Office of
Applied Studies. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2006b. Suicidal
Thoughts, Suicide Attempts, Major Depressive Episode, and Substance Use
among Adults. Office of Applied Studies. Washington, DC: U.S. Govern-
ment Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2007a. Health, United
States, 2006. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2007b. A Profile of Older
Americans: 2007. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2007c. America’s Chil-
dren: Key National Indicators of Well-Being, 2007. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
212
Data and Documents

7
Directory of Organizations
T
his chapter contains a comprehensive listing of organizations,
associations, and agencies related to the study of family stress
and crises. Web site and e-mail contact information are in-
cluded for further study. For the dual purpose of convenience
and organization, the presentation of these sources is organized
according to the sequence of problems, controversies, and solu-
tions presented in Chapters 2 and 3. Readers will recall that
Chapter 2 focuses on seven key family crises: addiction, adoles-
cent runaways, unemployment, infidelity, divorce, chronic illness
and disease, and caring for aging family members. Chapter 3 ex-
amines five problems plaguing families in the United States
today: domestic violence, school violence, natural disasters, de-
ployed military families, and adolescent suicide.
Addiction
Addiction Resource Guide
Web site: http://www.addictionresourceguide.com/
aboutthisguide.html
A Web site whose mission is to help locate resources on addic-
tion, it provides much information on topics such as self-help
groups, addictive problems, and residential treatment resources.
The directory of resources listed is organized and explained in
simple and understandable terms and concepts. The Web site in-
cludes a section on government and intervention resources.
213

American Society of Addiction Medicine
Web site: http://www.asam.org
This organization seeks to improve the quality of addiction treat-
ment with a particular emphasis on promoting the role of the
physician treating the patient facing addiction issues. Readers
will discover that this Web site is an excellent resource shedding
light on treatment options for those suffering from alcoholism or
other addictions. The Web site also offers professional informa-
tion on licensed physicians in the area of addiction medicine.
Center for Alcohol and Addiction Studies
Web site: http://www.caas.brown.edu/Content/research/
projects.html
Located at Brown University in Providence, Rhode Island, the cen-
ter seeks to promote the identification, prevention, and effective
treatment of alcoholism and other addictions through research, ed-
ucation, and policy advocacy. The Web site contains a number of
useful links, including links to services and organizations located
at Brown University, as well as national organizations specializing
in the prevention of addictive behaviors.
Center for Education and Drug Abuse Research (CEDAR)
Web site: http://www.pitt.edu/~cedar/
The Center for Education and Drug Abuse Research, established
in 1989, is sponsored by the University of Pittsburgh and funded
by the National Institute on Drug Abuse. Its primary focus is to
conduct research studies investigating the origins of substance
abuse and substance use disorders. Visitors to this Web site will
discover a plethora of research investigations and valuable links
to other resources.
Community Anti-Drug Coalitions of America (CADCA)
Web site: http://www.cadca.org/
Founded in 1992 under the leadership of Alvah Chapman, this
organization seeks to promote safe, healthy, and drug-free com-
munities. Using various components of the community, from
parents and businesses to health providers and social service
agencies, CADCA works on behalf of more than 5,000 commu-
nity coalitions in the United States. A particular strength of its
214
Directory of Organizations

programming is providing members with antidrug training op-
portunities, including specialized workshops and conferences.
National Clearinghouse for Alcohol & 
Drug Information (NCADI)
Web site: http://ncadi.samhsa.gov/about/
The National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Information is
sponsored by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
and the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administra-
tion. NCADI’s mission is to build resilience and facilitate recovery
for people with or at risk for mental or substance use disorders. The
organization believes that substance abuse disorders and mental ill-
nesses in general can be reduced by prevention and early interven-
tion with carefully planned research-based services and community
supports. This Web site contains a wealth of research studies, books,
and pamphlets, as well as referrals to other organizations.
National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence
Web site: http://www.ncadd.org
The National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence was
founded in 1944 by Marty Mann. The organization advocates the
prevention and treatment of alcoholism and substance abuse
through a nationwide network of affiliates. It provides compre-
hensive and informative publications on all drugs, as well as an
exhaustive listing of links and resources. This is one of the more
popular Web sites on the topic.
Adolescent Runaways
Child Find of America
Web site: http://www.childfindofamerica.org
Child Find of America was founded in 1980 by the mother of a
missing child in upstate New York. Since its establishment, this
national, not-for-profit organization has offered the general pub-
lic information on how to prevent and resolve all cases of miss-
ing, abducted, and runaway children and teenagers. As the
agency evolved over the years, Child Find of America has broad-
ened its programming and now includes education, mediation,
Adolescent Runaways
215

conflict resolution, and referral support services, among other
specialties. Each year, the agency receives more than 15,000 calls
for help from searching parents and law enforcement officials
and brings more than 400 youngsters to a safe environment.
Child Quest International
Web site: http://www.childquest.org/
Readers seeking information on the prevention and recovery of
missing, abused, and exploited children will find it at this Web
site. Since its founding in 1990, Child Quest International has as-
sisted in the recovery of more than 3,000 children and teenagers.
Because the organization is funded through private and corporate
donations, grants, and fund-raising, Child Quest never charges a
fee to law enforcement or searching families. At the heart of its
programming is the provision of safety education to children,
teens, preteens, and parents in the war against child victimization.
The organization provides extensive Internet resources and safety
resources.
Child Welfare League of America (CWLA)
Web site: http://www.cwla.org/
The Child Welfare League of America was founded in 1920 as a
means to share ideas and offer mutually supportive ways to pro-
mote the welfare and well-being of America’s younger genera-
tions. Today, CWLA boasts a membership of nearly 800 public
and private nonprofit agencies that extend their services each
year. Among the targeted populations are runaway children and
teenagers.
Family and Youth Services Bureau (FYSB)
Web site: http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/fysb/
Established in 1977 by the U.S. Department of Health and
Human services, this organization seeks to monitor and improve
social services support for the nation’s children and families. It
offers a variety of programming, including that related to adop-
tion and foster care, child abuse and neglect, child support, dis-
abilities, and child care. Visitors to this Web site will find a
generous assortment of fact sheets, agency publications, policy
and legislative documents, updates on conferences and events,
and grant awards.
216
Directory of Organizations

National Center for Missing and 
Exploited Children (NCMEC)
Web site: http://www.missingkids.com/
Established in 1984 as a private, nonprofit organization, the Na-
tional Center for Missing and Exploited Children provides ser-
vices designed to combat abduction and the sexual exploitation of
children and teenagers. Since its inception, NCMEC has served as
a national clearinghouse of information related to missing and ex-
ploited younger generations. It also offers a variety of training
programs to law enforcement and social service professionals.
Readers searching for more information on these topics will find
a valuable listing of publications, including such topics as run-
aways, abduction, Internet safety, basic safety tips for teenagers,
child protection, and sexual exploitation.
National Runaway Switchboard (NRS)
Web site: http://www.1800runaway.org/
The National Runaway Switchboard is one of America’s most
visible and active organizations to keep runaway and at-risk
youth safe and off the streets. NRS was founded in 1971 by a
group of Chicago agencies to address a growing need for com-
prehensive crisis intervention for youngsters in the area. In 1974,
NRS received a federal demonstration grant to establish a na-
tional hotline and supportive services, which served to define the
agency’s mission and future. The 1-800-RUNAWAY hotline now
handles more than 100,000 calls each year. The hotline is avail-
able 24 hours a day throughout the United States and its territo-
ries, including Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and Guam.
Vanished Children’s Alliance (VCA)
Web site: http://www.vca.org
The Vanished Children’s Alliance was formed in 1980 by Georgia
K. Hilgeman (VCA’s current executive director) and other pro-
fessionals and victims to address the growing problem of run-
away and abducted children and adolescents. At the foundation
of VCA’s outreach efforts is a strong desire to educate public of-
ficials and professionals—as well as the community at large—
about America’s at-risk children and teens. Since its inception,
the VCA has assisted in more than 30,000 cases of missing and
abducted children. Of these, more than 90 percent have been
Adolescent Runaways
217

found. The VCA does not charge for its services, instead prefer-
ring to spread its mission: a dedication to keeping children safe
and bringing missing children home.
Unemployment
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)
Web site: http://stats.bls.gov/
The Bureau of Labor Statistics is a branch of the U.S. Department
of Labor and exists as a fact-finding agency for the United States
in the areas of labor economics and statistics. BLS produces im-
partial, timely, and accurate data relevant to America’s labor
force and its families, including unemployment. Regarding the
latter, this Web site provides up-to-date information on unem-
ployment rates, employment by occupation, and job openings
and labor turnover.
Careermag.com
Web site: http://www.careermag.com
This self-help Web site provides visitors with industry-specific ca-
reer opportunities along with abundant information to assist in-
dividuals tailoring their information to career goals. Among the
topics available to explore at this Web site are career consultation,
resume building, continuing education, job descriptions, salary
reports, franchise opportunities, and industry publications.
Employment Development Department (EDD)
Web site: http://www.edd.ca.gov/aboutedd.htm
Sponsored by the state of California, the Employment Develop-
ment Department seeks to connect job seekers and employers.
The EDD offers a variety of services, including an online job and
resume bank, information on filing for unemployment insurance
or disability insurance claims, labor market tools to help the un-
employed make educated and calculated vocational decisions,
information related to employment tax information and forms,
and a variety of other vocational and training services.
Employment Guide
Web site: http://www.employmentguide.com
218
Directory of Organizations

One of the more popular Web sites available to job seekers, Em-
ployment Guide makes available a wide range of vocational op-
portunities, from large franchise opportunities to working from
home. Visitors will discover a number of worthwhile topics to in-
vestigate, such as educational opportunities and job fairs. The
Web site is quite user friendly.
Employment Spot
Web site: http://www.employmentspot.com/
This Web site captures the pulse of today’s employment world,
including listings of jobs by city, state, or industry. Offering
added appeal to this Web site is an extensive library of employ-
ment articles on the following timely topics: criteria for choosing
an ideal career, employment tips to earn a promotion, minority
job and career resources, interviewing dos and don’ts, fastest
growing occupations in the United States today, and keys to suc-
cessful networking.
Michigan eLibrary (MeL)
Web site: http://www.mel.org/SPT—BrowseResources
NewMeL.php 
This is the official state of Michigan Web site, and it is one of the
best of its kind on the Internet. Among its many prominent fea-
tures are recommended Web sites for specialized topics, data-
bases, and books and journals. More than 45 databases are
available to the user, making this an ideal source for students and
other readers researching topics related to unemployment. The
databases contain full-text articles from magazines, journals, and
newspapers as well as digital books.
Monthly Labor Review Online
Web site: http://stats.bls.gov/opub/mlr/welcome.htm
This online resource provides users with complete access to the
Monthly Labor Review. The Monthly Labor Review, founded in 1915,
is an authoritative journal of research and analysis from the Bu-
reau of Labor Statistics, drawing upon the collective expertise of
economists, statisticians, and other labor force specialists within
the private and public sectors. It provides a wide scope of data on
employment, including trends in the labor force, inflation, wages,
and occupational illnesses and injuries. This online resource makes
Unemployment
219

available access to related Bureau of Labor Statistics programs, as
well as valuable links and other resources. This is a highly recom-
mended Web site.
Occupational Outlook Handbook (OOH)
Web site: http://www.bls.gov/OCO/
The Occupational Outlook Handbook is a must stop for anyone ex-
ploring the labor market in these modern times. Published by the
U.S. Department of Labor, the OOH offers a detailed analysis of
hundreds of different types of vocations, offering insight into earn-
ings, anticipated job prospects, job descriptions, working condi-
tions, and training and education needed. The OOH is widely
known as a valuable and comprehensive career resource, and its
user-friendly design allows visitors to this Web site easy access to
important sources of vocational information.
Quintessential Careers
Web site: http://www.quintcareers.com/
Attracting more than 1 million visitors each month, this Web site
is widely respected in the career world. Visitors will discover a
variety of job hunting tips, from developing effective resumes to
filing for unemployment benefits. The Web site offers more than
3,500 pages of free college, career, and job-search content and
provides visitors with help in writing cover letters, networking,
interviewing, and negotiating salaries. The Web site also offers
tips, links, and expert advice about undergraduate and graduate
college degrees, financial aid, and distance learning.
Infidelity
Affairs-Help
Web site: http://www.affairs-help.com/
This Web site features the expertise of Emily M. Brown, LCSW, di-
rector of Key Bridge Therapy and Mediation Center in Arlington,
Virginia. She offers her assistance to couples, individuals, and
families regarding the underlying issues in marriage, divorce, and
betrayal. Her Web site offers a variety of resources to visitors, in-
cluding publication, consultation services, self-assessment exer-
cises, and links to other Web sites.
220
Directory of Organizations

American Association for Marriage and 
Family Therapy (AAMFT)
Web site: http://www.aamft.org/families/consumer_updates/
infidelity.asp
The American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy is a
highly respected professional organization representing marriage
and family therapists. In addition to information about infidelity,
this Web site offers references and resources on the topic, as well
as links to other Web sites.
American Counseling Association (ACA)
Web site: http://www.counseling.org/
Established in 1952, the American Counseling Association is an
organization dedicated to the growth and visibility of the coun-
seling profession. ACA has the distinction of being the world’s
largest association representing professional counselors in vari-
ous practice settings. Members will find an abundance of infor-
mation here on the topics of marriage and infidelity, along with
myriad topics designed to enhance the quality of life.
Center for Internet Addiction Recovery
Web site: http://www.netaddiction.com/
This Web site was established in 1995 by Kimberly Young, PhD, an
accomplished author and professor at St. Bonaventure University
in New York. The Web site leaves no stone unturned addressing
the many issues surrounding Internet addiction, including cyber-
sex pornography, online affairs, online gambling, online gaming,
compulsive surfing, and eBay addiction. The Web site also offers
valuable articles, books, tapes, and a referral directory of therapists.
Infidelity.com
Web site: http://www.infidelity.com/
Another Web site providing visitors with information on how to
best deal with an unfaithful partner, infidelity.com offers an ex-
tensive and comprehensive array of services, in-depth informa-
tion, and wide-ranging support, including advice from divorce
attorneys, therapists, mediators, arbitrators, and child custody
experts. Another strength is the provision of useful articles and
books on such topics as spotting the signs of infidelity, emotional
infidelity, and ways to survive infidelity.
Infidelity
221

Infidelity Help
Web site: http://infidelityhelp.com/
This Web site features the insights of Don-David Lusterman, PhD,
a licensed psychologist and nationally certified provider of psy-
chological services specializing in infidelity, couples, and family
therapy. He sheds light on a number of issues related to infidelity,
from what to do if your partner is having an affair to what to do
if your parent is being unfaithful. The Web site lists many avail-
able books and resources.
The Kinsey Institute
Web site: http://www.kinseyinstitute.org/resources/FAQ.html
The Kinsey Institute, founded in 1947 and located at Indiana Uni-
versity, promotes interdisciplinary research and scholarship in
the fields of human sexuality, gender, and reproduction. This is
an excellent Web site for students and other readers wanting to
research topics related to all aspects of human sexuality, includ-
ing infidelity. Visitors to this Web site will discover a rich assort-
ment of articles, books, and book chapters representing the work
of researchers during their affiliation with The Kinsey Institute.
This Web site is highly recommended.
Divorce
Academy of Family Mediators (AFM)
Web site: http://www.mediate.com/people/personprofile.
cfm?auid=724
Founded in 1981, the Academy of Family Mediators is the largest
family mediation organization in the United States. Its member-
ship consists of mediators in many different sectors, such as the
government, schools, courts, and private practice. The Web site
contains an impressive listing of mediators at local, state, na-
tional, and international levels. It also provides users with a list-
ing of resources, including recently published articles and books.
American Bar Association, Section of Family Law
Web site: http://www.abanet.org/family
The American Bar Association’s Section of Family Law boasts a
membership of more than 10,000 lawyers, associates, and law stu-
222
Directory of Organizations

dents across the United States and abroad. The membership
serves the field of family law in such areas as divorce, child cus-
tody, adoption, and elder law. The Web site provides visitors with
a number of diverse publications to meet educational and infor-
mational needs, as well as a generous listing of general public and
legal resources. For students undertaking research on the topic of
family law, this is a valuable Web site.
DivorceSource
Web site: http://www.divorcesource.com/
A unique Web site offering information on virtually every aspect
of separation and divorce, DivorceSource is user friendly as well as
supportive in its guidance and advice. Among the divorce topics
and services available to visitors are divorce laws by state, state re-
sources, children and divorce, child support, property division,
and child custody.
National Conflict Resolution Center (NCRC)
Web site: http://www.ncrconline.com/index.shtml
Founded in 1983, the National Conflict Resolution Center was
established by the University of San Diego Law Center and the
San Diego County Bar Association. An international leader in
mediation and conflict resolution, NCRC operates as a private,
nonprofit corporation. The mediation process is handled by fam-
ily law attorneys, who assist couples in reaching their own
agreements on all family law issues, including division of assets
and debts and child custody. Since its inception, NCRC has man-
aged thousands of cases, serving clients from public agencies,
private industry, the courts, and community and local govern-
ments. Services offered by NCRC include conflict resolution, me-
diation training, community mediation, divorce mediation, and
coaching.
National Family Resiliency Center, Inc. (NFRC)
Web site: http://www.divorceabc.com/
This is one of the better Web sites offering supportive advice to
families experiencing separation, divorce, and remarriage. Its
central theme is helping partners and children to better under-
stand and accept the realities of relationship dissolution with
programs and resources. Particular strengths are the provision of
Divorce
223

articles related to divorce and separation, resources for profes-
sionals, and listings of educational seminars and support groups.
Oregon Mediation Center, Inc.
Web site: http://www.to-agree.com
The Oregon Mediation Center was founded in 1983 by Jim
Melamed. Through its practice of mediation, the center seeks to
offer supportive guidance to the parties involved, assist partners
to most capably work together, and help each participant to
achieve the greatest available satisfaction. The Web site contains
a number of excellent family mediation articles.
Rainbows
Web site: http://www.rainbows.org/mission.html
Rainbows was established in 1983, its vision being to reach out to
youngsters grieving a loss from a life-altering crisis. Rainbows is
headed by Suzy Yehl Marta and was inaugurated in Chicago.
Today, Rainbows has been implemented in 49 of the United
States as well as Australia, England, New Zealand, and Switzer-
land. An estimated 1.6 million participants have benefited from
the assistance provided by Rainbows. Visitors to this Web site
will discover a host of materials related to programs and train-
ing, as well as links to useful resources.
Support Guidelines
Web site: http://www.supportguidelines.com
This Web site will prove invaluable for those readers looking for
more information on the interpretation and application of child
support guidelines in the United States. Among the contents are
a comprehensive overview of the history of child support guide-
lines as well as child support guidelines for all 50 states and the
District of Columbia. An extensive library of articles and books is
complemented by a well-rounded listing of resources and links.
Chronic Illness and Disease
American Chronic Pain Association
Web site: http://www.theacpa.org/
224
Directory of Organizations

The American Chronic Pain Association is one of the more active
and visible organizations in this area. It seeks to supply informa-
tion and support to chronic pain sufferers and their families and
to educate the general public about issues related to chronic pain.
It offers an extensive news archive that keeps visitors aware of
up-to-date developments in pain management.
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention 
and Health Promotion
Web site: http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/index.htm
Sponsored by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, this
government Web site is a good information source for chronic ill-
nesses and physical disabilities. The center’s programming re-
volves around three components: preventing death and disability
from chronic diseases; promoting health and optimal well-being
across the lifespan; and developing partnerships with health and
education agencies, major voluntary associations, the private sec-
tor, and other federal agencies. The Web site offers access to a data
warehouse containing information on all chronic diseases and ill-
nesses as well as health facts for all ages.
National Dissemination Center for Children with Disabilities
Web site: http://www.nichcy.org/
The National Dissemination Center for Children with Disabilities
is a comprehensive and detailed source of information on dis-
abilities in infants, toddlers, children, and youth. The Web site
contains current issues in research and practice as well as road
maps to future research possibilities. This organization also pro-
vides disability-related resources in each state as well as very
useful state resource sheets. The latter enable visitors to locate or-
ganizations and agencies within their states that address disabil-
ity-related issues.
National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR)
Web site: http://www.ed.gov/about/offices/list/osers/nidrr/
index.html?src=mr
The National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research
offers a comprehensive program of research related to the 
Chronic Illness and Disease
225

rehabilitation of individuals with disabilities. Established in
1978, NIDRR is dedicated to educating the general public about
disability and research and to expanding society’s capacity to
provide full opportunities and accommodations for its disabled
citizens, from birth through adulthood.
New Health Partnerships
Web site: http://www.newhealthpartnerships.org/
New Health Partnerships is sponsored by the Robert Wood John-
son Foundation and is geared toward offering information and
support to enhance the care and health of individuals afflicted
with long-term medical conditions. The organization maintains
that patients and families can forge important and needed part-
nerships with health care providers, in the process creating opti-
mal health care. At this Web site visitors will discover such topics
as communicating about health, helping people change, connect-
ing with the community, helping systems change, and using
technology. Each of these topics is accompanied by many differ-
ent links and resources.
WebMD
Web site: http://www.webmd.com/
WebMD provides a wealth of medical information, including tools
for managing one’s health and supportive guidance to those who
are seeking information. The mission of WebMD is to provide
users with important and timely health information. It regularly
offers in-depth medical news, reference material, features, and on-
line community programs. In addition, the Web site includes
newsletters and message boards, the latter enabling users to share
their conditions and experiences with others and obtain relevant
health information. The content of WebMD is not intended to re-
place professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment.
Caring for Aging Family Members
Aging Parents and Elder Care
Web site: http://www.aging-parents-and-elder-care.com/
This is a highly recommended Web site to those searching for in-
formation on elder care. The Web site’s mission is to offer the
226
Directory of Organizations

best possible information for caring for aging parents, regardless
of whether you are managing the care of aged family members
in the home or offering assistance from a distant location. One of
its strongest features is information directed to new caregivers,
particularly tips to ease the transition. The Web site provides
many articles on the topic as well as support groups on elder
care.
Caregivers Home Companion
Web site: http://www.caregivershome.com/
The Caregivers Home Companion is a Web site designed to pro-
vide the general public with practical guidance, information, ad-
vice, and resources for family caregivers. Another important
function of this organization is helping caregivers take care of
themselves and safeguarding their well-being. In addition to
archived articles, the Web site offers a caregiver’s hotline and fo-
rums. One of the unique features of this organization is that it of-
fers specialized information on the topic, including spousal,
professional, spiritual, and family caregiving.
Children of Aging Parents (CAPS)
Web site: http://www.caps4caregivers.org/
Established in 1977 in Levittown, Pennsylvania, this nonprofit,
charitable organization offers assistance to caregivers of the aged
or chronically ill with timely information, referrals, and support.
Driving this mission is the organization’s desire to heighten pub-
lic awareness of caregiving and the many challenges providers
face. The Web site is well stocked with valuable links and re-
sources. CAPS is one of the more visible, active, and respected re-
sources of its kind.
Family Caregiver Alliance (FCA)
Web site: http://www.caregiver.org/
Another good resource for those seeking information on caregiv-
ing for aging parents, the Family Caregiver Alliance was founded
in 1977 in San Francisco. Its mission has remained steady over the
years: to address the needs of families and loved ones faced with
providing long-term care at home. Since its founding, the organi-
zation has mushroomed and now offers programs at the local,
state, and national levels. The extensive listing of fact sheets, 
Caring for Aging Family Members
227

research publications, newsletters, and support groups makes this
Web site well worth the visit.
National Caregivers Library
Web site: http://www.caregiverslibrary.org/
Anyone doing research on the topic of caregiving will find this
Web site valuable. It contains hundreds of articles, books, and
links to topic-specific resources. Located in Richmond, Virginia,
the National Caregivers Library has as its mission to seek to help
caregivers find supportive assistance. Among the available top-
ics are types of care facilities, disabilities, diseases, and end-of life
issues. The Web site also offers a listing of government resources,
legal issues, and long-distance care options.
National Family Caregivers Association (NFCA)
Web site: http://www.nfcacares.org/
The National Family Caregivers Association was created in 1993
by Suzanne Mintz and Cindy Fowler, both of whom at the time
were caring for aging family members. Their vision was to sup-
ply information and resources to caregivers and to let them know
they were not alone and without support. This vision has stood
unwavering over the years, the organization empowering family
caregivers to act on behalf of their loved ones and removing or
minimizing barriers to health and well being. Among its re-
sources, NFCA offers hundreds of caregiving Web sites and re-
sources for such important topics as insurance, training, respite,
disease-specific information, and Medicare.
Domestic Violence
Administration for Children & Families (ACF)
Web site: www.acf.hhs.gov/
The Administration for Children & Families is a branch of the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, which exists to pro-
tect the health of all Americans and provide supportive program-
ming, especially to those who are incapable of helping themselves.
ACF seeks to empower families to increase their economic inde-
pendence and build healthy and supportive communities. The or-
228
Directory of Organizations

ganization is committed to curbing all forms of domestic violence
and offers a variety of resources, including related links, hotlines,
fact sheets, and other important information.
Child Abuse Prevention Network
Web site: www.child-abuse.com/
The Child Abuse Prevention Network Web site offers visitors de-
tailed and practical information on all aspects of child maltreat-
ment, including physical abuse, psychological maltreatment,
sexual abuse, and emotional abuse and neglect. The Web site is
one of the most thorough of its kind on the Internet, with a di-
versity of available topics, including tools to support the identifi-
cation, investigation, treatment, adjudication, and prevention of
child maltreatment. The Web site also provides child abuse re-
porting hotlines, state by state.
Domestic Violence and Violence Related Research Resources
Web site: www.growing.com/nonviolent/research/dvlinks.htm
For those undertaking research in child abuse or domestic vio-
lence in general, this is a must stop in your literature review. The
Web site provides an exhaustive listing of links, articles, books,
and other valuable resources. Among the multitude of available
topics are cross-cultural variations in domestic violence; associa-
tions, commissions, foundations, institutes, and societies; batter-
ers’ intervention resources; books, videos, and publications; child
trauma; Bureau of Justice statistics; Children’s Bureau resources;
and legal issues in domestic violence.
Family Violence Prevention Fund (FVPF)
Web site: www.endabuse.org/
The Family Violence Prevention Fund is an organization whose
mission is to prevent violence within the home by reaching out to
help those whose lives have been impacted by violence. Addi-
tionally, FVPF seeks to reach out to communities to ensure that
antiviolence programming remains intact, seeking to change the
way employers, health care providers, police, and judges address
violence. Visitors to this Web site will also learn how FVPF has
extended itself to organizations around the globe, sharing strate-
gies designed to stop violence against women and children. The
Domestic Violence
229

organization has established partnerships in Russia, India,
China, and Mexico.
National Clearinghouse on Families & Youth (NCFY)
Web site: www.ncfy.com/
The National Clearinghouse on Families & Youth was estab-
lished by the Family and Youth Services Bureau (FYSB) and the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Its primary pur-
pose is to distribute free information to individuals, organiza-
tions, and communities interested in developing new strategies
for supporting youngsters and their families. In the area of do-
mestic abuse, NCFY offers an array of important resources, in-
cluding a literature database, which contains publications related
to family violence prevention. FYSB also awards grants for the
provision of shelter, emergency transportation, and child care to
victims of family violence and their dependents.
National Organization for Women (NOW)
Web site: http://www.now.org/
The National Organization for Women is the largest organization
of feminist activists in the United States. Founded in 1966, NOW
has as its vision to bring about equality for all women. The orga-
nization seeks to end harassment and discrimination in the labor
force, educational sector, justice system, and all other segments of
society. A visit to the NOW Web site will enable readers to learn
more about the organization’s efforts to end all acts of violence
against women. The Web site provides facts and statistics about
violence against women, progress made against domestic vio-
lence, news updates, research, and links to related resources.
Violence Against Women and Family Violence Program
Web site: www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/vawprog/pubs.html
The Violence Against Women and Family Violence Program pro-
motes the safety and well-being of women and family members
and seeks to increase the efficiency of the criminal justice system’s
response to domestic violence. The Web site contains research re-
ports as well as information on program grants and workshops.
Related content at the Web site addresses intimate partner vio-
lence, child abuse and maltreatment, elder abuse, human traffick-
ing, rape and sexual violence, and victims and victimization.
230
Directory of Organizations

School Violence
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
(AACAP)
Web site: http://www.aacap.org
The American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, es-
tablished in 1953, is a nonprofit medical association dedicated to
improving the quality of life for children and adolescents. It of-
fers many services to its members, including how to help young-
sters cope with school and community violence, in the process
strengthening their resiliency. The AACAP Web site is rich with
resources, including fact sheets, directories for therapists, videos,
and policy statements. Visitors will also discover a number of
topics related to school violence: understanding violent behavior
in children and adolescents, posttraumatic stress disorder, help-
ing children after a disaster, children and firearms, and bullying.
Center for the Prevention of School Violence (CPSV)
Web site: http://www.ncdjjdp.org/cpsv
The Center for the Prevention of School Violence was established
in 1993 and is part of North Carolina’s Department of Juvenile
Justice and Delinquency Prevention. Its mission is to make
schools safe and nonviolent, free of fear, and conducive to learn-
ing. Central to its mission is developing an awareness and under-
standing of school violence, then proposing strategies to
eliminate it. The center offers a number of valuable resources, in-
cluding background readings on school shootings, resource doc-
uments and sites, school violence statistics, research bulletins,
and parent resources.
International Bullying Prevention Association (IBPA)
Web site: http://www.stopbullyingworld.org/
The International Bullying Prevention Association is an organiza-
tion that strives to promote and share bullying prevention princi-
ples and practices in order to achieve a safe school climate,
healthy work surroundings, good citizenship, and civic responsi-
bility. Members/trainers of IBPA seek to exemplify the highest
ethical standards in providing and supporting sound, research-
based bullying prevention training. Four principles rest at the
foundation of the IBPA: ethical teaching practices, ethical conduct
School Violence
231

toward practices and performance, ethical conduct toward pro-
fessional colleagues, and ethical conduct toward one’s commu-
nity. This Web site contains an abundance of articles, books,
materials for bullying prevention programs, links, videos, and
policy guidelines.
National Association of School Psychologists (NASP)
Web site: http://www.nasponline.org
The National Association of School Psychologists is a profes-
sional organization seeking to optimize the learning and mental
health of school children, including their safety and well-being.
One of the many strengths of this Web site is the variety of topics
unavailable at other Web sites: vulnerability to violence among
gay, lesbian, and bisexual youth; aggression, antisocial behavior,
and violence among girls; best practices in school violence pre-
vention; how bullying can lead to violent behavior; and princi-
ples for identifying early warning signs of school violence.
National Center for Children Exposed to Violence (NCCEV)
Web site: http://www.healthfinder.gov/orgs/HR3712.htm
The National Center for Children Exposed to Violence is part of
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Its mission is
to help communities deal with all kinds of violence through pub-
lic awareness programming and to train the specialists who pro-
vide intervention and support. NCCEV publishes educational
materials and offers an extensive resource center for visitors. It
contains a diverse collection of materials on children’s exposure to
violence within homes, schools, and communities. A database con-
tains an online library of citations to fact sheets, research briefs, 
articles, books, chapters, and curricula. For the person doing re-
search on school violence, the database is a good starting point.
National School Safety Center (NSSC)
Web site: http://www.schoolsafety.us
The National School Safety Center focuses its energy on helping
institutions of higher education develop safety and crisis manage-
ment plans. More specifically, NSSC offers the training tools and
strategies specific to the culture and safety needs of a particular in-
stitution. Once the plan is in place, it is anticipated that heightened
levels of campus security and preparedness will have been
232
Directory of Organizations

achieved. A number of resources are available at this Web site, in-
cluding books, articles, videos, school safety updates, and school
crime and violence statistics. Browsers will also find some inter-
esting territory to explore: bullying, schools and readiness, creat-
ing a safe school system, national alert systems, and schools and
terrorism.
Virginia Youth Violence Project
Web site: http://youthviolence.edschool.virginia.edu/
home.html
The Virginia Youth Violence Project is sponsored by the Curry
School of Clinical and School Psychology at the University of Vir-
ginia. The project seeks to identify effective methods and pro-
gramming for youth violence prevention, particularly within the
school setting. The project conducts and distributes research on
the understanding and reduction of youth violence, and it pro-
vides education, consultation, and training for teachers, psychol-
ogists, and other human services practitioners. The Web site is
one of the best of its kind on the Internet, providing visitors with
resources on such topics as responding to student threats of vio-
lence, reducing the risks of gun violence, school violence myths,
threat assessment training, juvenile homicide, and bullying. The
Web site also contains extensive reading lists, links to other re-
sources, research reports, and conference presentations.
Wellesley Centers for Women (WCW)
Web site: http://www.wcwonline.org/bullying/index.html
Since 1974, the Wellesley Centers for Women, located at Wellesley
(Massachusetts) College, has launched a number of interdiscipli-
nary studies on issues such as sexual harassment in schools, gen-
der violence, and adolescent development. Its ongoing project on
teasing and bullying seeks to explore and counteract the effects of
child and adolescent bullying. WCW delves into the topic by rais-
ing public awareness about bullying and by exploring the connec-
tions among bullying, other forms of aggression, and violence.
Combining research, action, and advocacy, WCW seeks to better
understand the impact of societal messages about gender and gen-
der roles on the development of aggressive and violent behavior.
The WCW Web page titled “Teasing and Bullying” contains,
among other topics, facts and statistics on bullying, research refer-
ences, training programs, and related publications.
School Violence
233

Natural Disasters
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP)
Web site: http://www.aap.org/new/disasterresources.htm
The American Academy of Pediatrics is a medical organization
whose mission is to promote the well-being of all children and
teenagers. It offers many different child health resources and pro-
grams, including intervention in the wake of natural disasters.
Among the resources at this Web site are how to prepare for nat-
ural disasters, psychosocial issues for parents and children in-
volved in natural disasters, and responding to children’s
emotional needs during crisis situations. Among the more spe-
cific and recent topics are the roles of government agencies in
planning for and responding to disasters and bioterrorism;
health risks of children from wildfires; the care of infants and
children during pandemic influenza; and infant nutrition during
a natural disaster.
American Psychological Association Help Center
Web site: http://www.apahelpcenter.org/about/
The American Psychological Association Help Center is an on-
line resource center for brochures, guidelines, and articles on the
psychological issues that affect a person’s physical and emotional
well-being. The resources at this Web site are designed to help
both young and old cope more effectively with the disruption
and upheaval that natural disasters bring. Coverage is given to
such topics as managing traumatic stress originating from nat-
ural disasters; tornadoes, hurricanes, and children’s needs; and
achieving resiliency following a natural disaster. The Web site in-
cludes guidelines for locating a psychologist and ordering
reprints of articles.
American Red Cross Disaster Services
Web site: http://www.redcross.org/services/disaster/
0,1082,0_501_,00.html
The American Red Cross was established in 1905 and is focused
on meeting people’s immediate emergency disaster-caused
needs. When a disaster strikes, the Red Cross provides food, shel-
ter, and health services to address basic human needs. It also
feeds emergency workers, responds to inquiries from concerned
234
Directory of Organizations

family members living outside the disaster region, provides
blood and blood products to disaster victims, and assists those
impacted by disaster to access other available resources. The Web
site offers information on all types of natural disasters as well as
a range of related topics, including health and safety services,
community services, youth services, biomedical services, and in-
ternational services. Visitors also find press releases, assorted
publications, media contacts, and a video library.
Center for Catastrophe Preparedness & Response (CCPR)
Web site: http://www.nyu.edu/ccpr/
The Center for Catastrophe Preparedness and Response was es-
tablished in 2002 and is located at New York University. It serves
as a resource center to enhance preparedness and response capa-
bilities to natural disasters and other catastrophic events and
public health emergencies. Its mission is fivefold: to increase
America’s knowledge base on emergency preparedness; to con-
duct research addressing the many issues that surround pre-
paredness and response; to provide a forum for public- and
private-sector officials to exchange best practices; to serve as a
model academic center that is responsive to a critical national
need; and to offer support for academic-based research and train-
ing and educational opportunities for faculty and students. Pub-
lished research produced by the center, its projects, and research
fellows is available at the Web site.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 
Emergency Preparedness & Response
Web site: http://www.bt.cdc.gov/disasters/
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention was founded in
1946 and is located in Atlanta. CDC has been a world leader in
public health since its inception, promoting health and quality of
life by preventing and controlling disease, injury, and disability.
At the Emergency Preparedness & Response Web site, visitors
will find coverage on virtually every type of natural disaster,
from earthquakes and hurricanes to volcanoes and tsunamis. The
Web site also offers a considerable amount of information on dis-
aster preparedness, including tips for staying safe, information
for evacuation centers and evacuees, protecting pets, power out-
ages, and cleanup. Additionally, readers will discover a wealth of
links, surveillance reports, and news releases from CDC.
Natural Disasters
235

Disaster Training International
Web site: http://www.disastertraining.org/
Disaster Training International is an organization whose vision is
to help adults help children who are faced with the threat, exis-
tence, and aftermath of natural disasters or other devastating
trauma. More specifically, the organization provides emergency
preparedness training, assists with the lessening of hazards at
schools, teaches staff how to respond to disasters so that children
are safe and can heal, and shows how schools can forge partner-
ships with families that always keep children at the forefront.
The Web site offers an excellent selection of written materials and
links to other important sites. Given the organization’s mission,
this Web site should have significant appeal to teachers, admin-
istrators, parents, child care providers, family life specialists, and
social workers.
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
Web site: http://www.fema.gov/
The Federal Emergency Management Agency is a government-
sponsored organization charged with building and supporting
America’s emergency management system. In 2003, FEMA be-
came part of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. From a
broad perspective, FEMA prepares for disasters and emergen-
cies, such as natural and man-made disasters, and helps people
recover from them, reduce the risk of loss, and prevent similar
emergencies from recurring. Headquartered in Washington,
D.C., FEMA works in partnership with other national organiza-
tions and agencies instrumental in America’s emergency man-
agement system. Among the partners are local and state
emergency management agencies, federal agencies, and the
American Red Cross.
National Child Traumatic Stress Network (NCTSN)
Web site: http://www.nctsnet.org
The National Child Traumatic Stress Network was established by
the U.S. Congress in 2000. Coordinated by Duke University and
the University of California at Los Angeles, NCTSN is a unique
collaboration of academic and community-based social services.
Its mission is to upgrade the standard of care and access to ser-
vices for America’s traumatized children and their families. Visi-
236
Directory of Organizations

tors to this Web site will find an outstanding assortment of re-
sources related to natural disasters and how they impact children
and adolescents. Each type of natural disaster is indexed accord-
ing to a description of it, guidelines for readiness, responses dur-
ing the disaster, and eventual recovery. Print materials are
indexed according to intended audience: parents and caregivers,
medical and mental health professionals, educators, and relief
workers.
Deployed Military Families
America Supports You
Web site: http://www.americasupportsyou.mil
America Supports You was established in 2004 by the U.S. De-
partment of Defense. Its mission is to provide opportunities for
citizens, organizations, and companies to show their support for
the armed forces, both home and abroad. America Supports You
home front groups demonstrate their support in a number of
ways, including sending care packages, writing letters and 
e-mails, and offering scholarships and helping the wounded
when they return home. The Web site details how individuals
and family members can show their support or send messages to
troops. It also contains recent news, press releases, corporate sup-
porters, and upcoming events.
Military Child Education Coalition (MCEC)
Web site: http://www.militarychild.org/
The Military Child Education Coalition is a nonprofit, worldwide
organization that identifies the challenges that face the military
child, increases understanding of these challenges in military and
educational communities, and implements programs to success-
fully address the challenges. The coalition assists schools and
military installations in delivering programming and materials
that address the transitioning needs of military children and their
families. The Web site offers information on such topics as check-
lists for transferring students, deployment/separation issues, ed-
ucational partnerships for military families, parent and school
support, and student enrichment. Links to other important
sources are also available, including those related to school and
family, school scholarships, and military organizations. The Web
Deployed Military Families
237

site also has newsletters, information related to training work-
shops, and various publications and printed materials.
Military Family Research Institute (MFRI)
Web site: http://www.cfs.purdue.edu/mfri/
The Military Family Research Institute is a research program lo-
cated at Purdue University in Indiana. It is funded by the Lilly
Endowment and the Department of Defense, Office of Military
Community and Family Policy. The institute conducts outreach
programming and activities that assist military families in Indi-
ana and also executes research studies that provide insight into
the military quality of life. The Web site is both interesting and in-
formative. Visitors are afforded the opportunity to examine the
kinds of research conducted by the MFRI, including research pro-
gram focus, current projects, and reports. Also available are de-
ployment support resources, including a listing of valuable links
to key programs and organizations. The Web site contains a list-
ing of organizations making significant contributions to the suc-
cess of MFRI.
Military HOMEFRONT
Web site: http://www.militaryhomefront.dod.mil/
Military HOMEFRONT is a military organization that provides
accurate and up-to-date information about Department of De-
fense programs serving troops and their families. A particular
emphasis is placed on providing a service that enhances the qual-
ity of life, one that supports military members, their families, and
retirees across the life cycle. The Web site is extensive in its cov-
erage of military family topics, including deployment, casualty
assistance, counseling, education for service personnel and their
families, legal assistance, new parent support, financial manage-
ment, and moving. Links to other resources are provided along
with a directory of military installations, including locations of
all installation programs and services, maps, and directions.
National Military Family Association (NMFA)
Web site: www.nmfa.org
The National Military Family Association is a nonprofit organi-
zation that was founded in 1969. At that time the organization
was named the National Military Wives Association by a group
238
Directory of Organizations

of wives and widows. It was renamed the National Military Fam-
ily Association in 1984 to capture the wider scope of the entire
family system. Its mission is to advocate for improvements in the
quality of military family life. NMFA has significant support at
top levels of the Department of Defense and works regularly on
important issues and concerns with other military-related associ-
ations. The Web site contains a variety of topics and accompany-
ing resources such as predeployment checklists for military
families, advancing the health of the family left behind, and re-
turning to family life after military deployment. An impressive
list of links is also available, including deployment support sites,
service Web sites, Department of Defense Web sites, legislative
and government agency sites, and family assistance sites.
Adolescent Suicide
American Association of Suicidology (AAS)
Web site: http://www.suicidology.org/
The American Association of Suicidology was founded in 1968
by clinical psychologist Edwin S. Shneidman. AAS is a nonprofit
organization whose membership consists of mental health prac-
titioners, crisis center volunteers, public health professionals,
survivors of suicide, and those persons who have an interest in
suicide prevention. The mission of AAS is to conduct and pro-
mote research, public awareness programs, public education,
and training for professionals and volunteers. Additionally, AAS
serves as a national clearinghouse for information on suicide.
The Web site offers more detail on the organization, including
conferences and training, publications, survivor support ser-
vices, accreditation, and certification. Also available at the Web
site are links of interest as well as a directory of support groups
in the United States.
American Foundation for Suicide Prevention (AFSP)
Web site: http://www.afsp.org
The American Foundation for Suicide Prevention was founded in
1987 and devotes itself to understanding and preventing suicide
through research and education and to reaching out to people
with mood disorders and those impacted by suicide. Its mission
consists of six components: funding scientific research; offering
Adolescent Suicide
239

educational programs for professionals; educating the general
public about mood disorders and suicide prevention; promoting
policies and legislation that impact suicide and prevention; pro-
viding programs and resources for survivors of suicide loss; and
providing programs and resources for people with mood disor-
ders and their families. Features of the Web site include educa-
tional resources that embrace the AFSP mission, suicide
prevention projects, grants, AFSP news releases, and advocacy
and public policy.
National Council for Suicide Prevention (NCSP)
Web site: http://www.ncsp.org/
The National Council for Suicide Prevention, founded in 1999, is
an organization promoting suicide prevention through collabo-
rative information sharing and activities with other affiliations.
The organization is dedicated to working within the private and
public sectors to promote the National Strategy for Suicide Preven-
tion: Goals and Objectives for Action, a visionary document encour-
aging the convergence of allied professionals to collectively curb
this alarming social problem. The document was drafted by the
Department of Health and Human Services under the direction
of the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administra-
tion, Center for Mental Health, and the Office of the Surgeon
General. NCSP helped shape and release this document to the
public sector in 2001.
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
Web site: http://www.nimh.nih.gov/
The National Institute of Mental Health is the largest scientific or-
ganization in the world. Located in Bethesda, Maryland, NIMH
is dedicated to research focused on the understanding, treatment,
and prevention of mental disorders and the promotion of opti-
mal mental health. A visit to this Web site reveals an abundance
of information on suicide and suicide prevention. For example,
NIMH offers statistics, research findings, press releases, and links
to other important resources on the topic. Among the more recent
topics on suicide available at the Web site are suicidal thinking
during antidepressant treatment, data on suicidal behaviors in
black Americans, reporting on suicides, recommendations for the
media, and risk factors for suicide.
240
Directory of Organizations

National Organization for People of 
Color Against Suicide (NOPCAS)
Web site: http://www.nopcas.org/
The National Organization for People of Color Against Suicide
seeks to halt the epidemic of suicide in minority communities. The
organization’s mission is to develop intervention designed to instill
hope, improve health and opportunity, and save lives in com-
munities of color. Among other strategies, it seeks to implement
community-based programming to prevent suicide as well as the
related problems of violence and depression. An emphasis is also
placed on developing corporate partnerships to expand opportu-
nity and forge alliances in inner cities. Visitors to this Web site will
discover an impressive array of national statistics, suicide research
including articles and publications, guidelines for defining a cultur-
ally competent program, and an African American bibliography.
Samaritans USA
Web site: http://www.ncsp.org/samaritans.html
Samaritans USA was established in 1974 and seeks to under-
stand, treat, and prevent suicidal behaviors. It consists of a coali-
tion of 11 nonprofit, nonreligious suicide prevention centers in
the United States. Its mission is to befriend individuals who are
depressed and offer volunteer-staffed crisis response hotlines,
public education programs, and suicide survivor support
groups. Since its inception, Samaritans USA has responded to ap-
proximately 25,000 calls annually. Volunteers who staff the
phones are taught important communication skills, including
utilizing the Samaritans’ “befriending” model, which empha-
sizes active listening and the provision of unconditional emo-
tional support. Samaritans USA is a member of the oldest and
largest suicide prevention network in the world and has about
400 centers located in 40 nations.
Suicide Awareness Voices of Education (SAVE)
Web site: http://www.save.org
Suicide Awareness Voices of Education is a nonprofit organization
incorporated in 1990 and a cofounding member of the National
Council for Suicide Prevention. Its mission is to prevent suicide
through public education and serve as a resource for those
Adolescent Suicide
241

touched by suicide. Central themes of this organization are that
suicide should not be considered a hushed or taboo topic and that
public awareness of it will save lives. Visitors to the Web site will
find information on depression and suicide, an extensive and
well-rounded reading list, guidelines on how to talk with children
about suicide, tips on responding to survivors, and better under-
standing the grief that accompanies suicide. Also available are a
community action kit and public awareness materials, a suicide
prevention education program, and SAVE news and events.
Suicide Prevention Action Network USA (SPAN USA)
Web site: http://www.spanusa.org/
The Suicide Prevention Action Network USA seeks to prevent
suicide through public education and awareness; community en-
gagement; and federal, state, and local grassroots advocacy. The
network consists of individuals who have been touched by sui-
cide: those who have attempted to end their lives or have been
consumed with suicidal thoughts, survivors, professionals in-
volved in suicide intervention and its aftermath, and concerned
citizens. The vision of the organization is to create a society in
which suicide prevention is embraced as a public priority, where
those impacted by suicide are supported and embraced, and
where awareness converges with action to save lives.
Suicide Prevention Research Center (SPRC)
Web site: http://www.cdc.gov/ncipc/dvp/suinevada.htm
The Suicide Prevention Research Center is sponsored by the Cen-
ters for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and is CDC’s
largest national program in suicide prevention research and
training, intervention development, and evaluation. SPRC is lo-
cated at the Trauma Institute of the University of Nevada School
of Medicine. The center consists of four components or areas of
activity: administration and program and policy development;
methodology development and program evaluation; research;
and education and distribution of findings and other printed ma-
terials. The ultimate goal of SPRC is the development of a suicide
surveillance system linking all available sources of information
within this region. Information obtained from the system will be
used to develop and implement programming interventions. The
Web site contains very useful fact sheets on suicide, scientific
data and statistics, and publications.
242
Directory of Organizations

8
Selected Print and 
Nonprint Resources
T
his chapter contains a comprehensive listing of books, re-
search journals, and nonprint resources. Keeping with the for-
mat utilized throughout this reference manual, the resources
are organized according to the sequence of family crises pre-
sented in Chapters 2 and 3. Readers will recall that Chapter 2 ad-
dressed seven key problems plaguing modern-day families:
• Addiction
• Adolescent runaways
• Unemployment
• Infidelity
• Divorce
• Chronic illness and disease
• Caring for aging family members
In Chapter 3, attention was focused on five problems partic-
ularly prevalent in modern American society:
• Domestic violence
• School violence
• Natural disasters
• Deployed military families
• Adolescent suicide
243

Books
Addiction
Aue, P. W., ed. 2006. Teen Drug Abuse. Detroit: Thomson/Gale.
This book explores whether or not teen drug abuse is on the in-
crease, the core causes, the role of the media in promoting ciga-
rette and alcohol use, and abuse prevention. Charts aid in the
presentation of the material, and the book provides contact in-
formation for related organizations.
Balkin, K., ed. 2004. Alcohol: Opposing Viewpoints. San Diego:
Greenhaven Press.
This book contains a wealth of conflicting viewpoints on alco-
hol’s harms and benefits, the marketing of alcohol, different
treatment programs (Alcoholics Anonymous, Children of Adult
Alcoholics, and others), and various prevention programs.
Brick, J., ed. 2004. Handbook of the Medical Consequences of Al-
cohol and Drug Abuse. New York: Haworth Press.
Brick’s handbook is an important contribution to the literature on
alcohol and drug abuse. It includes coverage of the relationship
between alcohol and accidental injuries, alcohol’s effect on skele-
tal and major organ systems, and its effect on risk factors for cer-
tain cancers.
Carson-DeWitt, R. 2001. Encyclopedia of Drugs, Alcohol and
Addictive Behavior. New York: Macmillan.
This encyclopedia includes a vast amount of information about
substance abuse and addiction. It contains material on addictive
behaviors not associated with substance abuse, such as gambling
and eating disorders. The encyclopedia is a technical work that is
accessible to lay readers.
DiClemente, C. 2003. Addiction and Change: How Addictions
Develop and Addicted People Recover. New York: Guilford
Press.
A practical guide designed to help people better understand how
addictions can best be prevented and treated. DiClemente pro-
244
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

vides a clear and detailed picture not only of how people recover
but also how they develop addiction.
Dodes, L. M. 2002. The Heart of Addiction. New York: Harper-
Collins.
Dodes reexamines common myths and provides a world of new
recommendations aimed at helping anyone with an addiction, be
it to gambling, alcohol, or prescription medications. Rather than
focusing on the specific object of addiction, he chooses instead to
look at the common desires and emotions present in anyone with
addiction issues.
Gahlinger, P. 2004. Illegal Drugs: A Complete Guide to Their His-
tory, Chemistry, Use, and Abuse. New York: Penguin.
The author has written a comprehensive reference book that of-
fers timely, pertinent information on every drug currently pro-
hibited by law in the United States. It includes their histories,
chemical properties and effects, medical uses and recreational
abuses, and associated health problems, as well as addiction and
treatment information.
Gwinnell, E., and C. Adamec. 2006. The Encyclopedia of Addic-
tions and Addictive Behaviors. New York: Facts on File.
The authors provide coverage of the symptoms, possible causes,
treatment, rate of occurrence, social and ethnic influences, and
emergency treatment of addictions. Useful appendixes provide
information on state mental health agencies, rates of substance
abuse by teenagers, and demographics of people who have re-
ceived treatment for substance abuse. Numerous tables and
graphs effectively convey statistical data.
Kesten, D. 2004. Addiction, Progression and Recovery: Under-
standing the Stages of Change on the Addiction Recovery Learn-
ing Curve. Eau Claire, WI: PESI Healthcare.
This engaging and practical book explores how harmful addic-
tions often develop gradually, with many identifiable signs and
symptoms emerging over time in a series of progressively wors-
ening stages. It also describes the lifelong learning processes nor-
mally followed by people who successfully make the difficult
transition from active progression into permanent recovery.
Books
245

Wekerle, C., and A. M. Wall, eds. 2001. The Violence and Addic-
tion Equation: Theoretical and Clinical Issues in Substance Abuse
and Relationship Violence. New York: Brunner-Routledge.
The authors provide an excellent overview of current information
on the overlap between violence and substance abuse. The book
is comprehensive, is highly readable, and brings clarity to the
often complex issues surrounding the relationship between vio-
lence and addictions. In addition to enhancing our understanding
of what is known currently about the violence–substance abuse
connections, the book identifies areas of controversy and direc-
tions for future research.
Adolescent Runaways
Bolnick, J. P. 2000. Living at the Edge of the World: A Teenager’s
Survival in the Tunnels of Grand Central Station. New York: St.
Martin’s Press.
A fascinating and disturbing true account of a teenager who
lived for four years in the train tunnels of Grand Central Station
amidst the homeless, runaways, and the drug addicted. This is
must reading for anyone interested in pursuing a career working
with troubled adolescents. 
Fitzpatrick, S. 2000. Young Homeless People. New York: Pal-
grave Macmillan.
Although politicians, researchers, and the media often focus on
the more visible runaways and homeless, this work emphasizes
the same population hidden in local communities. Fitzpatrick
places their experiences in the context of their biographies as a
whole and makes policy and practice recommendations.
Flowers, B. 2001. Runaway Kids and Teenage Prostitution. West-
port, CT: Greenwood Press.
A look at the correlations between runaway children and teenage
prostitution in the United States from a criminological, sociolog-
ical, and psychological perspective. Flowers describes the differ-
ences between youth who run away from home and those who
leave institutional settings and distinguishes the difference be-
tween runaway and throwaway children.
246
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Mickelson, R. A., ed. 2000. Children on the Streets of the Ameri-
cas: Globalization, Homelessness and Education in the United
States, Brazil and Cuba. New York: Routledge.
A compelling narrative that shows us the face of runaways and
homelessness in Brazil, Cuba, and the United States. Mickelson
offers the reader a comparative analysis of education for the least
privileged children in the context of globalization. It is frighten-
ing to imagine that the number of street children in developed
and developing nations is rising, often in the midst of prosperity.
This book offers special appeal to students working with trou-
bled teens and to social workers who are looking to connect the
education of children with larger-scale social processes.
Nunez, R. D. 2004. A Shelter Is Not a Home . . . Or Is It? Lessons
in Family Homelessness in New York City. New York: White
Tiger Press.
A sobering but realistic investigation of the New York City shel-
ter system as it exists today, including teenage runaway inhabi-
tants. Nunez maintains that by harnessing the power to foster
change within shelters themselves, a blueprint can be developed
to successfully move families from homelessness to permanent
independent living.
Slesnick, N. 1988. Our Runaway and Homeless Youth: A Guide
to Understanding. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
In addition to describing the scope of this problem, Slesnick ex-
plains different types of runaway and homeless youths and why
they leave home by choice or are asked to leave. Slesnick also ex-
plains some of the factors common to these children and their
families, as well as what happens to the youths when they leave
home.
Staller, K. M. 2006. Runaways: How the Sixties Counterculture
Shaped Today’s Practices and Policies. New York: Columbia
University Press.
An informative and interesting account of the history of service
development and media construction of runaway youth in the
United States. Staller’s work will be a valuable resource for any-
one working with runaway youth. She succeeds in penning a
Books
247

readable, compelling demonstration that ideas matter in forming
public policy.
Unemployment
Busse, R. C. 2005. Fired, Laid Off or Forced Out: A Complete
Guide to Severance, Benefits and Your Rights when Starting Over.
Naperville, IL: Sourcebooks.
The author seeks to take the fear out of the possibility of losing
one’s job and replaces it with specific guidelines workers can use
to protect their rights. This highly readable and practical book ap-
plies to all facets of the work environment, from the factory
worker to the professional, the salesperson to upper management.
Endress, D. R., and R. Venckus. 2007. Why Shouldn’t We Hire
You? Lafayette, IN: Writers’ Café Press.
This book emphasizes how prospective employees can better
market themselves by developing effective interviewing skills.
Analysis and knowledge of oneself and the prospective company
are key, and the authors guide the reader through this critical
process of discovery, including ways to perfect the presentation.
Freedman, M. 2007. Encore: Finding Work that Matters in the
Second Half of Life. Jackson, TN: Perseus.
Freedman focuses on the baby boom generation and its implica-
tions for the vocational arena. He looks at the dynamics of retire-
ment for middle-agers, including those who eagerly anticipate it,
those who wish to keep punching the clock, and those switching
interests and pursuing different careers.
Hornby, M. 2007. Working at 50+: Getting and Keeping a Job in
Mid-Life. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
This is a valuable book that is loaded with practical advice for
anyone looking for a job. Hornby supplies strategies for setting
career and life goals as well as creating an effective resume and
letters of application.
Kane, A. 2002. You’re Fired: How to Turn a Pink Slip into a
Golden Opportunity. Boulder, CO: Paladin Press.
248
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

This book is a survival guide that offers practical and inventive
suggestions for finding another job. Kane tells readers, among
other tips, how to get one’s foot in the door, create a resume that
will get noticed, network, and evaluate job offers.
Marling, S., and J. Pfaff-Waterbury. 2006. Boomers’ Job Search
Guide. New York: Life Transition Consulting.
This book is aimed at the ever-expanding audience of men and
women who, for one reason or another, are not ready or willing
to climb into the rocking chair following retirement. The rise of
“gray labor” is a result of many reasons: the recent economic
downturn, increasing life expectancy, corporate downsizing, ad-
ditional financial pressures, and loss of benefits and increasing
entrepreneurial interests. The authors provide a highly readable
and easy-to-follow path for mature workers in a job search.
Sack, S. M. 2000. Getting Fired: What to Do if You’re Fired,
Downsized, Laid Off, Restructured, Discharged, Terminated, or
Forced to Resign. Minneapolis, MN: Grand Central.
This book reaches out to those going through one of the most vul-
nerable times of their lives. It tells you when to call a lawyer if
you are fired and gives an overview of U.S. laws protecting em-
ployees from discrimination and unfair dismissal. From sample
letters to a list of relevant government agencies, it is designed for
the let-go, downsized, or dismissed.
Simerson, B. K., and M. D. McCormick. 2003. Fired, Laid Off,
Out of a Job: A Manual for Understanding, Coping, Surviving.
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Simerson and McCormick’s perspectives on the job search
process provide an insightful, practical, and proactive approach
to anyone who may be facing a change in their employment. This
is a worthwhile read, not only for those who have been laid off
but also for those who have the unpleasant task of delivering the
pink slip.
Tatro, W. L. 2002. The One Hour Survival Guide for the Down-
sized: What You Need to Know When You’re Let Go. Sanford, FL:
DC Press.
Books
249

This is a book that reaches out to people on the receiving end of
employment termination. Tatro offers guidance on how to take
control of the situation, including what questions to ask human
resources representatives about final paychecks and severance
pay.
Infidelity
Browne, M. H., and M. M. Browne. 2007. You Can’t Have Him,
He’s Mine. Avon, MA: Adams Media.
A psychotherapist and family law attorney team up to share in-
sights, including what makes a woman’s partner susceptible to
sexual advances from another female and what can be done to
stop such advances. It includes a chapter focusing on how to as-
sess one’s partner as well as the quality of one’s relationship and
home life for “infidelity vulnerability.”
Farbman, S., M. Williamson, and B. Farbman. 2004. Back from
Betrayal: Saving a Marriage, a Family, a Life. South Boardman,
MI: Crofton Creek Press.
This book explores the many sides to marital infidelity and the
long journey back to reconciliation. It is aimed at those couples
who want to repair broken marriages and also guides those in
healthy partnerships to a deeper level of commitment and self-
awareness. The authors succeed in enhancing our understanding
of infidelity and, more important, revealing a process that can
lead to healing and renewal.
Glass, S. P., and J. C. Staeheli. 2004. Not “Just Friends”: Re-
building Trust and Recovering Your Sanity after Infidelity. New
York: Simon and Schuster.
The authors contend that even “good” people in “good” mar-
riages can be swept away in a flurry of emotional and sexual in-
timacy. This book explores affairs and offers well-defined
guidelines, including tips for determining how vulnerable indi-
viduals and relationships are to temptation, and prescriptions for
keeping relationships “safe.” Also receiving attention is how
partners can repair betrayal-induced damages and recover from
the trauma.
250
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Kinnett, L. N. 2001. Beyond the Affair: The Healing of a Mar-
riage. Bangor, ME: BookLocker.
Kinnett explores the pain of infidelity and the many emotions it
triggers. The book offers suggestions regarding feelings of dis-
trust, jealousy, fear, guilt, and, finally, hope and forgiveness.
Neuman, M. G. 2002. Emotional Infidelity. New York: Crown.
Neuman maintains that one need not have sex with someone
other than one’s spouse to be considered unfaithful. Rather, Neu-
man argues that when a marital partner invests emotional energy
into an opposite sex coworker or friend—instead of focusing on
one’s spouse—infidelity has occurred. His viewpoints are both
persuasive and challenging, especially the values and strategies
he offers to those reexamining their relationships.
Ortega, A., and M. Fleming. 2005. The Dance of Restoration: Re-
building Marriage after Infidelity. Chattanooga, TN: AMG.
Couples traumatized by affairs will find this book helpful in re-
building their marriages. It is written in a simple, straightforward
style that seeks to guide couples along the often treacherous path
toward reconciliation.
Peluso, P. R. 2007. Infidelity. New York: Routledge.
Peluso’s premise is that relatively little professional literature is de-
voted to understanding and “treating” infidelity. To fill this void,
Peluso has assembled the works of contributors from a range of
disciplines and backgrounds, including marital therapy, family
therapy, evolutionary psychology, marriage research, and cyber
studies.
Spring, J. A. 2005. How Can I Forgive You? New York: Harper-
Collins.
Spring supplies concrete, step-by-step instructions for both the
hurt party and the offender. She brings to light strategies to help
change the way we think about forgiveness, regardless of
whether or not the offending party is willing to apologize.
Weil, B. 2003. Adultery: The Forgivable Sin, 2nd ed. Poughkeep-
sie, NY: Vivisphere.
Books
251

Weil proposes that infidelity is a cry for help in stabilizing a dys-
functional marriage and that many adulterers are themselves the
children of adulterers. Weil describes how knowledge of family
intimacy patterns can be used to develop insight, understanding,
and forgiveness in a relationship stressed by infidelity.
Divorce
Anderson, K., and R. MacSkimming. 2007. On Your Own Again.
Toronto: McClelland and Stewart.
Providing down-to-earth help for readers seeking to survive
shattered relationships and build new lives, this book shares prac-
tical advice that can be used by male or female readers, young or
middle aged, straight or gay, in or recently out of troubled rela-
tionships, to help cope with the loss and move toward a speedy
recovery.
Bailey, J. L. 2007. The Parental Peace Accord. Bloomington, IN:
AuthorHouse.
Bailey describes a unique process that allows divorced and di-
vorcing parents the opportunity to shift their focus from their
own emotional turmoil to the needs and best interests of their
children. In so doing, parents learn that while they may no longer
be husband and wife, they can and will be “parenting partners.”
Baksh, N., and L. Murphy. 2007. In the Best Interest of the Child.
Gardena, CA: Hohm Press. 
This book was written to help parents save their children unnec-
essary anguish and pressure throughout the divorce process. The
book details what adults can expect from a custody battle; what
they will encounter in themselves and in their children (emo-
tionally, physically, mentally) during divorce; how parents can
make sense out of children’s questions; how to make decisions
for themselves and their children; and the ultimate importance of
putting the children’s needs first.
Clarke-Stewart, A., and C. Brentano. 2007 Divorce: Causes and
Consequences. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
This comprehensive book provides a balanced overview of the
current research on divorce. The authors examine the scientific ev-
252
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

idence to uncover what can be said with certainty about divorce
and what remains to be learned about this socially and politically
charged issue. The authors convey the real-life consequences of
divorce with excerpts from autobiographies by young people,
and they also include guidelines for social policies that would
help to diminish the detrimental effects of divorce.
Grabenstein, C. C. 2007. Divorced Parents Challenge: Eight
Lessons to Teach Children Love and Forgiveness. Calverton, MD:
Collier.
The lessons presented by Grabenstein give parents the opportu-
nity to help their children learn about love and forgiveness by
helping to maximize the love in their lives. The advice is simple,
straightforward, and nonjudgmental. It seems that all parents
would benefit from reading this book, but the message is espe-
cially helpful to divorced and remarried couples.
Hansen, D. 2007. Broken Strings: Wisdom for Divorced and Sep-
arated Families. Bloomington, IN: AuthorHouse.
Hansen supplies guidance and direction to families who are cur-
rently navigating a divorce or separation. She also seeks to help
those who made the trip previously and are now finding that it is
never really finished. Hansen regards separation as a life-altering
experience for everyone involved, today and into the future of
each family. To ease the journey, she offers coping strategies that
can help mend the wounds and strengthen resiliency.
Leman, K. 2007. Step-parenting 101. Nashville, TN: Thomas
Nelson.
This book has appeal for those who are just starting out as a step-
family or have been battling to unify two families for years. It
contains much practical advice conveyed in a clear and convinc-
ing writing style.
Smoke, J. 2007. Growing through Divorce. Eugene, OR: Harvest
House.
The author captures how many people going through divorce are
left with little hope for the future and even less energy for daily
living. Many are forced to accept drastic changes, make lifestyle-
altering decisions, and develop new coping skills. This book 
Books
253

addresses these and other issues, including helping children ad-
just, seeking legal advice, and contemplating remarriage.
Stahl, P. M. 2007. Parenting after Divorce: Resolving Conflicts
and Meeting Your Children’s Needs. Atascadero, CA: Impact.
This is one of the better books available on the topic. Stahl has
penned a very practical guide and an easy read for all parents
who are separated or divorced. Stahl’s strength is his ability to
help parents take a look at what they are doing to create prob-
lems so they do not just blame the other parents or, even worse,
the children.
Steadman, L. 2007. It’s a Breakup, Not a Breakdown. Prince Al-
bert, Canada: Polka Dot Press.
A survival guide designed to help the reader see his or her di-
vorce not as a breakdown but as an opportunity to break up with
a relationship that is no longer working and move on, this book
offers many helpful suggestions and guidance along the way.
Chronic Illness and Disease
Bouvard, M. G. 2007. Healing: A Life with Chronic Illness.
Lebanon, NH: University Press of New England.
This memoir tells the story of a woman who came to create a rich
and full life despite debilitating physical conditions. Bouvard ad-
dresses key issues such as the importance of speaking clearly to
the broader society about illness, learning to deal with pain, and
learning how to manage relations with physicians. She shares
how the meditation and reflection she turned to because of her
curtailed activities actually enabled her to cultivate inner
strength, flexibility, and adaptability.
Bumagin, V., and K. Hirn. 2006. Caregiving: A Guide for Those
Who Give Care and Those Who Receive It. New York: Springer.
A book having appeal to caregivers of all age groups, from young
children to the frail elderly, it is clearly written and loaded with
descriptive case examples. Its strength is focusing on the various
facets of the caregiving experience—from the caregivers’ per-
spective to that of those who are receiving the care. 
254
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Cline, F. W., and L. C. Greene. 2007. Parenting Children with
Health Issues: Essential Tools, Tips, and Tactics for Raising Kids
with Chronic Illness, Medical Conditions and Special Health-
care Needs. Golden, CO: Love and Logic Institute.
This book provides helpful guidance to parents when their chil-
dren struggle with health issues, from weight problems to diabetes
and cancer. Readers will discover the essential parenting skills
they need to help their children comply with medical require-
ments, cope with health challenges, and live a hope-filled life.
Davis, N. 2007. Lean on Me: Ten Powerful Steps to Moving be-
yond Your Diagnosis and Taking Back Your Life. New York:
Simon and Schuster.
The author, a woman diagnosed with multiple sclerosis at age 33,
recounts her journey to help others traveling similar paths. She
provides readers with an informed overview of how to negotiate
the health care system, understand legislation, and navigate Web
resources. This book is a valuable contribution to the literature
since it represents a practical, methodical plan for dealing with
devastating illnesses.
Martz, E., and H. Livneh. 2007. Coping with Chronic Illness and
Disability: Theoretical, Empirical, and Clinical Aspects. New
York: Springer-Verlag.
The first part of this informative book provides readers with the
major theories and conceptual perspectives on coping, with spe-
cial emphasis on social aspects and models of coping with differ-
ent types of chronic illness and disease. The second part offers an
array of specific medical conditions, including clinical descrip-
tions; current empirical findings on coping; effective medical,
physical, and psychological interventions; employment issues;
and social concerns. 
Natelson, B. H. 2007. Your Symptoms Are Real: What to Do
When Your Doctor Says Nothing Is Wrong. New York: Wiley.
This book is for the millions of people who suffer from debilitat-
ing pain or chronic fatigue that has gone undiagnosed. Natelson,
a medical practitioner, draws on his 18 years of dedicated re-
search into “invisible illnesses” that defy medical explanation to
Books
255

reassure readers that their symptoms are real and empower
them to take charge of their health with a step-by-step blueprint
to wellness. The author explains how to talk with doctors, offers
dietary, medicinal, and gentle physical conditioning programs
that can gradually help relieve symptoms, and presents the 
cutting-edge research and promising treatments that are on the
horizon.
Schwartz, D. 2007. Disease Management Directory and Guide-
book. Northboro, MA: HCPro.
This reference manual is must reading for anyone pursuing a ca-
reer in disease management. Its eight comprehensive sections are
loaded with valuable information and advice to help make sure a
disease management program succeeds. In-depth case studies of
the most successful disease management programs cover a wide
range of chronic illnesses.
Thomas, C. 2007. Sociologies of Disability and Illness. New
York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Thomas cuts across a disciplinary divide and critically reviews
and compares the conflicting perspectives on disability and
chronic illness found in disability studies and medical sociology.
She skillfully outlines the historical development of both these
approaches, providing readers with a solid understanding of the
overlaps and divergences between the two fields.
Caring for Aging Family Members
Abramson, A., and M. A. Dunkin. 2004. Caregiver’s Survival
Handbook: How to Care for Your Aging Parent without Losing
Yourself. New York: Perigee Press.
The authors contend that today’s caregivers often feel trapped
between the needs of their elderly relatives and their young fam-
ilies. They frequently feel invisible, their own needs unobserved
and unappreciated by those around them. This book offers prac-
tical caregiving advice for these women, and seeks to help them
deal with the emotional concerns they face, such as fostering
aging parents’ independence; getting help from siblings and
other family members; and balancing work, family, and caregiv-
ing duties.
256
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Barg, G. 2001. The Fearless Caregiver: How to Get the Best Care
for Your Loved One and Still Have a Life of Your Own. Herndon,
VA: Capital.
Barg’s book contains a number of valuable articles, helpful hints,
and thoughtful commentaries on the difficult task of caring for a
loved one. The chapters are easy to read and, most important, ad-
dress real-life situations. The book guides the reader through the
maze of caregiving and is as motivating as it is empowering.
Berman, C. 2001. Caring for Yourself while Caring for Your Aging
Parents: How to Help, How to Survive. New York: Henry Holt.
Berman provides a valuable guide to adult children caring for el-
derly parents, directing her attention to the emotional, practical,
and financial aspects of the chore. Drawing from personal expe-
rience, she examines such specific areas as financing, sharing the
care among siblings, and coping with loss. The book includes a
listing of helpful resources and a suggested bibliography.
Brody, E. 2006. Women in the Middle: Their Parent Care Years.
New York: Springer.
A leading researcher in the field describes and discusses the care-
giving woman’s subjective feelings, experiences, and problems.
She addresses the effects of caregiving on female caregivers’ men-
tal and physical well-being, lifestyles, family relationships, and vo-
cational activities. The book features case studies and narratives.
Bumagin, V., and K. Hirn. 2006. Caregiving: A Guide for Those
Who Give Care and Those Who Receive It. New York: Springer.
This book focuses on the various facets of the caregiving experi-
ence and the ways in which caregiving is affected by the condi-
tions, personalities, capabilities, and wishes of the caregivers and
the care recipients. It explores the range of care receivers and the
difference in styles and options that exist. The book includes a
number of case examples.
McLeod, B. W., ed. 2003. And Thou Shalt Honor: The Caregiver’s
Companion. New York: Rodale.
Throughout this comprehensive resource book, actual caregivers
tell their stories, acknowledging their vast range of experiences
Books
257

and emotional reactions alongside a gamut of action plans,
checklists, and medical and support networking information.
This book is highly recommended.
Nerenberg, L. 2007. Elder Abuse Prevention. New York: Springer.
Nerenberg provides a comprehensive look at elder abuse pre-
vention trends and strategies. Drawing from existing models and
research, she outlines approaches to intervention that consider
victims and perpetrators and engage communities and service
systems. She also offers meaningful responses to the many chal-
lenges endemic to elder abuse work.
Rubenson, A. F. 2000. When Aging Parents Can’t Live Alone.
Lincolnwood, IL: Lowell House.
Written for those affected by an elderly parent’s inability to con-
tinue living autonomously, Rubenson provides comprehensive
information on in-house help, retirement communities, assisted
living options, and nursing facilities. Financial, medical, and
emotional considerations are also discussed, enabling families to
make healthy decisions about this sometimes delicate and emo-
tional situation.
Szinovacz, M. E., and A. Davey. 2007. Caregiving Contexts. New
York: Springer.
This book explores the ways in which demographic change will
influence the availability of caregivers and how the welfare sys-
tem will affect care among family members and between family
and formal care systems. The authors also discuss the differences
in experience between spousal and adult child caregivers, special
circumstances such as child or adolescent caregivers, and gov-
ernment and workplace policies that are available to support
caregivers in the United States and in some European countries.
Domestic Violence
Bancroft, L., and J. G. Silverman. 2002. The Batterer as Parent:
Addressing the Impact of Domestic Violence on Family Dynam-
ics. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
This book exposes the world in which batterers live and raise
their children. The authors shed considerable light on the many
258
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

problems batterers exhibit as parents, how these behaviors affect
children, and what needs to be done in terms of intervention.
This is an excellent resource book for students majoring in psy-
chology, sociology, and family studies.
Barnett, O. W., C. L. Miller-Perrin, and R. D. Perrin. 2005. Fam-
ily Violence across the Lifespan: An Introduction. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Chapters in this book cover child physical, sexual, and emotional
abuse; courtship violence and date rape; spouse abuse, battered
women, and batterers; and elder abuse. The book also includes a
chapter on future directions for research as well as appendixes
with a thorough guide to resources.
Flannery, D. J. 2006. Violence and Mental Health in Everyday
Life: Prevention and Intervention Strategies for Children and
Adolescents. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Flannery reveals the impact of violence and victimization in the
lives of children and adolescents from a developmental perspec-
tive. He explores how young people experience violence in their
everyday lives and how this exposure impacts their mental
health and ability to cope with challenges and crises. Flannery
provides the reader with lists of professional resources, includ-
ing Web sites and readings related to violence and mental
health.
Hines, D. A., and K. Malley-Morrison. 2005. Family Violence in
the United States: Defining, Understanding, and Combating
Abuse. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
This book examines all types of family aggression. It is designed
to stimulate readers into questioning assumptions, evaluating in-
formation, formulating hypotheses, and designing solutions to
problems of family violence in the United States. The authors
probe the most well-recognized forms of maltreatment in fami-
lies, but also less understood and more controversial issues such
as husband abuse, parent abuse, and gay/lesbian abuse.
Jaffe, P. G., L. L. Baker, and A. J. Cunningham. 2004. Protecting
Children from Domestic Violence: Strategies for Community In-
tervention. New York: Guilford.
Books
259

This text provides the reader with a broad background on domes-
tic violence. Well written and engaging, it conveys how children
are impacted by domestic violence and the types of intervention
that are needed, at both the individual and community levels.
Kurst-Swanger, K., and J. L. Petcosky. 2003. Violence in the
Home: Multidisciplinary Perspectives. New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
The authors review the most current theoretical explanations of
family violence and then link theory to practice. The book exam-
ines the systems and institutions that interact with families that are
mandated to provide protection and services, and it explores the
current debates surrounding family violence and public policy. In
addition, the authors explore the role of power in abusive rela-
tionships and consider the short- and long-term consequences of
abuse.
Loseke, D. R., R. J. Gelles, and M. M. Cavanaugh. 2005. Current
Controversies on Family Violence. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
This important book contains thoughtful discussions that high-
light the most current controversies, research, and policy direc-
tions in family violence. It includes chapters by academic and
public policy researchers, therapists, lawyers, victim advocates,
and educators. The writing is clear and understandable.
Roberts, A. R., and B. S. Roberts. 2005. Ending Intimate Abuse:
Practical Guidance and Survival Strategies. New York: Oxford
University Press.
This book is based on more than 500 interviews with battered
women. Among other topics, it teaches how to recognize the warn-
ing signs of a dangerous relationship and urges women who have
been battered in a dating, cohabiting, or marital relationship to end
it quickly. The book includes a national directory of domestic vio-
lence hotlines and intervention programs and a detailed glossary
of key terms.
Schewe, P. A. 2002. Preventing Violence in Relationships: Inter-
ventions across the Life Span. Washington, DC: American Psy-
chological Association.
260
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Each chapter of this book covers relationship violence at a differ-
ent stage of life and in different relationships, from child and
partner abuse through rape and elder abuse. Empirical research
is blended with practical guidance for day-to-day interventions
in the lives of children and adults.
Shipway, L. 2004. Domestic Violence: A Handbook for Health
Professionals. New York: Routledge.
This is a clearly written handbook on the major issues surround-
ing domestic violence, one that is interspersed with much practi-
cal advice on possible interventions. Focusing on improving the
care of clients, the book explores the causes of domestic violence,
professional issues for the practitioner, the process of intervention
(in specific settings and with children), multiagency approaches,
and education.
School Violence
Dawn, J. 2007. Managing Violence in Schools. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Dawn covers preventive methods and strategies for strengthen-
ing school culture, such as peer support and cooperative group
work. This book also provides guidance for implementing a
needs analysis, formulating a cycle of change for handling bully-
ing and violence, and creating a shared understanding of the
issue. Each strategy for preventive and integrative practice is 
illustrated with real-life case studies and relevant experiential 
exercises.
Denmark, F. L., ed. 2005. Violence in Schools: Cross-National
and Cross-Cultural Perspectives. New York: Springer.
This collection of articles provides both a broad overview of vio-
lence in schools and offers specific descriptions of models that
have been used successfully within school settings to prevent vi-
olent crime from occurring. It explores the history of school vio-
lence and delineates what constitutes violence. Regarding the
latter, the focus is not only on physical assault but also on the ne-
glect and abusive behavior that contribute to its occurrence.
Books
261

Hardy, G. V., and T. A. Laszloffy. 2006. Teens Who Hurt: Clinical
Interventions to Break the Cycle of Adolescent Violence. New
York: Guilford.
This book presents an overarching framework and many specific
strategies for working with violent youth and their families. The
authors shed light on the complex interplay of individual, family,
community, and societal forces that lead some adolescents to hurt
others or themselves. The book provides essential guidance on
connecting with aggressive teens and their parents and manag-
ing difficult situations that are likely to arise.
Larkin, R. W. 2007. Comprehending Columbine. Philadelphia:
Temple University Press.
This title is as compelling as it is intriguing. Larkin offers one of
the first serious, impartial investigations into the cultural, envi-
ronmental, and psychological causes of the Columbine High
School shooting in Littleton, Colorado. Rather than simply look-
ing at Columbine as a crucible for all school violence, Larkin
places the tragedy in its proper context and, in doing so, exam-
ines its causes and meaning. Using firsthand interviews and a re-
view of the relevant literature, Larkin examines the numerous
factors that led the two young men to plan and carry out their
massacre.
Lieberman, J. 2006. The Shooting Game: The Making of School
Shooters. Santa Ana, CA: Seven Locks Press.
This book provides an overview of the 30-year school shooting
phenomenon, one that sheds light on the rampage shooters: their
motivations, their mentality, and contributing community fac-
tors. This book is one that no parent, educator, administrator, law
official, or counselor can afford not to read.
Rivers, I., V. Besaq, and N. Duncan. 2007. Bullying: A Handbook
for Educators and Parents. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
This book offers insights into the immediate and long-term im-
pact bullying can have upon the lives of students, their families,
and teachers. It provides parents and guardians with useful tips
on working proactively with school administrators to resolve
bullying issues and provides teachers with materials that facili-
262
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

tate a better understanding of the social dynamics of the class-
room, hallways, and playground. The book also includes a guide
to recent directives and legislation relating to bullying.
Thomas, R. M. 2006. Violence in America’s Schools: Understand-
ing, Prevention, and Responses. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
According to Thomas, violence in American schools is persistent
and includes fighting, sexual abuse, carrying weapons to school,
vandalism, and assorted other crimes. These crimes take place in
elementary, middle, and high school settings across the country
and have caused violent victimization and death, not to mention
the disruption of learning and fear among student bodies and
teaching staffs. Thomas provides a foundation for understanding
why violence occurs, as well as how we can prevent it from hap-
pening. This book is highly recommended.
Wilde, J. 2002. Anger Management in School: Alternatives to
Student Violence, 2nd ed. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press.
Wilde shares how anger is directly linked to violence, health
problems, and interpersonal difficulty. Because of such negative
effects, it is imperative that we teach children to control their
anger. Wilde shows how teachers and counselors can encourage
students to acknowledge and change feelings that are causing
problems in their lives without the use of anger.
Zins, J. E., M. J. Elias, and C. A. Maher, eds. 2007. Bullying, Vic-
timization, and Peer Harassment: A Handbook of Prevention
and Intervention. New York: Haworth.
Zins, Elias, and Maher integrate emerging research, theory, and
effective practice on this subject into this book. It targets the com-
plex problems of victimization, peer harassment, and bullying
and advocates intervention on an individual level as well as
broad, systems-level change within schools and communities.
The challenge of prevention is also explored, using the latest
studies as a conceptual foundation. Suggestions are provided de-
tailing effective strategies to make changes in the culture within
schools while offering directions for future research.
Books
263

Natural Disasters
Alexander, D. 2000. Confronting Catastrophe: New Perspectives
on Natural Disasters. New York: Oxford University Press.
This book provides a comprehensive overview of the physical,
technological, and social components of natural disaster. The re-
lationship between disasters and society is examined with re-
spect to a wide variety of themes, including damage assessment
and prevention, hazard mapping, emergency preparedness, the
provision of shelter, and the nature of reconstruction.
Bradford, M., and R. S. Carmichael. 2001. Natural Disasters.
Pasadena, CA: Salem Press.
This is an excellent reference source for the student. It covers vir-
tually all kinds of natural disasters: blizzards, epidemics, explo-
sions, famines, floods, hurricanes, and tornadoes. Each topic is
introduced with an overview of the phenomenon along with a
definition and the regions affected. The authors supply maps,
charts, and photographs throughout the book.
Bryant, E. 2001. Tsunami: The Underrated Hazard. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Bryant has authored a book that fully describes the nature and
process of tsunami; outlines field evidence for detecting the pres-
ence of past events; and describes particular events linked to
earthquakes, volcanoes, submarine landslides, and meteorite im-
pacts. Although technical aspects are covered, much of the text
can be read by anyone with a high school education. The book
will appeal to students and researchers in earth and environ-
mental science, as well as those involved in emergency planning. 
Faidley, W. 2006. The Ultimate Storm Survival Handbook.
Nashville, TN: Thomas Nelson.
This practical book provides the information you need to prepare
to survive any major storm. It covers all forms of severe weather,
including snowstorms, tornadoes, ice storms, hurricanes, and
firestorms. In addition to practical advice on preparing your home,
avoiding dangers, and creating action plans, it features special
chapters on pet care, poststorm dangers, children, and phobias.
264
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Halpern, J., and M. Tramontin. 2007. Disaster Mental Health.
Belmont, CA: Thomson Learning.
The authors have prepared a valuable resource tool in disaster
preparedness and planning. This book presents a theoretical in-
tegration and context for what disaster mental health is and what
it is not. A practical discussion of a range of mental health inter-
ventions appropriate in the wake of a disaster helps the reader ef-
fectively prepare to respond to a disaster of any kind.
Hansen, A., and C. Gibson. 2007. Extreme Natural Disasters.
New York: HarperCollins.
For those wanting to study natural disasters up close and per-
sonally, this is the book for them. It features catastrophic events
such as volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, hurricanes, floods, and
other extreme acts of nature. The reader will discover facts on the
worst and deadliest of these events, including the scientific ex-
planations behind them.
Hyndman, D., and D. Hyndman. 2005. Natural Hazards and
Disasters. Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole.
This book emphasizes earth and atmospheric hazards that ap-
pear suddenly or rapidly, without significant warning. It dis-
cusses ways to prevent or mitigate the damage caused by natural
hazards, providing readers with the latest scientific research
about these topics. The authors reinforce the need to become in-
formed citizens and make educated living decisions. Readers
will find a balanced coverage of North American natural haz-
ards, including earthquakes, hurricanes, floods, and volcanic
eruptions. These hazards are illustrated using numerous four-
color photos and diagrams.
Smith, K. 2007. Environmental Hazards: Assessing Risk and Re-
ducing Disaster, 3rd ed. New York: Taylor and Francis.
This book is an objective, up-to-date, and thoughtful introduc-
tion to important findings from the natural social sciences.
Smith provides much information on disaster databases, El
Niño events, sea-level rise and coastal flooding, mega-cities and
sustainability, epidemics, storms, and other natural disaster 
issues.
Books
265

Torrence, R., and J. Grattan. 2002. Natural Disasters and Cul-
tural Change. New York: Routledge.
This book contains comprehensive coverage of natural disasters,
with a particular emphasis on the role they play in influencing cul-
tural change. The authors describe how tsunamis, earthquakes,
volcanic eruptions, flooding, and other natural disasters wreak
havoc on human life and communities.
Deployed Military Families
Doell, S. 2006. Mom’s Field Guide: What You Need to Know to
Make It through Your Loved One’s Military Deployment. New
York: Warrior Angel Press.
Supportive advice for deployed military families does not come
any more personal than this book. When the author’s son was
deployed to Iraq in 2004, she felt overwhelmed with fear and
anxiety and could not help but worry. She put her thoughts into
action and penned this book, full of support and guidance for
others like her to follow. The end result is a book filled with com-
passion and practical advice.
Dumler, E. G. 2007. I’m Already Home Again: Keeping Your Fam-
ily Close while on Assignment or Deployment. Cambridge, MA:
Frankly Speaking.
This is another good sourcebook designed to keep service men
and women connected to their families while they are on assign-
ment or deployment. Dumler provides countess sources of avail-
able aid and guidance for readers, whether they are preparing for
active-duty training or are about to be deployed.
Hosek, J. R., L. Miller, and J. Kavanagh. 2006. How Deploy-
ments Affect Service Members. Santa Monica, CA: Rand.
The authors provide a readable and understandable book cover-
ing the complexities of military families experiencing deploy-
ment. The book offers insights into the challenges faced by
active-duty service members deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan,
the resiliency they and their families have shown in coping with
these challenges, and the adequacy of defense manpower policy
in assisting members and families.
266
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Kay, E. 2002. Heroes at Home: Help and Encouragement for
America’s Military Families. Minneapolis, MN: Bethany
House.
This is another book authored by a military wife whose husband
has been deployed into hostile territory. It is also one of the best.
Using her firsthand knowledge, the author shares practical ideas
for military families, including dealing with multiple moves, pre-
deployment readiness, and staying in touch when families are
separated.
Neven, T., and C. C. Krulak. 2006. On the Frontline: A Personal
Guidebook for the Physical, Emotional, and Spiritual Chal-
lenges of Military Life. Colorado Springs, CO: WaterBrook
Press.
The authors maintain that the demands of military life can be
staggering. Soldiers, sailors, air personnel, and marines face pres-
sures and temptations that civilians will never know. This book
offers supportive assistance designed to help deployed military
families face their many challenges. Among the topics covered
are how to manage financial affairs, how to build and maintain
friendships, and how to deal with the threat of injury or pain.
Underlying themes of this book are hope, encouragement, and
practical everyday guidance.
Pavlicin, K. M. 2007. Life after Deployment: Military Families
Share Reunion Stories and Advice. St. Paul, MN: Elva Resa.
This book captures the emotional stories of military families dur-
ing their reunions. Service members and their spouses, parents,
fiancées, and children share the joy and anxiety of homecoming,
the adjustments of living together again, and how they coped
with anger, depression, posttraumatic stress disorder, injuries,
grief, and other challenges.
Schaeffer, F. 2005. Voices from the Front: Letters Home from
America’s Military Family. Cambridge, MA: Da Capo Press.
This is must reading. Schaeffer takes us directly to the often in-
visible front lines in Iraq and Afghanistan, from first deployment
to patrols to combat to field hospitals and eventually returning
home. Powerful and moving, this book tells the story of this war
Books
267

in the voices of the Americans who are living—and dying—in it
every day.
Westling, L. L. 2006. When Johnny/Joanie Comes Marching
Home: Reuniting Military Families Following Deployment.
Gainesville, GA: Praxis Press.
Westling offers insight into the family dynamics of military sep-
arations as well as the reunions and restoration of the family cir-
cle. This book deals specifically with what combat does to the
combatant, to the family, and to the nation, with suggested cop-
ing strategies for those involved. A strength of this book is that it
includes all of the armed forces and both genders—women as
well as men returning to their families from combat.
Adolescent Suicide
Baugher, R., and J. Jordan. 2002. After Suicide Loss: Coping with
Your Grief. New York: Routledge.
This book is organized chronologically around the first days,
weeks, and months after a suicide loss. It includes information
about psychiatric disorders, where to seek professional help, and
practical strategies for coping and healing. This book is one of the
better self-help books on the market.
Carlson, T. 2000. Suicide Survivors’ Handbook. Duluth, MN:
Benline Press.
A very important book for those grieving the loss of a loved one,
it is well written, insightful, and filled with practical guidance.
This is a valuable reference source for those who work with
teenagers and suicide survivors.
Crook, M. 2004. Out of the Darkness: Teens Talk about Suicide.
Vancouver, Canada: Arsenal Pulp Press.
Based on interviews with teen suicide survivors, parents, and pro-
fessionals, the author sensitively explores all aspects of teen sui-
cide, in particular the reasons why certain young people are driven
to it. The book also examines the history of teen suicide in Western
and other cultures, what roles parents and schools can play in sui-
cide prevention, and coping strategies for teens in crisis.
268
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Helen, M. 2002. Coping with Suicide. London: Sheldon Press.
This book is aimed at those whose loved ones have committed
suicide; it will also be useful for people working with the rela-
tives and friends of those who have committed suicide. The book
covers the reasons for suicide, emotional and practical issues,
and where to go for help.
Myers, M. F., and C. Fine. 2006. Touched by Suicide: Hope and
Healing after Loss. New York: Gotham.
The authors recognize that the loss of a loved one by suicide is as
tragic as it is traumatic for survivors. They provide expert guid-
ance and advice to those left behind, conveyed in a compassion-
ate tone designed to support the healing journey.
Robinson, R., and P. Hart. 2001. Survivors of Suicide. Franklin
Lakes, NJ: New Page.
The authors dispel the myths surrounding suicide, based on the
latest research and interviews with leading medical experts. The
book also contains interviews with family and friends who have
survived the suicide deaths of loved ones and who offer support,
knowledge, and comfort to other survivors. An informative, ap-
plied book, it serves as a good reference guide.
Ross, E. B. 2002. After Suicide: A Ray of Hope for Those Left Be-
hind. Jackson, TN: Perseus.
Ross takes the reader beyond the silence and shame often associ-
ated with suicide and shatters some of the most pervasive myths
surrounding this tragedy. Utilizing dozens of real-life case stud-
ies, this book offers hope for the survivors and helps them main-
tain their sanity and poise during this most difficult time. The
book also includes a comprehensive resource guide.
Smith, H. 2007. A Long-Shadowed Grief: Suicide and Its After-
math. Lanham, MD: Cowley.
In the aftermath of suicide, friends and family face considerable
grief and reflection. The author offers a compassionate narrative
of the suffering that friends and family endure in the wake of a
loved one’s suicide. At the heart of the book are true stories of
suicide and the words of survivors.
Books
269

Research Journals
Addiction
Addiction
http://www.blackwellpublishing.com/journal.asp?ref=
0965-2140&site=1
Published on behalf of the Society for the Study of Addiction, this
journal offers a wide range of articles, commentaries, interviews
with leading researchers, and book reviews.
Addiction Research and Theory
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/journal.asp?issn=1606-
6359&subcategory=PS050000
A cross-disciplinary journal that explores addictive behaviors
from a variety of different fields, including anthropological, med-
ical, historical, psychological, and sociological perspectives.
Alcoholism
http://www.blackwellpublishing.com/journal.asp?ref=0145-
6008&site=1
Provides readers with current and important findings on alco-
holism and drug dependence, including topics focusing on med-
ical topics, clinical research, and health care issues.
American Journal on Addictions
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/journal.asp?issn=1055-
0496&subcategory=PS050000
As the official publication of the American Academy of Addiction
Psychiatry, this journal contains topical issues, including research
related to the prevention and treatment of substance abuse.
Adolescent Runaways
Deviant Behavior
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/titles/01639625.asp
Readers will discover a diversity of topics covered in this journal,
including alcohol abuse, mental illness, crime, sexual deviance,
and juvenile delinquency.
270
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Journal of Family Issues
http://www.sagepub.com/journalsProdDesc.nav?prodId=
Journal200912
Sponsored by the National Council on Family Relations, this
publication provides a forum on important family topics in mod-
ern society and includes articles and commentaries.
Journal of Marital & Family Therapy
http://www.blackwellpublishing.com/journal.asp?ref=
0194-472X&site=1
This is the official publication of the American Association for
Marriage and Family Therapy and provides extensive coverage
of the major issues and challenges facing families today.
Journal of Research on Adolescence
http://www.blackwellpublishing.com/journal.asp?ref=
1050-8392&site=1
A rigorous exploration into adolescent research, including cover-
age of the physical, cognitive, social, and emotional domains of
the teenage years.
Youth & Society
http://www.sagepub.com/journalsProdDesc.nav?prodId=
Journal200812
A valuable reference source for educators, policy makers, and re-
searchers, especially those seeking information on such topics as
adolescent pregnancy, runaways, sexually transmitted diseases,
and substance abuse.
Unemployment
Journal of Career Development
http://www.sagepub.com/journalsProdDesc.nav?prodId=
Journal201758
This research journal provides subscribers with the latest in career
development theory and practice, including career development
across the lifespan, vocational satisfaction, midcareer changes,
and unemployment.
Research Journals
271

Journal of Vocational Behavior
http://www.elsevier.com/wps/find/journaldescription.cws_
home/622908/description#description
One of the leading research journals in the career field today, of-
fering coverage of vocational decision making as well as adjust-
ments and adaptations.
Work & Stress
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/journal.asp?issn=
0267-8373&subcategory=PS650000
An international, quarterly publication featuring the psychologi-
cal, organizational, and social components of work, health, and
organizations.
Work, Employment and Society
http://www.sagepub.com/journalsProdDesc.nav?prodId=
Journal201568
In addition to regular coverage of unemployment, this publica-
tion features articles on industrial relations, labor economics, and
organizational analysis.
Infidelity
American Journal of Family Therapy
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/journal.asp?issn=
0192-6187&subcategory=PS350000
This research publication provides subscribers with the latest
findings on treating normal and atypical relationships. Topics in-
clude research on intimacy and sexuality, alternative relation-
ships, and therapeutic styles of intervention.
Family Journal
http://www.sagepub.com/journalsProdDesc.nav?prodId=
Journal200924
The official journal of the International Association of Marriage
and Family Counselors, this publication showcases contempo-
rary research and applied formulation for educators, practition-
ers, and students.
272
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/usmt
Readers can expect to find side coverage of special medical and
clinical problems, therapeutic intervention for sexual dysfunc-
tions, and the interplay between sexual functioning and marital
stability.
Sexual and Relationship Therapy
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/titles/14681994.asp
One of the more visible research journals of its kind, offering a
forum for review of all sexual and relationship dysfunctions and
therapies.
Divorce
Counseling Psychologist
http://www.sagepub.com/journalsProdDesc.nav?prodId=
Journal200805
Keeps readers abreast of important topics in the counseling field
today, including issues related to divorce, separation, and remar-
riage. The publication also features information on professional
issues as well as coverage of international perspectives.
Family Process
http://www.blackwellpublishing.com/journal.asp?ref=
0014-7370&site=1
This is the official publication of the Family Process Institute, an
international and multidisciplinary journal offering cutting-edge
research in family interaction and therapy.
Family Relations
http://www.blackwellpublishing.com/journal.asp?ref=
0197-6664&site=1
One of the more popular and visible research journals of its kind.
Its timely and applied articles hold vast appeal to educators,
therapists, and family studies researchers.
Research Journals
273

Journal of Marriage and Family
http://www.blackwellpublishing.com/journal.asp?ref=
0022-2445&site=1
Published on behalf of the National Council on Family Relations,
this journal represents the leading research journal in the field.
Every serious-minded student in family studies should have ac-
cess to it.
Chronic Illness and Disease
Chronic Illness
http://www.sagepub.com/journalsProdDesc.nav?prodId=
Journal201862
A forum in which researchers share findings on important issues
in chronic illness, with a particular emphasis on the experience
and management of long-term medical conditions.
Disability and Rehabilitation
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/tf/09638288.html
This publication is the official journal of the International Society
of Physical and Rehabilitation Medicine. It seeks to foster a bet-
ter understanding of all aspects of disability and to promote all
phases of rehabilitation.
Disability & Society
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/carfax/09687599.html
An international journal focusing on such topics as definitions of
disability, discrimination, social policy related to the disabled,
and community care and inclusion.
Pain Research & Management
http://www.pulsus.com/journals/journalHome.jsp?origPg=
journalHome.jsp&jnlKy=7&/home.htm&&HCtype=Consumer
This publication is the official journal of the Canadian Pain Soci-
ety and offers subscribers coverage of all facets of the manage-
ment of pain.
274
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Caring for Aging Family Members
Gerontologist
http://www.gerontologyjournals.org/
The official publication of the Gerontological Society of America.
It offers multidisciplinary perspective on aging, including social
policy and program development.
Journal of Aging and Health
http://jah.sagepub.com/
A good resource for the latest findings on such topics as factors
influencing life expectancy, disease prevention, health care, diet
and nutrition, and social support for the aged.
Journal of Applied Gerontology
http://jag.sagepub.com/
This highly regarded research publication publishes a variety of
multidisciplinary articles on aging, including psychological and
social investigations of aging and the aged.
Journal of Elder Abuse & Neglect
http://www.haworthpressinc.com/store/product.asp?sku=J084
A quarterly journal offering subscribers the latest advances in re-
search and policy issues involving the abuse and neglect of the
elderly.
Domestic Violence
Child Maltreatment
http://www.sagepub.com/journalsProdDesc.nav?prodId=Jour
nal200758
This journal is the official publication of the American Profes-
sional Society on the Abuse of Children. It offers research, infor-
mation, and technical innovations on the topics of child abuse and
neglect and has significant appeal to professionals involved in
child protection, social work, law enforcement, and psychology.
Journal of Family Violence
http://www.wkap.nl/journalhome.htm/0885-7482
Research Journals
275

An interdisciplinary journal that publishes research from noted
scholars in the field, including those from social work, sociology,
psychology, law, and criminology. Covers all forms of domestic
abuse.
Journal of Interpersonal Violence
http://jiv.sagepub.com/
This journal provides subscribers with in-depth coverage of child
sexual abuse and neglect, intimate partner violence, rape, and
other violent crimes. Also included are book reviews exploring
key contributions to the field.
Violence against Women
http://www.sagepub.com/journalsProdDesc.nav?prodId=
Journal200837
A peer-reviewed research journal that focuses on all facets of vi-
olence against women. The journal includes empirical research as
well as book reviews from scholars in women’s studies.
School Violence
Aggression and Violent Behavior
http://www.elsevier.com/wps/find/journaldescription.cws_
home/30843/description#description
Coverage includes child and youth violence, including school
shootings, gang violence, and domestic abuse.
Journal of Child & Adolescence Trauma
http://www.haworthpress.com/store/product.asp?sku=J392
Explores the prevention and treatment strategies for dealing with
symptoms and disorders related to the psychological effects of
trauma, including school shootings and loss. Also offers coverage
of school and community violence prevention programs.
Journal of Early Adolescence
http://www.sagepub.com/journalsProdDesc.nav?prodId=
Journal200872
A recognized leader among research journals focusing on the
teenage years, specifically ages 10 through 14 years of age. Con-
276
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

tains original theories and studies, guest editorials, and literature
reviews.
Youth Violence and Juvenile Justice
http://www.sagepub.com/journalsProdDesc.nav?prodId=
Journal201632
This interdisciplinary research journal is a valuable resource for
those exploring research in such areas as youth violence and
school safety. It offers considerable appeal to those involved in
education, social work, psychology, public health, therapy, and
other disciplines.
Natural Disasters
American Journal of Disaster Medicine
http://www.pnpco.com/pn03000.html
Offers readers an important resource on the care and treatment of
injuries and other physical trauma suffered in the wake of nat-
ural disasters and disease outbreak.
Disasters
http://www.blackwellpublishing.com/journal.asp?ref=0361-
3666&site=1
A peer-reviewed quarterly journal that provides coverage of all
features of disasters, including intervention, policy, and manage-
ment issues.
Journal of Emergency Management
http://www.pnpco.com/pn06001.html
A bimonthly research journal designed to educate readers on
emergency preparedness for everything from natural disasters to
acts of terror, fires, and other catastrophes.
Trauma
http://www.sagepub.com/journalsProdDesc.nav?prodId=
Journal201832
Makes available a diverse selection of topics for those involved in
the management of trauma patients, including survivors of nat-
ural disasters.
Research Journals
277

Deployed Military Families
American Psychological Association publications
http://www.apa.org/journals/
Readers will find an abundance of research articles on the psy-
chological effects of war, including posttraumatic syndrome.
Armed Forces Journal
http://www.armedforcesjournal.com/
A global newsweekly designed for those seeking information on
defense programs, policy, business, and technology.
Armed Forces & Society
http://www.sagepub.com/journalsProdDesc.nav?prodId=
Journal201730
A peer-reviewed, international journal offering coverage of such
topics as the consequences of war, terrorism, and family and
health issues.
Stress, Trauma and Crisis
http://www.counselingarena.com/journals/Stress-Trauma-
and-Crisis-1543-4613
Includes coverage of topics such as disequilibrium and instabil-
ity, stress management, and crisis intervention in a variety of set-
tings such as families dealing with the many sides of military
deployment.
Adolescent Suicide
Archives of Suicide Research
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/titles/13811118.asp
Offers an examination of suicidal behavior, its causes and effects,
and intervention techniques.
Crisis: The Journal of Crisis Intervention and 
Suicide Prevention
http://www.hhpub.com/journals/crisis/index.html
278
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

One of the better research journals on the topic of suicide. It of-
fers timely and important articles as well as reviews of important
books, videos, and training programs.
Journal of Loss & Trauma
http://www.counselingarena.com/journals/Journal-of-
Loss-and-Trauma-1532-5024
This journal is a forum examining personal losses relating to fam-
ily and health, including the tragedy of adolescent suicide.
Preventing Suicide
http://www.preventsuicide.net/
In addition to presenting important research, including scientific
and medical studies, this journal examines trends and practical
information on the topic of suicide prevention.
DVDs/Videotapes
Addiction
Addictions: Chemical and Behavioral (2004)
http://www.films.com/id/11903/Addictions_Chemical_and_
Behavioral.htm
An examination of how addictions develop, as well as the inter-
ventions that are available.
Alcohol (2001)
http://www.films.com/id/1804/Alcohol.htm
A look at how alcohol impacted the lives of three teenagers.
Constant Craving: The Science of Addiction (2000)
http://www.films.com/id/1284/Constant_Craving_The_
Science_of_Addiction.htm
This video sheds considerable light on the biological causes and
consequences of addiction.
Young Addicts: Drugs, Alcohol, and America’s Future (2006)
http://www.films.com/id/12997/Young_Addicts_Drugs_
Alcohol_and_Americas_Future.htm
DVDs/Videotapes
279

A troubling look at how young generations are turning to drugs
and alcohol, and the dangers that such choices bring.
Adolescent Runaways
Adolescent Family Therapy (2002)
http://www.insight-media.com/IMHome.htm
A look at some of the strategies involved in therapeutic interven-
tion for teenagers.
Challenge of Counseling Teens, The (2004)
http://www.insight-media.com/IMHome.htm
Helpful information about engaging adolescents in therapy and
overcoming resistance.
Teens and Runaways (2007)
http://www.cambridgeeducational.com/id/15185/Real_Life_
Teens_Teens_and_Runaways.html
Explores why adolescents run away from home and where par-
ents can turn for help.
Unemployment
The Business Cycle (2000)
http://www.insight-media.com/IMHome.htm
The various types of unemployment are captured in this video.
Dealing with Job Loss (2006)
http://www.jist.com/shop/web
Viewers are taught how to deal with the crisis of unemployment,
with a particular emphasis on the steps needed to launch a new
job search.
Rebounding from Job Loss (2000)
http://www.impactpublications.com/
An insightful look at unemployment and what displaced work-
ers can do to regain stability in their lives.
280
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Infidelity
Couples Therapy for Extramarital Affairs (2000)
http://www.apa.org/videos/4310360.html
A noted psychotherapist explores couple strategies when one
partner has had an affair.
The Love Lab: Putting Marriages Back Together (2002)
http://www.insight-media.com/IMHome.htm
An inside look at how marital distress is assessed and the man-
ner in which relational changes are implemented.
Love, Lust and Marriage: Why We Stay and 
Why We Stray (1997)
http://www.insight-media.com/IMHome.htm
An interesting look at marital fidelity, infidelity, and how modern
divorce rates have impacted the notion of love.
Divorce
Changing Families (2007)
http://www.insight-media.com/IMHome.htm
An exploration of the modern-day family, including how divorce
rates have affected the family as a social institution.
Child Custody (2006)
http://www.insight-media.com/IMHome.htm
Safeguarding the best interests of the children of divorce rests at
the foundation of this program.
Divorce: How It Affects Kids (2002)
http://www.insight-media.com/IMHome.htm
A thoughtful analysis of how divorce affects children and what
parents can do to ease the transition.
Effects of Divorce (2000)
http://www.insight-media.com/IMHome.htm
A presentation focusing on the negative effects of divorce and
what can be done to minimize the damage.
DVDs/Videotapes
281

Working with Couples Considering Divorce (2006)
http://www.insight-media.com/IMHome.htm
Sheds light on the manner in which therapeutic intervention is
aimed at couples considering marital dissolution.
Working with Stepfamilies (2004)
http://www.insight-media.com/IMHome.htm
Suggests ways blended families can overcome obstacles and
achieve domestic harmony.
Chronic Illness and Disease
A Disease Called Pain (2003)
http://www.fanlight.com/catalog/films/377_adcp.php
An investigation of chronic pain through the lives of patients as
well as physicians and researchers seeking to supply relief, com-
fort, and hope.
Finding Optimism in a Family with Chronic Illness (2006)
http://www.insight-media.com/IMHome.htm
An exploration of the challenges and hardships of families deal-
ing with chronic illness as well as ways to ease the burden.
Not on the Sidelines (2000)
http://www.fanlight.com/catalog/films/280_nos.php
A poignant look at four people whose lives were changed by ill-
ness or injury.
Caring for Aging Family Members
Growing Up and Growing Old: Caring for Our Parents (2002)
http://www.fanlight.com/catalog/films/365_gugo.php
Explores the challenges and struggles of grown children caring
for aging parents.
Parenting Our Elderly Parents (2004)
http://www.insight-media.com/IMHome.htm
282
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

The focus of this program is how to care for aging parents while
preserving one’s own quality of life.
When Help Was There: Four Stories of Elder Abuse (2000)
http://www.fanlight.com/catalog/films/335_whwt.php
A look at elder abuse, including physical, emotional, and finan-
cial consequences.
Domestic Violence
Battered Hearts (2005)
http://www.fanlight.com/catalog/films/430_bh.php
A documentary designed to increase awareness of domestic vio-
lence and of programs available to those seeking help.
Breaking the Cycle of Domestic Violence (1998)
http://www.fanlight.com/catalog/films/321_btcodv.php
Excellent overview of the many sides to domestic violence.
Breaking the Silence: Issues of Sexual Abuse (2000)
http://www.insight-media.com/IMHome.htm
An investigation of the long-term consequences of child sexual
abuse.
Broken Child: Case Studies of Child Abuse (2000)
http://www.insight-media.com/IMHome.htm
A compelling look at the cycle of child abuse, including causes
and consequences.
Child Abuse: How to See It, How to Stop It (2004)
http://www.insight-media.com/IMHome.htm
Explores physical abuse, sexual abuse, emotional abuse, and 
neglect.
School Violence
Bullied to Death (2000)
http://www.insight-media.com/IMHome.htm
DVDs/Videotapes
283

This video explores the effects of bullying and offers intervention
strategies for parents as well as teachers.
Bullies and Harassment (2001)
http://www.films.com/id/15168/Real_Life_Teens_Bullies_
and_Harassment.htm
Insightful look at bullying and how this growing social problem
can be curbed.
Calming the Tempest: Helping Explosive Children (2004)
http://www.insight-media.com/IMHome.htm
Thoughtful analysis of how to reach out and help children hav-
ing anger management issues.
Killer at Thurston High, The (2000)
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/kinkel/
A chronology of school shooter Kip Kinkel’s life and the events
leading up to the horror of May 20–21, 1998.
Preventing School Violence (2001)
http://www.films.com/id/4614/Preventing_School_
Violence.htm
Proposes innovative strategies to reduce school violence among
children and teenagers.
School Shootings: America’s Tragedy (1999)
http://www.films.com/id/623/School_Shootings_Americas_
Tragedy.htm
A penetrating look at the causes and long-term effects of school
shootings.
Natural Disasters
Crisis Stabilization for Children: Disaster Mental Health (2006)
http://www.insight-media.com/IMHome.htm
A video focusing on strategies designed to assist and support
children after a disaster.
284
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Helping Children Cope with Disaster (2003)
http://www.insight-media.com/IMHome.htm
In addition to describing children’s typical reactions to disaster,
this program outlines effective coping strategies for easing stress
and anxiety.
Killer Hurricane: Anatomy of Katrina (2005)
http://www.films.com/id/12606/Killer_Hurricane_Anatomy_
of_Katrina.htm
A detailed look at Hurricane Katrina’s effects on infrastructure,
economic conditions, and human lives.
Savage Earth (1998)
http://www.pbs.org/wnet/savageearth/
Compelling look at volcanoes, earthquakes, and tsunamis, includ-
ing their origins and the impact they bring to people’s lives.
Deployed Military Families
My War Diary (2005)
http://shopping.discovery.com/product-64821.html
?endecaSID=116164E5C954
A look at combat from the eyes of soldiers on the front line of Iraq
as well as from loved ones awaiting reunion.
Talk, Listen, Connect: Helping Families during 
Military Deployment (2000)
http://www.militaryonesource.com/skins/MOS/home.aspx
Meeting the needs of children during deployment is the focus of
this video.
These Boots: A Spouse’s Guide to Stepping Up and Standing
Tall during Deployment (2000)
http://www.militaryonesource.com/skins/MOS/home.aspx
Practical advice for deployed military families to help ensure
healthy adjustment.
War Letters (2001)
http://www.shoppbs.org/product/index.jsp?productId=1402920
DVDs/Videotapes
285

The connection between soldiers in combat and family on the
home front is captured in this heartfelt collection of letters.
Adolescent Suicide
It’s Never Too Late: Stopping Teen Suicide (2005)
http://hrmvideo.com/
Teaches viewers how to recognize and respond to the risks of
adolescent suicide.
Remembering Tom (1999)
http://www.fanlight.com/catalog/films/320_rt.php
The trauma of adolescent suicide and its impact on the family
system are explored in this video.
Suicide Prevention for Parents and Teachers (2005)
http://www.insight-media.com/IMHome.htm
Informative video that explores the risks of suicide as well as the
recognition of warning signs.
Links to Additional Resources
Family Health and Well-Being
Administration for Children and Families
http://www.acf.hhs.gov
American Academy of Pediatrics
http://www.aap.org
American Medical Association
http://www.ama-assn.org
American Psychological Association
http://www.apa.org
American School Health Association
http://www.ashaweb.org/
286
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Children’s Health Council
http://www.chconline.org
Cross Cultural Health Care Program
http://www.xculture.org
Facts for Health
http://www.factsforhealth.org
Federation of Families for Children’s Mental Health
http://www.ffcmh.org
KidsHealth
http://www.kidshealth.org
National Center for Children in Poverty
http://www.nccp.org/
National Center for Education in Maternal and Child Health
http://www.ncemch.org/
National Center for Health Statistics
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/
National Resource Center for Health and Safety in Child Care
http://nrc.uchsc.edu
National Training Institute for Child Care Health Consultants
http://www.sph.unc.edu/courses/childcare/
Safe Kids Worldwide
http://www.safekids.org
World Health Organization
http://www.who.ch
Family Policy
Advocates for Youth
http://www.advocatesforyouth.org
Links to Additional Resources
287

American Youth Policy Forum
http://www.aypf.org
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities
http://www.cbpp.org
Center for Law and Social Policy
http://www.clasp.org
Child Advocate
http://www.childadvocate.net
Child Welfare League of America
http://www.cwla.org
Children Now
http://www.childrennow.org
Children’s Partnership
http://www.childrenspartnership.org
Coalition for America’s Families
www.coalition4families.com
Economic Policy Institute
http://www.epinet.org/
Families Worldwide
http://www.fww.org
Human Services Policy Center
http://www.hspc.org/
Insight: Center for Community Development
http://www.insightcced.org/
Institute for Child Health Policy
http://www.ichp.ufl.edu/
Institute for Women’s Policy Research
http://www.iwpr.org
288
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

National Families in Action
http://www.emory.edu/NFIA
National Women’s Law Center
http://www.nwlc.org
Stand for Children
http://www.stand.org
Government Agencies Serving Families
Administration for Children and Families
http://www.acf.hhs.gov
Afterschool.gov
http://www.afterschool.gov
Child Care Bureau
http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ccb/
Division of Violence Prevention
http://www.cdc.gov/ncipc/dvp/dvp.htm
Family and Youth Services Bureau
http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/fysb/
Healthy Schools, Healthy Communities
http://www.educationmoney.com/prgm_93.302_hhs.html
National Child Care Information Center
http://www2.nccic.org/index.html
National Institute of Child Health and 
Human Development
http://www.nichd.nih.gov
National Institutes of Health
http://www.nih.gov
Office of Community Services
http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ocs
Links to Additional Resources
289

Office of Family Assistance
http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ofa
Office of Family Planning
http://www.cdph.ca.gov/programs/ofp/pages/default.aspx
Social Security Administration
http://www.ssa.gov/
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
http://www.hhs.gov
U.S. Department of Labor Women’s Bureau
http://www.dol.gov/dol/wb
U.S. Government Printing Office
http://www.access.gpo.gov/
USA Services
http://www.info.gov/
National Family Organizations
About Our Kids
http://www.aboutourkids.org
Center for the Child Care Workforce
http://www.ccw.org/
Child Care Institute of America
http://www.nccic.org/orgs/ccia.html
Children, Youth and Family Consortium
http://www.cyfc.umn.edu
Children’s Defense Fund
http://www.childrensdefense.org
Children’s Foundation
http://www.thechildrensfoundationchasi.org/
290
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Council on Contemporary Families
http://www.contemporaryfamilies.org/
Council for Exceptional Children
http://www.cec.sped.org
The Fathers Network
http://www.fathersnetwork.org
FPG Child Development Institute
http://www.fpg.unc.edu
The Future of Children
http://www.futureofchildren.org
Institute for Youth, Education, and Families
http://www.nlc.org/IYEF/index.aspx
National Adoption Information Clearinghouse
http://www.adoption.org/adopt/national-adoption-
information-clearinghouse.php
National Black Child Development Institute
http://www.nbcdi.org
National Council on Family Relations
http://www.ncfr.com
National Dissemination Center for Children with Disabilities
http://www.nichcy.org
National Resource Center for Family Centered Practice
http://www.uiowa.edu/~nrcfcp/
National Youth Development Information Center
http://www.nydic.org
North American Council on Adoptable Children
http://www.nacac.org/
Zero to Three
http://www.zerotothree.org
Links to Additional Resources
291

Family Research Sites
Bureau of Labor Statistics
http://www.bls.gov
Child Trends
http://www.childtrends.org
Children, Youth and Families Education and Research Network
http://www.cyfernet.org
ChildStats.gov
http://www.childstats.gov
Early Childhood Research & Practice
http://www.ecrp.uiuc.edu
Guttmacher Institute
http://www.agi-usa.org
Harvard Medical Library
http://www.med.harvard.edu
Library of Congress
http://www.lcweb.loc.gov/
National Research Council
http://www.nas.edu/nrc/
Research Forum at the National Center for 
Children in Poverty
http://www.researchforum.org
Research and Training Center on Family Support and
Children’s Mental Health
http://www.rtc.pdx.edu
U.S. Census Bureau
http://www.census.gov
292
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Glossary
ABCX model
A model of family crisis developed by Reuben Hill. The
component parts of the model include the stressor, resources, the fam-
ily’s definition of the stressor, and the actual crisis.
acute stress disorder
A psychological disturbance marked by intrusive
and disturbing memories of the crisis, an exaggerated startle response,
and a tendency to avoid the situation by withdrawing from it physically
and psychologically.
addiction
A dependence on a behavior or substance that a person is
powerless to stop.
biochemical stressor
An external condition that creates disequilib-
rium, such as heat, cold, injury, pollutants, toxicants, or poor nutrition.
blended family
A family that results when a divorced parent with cus-
tody of children remarries.
bullying
A form of violence that exposes a person to abusive actions
repeatedly over time. It entails unwanted and repeated written, verbal,
or physical behavior, including any threatening, insulting, or dehuman-
izing gesture, by an adult or a student that is severe or pervasive enough
to create an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment.
child abuse
Harm to, or neglect of, a child by another person, whether
adult or child.
child sexual abuse
A form of child abuse when the child is used for
sexual purposes by an adult or adolescent. It involves exposing a child
to any sexual activity or behavior.
chronic illness
A progressive disorder caused by a nonreversible con-
dition that often leaves the person with some type of disability.
codependency
A relationship in which a person exhibits too much,
and often inappropriate, caring for addicts who depend on him or her.
community divorce
A divorce process described by Paul Bohannan. It
entails how the divorced person’s status changes or is altered by one’s
surrounding neighborhood.
293

contact addiction
An extension of Internet addiction that is character-
ized by the obsessive use of cell phones and text messaging.
coparental divorce
In all likelihood, the most difficult of all divorce
components described by researcher Paul Bohannan. The coparental di-
vorce focuses on the issue of child custody.
cyclical unemployment
Unemployment caused by a drop in economic
activity.
developmental crisis
A state of disequilibrium originating from pre-
dictable, developmental changes over the course of the family life cycle.
Also called a normative crisis.
distress
Negative and unpleasant stress.
divorce from dependency
The last of six divorce processes proposed
by researcher Paul Bohannon. The key challenge here is for separating
partners to establish psychological autonomy.
domestic violence
An abusive relationship within an intimate rela-
tionship where one partner uses a pattern of assault and intimidating
acts to assert power and control over the other partner. Also called inti-
mate partner violence.
Double ABCX model
A model of family crisis proposed by Hamilton
McCubbin and Joan Patterson. The component parts of the model in-
clude the pileup of family demands, family adaptive resources, family
definition and meaning, and family adaptation balancing.
economic divorce
According to divorce expert Paul Bohannan, one of
the six components of the divorce process. The economic divorce entails
decisions regarding how to divide money and property.
emotional divorce
According to Paul Bohannan, one of the six
processes or components of divorce. The emotional divorce is centered
around the deteriorating marriage and the initial motivations for con-
sidering a divorce.
endemic stressor
An external condition that creates disequilibrium
and is usually long term in scope. An endemic stressor is one that has be-
come so prevalent that the individual has learned to live with it, such as
being afflicted with a chronic disease or illness.
eustress
A term referring to positive stress. Eustress occurs when the
body’s reactive change is put to productive use.
family crisis
A situation that occurs when the family system encoun-
ters disruption to its everyday routines and experiences a state of dise-
quilibrium or instability.
family disequilibrium
A family condition marked by upheaval and
instability.
294
Glossary

family equilibrium
The ability of a system to function smoothly and
demonstrate stability and balance, particularly in the face of challenge or
change.
family metacognition stage
According to Constance Ahrons, a stage
that accompanies marital degeneration. At this time, the entire family
system recognizes that the marriage is deteriorating.
family redefinition stage
Final stage of divorce suggested by Con-
stance Ahrons. At this time, the family system must redefine its identity,
particularly parent-child relationships.
family reorganization stage
Stage of divorce proposed by Constance
Ahrons focusing on the family adjustments required once the divorce is
finalized.
frictional unemployment
Temporary unemployment originating
from the normal and routine job search process.
individual cognition stage
Stage of divorce proposed by Constance
Ahrons. At this time, attention is focused on the individual perceptions
and reactions that accompany a deteriorating marriage.
infidelity
Sexual activity with another person without the consent of
one’s spouse.
Internet addiction
The excessive use of the Internet that causes psy-
chological, social, and physical problems for the user.
multigenerational household
Living arrangements in which older
persons are living with adult children and/or grandchildren under the
same roof.
natural disaster
An extreme, sudden traumatic crisis caused by envi-
ronmental factors. A natural disaster can strike at any time, often with
little or no warning, and can threaten the lives of people and destroy
property.
philosophical stressor
An external condition that creates disequilib-
rium, such as value-system conflicts, lack of purpose, or lack of direc-
tion.
physical disability
An impairment of body structure and function, in-
cluding mobility impairments, amputations, skeletal deformities, and
disfigurements.
primary stressor
A stressor that is responsible for initiating the stress
response.
psychological stressor
An external condition that creates disequilib-
rium, such as worry and anxiety.
psychosocial stressor
An external condition that creates disequilib-
rium, such as the loss of a job or the death of a friend.
Glossary
295

relapse
A term often used in connection to addiction; a return to the
abused substance or behavioral pattern.
resiliency
A family’s ability to recover from disruptive change without
being overwhelmed or acting in dysfunctional ways.
secondary stressor
A condition that results from the first stressor and
keeps the stress response activated.
separation stage
Stage of divorce proposed by Constance Ahrons. At
this time, one parent physically leaves the home and consequently forces
adjustments and adaptations on remaining members of the system.
situational crisis
A state of disequilibrium that is neither predictable
nor normal. Rather, this type of crisis is sudden and abrupt and can
occur at any point in the family’s development. Also called a nonnorma-
tive crisis.
social stressor
An external condition that creates disequilibrium, such
as noise or crowding.
stress
The common, nonspecific response of the body to any demand
made upon it, be it psychological, sociological, or physiological.
stressor
An external event or condition that affects the equilibrium of
an organism.
structural unemployment
Unemployment resulting from changes in
the economy caused by technological progress and shifts in the demand
for goods and services.
system
A term referring to the family unit and the members compris-
ing it.
systems theory
A school of thought proposing that an individual’s be-
havior cannot be understood without reference to the individual’s past
and present relationships, especially family interactions.
teenage runaway
A person under 18 who is away from home or place
of legal residence at least one night without the permission of parents,
guardians, or custodial authorities.
traumatic crisis
A state of disequilibrium that is often life threatening
and, due to the circumstances, gives survivors a feeling of extreme help-
lessness. A traumatic crisis is a highly stressful event.
unemployment rate
The percentage of the U.S. labor force that is un-
employed. It is calculated by dividing the number of unemployed indi-
viduals by the sum of the number of people unemployed and the
number of people employed.
296
Glossary


ABCX model, 13, 27
(A) stressor, 13 14
(B) resources, 14
(C) family’s definition of stressor,
14
(X) actual crisis, 14
See also Double ABCX model; Hill,
Reuben
Academy of Family Mediators (AFM),
222
accession, 14
acute stress disorder, 82
adaptability, 14
adaptation, 17, 18
bonadaptation, 18
family to community, 17 18
maladaptation, 18
member to family, 17
See also general adaptation
syndrome
addiction
to alcohol, 32 33, 34 35
as cause of secondary stressors, 34
in children of addicts, 34
and codependency, 36 37
to contact (cell phones, text
messaging), 35
current alcohol use among persons
age 12 20, by gender
(2002 2006), 168 170, 169
current, binge, and heavy alcohol
use among persons age 12 or
older, by age, 167 168, 169
defined, 33
disease model, 38
and domestic violence, 34, 84
effects on children of addicts, 37
family systems therapeutic
approach, 38 39
to gambling, 35
implications for family life, 36 37
to Internet, 35 36
as major public health problem, 36
organizations, 213 215
process addictions, 34
as progressive syndrome, 34
and relapse, 36
substance abuse treatment
admissions for elderly, by
substance (1995 2005), 170 171,
170t.
substance addictions, 34
symptoms, 33 34
therapeutic approaches, 38 39
use of illicit drugs during past
month among persons age 12 or
older (2006), 165, 166
use of illicit drugs during past
month among persons age 12 or
older, by age (2002 2006),
165 166, 167
use of selected drugs during past
month among persons age 12
order, by gender (2006), 166 167,
168
Addiction Resource Guide, 213
Administration for Children &
Families (ACF), 228 229
297
Index
Note: italic page number indicates figure; t. indicates table.

adolescent runaways, 39
characteristics of, 40 41
dangers experienced, 39 40, 42
defined, 39
intervention approaches, 41 42
organizations, 215 218
and parental emotions, 39
as throwaways, 41
adolescent suicide, 101 103, 207 208
and antidepressants, 101, 102, 103
drug related, 210
and ethnicity, 103
and family therapy, 104
and gender, 103 104
and guilt, 105
implications for family life, 104 105
and major depressive episodes,
207, 208 210, 209, 210
motivations for, 104
Office of Applied Studies study,
207 208
organizations, 239 242
statistics, 102 103
suicide rates by age (1950 2004),
208, 209t.
and survivors’ support groups, 105
and unanswered questions, 105
Affairs Help, 220
aging family members, caring for,
62 63, 181 183
divorced children and, 64 65
and elder abuse, 66 67
elderly population growth
compared with general
population (1950 2050), 181 182,
182
and emotional changes, 65, 67
expenses of, 67 68
grandparents living with
grandchildren, by race and sex
(2005), 183, 184t.
growing rate of, 63
implications for family life, 65 66
men as caregivers, 63 64
numbers of people involved in, 63
nursing home population, 183, 185
old helping old, 64
organizations, 226 228
pressures on caregivers, 65 67
and sandwich generation, 65
support and assistance, 67 68
women as caregivers, 63 64, 66
See also elderly
Aging Parents and Elder Care,
226 227
Ahrons, Constance R.
biographical sketch, 137 138
on five stages of divorce, 52 56
alcohol
addiction, 32 33, 34 35
current use among persons age
12 20, by gender (2002 2006),
168 170, 169
current, binge, and heavy use
among persons age 12 or older,
by age, 167 168, 169
Alcoholics Anonymous, 161 162
Aldous, Joan, 138
America Supports You, 237
American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry
(AACAP), 231
American Academy of Pediatrics
(AAP), 234
American Association for Marriage
and Family Therapy (AAMFT),
221
American Association of Suicidology
(AAS), 239
American Bar Association, Section of
Family Law, 222 223
American Chronic Pain Association,
224 225
American Counseling Association
(ACA), 221
American Foundation for Suicide
Prevention (AFSP), 239 240
American Psychological Association
Help Center, 234
American Red Cross Disaster
Services, 234 235
American Society of Addiction
Medicine, 214
biochemical stressors, 3
blended families, 176
and addiction, 37
See also remarriage
Bohannon, Paul J.
biographical sketch, 138 139
298
Index

on components of divorce, 139 140
See also Goetting, Ann M.
bonadaptation, 18
Brody, Elaine M., 64
biographical sketch, 140 141
Buel, Sarah M., 141 142
bullying, 91
ages 12 18, by location (2005), 194,
197
ages 12 18, by type (2005), 194, 196
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), 218
Butler, Robert N., 142 143
careermag.com, 218
Caregivers Home Companion, 227
caregiving. See aging family members,
caring for; chronic disease and
illness
Cargan, Leonard, 52
Center for Alcohol and Addiction
Studies, 214
Center for Catastrophe Preparedness
& Response (CCPR), 235
Center for Education and Drug Abuse
Research (CEDAR), 214
Center for Internet Addiction
Recovery, 221
Center for the Prevention of School
Violence (CPSV), 231
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) Emergency
Preparedness & Response, 235
Chandler, Nancy, 143
Cherlin, Andrew J., 144
child abuse, 84 86
and deployed military families,
100 101
rate of substantiated maltreatment
reports of children ages 0 17
(1998 2005), 188 189, 189
Child Abuse Prevention Network, 229
Child Find of America, 215 216
Child Quest International, 216
child sexual abuse, 85 86
Child Welfare League of America
(CWLA), 216
children
acute stress, 21
chronic stress, 21
and divorce, 56 57
external stress, 21
and inevitability of stress, 21 22
internal stress, 21
and parental unemployment, 46 47
reducing stress for, 22 23
Children of Aging Parents (CAPS),
227
chronic disease and illness, 57 58
among adults 45 years of age and
over, by age and poverty level,
177 178, 180
among adults over 65, by age
(selected conditions), 179 180,
181
among the young, 176 177, 178
among working age adults, 177,
179
and caregiving, 60 62
chronic illness, 59, 60
and communication, 61
and emotional withdrawal, 61
implications for family life, 60 62
and minorities, 59 60
organizations, 224 226
physical disability, 58, 60
See also Fennell Four Phase
Treatment (FFPT) approach
codependency, 36 37
defined, 37
Columbine High School shootings, 
90
Community Anti Drug Coalitions of
America (CADCA), 214 215
community divorce, 140
contact addiction, 35
coparental divorce, 139 140
coparental relationship, 55
crises, 2, 8, 26, 31, 68 69
developmental (normative), 8 9,
26, 68
situational, 9, 12, 26, 68
traumatic, 9 11, 12
See also addiction; adolescent
runaways; adolescent suicide;
aging family members, caring
for; chronic disease and illness;
deployed military families;
divorce; domestic violence;
infidelity; natural disasters;
school violence; unemployment
Index
299

deployed military families, 96 97,
203 204
anticipation of departure, 97 98
anticipation of return, 98
and child maltreatment, 100 101
detachment and withdrawal, 98
dual service marriages, 206
and effective family
communication, 99 100
emotional disorganization, 98
emotional stages of, 97 99
and fatalities and injuries, 204
implications for family life, 97 101
numbers of married military
personnel, 205 207
organizations, 237 239
Population Reference Bureau study,
203 207
recovery and stabilization, 98
reintegration and stabilization, 99
return adjustment and
renegotiation, 99
since 9/11, 96 97
single parents, 206
support and assistance for, 100
and women in the military, 204 205
developmental crises, 8 9, 26, 68
defined, 8
See also aging family members,
caring for
Disaster Training International, 236
dismemberment, 14
distress, defined, 4, 26
divorce, 50 51
community component, 140
coparental, 55, 139 140
crude rates of (1960 2006), 172,
173t. 174t.
declining rate of, 51
economic, 139
effects on children, 56 57
emotional, 139
family metacognition stage, 53 54
family redefinition stage, 55 56
family reorganization stage, 54 55
from dependency, 140
historical pattern of (1946 2000),
172
individual cognition stage, 53
legal, 139
myth of 50 percent rate, 172 173
organizations, 222 224
separation stage, 54
and socioeconomic and ethnic
groups, 173 174
stages of, 52 56
See also remarriage
DivorceSource, 223
domestic violence, 82 83
and addiction, 34, 84
Bureau of Justice survey, 183 184
child abuse, 84 86
child sexual abuse, 85 86
homicides of intimates (1976 2004),
185 186, 187
hotlines, 87
implications for family life, 86 87
and isolationism, 84
nonfatal intimate partner
victimization rate for females by
age (1993 2004), 186, 187
nonfatal intimate partner
victimization rate for females by
marital status (1993 2004),
186 188, 188
nonfatal intimate partner
victimization, by gender and
race (1993 2004), 185, 186
organizations, 228 230
partner abuse, 83 84
rate of substantiated maltreatment
reports of children ages 0 17
(1998 2005), 188 189, 189
and substance use, 84
types of, 82 83
women’s difficulty in leaving,
86 87
Domestic Violence and Violence
Related Research Resources, 229
Double ABCX model, 15, 27
aA factor (pileup of family
demands), 15 16
bB factor (family adaptive
resources), 16
cC factor (family definition and
meaning), 16 17
xX factor (family adaptation
balancing), 17 18
See also ABCX model; McCubbin,
Hamilton; Patterson, Joan
300
Index

Drug Abuse Warning Network, 207
drugs, 165
substance abuse treatment
admissions, age 65 or older, by
substance (1995 2005), 170 171,
170t.
use of illicit drugs during past
month among persons age 12 or
older (2006), 165, 166
use of illicit drugs during past
month among persons age 12 or
older, by age (2002 2006),
165 166, 167
use of selected drugs during past
month among persons age 12 or
older, by gender (2006), 166 167,
168
economic divorce, 139
elderly
abuse of, 66 67
substance abuse treatment
admissions, by substance
(1995 2005), 170 171, 170t.
See also aging family members,
caring for
emotional divorce, 139
Employment Development
Department (EDD), 218
Employment Guide, 218 219
Employment Spot, 219
endemic stressors, 3, 93
enrichment programs, 19, 27
family structured, 19 20
Erickson, Milton H., 144 145
eustress, defined, 3 4, 26
families
and adaptability, 25
and appreciation, 25
changed structure and morale, 
14
and commitment, 24
and conflict resolution skills, 25
and creative coping skills, 25
and effective communication,
24 25
four  and five generation, 64
and stress as normal part of life,
23 24
stress effective, characteristics of,
23 26, 27
stresses and adjustments, 1 2
and time together, 26
varying forms of, 51 52
wellness, 24
See also crises; stress; stressors
Family and Youth Services Bureau
(FYSB), 216
Family Caregiver Alliance (FCA),
227 228
family crisis, defined, 8
family disequilibrium, 13
defined, 3
family equilibrium, defined, 2 3
family intervention programs, 19 20,
27
family relationship enhancement, 20
family therapy
enrichment programs, 19 20, 27
history, 12 13
prevention programs, 18 19, 27
See also ABCX model; Double
ABCX model
Family Violence Prevention Fund
(FVPF), 229 230
family structured enrichment, 19 20
Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA), 236
Fennell, Patricia
biographical sketch, 145, 146
and Fennell Four Phase Treatment
(FFPT) approach, 145 146
Figley, Charles, 10
biographical sketch, 146 147
Framo, James L., 147 148
Friedman, Meyer, and theory of stress,
7 8, 12
Furstenberg, Frank F., Jr., 148 149
gambling addiction, 35
Gelles, Richard J., 149
general adaptation syndrome, 5
alarm reaction, 5
exhaustion, 5 6
resistance, 5
Goetting, Ann M.
biographical sketch, 150
on remarriage, 150 151
See also Bohannon, Paul J.
Index
301

Guerney, Bernard, Jr., and Louise,
151 152
Haley, Jay, 153
Hetherington, E. Mavis, 153 154
Hill, Reuben, 13 14
biographical sketch, 154 155
See also ABCX model
Honig, Alice, 21
human made disasters, 93 94
Hurricane Katrina, 93
infidelity
defined, 47
and dishonesty, 48
and emotional voids, 48
intense affairs, 47
isolated affairs, 47
negative consequences of, 49
online, 49 50
organizations, 220 222
and personality characteristics, 48
prevalence of, 47 48
and secrecy, 49
and women, 48 49
Infidelity Help, 222
infidelity.com, 221
integration, 14
International Bullying Prevention
Association (IBPA), 231 232
internet addiction, 35 36
intimate partner violence. See
domestic violence
Jackson, Don, 155 156
Kinkel, Kipland, 87 89
The Kinsey Institute, 222
legal divorce, 139
levels of emotional disorganization,
6 7, 12
loss of family morale and unity, 14
major depressive episodes, 208, 209
maladaptation, 18
marriage, expectations of, 52
Marriage Encounter, 20
McCubbin, Hamilton, 15 18
biographical sketch, 156 157
See also Double ABCX model
Menninger, Karl, and theory of stress
(levels of emotional
disorganization), 6 7, 12
Michigan eLibrary (MeL), 219
Military Child Education Coalition
(MCEC), 237
Military Family Research Institute
(MFRI), 238
Military HOMEFRONT, 238
Minnesota Couples Communication
Program, 20
Monthly Labor Review Online, 219 220
National Association of School
Psychologists (NASP), 232
National Caregivers Library, 228
National Center for Children Exposed
to Violence (NCCEV), 232
National Center for Chronic Disease
Prevention and Health
Promotion, 225
National Center for Missing and
Exploited Children (NCMEC),
217
National Child Traumatic Stress
Network (NCTSN), 236 237
National Clearinghouse for Alcohol &
Drug Information (NCADI), 215
National Clearinghouse on Families &
Youth (NCFY), 230
National Conflict Resolution Center
(NCRC), 223
National Council for Suicide
Prevention (NCSP), 240
National Council on Alcoholism and
Drug Dependence, 215
National Crime Victimization Survey,
183
National Dissemination Center for
Children with Disabilities, 225
National Family Caregivers
Association (NFCA), 228
National Family Resiliency Center,
Inc. (NFRC), 223 224
National Institute of Mental Health
(NIMH), 240
National Institute on Disability and
Rehabilitation Research
(NIDRR), 225 226
302
Index

National Military Family Association
(NMFA), 238 239
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), 200
National Organization for People of
Color Against Suicide
(NOPCAS), 241
National Organization for Women
(NOW), 230
National Runaway Switchboard
(NRS), 217
National School Safety Center (NSSC),
232 233
National Survey on Drug Use and
Health (NSDUH), 164 165, 207
natural disasters, 94, 200 203
compared with human made
disasters, 93 94
defined, 93
as endemic stressors, 93
fatalities (2006), 200, 201t.
Hurricane Katrina, 93
implications for family life, 94 95
organizations, 234 237
types of, 93
weather events and effects, 200,
201t.
weather related, by month (2006),
200, 202
New Health Partnerships, 226
normative crises. See developmental
crises
Occupational Outlook Handbook (OOH),
220
Oregon Mediation Center, Inc., 224
Patterson, Joan, 15 18, 156 157. See
also Double ABCX model
philosophical stressors, 3
Population Reference Bureau, 203 207
prevention programs, 18 19, 27
process addictions, 34
psychological stressors, 3
psychosocial stressors, 3
Quintessential Careers, 220
Rainbows, 224
remarriage, 174 175
community, 151
coparental, 151
economic, 151
emotional, 150
from independency, 151
legal, 150
and subsequent divorce, 175 176
resiliency, 2
resources. See ABCX model; Double
ABCX model
Riggins, Sean, 101 102
Rosenman, Ray, and theory of stress,
7 8, 12
Samaritans USA, 241
sandwich generation, 65
Satir, Virginia, 157
school violence, 189 190, 194 195
and bullying, 91
bullying, ages 12 18, by location
(2005), 194, 197
bullying, ages 12 18, by type
(2005), 194, 196
Columbine High School incident,
90
decrease in, 190
fighting, grades 9 12, by location
and sex (1993 2005), 195 196,
198
gang presence, ages 12 18 (2005),
194, 195
homicides and suicides, ages 5 18,
at school (1992 2005), 190 191,
192
homicides and suicides, ages 5 18,
by location (2003 2004), 190, 191
implications for family life, 92 93
and interventions, 89 90
Kipland Kinkel incident, 87 89
organizations, 231 233
prevalence of shootings since late
80s, 89
threats and violence against
teachers, 193 194
threats with weapons (grades
9 12), 192 193, 193
and unsafe learning environments,
90 91
and victimization (theft, violence,
threats, etc.), 191 192
Index
303

school violence (cont.)
weapons possession, grades 9 12,
by location and ethnicity (2005),
196 197, 199
secondary stressors, 4 5, 26
addiction and, 34
unemployment and, 43, 45
Segal, David and Mady Wechsler, 
203
Selye, Han, and theory of stress, 5 6,
12
seniors. See elderly
situational crises, 12, 26, 68
defined, 9
See also addiction; adolescent
runaways; chronic disease and
illness; divorce; infidelity;
unemployment
Smith, Robert, 161 162
social stressors, 3
statistics, role of, 163 164
stress
acute stress disorder, 82
and adjustment, 1 2
and children, 21 23
defined, 2, 26
distress, 4, 26
eustress, 3 4, 26
Han Selye’s theory of, 5 6, 12
as normal part of family life, 
23 24
stressors, 11 12, 26
accession, 14
changed family structure and
morale, 14
defined, 3
dismemberment, 14
Karl Menninger’s theory of, 6 7, 
12
loss of family morale and unity, 
14
Meyer Friedman and Ray
Roseman’s theory of, 7 8, 12
primary, 4, 26
secondary, 4 5, 26, 34
types of, 3
See also ABCX model; Double
ABCX model
substance addictions, 34
suicide
drug related attempts (persons 18
or older), 210 211, 211
rates by age (1950 2004), 208, 209t.
See also adolescent suicide
Suicide Awareness Voices of
Education (SAVE), 241 242
Suicide Prevention Action Network
USA (SPAN USA), 242
Suicide Prevention Research Center
(SPRC), 242
support guidelines, 224
systems
defined, 2
and equilibrium, 2 3
theory, 12 13, 26
teenagers. See adolescent runaways;
adolescent suicide; school
violence
Thomas, Gregory A., 158 159
throwaway adolescents, 41
traumatic crises, 12, 26, 81 82, 
105 106
characteristics of, 10 11
defined, 9 10
recovery from, 106
See also adolescent suicide;
deployed military families;
domestic violence; natural
disasters; school violence
Twelve Step program, 161 162
Type A and Type B (and Type C)
stress theory, 7 8
unemployment, 42 43
and blame issues, 46
and changing values, 46
and children, 46 47
cyclical, 44
and domestic duties, 46
and emotions, 46
factors affecting, 43 45
and factory workers, 43
and family support, 47
and family’s daily routines, 45 46
and financial worries, 45
frictional, 44
and grief, 45
304
Index

implications for family life, 
45 47
and minorities, 44
occupations with largest numerical
declines (2004 2014), 171 172,
171t.
organizations, 218 220
rate, 44
and secondary stressors, 43
structural, 44
and technological change, 43
and teenagers, 44
U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, Substance
Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration, Office
of Applied Studies, 207
Vanished Children’s Alliance (VCA),
217 218
Violence Against Women and Family
Violence Program, 230
Virginia Youth Violence Project, 233
Wallerstein, Judith S., 159 160
WebMD, 226
Wellesley Centers for Women (WCW),
233
White, Glen W., 160 161
Wilson, William, 161 162
Index
305


About the Author
Jeffrey S. Turner is a full professor in the Human Development
and Family Studies Department at Mitchell College in New Lon-
don, Connecticut. Dr. Turner is the author of many college-level
textbooks, including Dating and Sexuality in America; Families in
America; Marriage and Family: Traditions and Transitions; Encyclopedia
of Relationships across the Lifespan; Lifespan Development; Contempo-
rary Adulthood; Exploring Child Behavior; and Contemporary Human
Sexuality. Dr. Turner’s various books have sold more than 260,000
copies and have been used in many colleges and universities in the
United States and abroad. He is also the author of articles and
studies and has received numerous awards and citations for his
distinguished teaching and writing accomplishments.
307

